DEVOUT EXERCISES OF THE HEART, IN MEDITATION AND SOLILOQUY, PRAYER AND PRAISE.

BY THE LATE PIOUS AND INGENIOUS Mrs. ROW.

REVIEWED AND PUBLISHED AT HER REQUEST, By I. WATTS, D. D.

BOSTON: Printed and sold by SAMUEL HALL, No. 53, Cornhill. MDCCXC.

TO, AN IN^^^ATE FRIEND OF MRS. ROW.
MADAM,
IF these pious MEDITATIONS, of so sublime a genius, should be inscribed to any
name, there is none but yours must have stood in the front of them. That long
and constant intimacy of friendship, with which you delighted to honor her,
that high esteem and veneration you are pleased to pay her memory, and the
sacred likeness and sympathy between two kindred souls, absolutely determine
where this respect should be paid.

Besides, Madam, you well know that some copies out of these papers have been
your own several years by the gift of the deceased; and the favor you have
done me lately by your permission to peruse them, has assisted the correction
of these Manuscripts, and would add another reason to support this inscription
of them, if your fear of assuming too much honor could but have admitted this
piece of justice.

I know, Madam, your tenderness and indulgence to every thing Mrs. ROW has
written, cannot withold your judgment from suspecting some of her expressions
to be a little too rapturous, and too near akin to the language of the
mystical writers; yet your piety and candor will take no such offense as to
prevent your best improvement by them in all that is divine and holy; and may
your retired hours find such happy assistances and elevations hereby, that you
may commence the joys of angels and of blessed spirits beforehand.

And when your valuable life has been long extended amidst all the temporal
blessings you enjoy, and the christian virtues you practice, may you at the
call of God find a gentle dismission from mortality, and ascend on high to meet
your deceased friend in paradise. Nor can I suppose that any of the inhabitants
of that blissful region will sooner recognize your glorified spirit, or will
salute your first appearance there with a more tender sense of mutual
satisfaction. There may you join with your beloved Philomela, in paying
celestial worship, in exalted and unknown forms, to her God, and your God; and
may the harmony of the place be assisted by your united songs to JESUS, your
common Savior!

I am, MADAM, with great sincerity and esteem,

Your most faithful, and obedient servant, I. WATTS.
Newington, Sept. 29, 1737.
PREFACE.
THE admirable author of these devotional papers has been in high esteem among
the ingenious and the polite, since so many excellent fruits of her pen, both
in verse and prose, have appeared in public. She was early honored, under the
feigned name of Philomela, before the world was allowed to know Mrs. Elizabeth
Singer by the name drawn from her family, or that of Mrs. Row, which she
acquired by marriage.

Though many of her writings that were published in her lifetime discover a
pious and heavenly temper, and a warm zeal for religion and virtue; yet she
chose to conceal the Devotions of her heart till she was got beyond the censure
and the applause of mortals. It was enough that God, whom she loved with ardent
and supreme affection, was witness to all her secret and intense breathings
after him.

In February last he was pleased to call her out of our world, and take her to
himself. Some time after her decease, these manuscripts were transmitted to me,
all enclosed in one sheet of paper, and directed to me at Newington, by her own
hand: In the midst of them I found her letter, which entreated me to review
them and commit them to the press. This letter I have thought necessary to show
the world, not so much to discover my right to publish these papers, as to let
the reader see something more of that holy and heavenly character which she
maintained in an uniform manner both in life and death.

It is now almost thirty years ago since I was honored with her acquaintance,
nor could her great modesty conceal all her shining graces and accomplishments;
but it is not my province to give a particular account of this excellent woman,
who has blessed and adorned our nation and our age. I expect her temper, her
conduct, and her virtues will be set in a just and pleasing light among the
memoirs of her life, by some near relations, to whom the care of her poetical
pieces and her familiar letters is committed.

These Devout Exercises are animated with such fire as seems to speak the
language of holy passion, and discovers them to be the dictates of her heart;
and those who were favored with her chief intimacy will most readily believe
it. The style, I confess, is raised above that of common meditation or
soliloquy; but let it be remembered she was no common Christian. As her virtues
were sublime, so her genius was bright and sparkling, and the vivacity of her
imagination had a tincture of the muse almost from her childhood. This made it
natural to her to express the inward sentiments of her soul in more exalted
language, and to paint her own ideas in metaphor and rapture near akin to the
diction of poesy.

The reader will here find a spirit dwelling in flesh elevated into divine
transports congenial to those of angels and unbodied minds. Her intense love to
her God kindles at every hint, and transcends the limits of mortality. I scarce
ever met with any devotional writings which gave us an example of a soul, at
special seasons, so far raised above every thing that is not immortal and
divine.

Yet she is conscious of her frailties too: She sometimes confesses her solly
and her guilt in the sight of God in the most affecting language of a deep
humiliation. It is with a pathetic sensibility of her weakness, and in the
strongest language of self-displiciency, she bewails her offenses against her
Creator and Redeemer; and in her intervals of darkness, she vents her painful
complaints and mournings for the absence of her highest and best beloved.

Let it be observed, that it was much the fashion, even among some divines of
eminence, in former years, to express the fervours of devout love to our
Savior in the style of the Song of Solomon: and I must confess that several of
my composures in verse, written in younger life, were led by those examples
unwarily into this track. But if I may be permitted to speak the sense of
maturer age, I can hardly think this the happiest language in which Christians
should generally discover their warm sentiments of religion, since the clearer
and more spiritual revelations of the New Testament. Yet still it must be
owned, there are some souls favored with such beatifying visits from heaven,
and raptured with such a flame of divine affection, as more powerfully engages
all animal nature in their devotions, and constrains them to speak their purest
and most spiritual exercises in such pathetic and tender expressions as may be
perversely profaned by an unholy construction. And the bias and propensity
toward this style is yet stronger, where early impressions of piety have been
made on the heart by devout writings of this kind.

It should be remembered also, there is nothing to be found here which rises
above our ideas; here are none of those absurd and incomprehensible phrases
which amuse the ear with sounding vanity, and hold reason in sovereign
contempt: Here are no visionary scenes of wild extravagance, no affectations of
he tumid and unmeaning style, which spreads a glaring confusion over the
understanding; nothing that leads the reader into the region of those mystical
shadows and darkness which abound in the Romish writers, under the pretense of
refined light and sublime ecstacy. Nor is the character of this ingenious
author to be blemished with any other reproaches which have been sometimes cast
on such sort of meditations.

I know it has been said, that this language of rapture addressed to the
Deity, is but a new track given to the flow of the softer powers, after the
disappointment of some meaner love; or at least, it is owing to the want of a
proper object and opportunity to fix those tender passions: But this cannot be
allowed to be the case here; for as Mrs. Row had been sought early be several
lovers, so she spent several years of younger life in the connubial state with
a gentleman of such accomplishments and such circumstances, that he was well
fitted to be a partner of her joys and cares.

I know also that this soft and passionate turn of religious meditation has
sometimes been imputed to injuries and ill-treatment in the marriage state,
whereby the same affections are weaned from an undeserving object, and poured
out in amorous language upon an object supremely worthy and divine. But neither
has this reproach any pretense in the present case: That happy pair had souls
so near akin to each other, that they preserved an uncommon amity, and mutual
satisfaction, so long as providence favored him with life. It is sufficiently
evident, then, that in these meditations there is no secret panting after a
mortal love in the language of devotion and piety.

Nor yet can it be objected, that it was any displicience and peevishness
toward other things round about her, that taught her to express herself with
such contempt of the things of mortality, and all the gay and tempting scenes
of the present state: She was by no means sour and morose, and out of humor
with the world, nor with her acquaintance that dwelt in it: She often conversed
freely with the gay and the great, and was in high esteem among persons of rank
and honor. But honor and rank among mortals, with all the scenes of gaiety
and greatness, were little, despicable and forgotten things, while in her
devout moments her eye and her heart were fixed on God, the supreme original of
all excellence and all honor.

In common life she was affable and friendly with persons of every rank and
degree; and in her latter years, as she drew nearer to hea^^n, if she avoided
any thing, it was grandeur and public appearances on earth. But she never so
concealed and abstracted herself from the society of any of her
fellow creatures, as to despise the meanest of her species. She was ever kind
and compassionate to the distressed, and largely liberal to the indigent. Nor
did she neglect the daily duties of human life under a vain imagination that
she moved in a higher sphere, and was seraphically exalted above them.

In short, there is nothing in these papers that can justly support any such
sort of censures, though men of corrupt minds may cover the bible itself with
slander and ridicule. Let all such readers stand aloof, nor touch these sacred
leaves, lest they pollute them.

Though there is not one complete copy of verses amongst all these transports
of her soul, yet she ever carried with her a relish of poesy even into her
sacred retirements. Sometimes she springs her flight from a line or two of
verse, which her memory had impressed upon her heart: Sometimes from the midst
of her religious elevations she lights down upon a few lines of some modern
poet, even Herbert as well as Milton, etc. though it is but seldom she cites
their names. At other times the verses seem to be the effusion of her own
rapturous thoughts in sudden melody and meter; or at least I know not whence
the lines are copied: But she most frequently does me the honor to make use of
some of my writings in verse in these holy meditations of her heart. Blessed be
that God, who has so far favored any thing my pen could produce, as to assist
so sublime a devotion.

From the different appearance of the paper and ink in some of these pieces, as
well as from the early transcripts of several among her friends, it is evident
they were written in her younger days; others are of a much later original,
though there is but one that bears a date, and that is April 30, 1735. They
seem to have been penned at special seasons and occasions throughout the course
of her life. A few of them bear the corrections or additions of her own pen,
which discovers itself by a little difference of the handwriting.

Though she was never tempted away from our common Christianity into the
fashionable apostacies of the age, yet I am well informed from many hands, that
in her latter years she entered with more zeal and affection into some of the
peculiar doctrines of the gospel: And it is evident that some of these
devotional pieces have a more evangelick turn than others, and probably most of
those were composed or corrected in the latter part of life. The opposition
which has of late been made to some of these truths, gave occasion to her
further search into them, and her zeal for them. However, I have placed these
papers all as I found them pinned up in a wrapping-paper, though it is evident,
from plain circumstances, this is not the order in which they were written, nor
is that of any great importance.

Though these writings give us the aspirations of a devout soul in her holy
retirements, when she had no design to present the public with them; yet they
did not want a great deal of adjustment or correction in order to see the
light. The numbers and the titles are added by the publisher, as well as the
breaks and pauses, which give a sort of rest to the reader's mind, and make the
review more easy. Here and there a too venturous flight is a little moderated;
sometimes a meditation or a sentence is completed, which seemed very imperfect,
or a short line or two inserted to introduce the sense where the language
seemed too abrupt or the meaning too obscure. Her soul had a large set of ideas
in present view, which made every expression she used easy and perspicuous to
herself, when she wrote only for her own use; though sometimes her entire sense
might not be quite so obvious to every reader without a little introduction
into her track of sentiments: Upon the whole, I must acknowledge I was very
unwilling that this excellent work should lose any degrees of elegance or
brightness by passing through my hands.

When the manuscript came first under my revisal, I read it over with the eye
of a critic and a friend, that I might publish it with honor to the hand that
wrote it, and with religious entertainment and advantage to the world: Nor was
this employment destitute of its proper satisfaction. But never did I feel the
true pleasure of these meditations, till I had finished this labor of the
head, and began to read them over again as devout exercises of the heart: Then
I endeavored to enter more entirely into the spirit of the pious author, and
attempted to assume her language as my own. But how much superior was the
satisfaction which I received from this review, especially wheresoever I had
reason to hope I could pronounce her words with sincerity of soul. How happily
did this raise and entertain all my pleasing passions, and gave me another sort
of delight than the dry, critical perusal of them, in order to judge concerning
their propriety? But I confess also, it was an abasing and mortifying thought
when I found how often I was constrained to drop the sublime expression from my
lips, or forbid my tongue to use it, because my own seize sunk so far
beneath those sacred elevations of spirit, and fell so far short of those
transcendent degrees of divine affection and zeal.

Let me persuade all that peruse this book, to make the same experiment that I
have done; and when they have shut out the world, and are reading in their
retirements, let them try how far they can speak this language, and assume
these sentiments as their own: And by aspiring to follow them, may they find
the same satisfaction and delight, or at least learn the profitable lessons of
self abasement and holy shame: And may a noble and glorious ambition excite in
their breasts a sacred (...) emulate so illustrious an example. Whatsoever
ardours of divine love have been kindled in a soul united to flesh and blood,
may also be kindled by the same influences of grace in other spirits, laboring
under the same clogs and impediments.

But perhaps it will be necessary here to give a caution to some humble
Christians, (...) would not make these higher elevations of piety and holy joy
the test and standard by which to judge of the sincerity of their own religion.
Ten thousand saints are arrived safe at paradise, who have not been favored,
like St. Paul, with a rapture into the third heaven, nor could ever arise to
the affectionate transports and devout joys of Mrs. Row; yet I hope all
serious readers may find something here, which, through the aids of the blessed
Spirit, may raise them above their usual pitch, may give a new spring to their
religious pleasures, and their immortal hopes, and thereby render their lives
more holy and heavenly.

That the publication of this little book may be favored with the divine
blessing for this happy end, is the sincere desire and request of the
publisher, as it was the real motive of the ingenious and pious writer, to
commit them by my hand to the public view. This sufficiently discovers itself
in the following letter.

TO THE Reverend Dr. WATTS, at Newington.
SIR,
THE opinion I have of your piety and judgment is the reason of my giving you
the trouble of looking over these papers, in order to publish them; which I
desire you to do as soon as you can conveniently; only you have full liberty to
suppress what you think proper.

I think there can be no vanity in this design, for I am sensible such thoughts
as these will not be for the taste of the modish part of the world; and before
they appear, I shall be entirely disinterested in the censure or applause of
mortals.

The reflections were occasionally written, and only for my own improvement;
but I am not without hopes that they may have the same effect on some pious
minds, as the reading the experiences of others have had on my own soul. The
experimental part of religion has generally a greater influence than its
theory; and if, when I am sleeping in the dust, these soliloquies should kindle
a flame of divine love in the heart of the lowest and most despised Christian,
be the glory given to the great spring of all grace and benignity.

I have now done with mortal things, and all to come is vast eternity --
eternity -- How transporting is the sound! as long as God exists, my being and
happiness is secure. These unbounded desires, which the wide creation cannot
limit, shall be satisfied for ever. I shall drink at the fountain head of
pleasure, and be refreshed with the emanations of original life and joy. I
shall hear the voice of uncreated harmony speaking peace and ineffable
consolation to my soul.

I expect eternal life, not as a reward (of merit) but a pure act of bounty.
Detesting myself in every view I can take, I fly to the righteousness and
atonement of my great Redeemer, for pardon and salvation; this is my only
consolation and hope. Enter not into judgment, O Lord, with thy servant; for in
thy sight shall no flesh be justified.

Through the blood of the Lamb I hope for an entire victory over the last
enemy; and that before this comes to you, I shall have reached the celestial
heights; and while you are reading these lines, I shall be adoring before the
throne of God, where faith shall be turned into vision, and these languishing
desires satisfied with the full fruition of immortal love. Adieu.

ELIZ. ROW.

DEVOUT EXERCISES OF THE HEART, etc.
I. Supreme Love to God.
WHY, O my God, must this mortal structure put so great a separation between my
soul and thee? I am surrounded with thy essence, yet I cannot perceive thee? I
follow thee, and trace thy footsteps in heaven and earth, yet I cannot overtake
thee; thou art before me, and I cannot reach thee; and behind me, and I
perceive thee not.

O thou, whom unseen, I love, by what powerful influence do thou attract my
soul? the eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, nor has it entered into the
heart of man to conceive, what thou art; and yet I love thee beyond all that
mine eye has seen, or my ear heard, beyond all that my heart can comprehend.
Thou dwell in heights of glory, to which no human thought can soar, and yet
thou art more near and intimate to my soul than any of the objects of sense.
These ears have never heard thy voice, and yet I am better acquainted with
thee, and can rely on thee with more confidence, than on the dearest friend I
have on earth.

My heart cleaves to thee, O Lord, as its only refuge, and finds in thee a
secret and constant spring of consolation. I speak to thee with the utmost
confidence, and think thy being my greatest happiness. The reflection on thy
existence and greatness recreates my spirits, and fills my heart with alacrity;
my soul overflows with pleasure, I rejoice, I triumph in thy independent
blessedness, and absolute dominion. Reign, O my God, for ever glorious and
uncontrouled.

I, a worm of the earth, would join my assent with the infinite orders above,
with all thy flaming ministers who rejoice in thy kingdom and glory.

Though not with them, thy happier race allowed
To view the bright unveiled divinity;
(By no audacious glance from mortal eyes,
Those mystic glories are to be profaned)
But yet I feel the same immortal flame,
And love thee, though unseen.
I love thee -- Thus far I can speak, but all the rest is unutterable; and I
must leave the pleasing tale untold till I can talk in the language of
immortality: and then I Will begin the transporting story, which shall never come
to an end, but be still and still beginning: for thy beauties, O thou fairest
of ten thousand, will still be new, and shall kindle fresh ardour in my soul to
all eternity. The sacred flame shall rise, nor find any limits till thy
perfections find a period.

I love thee, and O thou that know all things, read the characters that love
has drawn on my heart: what excellence but thine in heaven and earth could
raise such aspirations of soul, such sublime and fervent affections as those I
feel? what could fix my spirit but boundless perfection? what is there else for
whose sake I could despise all created glory? why am I not at rest here among
sensible enjoyments? whence arise these importunate longings, these infinite
desires? why does not the complete creation satisfy, or at least delude me with
a dream of happiness? why do not the objects of sense awake a more ardent
sentiment than things distant and invisible? why should I, who say to
corruption, thou art my father, aspire after a union with the immense divinity?

You angels of God that behold his face, explain to me the sacred mystery; tell
me how this heavenly flame began, unriddle its wondrous generation: who has
animated this mortal flame with celestial fire, and given a clod of earth this
divine ambition? what could kindle it but the breath of God, which kindled up
my soul? and to thee, its amiable original, it ascends; it breaks through all
created perfection, and keeps on its restless course to the first pattern of
beauty.

Ye flowery varieties of the earth, and you sparkling glories of the skies,
your blandishments are vain, while I pursue an excellence that casts a reproach
on all your glory. I would fain close my eyes on all the various and lovely
appearances you present, and would open them on a brighter scene. I have
desires which nothing visible can gratify; to which no material things are
suitable. O when shall I find objects more entirely agreeable to my
intellectual faculties? my soul springs forward in pursuit of a distant good,
whom I follow by some faint ray of light, which only glimmers by short
intervals before me. Oh! when will it disperse the clouds, and break out in
full splendour on my soul?

But what will the open vision of thy beauties effect, if, while thou art but
faintly imagined, I love thee with such a sacred fervor. To what blessed
heights shall my admiration rise, when I shall behold thee in full perfection;
when I shall see thee as thou art, exalted in majesty, and complete in beauty?
how shall I triumph then in thy glory, and in the privileges of my own being?
what ineffable thoughts will rise to find myself united to the all-sufficient
divinity, by ties which the sons of men have no names to express, by an
engagement that the revolution of eternal years shall not dissolve? the league
of nature shall be broken, and the laws of the mingled elements be cancelled;
but my relation to the almighty God shall stand fixed and unchangeable as his
own existence? Nor life, nor death, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers,
nor things present, nor things to come, shall ever separate me from his love.

Triumph, O my soul, and rejoice; look forward beyond the period of all
terrestrial things: look beyond ten thousand ages of celestial blessedness,
look forward still, and take an immeasurable prospect; press on and leave
unnumbered ages behind, ages of ineffable peace and pleasure; plunge at once
into the ocean of bliss, and call eternity itself thy own.

There are no limits to the prospect of my joy; it runs parallel with the
duration of the infinite divinity; my bliss is without bounds; O when shall the
full possession of it commence.

II. The Truth and Goodness of God.
ENGRAVED as in eternal brass,
The mighty promise shines;
Nor can the powers of darkness raze
Those everlasting lines.
The sacred word of grace is strong
As that which built the skies;
The voice that rolls the stars along
Speaks all the promises.
And they are all built on the immutable truth and goodness of thy nature: thou
do not speak at random like vain man; but whatever thou have engaged to
perform, is the result of eternal counsel and design. Thou have uttered nothing
that thou can see occasion to alter on a second review: thou can promise
nothing to thy own damage, nor be a loser by the utmost liberality. Thou art
every way qualified to make good thy engagements, by the fullness of thy riches
and power.

Nor have thou any necessity to flatter thy creatures, or to say kinder things
to them than thou meanest to fulfill. Miserable man can bring no advantage to
thee, nor has he any thing to claim from thee. By what benefit has he prevented
thee? by what right can he demand the least of thy favors? thy engagements are
all free and unconstrained, founded on thy own beneficence, and not on the
merits of thy creature. While I consider this, my expectations rise, I set no
limits to my hopes: I look up with confidence, and call thee my Father, and
with a humble faith, I claim every advantage that tender name imports. My heart
confides in thee with stedfastness and alacrity; fear and distrust are
inconsistent with my thoughts of the beneficence of thy nature.

Every name and attribute by which thou have revealed thyself to man confirms
my faith. Thy life, thy being, is engaged: I may as well question thy
existence, as thy faithfulness: as sure as thou art, thou art just and true.
The protestation of the most faithful friend I have, cannot give me half the
consolation that thy promises give me. I hear vain man with diffidence, I bid
my soul beware of trusting a false mortality; but I hear thy voice with joy and
full assurance.

Thy words are not writ in sand, nor scattered by the fleeting winds, but shall
stand in force when heaven and earth shall be no more. Eternal ages shall not
diminish their efficacy, nor alter what the mouth of the Lord has spoken. I
believe, I believe with the most perfect assent: I know that thou art, and that
thou art a rewarder of them that diligently seek thee; I feel the evidence, for
thou have not left thyself without witness in my heart.

III. Longing after the Enjoyment of God.
MY God, to thee my sighs ascend; every complaint I make, ends with thy name: I
pause, I dwell on the sound, I speak it over again, and find that all my cares
begin and end in thee. I long to behold the supreme beauty, I pant for the fair
original of all that is lovely, for beauty that is yet unknown, and for
intellectual pleasures yet untasted.

My heart aspires, my wishes fly beyond the bounds of creation, and despise all
that mortality can present me with. I was formed for celestial joys, and find
myself capable of the entertainments of angels. Why may I not begin my heaven
below, and taste at least of the springs of pleasure that flow from thy
right hand for ever?

Should I drink my fill, those fountains are still exhaustless; millions of
happy souls quench their infinite desires there: millions of happy orders of
beings gaze on thy beauty, and are made partakers of thy blessedness; but thou
art still undiminished. No liberality can waste the store of thy perfection; it
has flowed from eternity, and runs forever fresh, and why must I perish for
want?

My thirsty soul pines for the waters of life. Oh! who will refresh me with the
pleasurable draught? how long shall I wander in this desert land, where every
prospect is waste and barren; I look round me in vain, and sigh still
unsatisfied: Oh! who will lead me to the still waters, and make me repose in
green pastures, where the weary are for ever at rest? how tedious are the hours
of expectation!

Come, Lord, my head does burn, my heart is sick,
While thou do ever, ever stay;
Thy long deferring wounds me to the quick;
My spirit gaspeth night and day:
O show thyself to me,
Or take me up to thee.
Dispatch thy commissions; give me my work, and activity to perform it, and let
me as a hireling fulfill my day^ Lord, it is enough: what am I better than my
fathers? they are dead, and I am mortal.

I Am but a stranger and a pilgrim here
In these wild regions, wandering and forlorn,
Restless and sighing for my native home,
Longing to reach my weary space of life,
And to fulfill my task. Oh! haste the hour
Of joy and sweet repose. Transporting hope!
Lord, here I am, waiting for thy commands, attending thy pleasure; O speak,
and incline my ear to hear; give me my work, let me finish it, and gain my
dismission from this body of sin and death; this hated clog of error and guilt,
of corruption and vanity. Oh! let me drop this load, and bid these scenes of
guilt a final adieu.

I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord; when will thou let me into thy holy
habitation? how long shall I pine at this distance from thee? what can I speak
to show thee my pain, to utter my anguish, when I fear the loss of my God? Oh!
speak an assuring word, and confirm my hope?

Transporting moment! when will thou appear,
To crown my hopes, and banish all my fear?
Again, O my Father, and my eternal Friend, I breathe out my requests to thee
in this land of fatigue and folly! what is this life but a sorry tiresome
round, a circle of repeated vanities? happiness has been never seen in it since
sin and folly entered: all is empty appearance, or vain labor, or painful
vexation.

Sufficed with life, my languid spirits saint,
And fain would be at rest. Oh! let me enter
Those sacred seats, and after all the toil
Of life, begin an everlasting sabbath.
Yet again, O Lord, I ask leave to tell thee, I have waited for thy salvation,
and hourly languished after the habitation of my God. My heart grows sick, and
I almost expire under these delays: What have I here to keep me from thee? What
to relieve the tedious hours of absence? I have pronounced all below the sun,
vanity and vexation; all insipid and burdensome. Amidst health and plenty,
friends and reputation, thou art my only joy, my highest wish, and my supreme
delight. On thee my soul fixes all her hopes; there I rest in a celestial calm!
Oh! let it not be broken with earthly objects; let me live unmolested with the
cares or delights of sense.

Oh! let me flee
From all the world, and live alone to thee.
IV. God my supreme, my only Hope.
WHY do I address thee, my God, with no more confidence? Why do I indulge these
remains of unbelief, and harbor these returns of infidelity and distrust? Can
I survey the earth, can I gaze on the structure of the heavens, and ask if thou
art able to deliver? Can I call in question thy ability to succor me, when I
consider the general and particular instances of thy goodness and power? One
age to another, in long succession, has conveyed the records of thy glory; In
all generations thou have been our dewlling place, my fathers trusted in thee,
and were delivered. They have encouraged me, my own experience has encouraged
me to trust in thee for ever.

The sun may fail to rise, and men in vain expect its light; but thy truth, thy
faithfulness cannot fail; the course of nature may be reversed, and all be
chaos again; but thou art immutable, and can not by any change deceive the
hopes of those that trust in thee; I adore thy power, and subscribe to thy
goodness and fidelity, and what farther objection would my unbelief raise? Is
any thing too hard for God to accomplish? Can the united force of earth and
hell resist his will?

Great God, how wide thy glories shine!
How broad thy kingdom, how divine!
Nature and miracle, and fate, and chance are thine.
Therefore I apply myself immediately to thee, and renounce all the terror and
all the confidence that may arise from heaven or earth besides.

Not from the dust my joys or sorrows spring:
Let all the baleful planets shed
Their mingled curses round my head:
Their mingled curses I despise,
Let but the great, the eternal King,
Look through the clouds, and bless me with his eyes.
Let him bless me, and I shall be blessed; blessed without reserve or
limitation; blessed in my going out, and coming in; in my sitting down, and
rising up; blessed in time, and blessed to all eternity. That blessing from thy
lips will influence the whole creation, and attend me wherever I am. It shall
go before me as a leading light, and follow me as my protecting angel. When I
lie down it will cover me, I shall rest beneath the shadow of the most High,
and dwell safely in the secrets of his tabernacle.

Thy kingdom rules over all, O Lord, and thou do according to thy will in
the armies of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth: I confess and
acknowledge thy providence. The ways of man are not at his own disposal, but
all his goings are ordered by thee; all events are in thy hands, and thou only
can succeed or disappoint his hopes. If thou blow on his designs they are
forever blasted; if thou bless them, neither earth nor hell can hinder their
success: therefore I apply myself immediately to thee; for not all created
power can assist me without thee.

Hence from my heart, ye idols, flee,
Ye sounding names of vanity!
No more my tongue shall sacrifice
To chance and nature, tales and lies;
Creatures without a God can yield me no supplies.
Not all the power of men on earth, nor angels nor saints in heaven, can help
or relieve me in the least exigence, if my God hide himself and stand afar off
from me. Second causes are all at thy direction, and cannot (...) me till
commissioned by thee.

(...) when my thoughtful soul surveys
(...) and earth, and stars and seas,
I call them all thy slaves;
Commissioned by my Father's will,
Poison shall cure, or balms shall kill;
Vernal suns, or Zephyrs' breath
May burn or blast the plants to death
That sharp December saves.
What can winds or planets boast,
But a precarious power?
The sun is all in darkness lost,
Frost shall be fire and fire be frost,
When he appoints the hour.
At thy command nature and necessity are no more; all things are alike easy to
a God: speak but thou the word, and my desires are granted: say, let there be
light, and there shall be light. Thou can look me into peace, when the tumult
of thoughts raise a storm within. Bid my soul be still, and all its tempest
shall obey thee.

I depend only on thee; do thou smile, and all the world may frown. Do thou
succeed my affairs, and I shall fear no obstacle that earth or hell can put in
my way. Thou only art the object of my fear, and all my desires are directed to
thee.

Human things have lost their being and their names, and vanish into nothing
before thee; they are but shades and disguises to vail the active divinity. Oh!
let me break through all these separations, and see and confess the great, the
governing cause. Let no appearance of created things, however specious, hide
thee from my view: Let me look through all to thee, nor cast a glance of love
or hope below thee. With a holy contempt let me survey the ample round of the
creation, as lying in the hollow of thy hand, and every being in heaven and on
earth as unmovable by the most potent cause in nature, till commissioned by
thee to do me good or hurt. Oh! let thy hand be with me to keep me from evil,
and let me abide under the shadow of the almighty: I shall be secure in thy
pavilion. To thee I fly for shelter from all the ills of mortality.

V. God a present Help, and ever near.
THOU wast fond of me, O my God, when I sought thee not, and will thou fly from
me when I seek thee? Am I giving my breath to the wind, and scattering my
petitions in the air? Is it a vain thing to call upon God, and is there no
profit in crying to the Almighty? Art thou a God afar off, and not near at
hand? Is there any place exempt from thy presence? Any distance whence my cries
cannot reach thee? Can any darkness hide me from thy eyes? or, is there a
corner of the creation unvisited by thee? Do thou not fill heaven and earth,
and am not I surrounded by thy immensity.

Are my desires unknown to thee? or is there a thought in my heart concealed
from thee? Do not thou that have formed the ear, hear? Can thou forget the
work of thy own hands? or retired far in the heavens, full of thy own
happiness, can thou leave thy creation to misery and disorder, helpless and
hopeless? Are the ways of man at his own disposal, and his paths undirected by
thee? Is calling on the living God no more than worshipping a dumb idol? Can
thou, like them, disappoint and mock thy adorers?

Art thou unacquainted with the extent of thy own power, that thou should
promise beyond thy ability to perform? or art thou as a man that should lie;
or the son of man, that should repent? Is thy faithfulness uncertain, and thy
power precarious? Are those perfections imaginary for which men adore thee, and
thy gracious names insignificant titles? Do the children of men in vain put
their trust under the shadow of thy wings? Art not thou a present help in the
time of trouble, and is there no security in the secret places of the Most
High? Whither then shall I look in my distress? To whom shall I direct my
prayer? From whom shall I expect relief, if there is no help in God for me?

But, oh! what unrighteousness have my fathers ever found in thee? What
injustice can I charge thee with? What breach of truth, or want of piety? Have
the records of thy actions ever been stained with the breach of faithfulness?
Art thou not my only hope, and my long experienced support? Have I ever found
help from the creatures when thou have failed me? Have I, or can I have, a
greater certainty than thy word to depend on? Can any other power defend or
deliver like thee? Thou art a rock, and thy work is perfect, for all thy ways
are judgment: a God of truth, and without iniquity, just and right art thou.
With my last breath I will witness to thy truth and faithfulness, and declare
thy goodness to the children of men.

VI. God an all-sufficient Good, and my only Happiness.
WHY is my heart so far from thee,
My God, my chief delight?
Why are my thoughts no more by day
With thee, no more by night?
Why should my foolish passions rove?
Where can such sweetness be
As I have tasted in thy love,
As I have found in thee?
Where can I hope to meet such joys as thy smiles have given me? Where can I
find pleasure so sincere and unallayed? When I have enjoyed the light of thy
countenance, and the sense of thy love, has not all my soul been filled? Have I
found any want or emptiness? Has there been any room left for desire, or any
prospect beyond, besides the more perfect enjoyment of my God? Have not all the
glories of the world been darkened, and turned into blackness and deformity?
How poor, how contemptible have they appeared! or rather have they not all
disappeared and vanished as dreams and shadows in the noon of day, and under
the blaze of sun beams.

I have never found satisfaction in any thing but in God; Why then do I wander
from him? Why do I leave the fountain of living water for broken cisterns? Why
do I abandon the full ocean in search of shallow streams? What account can I
give for folly like this? I can promise myself nothing from the creature; those
expectations shall deceive me no more. It is thou, my God, thou art the only
object of my hopes and desires; it is thou only that can make me happy.

If thou frown, my being is a curse: Thy indignation is hell with all its
terrors. Let me never feel that, and I defy all things else to make me
miserable. I seem independent on all nature, to thee only I apply myself. Hear
me, thou beneficent author of my being, thou support of my life, to thee I
direct my wishes, those desires which thou will approve, while I ask but the
happiness I was created to enjoy. Oh! fix all my expectation on thee, and free
me from this levity and inconstancy.

Look gently down, Almighty Grace,
Prison me round in thy embrace;
Pity the heart that would be thine,
And let thy power my love confine.
Suffer me never to start from thee; such a confinement were sweeter than
liberty: Thy yoke is easy, and thy burden light. I shall bless the chain that
binds me to thee. Oh! give me such a view of thy beauty as shall fix my
volatile heart for ever; such a view as shall determine all its motions, and be
a constant conviction how unreasonable it is to wander from thee.

Is it that I relish any thing beyond thy love? Oh! no. I appeal even to thee,
who can not be deceived, and know the inmost secrets of my soul: Thou
know where the balance of my love falls, and that my wanderings are not
deliberate; that it is not by choice that I forsake thee. I grieve, I sigh for
my folly; should thou forgive me, I can never forgive myself, for I know it
is inexcusable.

I want nothing when I am possessed of thee; without thee I want all things.
Thou art the center of all my passions; I have no hope but what is thine, no
joy but what flows from thee: My greatest fears are those of losing thee; my
inmost care is to secure thy favor. This is the subject of my deepest anxiety:
Every sigh I breathe ends in thy name, and that loved name alone allays every
anguish of my soul, and calms its wildest tempests.

From thy frowns or favor all my joys or sorrows spring; thy frowns can make
me infinitely miserable, thy favor can make me infinitely blessed. I can defy
hell, and smile in the face of death, whilst I can call thee mine. My God!
still let me bless the sound, and part with all things rather than renounce my
propriety in thee: let me hold it to my last breath, and claim it with my
expiring sighs.

Secure of thee, nothing can terrify my soul; all is peaceable and serene
within, eternal love and immortal pleasure: I desire no more: imagination stops
here, and all my wishes are lost in eternal plenty. -- My God! more cannot be
asked, and with less I should be infinitely miserable. The kingdoms of the
skies should not buy my title to thee and thy love: The blessedness of all
creatures is complete here, for God himself is blessed in himself for ever.

What can I add, for all my words are faint,
Celestial love no eloquence can paint?
No more can be in mortal sounds expressed,
But vast eternity shall tell the rest.
VII. A Covenant with God.
INcomprehensible Being, who searchest the heart, and triest the reins of the
children of men, thou know my sincerity, and my thoughts are all unveiled to
thee; I am surrounded with thine immensity; thou art a present, though
invisible witness of the solemn affair I am now engaged in. I am now taking
hold of thy strength, that I may make peace with thee, and entering into
articles with the Almighty God: These are the happy days long since predicted,
when one shall say, I am the Lord's, and another shall call himself by the name
of Israel, and another shall subscribe with his hand to the Lord; and I will be
their God, and they shall be my sons and my daughters, says the Lord Jehovah.

With the most thankful sincerity I take hold on this covenant, as it is more
fully manifested and explained in thy gospel by Jesus Christ; and humbly
accepting thy proposals, I bind myself to thee by a sacred and everlasting
obligation. By a free and deliberate action, I do here ratify the articles
which were made for me in my baptism into the name of the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Spirit; I religiously devote myself to thy service, and entirely
submit to thy conduct. I renounce the glories and vanities of the world, and
choose thee as my happiness, my supreme felicity and everlasting portion. I make
no article with thee for any thing besides: Deny or give me what thou will, I
will never repine while my principal treasure is secure. This is my deliberate,
my free and sincere determination; a determination, which, by thy grace, I will
never retract.

Oh! thou, by whose power alone I shall be able to stand, Put thy fear in my
heart, that I may never depart from thee: Let not the world, with all its
flatteries; nor death, nor hell, with all their terrors, force me to violate
this sacred vow. Oh! let me never live to abandon thee, nor draw the impious
breath, that would deny thee.

And now let surrounding angels witness for me, that I solemnly devote all the
powers and faculties of my soul to thy service; and when I presumptuously
employ any of the advantages thou have given me, to thy dishonor, let them
testify against me, and let my own words condemn me.

ELIZABETH ROW.


Thus have I subscribed to thy gracious proposals, and engaged myself to be the
Lord's: And now let the malice of men, and the rage of devils, combine against
me, I can defy all their stratagems; for God himself is become my friend, Jesus
is my all-sufficient Savior, and the Spirit of God, I trust, will be my
sanctifier, and my comforter.

O happy day! transporting moment! the brightest period of my life! heaven with
all its light smiles on thee: what glorious mortal can now excite my envy? What
scene to tempt my ambition could the whole creation display? Let glory call me
with her exalted voice; let pleasure, with a softer eloquence, allure me; the
world in all its splendour appears but a trifle, while the infinite God is my
portion. He is mine by as sure a title as eternal veracity can confer. The
right is unquestionable, the conveyance unalterable. The mountains shall be
removed, and the hills be dissolved, before the everlasting obligation shall be
cancelled.

VIII. A Thank-Offering for saving Grace.
BLESS the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy name:
Bless the Lord, and forget not all his benefits, who redeemeth thy life from
destruction, and crowns thee with loving kindness, and tender mercy; who
brought thee out of the mire and clay, and set thy feet upon a rock; who broke
thy fetters, and freed thee from the miserable bondage of sin. I lay, a
wretched slave, pleased with my chains, and fond of my captivity, fatally
deluded and undone, till love, almighty love, rescued me. Blessed effect of
unmerited grace! I shall stand for ever an illustrious instance of boundless
mercy: To that I must entirely ascribe my salvation, and through all the ages
of eternity, I will rehearse the wonders of redeeming love, and tell to
listening angels what it has done for my soul.

I Will sing the endless miracles of love;
For ever that my lofty theme shall prove.
My glorious Creator, why did I employ thy thoughts before I had a being? Why
from all eternity was an immortality designed me, and my birth allotted me in a
land illuminated with the rays of sacred light? I might have been invoking the
powers of hell with detestable ceremonies, instead of adoring the omnipotent
God. But when thousands are lost in these delusions, why am I thus graciously
distinguished? Instead of being born among the shameful vices of impious
parents, and an heir to their curses, why am I entitled to the blessing of
religious ancestors? Why, when I was incapable of choice, was I devoted to the
God that keeps covena^^ and mercy to a thousand generations of them that fear
him?

Why, when I knew thee not, did thou sustain me? But oh! why, when I knew
thee, and rebelled against thee, why did thou so long suffer my ingratitude?
Why did thy watchful providence perpetually surround me, crossing all the
methods I took to undo myself? Why was I not cursed with my own wishes, and
left to the quiet possession of those vanities I delighted in; those toys which
I foolishly preferred to all the treasures of thy love? Why did thou pursue
me with the offers of thy favor when I fled thee with such aversion; and had
fled thee for ever, if thou had not compelled me to return?

Why did thy Spirit strive so long with an obstinate heart, which resisted all
its motions, and turned thy patience and long suffering into provocation and
guilt? Why am I not undone by those pleasing snares in which I have seen so
many deluded wretches perish? Like them I despised the unsearchable riches of
thy grace; with them I had been content to share the sorry portion and
pleasures of this world, if thou had let me alone, and I should never have
inquired after thee; but why wast thon found of one that sought thee not? O
why, but because thou will be merciful to whom thou will be merciful?

Therefore again with astonishment and delight I look back on the methods of
thy grace, and again I consider myself lost in an abyss of sin and misery; when
there was no eye to pity me, no hand but thine to assist me, thou made it
then the time of love. Never was grace more free and surprising than thine is;
never was there a more obstinate heart than mine; and never such unconquerable
love as thine. How gloriously has it triumphed over my rebellious faculties?
How freely has it cancelled all my guilt?

Could I have made the least pretense to merit, or have challenged any thing
from thee, the benefit had been less exalted; had there been any foundation for
human pride, my corrupt heart would soon have taken the advantage, and have
robbed thee of thy honor, by ascribing the glorious work to the strength of my
own reason, or a natural tendency to virtue; but here my vanity is for ever
silenced. I am lost in the boundless abyss. O height! O depth! O length and
breadth immeasurable! How unsearchable are thy ways, Almighty Love, and thy
paths past finding out!

Let me here begin my eternal song, and ascribe salvation and honor, dominion
and majesty, to him that sits on the throne, and to the Lamb for ever, who has
loved me, and ransomed me with his blood; ransomed me from a voluntary bondage,
from the most vile and hopeless captivity, a captivity from which nothing but
that invaluable purchase could have redeemed me.

Infinite love! almighty grace!
Stand in amaze, ye rolling skies:
Bring hither your celestial harps, ye beneficent beings, who amidst the height
of your happiness express a kind regard for man: teach me the language of
paradise, the strains of immortality. But oh! it is all too feeble, the tougues
of seraphims cannot utter what I owe my Redeemer: From what misery, my adorable
Savior, have thou rescued me? From error, from sin, from snares and death,
from infernal chains, eternal horror, and the blackness of darkness for ever.

Nor here my glorious benefactor stayed; but still went on to magnify the
riches of his grace, and entitled me to an endless inheritance, and an immortal
crown; to the fruition of God, and the unutterable joys that flow from his
presence.

Mysterious depths of boundless love
My admiration raise:
O God, thy name exalted stands
Above my highest praise.
IX. Evidence of sincere Love to God.
IF I love thee not, my blessed God, I know not what I love: If I am uncertain
of this, I am uncertain of my existence: If I love thee not, what is the
meaning of these pathetic expressions, My God, My All! thou spring of my life,
and fountain of my happiness! my great reward, and my exceeding joy, the
eternal object of my love, and supreme felicity of my nature! Does not my heart
attend my lips in all this language? How can this be if my soul does not love
thee?

O my God, if I love thee not, what is the meaning of this constant uneasiness
at thy absence? From whence proceeds this painful anxiety of mind about thy
love, and all these intense, these restless desires after thee? Why are all the
satisfactions of life insipid without thee? Without my God, what are riches and
honors, and pleasures to me? I should esteem the possession of the world but a
trifle, or rather my eternal damage, if it must be purchased with the loss of
thy favor. Thy benignity is better than life, and the moments in which I enjoy
a sense of thy love, are the only happy intervals of my life. It is then I
live, it is then I am truly blessed: It is then I look down with contempt on
the little amusements of the world, and pity them that want a taste for these
exalted pleasures.

How calm, how peaceful in those seasons are all the regions of my soul! I have
enough, I ask no more. Can they languish for the stream, who drink at the
overflowing fountain? I have all the world, and more, I have heaven itself in
thee: In thee I am completely and securely blessed, and can defy the malice of
earth and hell to shake the foundation of my happiness, while thou do whisper
thy love to my soul. O blessed stability of heart! O sublime satisfaction! have
thou not told me that thou art mine by an inviolable engagement, when my soul
devoted itself sincerely to thee? Does not thy word assure me, that the
mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed; but thy kindness shall not
depart, nor the Covenant of thy peace be broken?

Have not thou terminated my wishes, O Lord, in thyself, and fixed my wandering
desires? Is it for riches or honor, for length of days, or pleasure, that I
follow thee with daily importunities? Thou know these are not the subject of
my restless petitions: Do I ever balance these toys with thy favor? Oh! no.
One smile of thine obscures all their glory. When thou do bless my retired
devotions with thy presence, I can wink all created beauty into blackness. When
I meet thee in my solitary contemplations, with what contempt do I look back on
the lessening world.

How dazzling is thy beauty! how divine!
How dim the luster of the world to thine!
How dull are its entertainments to the pleasure of conversing with thee? Oh
stay, in those happy moments, cries my satisfied soul;

Stay, my beloved, with me here;
Stay till the morning star appear;
Stay till the dusky shadows fly
Before the day's illustrious eye.
Oh! (...) till the gloomy night of life is past, and eternity dawn on my soul.
There is nothing in this barren place to entertain me when thou art gone: I can
relish nothing below after these celestial banquets.

If I love thee not, what is the meaning of this impatience to be with thee? My
soul longs, yea faints, for the courts of the Lord; when shall I come and
appear before thee? Oh! that I had the wings of a dove; for then would I fly
away, and be at rest.

X. Assurances of Salvation in Christ Jesus.
I Have put my treasure, my immortal part, into thy hands. Oh! my dear
Redeemer, and shall the prey be taken from the mighty? Shall a soul consecrated
to thee fall a sacrifice to hell?

Blessed God, am I not thine? and shall the temple of thy spirit be profaned,
and the lips that have so often ascribed dominion and glory and majesty to
thee, be defiled with infernal blasphemy, and the execrations of the damned?
Shall the sparks of divine love be extinguished, and immortal enmity succeed?
And shall I, who was once blessed with thy favor, become the object of thy
wrath and indignation? Shall all the mighty things thou have done for my soul
be forgotten? Shall all my vows, and thy own sacred engagements be cancelled?
It is all impossible; for thou art not as man, that thou should lie; nor as
the son of man, that thou should repent.

Thou art engaged by thy own tremendous name for my security: My God and my
father's God, from generation to generation thou have been our dewlling place.
I was devoted to thee in baptism by the solemn vows of my religious parents: My
infant hands were early lifted up to thee, and I soon learned to know and
acknowledge the God of my fathers. I have actually subscribed with my hand to
the Lord, and am thine by the most voluntary and deliberate obligations. The
portion of Jacob is my joyful choice, nor need I fear losing it while thy word
is established as the heavens.

The Lord, who made heaven, earth, and sea,
And all that they contain,
Will never quit his steadfast truth,
Nor make his promise vain.
Were my dependence on myself I were undone: The first temptation would shake
my resolutions; I should sell the inestimable riches of thy love for a trifle,
and fool away immortal pleasures for the joys of a moment; a specious delusion
would seduce me from all my hopes of a glorious futurity, I shall fall a victim
to my own folly, and must inevitably perish, if thou forsake me: But the
strength of Israel is my hope, the Mighty One of Jacob my defense.

Thou art the rock of ages; the fixed and immutable divinity is my high tower,
and my refuge, my Redeemer, and Almighty Savior. These were the blessed, the
glorious titles by which thou did at first assure my doubtful soul: These
were the transporting names I knew and called thee by; and thou have answered
them through all the changes of my life.

I was thy early care; thou did support my helpless infancy, and art the
watchful guide of my unsteady youth. Which way soever I turn, I meet thy mercy,
and trace thy providence; and as long as I live I will record thy benefits, and
depend on thy truth; those benefits which have constantly pursued me, and that
truth which has never deceived me, and is engaged never to abandon me.
Transporting assurance! What further security can I ask? What security can I
wish beyond eternal veracity? The mountains shall depart, and the hills be
removed, but thy kindness shall not depart, nor the covenant of thy peace be
broken; that covenant which has been sealed by the blood of the Son of God, and
in that holy sacrament I have received the pledges of thy love. Thou did
gracionsly invite me into that communion, and meet me there with the most
unmerited favor.

Fear not, say thou, poor trembling soul, for I am thy Redeemer and thy
mighty Savior, the hope of Israel, and in my name shall all the nations of the
earth be blessed; I am gracious and merciful, long-suffering, and abundant in
goodness and truth: These are the titles by which I have revealed myself to
men. I came the expected Messiah, the star of Jacob, and the glory of the
Gentiles. I came from the fullness of ineffable glory, in the form of man, to
redeem the race of Adam. I am willing and able to save, and whosoever comes to
me, I will in no wise cast away. Fear not, I had kind designs toward thee from
eternity; and by these visible signs of my body and blood, I seal my love to
thy soul: Take here the pledges of heaven, the assurances of everlasting
happiness.

It is enough, replied my transported soul, divide the world as thou will, let
others unenvied share its glory; thy love is all I crave, I am blessed with
that assurance, I am surrounded with the joys of paradise; every place is a
heaven, while my beloved is mine, and I am his.

If all the monarchs, whose command supreme,
Divides the wide dominion of this ball,
Should offer each his boasted diadem,
I would not quit thy favor for them all:
These trifles with contempt I would resign,
The world's a toy, while I can call thee mine.
Let God and angels witness for me, that I renounce the world, and choose thy
love as my portion; witness that I sacrifice my darling sins to thee; and from
this moment solemnly devote myself to thy service.

Thus did I engage myself to be the Lord's, and thus did thou graciously
condescend to seal the privileges of the new covenant to my soul. And O let the
solemn transaction never be forgotten; let it be writ in the volumes of
eternity; let it be engraven in the books of unalterable destiny: There let the
sacred articles stand recorded, and be had in everlasting remembrance.

XI. Thou art my God.
O God, thou art my God; thou art thy own blessedness, the center of thy own
desires, and the boundless spring of thy own happiness. Thou art immutable and
infinitely perfect, and therein consists thy blessedness and glory: But that
thou art my God, it is from thence flows all my consolation: This glorious
privilege is my dignity and boast, Thou art my God, and I will praise thee; my
father's God, and I will exalt thee; the Lord lives, and blessed be my rock,
and let the God of my salvation be exalted. Thy benignity is better than life,
therefore my lips shall praise thee.

I have all things in possessing thee; I find no want, no emptiness within; my
wishes are answered, and all my desires appeased, when I believe my title to
thy favor secure. Whatever tempests arise, whatever darkness surrounds me, yet
thou art my God; I cry, and the storms are appeased, and the darkness vanishes.
I find my expectations from the world disappointed, my friends false, and human
dependence vain; but still thou art my God, my unfailing confidence, my rock,
my everlasting inheritance. Death and hell level their darts against me; but
with a heavenly tranquillity I cry, Thou art my God: I dwell on high: my place
of defense is the munition of rocks.

My hiding place, my refuge, tower,
And shield, art thou, O Lord,
I firmly anchor all my hopes
On thy unerring word.
While thou art mine, what can I fear? Can omnipotence be vanquished? Can
almighty strength be opposed? When it can, then, and not till then, shall I
want security; then, and not till then, shall my confidence be shaken, and my
hopes confounded.

Thou art my God: Let me again repeat the glorious accents, and hear the
pleasurable sounds. Let me a thousand and a thousand times repeat it; it is
rapture all, and harmony: The harps of angels and their tongues, what notes
more melodious could they sing or play? What but these transporting words give
the emphasis to all their joys? On this they dwell, it is their eternal theme,
Thou art my God. Like me, every seraph boasts the glorious propriety, and owes
his happiness to those important words: In them unbounded joys are
comprehended, paradise itself, all heaven is here described; all that is
possible to be uttered of celestial blessedness is here contained.

My God, my all-sufficient good,
My portion, and my choice;
In thee my vast desires are filled,
And all my powers rejoice.
My God, my triumph, and my glory, let others boast of what they will, and
pride themselves in human securities; let them place their confidence in their
wealth, their honor, and their numerous friends; I renounce all earthly
dependence, and glory only in my God.

From him alone my joys shall rise,
And run eternal rounds,
Beyond the limits of the skies,
And all created bounds.
When death shall remove all other supports, and force me to quit my title to
the dearest names below, in my God I shall have an unchangeable propriety: That
engagement shall remain firm when I shall lose my hold of all other enjoyments:
when all human things vanish with an everlasting flight, I shall bid them a
joyful adieu, and breathe out my soul with this triumphant exclamation, Thou
art my God, my inheritance, my eternal possession: Nor death nor hell shall
ever separate me from thy love.

Thou art my God. Let me survey the extent of my blessedness: Let me take a
prospect of my vast possession: Let me consider its dimensions! O height! O
depth! O length and breadth immeasurable! I have all that is worth possessing,
thou art my God.

But what have I uttered? is mortality permitted to speak these daring words?
Can the race of man make such glorious pretensions? Thou thyself can give no
more: Thou that art thy own happiness, and the spring of joy to all thy
creatures; with thee are the fountains of pleasure, and in thy presence is
fullness of joy; immortal life and happiness flow from thee, and they are
necessarily blessed who are surrounded with thy favor; thou art their God, and
thou art my God, to everlasting ages.

Earth flies with all the charms it has in store,
Its snares and gay temptations are no more,
Creatures no more of entity can boast,
The streams, the hills, and towering groves are lost.
The sun, the stars, and the fair fields of light
Whithdraw, and now are vanished from my sight,
And God is all in all.
XII. Confession of Sin, with Hope of Pardon.
BREAK, break, insensible heart! Let confusion cover me, and darkness, black as
my own guilt, surround me. Lord, what a monster am I become? How hateful to
myself for offending thee? How much more detestable to thee, to thee against
whom I have offended? Why have I provoked the God on whom my being every moment
depends? The God, who out of nothing advanced me to a reasonable and immortal
nature, and put me in a capacity of being happy for ever? The God whose
goodness has run parallel with my life; who has preserved me in a thousand
dangers, and kept me even from the ruin I courted, and even while I repined at
the providence that saved me.

How often has he recovered me from eternal misery, and brought me back from
the very borders of hell, when there was but a dying groan, but one faint sigh,
between me and everlasting perdition? When all human help failed, and my
mournful friends were taking their last farewells; when every smiling hope
forsook me, and the horrors of death surrounded me; to God I cried from the
depths of misery and despair; I (...) and he was entreated, and rescued my life
from (...): He brought me out of the miry clay, and set my feet upon a rock. A
thousand instances of thy goodness could I recount, and all to my own confusion.

Could I consider thee as my enemy, I might forgive myself; but (...) I
consider thee as my best friend, my (...) father, the sustainer of my life, and
author of my happiness, good God! what a monstrous thing do I appear, who have
sinned against thee? Could I charge thee with severity, or call thy laws
rigorous and unjust, I had some excuse; but I am silenced there by the
conviction of my own reason, which assents to all thy precepts as just and
holy. But to heighten my guilt, I have violated the sacred rules I approve: I
have provoked the justice I fear, and offended the purity I adore.

Yet still there are higher aggravations of my iniquity; and what gives me the
utmost confusion is, that I have sinned against unbounded love and goodness:
horrid ingratitude! here lies the emphasis of my folly and misery: the sense of
this torments me, can I not say, as much as the dread of hell, or the fears of
losing heaven? Thy love and tender compassion, the late pleasing subjects of my
thoughts, are on this account become my terror. The titles of an enemy and a
judge scarce found more painful to my ears, than those of a friend and a
benefactor, which so shamefully enhance my guilt: those sacred names confound
and terrify my soul, because they furnish my conscience with the most exquisite
reproaches: The thoughts of such goodness abused, and such clemency affronted,
seem to me almost as insupportable as those of thy wrath and severity.

O whither shall I turn! I dare not look upward; the sun and stars upbraid me
there: If I look downward, the fields and fountains take their Creator's part,
and heaven and earth conspire to aggravate my sins; those common blessings tell
me how much I am indebted to thy bounty; but, Lord, when I recall thy
particular favors, I am utterly confounded; what numerous instances could I
recount? Nor has my rebellion yet shut up the fountain of thy grace; for yet I
breathe, and yet I live, and live to implore a pardon: Heaven is still open,
and the throne of God accessible. But oh! with what confidence can I approach
it? What motives can I urge, but such as carry my own condemnation in them.

Shall I urge thy former pity and indulgence? This were to plead against
myself; and yet thy clemency, that clemency which I have abused, is the best
argument I can bring; thy grace and clemency, as revealed in Jesus, the Son of
thy love, the blessed reconciler of God and man.

O whither has my folly reduced me? With what words shall I choose to address
thee? Pardon, my iniquity, O Lord, for it is great: Surprising argument! yet
this will magnify thy goodness, and yield me an eternal theme to praise thee;
it will add an emphasis to all my grateful songs, and tune my harp to
everlasting harmony. The ransomed of the Lord shall join with me, while this
glorious instance of thy grace excites their wonder, and my unbounded
gratitude: thus shall thy glory be exalted.

O Lord God, permit a poor worthless creature to plead a little with thee; what
honor will my destruction bring thee? What profit, what triumph to the
Almighty will my perdition be? Mercy is thy brightest attribute; this gives
thee all thy loveliness, and completes thy beauty. By names of kindness and
indulgence thou have chosen to reveal thyself to men; by titles of the most
tender import thou have made thyself known to my soul; titles which thou do
not yet disdain, but art still compassionate and ready to pardon.

But that thou have or wilt forgive me, O my God, aggravates my guilt. And will thou indeed forgive me? will thou remit the gloomy score, and restore the
privilege I have forfeited? Wondrous love! astonishing benignity! Let me never
live to repeat my ingratitude; let me never live to break my penitent vows; let
me die ere that unhappy moment arrive.

XIII. The Absence of God on Earth.
WHAT is hell? What is damnation, but an exclusion from thy presence? It is the
want of that which gives the regions of darkness all their horror: What is
heaven? What are the satisfactions of angels, but the views of thy glory? What
but thy smiles and complacence are the springs of their immortal transports?

Without the light of thy countenance, what privilege is my being! What can
thou thyself give me to countervail the infinite loss? Could the riches, the
empty glories, and insipid pleasures of the world, recompense me for it? Ah!
no. Not all the variety of the creation could satisfy me, while I am deprived
of thee: Let the ambitious, the licentious and covetous, share these trifles
among themselves; they are no amusements for my dejected thoughts.

There was a time (but ah! that happy time is past, those blissful minutes
gone) when with a modest assurance I could call thee my father, my almighty
friend, my defense, my hope, and my exceeding great reward: But those glorious
advantages are lost, those ravishing prospects withdrawn, and to my trembling
soul thou do no more appear but as a consuming fire, an inaccessible majesty,
my severe judge, and my omnipotent adversary; and who shall deliver me out of
thy hands? Where shall I find a shelter from thy wrath? What shades can cover
me from thy all-seeing eye?

One glance from thee, one piercing ray
Would kindle darkness into day:
The veil of night is no disguise,
No screen from thy all-searching eyes:
Through midnight shades thou find'st thy way,
As in the blazing noon of day.
But will the Lord cast off for ever? Will he be favorable no more? Has God
indeed forgotten to be gracious? Will he shut out my prayer for ever, and must
I never behold my maker? Must I never meet those smiles that fill the heavenly
inhabitants with unutterable joys? those smiles which enlighten the celestial
region, and make everlasting day above? In vain then have these wretched eyes
beheld the light, in vain am I endued with reasonable faculties and immortal
principles: Alas! what will they prove but everlasting curses, if I must never
see the face of God?

Is it a dream? or do I hear
The voice that so delights my ear?
Lo, he over hills his steps extends,
And bounding from the cliffs descends:
Now like a roe outstrips the wind,
And leaves the panting heart behind.
I have waited for thee as they that wait for the morning, and thy returns are
more welcome than the springing daylight after the horrors of a melancholy
night; more welcome than ease to the sick, than water to the thirsty, or rest
to the weary traveller. How undone was I without thee? In vain, while thou were
absent, the world has tried to entertain me; all it could offer was like jests
to dying men, or like recreations to the damned. On thy favor alone my
tranquillity depends; deprived of that, I should sigh for happiness in the
midst of a paradise: Thy loving kindness is better than life, and if a taste of
thy love be thus transporting, what ecstasies shall I know when I drink my fill
of the streams of bliss that flow from thy right hand for ever? But when --

When shall this happy day of vision be?
When I shall make a near approach to thee?
Be lost in love and wrapped in ecstasy?
Oh! when shall I behold thee all serene,
Without this envious, cloudy veil between?
It Is true; the sacred elements At the Lord's Supper.
impart
Thy virtual presence to my faithful heart,
But to my sense still unreveal'd thou art.
This, though a great, is an imperfect bliss,
To see a shadow for the God I wish.
My soul a more exalted pitch would fly,
And view thee in the heights of majesty.
XIV. Banishment from God for ever.
DEpart from me, ye cursed: Oh! let me never hear thy voice pronounce those
dreadful words. With what terrors would that sentence pierce my heart, while it
thunders in my ears? Oh! rather speak me into my primitive nothing, and with
one potent word finish my existence. To be separated from thee, and cursed with
immortality, who can sustain the intolerable doom?

O dreadful state of black despair,
To see my God remove,
And fix my doleful station where
I must not taste his love,
nor view the light of thy countenance for ever. Unutterable woe! there is no
hell beyond it. Separation from God is the depth of misery. Blackness of
darkness and eternal night must necessarily involve a soul excluded from thy
presence. What life, what joy, what hope is to be found where thou art not? I
want words to paint my thoughts of that dismal state. Oh! let me never be
reserved for the dreadful experience! rather let loose thy wrath, and in a
moment reduce me into nothing.

Depart from thee! Oh! whither should I go from thee? Into utter darkness? That
makes no addition at all to the wretch's misery that is banished from thy face.
After that fearful doom, I should without constraint seek out shades as dark as
hell, being most agreeable to my own despair, and in the horrors of eternal
night bewail the infinite loss.

The remembrance of that lost happiness would render celestial day
insufferable. The light of paradise could not cheer me without thy favor: The
songs of angels would but heighten my anguish, and torment me with a scene of
bliss which I must never taste. The sight of thy favorites, and the glories of
thy court, would but excite my envy, and fill me with madness, while I
considered myself the object of thine eternal indignation: Nor could all the
harmony (...) heaven allay the horror of that reflection.

The groans of the damned, and the darkness of the infernal caverns, would
better suit my grief. There to the cries of tormented ghosts, and to the sound
of eternal tempests, I might join my wild complaints, and lament the loss of
infinite bliss, and curse my own folly: But all the plagues below, if I might
speak my present thoughts, should not extort a blasphemous reflection on the
divine attributes; for I know I deserve eternal misery, and even in hell I
think I should confess thy justice. Thy long-experienced clemency, I am sure,
ought to silence my reproaches for ever, and to all eternity leave thee
unblemished with the imputation of cruelty.

But oh! what agonies would the remembrance of thy former favor excite? What
exquisite remorse would it give me to recall those happy moments when thou did
bless my retired devotions with thy presence? After I have relished those
divine entertainments, how bitter would the dregs of thy wrath be? Whither
would thy frowns sink me, after I have enjoyed the light of thy countenance?

If I must lose thy favor, oh! let me forget what that word imports, and blot
for ever from my remembrance the joys that a sense of thy love has excited: Let
no traces of those sacred transports be left on my soul.

But must I depart from thee into everlasting fire? Double and dreadful curse!
And yet unquenchable flames, and infernal chains (if I can judge in this life
of such awful futurities) would be less terrible than the sense of those lost
joys. That loss would endure no reflection; the review would be for ever
insufferable; the ages of eternity could not diminish the exquisite regret;
still it would excite new and unutterable anguish, and rack me with infinite
despair.

Blessed God, pity the soul whose extremest horror is the doom of an eternal
departure from thee. Draw my spirit into the holiest and the nearest union with
thyself that is possible, while it dwells in this flesh; and let me here
commence that delightful residence and converse with God, which nor death, nor
judgment shall ever destroy, nor shall a long eternity ever put a period to it.

XV. The Glory of God in his' Works of Creation, Providence and Redemption.
MY being immediately flows from thee, and should I not praise my omnipotent
Maker? I received the last breath I drew from thee, thou do sustain my life
this very moment, and the next depends entirely on thy pleasure. It is the
dignity of my nature to know, and my happiness to praise and adore my great
original. But oh! thou supreme of all things, how art thou to be extolled by
mortal man! I say to corruption, thou art my father, and to the worms, ye are
my brethren; my days are as a hand's breadth, and my life is nothing before
thee; but thou art the same, and thy years never fail: From everlasting to
everlasting, thou art God, the incomprehensible, the immutable divinity. The
language of paradise, and the strains of celestial eloquence, fall short of thy
perfections; the firstborn sons of light lose themselves in blissful
astonishment in search of thy excellencies; even they with silent ecstasy adore
thee, while thou art veiled with ineffable splendour.

The bright, the blessed divinity is known
And comprehended by himself alone.
Who can conceive the extent of that power, which out of nothing brought
materials for a rising world, and from a gloomy chaos bid the harmonious
universe appear?

Confusion heard the voice, and wild uproar
Stood ruled; stood vast infinity confined.
At thy word the pillars of the sky were framed, and its beauteous arches
raised: Thy breath kindled the stars, adorned the moon with silver rays, and
gave the sun its flaming splendour. Thou did prepare for the waters their
capacious bed, and by thy power set bounds to the raging billows: By thee the
valleys were clothed in their flowery pride, and the mountains crowned with
groves. In all the wonderful effects of nature, we adore and confess thy power;
thou utterest thy voice in thunder, and do scatter thy lightnings abroad:
thou ridest on the wings of the wind, the mountains smoke, and the forests
tremble at thy approach; the summer and winter, the shady night, and the bright
revolutions of the day, are thine.

These are thy glorious works, parent of good,
Almighty; thine this universal frame:
Thus wondrous they: thyself how wondrous then!
But O! what must thy essential majesty and beauty be, if thou art thus
illustrious in thy works? if the discoveries of thy power and wisdom are thus
delightful, how transporting are the manifestations of thy goodness? From thee
every thing that lives receives its breath; and by thee are all upheld in life.
Thy providence reaches the least insect, for thou art good, and thy care
extends to all thy works. Thou feedest the ravens, and do provide the young
lions their prey: Thou scatterest thy blessings with a liberal hand on the
whole creation; man, ungrateful man, largely partakes thy bounty. Thou causest
thy rain to descend, and make thy sun to shine on the evil and unthankful;
for thou art good and thy mercy endures forever.

As the creator and preserver of men, thou art gloriously manifest; but oh! how
much more gloriously art thou revealed, as reconciling ungrateful enemies to
thyself by the blood of thy eternal Son? Here thy beneficence displays its
brightest splendour: Here thou do fully discover thy most magnificent titles,
THE LORD, THE LORD GOD, MERCIFUL AND GRACIOUS, LONG-SUFFERING, AND ABUNDANT IN
GOODNESS: How unsearchable are thy ways, and thy paths past finding out!
Infinite depths of love, never to be expressed by human language! and yet
should man be silent, the stones themselves would speak, and the mute creation
find a voice to upbraid his ungrateful folly.

XVI. Longing for the Coming of Christ.
COME, Lord Jesus, come quickly; oh come, lest my expectations faint, lest I
grow weary, and murmur at thy long delay. I am tired with these vanities, and
the world grows every day more unentertaining and insipid; it has now lost its
charms, and finds my heart insensible to all its allurements. With coldness and
contempt I view these transitory glories, inspired with nobler prospects and
vaster expectation by faith. I see the promised land, and every day brings me
nearer the possession of my heavenly inheritance. Then shall I see God and
live, and face to face behold my triumphant Redeemer,

And in his favor find immortal light.
Ye hours and days, cut short your tedious flight;
Ye months and years (if such allotted be,
In this detested barren world for me)
With hasty revolution roll along,
I languish with impatience to be gone.
I have nothing here to linger for; my hopes, my rest, my treasure and my joys
are all above: My soul faints for the courts of the Lord in a dry and thirsty
land, where there is no refreshment.

How long shall I dwell in Mesheck, and sojourn in the tents of Kedar? When
will the wearisome journey of life be finished? When shall I reach my
everlasting home, and arrive at my celestial country? my heart, my wishes are
already there: I have no engagements to delay my farewell, nothing to detain me
here; but wander an unacquainted pilgrim, a stranger and desolate, far from my
native regions.

My friends are gone before, and are now triumphing in the skies, secure of the
conquest, possessed of the rewards of victory. They survey the field of battle,
and look back with pleasure on the distant danger: Death and hell forever
vanquished, leave them in the possession of endless tranquillity and joy; while
I, beset with a thousand snares, and tired with continual (...) unsteadily
maintain the field, till active faith (...) in, assures me of the conquest, and
shows me the immortal crown. It is faith tells me that light is sown for the
righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart: It assures me that my
Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand the last day on the earth; and though
after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God; whom I
shall see for myself, and not another; and these eyes shall (...) though my
reins be consumed within me. Amen, even so come Lord Jesus. This must be the
language of my soul till thou do appear, and these my impatient breathings
after thee. Till I see thy salvation, my heart and flesh will pine for the
living God.

Grant me, O Lord, to fulfill as a hireling my day; shorten the space, and let
it be full of action. It is of small importance how few there are of these
little circles of days and hours, so they are but well filled up with devotion,
and with all proper duty.

XVII. Seeking after an absent God.
OH! let not the Lord be angry, and I who am but dust will speak! Why do thou
withdraw thyself, and suffer me to pursue thee in vain? If I am surrounded with
thy immensity, why am I thus insensible of thee? Why do I not find thee, if
thou art every where present? I search thee in the temple, where thou have
often met me; there I have seen the traces of thy majesty and beauty; but those
sacred visions bless my sight no more. I search thee in my secret retirements,
where I have called upon thy name, and have often heard the whispers of thy
voice; that celestial conversation has often reached and raptured my soul, but
I am solaced no more with those divine condescensions; I listen, but I hear
those gentle sounds no more; I pine and languish, but thou fliest me; still I
wither in thy absence, as a drooping plant for the reviving sun.

O when will thou scatter this melancholy darkness? When shall the shadows flee
before thee? When shall the cheerful glory of thy grace dawn upon my mind at
thy approach? I shall revive at thy light? my vital spirits will confess thy
presence; grief and anxiety will vanish before thee, and immortal joys surround
my soul.

Where thou art present, heaven and happiness ensue; hell and damnation fill
the breast where thou art absent. While God withdraws I am encompassed with
darkness and despair; the sun and stars shine with an uncomfortable luster, the
faces of my friends grow tiresome; the smiles of angels would fail to cheer my
languishing spirit. I grow unacquainted with tranquillity; peace and joy are
empty sounds to me, and words without a meaning.

Tell me not of glory and pleasure, there are no such things without my God;
while he withdraws, what delight can these trifles afford? All that amuses
mankind, are but dreams of happiness, shades and fantastic appearances: What
compensation can they make for an infinite good departed? All nature cannot
repair my loss: Heaven and earth would offer their treasures in vain; not all
the kingdoms of this world, nor the thrones of archangels, could give me a
recompense for an absent God.

O where can my grief find redress? whence can I draw satisfaction when the
fountain of joy seals up its streams? My sorrows are hopeless till he return;
without him my night will never see a dawn, but extend to everlasting darkness:
Content and joy will be eternal strangers to my breast. Had I all things within
the compass of creation to delight me, his frowns would blast the whole
enjoyment; unreconciled to God, my soul would be for ever at variance with
itself.

Even now, while I believe thy glory hid from me but with a transient eclipse,
while I wait for thy return, as for the dawning day, my soul suffers
inexpressible agonies at the delay; the minutes seem to linger, and days are
lengthened into ages: But, Lord, what keener anguish should I feel, did I think
thy presence had totally forsaken me, did I imagine thy glory should no more
arise on my soul? My spirits fail at the supposition; I cannot face the
dreadful apprehensions of my God for ever gone. Is it not hell in its most
horrid prospect? eternal darkness, and the undying worm, infinite ruin and
irreparable damage? Compared to this, what were all the plagues that earth
could threaten, or hell invent? what is disgrace, and poverty, and pain? what
is all that mortals fear, real or imaginary evils? they are nothing compared to
the terrors which the thought of losing my God excites.

O thou, who art my boundless treasure, my infinite delight, my all, my
ineffable portion, can I part with thee? I may see without light, and breathe
without air, sooner than be blessed without my God. Happiness separate from
thee were a contradiction, an impossibility (if I dare speak it) to omnipotence
itself. I feel a flame which the most glorious creation could not satisfy; an
emptiness which nothing but infinite love could fill. I must find thee, or
weary myself in an eternal pursuit. Nothing shall divert me in the endless
search, no obstacle shall fright me back, no allurement withhold me, nothing
shall flatter or relieve my impatience; my bliss, my heaven, my all depends on
the success. Show me where thou art, O my God, conduct me into thy presence,
and let thy love confine me there for ever.

XVIII. Appeals to God concerning the Supremacy of Love to him.
O GOD, when I cease to love and praise thee, let me cease to breathe and live;
when I forget thee, let me forget the name of happiness, and let every pleasing
idea be razed from my memory. When thou art not my supreme delight, let all
things else deceive me; let me grow unacquainted with peace, and seek repose in
vain: let delusions mock my gayest hopes, let my desires find no satisfaction,
till they are terminated all in thee. When I forget the satisfactions of thy
love, O my God, let pleasure be a stranger to my soul; when I prefer not that
to my chiefest joy, let me be insensible of all delight; when thy benignity is
not dearer to me than life, let that life become my burden and my pain.

Search the inmost recesses of my heart, and if thou find any competitor
there, remove the darling vanity, and blot every name but thine from my breast.
Let me find nothing but emptiness in the creature, when I forsake the
all-sufficient Creator: let the streams be cut off, when I wander away and
abandon the fountain. Let me be destitute of assistance, when I cease to rely
on thee; let my lips be for ever silent, when they refuse to acknowledge thy
benefits, and make not thee the subject of their highest praise. Let no joyful
strain enter at my ears, when thy name is not the most delightful sound they
can convey to my heart.

I have been pronouncing heavy curses on myself, if thy love be not my chief
blessing; yet, O my dearest good, my portion, and my only felicity, might I not
go on farther still, and even venture immortal joys on the sincerity of my love
to thee? Blessed Lord, forgive these dangerous efforts of a mortal tongue,
which are the mere out-breakings of a fervent affection. I could even dare to
pledge all my hopes and my pretensions to future happiness, (and O let not my
heart deceive me) I think I could risk them all, if thou thyself art not the
object of my brightest hopes, and the light of thy countenance the height of
that expected happiness.

If I desire any thing in heaven or on earth in comparison of thee, I am almost
ready to say, banish me as an eternal exile from the light of paradise: Even
that paradise would be melancholy darkness without thee, and the obscurest
corner of the creation, blessed with thy presence, would be more agreeable. Oh!
where could I be happy, remote from thee? what imaginable good could supply thy
absence? Say, O my God, do I not love thee?

Shall I call the holy angels to witness? shall I call heaven and earth to
witness? will not the most high God himself, the possessor of heaven and earth,
condescend to witness the ardour and sincerity of my love?

With what pleasure do I reflect on the obligations by which I have devoted
myself to thee? My soul collects itself, and with an entire assent gives up all
its powers to thee: I would bind myself to thee beyond all the ties that
mortals know. You ministers of light, give me your flames, and teach me your
celestial forms; let all be noble and pathetic, and solemn as your own immortal
vows, and I will joyfully go through them all to bind myself to my God for
ever. Say, now, ye heavens and earth, say, ye holy angels, and O thou
all-knowing God, say, do I not love thee?

XIX. A devout Rapture, or Love to God inexpressible.
THOU radiant sun, thou moon, and all ye sparkling stars, how gladly would I
leave your pleasant light to see the face of God? Ye crystal streams, ye groves
and flowery lawns, my innocent delights, how joyfully could I leave you to meet
that blissful prospect? and you delightful faces of my friends, I would this
moment quit you all to see him whom my soul loves; so loves, that I can find no
words to express the unutterable ardour: Not as the miser loves his wealth, nor
the ambitious his grandeur; not as the libertine loves his pleasures, or the
generous man his friend: These are flat similitudes to describe such an intense
passion as mine. Not as a man, scorched in a fever, longs for a cooling
draught; not as a weary traveller wishes for soft repose; my restless desires
admit of no equal comparison from these.

I love my friend; my vital breath and the light of heaven are dear to me: But
should I say I love my God as I love these, I should belie the sacred flame
which aspires to infinity. It is thee, abstractly, then, O uncreated beauty,
that I love; in thee, my wishes are all terminated; in thee, as in their
blissful center, all my desires meet, and there they must be eternally fixed:
it is thou alone that must constitute my everlasting happiness. Were the harps
of angels silent, there would be harmony for me in the whispers of thy love:
Were the fields of light darkened, thy smiles would bless me with everlasting
day; the vision of thy face will attract my eyes, nor give me leisure to waste
a look on other objects to all eternity, any farther than God is to be seen in
his creatures. All their beams of grace, and joy, and glory, are derived from
thee, the eternal sun, and will merit my attention no farther than they reflect
thy image, or discover thy excellencies.

Even at this distance, encompassed with the shades of death, and the mists of
darkness, in these cold, melancholy regions, when a ray of thy love breaks in
on my soul, when through the clouds I can trace but one feeble beam, even that
obscures all human glory, and gives me a contempt for whatever mortality can
boast. What wonders, then, will the open vision of thy face effect, when I
shall enjoy it in so sublime a degree, that the magnificence of the skies will
not draw my regard, nor the converse of angels divert my thoughts from thee?
Thou will engross my everlasting attention, and I should abound in felicity if
I had nothing to entertain me but immediate communion with the infinite
divinity.

Mend thy pace, old lazy time, and shake thy heavy sands; make shorter circles,
ye rolling planets; when will your destined courses be fulfilled? Thou restless
sun, how long will thou travel the celestial road? when will thy starry walk be
finished? when will the commissioned angel arrest thee in thy progress, and
lifting up his hand, swear by the unutterable name, that time shall be no more.
O happy period! my impatient soul springs forward to salute thee, and leaves
the lagging days, and months and years far behind. Make haste, my beloved, and
be like a roe, or a young heart on the spicey mountains.

I pine, I die for a sight of thy countenance; oh! turn the veil aside, blow
away the separating cloud; pull out the pins of this tabernacle; break the
cords, and let fall the curtain of mortality. Oh! let it interpose no longer
between me and my perfect bliss. I feel those flames of divine love, which are
unextinguishable as the lights of heaven, not death itself shall quench the
sacred ardour.

Ye ministers of light, ye guardians of the just, stand and witness to my vows;
and in a humble dependenc^ on thy grace, O Jesus, may I not venture to bid
these thy flaming ministers protest against me when I change my love, and stand
my accusers at the la^t judgment? When I prove false to thee, may I not venture
to say to them all, bring in your awful evidence, and proclaim my perjury.

For you have listened, while the sacred name
That kindles in each heavenly breast a flame,
You listened while it melted on my tongue,
Flowed from my lips, and graced the midnight song.
Blessed was the time, and swiftly fled the hours,
While holy love employed my noblest powers:
The heavens appeared, and the propitious skies
Unveiled their inmost glories to my eyes.
Oh! stay, I cried, ye happy moments stay,
Nor in your flight snatch these delights away:
I ask no more the rising sun to view,
To mortals and their hopes I bid adieu.
These heavens and this earth have been witnesses to my vows: The holy angels
have been witnesses, and all will join together to condemn me when I violate my
faith. Strengthen and confirm it, O my Savior, and make the bonds of it
immortal.

If I were only to reason upon this subject, I might say, what motive could
earth, what could hell, what could heaven itself propose to tempt my soul to
change its love? What could they lay in the balance against an infinite good?
what could be thrown in as a stake against the favor of God? Ask the happy
souls who know what the light of his countenance imports, who drink in joy and
immortality from his smiles, ask them what value they set on their enjoyments;
ask them what in heaven or earth should purchase one moment's interval of their
bliss; ask some radiant seraph, amidst the fervency of his raptures, at what
price he values his happiness; and when these have named the purchase, earth
and hell may try to balance mine. Let them spread the baits that tempt deluded
men to ruin; let riches, honor, beauty, and bewitching pleasure appear in all
their charms, the sensuality of the present and past ages, the Persian
delicacy, and the Roman pride; let them uncover the golden mines, and disclose
the ruby sparkling in its bed; let them open the veins of sapphire, and show
the diamond glittering on its rock; let them all be thrown into the balance;
alas! their weight is too little and too light. Let the pageantries of State be
added, imperial titles, and the ensigns of majesty; put in all that boundless
vanity imagines, or wild ambition craves, crowns and sceptres, regal vestments
and golden thrones -- the scale still mounts. Throw in the world entire -- it
is unsubstantial, and light as airy vanity.

Are these thy highest boasts, O deluding world? -- ye ministers of darkness,
have you nothing else to offer? Are these your utmost proposals? Are these a
compensation for the FAVOR OF GOD? Alas! that boundless word has a meaning
which out-weighs them all: Infinite delight, unconceivable joy are expressed in
it; the light of his countenance signifies more than angels can describe, or
mortality imagine: And shall I quit all that an everlasting heaven means, for
empty shadows?

Go, ye baffled tempters, go offer your toys to madmen and fools! they all
vanish under my scorn, and cannot yield so much as an amusement to my aspiring
thoughts. The sun, in all his spacious circuit, beholds nothing to tempt my
wishes. These winding skies, in all their ample round, contain nothing equal to
my desires; my ambition has far different ends, and other prospects in view;
nothing below the joys of angels can satisfy me.

Let me explore the worlds of life and beauty, and find a path to the dazzling
recesses of the Most High: Let me drink at the fountainhead of pleasure, and
derive all that I want from original and uncreated fullness and felicity.

Oh divine love! let me launch out into thy pleasurable depths, and be
swallowed up of thee: Let me plunge at once in immortal joy, and lose myself in
the infinite ocean of happiness.

Till then I pine for my celestial country: till then I murmur to the winds and
streams, and tell the solitary shades my grief. The groves are conscious to my
complaints, and the moon and stars listen to my sighs; by their silent lights I
talk over my heavenly concerns, and give a vent to my divine affections in
mortal language; then looking upward, I grow impatient to reach the milky way,
the seats of joy and immortality.

Come love, come life, and that blessed day
For which I languish, come away;
When this dry soul, these eyes shall see,
And drink the unsealed source of thee.
Oh come, I cry, thou whom my soul loves: I would go on, but want expression,
and vainly struggle with the unutterable thought.

Tell me, ye sons of light, who feel the force of these celestial fires, in
what language you paint their sacred violence? Or do the tongues of seraphs
faulter? Does the language of paradise want emphasis here, and immortal
eloquence fail? Surely your happiness is more perfect than all your
descriptions of it: heaven echoes to your charming notes as far as they reach,
while divine love, which is all your song, is infinite, and knows no limits of
degree or duration.

Yet I would say, some gentle spirit come and instruct me in your art; lend me
a golden harp, and guide the sacred flight; let me imitate your devout strains,
let me copy out your harmony, and then,

Some of the fairest choir above
Shall flock around my song,
With joy to hear the name they love
Sound from a mortal tongue.
Blessed and immortal creatures, I long to join with you in your celestial
style of adoration and love, I long to learn your ecstasies of worship and joy
in a language which mortals cannot pronounce, and to speak the divine passion
of my soul in words which are now unspeakable.

XX. Self-Reproof for Inactivity.
IS it possible that I should one day be wrapped almost into the third heavens,
and ere a few weeks have passed over me, I should find myself creeping among
the insects of the earth, and almost as meanly busied as they? Can divine love,
which exalted me lately into flaming transports, so far subside, and grow cool
within me? Can it leave me so unactive as I now feel myself? What shall I do to
shame my conscience with reproaches, and renew the flame of religious zeal and
vigor?

Alas! how does the activity of men about the little affairs of human life,
condemn my negligence in matters of everlasting consequence? Does the fond
lover, with such anxiety and impatience, pursue the object of his wishes, and
shall not divine beauty and infinite loveliness inflame my desires to a nobler
height, and excite my languishing devotion?

Are the ambitious so restless and solicitous to make themselves great, and to
purchase the veneration of fools? Do they lay such mighty projects, and compass
their designs with such (...) and difficulty, for mere pageantry and gaudy
trifles; and shall I, who am a candidate for heaven, a probationer for
celestial dignity, lose my title for want of diligence; shall I faint in the
noble strife, when God and angels are ready to assist me, and every moment's
toil will be recompensed with eternal ages of rest and triumph?

See, see the moments fly: the labor shortens, and the immense reward draws
near; the palm of victory, the starry crown are in view; the happy realms and
fields of light entertain me with their glorious prospect. Rouse thee, my soul,
to the most active pursuit of these felicities: Waken all thy sprightly powers,
and let it never, never be thy reproach, that the vigor and intenseness of thy
labors fall short of the pretensions of thy desire; or that thy holy industry
should sink so far below the fervor of those affections, which in a devout
hour thou have pronounced inexpressible.

O Lord, what a mutable thing is man! what frailty works in this flesh and
blood, and hangs heavy upon our better powers? It is grace, divine grace alone,
can keep alive that immortal spark within us, which came first from heaven, and
first taught our hearts to arise and spring upward. Preserve and complete thy
own work, almighty grace.

XXI. A joyful View of approaching Death.
O Death, where is thy sting? where is thy boasted victory? The conquest is
mine: I shall pass in triumph through thy dark dominions, and through the grace
of the Son of God, my divine leader, I shall appear there, not a captive, but a
conqueror.

O king of terrors, where are thy formidable looks? I can see nothing dreadful
in thy aspect: Thou appearest with no tokens of defiance, nor do thou come
with summons from a severe judge; but gentle invitations from my blessed
Redeemer, who has passed gloriously through thy territories, in his way to his
throne.

Thrice welcome, thou kind messenger of my liberty and happiness! a thousand
times more welcome than jubilee to the wretched slave, than pardon to a
condemned malefactor: I am going from darkness and confinement to immense light
and perfect liberty: from these tempestuous regions to the soft and peaceful
climes above; from pain and grief to everlasting ease and tranquillity. For the
toils of virtue, I shall immediately receive its vast rewards; for the reproach
of fools, the honor and applause of angels. In a few minutes I shall be higher
than yonder stars, and brighter far than they. I shall range the boundless
either, and breathe the balmy airs of paradise. I shall presently behold my
glorious Maker, and sing hallelujahs to my exalted Savior.

And now come, ye bright guardians of the just, conduct me through the unknown
and trackless either, for you pass and repass the celestial road continually;
you have commission not to leave me till I arrive at Mount Sion, the heavenly
Jerusalem, the city of the living God; till I come to the innumerable company
of angels, and the spirits of just men made perfect.

Hold out, faith and patience; it is but a little while and your work will be
at an end; but a few moments, and these sighs and groans shall be converted
into everlasting hallelujahs; but a few weary steps, and the journey of life
will be finished. One effort more, and I shall have gained the top of the
everlasting hills, and from yonder bright summit shall presently look back on
the dangers I have escaped in my travels through the wilderness.

Roll faster on, ye lingering minutes; the nearer my joys, the more impatient I
am to seize them: After these painful agonies, how greedily shall I drink in
immortal ease and pleasure? Break away, ye thick clouds, be gone, ye envious
shades, and let me behold the glories ye conceal: Let me see the promised land,
and survey the happy regions I am immediately to possess. How long will you
interpose between me and my bright sun, between me and the unclouded face of
God? Look up, my soul, see how sweetly those reviving beams break forth; how
they dispel the gloom, and gild the shades of death.

O blessed eternity; with what a cheerful splendour do thou dawn on my soul?
With thee comes liberty, and peace, and love, and endless felicity; but pain,
and sorrow, and tumult, and death and darkness vanish before thee for ever. I
am just upon the shores of those happy realms, where uninterrupted day and
eternal spring reside: Yonder are the delectable hills and harmonious vales,
which continually echo to the songs of angels. There the blissful fields extend
their verdure, and there the immortal groves ascend; but how dazzling is thy
prospect. O city of God, of whom such glorious things are spoken? In thee there
shall be no more night, nor need of the sun or moon; for the throne of God and
of the Lamb is in the midst of thee, and the nations that are saved shall walk
in thy light, and the kings of the earth shall bring their glory and honor
into thee, and there the glorious Lord shall be to us a place of defense, a
place of streams and broad rivers, and the voice of joy, and the shout of
triumph, shall be heard in thee for ever.

There holy souls perpetual sabbaths keep,
And never are concerned for food or sleep:
There new come saints with wreaths of light are crowned,
While ivory harps and silver trumpets sound:
There flaming seraphs sacred hymns begin,
And raptured cherubs loud responses sing.
My eyes shall there behold the King in his beauty, and oh! how ravishing will
the aspect of his love be? What unutterable ecstasies shall I feel, when I meet
those smiles which enlighten heaven, and exhilerate all the celestial regions?
When I shall view the beatific glory without one interposing cloud to eternity?
When I shall drink my fill at the fountains of joy, and in those rivers of
pleasure that flow from his right hand for ever.

XXII. A devout Resignation of Self to the divine Power and Goodness.
MY all-sufficient friend, my shield, and my exceeding great reward! I have
enough: Unbounded avarice can covet nothing beyond thee; the soul whom thou
do not suffice, deserves to be eternally poor. Thou art my supreme happiness,
my voluntary choice: I took thy love alone for my treasure, in that blessed day
when I entered into covenant with thee, and became thine: I made no articles
with thee for the friendships, the honors and pleasures of the world; but
solemnly renounced them all, and chose thy favor for my single inheritance,
leaving the conduct of my life entirely to thee.

These were my vows, and these I have often renewed; and shall I now retract
such sacred obligations, and alter a choice so just and reasonable? Forbid it,
gracious God! let me never be guilty of such madness: The world has often
disappointed my most confident expectations, but thou have never deceived me.
In all my distress I have found thee a certain refuge, my shield, my fortress,
my high tower, my deliverer, my rock, and he in whom I trust. When there was
none to save me, thy powerful hand has set me free; thou have redressed my
grievances, and dissipated my fears; thou have brought me light out of
obscurity, and turned my darkness into day.

When the world could afford me nothing but tempest and disorder, with thee I
have found repose and undisturbed tranquillity. Thou have been my long
experienced refuge, my unfailing confidence, and I steadfastly depend on thee
for my future conduct. I cannot err when guided by infinite wisdom; I must be
safe in the arms of eternal love, to which I humbly resign myself. Let me have
riches or poverty, honor or contempt; whatever comes from thy hands shall be
thankfully received. I would hear no voice but thine, nor make a step but where
I am following thee.

If thou would leave me to choose for myself, I would resign the choice again
to thee; I dread nothing more than the guidance of my own blind desires; I
tremble at the thought of such a fatal liberty: Avert, gracious God, that
miserable freedom. Thou foreseest all events, and at one single view do look
through eternal consequences; therefore do thou determine my circumstances, not
to gratify my own wild desires, but to advance thy glory.

Thou have an unquestioned right to dispose of me; I am thine by necessary
ties, and voluntary engagements, which I thankfully acknowledge and solemnly
renew: Deliberately and entirely I put myself into thy hands. Whatever interest
I have in this world I sacrifice to thee, and leave my dearest enjoyments to
thy disposal, acknowledging it my dearest happiness to be guided by thee.

Lord, what is man, that thou art mindful of him? That thou, who art supremely
blessed, and independently happy, should concern thyself with human affairs,
and condescend to make our wants as much thy care as if mortal miseries could
reach thee, and interrupt immortal blessedness. Thou would make us sensible
of thine indulgence by the most tender similitudes: A father's gentle care but
faintly shadows thine, and all we can conceive of human pity falls short of thy
compassion. Thou do seem to share in our calamities, and sympathize in all
our grief. No friend flies to our assistance with half the speed that love
brings thee, nor can thou ever want methods to relieve those that confide in
thee.

Thy providence finds or makes its way through all oppositions: The streams
shall roll back to their fountains, the sun shall stand still, and the course
of nature be reversed, rather than thou want means to bring thy purposes to
pass. No obstacle puts a stand to thy designs, nor obstructs thy methods: It is
thy will that makes nature and necessity: Who can stay thy hand, or say unto
thee, What do thou? Thy counsel shall stand, and thou will do all thy
pleasure. Nothing is impossible for thee to accomplish? Wherever I cast my
eyes, I see instances of thy power: The extended firmament, the sun and stars,
tell me what thou art able to perform; they attest thy omnipotence, and rebuke
my unbelief. The whole creation pleads for thee, and condemns my infidelity.

Almighty God, forgive my diffidence, while I confess it is most inexcusable.
Thy hand is not shortened, nor are the springs of thy bounty sealed; thy
ancient miracles have not exhausted thy strength, nor has perpetual
beneficence impoverished thee; thy power remains undiminished, and thy mercy
endures for ever. That dazzling attribute surrounds me with transporting
glories: Which way soever I turn, I meet the bright conviction; I cannot recall
a day of my past life on which some signature of thy goodness is not stamped.

Oh! who has tasted of thy clemency
In greater measure, or more often than I?
Which way soever I turn my face or feet,
I see thy mercy and thy glory meet.
In whatever thou have granted, or whatever thou have denied me, thy
beneficence has been mingled with every dispensation; thou have not taken the
advantage of my follies, nor been severe to my sins; but have remembered my
frame, and treated me with the utmost indulgence. Glory be to thy name for ever.

XXIII. Redeeming Love.
ALMIGHTY love, the theme of every heavenly song! Infinite grace, the wonder of
angels! forgive a mortal tongue that attempts thy praise; and yet should man be
silent, the mute creation would find a voice to upbraid him.

But oh! in what language shall I speak? with what circumstance shall I begin?
shall I roll back the volumes of eternity, and begin with the glorious design
that determined man's redemption before the birth of time, before the confines
of creation were fixed:

Infinite years before the day,
Or heavens began to roll?
Shall I speak in general of all the nations of the redeemed? or, to excite my
own gratitude, shall I consider myself, my worthless self, included by an
eternal decree among the number of those who should hear of a Redeemer's name,
and be marked out a partaker of that immense privilege? Before the foundation
of the hills were laid, the gracious design was formed, and the blessed plan of
it schemed out before the curtains of the sky were spread.

Lord! what is man? what am I? what is all the human race, to be thus regarded?
O narrow thoughts, and narrower words! here confess your defects; these are
heights not to be reached by you. Adorable measures of infinite clemency!
unsearchable riches of grace! with what astonishment do I survey you! I am
swallowed and lost in the glorious immensity. All, hail, ye divine mysteries,
ye glorious paths of the unsearchable Deity! let me adore, though I can never
express you.

Yet should I be silent, heaven and earth, nay hell itself, would reproach me:
The damned themselves would call me ungrateful, should I fail to celebrate that
grace whose loss they are for ever lamenting; a loss that leaves them for ever
desperate and undone. It is this grace which tunes the harps of heaven, and
yields them an immortal subject of harmony and praise. The spirits of just men
made perfect fix their contemplations here; they adore the glorious mystery,
and, while they sing the wonders of redeeming love, they ascribe sublime and
living honors to him who sits on the throne, and to the Lamb for ever. And
infinitely worthy art thou, O Lord, to receive the grateful homage: Who shall
not praise and magnify thy name? Who shall deny the tribute of thy glory?

But alas! what can mortal man add to thee? what can ^^^^ingness and vanity
give? We murmur from the dust, and attempt thy praise from the depths of
misery; yet thou do condescend to hear, and listen to our broken accents;
amidst the hallelujahs of angels, our groans ascend to thee, our complaints
reach thee: From the height of thy happiness, and from the exaltations of
eternal glory, thou have a regard to man, poor, wretched man! thou receivest
his homage with delight; his praises mingle with the harmony of angels, nor
interrupt the sacred concord. Those natives of heaven, those morning stars,
sing together in their heavenly beatitudes, nor disdain to let the sons of
earth and mortality join with them in celebrating the honors of Jesus, their
Lord and ours: To him be every tongue devoted, and let every creature forever
praise him. Amen.

XXIV. Pleading for Pardon and Holiness.
IMmortal spring of life, the fountain of all existence, the first and last,
without beginning of days, or end of years; before the heavens were created
thou wast, and shall remain unchanged while they wax old and decay. Thou art
infinitely blessed in thyself, thy glory admits of no addition; the praises of
angels cannot heighten thy happiness, nor the blasphemies of hell diminish it.
Thou can do every thing, and thy power finds no obstacle. Thou made heaven
and earth, the sea and the fountains of water; thou do according to thy will
in the armies of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth; thou hold
the waters in the hollow of thy hand, and measurest out the heavens with a
span: Thou comprehendest the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighest the
mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance: Thou coverest thyself with
light, as with a garment, and art surrounded with inaccessible splendour: Thou
art glorious in holiness, fearful in praises; the heavens are not clean in thy
sight; but thou chargest thine angels with folly: What then is man, that drinks
in iniquity like water? What is man, that thou art mindful of him; or the son
of man, that thou do thus visit him? It is because thou art good, and thy
mercy endures for ever; mercy is thy prevailing attribute. Thou art
compassionate, and infinitely gracious, and have fully manifested thy love and
beneficence to the race of man in the glorious methods of our redemption from
everlasting bondage and death by thy son Jesus.

Therefore with the lowest reverence, and most humble gratitude, I desire to
prostrate myself before thee, acknowledging it my greatest honor, and
undeserved privilege, to approach the Lord, and bow myself before the high God;
I that am unworthy to utter thy tremendous name, or once to lift up my eyes to
heaven. To my own confusion, I here confess I have abused the mercy which I now
implore, and injured that goodness and forbearance by my sins which I am now
addressing myself to. I have forfeited the very benefits I ask, and despise
those sacred privileges which I am forced to plead: I can use scarce any motive
but what would carry in it my own condemnation. Shall I implore thy mercy by
the gracious terms of the new covenant sealed by the blood of thy eternal Son!
alas! that gracious covenant I have violated, and profaned its sacred seals: I
have sinned against the clearest light, and the tenderest instances of love: I
have not only broken my obligations to thee as my Creator, but the stronger
engagements of thy adoption, even the glorious privilege of being admitted into
thy family, and numbered among the children of God.

But still those very circumstances that aggravate my guilt, exalt thy mercy;
here the freeness and magnificence of thy grace will display itself; here thou will answer the indulgent title of a father in its tenderest extent; I have no
sins too great for infinite clemency to pardon. Thou art God, and not man; and
as the heavens are high above the earth, so high are thy ways of compassion
above all human methods.

I dare not set bounds to thy goodness, nor affirm that thus far, and no
farther, divine patience extends. Thou have pardoned and re^t^^ed me to thy
favor too often for me now to despair: My penitent sighs were never rejected,
nor my humble request unanswered: I have always found the heavens open, and the
throne of God accessible, through the blood of a Redeemer. By his agony and
bloody sweat, by his cross and passion, by his painful death and glorious
resurrection, I implore thy pardon: He has made a full atonement, and divine
justice will demand no further satisfaction. To him give all the prophets
witness, that through his name, whosoever believes in him, shall receive
remission of sins.

O blessed Jesus! the hope of the Gentiles, the salvation of the ends of the
earth; the great Messiah, the promised Savior, who do answer those glorious
titles in their utmost signification; to thee, my certain, my experienced
refuge, I fly: O Son of God, hear me; O Lamb of God, who take away the sins
of the world, have mercy on me.

O eternal Spirit, the promised comforter, come with all thy sacred
consolations! come, and be as dew to the drooping flowers, as rain to the
parched ground; oh! come with thy reviving light, and dispel the darkness that
beclouds my soul: Break in like the sun after a melancholy night; one beam of
thine would melt this frozen, this obdurate heart, and kindle in my soul the
spark of holy love; breathe upon my cold affections, and raise them to a sacred
flame.

Searcher of hearts, from whom nothing is concealed, whose penetrating eyes
find out hypocrisy in its darkest disguise; thou know the desires of my
soul, and art my impartial witness that I kneel not here for the riches and
honors of the world; that I am not prostrate before thee for length of days or
pleasure; but that it is the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof,
that I seek. Give me not my portion with the rich and great, but let me have my
humble lot with thy children; let me bear contempt and derision, and suffer
reproach with the people of God, rather than enjoy the pleasures of sin, which
are but for a season.

Thy favor is the end of all my wishes, the constant subject of my prayer. Oh!
thou whose ears are open to the wants of all thy creatures, who hear the
young ravens when they cry from their nests to thee, who give the men of the
world the transitory things they choose, will thou deny the desires which thou
thyself do inspire and approve? O let me be filled with that righteousness
which I hunger and thirst after, and be satisfied with thy likeness. Thou can
not be diminished, whatever perfection thou do communicate to the creature;
endless liberality could not make thee poor.

I ask not privileges above the capacity of my nature, nor aspire to the
perfections of angels: I only beg that I may reach those heights of holiness
and divine love, which souls, invested with a mortal body like mine, and
encumbered with the same human passions, have attained. But in vain I strive to
imitate those bright examples thou have set before me; without thy assistance,
all my endeavors will prove successless. Thou know the frailty of my
nature, and the mighty difficulties I have to encounter: I have not only the
allurements of the world, but all the stratagems of hell to engage with, and a
treacherous heart within, ready on all occasions to betray me into sin and
endless perdition: O let my impotence and danger awaken thy compassion.

Remember thy former benignity, O Lord, and let that engage thee to grant me
new supplies of that grace, by which alone I shall prove victorious. Thy bounty
to any of the works of thy hands must always flow from the goodness of thy own
nature: for what creature can pretend to merit any thing from thee? I would
urge nothing but thy own infinite mercy, when I entreat thee not to let me
perish, after the wonderful things thou have done for my soul; after all the
pledges thou have given me of thy love, let not my follies provoke thee to
forsake me; but remember thy covenant, and its gracious articles, and act
according to thy own ineffable benignity, which has been the glorious motive of
every favor I have received from thee.

XXV. A Transport of Gratitude for saving Mercy.
I Bless a thousand times the happy day when first a beam of heavenly light
broke in on my soul; when the day star from on high visited me, and the
celestial light began to dawn. I welcomed its cheerful luster, and felt the
sacred influence; the flames of holy love awoke, and holy joys were kindled.

The earth and all its pageantry disappeared like clouds before the morning
sun: The scenes of paradise were opened -- seraphie pleasures and unutterable
delights: All hail, I cried, you unknown joys, you unexperienced pleasures!
compared to you, what is all I have relished till now? what is earthly beauty
and harmony? what is all that mortals call charming and attractive? I never
lived till now: I knew no more than the name of happiness till now: I have been
in a dream during all the days of my folly and vanity; but now I awake to the
life of heaven-born spirits, and taste the joys of angels.

XXVI. Importunate Requests for the Return of God to the Soul.
THOU great and glorious, thou invisible and universal Being, art thou no
nearer to be approached? Or do I search thee amiss? Is there a corner of the
creation unvisited by thee, or any place exempt from thy presence? I trace thy
footsteps through heaven and earth, but I cannot overtake thee.

Why do I seek thee, if thou art not here?
Or find thee not, if thou art every where?
Tell me, O my God, and my all, tell me where thou art to be found; for there
is the place of my rest. What imaginable good can supply thy absence? Deprived
of thee, all that the world could offer would be like a jest to a dying man,
and provoke my aversion and disdain. It is a God that I seek:

My wishes stoop not to a lower aim;
Thou, thou have kindled this immortal flame,
Which nothing can allay.
Adieu, adieu to all human things! Let me find my God, the end of all my
wishes: Why do thou keep back the face of thy throne? Why does the cloud and
sacred darkness conceal thee?

Thy voice produced the seas and spheres,
Bid the waves roll, and planets shine;
But nothing like thyself appears,
Through all these various works of thine.
O thou fairer than all the works of thy hands, will thou ever hide thyself
from a creature that loves and seeks thee with so intense desire? I appeal to
thee, O Lord, are not my breathings after thee most hearty and unfeigned? Doe^
not my soul pant after thee with a fervor which (...) be extinguished, and a a
sincerity which cannot be disguised?

For thee I pine, and am for thee undone:
As drooping flowers that want their parent sun.
How do my spirits languish for thee! No similitudes can express the vehemence
of my desires: Wealth and glory, friends and pleasure, lose their names
compared to thee. To follow thee I would leave them all behind; I would leave
the whole creation, and bid the fields and sparkling skies adieu. Let the
heavens and earth be no more, while thou endurest for ever, I can want no
support. My being itself, with all its blessedness, depends entirely on thee.

Place me far from the bounds of all creation, remote from all existence but
thy own; in that ineffable solitude let me be lost, let me expatiate there for
ever, let me run the endless rounds of bliss; -- but, alas; I flatter myself in
vain with scenes of unattainable happiness. I will search thee, then, where I
hope thou may be found. I cast my eyes to the bright regions above, and
almost envy the happy beings that see thy face unveiled. I search thee in the
flowery meadows, and listen for thee among the murmuring springs: Then, silent
and abstracted from human things, I search thee in holy contemplation. It is
all in vain: nor fields, nor floods, nor clouds, nor stars, reveal thee.

Ye happy spirits, that meet his smiles, and hear his voice, direct a mournful
wanderer while I seek him whom my soul loves, while I sigh and complain, and
cast my languishing eyes to yonder happy mansions; fain would I penetrate the
starry pavilions, and look through the separating firmament: Oh! that thou
would divide the clouds, that thou would rend the heavens, and give me one
glimpse of thy glory! that thou would display thy beauty; and in the midst of
these earthly scenes of amusing vanity, give me one moment's interval of
celestial blessedness.

One look of mercy from thy eye,
One whisper of thy voice,
Exceed a whole eternity
Employed in carnal joys.
Could I the spacious earth command,
Or the more boundless sea,
For one dear hour at thy right hand
I Would give them both away.
If things were put into just balances, and computed aright, for the first
moment of this satisfaction I am ready to say, the whole creation would be
cheaply lost: How gladly would I resign all for such a bliss Adieu to human
things; let me find my God, the end of all my wishes: It is he whom I seek, it
is he alone can satisfy my infinite desires. Oh! why do thou withdraw? Why
thus long conceal thyself? Where do thou retire? Nor earth, nor heaven reply
to my repeated calls.

Let me invoke thee by every gracious title, my God, and the God of my fathers:
From one generation to another, thou have been our dewlling place; the claim
has descended from age to age; thy covenant has been established with us, and
thy faithfulness remains unblemished. Oh! forget not thy covenant, forget not
the blessings entailed on me; forget not the prayers and tears by which my
pious ancestors have engaged thy mercy for me; forget not their vows and solemn
dedications of me to thee: Oh! recall thy ancient favors, and renew thy former
mercy, to a family which has been thine in a succession of ages.

Let me invoke thee now by a nearer propriety: My covenant God, my father, and
my friend! if by all those tender names I have ever known thee, forget me not.
By those sacred engagements, O Lord, I entreat thy return. If all thy past
favors were real, if all was waking bliss, and not a gay delusion, O restore
my heaven again. Life of my soul, light of my eyes, return; come and bring all
thy sacred consolations; once again let me experience those holy joys that thy
presence imparts; once again let me hear thy voice; and once again be blessed
with thy smiles.

Oh! hear, and to my ^onging eyes
Restore thy wonted light;
And suddenly; or I shall sleep
In everlasting night.
Blessed Savior, in thee we behold the face of God as a reconciled father; and
do thou withdraw thyself? O how welcome will thy returns be? How like the
breakings of immortal day will thy presence cheer me? How dearly shall I prize
my happiness? How fearful shall I be of every thing that would offend thee? How
joyful in the blessed discovery and possession of thy love? I would whisper my
bliss to the listening streams and groves:

I Would carve our passion on the bark,
And every wounded tree
Shall drop, and bear some mystic mark,
That Jesus died for me.
The swains shall wonder when they read
Inscribed on all the grove,
That heaven itself came down and bled
To win a mortal's love.
But why do I flatter myself with these delightful scenes? I find thee absent
still; I mourn and complain as one unpitied; what is life while thou art
absent? Oh! return and bless me with thy presence, thou who know my
distress, and art acquainted with my secret cares. Thou who art the witness of
my midnight sighs, and do hear, when at the dawning day I call thee; but
still thou answerest not, and seem deaf to my prayers. I am, it is true, a
worthless wretch; but vile as I am, thou have, in thy immense compassion,
brought me into covenant (...) thee. My beloved is mine, and I am his.

He is my sun, though he refuse to shine;
Though for a moment he depart,
I dwell for ever on his heart;
For ever he on mine.
Nothing can break the sacred union; but for this confidence I were undone; but
for this beam of hope I were lost in eternal darkness. Why art thou disquieted,
O my soul, and why art thou cast down within me? Hope in God, for I shall yet
praise him for the light of his countenance. I shall yet welcome his return, I
shall yet hear his charming voice, and meet his favorable smiles.

But why, O my God, this long suspense? Why do these intervals of night and
darkness abide upon me, and torment my heart so long? Will thou deny a bliss so
easily granted? I ask no more than is lawful for mortality to wish: I ask not
the visions of angels here below; nor the beatitudes of perfected spirits: I
ask but what thou have bid me seek, and given me hopes to obtain: I ask that
sacred fellowship, that ineffable communion with which thou favourest thy
saints.

Oh! let me hear those heavenly whispers that give them the (...) of immortal
pleasures: Let me be sensible of those divine approaches that kindle celestial
ardour in their souls: Let me meet those beams that darken all mortal beauty:
Let me enjoy, at this earthly distance, those smiles that are the bliss of
angels in heaven. Though it is but darkly, and afar off, yet let me feel their
influence; it will brighten the passage of life, it will direct me through its
mazes, and gild its rough and gloomy paths; it will raise the flames of sacred
love, it will waken the divine principle within me, and set it a glowing
through all my powers. I shall abandon, I shall forget the vanities below, and
the glories of the world will be no more. But while thou, O my God, (...), I
lose my sun, I languish and die: Yet to thee I will lift up my eyes, to thee I
lift my soul.

Come, Lord, and never from me go;
This world's a darksome place:
I find no pleasure here below,
When thou do veil thy face.
XXVII. Breathing after God and weary of the World.
IT IS no mean beauty of the ground
That has allured my eyes:
I saint beneath a nobler wound,
Nor love below the skies.
If words can reach the heights of love and gratitude, let me pour out the
secret ardour of my soul; O let it not offend thy greatness, that dust and
vanity adores and loves thee. If thou had given me other capacities, and
formed any thing more suitable to my wishes, I might have found a lower
happiness, and been content with something below the infinite Deity; but the
scanty creation affords nothing to satisfy me, and I follow thee by a divine
instinct and mere necessity of nature.

My life is useless, and my being insignificant without thee: My reason has no
proper employment; love, the noblest passion of my soul, has no object to
answer its dignity. I am reduced to absolute poverty; my nature is entirely
ruined; I am lost, eternally lost, undone, and abandoned to despair, if I am
deprived of thee. There can be no reparation made for an infinite loss; nothing
can be instead of God to my soul.

I have willingly renounced all things else for thy sake: All the sentiments of
tenderness and delight, that my soul ever feels for any earthly object, is mere
indifference, compared to my love for thee: and it grows into hatred when that
object stands as thy rival or competitor. This is the conquering, the superior
flame that draws in and swallows up all the other ardours of my nature. My
engagements with all terrestrial things are broken; the names of father, of
brother, or of friend, are no more: abstracted from thee, these tender titles
give me neither confidence, nor joy, and are mere insignificant names, but as
thou do give them an emphasis; they are nothing at all without thee; and with
thee, what finite good can be an addition?

The soul can hold no more, for God is all,
He only equals its capacious grasp,
He only overfills to spaces infinite.
Thou art my God, and I have enough; my soul is satisfied, I am entirely at
rest. Divide the vain, the perishing creation, to the miserable wretches that
ask no other portion: let them, unenvied, possess the honors, and riches, and
pleasures of the world; with a lavish hand divide them away: these things are
but as the dust of the balance to the happy soul that knows what the light of
thy countenance imports. After that there can be no relish left for the low
delights of mortality.

Lost in the high enjoyments of thy love,
What glorious mortal could my envy move?
You ineffable delectations of divine love, let me have no sentiment of
pleasure left but for you. My God revealing his glories and his graces in Jesus
Christ his Son, is sufficient for my eternal entertainment.

What if all former ideas of visible things were wiped from my soul? what if I
had no imagination, no memory, no traces left of any thing but the joys I have
found in thy presence, and the assurance of thy everlasting favor? those are
the only past moments I recall with pleasure, and oh! let all the vast eternity
before me be spent in these satisfactions.

Vanish, ye terrestrial scenes! fly away, ye vain objects of sense! I resign
all those poor and limited faculties (...) which you are enjoyed; let me be
insensible to all (...) impressions, if they do not lead me to my God. Let
chaos come again, and the fair face of nature become an universal blank: Let
her glowing beauties all ^ade away, and those divine characters she wears be
effaced, I shall yet be happy; the God of nature, and the original of all
beauty is my God.

What if the sun were extinguished in the skies, and all the eth^^^al lamps had
burnt out their golden flames, I shall dwell in light and immortal day, for my
God will be ever with me. When the groves shall no more renew their verdure,
nor the fields and valleys boast any longer their flowery pride; when all these
lower heavens, and this earth, are mingled in universal ruin, and these
material images of things are no more; I shall see new regions of beauty and
pleasure for ever opening themselves in the divine essence with all their
original glories.

But oh! how various, how boundless, how transporting will the prospect be? oh!
when shall I bid adieu to phantoms and delusions, and converse with eternal
realities? When shall I drink at the fountain head of essential life and
blessedness?

-- and then,
O what? -- But ask not of the tongues of men,
For angels cannot tell. -- Let it suffice,
Thyself, my soul, shall feel thy own full joys
And hold them fast for ever.
Oh! break my fetters, for I must be gone. Bring my soul out of prison; I am
straitened; the whole creation is too narrow for me; I sicken at this
confinement, and groan and pant for liberty. How sweet are the thoughts of
enlargement? My soul is already on the wing, and practices imaginary flights: I
seem to reach the heaven of heavens, where God himself resides. It is good for
me to be here. --

But ah! how soon the clouds of mortal sense
Arise, and veil the charming vision!
Alas! what do I here in this waste and dreadful wilderness? This dismal
region, where our delights are vanishing, and the very glimpses of future
felicity we enjoy are so soon overshaded, and surrounded with real horrors?
Alas! what do I here, wasting that breath in sighs and endless complaints, that
was given me to bless and praise the infinite Creator? Alas! what do I here,
among strangers and enemies, in this wild, unhospitable place, far from my
home, and all the objects of my solid delight?

My wishes, hopes, my pleasures, and my love,
My thoughts, and noblest passions, are above.
What do I here, in the dominions of death and sin, in the precincts and range
of the powers of darkness? Here they lay their toils, and set their fatal
snares; but, Lord, what part have they in me? I have bid defiance to the powers
of darkness, in thy strength, and renounced my share in the vanities of the
world. I am a subject of another kingdom, and dare not enter into any terms of
peace and amity with the irreconcilable adversaries of God and my soul, which
inhabit these treacherous and sinful regions. The friendship of the world is
enmity with God. Death and destruction are in its smiles; I stand on my guard,
and am every moment in danger of surprise: Oh! when will my deliverance come
from on high?

-- When, my soul,
O when shall thy release from cumb'rous flesh
Pass the great seal of heaven? What happy hour
Shall give thy thoughts a loose, to soar and trace
The intellectual world?
What glorious scenes shall open, when once this mortal partition falls, when
these walls of clay shall totter and sink down into dust? Ye waters of life, ye
torrents of immortal pleasure, how impetuously will you then roll in upon me,
and swell and fill up all the capacities of joy in my nature? Every faculty
shall then be filled, and every wish shall end in unutterable fruition. When I
awake into immortal light, I shall be satisfied with thy likeness. These
expressless desires will die into everlasting raptures: Hope and languishing
expectation will be no more; but present, complete, and unbounded satisfactions
will surround me. My God, my God himself, shall be my infinite, my unutterable
joy: All the avenues of pleasure shall be open before me, the scenes of beauty,
and prospects of delight. Everlasting joy shall be upon my head, and sorrow and
sighing shall flee away for ever.

There will be no more intervals of grief and sin; sin, that insupportable
evil, that worst, that heaviest burden: Here the painful and deadly pressure
lies: It is this that hangs as a weight on all my joys; but thanks be to my
God, I can say, I sincerely detest and hate this vilest of slaveries, this
cursed bondage of corruption; I long for the glorious liberty of the sons of
God; I groan under this load of flesh, this burden of mortality, this body of
death.

But grant, O Lord, I may with patience continue in well-doing, and at last
obtain glory and immortality through my Redeemer's righteousness. Sanctify me
through thy word of truth, remember this request of my glorious advocate.

XXVIII. A Prayer for speedy Sanctification.
O Lord God, great and holy, all-sufficient, and full of grace, if thou
should bid me form a wish, and take whatsoever in heaven or earth I had to
ask, it should not be the kingdoms of this world, nor the crowns of princes;
no, nor should it be the wreaths of martyrs, nor the thrones of archangels: My
first request is to be made holy; this is my highest concern. Rectify the
disorders sin has made in my soul, and renew thy image there; let me be
satisfied with thy likeness. Thou have compassed my paths with mercy in all
other respects, and I am discontented with nothing but my own heart; because it
is so unlike the image of thy holiness, and so unfit for thy immediate presence.

Permit me to be importunate here, O blessed God, and grant the importunity of
my wishes; let me be favored with a gracious and speedy answer, for I am dying
while I am speaking: The very breath with which I am calling upon thee, is
carrying away a part of my life: This tongue, that is now invoking thee, must
shortly be silent in the grave: These knees, that are bent to pay thee homage,
and these hands, that are now lifted to the most high God for mercy, must
shortly be mouldering to their original dust: These eyes will soon be closed in
death, which are now looking up to thy throne for a blessing. Oh! prevent the
flying hours with thy mercy, and let thy favor outstrip the hasty moments.

Thou art unchanged, while rolling ages pass along; but I am decaying, with
every breath I draw: My whole allotted time to prepare for heaven is but a
point, compared with thy infinite duration. The shortness and vanity of my
present being, and the importance of my eternal concerns, join together to
demand my utmost solicitude, and give wings to my warmest wishes. Before I can
utter all my present desires, the hasty opportunity perhaps is gone, the golden
minute vanished, and the season of mercy has taken its everlasting flight.

Oh! God of ages, hear me speedily, and grant my request while I am yet
speaking; my frail existence will admit of no delay; answer me according to the
shortness of my duration, and the exigence of my circumstances. My business, of
high importance as it is, yet is limited to the present NOW, the passing
moment, for all the powers on earth cannot promise me the next.

Let not my pressing importunity, therefore, offend thee; my happiness, my
everlasting happiness, my whole being is concerned in my success: As much as
the enjoyment of God himself is worth, is at stake.

Thou know, O Lord, what qualifications will fit me to behold thee; thou
know in what I am defective; thou can prepare my soul in an instant, to
enter into thy holy habitation: I breathe now, but the next moment may be
death; let not that fatal moment come before I am prepared. The same creating
voice the said, Let there be light, and there was light, can in the same manner
purify and adorn my soul, and make me fit for thy own presence; and my soul
longs to be thus purified and adorned. O Lord, delay not, for every moment's
interval is a loss to me, and may be a loss unspeakable and unrepairable. Thy
delay cannot be the least advantage to thee; thy power and thy clemency are as
full this present instant as they will be the next, and my time as fleeting,
and my wants as pressing.

Remember, O eternal God, my lost time is for ever lost, and my wasted hours
will never return, my neglected opportunities can never be recalled; to me they
are gone for ever, and cannot be improved; but thou can change my sinful soul
into holiness, by a word, and set me now in the way to everlasting improvement.

O let not the spirit of God restrain itself, but bless me according to the
fullness of thy own being, according to the riches of thy grace in Christ Jesus,
according to thy infinite, unconceivable love, manifested in that glorious gift
of thy beloved Son, wherein the fullness of the Godhead was contained: It is
through his merit and mediation I humbly wait for all the unbounded blessings I
want or ask for.

XXIX. Gratitude for early and peculiar Favors.
LET me trace back thy mercy, O my God, from the first early dawn of life, and
bless thee for the privileges of my birth, that it was not in the lands of
darkness, where no ray of the gospel had ever darted its light; where the name
of a Savior never had reached my ears, nor the transporting tidings of
redemption from eternal misery had never blessed my soul.

But how shall I express my gratitude for that grace which ordained my lot in
this happy land, one of the islands of which it was long since prophesied, they
should see thy glory, and trust in thy name? God has enlarged Japhet, even the
islands of the sea, and made him to dwell in the tents of Shem, in the
inheritance of Abraham. I have my descent from the Gentiles, who were once
strangers to the covenant of grace, aliens from the commonwealth of Israel; but
are now brought nigh by the blood of sprinkling. Jesus, the great peacemaker,
has brought both near to God, and to each other.

I bless thee with all my powers, for the privilege of my descent from pious
ancestors; that thou have been their dewlling place from generation to
generation, and have not taken thy loving kindness from their seed, nor
suffered thy faithfulness to fail.

Thou have extended thy mercy to me, the last and least of all my father's
house, unworthy to wipe the feet of the meanest of the servants of my Lord; and
yet by an absolute act of goodness I am brought into thy family, and numbered
with the children of God. Even so it has seemed good in thy sight, who art
gracious to whom thou will be gracious.

I might have been a vessel of wrath, a trophy to thy justice, instead of a
monument of thy mercy: How unsearchable thy ways! how uncontrouled and free!
thou did regard me in my low estate, in more than my original guilt and
misery; for I had improved the wretched stock, and been a voluntary as well as
a natural slave to sin and death.

From this ignominious slavery, thou, my great Redeemer, have ransomed me, and
brought me into the glorious liberty of the sons of God: I was a stranger, and
thou did take me in; naked, and thou have clothed me with the spotless robes
of thy own righteousness; I was hungry, and thou did feed me; thirsty, and
thou did give me to drink of the fountain of life.

What am I, O Lord, and what is my father's house, that thou have dealt thus
graciously with me, in entering into an everlasting covenant, signed and
sealed, even sensibly sealed to my soul by the witness of thy spirit? Lord, why
me, rather than many that were companions of my earthly vanities and folly?
Whence were the motives drawn but from thy sovereign pleasure? How many are
passed by, that could have done thee more service, and returned a warmer
acknowledgment to thy distinguishing bounty?

Ye spirits of just men made perfect, ye ransomed nations, triumphant above,
instruct me in the art of celestial eloquence; tell me in what strains of
sacred harmony you express your gratitude for this glorious redemption, while
in exalted raptures you sing to him that loved and washed you in his own blood,
and made you kings and priests to God.

XXX. Aspiring after the Vision of God in Heaven.
I Beseech thee, show me thy glory: It was a mortal in a state of frailty and
imperfection, that made this bold, but pious request: Whi^^ I repeat on
different terms: Since none can see thy face and live, let me die to behold it.
This is the only request I have to make, and this will I seek after, that I may
behold the beauty of the Lord; not as I have seen it in thy sanctuary below,
but in full perfection and splendour, as thou art seen by seraphs and cherubs,
by angels and archangels, and the spirits of just men made perfect.

O my God, forgive my importunity: Thou have commanded me to love thee with all
my heart, my soul, my strength, and have by thy spirit kindled the sacred flame
in my breast: From this rises my present impatience; from hence the ardour of
my desires spring. Can I love thee, and be satisfied at this distance from
thee? Can I love thee, and not long to behold thee in perfect excellence and
beauty? Is it a crime to press forward to the end for which I was created? All
my wishes and my hopes of happiness terminate in thee.

Does not the thirsty traveller pine for some refreshing stream? Would not the
weary be at rest, or the wretched captive be free? And shall not my thirsty,
weary, captive soul, long for refreshment, liberty and rest? I am but a
stranger, a pilgrim here, and have no abiding place; this is not my rest, my
home; and yet if thou have any employment for me, though the meanest office in
thy family, I will not repine at my stay.

But, O Lord, thou have no need of such worthless service as I can pay thee;
thy angels are spirits, thy ministers flames of fire; thousands of thousands
stand before thee, and ten thousand times ten thousand minister unto thee; they
attend thy orders, and fly at thy command. O deliver me from this burden of
mortality, and I will serve thee with a zeal as pure and active as theirs.

I can speak of thy loving kindness to the children of men in a very imperfect
manner; but then I will join with the celestial choir, in praising thee, and
rehearse to listening angels what thou have done for my soul. Here I have a
thousand interruptions from the delightful work, a thousand cold and darksome
intervals, when my heart and tongue are both untuned, a thousand necessary
distractions, that rise from the miseries of mortality; but when these
intervals of grief and sin shall cease, my soul shall dwell at ease, and be for
ever glad, and rejoice in thy salvation.

XXXI. A Surrender of the Soul to GOD.
COMMAND me what thou will, O Lord, give me but strength to obey thee; be thy
terms never so severe, O let us never part. I resign my will, my liberty, my
choice to thee; I stand divested of the world, and ask only thy love as my
inheritance. Give, or deny me what thou will, I leave all the circumstances of
my future time in thy hands: Let the Lord guide me continually; here I am, do
with me what seems good in thy sight, only do not say, Thou have no pleasure
in me.

Let me not live to dishonor thee, to bring a reproach on thy name, to profane
the blood of the Son of God, and grieve the Spirit of grace. O take not thy
loving kindness from me, nor suffer thy faithfulness to fail. Thou have sworn
by thy holiness, and thou will not lie to the seed of thy servants; thou have
sworn that the generation of the righteous shall be blessed: Vest me with this
character, O my God, and fulfill this promise to a worthless creature.

XXXII. Trust and Reliance on the Divine Promises.
O LET not my importunity offend thee, for it is the importunity of faith; it
is my steadfast belief in thy word that makes me persist: Thy word and thy oath,
the two immutable things in which it is impossible for God to lie, give me
strong consolation.

It is this that makes me press forward to thy throne, and with confidence lay
hold on thy strength, thy wisdom, and thy faithfulness, on thy goodness, and
tender compassion; those glorious attributes for which the children of men put
their trust under the shadow of thy wings. It is thy glory to be the confidence
of the ends of the earth, and it was long since predicted, that in thy name the
Gentiles should trust.

Kind guardian of the world, our heavenly aid,
To whom the vows of all mankind are paid --
We pay thee highest homage, and exalt thy infinite attributes by faith and
confidence in thee.

I know that thou art, and believe thee a rewarder of them that diligently seek
thee. I will never quit my hold of thy promises, there I fix my hopes: I will
not let a tittle go, nor part with a mite of the glorious treasure. I humbly
hope I have a rightful claim; thou art my God, and the God of my religious
ancestors, the God of my mother, the God of my pious father: Dying and
breathing out his soul, he gave me to thy care, he put me into thy gracious
arms, and delivered me up to thy protection. He told me thou would never
leave nor forsake me; he triumphed in thy long experienced faithfulness and
truth, and gave his testimony for thee with his latest breath.

And now, O Lord God of my fathers, whose mercy has descended from age to age,
whose truth has remained unblemished, and inviolable, and whose love remains
without decay; O Lord, the faithful God and the true, keeping covenant and
mercy to a thousand generations, let me find that protection and blessing that
the prayers of my dying father engaged for me: Now in the time of my distress,
be a present help; and if thou will this once deliver me, thou alone shall be
my (...) ^rust, my counselor, and my hope; to thee I will immediately apply
myself, and look on the whole force of created nature as insignificant. To thee
I will devote all the blessings thou shall give me, my time, my life, my whole
of this world's goods; whatever share thou shall graciously allot me, shall
surely be the Lord's.

Oh! hearken to the vows of my distress, and for thy own honor deliver me from
this perplexity, which thou know, and reveal to me the abundance of mercy
and truth.

It was my dependence on this promise and fidelity that brought me into this
exigence; I staggered not at thy promises through unbelief, but boldly ventured
on the credit of thy word: I took it for my security, and can the strength of
Israel repent? Can thou break thy covenant, and alter the thing that is gone
out of thy mouth.

O God of Abraham, God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, this is thy name for ever,
and this thy memorial to all generations; the God before whom my fathers
walked, the God that fed me all my life long till now, and the angel that
redeemed me from all evil, bless me. Let the God of Jacob be my help, let the
Almighty bless me; let the blessings of my father prevail above the blessings
of his progenitors to the utmost bounds of the everlasting hills.

Bless me according to thy own greatness, according to the unsearchable riches
of thy grace in Christ Jesus; he is the spring of all my hope, in whom all the
promises of God are yea and amen; he is the true and faithful witness, and has
by his death sealed the divine veracity, and is become surety for the honor
and faithfulness of the most high God. To this also the Holy Ghost, the Spirit
of Truth, bears witness.

Oh! great Jehovah, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the Lord God omnipotent, hear
and grant my request, for the glory of thy mighty name, that name which saints
and angels bless and love: Let thy perfections be manifest to the children of
men; let them say, there is a God that judges in the earth: Let them confess
thou do keep thy covenant with the seed of thy servants, that thy
righteousness is from age to age, and thy salvation shall never be abolished;
let them see and acknowledge, that in the fear of the Lord is strong
confidence, and his children have a place of refuge.

Unshaken as the sacred hill,
And firm as mountains be;
Firm as a rock the soul shall rest
That leans, O Lord, on thee.
Memorandum.

This act of faith in God was fully answered, and I leave my testimony, that
the name of the Lord is a strong tower, and he knows them that put their
trust in him.

XXXIII. Application to the divine Truth.
HOWEVER intricate and hopeless my present distress may be to human views, why
should I limit the Almighty? or why should the Holy One of Israel limit
himself? Nature and necessity are thine; thou speak the word, and it comes
to pass; no obstacle can oppose the omnipotence of thy will, nor make thy
designs ineffectual.

Is thy hand at all shortened since the glorious period, when thy mighty power,
and thy stretched arm, formed the heavens and earth; when these spacious skies
were spread at thy command, and this heavy globe fixed on its airy pillars?

The strong foundations of the earth
Of old by thee were laid;
Thy hands the beauteous arch of heaven
With wondrous skill has made.
And these shall wax old as a garment, as a vesture shall thou change them, and
they shall be changed; but should thou, like these, decay, what were the hopes
of them that confide in thee? If in all generations thy perfections were not
the same, what consolation could the race of men draw from the ancient records
of thy wonderful works? Why are we told, thou did divide the sea, to make a
path for thy people through the mighty waters; that thou did rain bread from
heaven, and dissolve the flinty rock in crystal rills to give thy chosen nation
drink?

Thou art he that distinguished Noah in the universal deluge, and preserved the
floating ark amidst winds and rains, and tumultuous billows.

It was thy protecting care that led Abraham from his kindred and his native
country, and brought him safely to the promised land.

Thou did accompany Jacob in his journey to Padan-aran, and gave him bread to
eat, and raiment to put on, till greatly increased in substance: He returned to
his father's house, he wrestled for a blessing, he wrestled with the Almighty,
and prevailed.

With Joseph thou wentest down into Egypt, and did deliver him out of all his
adversities, till he forgot his sorrows, and all the toil of his father's house.

Thou did remember thy people in the Egyptian bondage, and look with pitying
eyes on their affliction; and after four hundred and thirty years, on the very
day thou had promised, did release and bring them out with triumph and
miracles. Thy presence went with them in a pillar of a cloud by day, and a
protecting fire by night: Thy conquering hand drove out great and potent
nations, and gave them an entire possession of the land promised to their
fathers: Nor did thou fail in the least circumstance of all the good things
thou had promised.

What a cloud of witnesses stand on record! Joshua and Gideon, Jephtha and
Sampson, who through faith obtained promises.

Thou did command the ravens to feed thy holy prophet; and at the word of a
prophet, did sustain the widow's family with a handful of meal.

Thou did walk with the three Hebrews in the fiery furnace: Thou wast present
with Daniel in the lion's den, to deliver him, because he trusted in thee.

In what instance has the prayer of faith been rejected? Where were the
righteous forsaken? Who can charge God without charging him foolishly? What
injustice has been found in the Judge of all the earth? His glorious titles
have stood unblemished from generation to generation; nor can any of his
perfections decay, or rolling years make a change on the Ancient of days.

Are not his words clear and distinct, without a double meaning, or the least
deceit? Are they not such as may justly secure my confidence? Such as would
satisfy me from the mouth of man, unconstant man, whose breath is in his
nostrils, and his foundation in the dust, unstable as water, and fleeting as a
shadow? And can I so slowly assent to the words of the Most High? Shall I trust
impotent man, that has neither wisdom nor might to accomplish his designs, that
cannot call the next breath or motion his own, nor promise himself a moment in
all futurity? Can I rest on these feeble props; and yet tremble and despond
when I have the veracity of the eternal God to secure and support me?

I know he will not break his covenant, nor suffer his faithfulness to fail: I
dare attest it in the face of earth and hell, I dare stake my all for time and
eternity on this glorious truth; a truth which hell cannot blemish, nor all its
malice contradict.

Exert yourselves, ye powers of darkness, bring in your evidence, collect your
instances, begin from the first generation, since the world was peopled, and
men began to call on the name of the Lord; when did they call in vain? When did
the Holy One of Israel fail the expectation of the humble and contrite spirit?
Point out in your blackest characters the dismal period, when the name of the
Lord was no more a refuge to them that trusted in him? Let the annals of hell
be produced, let them mark the dreadful day, and distinguish it with eternal
triumphs.

In vain you search; for neither heaven, nor earth, nor hell, have ever been
witness to the least deviation from truth or justice. The Almighty shines with
unblemished glory, to the confusion of hell, and the consolation of those that
put their trust in him.

On thy eternal truth and honor I entirely cast myself? if I am deceived, I am
deceived: Angels and archangels are deluded too; they, like me, have no
dependence beyond the divine veracity for their blessedness and immortality;
they hang all their hopes on his goodness and immutability; if that fails, the
celestial paradise vanishes, and all its glories are extinct; the golden
palaces sink, and the seraphic thrones must totter and fall. Where are your
crowns, ye spirits elect; where are your songs and your triumphs, if the truth
of God can fail? A mere possibility of that would darken the fields of light,
and turn the voice of melody into grief and lamentation.

What pangs would rise, even through all the regions of blessedness, what
diffidence and fear would shake the heart of every inhabitant, what agonies
surprise them all, could the word of the most high God be cancelled? The
pillars of heaven might then tremble, and the everlasting mountains bow, the
celestial foundations might be moved from their place, and that noblest
structure of the hands of God be chaos, and eternal emptiness.

But for ever just and true are thy ways, thou King of saints; blessed are all
they that put their trust in thee; for thou art a certain refuge in the day of
distress, and under the shadow of thy wings I will rejoice. My soul shall make
her boast in the Lord, and triumph in his salvation: I called on him in my
distress, and he has delivered me from all my fears. -- Hallelujah.

Here I dismiss my carnal hope,
My fond desires recall;
I give my mortal interests up,
And make my God my all.
XXXIV. Glory to GOD for Salvation by JESUS and his Blood.
LET me give glory to God before I die, and take shame and confusion to myself.
I ascribe my salvation to the free and absolute goodness of God. Not by the
strength of reason or any natural inclination to virtue, but by the grace of
God I am what I am. O my Redeemer, be the victory, be the glory thine. I expect
eternal life and happiness from thee, not as a debt, but a free gift, a
promised act of bounty. How poor would my expectations be, if I only looked to
be rewarded according to those works which my own vanity, or the partiality of
others, have called good, and which, if examined by the divine purity, would
prove but specious sins? As such I renounce them: Pardon them, gracious Lord,
and I ask no more; nor can I hope for that, but through the satisfaction which
has been made to divine justice for the sins of the world.

O Jesus, my Savior, what harmony dwells in thy name! celestial joy, immortal
life is in the sound.

Sweet name! in thy each syllable
A thousand blessed Arabia's dwell:
Mountains of myrrh, and beds of spices,
And ten thousand paradises.
Let angels set this name to their golden harps; let the redeemed of the Lord
for ever magnify it.

O my propitious Savior, where were my hopes but for thee; how desperate, how
undone were my circumstances? I look on myself, in every view I can take, with
horror and contempt. I was born in a state of misery and sin, and in my best
estate am altogether vanity. With the utmost advantages I can boast, I shrink
back, I tremble to appear before unblemished Majesty. O thou, in whose name the
Gentiles trust, be my refuge in that awful hour. To thee I come, my only
confidence and hope. Let the blood of sprinkling, let the seal of the covenant
be on me. Cleanse me from my original stain, and my contracted impurity, and
adorn me with the robes of thy righteousness, by which alone I expect to stand
justified before infinite justice and purity.

O enter not into judgment with me, for the best actions of my life cannot bear
thy scrutiny; some secret blemish has stained all my glory. My devotion to God
has been mingled with levity and irreverence; my charity to man with pride and
ostentation. Some latent defect has attended my best actions, and those very
things which perhaps have been highly esteemed by men, have deserved contempt
in the sight of God.

When I survey the wondrous cross,
On which the Prince of glory died,
My richest gain I count but loss;
And pour contempt on all my pride.
Forbid it, Lord, that I should boast,
Save in the cross of Christ, my God:
All the vain things that charm me most
I sacrifice them to thy blood.
APRIL 30, 1735. XXXV. A Review of divine Mercy and Faithfulness.
I AM now setting to my seal that God is true, and leaving this as my last
testimony to the divine veracity. I can from numerous experiences assert his
faithfulness, and witness to the certainly of his promises. The word of the
Lord is tried, and he is a buckler to all those that put their trust in him.

O come, all you that fear the Lord, and I will tell you what he has done for
my soul; I will ascribe righteousness to my Maker, and leave my record for a
people yet unborn; that the generation to come may rise up and praise him.

Into whatever distress his wise providence has brought me, I have called on
the Lord, and he heard me, and delivered me from all my fears; I trusted in
God, and he saved me. Oh! let my experience stand a witness to them that hope
in his mercy; let it be to the Lord for a praise and a glory.

I know not where to begin the recital of thy numerous favors. Thou have hid
me in the secret of thy pavilion, from the pride of man, and from the strife of
tongues, when by a thousand follies I have merited reproach: Thou have
graciously protected me, when the vanity of my friends, or the malice of my
enemies, might have stained my reputation: Thou have covered me with thy
feathers, and under thy wings have I trusted: Thy truth has been my shield and
my buckler; the thee I owe the blessing of a clear and unblemished name, and
not my own conduct, nor the partiality of my friends. -- Glory be to thee, O
Lord.

Thou have led me through a thousand labyrinths, and enlightened my darkness.
When shades and perplexity surrounded me, my light has broke forth out of
obscurity, and my darkness been turned into noonday. Thou have been a guide and
a father to me. When I knew not where to ask advice, thou have given me
unerring counsel: The secret of the Lord has been with me, and he has shown me
his covenant.

In how many seen and unseen dangers have thou delivered me? How narrow my
gratitude? How wide thy mercy? How innumerable are thy thoughts of love? How
infinite the instances of thy goodness? How high above the ways and thoughts of
man?

How often have thou supplied my wants, and by thy bounty confounded my
unbelief? Thy benefits have surprised and justly reproached my diffidence; my
faith has often failed, but thy goodness has never failed. The world and all
its flatteries have failed, my own heart and hopes have failed, but thy mercy
endures for ever, thy faithfulness has never failed.

The strength of Israel has never deceived me, nor made me ashamed of my
confidence. Thou have never been as a deceitful brook, or as waters that fail,
to my soul.

In loving kindness, in truth, and in very faithfulness, thou have afflicted
me: Oh! how unwillingly have thou seemed to grieve me? With how much indulgence
has the punishment been mixed? Love has appeared through the disguise of every
frown: Its beams have glimmered through the darkest night; by every affliction
thou have been still drawing me nearer to thyself, and removing my carnal
props, that I may lean with more assurance on the eternal rock.

Thy love has been my leading glory from the first intricate steps of life: The
first undesigning paths I trod were marked and guarded by the vigilance of thy
love: Oh! whither else had my sin and folly led me?

How often have I tried and experienced thy clemency, and found an immediate
answer to my prayers? Thou have often literally fulfilled thy word: I have a
fresh instance of thy faithfulness again: Thou have made me triumph in thy
goodness, and given a new testimony to the veracity of thy promises.

And after all, what ingratitude, what insensibility reigns in my heart! Oh!
cancel it by the blood of the covenant: Root out this monstrous infidelity that
still returns after the fullest evidence of thy truth. Thou have graciously
condescended to answer me in my own time and way, and yet I am again doubting
thy faithfulness and care. Lord, pity me, I believe, O help my unbelief. Go on
to succor, go on to pardon, and at last conquer my diffidence. Let me hope
against hope, and in the greatest perplexity give glory to God, by believing
what my own experience has so often found -- That the strength of Israel will
not lie; nor is he as man, that he should repent.

While I have memory and thought, let his goodness dwell on my soul. Let me not
forget the depth of my distress, the anguish and importunity of my vows: When
every human help failed, and all was darkness and perplexity, then God was all
my stay. Then I knew no name but his, and he alone knew my soul in adversity.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits.

Long as I live I Will bless thy name,
My King, and God of love;
My work and joy shall be the same
In the bright worlds above.
I have yet a thousand, and ten thousand deliverances to recount, ten thousand
unasked-for mercies to recall: No moment of my life has been destitute of thy
care, no accident has found me unguarded by thy watchful eye, or neglected by
thy providence. Thou have been often found, unsought by my ungrateful heart,
and thy favors have surprised me with great and unexpected advantages: Thou
have compelled me to receive the blessings my foolish humor despised, and my
corrupt will would fai^^ have rejected: Thou have stopped thy ears to the
desires which would have ruined and undone me, when I might justly have been
left to my own choice, (...) the punishment of my many sins and follies. How
great my guilt! how infinite thy mercy!

Hitherto God ha^ helped, and here I set up a memorial to that goodness, which
has never abandoned me to the malice and ^^^atagems of my infernal foes, nor
left me a prey to human craft or violence. The glory of his providence has
often surprised me, when groping in thick darkness. With a potent voice he has
said, Let there be light, and there was light. He has made his goodness pass
before me, and loudly proclaimed his name, the Lord, the Lord God, merciful and
gracious. To him be glory for ever. Amen.

XXXVI. Some daily Experiences of the gracious Methods of Divine Providence, to
me the least and most unworthy of all the Servants of my Lord.
FIRST WEEK Note. The division of these meditations into sevens by the pious
writer, seems to tell us that these were the devout thoughts of six weeks of
her life.

I.
EVERY day's experience reproaches my unbelief, and brings me some new evidence
of thy faithfulness. Thou have dispelled my fears, and, to the confusion of my
spiritual foes, thou have heard the voice of my distress. But a few hours ago I
was trembling and doubting, if thou wast indeed a God hearing prayer; and now I
have a fresh instance of thy goodness, which with a grateful heart I here
record. May the sense of thy benefits dwell for ever on my soul.

II.
Thy mercies are new every morning; again thou have given me an instance of thy
truth; I trusted in God, and he has delivered me; I will love the Lord, because
he has heard the voice of my supplication; therefore will I call on him as long
as I (...).

III.
As for God, his way is perfect; the word of the Lord is tried: He is a buckler
to all that put their trust in him. He has punctually fulfilled the word on
which I relied Bless the Lord, O my soul.

IV.
Thy bounty follows me with an unwearied course; language is too faint to
express thy praise: No eloquence can reach the subject. My heart is warm with
the pious reflection; I look upward, and silently breathe out the unutterable
gratitude that melts and rejoices my soul; I staggered at thy promise through
unbelief, and yet thou have graciously performed thy words. If we sometimes
doubt or faulter in our faith, yet he abides faithful who has promised.

V.
With the morning-light my health and peace are renewed; the cheering influence
of the sun, and the sweeter beams of the divine favor shine on my tabernacle.
-- Lord, why me? why am I a ransomed, pardoned sinner? why am I rejoicing among
the instances of sovereign grace, and unlimited clemency?

VI.
I boasted in thy truth, and thou have not made me ashamed: My infernal foes
are confounded, while my faith is crowned with success.

Oh! who has tasted of thy clemency
In greater measure, and more often than I?
VII.
As the week begun, so it ends with a series of mercy: Language and numbers
fail to reckon thy favors, but this shall be my eternal employment;

When nature fails, and day and night
Divide thy works no more,
My ever thankful soul, O Lord,
Thy goodness shall adore.
SECOND WEEK.
I.
I HAVE seen the goings of God my King in his sanctuary: But Oh, how transient
the view! my sins turned back thy clemency, and yet I can celebrate the wonders
of forgiving grace.

II.
What do I owe thee, O thou great Preserver of men, for easy and peaceful
sleep, for nights unmolested with pain and anxiety.

Thou round my bed a guard do keep:
Thine eyes are open while mine sleep.
Not a moment slides in which I am unguarded by thy gracious protection.

III.
Thanks be to God, who has given me the victory through the Lord Jesus Christ.
Thou have delivered me from the snare of the fowler, the craft and malice of
hell, and kept me back from sinning against thee; be thine the victory and
praise. Hallelujah.

IV.
O Lord God of Israel, happy is the man that puts his trust in thee. I left
my burden at thy feet, and thou have sustained me; my cares are dissipated, my
desires answered. O who is a God like unto thee, near unto all that call upon
thee?

V.
Thy strength is manifest in weakness; Not unto me, O Lord, but to thee be all
the glory.

For ever thy dear charming name
Shall dwell upon my tongue,
And Jesus and salvation be
The theme of every song.
This shall be my employment through an eternal duration: It is that alone can
measure my gratitude; The Lord Jehovah is my strength and salvation, he also
shall be my song.

VI.
Every day's experience confirms my faith, and brings a fresh evidence of thy
goodness. Thou have dispelled my fears, and, to the confusion of my spiritual
foes, hearkened to the voice of my distress.

VII.
I will love the Lord, who has heard my supplications. I made my boast in his
faithfulness, and he has answered all my expectation.

THIRD WEEK.
I.
MY last exigence will be the closing part of life. Oh! remember me then, my
God. Thou who have led me hitherto, forsake me not at last. Be my strength when
nature fails, and the flame of life is just expiring; let thy smiles cheer that
gloomy hour; Oh! then let thy gentle voice whisper peace and ineffable
consolation to my soul.

II.
In six and seven troubles thou have delivered me, and been a covert from the
tempest, a hiding place from the wind: Hitherto God has helped, and I have
dwelt secure; and here I leave a memorial to thy praise, a witness against all
my future distrust of thy faithfulness and truth.

III.
Every day of my life increases the sum of thy mercies: The rising and the
setting sun, in its constant revolution, can witness the renewal of thy
favors: Thou wast graciously present in an imminent danger; by thee my bones
have been kept entire, and thou have not suffered me to dash my foot against a
stone.

IV.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy name.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits; who heals thy
diseases, and pardons all thy sins. O thou the great Physician of my body, as
well as of my distempered soul, thou have restored and saved me from death and
hell. Blessed Jesus, thou have taken my infirmities, and borne my sickness; the
chastisement of my peace was on thee, and by thy stripes I am healed.

V.
I subscribe to thy truth, O Lord; I attest it in contradiction to infernal
malice, to all the hellish suggestions that would tempt my heart to diffidence
and unbelief, even against repeated experience, against the fullest evidence of
the divine veracity.

VI.
Oh! thou, who never slumberest nor sleep, this night thy watchful care has
kept me from a threatening danger: Thy eyes were open, while I was sleeping
secure beneath the covert of thy wings.

VII.
Another, and a greater deliverance has crowned the day: I have found thy grace
sufficient in an hour of temptation, thy strength has been manifest in my
weakness. Thine was the conquest; be the crown and the glory thine for ever. By
thee I have triumphed over the stratagems of hell; not unto me, but to thy
name, be the praise, O Lord.

FOURTH WEEK.
I.
IT is not one of a thousand of thy favors I can record; but eternity is
before me, and that unlimited duration shall be employed to rehearse the
wonders of thy grace. Then in the great assembly I will praise thee, I will
declare thy faithfulness, and tell to listening angels what thou have done for
my soul, even for me, the least in thy family, unworthy to wipe the feet of the
meanest of the servants of my Lord.

II.
How numberless are thy thoughts of love to my soul! If I should count them,
they are more than the sand on the shore: Thou have again reproved my unbelief,
and given me a new conviction that my whole dependence is on thee; that second
causes are nothing, but as thou do give them efficacy: All nature obeys thee,
and is governed at thy command.

III.
O my God, I am again ready to distrust thee, and call in question thy
faithfulness: Oh! how deep has this cursed weed of infidelity rooted itself in
my nature, but thou can root it out.

IV.
Again I must begin the rehearsal of thy mercies, which will never have an end:
for thou do renew the instances of thy goodness to a poor ungrateful sinner.
Thou have punctually fulfilled the promise on which I depended: Thou have
granted the request of my lips, and led me in a plain way that I have not
stumbled.

V.
This day I have received an unexpected favor: I doubted the success indeed,
but thou have gently rebuked my unbelief, and convinced me that all things are
possible with thee, and that the hearts of the children of men are in thy hands.

VI.
Whether thou do favor or afflict me, I rejoice in the glory of thy
attributes, in whatever instance they are displayed. Be thy honor advanced,
whether in mercy or justice: I must still assert the equity of thy ways, and
ascribe righteousness to my Maker. Yet let me plead with thee, O my God, since
mercy is thy darling attribute; Oh! let it now be exalted: Deal not with me in
severity, but indulgence; for if thou should mark what is amiss, who can
stand before thee?

VII.
Thou do heal my diseases, and renew my life; thou art the guardian of my
sleeping and my waking hours. Glory to my God, whose eyes never slumber.

FIFTH WEEK.
I.
THOU know my secret grief, where my pain lies, and what are my doubts and
difficulties. In thy wonted clemency, O Lord, dispel my darkness; leave me not
to any fatal delusion in an affair of everlasting moment. This is my hour of
information and practice; beyond the grave no mistake can be rectified: as the
tree falls, so it must for ever lie.

II.
Thy goodness still pursues me, O heavenly Father, with an unwearied course;
new instances of thy faithfulness reproach my unbelief. I sent up my petition
with a doubting heart, and yet thou have graciously deigned to encourage my
weak and staggering faith, which has often wavered and failed, even in the view
of the brightest evidence of thy power and truth.

III.
Thou do seem resolved to leave my unbelief without excuse, by renewing the
glorious conviction of thy clemency and truth. O let not the unworthiness of
the object turn back thy benignity from its natural course.

IV.
How many unrecorded mercies have glided along with my fleeting moments into
thoughtless silence, and long oblivion: How prone is my ungrateful heart to
forget thy benefits, or (oh! amazing guilt) to make an ungrateful return?

V.
Oh! never let my false heart relapse into distrust and unbelief again; thou
have rebuked my folly, and put a new song of praise into my mouth: Let those
infernal suggestions vanish, that would once object against thy oft-experienced
truth. In this I would still triumph, and insult all the malice of hell. A time
will come when thou shall be glorified in thy saints, when thy truth and
faithfulness shall appear in full splendour, when the beauty of thy attributes
shall be conspicuous, and clear from every blemish that the impiety of men, or
the malice of devils, has charged on thy most righteous providence.

VI.
Let me still assert, that the ways of God are perfect justice and truth: I
have a fresh instance of thy goodness to boast, and yet my ungrateful heart is
even now ready to distrust. The Lord increase my faith: Let thy renewed favors
silence my unbelief, to show that the Lord is upright; he is my rock, and there
is no unrighteousness in him.

VII.
Teach me your language, ye ministers of light, that I may express my wonder
and gratitude. O thou, who can explain the secret meaning of my soul, take
the praise that human words cannot express; accept these unutterable attempts
to praise thee.

SIXTH WEEK.
I.
LET me go on, O Most Holy, to record thy faithfulness and truth; let it be
engraven in the rock for ever; let it be impressed on my soul, and impossible
to be effaced. -- What artifice of hell is it that so often tempts me to
distrust thee, and joins with my native depravity to question thy truth.

II.
Oh! may I never forget this remarkable preservation: Thy gentle hand supported
me, and underneath were the everlasting arms. Thou have kept all my bones, not
one of them is broken: Thy mercy upheld me even when it foresaw my
insensibility and ingratitude. How does my guilt heighten thy clemency? How
wondrous is thy patience, O Lord, and thy rich grace, that only gently rebuked
me when thou might have taken severe vengeance of my sins.

III.
I must again begin the rehearsal of thy love. Thou have eased my pain,
scattered my fears, and lengthened out my days; Oh! may my being be devoted to
thee; let it be for some remarkable service that I am restored to health again.

IV.
I find thy mercies renewed with my fleeting days, and to rehearse them shall
be my glad employment. I trusted thee with my little affairs, and thou have
condescended to give me success. Lord, what is man, that thou do thus
graciously regard him? Even my sins, my hourly provocations, cannot put a check
to the course of thy beneficence; it keeps on its conquering way against all
the opposition of my ingratitude and unbelief; and have thou not promised, O
Lord, it shall run parallel with my life, and measure out my days?

V.
Jesus, my never-failing trust, I called on thy name, and thou have fully
answered my hopes: Let thy praises dwell on my tongue, let me breathe thy name
to the last spark of life. Thou have scattered my fears, and been gracious
beyond all my hopes: My faint and doubting prayers have not been rejected; but
oh! how slow are my returns of praise, how backward my acknowledgements!

VI.
Never have I trusted thee in vain; Lord, increase my faith; confirm it by a
continued series of thy bounty: Add this favor to the rest; for faith is the
gift of God, an attainment above reason or nature. I am now waiting for the
accomplishment of a promise! Oh! show me thy mercy and truth; add this one
instance to the rest, and for ever silence the suggestions of hell, and my own
infidelity.

VII.
How rooted is this cursed principle of unbelief, that can yet distrust thee
after so many recorded instances of thy love? How long will it be ere my
wavering soul shall entirely confide in thy salvation? Oh! my God, pity my
weakness, give new vigor to my faith, and let me take up my rest in thee for
ever.

FINIS.
CONTENTS.
I. SUPREME Love to God 19 II. The Truth and Goodness of God 23 III. Longing
after the Enjoyment of God 25 IV. God my supreme, my only Hope 28 V. God a
present Help, and ever near 32 VI. God an all-sufficient Good, and my only
Happiness 34 VII. A Covenant with God 37 VIII. A Thank-Offering for saving
Grace 39 IX. Evidence of sincere Love to God 43 X. Assurances of Salvation in
Christ Jesus 45 XI. Thou art my God 49 XII. Confession of Sin, with Hope of
Pardon 52 XIII. The Absence of God on Earth 56 XIV. Banishment from God for
ever 58 XV. The Glory of God in his Works of Creation, Providence and
Redemption 61 XVI. Longing for the Coming of Christ 64 XVII. Seeking after an
absent God 66 XVIII. Appeals to God concerning the Supremacy of Love to him 69
XIX. A devout Rapture, or Love to God inexpressible 71 XX. Self-Reproof for
Inactivity 78 XXI. A joyful View of approaching Death 79 XXII. A devout
Resignation of Self to the Divine Power and Goodness 82 XXIII. Redeeming Love
86 XXIV. Pleading for Pardon and Holiness 88 XXV. A Transport of Gratitude for
saving Mercy 93 XXVI. Importunate Requests for the Return of God to the Soul 94
XXVII. Breathing after God, and weary of the World 101 XXVIII. A Prayer for
speedy Sanctification 106 XXIX. Gratitude for early and peculiar Favors 109
XXX. Aspiring after the Vision of God in Heaven 111 XXXI. A Surrender of the
Soul to God 113 XXXII. Trust and Reliance on the Divine Promises 114 XXXIII.
Application to the Divine Truth 117 XXXIV. Glory to God for Salvation by Jesus
and his Blood 122 XXXV. A Review of Divine Mercy and Faithfulness 124 XXXVI.
Daily Experiences of the kind Providence of God, and pious Breathings of the
Soul toward the heavenly World 129
A new and correct Edition of Dr. WATTS'S LYRIC POEMS may be had of SAMUEL
HALL, No. 53, Cornhill, BOSTON.


