State of Rhode Island and Providence-Plantations. In GENERAL ASSEMBLY. January
Session, A. D. 1790.
An ACT for calling a CONVENTION, to take into Consideration the Constitution
proposed for the United States, passed on the 17th of September, A. D. 1787, by
the GENERAL CONVENTION held at Philadelphia.
BE it Enacted by this General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof it is
hereby Enacted, That the New Constitution proposed for the United States,
passed on the 17th of September, A. D. 1787, by the GENERAL CONVENTION held at
Philadelphia, be submitted to the People of this State, represented in a STATE
CONVENTION, for their full and free Investigation and Decision, agreeably to
the Resolve of the said Convention: That it be recommended to the Freemen of
the several Towns, qualified to vote in the Election of Deputies to the General
Assembly, to convene in their respective Towns, in legal Town-Meeting, on the
Second Monday in February next; and then to choose the same Number of Delegates
as they are entitled to elect Deputies, to represent them in the said
Convention: And that the said Convention be holden at South-Kingstown, on the
First Monday in March next.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Convention
be and hereby is empowered, and fully authorized, finally to decide on the said
Constitution, as they shall judge to be most conducive to the Interests of the
People of this State: And that the said Convention cause the Result of their
Deliberations and Proceedings, relative to the aforesaid Constitution, to be
transmitted to the PRESIDENT of the United States of America, as soon after the
Rising thereof as may be.

It is Voted and Resolved, That his Excellency the Governor be and he is hereby
requested, to transmit a Copy of this Act to the President of the said United
States immediately.

It is Ordered, That the Secretary cause Copies ^ereof to be transmitted to
each Town Clerk in the State, without the least Delay.

A true Copy: Witness, HENRY WARD, Sec'ry.

PRINTED BY J. CARTER.


