MISCELLANIES, VIZ.

I. The Time-Piece; or, An honest Servant's Advice to his Master. II. Verses on
the Month of May. III. An affectionate Father's dying Advice.
Frugibus maturis, frumentandum
Ferro candente, elaborandum,
Quippe tempus elabitur.
PHILADELPHIA: Printed for the AUTHOR, by John M'Culloch. M.DCC.XC.

An Honest Servant instructing his Master in a Lesson of the greatest Weight
and Importance.
Ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee; and the fowls of the air, and
they shall tell thee: or, speak to the earth, and it shall teach thee; and the
fishes of the sea shall declare it unto thee. JOB xii. 7, 8. A verse may find
him who a sermon flies,
And turn delight into a sacrifice.
HERBERT.
MY Master, Job 9. 25.
and my worthy friend,
Soon, very soon, your time must end;
Observe how swift your moments pass,
Man is cut down, Psalm. 37. 3.
just like the grass.
The weaver's shuttle swift does fly, Job 7. 6.

Man's time as swift for him to die.
Then take good heed, in time be wise,
And God will give the heavenly prize. John 10.28

Walk carefully in God's good ways, John 14.27

And peace shall crown your happy days.
I measure time both day and night,
Observe my hands, that I go right:
Attentively wind up my chain:
Thus you instruction shall obtain.
I am composed of steel and brass;
You, flesh and blood, a heavy mass.
My frame is delicate and nice,
The curious art of man's device;
Which to describe in every part,
Exceeds indeed my feeble art.
My main spring, of the purest steel,
Does keep in action every wheel;
When that does fail my motion's dead,
Like man, when once his soul is fled.
The hand that made you is divine, lsa. 54. 5

To his just will you must resign.
As far your form does mine surpass, (...) 1^9 14.

As purest gold the common brass:
The first rate surgeon cannot explain
Each curious vessel, nerve, and vein.
When you are mouldering in the grave,
Some other master I shall have,
Whose faithful servant I shall prove,
And be an object of his love.
From earth you came, to earth you go, Genesis 3. 19.

Your endless portion bliss or woe: Mat. 26. 46

Be careful, then, to husband time,
Like stars in glory you shall shine. Dan. 12. 3.

Receive advice for your own good;
Then watch and pray, Luke. 1^. 1.
have faith in God.
Grace better is than gold refined, Prove. 14. 1^.

Or precious stones of any kind:
No jewels of the purest gold Job. 28. 1^, etc.

Began vie with wisdom, we are told,
Nor all the things thou can desire,
Your heart can wish for, or admire.
Let this be precious in your eyes,
Ten thousand worlds below the prize.
A lively faith that works by love, Romans 5. 1.

The man who has, God does approve,
The worldly riches are but toys, Eccles. 1. 2.

Compared with Christ's celestial joys.
When God gives peace, who can annoy, Job. 34.29.

Or take away your sacred joy?
Why all this toil for earthly wealth? Isa. 55. 2.

When riches yield no peace or health.
My service is to you confined; Romans 12. 11.

Yours is to God and man designed.
This wicked world you soon must leave,
A crown of joy may you receive: Tom. 4. 8.

I speak sincerely from my heart,
I love to act the honest part.
Religion is the way to bliss,
My precepts mark, and practice this: Heb. 12. 14.

Religion makes the man of worth, Cor. 1^. 2.

The greatest hero on the earth. Job. 1. 3.

Observe how bright their numbers shine, (...). 1. 15.

In the pure sacred page divine. Heb. II.

They walked by faith, Genesis 5. 24.
and not by sight,
And served their God both day and night, Genesis 6. 9.

Likewise example take by me, (...). 2. 37.

To serve thy God as I serve thee.
Catch golden moments as they fly,
For it is an awful thing to die.
It Is now high time to mend your pace,
Cry to the Lord for saving grace. (...). 7.

No moment past you can recall.
If 'twould prevent your endless fall.
In order to a happy death,
A pious life now live by faith,
Else, Number. 23. 10.
Balaam like, you will cry in vain
A happy mansion to obtain.
Your soul in jeopardy does stand,
You Have not a moment at command, (...). 15. 30.

You're like a shadow or a vapor, (...).4. 14.

As soon extinguished as a taper.
Mortality proves what I say,
Death calls his thousands in a day:
At every moment death does crave
A human body for the grave.
Only a little puff of breath, Isa. 2. 22.

Keeps you from endless life or death.
The one thing needful here below Lu^. 10. 42.

Is your own self and God to know.
There Is no profession, scripture says;
God does approve without true faith, Romans 14. 23.

And if true faith the heart possess,
'Twill yield good fruits of righteousness. Man. 7. 1^.

My son, Prove. 23. 26.
says God, give me thy heart,
And from my precepts never depart.
Religion lies in the breast, Romans 10. 10.

A certain truth, I do protest,
And if at home none can be found, Isa. 1. 13.

Church duties are an empty sound;
In God's account as sounding brass, Cor.13. 1.

Or tinkling cymbals made with glass.
My doctrine shall be fairly tried,
The scripture will the cause decide.
How do thou read those pages, then?
Does God approve the froward man? (...). 11. 20.

No tree corrupted can produce (...). ^. 18.

Good fruit that is fit for human use.
The ser'ous and the pious mind,
The good man does acceptance find, Psalm. 65. 4.

And is received, through grace divine.
Mankind does view the outward part, Isam. 16. 7.

But God looks on the mind and heart.
Your forms and ceremonies all, (...). 11. 14.

Will be rejected when you call.
If no religion in the heart,
The Lord will say, From me depart.
Fools my instruction will despise, (...). 13. 9.

And practice their deceit and lies; (...). (...). (...).

The gallants they will laugh and jeer; (...) 69. 12.

Miss Jezabess will smile and sneer:
But my good master does believe,
My pious precepts will receive,
And this short sketch of wisdom's ways
Believe and practice all his days.
Then must you, Isa. 55. 6.
God sincerely seek,
In every day throughout the week; (...). 6. 3.

Your constant work through life's short space,
To seek God's glory and more grace. Phil. 3. 4.

Thus pressing to the heavenly prize, Phil. 3. 14.

With most sincere and longing eyes;
Holiness written on your trade, Deuteronomy. 25. 15.

For which blessed purpose you were made. Ezekiel. 15. 10.

When working with your honest hands, Ex.d. 20. 5.

The Lord thus serves, as he commands,
Be smart in trade with all thy might,
But take good heed the thing is right.
Fervent and true in things divine, (...). 11. 11

In useful business spend your time.
It Is for the use of my good friend,
These serious lines I now have penned.
I do declare upon the whole,
True faith in Christ will save your soul. Luke. 7. 50.

The inspired volume this does prove,
It Is lively faith that works by love. Mark. 9. 23.

Good works with faith you must conjoin, (...). 5. 16.

To prove your faith is most divine.
Fly from the wicked in their course,
And be thou single in thy choice.
Observe no vanity nor lies, (...). 2. 8.

Like fools that do the truth despise. Prove. 3. 8.

My grave instructions now regard,
The upright man has his reward. Prove. 4. 2.

What Is scriptural do thou receive,
What Is contrary don't believe. (...). 10.20.

Act well all parts, I thee entreat,
Be thou the man that is complete;
Like great good men of much renown,
Who ran, I Cor. 9. 26.
and fought, and won the crown,
Then God receives you for his son:
" Well done, thou faithful soul, well done."
My best advice I have now given,
To make you wise and meet for heaven.
Finally, to conclude my plan,
Be thou the wise and happy man.
What I begin I do entreat,
Some master hand for to complete.
My voice I lift once more, and cry,
This very moment you may die.
A Hymn on the Month of May with an attempt to illustrate some of the Beauties
of the Creation.
The winter is past, the rain is over and gone; -- The flowers appear on the
earth, the time of the singing of birds is come, and the voice of the turtle is
heard in our land; -- The fig tree puts sort her green figs, and the vines
with the tender grape gives a good smell. Arise, my love, my fair one, and come
away. SONG of SOLOMON, chap. ii. 11, 12, 13.
OF all the months within the year,
None is so beautiful and fair,
As the delightful month of May;
Creation blooms so fine and gay,
Like resurrection from the dead,
The vegetation shows indeed:
Observe the trees in robes of green,
A beautiful and lovely scene;
Their lovely bloom does give us hope;
Of a rich and plenteous crop.
Bright Phoebus warms the chilled earth,
Observe the beauties of new birth:
The indulgent father of the day,
His golden treasures does display;
When in the east he shows his light,
Does chase away the shades of night;
His shining beauties are so clear,
Makes all the stars to disappear;
A thousand beauties all in one,
Fall short in glory to the Sun.
Gives light and heat to sea and land,
By just degrees as they demand;
The earth does warm and makes her yield,
The copious crops in the field;
Vegetation without his ray,
All soon would fade and die away;
And animals of every kind,
Must die, or else no comfort find.
A pure celestial globe of fire,
This charming beauty men admire;
His golden splendors so refined,
Excels all beauties of each kind.
A million times the earth in size,
Which fills our souls with great surprise:
The learned sage does so affirm;
Those that reject, where is the harm:
So admirable, I protest,
In speculation I am lost.
Pagans view the beauteous orb --
Think it is a god to be adored.
The glorious orb of light behold,
It Is like a polished globe of gold;
All animals since time begun,
Were nourished by the blessed Sun.
The mute creation does declare
The joyful season of the year.
(Works are more than words I believe,
The very truth I will receive).
The infect tribes are all alive,
The useful bees swarm from their hive;
Many that slept, quite silent by,
Come forth, and in the air do fly,
And months remained without food,
Are raised to take of Nature's good.
A new creation once a year,
In flowers and herbs, does still appear.
The winter's cold, when passed away,
Makes double welcome flowery May.
The meadows green and strewn with flowers.
To entertain the rural hours;
A carpet soft of velvet green;
Oh! this delightful lovely scene.
All Nature smiles with beauty bright,
To please mankind and give delight.
The country swains now leave their home
To gather vi'lets in their bloom;
The birds build nests, bring forth their young,
The grove does echo with their song;
The ploughman whistles and does sing,
To welcome the delightful spring;
Sweet Philomela day and night,
Gives us pure songs with great delight;
Like heaven's choir, with hymns of joy,
Both day and night their time employ;
Her tuneful throat no rest does find,
Instructed by the great Divine:
This lovely bird, by heaven blessed,
I do admire above the rest.
America has not this kind,
To entertain the human mind:
It Is of Great Britain I do write,
From thence I do my song indite;
The very place where I was born,
And soon do hope for to return:
Although three thousand miles apart,
I am at home in mind and heart.
No country known throughout the earth,
So famed for merchandise of worth;
Rich manufactures of their own,
Exceeds all nations, it is well known;
In curious arts it is confessed,
They are the greatest and the best.
Their var'ous numbers to recite,
My time indeed would fail to write.
In summer season at day break,
The feathered choir sweet music make;
Join in a body, take a flight,
And bless the giver of daylight;
A band of music in the air,
Is charming to the human ear.
Blackbird and thrush with songs refined,
Sing to God's praise, and please mankind;
And finches in their golden dress,
With songs of praise themselves express;
Linnets too their tribute bring,
In honor of the heavenly King:
Soon as awake their time employ,
In singing of sweet hymns of joy;
[Let wretched man blush for his shame,
Soon as awake he does blaspheme.]
Each one his tuneful voice does raise,
And ushers in the day with praise.
The lark mounts up unto the sky,
Lost to the sight of human eye,
Sweetly does twiddle and does sing,
Keeps up her music on the wing;
But quickly to the earth descends,
To join her mate and other friends.
The turtle and the cooing-dove,
Join the sweet music of the grove,
And all the lovely feathered quire,
My soul with pleasure does admire;
May I those pretty songsters join,
To celebrate the hand divine.
The cuckcoo sings three months, no more,
Then drops her note, the season's over.
Birds of passage such wisdom have,
They cross with speed the briny wave,
No compass want or any line,
For to find out a warmer clime:
Great is the wisdom they do share,
They know the seasons of the year:
God does instruct and wisdom give,
To find out summer where to live;
The winter's cold they much do fear,
They must have summer all the year.
The turtle, swallow, and the crane,
The scripture has described by name;
From winter's cold away they fly,
To southern climes, a warmer sky.
The Lord instructs, does wisdom give;
In frost and snow they cannot live.
Irrational creatures of each kind,
Their end do answer God designed.
The lordly cock will kindly treat,
When finds a corn, calls to his mate,
Take this corn my dear, as I live,
When I find more, to thee I Will give.
His words so soft and tender were,
My soul delighted was to hear.
He is a father very kind,
And to his mate in love resigned;
And if disturbance does take place,
With haste does run for to make peace;
Nor mates, nor young, cannot bear to see
Either to fight or disagree.
What I have seen I do indite,
And put my thoughts in black and white.
Observe this kingly bird, how kind,
And good instruction you may find.
CHRIST does appoint the cock to crow,
Then Peter weeps with bitter woe,
Conviction now has reached his heart,
His conscience pierced with a dart;
Oh! the sad moans and bitter cries,
A flood of tears flow from his eyes.
When men from death and sleep awake,
Sad lamentation they do make.
Observe how creatures Christ obey,
Because he does the scepter sway:
The fish to Christ must money bring,
For to pay tribute to the king.
The winged people of the air,
Are joined in pure love, pair and pair.
Beasts of the earth, if I am right,
The male and female never will fight.
Does this not shame both man and wife,
Who wrangle out a wretched life.
In London I have often seen
May celebrated like a queen;
A rich garland of silver plate,
Their kind friends to congratulate,
Perhaps a thousand pounds the piece,
All very clean, elegant, and nice.
Young men and maids dressed fine and gay,
In honor of the month of May;
Decorated with May flowers,
Gathered from the neighboring bowers.
Jack in the green, does dance and sing;
The bells with music sweetly ring;
The very sweeps with garlands crowned,
Do clatter music through the town.
All Nature's changed, with beauties new,
And to mankind their glories show.
I step away to neighboring fields,
Admire the beauties nature yields;
The very forests has begun,
To show its blossoms to the sun.
Where ever I walk or turn my eyes,
New beauties to my sight arise;
The pretty lambs do sport and run,
And play their frolics in the sun:
These dear creatures, -- man clothe and feed
And do supply our present need.
Blessed are they who do behold,
That Lamb the prophets have foretold.
When grace from Christ, and peace are given,
On earth the man enjoys a heaven.
The lilly and the rose most fair,
Opens their beauties in the air,
But soon do fade and die away,
Like human life -- short is their stay.
Let blooming youth in time be wise,
Observe how soon sweet flowers dies
The rose of Sharon I admire,
For it is a type of the Messiah;
The passion flower in her dress,
Excels in every loveliness,
Some other flowers, I record,
An emblem of the blessed Lord.
The lily dressed in rich array,
Excels a king his nuptial day,
And all the flowery lovely tribe,
Excels the beauty of a bride.
The corn in beauty fast does spring,
The valleys they do laugh and sing,
Our kitchen gardens does produce,
The most healthful herbs, for our use;
These pure plants for meat are given,
By the indulgent hand of heaven.
In every blade of grass that is green,
The hand divine is clearly seen;
God's works are perfect in their kind,
In man's we no perfection find.
The crocus first, we do behold,
Clothed most rich, in robes of gold;
And silver snow-drops do appear,
Like to a virgin very fair:
Then various species spring to view,
Their numbers all I cannot show;
The yellow primrose we do find,
Which shows a power that is divine,
And cowslips of various hue,
New beauties open to our view.
Their various numbers to detail.
In very truth my time would fail.
Various beauties do spring forth,
From the rich surface of the earth;
Numerous are the flowery trust,
Some in fine powder richly dressed;
The painter can but imitate,
These lovely flowers are complete.
The air is soft, the sky serene,
Our path is decked with velvet green,
The meadows strewed with flowers are.
Without the gard'ner's toil or care.
Creation blooms, looks fine and gay,
Oh! this delightful month of May.
Grass, flowers, and trees of every kind,
Show forth to man the hand divine,
And all the flowery, lovely tribe,
Are dressed in robes of harmless pride,
And nourished by the heavenly showers,
Renews the beauties of the flowers;
The whole creation does declare
The mighty God, whose works they are
The thunders roar, and lightnings fly,
And dart their vengeance from the sky;
Ye rebels bold will you blaspheme
This awful and tremendous name.
Let Us imitate the be and ant,
And store up grace for future want;
The useful bees are so discreet,
Most worthy for to imitate:
They gather the delicious juice,
For their own food, and human use;
In summer when the sun does shine,
Much to industry they incline.
The little emmets do men teach,
A silent sermon they do preach.
Let sluggards learn for to be wise
Go to the ant, I thee advise;
Be active while the day is light,
Complete your work before it is night:
No post, so quick, so fast does fly,
As time does pass, for you to die.
Fly from sin, as the serpents sting,
For that more bitter pain will bring,
A wounded spirit, who can bear,
The pains of hell and black despair.
A dog that is mad man strives to shun,
But to base vice makes haste to run.
If in the town the plague's begun,
The people to the country run;
These life may end with bitter cries,
But sin, the soul that never dies.
The summer advances after May,
And man cuts grass, to dry for hay;
The country lad and sprightly lass,
Take forks to shake the tender grass,
Then make it up in cocks of hay,
And thus they spend the joyful day.
The summer now is in its prime,
And the warm days will soon decline;
Then comes gold autumn with rich store,
To feed the rich, likewise the poor;
Fruit and corn of various kind,
All given by the hand divine.
Thus does the seasons roll away;
Here ends my song on flowery MAY.
May 15, 1790.
An affectionate and dying Father's last Words; with his sincere and godly
Advice to his Children.
My dear Children,
IT appears to me, by the clearest demonstration, that I draw near, very near
to the period of this mortal life. Divine Providence has been pleased to lay my
feeble body on a languishing sick bed. I believe, from various symptoms, that
my disease is incurable, and consequently must issue in death; and, to confirm
this truth, I am given over by my physicians, and must in all appearance, in a
very short time depart into the invisible world of spirits, and never ending
eternity.

What a great and important change death makes on mankind. The body dies, and
in a short time turns to putrefaction in the grave; but the soul will survive
through the countless ages of eternity. But, my dear children, this is my
consolation, and the foundation of all my hopes, that Jesus Christ came into
the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief, Tim. i. 15; and whosoever
believes in him shall not perish, but have everlasting life. Therefore,
respecting myself, I am contented and happy. For, through the riches of divine
grace, I can, with assurance, say, that when the earthly house of this my
tabernacle is dissolved by the pale messenger Death, I have a building of God,
an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens, 2 Cor. v. 1. Therefore, I
shall very shortly in the words, and I humbly hope and pray in the faith, of
blessed Stephen, commit my soul into the hands of the Lord Jesus Christ, who is
ready to receive it, and bid an eternal farewell to all temporal things. But
what troubles and concerns me, is you, my dear children; after my departure you
will be poor helpless orphans, and my dear wife, and your kind indulgent
mother, will be a disconsolate widow. I leave you in a troublesome and wicked
world, beset with enemies on every side; but my trouble is mitigated and my
hopes revived, through the gracious and comfortable promises of my covenant
God, who commands me to leave my fatherless children "with him and he will
preserve them above alive, Jerem. xlix. 11. and my dear widow, by believing and
trusting in the Lord, shall want nothing that is truly good." They that trust
in the Lord shall be as mount Zion, which cannot be removed, but abides for
ever. Trust in the Lord, my dear children, with all your hearts, and lean not
to your own understandings; in all your ways acknowledge him, and he shall
direct your paths. The Lord tells us by his prophet Jeremiah, that the way of
man is not in himself; it is not in man that walks to direct his steps, Jer.
x. 23. We have nothing to hope in but sovereign grace.

Give me leave, my dear children, to recommend to you, in the strongest terms,
the reading and studying of the sacred and inspired writings, which our
gracious heavenly Father has given us to learn and know his will. Blessed is
he that reads and they who hear the words of this prophecy, Rev. i. 3. and
keeps those things which are written in this divine book. Make the Bible your
treasure, the promises your inheritance, and you will be happy here and for
ever.

I also beg and request, I pray and beseech you, my dear children, with all the
sympathizing bowels of compassion, and endearing entreaties of a loving and
tender parent, that you will grant me this one request, namely, to read my
dying words through at least once a month; it is my last will and testament,
and I desire it as much as I do that you should enjoy my estate and temporal
goods which I have given and bequeathed to you. I have been instrumental,
through God's blessing, of your birth into this world; your spiritual nativity
is out of my power, nothing short of the omnipotent power of divine grace, can
possibly effect it: And this divine change must pass, on your souls, my dear
children, otherwise there can be no salvation for you in the world to come,
John iii. 5. Therefore, my earnest cries, prayers, and petitions are frequently
offered up to the God of heaven; and you, my dear children, must not be wanting
to address the throne of grace yourselves, that God would pour his grace and
spirit upon your souls, and make you new creatures in Christ Jesus. "Yea, like
as a father pitieth his own children, even so is the Lord merciful unto them
that fear him. -- The merciful goodness of the Lord endures for ever and ever
upon them that fear him, and his righteousness upon children's children. -- The
Lord has engraven his people on the palms of his hands, he keeps them as the
apple of his eye, Deuteronomy. xxxii. 10. and waters them with his grace every moment
-- For the mountains shall depart and the hills be removed, but my kindness
shall not depart from thee; neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed,
faith the Lord that has mercy on thee, Isaiah lxiv. 10." I am commanded in the
sacred oracles of truth, to teach and instruct my children in the good old way,
that the holy fathers, prophets, and apostles have trod; and through grace, I
have endeavored, according to the ability given me of God, to discharge this
weighty and important duty. I will further, my dear children, address you in
the words of the pious Psalmist, to his beloved son Solomon: And thou, know
thou the God of thy father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a
willing mind, for the Lord searches all hearts and understands all the
imaginations of the thoughts. If thou seek him he will be found of thee, but if
thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever, 1 Chronicles. xxviii. 9. Hear, ye
children, the instruction of a father, and attend to know understanding, for I
give ye good doctrine, forsake ye not my law, Prove. iv. 1, 2. Call on the Lord
and he will answer thee, and show thee great and mighty things which thou
know not, Jer. xxxiii. 3. For the Lord has promised in his infallible word,
that he will be found of you, when you search for him with your whole heart and
soul, Jerem. xxix. 13. The eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole
earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect
toward him, 2 Chronicles. xvi. 9. For the Lord God is a sun and shield, the Lord
will give grace and glory: no good thing will he withhold from them that walk
uprightly, Psalm. lxxxiv. 11." The omnipotent Jehovah is a wall of fire about
his chosen people, and a munition of rocks to defend them from every enemy and
every evil. Secure his favor by an evangelical faith in Christ, and you may
bid defiance to every evil; you may laugh at all the wicked powers of earth and
hell. The omnipotent Jehovah fills heaven and earth with his presence, and
always surrounds us with his immensity, as the light and darkness does our
bodies, day and night, Jerem. xxxiii. 23. For in GOD we live, and move, and
have our being, Acts xvii. 28. Therefore, my dear children, do you not behave
in any manner, respecting YOURSELVES, or others, which you would be ashamed of
before the meanest of your fellow creatures. There is no creature that is not
manifest in the sight of God, Heb. iv. 13. Light and darkness are both alike to
him, Psalm. cxxxix. 12. His all-seeing eye beholds every creature with one
comprehensive glance, and no created substance can screen his all penetrating
eye from beholding it. -- Be ye, therefore, strong in the faith which is in
Christ Jesus; because abundance of grace, the special gift of faith, will
enable you to stand complete and perfect in the whole will of God, John vi. 29.
The glory of God and the salvation of your souls, ought always to have the
pre-eminence, because it is the one thing needful. Happy is the man that
finds wisdom, and the man that gets understanding; for the merchandise of
it is better than the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof than fine
gold: She is more precious than rubies, and all the things thou can desire
are not to be compared with her; length of days are in her right hand, and in
her left hand riches and honor: Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her
paths are peace: She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her, and
happy is every one that retains her, Prove. chap. iii. You are very near my
heart, my dear children, and I do most earnestly desire your eternal felicity;
but you must remember what the word of God says on this head, that without
holiness of heart and life, you can never see the face of God with comfort. Now
is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation; catch the present moments as
they fly: Arise, therefore, and be doing, and the Lord shall be with you.

But I am become exceeding faint and weak with speaking, and in a very short
time my soul will take its everlasting flight into the invisible world of
spirits; therefore, as Moses the great prophet of the Lord, breathed out his
soul in prayer to God, for his people, so my soul cries to the Father of
mercies, and the God of all comfort, for you, my dear children. Oh! that you
were wise, Oh! that you understood this, that you would consider your latter
end; how shortly will this great change pass on your souls, and pale death
bring your bodies to the dust. Probably not one of the human race in fifty
thousand lives to my age, which is about seventy; and you, my dear children,
though in the bloom of youth, and perfect health of body, may instantly cut
down like a flower in its prime, as thousands and tens of thousands of mankind
are; its is thought that three parts of mankind are called off by death before
they arrive at the age of thirty years. It is the opinion of the wise and
learned, that there is not a moment passes (all mankind considered throughout
the world), without an immortal soul departing into the invisible world --
Behold the Judge stands before the door. Eternity is at hand, be ye therefore
sober, and watch unto prayer. Now, my dear wife and children, I must leave you,
therefore, I commit you to God and the word of his grace, who is able to build
you up in the most holy faith, and give you an inheritance among them that are
sanctified. -- Farewell my dear wife and children, farewell.

LORD JESUS receive my Spirit.

N. B. My dear friend, at your request I have drawn out these papers, and I
pray God that they may have the desired effect on yours and others children's
souls. You will please to observe, my friend, that if a man dies not having a
wife, or, a woman not having a husband, the diminishing and adding a few words
with the pen, will make these papers, I hope, in some measure suit their
purposes, respecting the age of the man, also the giving and bequeathing his
estate, etc.

And if a copy of this little (...) (which is what you intend, Sir), be written
with the honored parent's own hand, probably it will have a greater tendency
to incline the minds of the children to read it, and strike their minds with
awe and reverence, remind them of their duty to God, and the care of their own
souls.

{oil} What you farther propose, Sir, seems very consistent, namely, to sew
these papers in at the end of your Bible, because it will be a means to keep
them clean, and preserve them from being lost.



FINIS.

