AMENDMENTS PROPOSED TO BE ADDED TO THE FEDERAL CONSTITUTION, BY THE CONGRESS
OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Begun and held at the CITY of NEW YORK, on
WEDNESDAY, the fourth Day of MARCH, in the YEAR M, DCC, LXXXIX.

PRINTED at BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS, BY THOMAS ADAMS, PRINTER to the HONORABLE
the GENERAL COURT M, DCC, XC.

UNITED STATES, OCTOBER 2d, 1789. SIR,
IN pursuance of the enclosed Resolution, I have the honor to transmit to your
Excellency, a copy of the Amendments proposed to be added to the Constitution
of the United States.

I have the honor to be, with due consideration, your Excellency's most
obedient Servant G. WASHINGTON.
His Excellency JOHN HANCOCK.



CONGRESS of the UNITED STATES. In the HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES, THURSDAY, 24th
of SEPTEMBER, 1789.
RESOLVED, by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of
America in Congress assembled, That the PRESIDENT of the United States be
requested to transmit to the Executives of the several States which have
ratified the Constitution, copies of the Amendments, proposed by Congress, to
be added thereto; and like copies to the Executives of the States of
Rhode Island and North Carolina.

Attest -- JOHN BECKLEY, Clerk.

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. In SENATE, SEPTEMBER, 26th, 1789.
RESOLVED, That the Senate do concur in this Resolution.

Attest -- SAMUEL A. OTIS, Secretary.

Congress of the United States, Begun and held at the city of NEW YORK, on
Wednesday the fourth of MARCH, one thousand seven hundred and eighty-nine.
The Conventions of a number of the States having at the time of their adopting
the Constitution, expressed a desire, in order to prevent misconstruction or
abuse of its powers, that further declaratory and restrictive clauses should be
added: And as extending the ground of public confidence in the government, will
best insure the beneficent ends of its institution:

RESOLVED, by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of
AMERICA, in Congress assembled, two thirds of both Houses concurring, That the
following Articles be proposed to the Legislatures of the several States, as
Amendments to the Constitution of the United States, all or any of which
Articles, when ratified by three fourths of the said Legislatures, to be valid
to all intents and purposes, as part of the said Constitution, viz.

ARTICLES in Addition to, and Amendment of, the CONSTITUTION of the UNITED
STATES of AMERICA, proposed by Congress, and ratified by the Legislatures of
the several States, pursuant to the fifth Article of the original Constitution.
Article the First.
AFTER the first enumeration required by the first Article of the Constitution,
there shall be one Representative for every thirty thousand, until the number
shall amount to one hundred, after which the proportion shall be so regulated
by Congress, that there shall be not less than one hundred Representatives, nor
less than one Representative for every forty thousand persons, until the number
of Representatives shall amount to two hundred; after which the proportion
shall be so regulated by Congress, that there shall not be less than two
hundred Representatives, nor more than one Representative for every fifty
thousand persons.

Article the Second.
NO law varying the compensation for the services of the Senators and
Representatives, shall take effect, until an election of Representatives shall
have intervened.

Article the Third.
CONGRESS shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or
prohibiting the free exercise thereof, or abridging the freedom of speech, or
of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition
the government for a redress of grievances.

Article the Fourth.
A WELL regulated militia being necessary to the security of a free State, the
right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed.

Article the Fifth.
NO soldier shall in time of peace be quartered in any house without the
consent of the owner; nor in time of war, but in a manner to be prescribed by
law.

Article the Sixth.
THE right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and
effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated; and
no warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by oath or
affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the
persons or things to be seized.

Article the Seventh.
NO person shall be held to answer for a capital, or otherwise infamous crime,
unless on a presentment or indictment of a Grand Jury, except in cases arising
in the land or naval forces, or in the militia when in actual service in time
of war or public danger; nor shall any person be subject for the same offense
to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb; nor shall be compelled in any
criminal case, to be a witness against himself, nor be deprived of life,
liberty or property, without due process of law; nor shall private property be
taken for public use, without just compensation.

Article the Eighth.
IN all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy
and public trial, by an impartial jury of the State and District wherein the
crime shall have been committed, which District shall have been previously
ascertained by law, and to be informed of the nature and cause of the
accusation; to be confronted with the witnesses against him; to have compulsory
process for obtaining witnesses in his favor, and to have the assistance of
counsel for his defense.

Article the Ninth.
IN suits at common law, where the controversy shall exceed twenty dollars, the
right of trial by Jury, shall be preserved, and no fact, tried by a Jury, shall
be otherwise re-examined in any Court of the United States, than according to
the rules of the common law.

Article the Tenth.
EXCESSIVE bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel
and unusual imprisonments inflicted.

Article the Eleventh
THE enumeration in the Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be construed
to deny or disparage others retained by the people.

Article the Twelfth.
THE powers not delegated to the United States, by the Constitution, nor
prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to
the people.

FREDERICK A. MUHLENBERG, Speaker of the House of Representatives.
JOHN ADAMS, Vice President of the United States, and President of the Senate.
Attest. JOHN BECKLEY, Clerk of the House of Representatives.
SAMUEL A. OTIS, Secretary of the Senate.


