An Oration.

By EDWARD BANGS, Esquire.

Delivered at WORCESTER.

AN ORATION, DELIVERED AT WORCESTER, ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, 1791.

BEING THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE UNITED STATES.

BY EDWARD BANGS, ESQUIRE.

PRINTED AT WORCESTER, MASSACHUSETTS, BY ISAIAH THOMAS.

Sold at his Book store in WORCESTER, and by him and Company in BOSTON.

MDCCXCI.

AN ODE FOR THE DAY.
[Composed by Doctor O. FISKE.]
Performed previous to the Oration.
HAIL blessed AMERICA!
Happy thy natal day!
Glorious in peace!
On this auspicious morn
Millions of Sons were born,
Fair Freedom to adorn --
'Till time shall ceas-!
Ah! with what fierce alarms
Columbia flew to arms! --
'Twas GOD's decree --
Heaven sent his favored Son --
Far famed WASHINGTON --
Soon the vast work was done --
Fate said -- BE FREE!
Heroes who bled and died
At Freedom's sacred side,
Godlike shall live --
High on the list of Fame,
Time holds each Patriot's name --
Bright glory is their claim,
Which Heaven shall give.
Far as bright Phoebus' rays,
Liberty spreads her blaze
Throughout our land --
Offering her choicest stores,
Science opes all her doors --
Art all her blessings pours
With liberal hand.
Commerce in every gale
Spreads her propitious sail --
Explores each (...).
Wealth her rich favor shows,
In every breeze that blows --
Peace, where our canva^^ flows,
Greets with a smile.
Freedom in rapid course,
Quick as electrick force,
Fires Gallia's shore --
Tyranny stands aghast --
Liberty binds him fast,
May the strong setters last
'Till time's no more!

AN ORATION.
Delivered at Worcester, on the Fourth of July, 1791.

ON a day like the present -- an anniversary designed to bring to our
remembrance those united and virtuous efforts which made us all brethren, and
called forth the exertion of every unexperienced power -- accounting it a
virtue for each one to surmount his natural diffidence: -- On such a day, it
would betray a want of candor in the speaker, to doubt the candor of his
audience.

IT has been the wise practice of most nations, to endeavor to commemorate
those great events, which have been fraught with any signal benefit or
instruction to mankind. To this end, monuments, columns, pillars, have been
erected, with engravings upon stone: But as the mind of man is weak, and liable
to lose the strongest impressions; as man himself must soon fall into the
earth, and give way to succeeding generations; so all, even the most lasting,
things on earth, are still liable to decay and change. The pillar tumbles; the
column moulders, and is shaken down; and even the broad based monument is
washed away by the current of time, and all the engravings obliterated.

SHALL we then seek, by anniversaries and festal days, to make frequent
impressions, and thereby preserve in the mind those images which brass and
marble cannot hold? Alas! what crowds of thoughtless men, carried along
blindfold by the custom, have perverted their festal days to folly and riot --
ignorant of the occasion.

SHALL we attempt, by orations and public set speeches, to catch that
attention which the historian has lost? Shall we repeat the wondrous things
which have been done in our days, and tell them to our children, and to our
children's children, that they may hand them down to future generations? -- But
the story has frequently been told. We can no longer expect to please the ear
with novelty. We must be satisfied, and think we have every success, if we can
improve the mind, and warm the heart to virtue.

EXCEPTING only the appearance of the Great Author of our religion, history has
no other event on her pages of more importance, than what this day
commemorates. It is the birthday of a free, expanding, multiplying nation: It
is the birthday of the western world. Let us call in our remembrance, and step
back, by recollection, to the period when Congress first published the
declaration of our independence. What were the feelings -- what the
palpitations of our hearts! Educated in the full belief of British irresistible
power, and accustomed to sink ourselves in comparison with them, the warmest
patriot, the boldest soldier of America, (they will forgive me) almost trembled
at the thought. Daring, said we, daring indeed, is Congress -- but not rash,
not treacherous. Our confidence in their wisdom and integrity forbade that
thought. That confidence was the cement of our union; that confidence inspired
with courage and strength every nerve in the struggling states; and
reciprocated fresh encouragement into the bosoms of those heroic spirits, that
first dared the bold declaration, and pledged their sacred honor, greatly to
die, or force their way to independence.

WHAT cannot a wise choice of rulers, and a proper confidence in them, after
choice, perform!

JEALOUSY has, for a long time, been considered as a political virtue: It has
even been dignified with the titles of noble, generous, manly; the jealousy of
a free people for their rights. In my mind, jealousy, of any sort, must be but
an uncomfortable feeling at best: And it is said, that in many instances, where
it has been unreasonably entertained, it has had a tendency to produce those
very evils, of which it was so overmuch afraid. But granting jealousy to have
been necessary in other governments, less perfect than ours, still we dignify
it highly enough, in styling it a necessary evil. -- An evil it most certainly
is; and must unfit the mind for many of the pleasures and enjoyments of life.
-- Heaven guard us from it, and enable us to live, and enjoy our independence,
without it.

SOME nations have been over cautious in the first establishment of the
necessary governmental powers; and by the jealousy which they have discovered
in this respect, have finally lost their privileges. Government in its own
nature requires, and always must and will have the necessary adequate powers of
regulation and defense: If you give them, they will probably be exercised
constitutionally; if you give them not, they must and will be assumed. For in
any dangerous crisis, the most faithful and conscientious magistrate, if too
much circumscribed, must from necessity transgress the limits of his authority;
and that necessity obliges you to pardon; nay, obliges you to approve of the
transgression. This becomes a dangerous precedent. The constitution is no
longer strictly observed; but arbitrary power begins. A wise man affords his
servant sufficient provisions, implements, and materials, for his service; the
avaricious man sometimes denies them; whence the servant is obliged to cut and
carve for himself, becomes his own judge of what is necessary, and soon learns
to despise his master's authority. There is, my friends, you have often read,
"There is that withholdeth more than meet, and there is that by giving
increases riches." The United Provinces of the Netherlands are an example to
our present purpose. Just escaped from the jaws of Spanish tyranny, glowing
with an intemperate zeal for liberty, and too sparing in the gift of power,
they have essentially lost their privileges, possessing now the shadow only,
and the form of liberty. We have had pilots that saw the rock on which they
split, have steered us clear, and brought us safe to harbor. In this respect
we have had the proper confidence, and by it have earned the blessings and the
praises of future rising nations throughout our own vast Continent: And Europe
too, and all the world, shall taste desirable fruit, from our fair tree of
liberty, and learn to plant and cultivate therefrom, till tyranny can find no
place to grow.

WHEN we compare our government, in ever so slight a manner, with that of other
nations, we shall soon be convinced, that we have more room for confidence, and
less occasion for jealousy, than any other people, ancient or modern. If we
take a view of the ancient states of Rome and Greece, so famed for wisdom and
for liberty; (I am sensible I shall offend the admirers of antiquity) but if we
take an intimate and comparative view of those nations, we shall find them mere
babes in politics, compared to the present times. Their constitutions were
never settled, or known to themselves; the functions of their magistrates were
never properly defined; they had no legislative assemblies by representation,
capable of collective wisdom and deliberation. Their laws were generally framed
by artful men, at the head of affairs, insidiously to increase their own
authority; and suddenly proposed to a whole assembled nation, worked up for the
purpose, and in agitation like the waves of the tempestuous roaring ocean, not
to be deliberated upon -- how was that possible in such an assembly -- but to
be enacted. They were often passed in the violence of passion, expost facto, to
punish the perpetration of some recent offense; and never after observed: Or,
full as often, to sacrifice to the mistaken fury of the people, some innocent,
virtuous, worthy man, their best friend, whose honest advice had given them
present displeasure; but whose advice, when it was too late, was found to be
good; and the man lamented, honored, and his name adored, by the very people
who, in their rage, had lately deprived him of life. Of what value is liberty
like this? What is the advantage, to a considerate, thinking man, to live
amidst a confused chaos of free citizens, to be carried about, and hurried
around by the eddies of faction, where reason and discretion are never known?
Such liberty can only be followed by regret; because it can never fail to be
misused. These nations boasted of liberty; but it was only the liberty of
fierce spirits, to be forever contending for their liberty. They were
constantly surprised to see their demagogue, the head of their mob, to whom
they looked up, as to the very son and guardian of liberty, after trampling
down the former tyranny, become the very worst of tyrants himself. No wonder
that this experience should make them jealous; but, Of what avail was jealousy?
Still the defects in their constitution forever prevented the tranquillity of
the state, or the enjoyment of the true blessings of personal liberty by the
citizen. If we had time to observe on the constitutions of modern states, which
have the reputation to be free, we should find their condition not widely
different. A question naturally presents itself. Why have not nations
heretofore formed for themselves better, and more regular constitutions? It has
partly been owing to their want of skill, and partly to their want of
opportuty, under favorable circumstances, like those which fell to us. The
constitutions of ancient and modern times, What were they, what are they, but
the productions of chance? The settlement of contrary contending interests and
factions, after their fermentations had subsided? We have been favored with
the rare opportunity -- suffer me to quote the preamble to our state
constitution -- "deliberately and peaceably, without fraud, violence or
surprise, of entering into an original, explicit and solemn compact with each
other, and of forming a new constitution of civil government for ourselves and
posterity." An opportunity which no nation ever enjoyed, accompanied with the
like favorable circumstances: -- It was a time when many bright stars of
learning shone to illuminate our political hemisphere. I would name some; but
others rush upon my mind; and, Who can count the stars of heaven? What tongue
can call them all by name. It was a time of general information. -- Besides, we
had among us no hereditary claims to particular privileges; no proud nobility,
or haughty ecclesiastical orders, to compromise with: No different ranks or
grades in society; but all stood together, as we now stand, upon the same
extended plain of free citizenship. What occasion then have we for jealousy?
Why may we not repose a pleasing considence in the rulers which we ourselves
have chosen?

OUR Military, they are not the livery servants of a court, the tools of
tyranny to enslave us. We have none of those standing armies, in times of
peace, which have so often proved destructive to the liberties of their own
country. And yet, I trust, our country would not be found defenseless, should
any power think proper to attack it. It has been the court policy, in
governments where standing armies have usually been kept on foot, to cry down,
and affect to despise a militia: But Britons have been taught to their cost,
others have seen and been convinced, and the names of Bennington and Saratoga
will ever call to mind, that an American militia is not to be despised.

THE Freedom of the Press is not among the least of the numerous advantages
which we enjoy; it is another, and a firm ground of confidence in our rulers.
This is our great political source of light and intelligence, from whence their
beams are darted and diffused, like the rays of the sun, in a moment, into
every part of the union: We are made hearers, we are made spectators of all
that is said or done by men in power. This must prove a constant spur to
activity, a strong incentive to virtuous actions, and at the same time, a
powerful check on any who might be disposed to misuse their authority: For we
can scarcely conceive of any man so lost to all the feelings of fear or shame,
so regardless of the good or bad opinion of his fellow citizens, as not to feel
and be wounded by the bold censures, the just reproaches, and the keen shafts
of satire, which may be levelled at him, like a storm, from the press. When a
man is thus set up as a public mark, there is nothing, but the precious
heavenly shield of innocence and conscious virtue, that can protect the heart.
And if impudence should put on his brazen helmet, and offer to confront the
public, the next election reduces him to his proper station.

I HAVE mentioned a few only of our chief advantages, and those briefly, for
time would not allow. But these few circumstances make it evident, that the
doctrine of jealousy is not so essential in our government, as it may have been
in some others, and that the designs of government are better answered. Secure,
that our watchmen are embarked with us in the same ship, and that while they
watch for us, they watch for their own lives, for their posterity, as well as
ours, we may turn each one to his private occupation with dignity, enjoying the
independence of our minds, the freedom of our thoughts and speech, and the
fruit of our labors; only taking care, as the times of election come regularly
round, to make a proper choice of our public servants, and occasionally
amusing ourselves, at leisure hours, with overlooking them in all their
proceedings, by reading the public printed papers.

BUT to be entirely exempt from care, is not the lot of humanity. It would be
childish to expect it. One thing has been mentioned, of which we must be
careful; that is, to make a wise election of our public officers. On this
depend our prosperity, the wisdom of our laws, the stability of our
constitution, and the preservation of our morals. If a man employ unskilful
workmen, Can he expect to have his business well performed? If we choose
unskilful legislators, Who can we blame but ourselves, should we have confused,
foolish, weak and unconstitutional laws? If we promote to places of public
power and trust, men of licentious manners and unfair characters, What do we,
but give encouragement to vice? If, on the contrary, we prefer to high stations
men only of superior eminence for virtue, we take the surest method to produce
a laudable emulation for virtue among all the people. True merit, my friends,
is apt to be diffident of itself. It will not push itself forward, or solicit
our suffrages; much less will it endeavor to elbow others out of place, to
make room for itself. This conduct is an infallible mark to prove a man
unworthy of the office he solicits. It is sometimes argued by those self
conceited men, who, having neither riches nor learning, therefore think
themselves the only proper persons for places of public power and trust, that
it would be of dangerous tendency to put our confidence in men of wealth and
learning; because, say they, these men are naturally inclined toward an
aristocracy: As if we did not know that an aristocracy is a government by an
hereditary nobility: As if we did not know, that learning is not hereditary;
and that men cannot long continue their estates in their own families, until
they can find out some method to prevent the children from squandering what
their fathers earned; and until they can prevent an industrious virtuous poor
from rising their superiors. If we cast our eyes around us, we shall be
surprised to observe, how many men of eminence, of the last age, have left
their descendants undistinguished among the common multitude of the people.
Again, how many of our present best and brightest characters, are the sons of
poor but honest men, and received nothing from their parents but an honest
education -- the principles of moral rectitude early and strongly impressed on
the mind. Persons not accustomed to look at things in the common course of
cause and effect, attribute these striking changes to the wheel of fortune.
Whatever wheel it may be called, it is seen to revolve oftener in this than any
other country; and one reason for it, among others, may be our law directing
the descent of intestate estates. These are not, as in the countries in Europe,
transmitted to a single heir, in exclusion of others as nearly related; but are
divided, as reason and equity would have them, among all the children alike;
hereby often making from one overgrown estate many moderate ones. And with
regard to learning, my friends, it is like the water, like the air we breathe,
like the light of heaven. All who thirst and pant after it, all who please to
turn their eyes toward it, may take portions equal to their several capacities,
with which they ought to be satisfied: May I not compare it to the common road,
in which any one may travel; while the expense is borne by the public. It is
seen that I now speak with reference to our town grammar schools -- an
admirable institution, if rightly improved. It is the gate opened, and the
pathway pointed out, that leads to the fair fields of science. Here the poor
man's young son may commence his studies; and if he feel in himself a true
relish for knowledge, let him read the life of FRANKLIN, and he will be
encouraged to proceed; let him peruse it often, and he will find a pattern and
a guide, whose steps are sure, and worthy to be followed. Besides, there is no
country in which an academick education may be obtained with so little expense,
as in this; where the sons of men in very moderate circumstances are often seen
to receive all its honors, and all its advantages: And we know from
observation, that as necessity is called the mother of invention, so poverty,
properly encouraged, is the parent of exertion: And in a country like this,
where all the faculties are free, it needs but exertion to climb to the highest
eminences.

I MAY further add, that these are not the times to apprehend degeneracy in
governments. It is true, that history has hitherto presented us with little
else than a constant series of governments, growing more and more corrupted as
they became older: And these political bodies were aptly enough compared to the
human body; it being thought as impossible for the one to renovate itself, as
for the other to renew its youth. But change of circumstances, and new events,
are giving us occasion to alter many articles in our political creed. Our good
allies, the French, an old nation, for a long time depressed, without being
degraded by the arm of arbitrary power, are now, in a manner unexampled since
the beginning of the world, framing for themselves a rational constitution,
founded on the rights of man. A revolution is brought about by reason, and not
by arms. This is owing to the diffusion of knowledge by the Art of Printing. It
is impossible for an enlightened nation to be slaves. And in these days, the
nations that were in darkness have seen great light; and to those that sat in
the region and shadow of political death, light has sprung up.

O HAPPY United States! rejoice, and be not unmindful of your gratitude to
Heaven on this auspicious day: For on this day ye were freed from participating
the perpetual quarrels and wars of Europe; where men are forever troubled by
the folly, the pride, and the avarice of kings. -- Removed at a happy distance
from the havoc and devastations that now threaten them, in bringing about
their necessary revolutions, ye may view the scene unconcerned, but for the
cause of liberty, the cause of humanity. No longer restrained, as once we were,
we may now entertain the whole peaceful circle of the industrious, enriching
arts; and add to the virtuous number by new inventions. Ambitious of no
conquest, but over the soil and the seas, our ships may now explore the most
distant coasts, and approach the natives with benevolence, and the friendly
offers of mutual advantage. Before our husbandmen the wilderness recedes, and
fat herds, and smiling fields of corn appear, promising plenty, and inviting to
partake the generous repast. These are the times in which a man should wish to
live. Verily the lines are fallen to us in pleasant places; and we have a
goodly heritage.

FINIS.

