At a meeting of the trustees of the first Presbyterian congregation in
Freehold, in the county of Monmouth, held on the sixteenth day of April,
seventeen hundred and ninety,

Resolved,

THAT Doctor Henderson, the President of this board, wait on the Rev. Mr.
Woodhull, and request a copy of the sermon which he delivered at the time of
the late general thanksgiving, in order that it may be printed.

A SERMON, FOR THE DAY OF PUBLIC THANKSGIVING, APPOINTED BY THE PRESIDENT, On
ACCOUNT of the ESTABLISHMENT of the NEW CONSTITUTION, etc. NOVEMBER 26, 1789.

BY THE REV. JOHN WOODHULL, A. M. Pastor of the first Presbyterian Church in
Freehold.

The LORD reigns, let the earth rejoice. Psalm. xcvii. I. TRENTON: PRINTED BY
ISAAC COLLINS. M.DCC.XC.

A SERMON, FOR THE DAY OF PUBLIC THANKSGIVING.
ISAIAH LXIII. 7. I will mention the loving kindnesses of the LORD, and the
praises of the LORD, according to all that the LORD has bestowed on us.
THE being and perfections, the providence and government of God, lie at the
foundation of all true religion -- of all real happiness -- of our very being
-- and, of the universe in general. Take away these foundations, and what a
yawning gulf do we hang over! -- how soon would all shrink back into their
native nonexistence! -- for an independent creature, is an absurdity.

AS God is the author and preserver of the universe, so his providence, both
general and particular, reigns over every part thereof.

HIS general providence is said to be, that superintendency and influence by
which he continues in being and vigor all those original laws of nature by
which the structure of the universe in general, and the particular being of
each individual, are upheld and continued throughout the several stages of
their existence.

HE who formed the universe, and set the wheels of the vast machine in motion,
has not abandoned it to the direction of blind fortune, or fickle chance; but,
superintends the whole himself, without intermission: and can, with the utmost
ease, give such a direction to its movements as to bless or punish an
individual, a nation, a continent, or a world.

THIS doctrine of a general providence does, in some respects, include a
particular one; for it implies that the most inconsiderable plant, the meanest
insect, and the most contemptible reptile, are under the perpetual guardianship
and protection of God. According to this scheme, there is not a spire of grass,
but vegetates and grows by a divine agency -- not a flower in the garden or
field, but what the hand of God paints -- not a blossom, but what he opens.
And, if we turn to divine revelation, and look through the sacred volume, we
shall find it an history of God's particular providence; as in general, it
contains an account of his dealing with particular persons, churches, and
nations: and teaches, that his care and inspection extend to every object
without exception -- that even the hairs of the head are numbered, and, that
not a sparrow falls to the ground, without the will of the heavenly Father.

WHILE we behold the divine agency in the spires of grass, and in the opening
flowers, and acknowledge God's superintendency over the meanest insect; we
cannot exclude it from man, and the kingdoms of men; but rather say, here is
its proper empire, here it reigns in a more peculiar manner.

WITH respect to us in these United States, wise observers have, with grateful
admiration, remarked a kind and powerful hand of providence, conducting us from
the feeble state of infancy and dependence, through darkness -- through dangers
-- and through a long and bloody contest, to our present state of greatness and
glory.

AND it is not only with pleasure, but even with exulting, I remind you, that,
that great and good man, whose glories, like the sun, shine throughout the
world, who led our armies to victory, and ourselves to empire; and now fills
the first seat of government; has ever stood among the foremost, in viewing
the divine hand, and in ascribing the glory of all his and our successes, to
its powerful interposition. And in addition to his example, he is now, by his
authority, calling on us, and on all united America, to join with him this day
in bowing before the LORD, with adoration and praise for his abundant goodness
and mercy -- and with ardent supplications for a continuance of them.

MY brethren, being invited by so bright an example, enforced by the highest
earthly authority, and led by the cords of divine goodness, we cannot suffer
all the rich mercies of God to pass unnoticed -- but while thanks ascend from
the grateful hearts of millions, we will join the praise -- we will join our
WASHINGTON, and the language of every heart shall be, I will mention the loving
kindnesses of the LORD, and the praises of the LORD, according to all that the
LORD has bestowed on us.

THE observation which naturally arises, both from the words of our text, and
from our present circumstances, is -- That we are under strong obligations as a
people, to mention the loving kindnesses of the LORD, with grateful hearts --
and with sincere desires, to make suitable returns therefore.

I. AND first, let us comply with the duty, by mentioning the loving kindnesses
of the LORD, and the praises of the LORD, according to all that he has
bestowed on us. Then --

II. SECONDLY, inquire, what are the suitable returns which we ought to make,
for all that the LORD has bestowed on us.

FIRST, let us, with grateful hearts, mention the loving kindnesses of the
LORD, and the praises of the LORD --

HERE, I may address you in the admiring language of Elihu to Job -- Stand
still, and see the wondrous works of God!

WE will begin the survey with a view of that which holds the highest rank of
all blessings to our fallen world -- I mean the gift of God's own son; a gift
which leads all others after it -- for he that spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all
things? Through him we receive the common bounties of providence in this world;
and through him only, we have the hope of eternal life in that which is to come.

As we have ever lived under a dispensation of grace, and do continually
experience benefits which flow through a Savior; we are in the habit of
viewing ourselves, and fellow men, only in that favored situation; and, from
the commonness of the view, I fear, lose a sense of the greatness of the
blessing. But, could we exclude the idea of a Savior, the Sun of
righteousness, from our world -- how gloomy and dreadful a prospect would rise
before us! -- all spiritual light and life would cease, and every comfort --
even hope itself, would die -- and the whole human race lie in the suburbs of
hell -- abandoned to eternal death! What soul does not shrink back from the
thought? -- Were our natural sun to be put out, or removed from the system, and
leave all objects here as frozen statues, wrapped in eternal night; yet the
prospect could not be equally dreadful. How great cause then had angels to
celebrate the coming of a Savior as glad tidings of great joy to all mankind!
but how much greater cause have we to proclaim his name, with the loudest
acclamations of joy and praise!

HERE too we should gratefully mention the goodness of God in giving us his
holy word, to be a light to our feet, and lamp to our way -- in giving us the
ordinances of the gospel, and means of grace; and ever preserving a church in
the world, so that the gates of hell have never effectually prevailed against
it.

AND as protestants, we ought still thankfully to recollect, that after a long
night of ignorance and errors had sitten down on the christian world, by means
of the Pope, that man of sin; that God did, in his providence, bring about a
glorious reformation in the beginning of the sixteenth century, or about two
hundred and seventy-three years ago: and thereby gave such a wound to the In
the Rev. XIII. 17, 18, the number of the Beast's name is said to be six hundred
and threescore and six; which is the number of that name which the Pope has
assumed to himself, and wears on his mitre, viz. VICARIUS FILII DEI, the
vicegerent of the Son of God; that is, the numerical letters in the name, make
exactly six hundred sixty and six, as may be seen on trial -- thus, In
VICARIUS, the numerical letters are, U being fermerly the same as V, V -- 5 I
-- 1 C -- 100 I -- 1 U -- 5
In FILII, I -- 1 L -- 50 I -- 1 I -- 1
112 In DEI, D -- 500 I -- 1
554 112 Which added make 666 Is not this a striking evidence that the Pope is
the Beast there mentioned?


beast as has never yet been healed, but under the increase of which he now
languishes, and will, probably, soon expire.

THE nation of Britain, from whence the most of us originally sprang, began to
be favored with the light of the reformation in the reign of Henry the eighth
-- but yet in a greater degree in the succeeding reign of the pious young
Edward the sixth. The reformation was interrupted for a short season, during
the reign of the persecuting and bloody queen Mary; but was again carried on,
and fixed on a solid basis, in the long and glorious reign of queen Elizabeth.
Yet, under the four succeeding kings of the Stuarts' line, persecution once
more reared its malignant head in the land of our forefathers, and with bloody
hands pursued and drove them to seek an asylum in a new world -- where we,
their children, now dwell; -- and where God provided them a place, and
nourished them from the face of the Dragon.

HERE pause -- and take a comparative view of what they were then, and, of what
we are now. If we look back, we see them, few in number -- driven from their
native land -- far from their friends -- without shelter, shivering on the
bleak shores of the north -- or with cautious step entering a vast wilderness,
with savage beasts and men around them, and boding fears within -- now casting
a sad look to their native shores -- then on the dreary wilderness -- then up
to heaven, for pity and protection.

BUT when we now look around; how is the scene changed! An extensive cultivated
country is pouring its riches into our lap -- the convenient dwelling, pleasant
villages, growing towns, and populous cities lie before us -- arts and sciences
flourish -- commerce swells the tide, and millions of inhabitants fill the
land, freed from the gripe of tyranny, conducted to independence and peace, and
crowned with glory and honor! Here the soul, filled with pleasing wonder, is
constrained to cry out, 'this is the LORD'S doing!' And this sense of a divine
and almighty arm in our favor will be more confirmed and improved, as we draw
nearer, and consider the manner in which these great events have taken place.
Want of time will make it necessary to pass over the variety of goodness which
our fathers have experienced, for whom God prepared a place in the wilderness
-- led them as by the hand -- and was as a wall of fire round about them -- and
come, to what more immediately respects ourselves; to our late, though ever
memorable contest with Great Britain. Who, like Pharaoh and the Egyptians, with
respect to Israel, being jealous of our growing strength and numbers, thought
it wise to lay their heavy hand and galling yoke upon us, in order to secure to
themselves our subjection and service. And, when they saw the great soul of
America disdain such bondage, instead of admiring her virtue, they sent forth
their armies like a flood to overwhelm her. And surely we may say, if it had
not be the LORD who was on our side, when men rose up against us: then they
had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us: then the
waters had overwhelmed us -- the proud waters had gone over our soul. We, being
but little more than in our infancy as a people, used to the walks of peace,
unaccustomed to the arts of war, and destitute of the means for carrying it on;
went forth, like the stripling David, with a sling and a stone, against an
overgrown Goliath clad in steel. And the success in either case, must not be
ascribed to human power or skill; but to a gracious and overruling providence,
whereby the race is not always given to the swift, nor the battle to the strong.

PROVIDENCE, generally, acts by secret springs, and its way is often in the
sea, and path in the great waters, so that we are unable to trace its
footsteps; but in the American cause the divine agency has been less obscure;
yea, God has so manifestly appeared for us in a variety of ways, that
infidelity must be dumb before him. Some of those ways I shall briefly mention.

I. FIRST, by impressing the minds of people, especially those of the good and
virtuous, with a confidence of success; or, shall I rather say, by inspiring
them with an assurance of final victory. It is difficult to acccount for that
high confidence which prevailed from any other cause. It could not have arisen
from a view of the comparative strength of the contending parties; this would
have led to a contrary conclusion -- it came down from heaven; -- and, together
with that ardor which accompanied it, had a powerful and happy influence
through every department, whether civil or military, and among all ranks of
men, from the highest to the lowest, supplied, in a great measure, the want of
constitutions and laws; raised us superior to difficulties and dangers, and
enabled us to do, and endure, what, in the review, is a wonder to ourselves.

II. ANOTHER way has been, by raising up, qualifying, and disposing persons to
conduct our cause. In this way God has in different ages afforded relief to
his people. Thus, when Israel was to be freed from the Egyptian bondage, become
an independent nation, and have a constitution and laws; Moses, a wise
lawgiver, was raised up, and qualified for that purpose. When the nations of
Canaan were to be conquered by war; Joshua a great general was raised up. And
after this, when the temple of the Jews was to be rebuilt; and they returned
from the Babylonish captivity: Cyrus was raised up for that express purpose,
and even mentioned by name many years before his birth.

AND when America was to be freed from the British yoke, and be led through a
long and bloody war, to independence and peace; a WASHINGTON is raised up, and
exactly suited to her circumstances.

AND we must ascribe it to the same superintending care, that events were so
disposed, and the mind of Congress so inclined, that the man, thus formed by
heaven for the very purpose, should be chosen by ourselves, from among the
thousands of America, as our head and leader.

III. GOD has also wrought for us, by disposing others to favor, and espouse
our cause.

I NEED not inform you, that both individuals and kingdoms have done this; but
especially the powerful nation of France, our first and generous ally. And it
may be, that a bountiful providence is about to reward them with blessings, in
some respects, similar to those which they have assisted in procuring for us.

IV. DIVINE goodness has further been visible, in bringing to naught the
councils, and discovering the plots of our enemies.

THEIR councils have been turned into foolishness, and they have fallen into
the pit, which they themselves had dug. We have a very memorable instance of
this, in the capture of major Andre; and in the discovery of the dark, and
traitorous plot of General Arnold; for betraying our army, and delivering up
our fortress into the hands of the enemy.

V. BUT the hand of the LORD has been more especially visible, in overruling,
even the victories of the enemy, and our own mistakes and losses, so as to make
all work together for good to us; and evil to them. While losses on our part
have been transformed into blessings; their most signal victories, have ever
proved the occasion of their more signal overthrow. If at any time, they were
lifted on high by successes, it served only to make their fall the greater, and
more terrible. There is no part of united America, but can witness the truth of
this observation.

IF we look toward the north; the successes of Burgoyne, and our loss, in that
quarter, though at the time grievous on our part, and led us with good old
Jacob to say, 'All these things are against us,' yet, in reality, led to, and
ended in his entire ruin, and our triumph; and gave the first decided turn to
the American cause.

AND if we turn toward the south; there we behold the same scene acted over
again. The rapid progress of lord Cornwallis through those states, was but his
making haste to destruction; and the successes which he met, were only baits in
the train of providence, to allure him into the net, which was in due time
spread over him, so that none escaped.

AND my brethren, you are my witnesses, that the progress of general How in
this state, though for a season it made the land to tremble, yet led to our
victories both at Trenton and Princeton. These were events in which your share
has been so great, and with which your particular interest was so intimately
connected, that the grateful impressions of them can never be worn out, so long
as your life and sense shall continue.

I ADD once more, that God has wrought for us, by calling in inanimate nature
to our aid. It is said in the song of Deborah and Barak, that the stars in
their courses fought against Sisera. The elements have been on our side: a
thick fog covered our retreat from Long Island; the snow covered our attack
upon the Hessians at Trenton; and the winds and the waves conspired to bring
the fleet and army of our allies before Yorktown at the very juncture they were
needed, in order to complete the capture of Cornwallis and the British army:
and did thus perform a very important part, in that great concluding scene of
the war, which exhibited to admiring millions, Britain and tyranny humbled,
America and liberty triumphant; and Empire, which had been for ages traveling
from the east, securely arrived on this Western World. O Empire! millions hail
thee welcome! And while the British yoke lies broken beneath thy feet, may
liberty be seated at thy right hand, and justice, mercy and truth, be enthroned
in thy heart; and thus may thou dwell with us, till time shall be no more!

THAT same kind and powerful providence, which in war turned our mistakes and
losses into blessings; and caused good to come forth out of evil, and light to
spring up out of darkness; has in peace, as yet, continued as a glory in the
midst of us. To this we are to ascribe it, that America has peaceably, and by
consent, given up a constitution framed in haste, amid the confusions of war;
and which, by reason of its feebleness, could promise little prosperity to the
people, or respect and permanency to itself. And with her collected wisdom, in
the arms of peace, and with the experience of ages before her, and the recent
experience of the defects of that constitution, after a cool and thorough
examination of the nature of government, the rights of man, and the situation
and interests of the several states; has, with admirable unanimity,
established a constitution, in which energy and liberty are duly blended, and
which seems wisely calculated to ensure prosperity at home, and reputation
abroad.

THIS, brethren, this is the elevated situation in which we are at this day
placed as a people. -- And if from this eminence we look back through the mazes
which we have passed; and duly consider the goodness and mercy, the wisdom and
omnipotence, of providence which has brought us to it; our souls, absorbed in
the view, must bow down before the LORD with reverence and praise.

IN the history of other nations, we read of defeating armies; and sometimes of
their suffering great loss: but here we see whole armies swallowed up at once
so that none escape. Among others, revolutions and governments, have been
founded in blood; -- here, we see a revolution take place in peace and
friendship; and a constitution founded in wisdom, containing in itself a remedy
for defects, and an open door for the highest improvement. In this review,
then, we see not only the general course of providence in our favor; but, even
new events take place in the world, tending both to exalt us as a people, and
mark us as the favorites of heaven.

AND if we look forward; -- what pleasing and sublime prospects rise, and grow
upon the mind -- until the idea becomes too great for expression! -- We will
therefore leave it, and.

II. INQUIRE, what are the suitable returns, which we ought to make, for all
that the LORD has bestowed on us? I answer,

1. To observe the hand of God in our manifold blessings, and ascribe them to
his power, his bounty and providence; is one of the returns which we ought to
make.

To be sensible of the author of our benefits, is absolutely necessary to any
measure of gratitude. Multitudes ascribe their blessings to the agency of
creatures, or power of second causes, and thereby rob the Creator of his due,
and derogate from the honor, which the first cause only has a right to claim.

SOME ascribe all events to irresistible and unalterable fate; others to
chance, or unintelligible fortune, -- mere names without a meaning. One is
ready to say, My right hand has gotten me the victory; another claims to
himself, as the effect of his own wisdom, all the great things which God has
made him an instrument in doing; thus that proud and haughty monarch
Nebuchadnezzar boasted; is not this great Babylon which I have built for the
house of the kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the honor of my
majesty? Vain man, he had mistaken his proper rank, and invaded the rights of
God; wherefore, he was driven from men, and did eat grass as oxen, until he
knew that the most high rules in the kingdom of men, and gives it to
whomsoever he will.

BUT we, who acknowledge the divine agency, in the smallest events, and have so
visibly beheld it, in this land of providence, leading us through dangers, and
raising us to greatness and empire; we will cry, not unto us, O LORD, not unto
us, but unto thy name be the glory.

2. AN high and exalted esteem of God, is another return which we ought to
make, for all that he has bestowed on us.

GREAT benefits not only claim, but also tend to raise our esteem for those
from whom they flow. Hence, an ingenuous mind esteems, and even reverences an
earthly benefactor. But how much more should those great benefits, which we
have been recounting, and which have filled the world with admiration, fill our
souls with the most exalted reverence and esteem for our heavenly benefactor.
And this inward esteem, these high and admiring thoughts of Jehovah, may be
termed the praise, and gratitude of the heart.

3. A FURTHER suitable return, is outward praise. This is making our salvation
our song, and is the overflowings of a grateful soul; and God is pleased to
account himself glorified thereby; whosoever offers praise, glorifieth me. And
this the sacred word enjoins upon us, in every thing give thanks, for this is
the will of God. But more especially must this be our duty, when the LORD
arises in his goodness and might, and becomes our salvation.

THUS, when the Hebrews had been delivered from the Egyptian bondage, had
passed through the Red sea on dry land, and had seen the hand of God on Pharaoh
and his army: then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song unto the
LORD, and spoke, saying, I will sing unto the LORD, for he has triumphed
gloriously -- the LORD is my strength and song, and he has become my
salvation; he is my God, and I will prepare him an habitation, my father's God,
and I will exalt him. And in the days of the Judges, when God had delivered
Israel from Jabin, king of Canaan; and Sisera the general of his army was slain
by Jael. Then sang Deborah, and Barak the son of Abinoam, on that day, saying,
Praise ye the LORD for the avenging of Israel, when the people willingly
offered themselves. Hear, O ye kings, give ear, O ye princes; I, even I will
sing unto the LORD, I will sing praise unto the LORD God of Israel.

AND can we withhold our praise? we who have tasted so much of divine goodness?
may, it is our business on this solemn day, throughout all the states of united
America. And O! America, while the loud song ascends from thy ten thousand
tongues, may heaven and nature join the praise, and God, who has been thy
salvation, bow his ear, and accept thine offering.

4. A GRATEFUL remembrance of what the LORD has bestowed on us -- or keeping
up memorials of his distinguished favors; is another return which we ought to
make unto him.

THIS is what God himself enjoined upon the Israelites of old. The passover,
was a memorial of their preservation in that night, when all the firstborn of
Egypt were slain: the twelve stones, taken from the midst of Jordan, were to be
a memorial forever, that its waters were cut off, before the ark of the
covenant of the LORD. And the days of thanksgiving established by Esther, and
Mordecai, were for a grateful remembrance of the happy deliverance of the Jews,
from the destruction devised by Haman their enemy.

AND of a similar nature is the day which we now celebrate; it is sacred to the
purpose of recounting the goodness of God, and rendering unto him thanksgiving
and praise. But the duty will not end with this day; his goodness should be
engraven on the tables of thy heart, and thou should talk of it as thou
fittest in thine house, and as thou walk by the way, and tell it to thy
children, and thy childrens' children. Again,

5. A LIVELY and supreme love, is another return which we ought to make.

THE great and peculiar national blessings, of which we have been taking a
short survey -- the far richer blessings of the gospel of peace -- and above
all, the unspeakable gift of a Savior, are displays of mercy and love, truly
astonishing to man, and altogether worthy of a God; and should enkindle every
pious passion within us. 'We love him,' says the apostle, 'because he first
loved us.' His great love should set all the amiable wheels of our gratitude,
into sweet and delightful motion. And then will follow,

6. A READY and willing obedience to his commandments; which is another
suitable return.

OBEDIENCE is the very substance of our duty; if this be wanting, all else is
vain show and empty sound; behold to obey is better than sacrifice, and to
hearken than the fat of rams. To this, all the divine goodness and love which
we have so greatly experienced, ought, not only to invite, but even constrain
us. And surely our own ingratitude would cover us with confusion and blushing,
were we to remain unmoved by such benefits, and to resist the cords of divine
love. Motives, similar to those which now exist before us, Joshua made use of a
little before his death, in order to engage Israel to serve the LORD. He set
before them the goodness of God to their fathers, his wonders in Egypt, in the
Red sea, and on the other side Jordan -- also, the good land for which they did
not labor, the cities which they did not build, and in which they dwelt -- the
vineyards, and oliveyards which they did not plant. And then pressed upon them,
saying, now therefore fear the LORD, and serve him in sincerity and truth. And
farther adds, if it seem evil to you to serve the LORD, choose you this day
whom you will serve. But lets them know, that his own resolution was fixed, as
for me, and my house, we will serve the LORD. Happy resolution! and happy this
highly favored people, should the goodness and love of God prevail with them
to resolve the same.

I ADD once more, that

7. TRUST in God for the future, is a return which former benefits demand from
us.

THE loving kindness, and mercy of God, afford a proper foundation for the most
entire trust, and confidence in him. This David knew, when he said how
excellent is thy loving kindness, O God! therefore, the children of men put
their trust under the shadow of thy wings.

IT would be base in a son, to distrust an earthly father, who had been the
support of his helpless infancy, and the guardian and guide of (...) youth; but
how much more so, would it be in us, t^ distrust our heavenly Father, whose
watchful eyes have ever been upon us, and whose everlasting arms have been
underneath us. His mercy has relieved our miseries, his goodness has supplied
our wants, his wisdom has been our guide in darkness, and his almighty power
our shield in danger: then when future troubles rise, we will say, Return to
thy rest, O my soul, to thy God, thou need go no farther, look no where
else, for they that trust in the LORD shall be as mount Sion, which cannot be
removed, but abides for ever.

A FEW observations shall now conclude the subject.

I. FIRST, the past goodness and bounty of God, with the many visible
interpositions of his providence, may lead us to look forward with hope.

GOD wrought wonders for Israel, in the land of Egypt, in the Red sea, and in
the wilderness, because he intended to make them a great nation, and a blessing
to all the families of the earth; the Messiah also, was to come forth of them,
and be a light to the world. And when we see the same God arise, and make bare
his arm for America, we may conclude that purposes of love are in his heart;
and hope that good things are yet in store for a great while to come.

SHOULD we extend our views, and consider, that in the course of providence,
intercourse and benevolence among mankind are greatly improving, and they
becoming more and more like children of the same family -- that the man of
sinks falling, and knowledge abounding -- that war has laid aside more than
half its terrors -- and that the horrors of persecution are, in a great
measure, past, and, in this respect, the lion and the lamb now lie down
together. I say, when we consider these things, together with the events which
have taken place in America, we may be led to look out for the glory of the
latter day; or rather, to look around, and see if it do not already dawn: for
we are not to suppose, that this day will appear suddenly in its full glory,
like the last great day of the Son of man, but gradually, as the rise and fall
of Antichrist have been.

THIS hope of approaching glory, added to all that the LORD has already
bestowed on us, should awaken our souls, and engage us to obedience and love;
and thus ensure to ourselves the blessings which we desire.

FOR I observe,

2. SECONDLY, that God usually, and I believe always, treats nations,
considered as public bodies, according to their general moral character.

THE Judge of all the earth will do right; he will render to every individual
and nation according to their works. And as nations exist only in this world,
they must here receive their reward. Hence, if we look through the history of
nations, we shall find, that so long as any have been remarkable for justice
and righteousness, they have also been remarkably blessed: but when they became
unjust, and abandoned to vice, God abandoned them to misery and ruin. This
observation has been frequently made with respect to the ancient nations of
Greece and Rome. Many other instances might be named, but none more remarkable
than God's ancient people Israel; for none under heaven were more eminently
favored, so long as they continued willing and obedient; and none more awfully
punished, when they were disobedient and rebellious, but especially when they
had filled up the measure of their iniquity, by rejecting the Savior of the
world.

SUFFER me then, lastly, to observe, that the way of prosperity and ruin are
both before us.

AND, as a new empire, we are now to make our choice. Solemn period -- in which
the fate of millions hangs (...) suspense, and in which the eyes of heaven and
earth are upon us! -- May infinite wisdom direct us! -- I hear its gracious
voice proclaiming, RIGHTEOUSNESS EXALTS A NATION. -- Here then lies the road
to prosperity and honor -- justice to man, obedience and gratitude to God,
lead to the summit of national glory; in this way, man will look up to us with
reverence, and God look down with approbation, and own us as his people. --

ON the other hand, iniquity and vice are the way to shame, contempt and ruin.
Infinite wisdom and purity have so constructed the frame of things, that these
have a natural tendency to ruin a people, and bring them low; they have also a
moral causality, by inflaming divine jealousy, which sets them on fire round
about. O my Country! should thou choose this forbidden path, thy prosperity
and peace will pass away, thy greatness will be lowered with dishonor, thy sun
will set in darkness, and thy God will forsake thee. Trembling thought! flee
from this way of darkness and danger, and walk in the path of the just, which
shines brighter and brighter to the perfect day; here peace and safety await
thee, here riches and honor allure; yea, to this, the goodness and love of God
constrain, and bind thee: O! break not these cords, but yield to almighty love
-- be wholly the LORD'S; and henceforth wear engraven on every heart;

' His hand has loosed my bands of pain,
' And bound me with his love.'
THE END.

