AN ORATION; DELIVERED AT DOVER, NEW HAMPSHIRE, On the FOURTH of JULY, 1791.

BEING THE FIFTEENTH ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

* * * * It Is ours to set
A bright example to succeeding times.
From us the world, suspended, even NOW
Expects its fate. --
VOLTAIRE'S BRUTUS. -- Non haec sine numine divum.
-- Et haec olim meminisse juvabit.
VIRGIL. BY WILLIAM KING ATKINSON.

DOVER, NEW HAMPSHIRE: PRINTED BY E. LADD NEAR THE COURT HOUSE M DCC, XCI.

To the inhabitants of Dover:
AS the following oration was written for YOUR amusement, it is entitled to
YOUR candor. To you it is humbly inscribed. That it is the production of
haste, and was composed amidst some avocations, is a true, but an indifferent
apology, for the state of imperfection in which it is now handed to the press;
I feel most sensibly, how inadequate it is, to the celebration of the great
event by which it was occasioned: an event, that forms a distinguished period
in the annals of mankind, and which will be remembered with reverential awe,
and gratitude, by every true American, while genuine sensibility, patriotism,
and liberality of sentiment, shall find a place in the human heart.

I am, your respectful fellow citizen, the AUTHOR.

Erratum. -- Page 17, line 8 -- instead of is read are.

An ORATION, etc.
FRIENDS, COUNTRYMEN, AND FELLOW-CITIZENS,
TO commemorate the great events of their own times; -- to celebrate the
illustrious exploits, and achievements, of their statesmen and heroes; -- and
to trace, the rise, progress, and establishment, of mighty states and empires;
have been deemed in all ages, and by all civilized nations, a just tribute of a
grateful people, and no ignoble employment for the intellect of man. -- In this
glory, their poets, orators, and historians have emulated each other; and from
their public performances, modern times, have derived the choicest information,
of their morals, science and police.

How interesting then, to the feelings of every American, must be this
anniversary! -- With what transport will he hail the day, which taught him to
realize THE RIGHTS OF MAN! -- a day, which burst asunder the shackles of
tyranny, proclaimed his country free, and independent; and gave to a new
empire, her rank and importance among the nations of the earth!

I would willingly believe, that in every city, town, and hamlet on this
extended continent, this day is set apart, as a day of rejoicing, and of public
thanksgiving to the supreme DIRECTOR of all events: and my approbation of so
laudable a conduct, -- a wish to contribute my mite, to the rational amusement
of this town, -- together with the obliging request, of my too partial friends;
-- have induced me to address you, from this place, on this great occasion.

As this subject has been often treated by far abler pens, you will not expect,
that I advance upon it, at this late period, any thing novel, or ingenious.
Truth, not novelty, will be the object of my pursuit. I shall tell you only
those things, which "you yourselves do know"; and, relying on your candor,
will concisely notice -- A few leading incidents in the american revolution; --
the actual and probable consequences of that event; -- our present prospects,
-- and the line of conduct we ought to pursue, to perpetuate the advantages we
have obtained.

While the rise and origin, of other nations, are enveloped in the labyrinths
of romance, and the dark uncertainty of fable it is the happiness of America,
that her history is attended with the clearness of day.

Our fathers, early in the seventeenth century, prompted by a spirit of
discovery, and determined never to wear the yoke of oppression; finding their
country at that time sunk in superstition and tyranny, cast themselves on the
bosom of the ocean to seek in a foreign land, an asylum of liberty. Auspicious
heaven approved the glorious attempt, and her favorite bark, was safely wafted
to her destined shore. Here they found a country swarming with its tawny sons,
the lord proprietors of their native soil; but savages and barbarians, with all
their cruelty, appeared less terrible, than the power of a tyrant, though dressed
in the purple garb of luxury, and refinement.

True it is, that as this part of America, was discovered by english subjects,
the crown of Britain affected to claim a property in the soil. Our ancestors
obtained from the king a grant of a part of these lands, merely I presume to
silence the cavils of their enemies; for I will not believe, they imagined, his
grant could operate, in the least degree, to convey a title. -- As well might
the king of that island, have made them a grant of the SOLAR SYSTEM.

Having by treaty, or by purchase, placed themselves on terms of amity with the
natives, they began diligently to apply themselves to the business, to which
the country appeared to be peculiarly adapted, I mean, agriculture and fishing.
They put the steel to the woods, and levelled the large and stately forests.
The virgin earth unbosomed all her treasures, and THE WILDERNESS BEGAN TO
BLOSSOM LIKE THE ROSE. -- They soon acquired a mean of comfortable subsistence.

But alas! this happiness was but of momentary duration. They had yet to learn,
that an exemption from tyranny, was not to be purchased, at so cheap a rate.
The Indians, with a grudging eye, beheld them reaping the fruits, of their
honest industry; they were continually exposed, to their outrages, hostilities,
and rapine: and from that period (with a few, short, transient intervals) for a
century onward, there is scarcely a page of history, which is not crimsoned
with YOUR fathers' blood.

During these struggles, Britain looked on with great indifference, for we were
as yet too poor to excite her jealousy, or to stimulate her rapaciousness.

To paint in detail the whole system of oppression, in the attempts of the
english to subjugate* and enslave this country, is the province of history;
she, inexorably severe toward those who have been superlatively guilty, will
delineate their characters with the point of a diamond; and, BLAZONED IN THE
FACE OF DAY, the abhorrence, and detestation of mankind will DAMN them to
everlasting same.

At the close of a war, carried on under the auspices of the ablest
War-minister, that nation, or perhaps any other, ever beheld; and in which (by
the bye) she had derived no small aid from her colonies; seeing her fleets
triumphant on the ocean, and intoxicated, and grown wanton with her victories,
she abandoned herself to the directions of a ministry, with whom ancient
english worth and honesty, disdained to dwell. They undertook, without any
consent on our part, to impose on us taxes, for the first time since we set our
feet on american ground. -- They went further. -- The omnipotence of
parliament, for so it was profanely called in the lute-string phraseology of
that day, assumed a right to tax and bind us in all cases whatever. A standing
army in the time of peace, that disgraceful badge, that last, and almost
irresistible resort of detested tyrants, was stationed in a neighboring town.
-- Its port was blocked up. -- And under the pretense of punishing a breach of
the peace, committed by a few individuals, an act was past, involving thousands
in promiscuous, unmerited, unexampled misery, which it was equally out of their
power, to stay, or to prevent. -- These penalties were to be inflicted on them,
not only UNHEARD, but UNCITED to answer.

Still the english colonists, replete with duty to their sovereign -- the
descendants of Britain, glowing with affection for their mother country, though
agonizing under the scourge of oppression, preserved their moderation, and
their temper. Petitions couched in terms of duty, and breathing the spirit of
humility, and submission, were presented at the footstool of majesty. -- But
the GENIUS of Britain had departed -- her glory had faded like the western
sunbeam.

"Far removed from the eye of royalty the humanity of a sovereign, was
insensible to the miseries it did not behold -- remote from the cries of public
justice, and the efforts of popular despair, lords and commons remained
unaffected with american convulsions" NOTES.

See the celebrated Josiah Quincy's observations on the Boston port-bill 1774.


-- Their prince turned a deaf ear to their complaints, and insult was
superadded to oppression. --

Our fishing on our own coasts was denied us: -- the troops were ordered to be
reinforced: - the plains of Lexington and the heights of Charlestown, (the
latter pillaged and set in flames) were witnesses to the horrors of war; -- the
savage of the wilderness was importuned to take up his hatchet against us, and
to deluge our houses with the innocent blood of our women and children. See the
address of Congress to the people of Ireland.
-- These are refinements in cruelty, at which even Britain must blush, --
refinements, which cannot be practiced without infamy, or recited without
horror!

THE VESSEL OF OUR CALAMITIES WAS NOW FILLED TO THE BRIM* and these last drops
caused THE WATERS OF BITTERNESS TO OVERFLOW. Bolingbroke.
-- The consequences are too recent, and too interesting to be unknown to any.
Innumerable hosts of brave officers, and soldiers have fought, and bled in
their country's cause, -- hecatombs of heroes, have been gloriously sacrificed
at the ALTAR OF LIBERTY. -- How many of our brave countrymen have been cut off
in the blossom of their years, "unhousel'd, unanointed, unanneal'd!"

But where justice is the standard, heaven is the warrior's shield: -- in their
noble exertions, they were inspired with that divine ardour, which, paramount
every thing human caused them to consider the "LORD OF HOSTS, as their leader
and his angels as fellow soldiers: -- Trumpets were to them joyful sounds, and
the ensigns of war the banners of GOD: -- their wounds were bound up in the oil
of a good cause, and their blood flowed into the veins of a SAVIOR: -- sudden
death was present martyrdom, and funeral obsequies, resurrections to eternal
honor and glory: -- their widows and their babes, being received into the arms
of a compassionate GOD; and their names enrolled among DAVID'S WORTHIES: --
greatest losses were to them greatest gains; for they left the troubles of
their warfare, to lie down on beds of eternal rest and felicity." NOTE.

Quincy's observations on the port-bill in 1774.


It Is a melancholy, but a pleasing sympathy, to shed a tear to the memory of
those, who have been the friends of their country, and of mankind -- highly
distinguished among the group of heroes, methinks I see a MONTGOMERY, and a
WARREN; yet justice to other characters forbids our eulogy on the greatest
names.

Thousands, -- the tribute of our praise

Demand; -- but who can count the stars of heaven? NOTE.

Thompson's seasons.


But I turn with pleasure from the ravages of war, to contemplate a very
different scene. Behold eight long years have rolled away, and peace, fair
peace, with healing in her wing returns. -- See plenty, with her copious horn,
commerce laden with the wealth and treasures of the globe* see all the gentle
arts of life, attendant in her train. -- Our swords are beat into ploughshares,
our spears into pruning hooks, and the trumpet's clangor and the din of arms,
is heard no more within our borders.

To complete, and give permanency to the happiness of America as a nation, a
task great, and arduous, yet remained. -- The constitutions of the several
states adopted amidst the commotions of war, and (as my Lord BACON expresses
it) "on the spur of occasion," were found to be totally inadequate to the
business of cementing the various, and opposed interests, of this great people.

Every one saw the evil, but how to apply a remedy was the problem.

Fanciful, and ingenious theorists, have represented mankind, in the first
dawnings of civil society convened on an extended plain, choosing out their
chieftan, and adopting rules of government for civil life. But nothing short of
the fact itself, could have given birth to the great idea, of five millions of
people, convened by their representatives, from every part of a new world,
coolly, and dispassionately deliberating on a form of government, which was to
last for ages. -- The admiring world saw in august assembly, the ORATORS,
SAGES, and PHILOSOPHERS of America, engaged in this all-glorious attempt.

To avoid the evils of a monarchy where ONE makes the WHOLE, and the WHOLE is
nothing.

Of an aristocracy, where a man's happening to be born of certain parents, is a
grant to him of all offices of power and profit in the state, without any
regard to merit: as though GOD had formed him of more HONORABLE DUST than the
rest of mankind!

And the evils of a democracy, that monster in politics which, like mount AETNA
and VESUVIUS, carries it own destruction in its bowels. --

To avoid these, I say, and to form a constitution of energy, and permanency;
-- furnished with proper checks, and balances; -- with all the powers of
government, nicely, and accurately distinguished, and kept as independent of
each other as the nature of them will admit; -- was indeed a work of no small
magnitude. --

What has been the result? A constitution of federal government has been
ratified by ALL the states, which will give perpetuity to the union. As the
people are the fountain of all POWER, the legislature are chosen by them, and,
at appointed periods, they are to return the sacred deposit whence they
received it.

A PRESIDENT has been chosen by the unbought suffrages of millions of freemen!
-- his NAME is greater than the names of the sovereigns and potentates of the
earth, -- for his empire is established IN THE HEARTS OF HIS PEOPLE. "They have
arrayed him with honors, they have armed him with power and set him on high:"
yet still it is his chief glory, that he is only "the right hand of THEIR POWER
and the MIRROR OF THEIR MAJESTY." NOTE.

The address of the convention to the inhabitants of this state on forming the
constitution 1781.




While I am considering the President, it is with difficulty I repress my wishes
to view the hero, and the man: but, as just praise offered to a living
personage may savor of adulation, I shall forbear: yet no apology can excuse
me from noticing the constellation of sages and patriots, who have illumined
and adorned this northern hemisphere, and whose SPLENDID ORBS have lately sunk
in the western ocean.

America has had her BRUTI, and her CASSII, her HARRINGTONS her HAMPDENS, and
her SYDNEYS: -- she has them still, and I trust will have them, till time shall
be no more; -- An OTIS, a BOWDOIN, and a FRANKLIN, the friends of science, of
freedom and of mankind, are gone to the chambers of death, but -- their FAME
shall endure forever.

HE DISARMED THE CLOUDS OF THEIR THUNDER;

-- HE WRESTED THE SCEPTER FROM TYRANTS. NOTE.

Fulmen eripuit caelo, sceptrum que Tyrannis.

There is scarcely any european language, into which the works of Franklin have
not been translated; and, as if this was not sufficient to give him celebrity,
they have within a few years, been translated into latin.

"Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas!"




The names of NEWTON and of FRANKLIN will in future ages be coupled together,
and their principles be handed down from generation to generation, as
expressive of the true SYSTEM OF NATURE. Like two ATLASSES of the two worlds,
supporting respectively the philosophy of each, they are traveling down, hand
in hand, the road of immortality, -- and their works will follow them.

But to return. -- The effects of the revolution have not been confined to
America alone; like that of the electric fluid, the mighty shock has pervaded
the whole earth, and made the thrones of tyrants totter to their centres.
Thanks be to GOD, the trumpet of jubilee is sounding throughout the world --
the people are informed of the RIGHTS OF MAN! A great and glorious revolution
has taken place in another hemisphere; the prison doors are thrown open, and
the poor, wretched captive, counts no more the tedious hours of his
confinement. We have seen, (says the venerable Dr. Price) "we have seen thirty
millions of people, indignant and resolute, spurning at slavery and demanding
FREEDOM with an irresistible voice." NOTES.

See his sermon delivered at the OLD JEWRY Nov. 4. 1789.




The Lords of Britain seem now more than ever, to fear the SPIRIT OF LIBERTY,
which has of late so remarkably displayed itself in France. They tremble lest
the spark should strike the opposite shore, and teach the english nation, that
the safety and happiness of the PEOPLE is the SUPREME LAW OF THE LAND. The late
celebrated pamphlet, which contains a revival of the antiquated doctrine of
non-resistance and passive obedience, seems to have been published as an
antidote, and a preventative of these effects. Oh Burke! thou greatest and
meanest of mankind! why have thou in this thy last, deliberate, desperate act,
(...) a whole life of glory. The splendor of a British peerage has dazzled
thine aged eyes, and thou art become, the flatterer of tyrants. The venerable
Apostle of Liberty has escaped the outrage and virulence of thy invective, and
gone to rest in the arms of the savior, whilst thou art left, to remorse of
conscience and perhaps a coronet, as the boon of thy noble exertions in favor
of -- Slavery.


I hasten to the last object proposed, to wit, our present prospects, and the
means of improving them.

I felicitate my Countrymen on the establishment of our excellent constitution
of national government, where taxation and representation are inseparable --
where not a spire of grass in all America can be subject to taxes, but what is
represented in the legislature; and where, if our rulers abuse our confidence,
provision is made for us at certain periods, to resume the trust and to place
it in other hands.

Our prospects are peculiarly pleasing at this time. Our credit and character
as a nation is in a great degree established; commerce revives; -- manufactures
of various kinds are advancing with rapidity toward european perfection, -- our
taxes are comparatively small, and the national expenditures are defrayed with
out any aid from direct taxes; -- we have nearly a sufficiency of the precious
metals, for the purposes of commerce and exchange, a want of which has
heretofore been matter of grievous complaint: -- we possess a country of a
salubrious climate, and abounding in the necessaries and conveniences of life.
Happy, thrice happy Americans, would ye but realize your own felicity!

And now to perpetuate these advantages, let us remember, "That a reverence for
the constitution, (so the elegant LORD BOLINGBROKE expresses it) and a
conscientious regard to the preservation of it, are in the political, like
charity in the religious system, a mantle to cover a multitude of sins; and as
the performance of all other religious duties, will not avail in the sight of
GOD, without charity, so neither will a discharge of all other secular duties
avail in the sight of men, without a faithful discharge of this principal
duty." A particular attention to the virtues of economy, temperance, and
industry, are peculiarly necessary in a country like ours. The farmer who will
make three ears of corn grow where nature gave only one, is more deserving of a
statue than the conqueror of a world. -- I am sorry to say it, but true it is,
that foreigners have been surprised at the extravagance of Americans both in
their dress and at their tables. Luxury maintains her thousands, and vanity her
ten thousands. While commerce supplies us with many of the conveniences of
life, we ought to be ashamed to be indebted to foreign nations, for almost
every article of our apparel. A proper pride and dignity one would naturally
suppose, instead of despising the work of our own hands, would induce us to
approve and to commend them. They in general wear better; they are certainly as
honorable; and, if a young lady happens, (for it is very rare) if she happens
I say, to appear in public in apparel of her own making, it is doubly to her
honor, as it implies habits of industry, and a want of vanity.

If we look into ancient history, we find that nations were flourishing while
they were industrious, temperate, and frugal; but as soon as luxury was
admitted, indoence and a train of evils soon followed her, sapp'd the
foundations and the whole fabric tumbled into ruin.

Too much cannot be said on the subject of the educaion of the youth of both
sexes; the observation is as true as it is trite, that "just as the twig is
bent the tree's inclined." This is the period which generally determines their
characters, both with respect to their morals, and the part they will probably
act in the great drama of life. The late revolution is much indebted to the
rapid advances of science, in enlightening the minds of Americans, and to the
liberality of sentiment and spirit of free inquiry, which hereof late years so
greatly prevailed.

Their morals are of the first importance; let us remember that virtue makes a
nation great. Without a solid foundation of honesty and virtue, it is impossible
a youth, whatever accomplishments he may have, can ever discharge the duty he
owes to himself, his country, his GOD.

Here let my oration pause. -- We have taken a cursory view of the rise and
establishment of a great empire, and of a revolution without example or
parallel in the world. And shall we content ourselves, my countrymen, with
considering only the SECONDARY causes of these great and glorious events! I am
sure your grateful hearts will answer -- No. Filled with rapture and
astonishment let us exclaim, "These are THY glorious works, parent of good.
Almighty." -- "Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy name be all the
praise. -- Thou set up kings and removest kings; thou give wisdom to the
wise, and knowledge to them who know understanding. Thine O Lord is the
greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty! for
all that is in the heavens, and in the earth is thine. Thine it is to make
great, and to give strength; thine is the kingdom, O Lord! and thou art exalted
as head over all."

We should also view GOD, not only as the supreme director, and sovereign
disposer of states and kingdoms, but should endeavor to view him in his whole
providence, even in what we call the common events, and accidents of life. He
is equally the father and friend of the whole creation and his paternal cares
extend to all. Let him not then "be DIMLY seen in these his lower works; for
THESE declare his goodness beyond thought, and power divine."

Could we bring our will and our wishes to coincide with his, WHOSE WILL IS
ALWAYS DONE IN EARTH, AS WELL AS IN HEAVEN, who disposes of all things even to
their minutest circumstances, and always for the best of purposes, we should
attain as far as it respects this life, the summit of felicity. But this is not
to be expected in the present state of things; we can only make it the subject
of our occasional study and meditations.

"If the soft hand of winning pleasure leads,
"By living waters, and through flowery meads;
"When all is smiling, tranquil and serene,
"And vernal beauty points the flott'ring scene,
"Oh teach us to elude each latent snare,
"And whisper to our sliding hearts beware:
"With caution let us hear the Syren's voice,
"And, doubtful, with a trembling heart rejoice.
"If friendless, in a vale of tears we stray,
"Where briars wound, and thorns perplex our way,
"Still let our steady souls thy goodness see,
"And with strong confidence lay hold on thee,
"With equal joy our various lot receive,
"Resigned to die, or resolute to live;
"Prepared to kiss the scepter or the rod
"WHILE GOD IS SEEN IN ALL AND ALL IN GOD.
"With thee in shady solitudes we walk,
"With thee in busy crowded cities talk;
"In every creature own thy forming power,
"In each event thy providence adore.
"Thy hopes shall animate our drooping soul,
"Thy precepts guide us and thy fear control,
"Thus shall we rest unmoved by all alarms,
"Secure within the Temple of thy arms;
"From anxious cares, from gloomy terrors free,
"And feel ourselves omnipotent in thee.
"Then when the last, the closing hour draws nigh,
"And earth recedes before the swimming eye;
"Teach us to quit this transitory scene,
"With decent triumph, and a look serene.
"Teach us to fix our ardent hopes on high,
"And having (...) thee (...) thee to die."
THE END.

