THE HISTORY OF NEW HAMPSHIRE.

VOLUME II.

COMPREHENDING THE EVENTS OF SEVENTY FIVE YEARS, FROM MDCCXV TO MDCCXC.

Illustrated by a MAP.

BY JEREMY BELKNAP, A. M. Member of the Philosophical Society in Philadelphia,
and of the Academy of Arts and Sciences in Massachusetts.

PRINTED AT BOSTON, FOR THE AUTHOR. BY ISAIAH THOMAS AND EBENEZER T ANDREWS.
FAUST'S STATUE, No. 4^, NEWBURY-STREET.

MDCCXCI.

PREFACE To the SECOND VOLUME.
WHEN the first volume was printed, I had not seen the "Political Annals" of
the American Colonies, published in 1780, by George Chalmers, Esquire. This
gentleman, being in England, was favored with some advantages, of which I was
destitute; having access to the books and papers of the Lords of Trade and
Plantations, from the first establishment of that Board. He seems to possess
the diligence and patience which are necessary in a historian; but either
through inadvertence or want of candor, has made some misrepresentations
respecting New Hampshire, on which I shall take the liberty to remark.

In page 491, speaking of the first Council, of which President CUTTS was at
the head, he says, they refused to take the accustomed oaths, as the English
law required, because liberty of conscience was allowed them. In the first
volume of my history, page 176, I have said, they published the commission and
took the oaths; for which I cited the Council records; and on recurring to
them, I find the following entry, in the hand writing of Elias Stileman,
Secretary.

January 21, 1679 -- 80.

His Majesty's Commissioners, nomynated in said commission, took their
respective oaths, as menconed in said commission.

That the oaths were really taken, is a fact beyond all dispute; but if there
is any ground for what Mr. Chalmers is pleased to call a refusal, it must have
been respecting the form of swearing; which was usually done here by lifting
the hand, and not by laying it on the bible, as was the form in England. Was it
a forced construction of the clause respecting liberty of conscience, to
suppose, that this indulgence was granted to them? What other use could they
have made of this liberty, than to act according to the dictates of their
consciences? Is it then consistent with candor, to publish an assertion, so
worded as to admit the idea, that these gentlemen refused to obey an essential
part of the duty prescribed by the commission, which they undertook to execute?
Or is it consistent with the character which he gives of the President, CUTTS,
p. 492, that he was allowed to have been an honest man and a loyal subject? The
commission required them to take the oaths of allegiance and supremacy, and an
oath of office, which last is recited in the commission; but not a word is said
of the mode and form, in which the oaths should be taken; neither was it said
that they should be taken 'as the English law required.' They were therefore
left at their liberty, to take them in any form which was agreeable to their
conscience, or their former usage.

In the same page (491) he says; An Assembly was soon called, which, by means
of the usual intrigues, was composed of persons, extremely favorable to the
projects of those who now engrossed power. And in a note (page 507) the Council
transmitted to the towns, a list of those who should be allowed to vote.

With what propriety can it be said that these gentlemen engrossed power, when
they were commissioned by the King; and it is acknowledged, that not only their
appointment, but their entering on office, was contrary to their inclinations?

That the persons chosen into the Assembly should be 'favorable' to the
sentiments of the Council, or of 'the wise men of Boston,' was not the result
of any intrigues; but because the majority of the people were of the same mind.
As to sending a list of those who should be allowed to vote; the true state of
the matter was this. The commission provided for the calling of an Assembly,
within three months after the Council should be sworn, by summons under seal,
using and observing therein such rules and methods, as to the persons who are
to choose the deputies, and the time and place of meeting, as they (the
Council) shall judge most convenient. The mode which they judged most
convenient was, to order the select men of the four towns, to take a list of
the names and estates of their respective inhabitants, according to their usual
manner of making taxes, and send it to the Council. The Council then issued an
order, appointing the persons therein named, to meet in their respective towns,
and elect by a major vote, three persons from each, to represent them in a
general Assembly, on the 16th of March; and in the order, there is this
proviso, Provided that we do not intend that what is now done be presidential
for the future, and that it shall extend noe farther, than to the calling this
first assembly.

Now as the rules and methods of calling an assembly, and the persons who were
to choose deputies, were left to the discretion of the Council; what more
proper method could they have taken, than to call for a list of the inhabitants
and their estates, and by that means to determine, who were qualified in point
of property and habitancy to be electors? And as the numbers were few, and the
persons well known, was it not as proper to name them at once, in the writs, as
to establish qualifications, and appoint other persons to judge of those
qualifications; especially when there was no law in force by which they could
be judged? It is observable that each voter was ordered to take the oath of
allegiance if he had not taken it before; and in the list of names in the book,
a mark is set against several persons, who did not take the oath; and another
against those who did not appear at the election. Has this the appearance of
intrigue?

In page 492, he says, they were extremely slow in conforming to present
requisitions, and passed no laws during the first session. Having again
consulted the records, I find in the Journal of the Council this entry, At a
general Assembly held in Portsmouth, the 16th of March, 1679 -- 80. Present,
etc. Sundry laws and ordinances made at this session are in another book, for
that purpose.

In that other book, a body of laws is recorded, in the same hand writing, viz.
of Stileman the Secretary, which bears the following title; The general laws
and liberties of the Province of New Hampshire, made by the general Assembly in
Portsmouth, the 16th day of March, 1679 -- 80, and approved by the President
and Council.

It appears from the books, that this Assembly held four sessions within the
year, viz. on the 16th of March, the 7th of June, the 12th of October, and the
7th of December. As there is not a particular date to each law, but the whole
code bears the date of the first session in March; it may fairly be inferred,
that the business was begun in the first session, and continued through the
other three; and when completed, was immediately sent to England; for Mr.
Chalmers himself tells us, that the laws which they transmitted, in conformity
to their Constitution, had no^ (...) good fortune to please, and were
disapp^^ved of, by the Lords of the Committee of Plantations, in Dec. 1681.

From this statement it may be concluded, that they were not slower in essaying
their legislative talents, than the necessity of proceeding with due
deliberation required; and that there was no just cause for the reproach which
he has cast upon them.

In page 494, he gives this account of the character of the people of
New Hampshire. When CRANFIELD arrived, he found the Province containing four
thousand inhabitants, extremely poor from the devastation of the Indian war.
But when he spoke contemptuously of the country which he had been sent to rule,
he seems not to have reflected, that all Colonies had once known the like
paucity of numbers, the same weakness, and the same poverty; animated only by a
dissimilar spirit from that of New Hampshire, which now disdained that
independence on her neighbors, that other Provinces had contended for, with
enthusiasm. And other plantations, actuated by very different maxims, had not
complained, even in their weakest days, of their inability to defend their
frontiers, against the attacks of a foe, that has never proved dangerous,
except to the effeminate, the factious, or the cowardly. When New Plymouth
consisted only of two hundred persons, of all ages and sexes, it repulsed its
enemies and secured its borders, with a gallantry worthy of its parent country;
because it stood alone, in the desert, without hope of aid.

That the people of New Hampshire ever deserved the character of effeminate or
cowardly, can by no means be admitted. Innumerable facts evince the contrary
beyond a doubt. Had this author ever resided among them, especially in time of
war, he would have thought quite otherwise of them. That the native savages
have never proved a dangerous foe, to any but the effeminate, the factious and
the cowardly, is an assertion totally unfounded. Their manner of attacking was
always by surprise, and the bravest and best men may sometimes be deficient in
vigilance, where no suspicion of danger exists.

If the people of New Hampshire disdained independence, let it be considered,
that they had been, for about 40 years, connected with Massachusetts, to their
mutual satisfaction; and the proposed independence which he means was but
another name for subjection to a landlord. When independence, in its genuine
meaning, became necessary, in 1776, they freely joined with their brethren in
asserting it, and in bravely defending it.

Without any disparagement to the first settlers of Plymouth, who, from the
year 1643, were protected by a confederacy of the four New England Colonies, it
may with truth be said, that the people of New Hampshire were never behind
them, in vigorous exertions for their own defense, when they were conducted by
officers in whom they could place confidence; but in Cranfield's time, there
was no war with the Indians; though he attempted to frighten them into an
apprehension of danger, from the Indians, to serve his own purposes.

The account which Mr. Chalmers gives of Cranfield's administration differs not
very materially from mine, except in one instance. He represents the ministers
as very attentive to him, because they deemed him gained over to the
Independents. I have met with no evidence of this; the deception, if any, must
have been very short lived.

Mr. Chalmers says nothing of the prosecution of Moody, and of Cranfield's
endeavors to ruin him, for his nonconformity to the Church of England; but
tells us that he deemed it unsafe, to remain any longer among the ministers,
who ruled an enthusiastic people, with the same sway as did the popish clergy
during the darkest ages; and that in his letters to England, he gave warning,
that while the clergy were allowed to preach, no true allegiance would be found
in those parts. This may be considered as a corroborating evidence of his
bigotry and intolerance. Truth obliges me to add, that his opponents were not
deficient in those unhappy qualities, which were too much in fashion among all
parties in that age.

Mr. Chalmers concludes his account of New Hampshire in these words. Being
excluded from the charter granted to Massachusetts, it has continued to the
present time, a different, though inconsiderable settlement; irregular and
factious in its economy, affording no precedents that may be of exemplary use
to other Colonies. What justice there is in this remark, the reader will be
able to determine, from the following portion of its history, which, after much
unavoidable delay, is now submitted to his perusal.

Boston, August 1, 1791.

CONTENTS.
CHAP. XIII. THE administration of Governor Shute, and his Lieutenants, Vaughan
and Wentworth. Page 1. XIV. The fourth Indian war, commonly called the three
years' war, or Lovewell's war. 43 XV. Wentworth's administration continued.
Burnet's short administration. Belcher succeeds him. Wentworth's death and
character. 84 XVI. Dunbar's Lieutenancy and enmity to Belcher. Efforts to
settle the boundary lines. Divisions. Riot. Trade. Episcopal Church. Throat
distemper. 101 XVII. State of parties. Controversy about lines. Commissioners
appointed. Their session and result. Appeals. Complaints. 123 XVIII. Revival of
Mason's claim. Accusations against Belcher, real and forged. Royal censure.
Final establishment of the lines. Spanish war. Belcher's zeal and fidelity. His
removal. Examination of his character. 158 XIX. The beginning of Benning
Wentworth's administration. War opened in Nova Scotia. Expedition to
Cape-Breton; its plan, conduct and success, with a description of the island,
and of the city of Louisbourg. 181 XX. Projected expedition to Canada. Alarm by
the French fleet. State of the frontiers. Peace. 225 XXI. Purchase of Mason's
claim. Controversy about representation. Plan of extending the settlements.
Jealousy and resentment of the savages. 258 XXII. The last French and Indian
war, which terminated in the conquest of Canada. Controversy concerning the
lands westward of Connecticut river. 283 XXIII. Beginning of the controversy
with Great Britain. Stamp Act. Resignation of Benning Wentworth. 317 XXIV.
Administration of John Wentworth the second. New attempt to force a revenue
from America. Establishment of Dartmouth College. Division of the Province into
counties. Death of Benning Wentworth. Complaint of Peter Livius against the
Governor. Its issue. Progress of the controversy with Great Britain. War.
Dissolution of British government in New Hampshire. 344 XXV. War with Britain.
Change of government. Temporary Constitution. Independence. Military exertions.
Stark's expedition. Employment of troops during the war. 388 XXVI. Paper money.
Confiscations. State Constitution. Controversy with Vermont. 425 XXVII. Popular
discontent. Efforts for paper currency. Tender-acts. Insurrection. Dignity and
lenity of government. Federal Constitution. 459
A NEW MAP OF NEW HAMPSHIRE, BY JEREMY BELKNAP. 1791.


CHAP. XIII. The administration of Governor SHUTE, and his Lieutenants, VAUGHAN
and WENTWORTH.
GEORGE VAUGHAN, Esquire. was the son of Major William Vaughan, 1715.
who had been so ill used by former Governors, and had suffered so much in the
cause of his country, that the advancement of his son, to the office of
Lieutenant Governor, was esteemed a mark of particular favor, from the Crown to
the Province, and a singular gratification to the parent, then in the decline
of life. The Lieutenant Governor had been employed by the Province, as their
agent in England, to manage their defense against Allen. There he was taken
notice of, by some persons of quality and influence, with whom his father had
been connected; and by them he was recommended as a candidate for the honor to
which he was now advanced.

After he had arrived, and opened his commission; Dudley, Oct. 1*
though not actually superseded, yet daily expecting Burges to succeed him, did
not think it proper to come into the Province, or perform any acts of
government; so that, during a year, Nov. 8.
Vaughan had the sole command. In this time he called an Assembly, who granted
him the product of the impost and excise, for one year, but refused to
establish these duties for any longer time; upon which he dissolved them, 1716.
and called another; August 21.
to whom he recommended, in a style too peremptory, Assembly Records.
the establishment of a perpetual revenue to the Crown; a matter in which he
had been so much engaged, that while in England, MS letter of Sir W. Ashurst to
Dr. I. Mather.
he presented a memorial to the King and Ministry, to bring New England into
the land tax of Great Britain; and proposed that a Receiver should be appointed
by the Crown. The Assembly was of opinion, that the public charges might be
defrayed in the usual manner, by an equal tax on polls and estates; and
declined laying an impost, or entering on any, but the common business of the
year, till the arrival of a Governor.

Oct. 17.
When Governor Shute came to the chair, several of the old Counselors were laid
aside, and six new ones appointed, all of whom were inhabitants of Portsmouth.
That town, at the same time, was unhappily agitated by a controversy, which had
for some years subsisted between the two parishes. This had not only imbittered
the minds of the people, but had prejudiced some of the members of the Council
and Assembly; so as to affect the proceedings of the Legislature, and break the
harmony, which had been preserved in that body, during the preceding
administration. The Governor, in his first speech to the Assembly, 1717.
took notice of their division, and advised them to unanimity. Jan. 10.
They thanked him for his advice, but remonstrated against the removal of the
old Counselors, Jan. 23.
and the confining of the new appointments, both in the Council and the
Judicial Courts, to residents in one town, as being contrary to former usage,
and giving an advantage, to the trading, above the landed interest. This, they
said, was the reason that an impost could not now be obtained, and that the
whole burden of taxes was laid on the husbandman, and the laborer, who had been
greatly impoverished by the late war. The Governor wisely avoided an answer to
this remonstrance, by putting it on the Council, who were a party in the
controversy. The Council, in their answer, acknowledged that the Province had
been much distressed by the war; Jan. 28.
but had in a great measure recovered; that there would have been no opposition
to an impost, if the Representatives had agreed to an act of export, according
to the practice in England; that the King had a right to appoint his
Counselors, from any part of the Province; that it was an affront to the
prerogative to find fault with the exercise of this right; and that it was most
convenient for the affairs of government, especially upon sudden emergencies,
that the Council should reside near the seat of government. This answer might
have appeared decent enough if they had not added, that they were gentlemen of
the best quality, and greatest ability to serve the government, in that
station; and had as good or better estates in land, and land securities, than
any in the House, and not inferior to the gentlemen who were laid aside.

While these altercations were in hand there was a great complaint of the
scarcity of money, and some expedient was judged necessary to supply the place
of current coin. A proposal was made to issue ten thousand pounds in bills, on
loan, for twenty-three years, at five per cent. on land security. In this both
Houses agreed; Jan. 24.
but the next day the Council proposed to enlarge the sum to fifteen thousand
pounds, to which the House would not consent. The Governor then ordered the
House to attend a conference with the Council; they desired to know on what
subject; he gave them no answer, but commanded their attendance. Having
conferred about the proposed loan to no purpose, the circumstance of asking on
what subject they were to confer was deemed an affront, and served as a pretext
for dissolving them. The next assembly was more pliant, and issued fifteen
thousand pounds, on loan, Assembly Records.
for eleven years, at ten per cent.

A controversy also arose between the Governor and Lieutenant Governor about
the power of the latter, in the absence of the former. Vaughan contended, that
when the Governor was present in his other Province, he was absent from
New Hampshire, and consequently that the administration devolved on him. The
position was a metaphysical truth, but the inference was to be measured by
political rules. Shute alleged that his commissions, being published and
recorded, in New Hampshire and Massachusetts, he had the power of commander in
chief over both Provinces, during his residence in either; and thought it an
absurdity to suppose, that the King had appointed the Governor commander in
chief, for five or six weeks only in the year, and the Lieutenant Governor
during the rest of the time; and that if the Lieutenant Governor should happen,
in that time, to step over the Province line, the senior Counselor must take
the chair; this he said would make the Province 'a monster with three heads.'
The controversy was soon brought to an issue; for Vaughan received an order
from Shute, while at Boston, to appoint a fast, which he did not obey; he
received another to prorogue the Assembly, instead of which he dissolved them,
without the advice of Council. He required the opinion of the Council on the
extent of his power, but they declined giving it. Penhallow, the Governor's
chief friend, was a warm opposer of Vaughan's pretensions, and incurred so much
of his displeasure, that he publicly charged him with sowing discord in the
government, Sept. 24.
and suspended him from his seat in Council. On hearing this, Shute hasted to
Portsmouth, and having summoned the Council, ordered the King's instruction to
him for suspending Counselors to be read, and demanded of Vaughan whether he
had any instruction which superseded it. He answered, No. The Governor then
asked the Council's advice whether the suspension of Penhallow was legal; they
answered in the negative. Council Minutes.
He then restored him to his seat, and suspended Vaughan.

The Assembly, which Vaughan had assumed the right to dissolve, met again, and
approved the proceedings against him, justifying the construction which the
Governor had put on his commission, and his opinion of the extent of the
Lieutenant Governor's power; which was to observe such orders, as he should
from time to time receive from the King or the Governor in chief. The
Representatives of Hampton presented a remonstrance; in which, admitting the
Lieutenant Governor's opinion that when the Governor is out of the Province,
the Lieutenant Governor is empowered to execute the King's commission, and
asserting that the Governor was not in the Province when the Lieutenant
Governor dissolved the Assembly, Assembly Records.
they declared that they could not act with the House, unless they were
re-elected. This remonstrance was deemed a libel, and the Governor in Council
having summoned them before him, laid them under bonds of four hundred pounds
each, for their good behavior. Council Minutes.
He then issued a proclamation, asserting his sole power, as commander in
chief; and declaring that the Lieutenant Governor had no right to exercise any
acts of government without his special order. Penhallow's MSS.


To maintain a controversy with a superior officer on the extent of power,
equally claimed by both, requires a delicacy and address which does not fall to
the lot of every man. An aspiring and precipitate temper may bring on such a
contention, but disqualifies the person from managing it with propriety. Had
Vaughan proposed to submit the question to the King, he would have acted more
in character, and might have preserved his reputation, though he had lost his
power. But having offended the Governor, and disgusted the Council and
Assembly, he could hope for no favor from the Crown. When the report of the
proceedings was sent to England, Sir William Ashurst, who had great interest at
Court, and was a friend to New England, and who greatly disrelished the
memorial which Vaughan had formerly presented to the King, Ashurst's letter MS.
easily found means to displace him; and in his room was appointed JOHN
WENTWORTH, Esquire. whose commission was published on the seventh of December. The
celebrated Mr. Addison, being then Secretary of State, this commission is
countersigned by a name particularly dear to the friends of liberty and
literature. Orig. MS.


John Wentworth, Esquire. grandson of William Wentworth, formerly mentioned as one
of the first settlers of the country, had been in the early part of his life,
commander of a ship; and had acquired a handsome fortune by mercantile
industry. Without any superior abilities or learning, by a steady attention to
business, and a prudent obliging deportment, he had recommended himself to the
esteem of the people. Having been five years in the Council, before his
appointment as Lieutenant Governor, he had carried the same useful qualities
into public life, and preserved or increased that respect which he had acquired
in a private station. The rancour of contending parties made moderation a
necessary character in a chief magistrate; and the circumstances of the
Province, at that time, required a person of experience in trade, at its head.

It being a time of peace, after a long and distressing war, the improvement of
which the Province was capable, in regard to its natural productions, lumber
and naval stores, rose into view and became objects of close attention both
here and in England. As early as 1668, the government of Massachusetts, Mass.
Rec.
under which the Province then was, had reserved for the public use all white
pine trees of twenty-four inches in diameter, at three feet from the ground. In
King William's reign, a surveyor of the woods was appointed by the Crown;
Council Minutes.
and an order was sent to the Earl of Bellamont, to cause acts to be passed in
his several governments for the preservation of the white pines. In 1708 a law
made in New Hampshire prohibited the cutting of such as were twenty-four inches
in diameter, Laws Chap. 20.
at twelve inches from the ground, without leave of the surveyor; who was
instructed by the Queen, to mark with the broad arrow, those which were or
might be fit for the use of the navy, and to keep a register of them. Whatever
severity might be used in executing the law, it was no difficult matter for
those who knew the woods and were concerned in lumber, to evade it; though
sometimes they were detected and fined. Great complaints were frequently made
of the destruction of the royal woods; Usher's MSS.
every Governor and Lieutenant Governor had occasion to declaim on the subject
in their speeches and letters; Council and Assembly Records.
it was a favorite point in England, and recommended them to their superiors as
careful guardians of the royal interest. On the other hand, the people made as
loud complaints against the surveyor, for prohibiting the cutting of pine
trees, and yet neglecting to mark such as were fit for masts; by which means
many trees, which never could be used as masts, and might be cut into logs for
sawing, were rotting in the woods; Penhallow's MSS.
or the people who got them were exposed to a vexatious prosecution. When no
surveyor was on the spot, the Governor and Council appointed suitable persons
to take care that no waste should be made of the mast trees; and these
officers, with a very moderate allowance, performed the duty, to much better
purpose, than those who were sent from England and maintained at a great
expense to the Crown. Assembly Records.


1718.
As those trees which grew within the limits of the townships were deemed
private property, the people were desirous to get other townships laid out,
that the trees might be secured for their own use. This was a difficult point.
The Assembly, in 1704, during the controversy with Allen, had explicitly
disclaimed all title to the waste lands, by which they understood all those
without the bounds of their towns. The heirs of Allen kept a jealous eye upon
them. Usher, who claimed by mortgage from Governor Allen, was still living, and
was daily inviting purchasers by advertisements. N. England Courants.
The heir of Sir Charles Hobby, whose claim was founded on purchase from Thomas
Allen, had offered his title to the Assembly, but they had refused it. The
creditors of Hobby's estate had applied for letters of administration; and
though the matter had been, by the Judge of Probate, Assembly Records.
submitted to the General Court, and by their advice suspended, yet the letters
had been granted. Allen's other heirs were in a state of minority in England;
but their guardian was attentive to their interest. The controversy had become
more complex than before; Print. state of Allen's title.
and the claimants, however multiplied in number and discordant in their views,
yet had an interest separate from that of the public. The royal determination
could not be had, but on an appeal from a verdict at law; but no suits were now
pending; nor could the lands be granted by royal charter, without seeming to
entrench on the property of the claimants. Notwithstanding these difficulties,
the necessity of extending the settlements, and improving the natural
advantages of the country, was too apparent to be neglected.

Great quantities of iron ore were found in many places; 1719.
and it was in contemplation to erect forges on some of the rivers, and to
introduce foreign artists and laborers to refine it. A law was made laying a
penalty of ten pounds per ton, Laws Chap. 90.
on the transporting of it out of the province; but for the further
encouragement of the manufacture, it was deemed necessary, that some lands
should be appropriated, to the purpose of supplying with fuel, the iron works
which were to be erected, Council Minutes.
on Lamprey river, and of settling the people who were to be employed in that
service. On this occasion, it was recollected, that in 1672, while this
Province was subject to the Massachusetts government, and after the town of
Portsmouth had made a liberal contribution for the rebuilding of Harvard
College, a promise had been made by the General Court to grant to that town a
quantity of land for a village, when they should declare to the court the place
where they desired it. Mass. Rec.
Upon this, a petition was presented to the Governor and Council praying for a
fulfillment of this promise; and after some hesitation, a grant was made of a
slip of land two miles in breadth, Council Minutes.
above the head line of Dover, for the use of the iron works, which was called
the renewing a grant formerly made. This was known by the name of the two mile
slip, and it was afterward included in the township of Barrington.

In some parts of the Province, were many pitch pine trees, unfit for masts,
but capable of yielding tar and turpentine. A monopoly of this manufacture had
been attempted by a company of merchants; but when many thousand trees were
prepared for use they were destroyed by unknown hands. Council Minutes.
Laws. Chap 19.
Afterward a law was made providing that tar should be received in lieu of
taxes, at twenty shillings per barrel. This encouraged the making of it for
some time. Chap. 94.
Another law laid a penalty on the injuring of trees for drawing turpentine.
But private interest was too strong to be counteracted by a sense of public
utility. Too many incisions being made in the trees at once, they were soon
destroyed; and as those which were near at hand became scarce, the manufacture
was gradually discontinued.

Hemp was another object. Some had been sown, and from the specimen of its
growth, much advantage was expected. An act was made to encourage it; Chap. 94.
and it was allowed to be received at the treasury, in lieu of money, at one
shilling per pound. But as there was scarcely land enough in cultivation, for
the production of corn, it was vain to think of raising a less necessary
commodity.

The Parliament of England was attentive to the advantages which might be
derived to the nation from the Colonies, to which they were particularly
incited by the war, which at this time raged between Sweden and Russia, the
grand marts for naval stores in Europe. A duty which had been paid on lumber
imported from America, was taken off; and this was esteemed so great a favor to
New Hampshire that the Assembly thanked Shute for Assembly Records.
the share he had in obtaining it. About the same time, an act of Parliament
was made for the preservation of the white pines. Penalties in proportion to
the size of the trees, were laid on the cutting of those which grew without the
bounds of townships; and for the greater terror, these penalties were to be
recovered by the oath of one witness, in a court of Admiralty; where a single
Judge, appointed by the Crown, and removeable at pleasure, determined the cause
without a Jury. Statute of George I. Chap 12.
While this bill was pending, Henry Newman, the agent for New Hampshire,
petitioned against the severity of it, MS petition.
but without effect.

Great inconveniences had arisen for want of a due settlement of the limits of
the Province. The people who lived near the supposed line, were sometimes taxed
in both Provinces, and were liable to arrests by the officers of both; and some
times the officers themselves were at variance, and imprisoned each other.
Several attempts had been made to remove the difficulty, and letters frequently
passed between the two Courts on the subject, in consequence of petitions and
complaints from the borderers. In 1716, Commissioners were appointed by both
Provinces, to settle the line. The New Hampshire Commissioners were furnished
by Lieutenant Governor Vaughan, with a copy of the report of the Lords Chief
Justices in 1677, Original MS instructions.
and were instructed to follow the course of the river Merrimack, at the
distance of three miles north as far as the river extends. The commissioners on
the other side complained that this power was not sufficient; MS letter Lt.
Governor Wentworth.
if by sufficient it was meant that they had no power to vary from their
instructions, the objection was true, but why this should have been objected it
is not easy to account, since the instructions would have given Massachusetts
all which they could claim by virtue of their old charter; or the judgment upon
it, on which they always laid much stress. Three years afterward the affair was
agitated again, in obedience to an order from the Lords of trade; who directed
a map to be drawn and sent to them, in which the boundaries of the Province
should be delineated, Original MS order.
and the best accounts and vouchers procured to elucidate it. Commissioners
were again appointed to meet at Newbury; Original MS instructions.
and those from New Hampshire were instructed by Lieutenant Governor Wentworth
to confer with the others; and if they could agree, in fixing the place where
to begin the line, they were to report accordingly; but if not, they were to
proceed ex part setting their compass on the north side of the mouth of
Merrimack river at high water mark, and from thence measuring three miles on a
north line, and from the end of the first three miles on a west line, into the
country, till they should meet the great river which runs out of Winipisiogee
pond. To this idea of a west line, the Massachusetts Commissioners objected;
and desired that the commission of the Governor of New Hampshire might be sent
to Newbury, which was refused, and the conference ended without any agreement.
However, a plan was drawn, agreeably to these instructions, and sent to the
Lords of trade; and Newman the agent was instructed to solicit for a
confirmation of it. In these instructions, the ideas of the gentlemen in
government are more fully expressed. Penhallow's MSS.
The due west line on the southern side of the Province, they supposed, ought
to extend as far as Massachusetts extended. The line on the northerly side
adjoining to the Province of Maine, they supposed, ought to be drawn, up the
middle of the river Pascataqua, as far as the tide flows in the Newwichwannock
branch; and thence northwestward, but whether two or more points westward of
north was left for further consideration.

While these things were in agitation, the Province unexpectedly received an
accession of inhabitants from the north of Ireland. A colony of Scots
presbyterians had been settled in the Province of Ulster, Hume.
in the reign of James I; they had borne a large share in the sufferings, which
the protestants in that unhappy country underwent, in the reign of Charles I
and James II; and had thereby conceived an ardent and inextinguishable thirst
for civil and religious liberty. Notwithstanding the peace which Ireland had
enjoyed, since the subjection of the Popish party by King William, some penal
laws were still in force; which, with the inconvenience of rents and tithes,
made these people wish for a settlement in America; where they might be free
from these burdens and have full scope for their industry. One Holmes, a young
man, son of a clergyman, had been here and carried home a favorable report of
the country, MS of John Harvey.
which induced his father, with three other presbyterian Ministers, James
Macgregore, William Cornwell, and William Boyd, and a large number of their
congregations, to resolve on an emigration. Having converted their substance
into money, they embarked in five ships, Oct. 14. 1718.
and about one hundred families of them arrived at Boston. Cornwell, with about
twenty families more, arrived at Casco. They immediately petitioned the
Assembly of Massachusetts for a tract of land; who gave them leave to look out
a settlement of six miles square, in any of the unappropriated lands at the
eastward. After a fruitless search along the shore, finding no place that
suited them there; sixteen families, hearing of a tract of good land, above
Haverhill, called Nutfield (from the great number of chestnut and walnut trees
there) and being informed that it was not appropriated, determined there to
take up their grant; the others dispersed themselves into various parts of the
country.

As soon as the spring opened, the men went from Haverhill, where they left
their families, April 11.
and built some huts near a brook which falls into Beaver River, and which they
named West-running brook. The first evening after their arrival, a sermon was
preached to them under a large oak, which is to this day regarded with a degree
of veneration. As soon as they could collect their families, they called
Macgregore to be their minister, who since his arrival in the country had
preached at Dracut. At the first sacramental occasion, were present two
ministers and sixty-five communicants. Macgregore continued with them till his
death; March 5, 1729.
and his memory is still precious among them: He was a wise, Ae^^ 52.
affectionate and faithful guide to them, both in civil and religious concerns.
These people brought with them the necessary materials for the manufacture of
linen; and their spinning wheels, turned by the foot, were a novelty in the
country. They also introduced the culture of potatoes, which were first planted
in the garden of Nathaniel Walker of Andover. They were an industrious, frugal
and consequently thriving people.

They met with some difficulty in obtaining a title to their lands. If the due
west line between the Provinces had been established, it would have passed
through their settlement and divided it between Massachusetts and
New Hampshire* but the curve line, following the course of Merrimack at three
miles distance, would leave them unquestionably in New Hampshire. This was the
idea of the General Court of Massachusetts, who, upon application to them for a
confirmation of their former grant, declared them to be out of their
jurisdiction. Among the many claimants to these lands, they were informed, that
Col. Wheelwright of Wells had the best Indian title, derived from his
ancestors. Supposing this to be valid in a moral view, they followed the
example of the first settlers of New England, and obtained a deed of ten miles
square, in virtue of the general license granted by the Indian Sagamores in
1629. To prevent difficulty from Allen's claim, they applied for leave of
settlement to Col. Usher, who told them that the land was in dispute, Usher's
MSS.
and that he could not give them leave, but that he supposed they might settle
on it, if they would hold it either of the King or of Allen's heirs, as the
case might be determined. They also applied to the Lieutenant Governor of
New Hampshire, who declined making them a grant in the King's name; but, by
advice of Council, gave them a protection, and extended the benefit of the law
to them; appointing James McKean to be a Justice of the Peace, Council Minutes.
and Robert Wier a Deputy Sheriff.

Some persons who claimed these lands, 1720.
by virtue of a deed of about twenty years date, from John, an Indian Sagamore,
gave them some disturbance; but, having obtained what they judged a superior
title, and enjoying the protection of government, they went on with their
plantation; receiving frequent additions of their countrymen, as well as
others, till in 1722, their town was incorporated by the name of Londonderry,
Harvey's and Macgregore's MSS
from a city in the north of Ireland, in and near to which most of them had
resided; and in which some of them had endured the hardships of a memorable
siege. John Bar, William Caldwell and Abraham Blair, with several others who
had suffered in this siege, and came to America, were by King William's special
order made free of taxes through all the British dominions.

This, with several other circumstances relating to these people, I took from a
manuscript letter written (1729) by Mr. John Harvey, schoolmaster in
Londonderry, to Mr. Prince. In the same letter was the following brief account
of the seige above mentioned. Londonderry was besieged near half a year (1689)
by King James's army, when he had all Ireland subdued but Derry and a little
place hard by. The besieged defended the city, most of them being
presbyterians, till they were very much pinched by famine, that a dog's head
was sold cheap enough at half a crown; and yet God supported them until King
William sent them relief by two ships with men and provisions from England; at
which fight, before the ships got up to the city and landed their men, the
besiegers moved their camp and fled to the west of Ireland, where afterward
two bloody battles were fought and the papists subdued.

Two things further (says he) I have to relate respecting Derry, 1. The church
of Derry i^ so strongly built with stone and lime that in the steeple they had
a cannon fixed, which did more hurt to the Irish army than six upon the walls.
2. There was one Col. Murray in the siege. He and a party were out against the
enemy, and having got the advantage in an engagement with them a mile from the
walls, the enemy's General, who was a Frenchman, and he, met; and having both
fired their pistols, drew their swords, and the General having a coat of mail,
had the advantage of Murray, so that he could not hurt him. At length Murray
observing that there was no touching him but through the harness in his face,
put his sword in through the bars of the harness and killed him. They made a
great slaughter that day.

Nothing was more offensive to these emigrants than to be called IRISH.
Macgregore in a letter to Governor Shute, (1720) says: We are surprised to hear
ourselves termed Irish people, when we so frequently ventured our all for the
British Crown and liberties against the Irish papists; and gave all tests of
our loyalty, which the government of Ireland required, and are always ready to
do the same when demanded.

The people of this country did not understand the distinction; nor in fact did
they treat these strangers with common decency on their first arrival. The
grudge subsisted a long time, but is now worn out.




The settlement of these emigrants, on the waste lands, opened the way for
other plantations. Those who had borne the burdens and distresses of war, in
defending the country, had long been circumscribed within the limits of the old
towns; but were now multiplied, and required room to make settlements for their
children. They thought it hard to be excluded from the privelege of cultivating
the lands, which they and their fathers had defended; while strangers were
admitted to sit down peaceably upon them. These were weighty reasons. At the
same time no attempt was making, by any of the claimants, to determine the long
contested point of property; and in fact, no person could give a clear and
undisputed title to any of the unsettled lands.

In these circumstances, a company of about one hundred persons, inhabitants of
Portsmouth, Exeter and Haverhill, petitioned for liberty to begin a plantation,
on the northerly part of the lands called Nutfield. 1721.
These were soon followed by petitioners from the other towns, for the lands
which lay contiguous to them. The Governor and Council kept the petitions
suspended for a long time, giving public notice to all persons concerned to
make their objections. In this time the lands were surveyed, and the limits of
four proposed townships determined; and the people were permitted to build and
plant upon the lands provided that they did not infringe on, or interfere with,
April 21.
Council Records.
any former grants, possessions or properties. Some of these lands were well
stocked with pine trees; which were felled in great abundance; this occasioned
a fresh complaint from the King's surveyor.

At length, charters being prepared, were signed by the Governor; 1722.
by which four townships, Chester, Nottingham, May 10.
Barrington and Rochester were granted and incorporated. The grants were made
in the name of the King, who was considered as the common guardian, both of the
people and the claimants; but with a clause of reservation, ' as far as in us
lies,' that there might be no infringement on the claims.

The signing of these grants was the last act of Government performed by Shute
in New Hampshire. A violent party in Massachusetts had made such strenuous
opposition to him and caused him so much vexation, as rendered it eligible for
him to ask leave to return to England. He is said to have been a man of a
humane, obliging and friendly disposition; but having been used to military
command, could not bear with patience the collision of parties, nor keep his
temper when provoked. Fond of ease, and now in the decline of life, he would
gladly have spent his days in America if he could have avoided controversy. The
people of New Hampshire were satisfied with his administration, as far as it
respected them; and though they did not settle a salary on him as on his
predecessor, yet they made him a grant twice in the year, generally amounting
to a hundred pounds, Assembly Records.
and paid it out of the excise which was voted from year to year. This was more
in proportion, than he received from his other government. On his departure for
England, which was very sudden and unexpected, 1723.
Lieutenant Governor Wentworth, Jan. 1.
took the chief command, in a time of distress and perplexity; the country
being then involved in another war with the natives.

CHAP. XIV. The fourth Indian War, commonly called the three years war, or
LOVEWELL'S war.
TO account for the frequent wars with the eastern Indians, usually called by
the French, the Abenaquis, and their unsteadiness both in war and peace; we
must observe, that they were situated between the Colonies of two European
nations, who were often at war with each other, and who pursued very different
measures with regard to them.

As the lands, on which they lived, were comprehended in the patents granted by
the crown of England, the natives were considered by the English, as subjects
of that crown. In the treaties and conferences held with them, they were styled
the King's subjects; when war was declared against them, they were called
rebels; and when they were compelled to make peace, they subscribed an
acknowledgement of their perfidy, and a declaration of their submission to the
government, without any just ideas of the meaning of those terms; and it is a
difficult point, to determine what kind of subjects they were.

Beside the patents, derived from the Crown, the English in general were fond
of obtaining from the Indians, deeds of sale for those lands, on which they
were disposed to make settlements. Some of these deeds were executed with legal
formality, and a valuable consideration was paid to the natives for the
purchase; others were of obscure and uncertain original; but the memory of such
transactions was soon lost, among a people who had no written records. Lands
had been purchased of the Indian chiefs, on the Rivers Kennebeck and St.
George, at an early period; but the succeeding Indians either had no knowledge
of the sales made by their ancestors, or had an idea that such bargains were
not binding on posterity; who had as much need of the lands, and could use them
to the same purpose as their fathers. At first, the Indians did not know that
the European manner of cultivating lands, and erecting mills and dams, would
drive away the game and fish, and thereby deprive them of the means of
subsistence; afterward, finding by experience that this was the consequence of
admitting foreigners to settle among them, they repented of their hospitality,
and were inclined to dispossess their new neighbors, as the only way of
restoring the country to its pristine state, and of recovering their usual mode
of subsistence.

They were extremely offended by the settlements, which the English, after the
peace of Utrecht, made on the lands at the eastward, and by their building
forts, block houses and mills; whereby their usual mode of passing the rivers
and carrying-places was interrupted; and they could not believe, though they
were told with great solemnity, Governor Shute's conference 1717.
that these fortifications were erected for their defense against invasion.
When conferences were held with them on this subject, they either denied that
the lands had been sold, or pretended that the Sachems had exceeded their power
in making the bargains; Waldo's defense of Loveret's title.
or had conveyed lands beyond the limits of their tribe; or that the English
had taken advantage of their drunkenness to make them sign the deeds; or that
no valuable consideration had been given for the purchase. No arguments or
evidence which could be adduced would satisfy them, unless the lands were paid
for again; and had this been done once, their posterity after a few years would
have renewed the demand.

On the other hand, the French did not in a formal manner declare them subjects
of the crown of France; Abbe Raynal.
but every tribe, however small, was allowed to preserve its independence.
Those who were situated in the heart of Canada kept their lands to themselves,
which were never solicited from them; those who dwelt on the rivers and shores
of the Atlantic, though distant from the French Colonies, received annual
presents from the King of France; and solitary traders resided with, or
occasionally visited them; but no attempt was made by any company to settle on
their lands.

It was in the power of the English to supply them with provisions, arms,
ammunition, blankets and other articles which they wanted, cheaper than they
could purchase them of the French. Governor Shute had promised that trading
houses should be established among them, 1717.
The reader is desired to correct a mistake in the first volume, page 358, line
5, instead of 'truck houses established,' read 'it was in contemplation to
establish truck houses.'
and that a smith should be provided to keep their arms and other instruments
in repair; but the unhappy contentions between the Governor and Assembly of
Massachusetts prevented a compliance with this engagement. The Indians were
therefore obliged to submit to the impositions of private traders, or to seek
supplies from the French; who failed not to join with them in reproaching the
English for this (...) of promise, and for their avidity in getting away the
land.

The inhabitants of the eastern parts of New England were not of the best
character for religion, and were ill adapted to engage the affections of the
Indians by their example. The frequent hostilities on this quarter, not only
kept alive a spirit of jealousy and revenge in individuals, but prevented any
endeavors to propagate religious knowledge among the Indians by the government;
though it was one of the conditions of their charter; and though many good men
wished it might be attempted. At length Governor Shute, in his conference with
their Sachems at Arrowsic, introduced this important business by offering them
in a formal manner, an Indian bible, and a protestant missionary; but they
rejected both, saying God has given us teaching already, and if we should go
from it we should displease him. He would have done much better service, and
perhaps prevented a war, if he had complied with their earnest desire to fix a
boundary, Judge Sewal's memorial.
beyond which the English should not extend their settlements.

A gentleman, in conversation with one of their Sachems, asked him why they
were so strongly attached to the French, Penhallow's MSS.
from whom they could not expect to receive so much benefit as from the Engl^^^
(...) Sachem gravely answered, Because the French have taught us to pray to
God, which the English never did.

Vol. 1. page 253.
It has been observed in the former part of this work, that the Jesuits had
planted themselves among these tribes. They had one Church at Penobscot, and
another at Norridgwog, where Sebastian Ralle, a French Jesuit, resided. He was
a man of good sense, learning and address, and by a compliance with their mode
of life, and a gentle, condescending deportment, had gained their affections so
as to manage them at his pleasure. Knowing the power of superstition over the
savage mind, he took advantage of this, and of their prejudice against the
English, to promote the cause, and strengthen the interest of the French among
them. He even made the offices of devotion serve as incentives to their
ferocity, and kept a flag, in which was depicted a cross, surrounded by bows
and arrows, which he used to hoist on a pole, at the door of his church, when
he gave them absolution, New England Cour^nt, No. 160.
previously to their engaging in any warlike enterprise.

With this Jesuit, the Governor of Canada held a close correspondence; and by
him was informed of every thing transacted among the Indians. By this means,
their discontent with the English, on account of the settlements made at the
eastward, was heightened and inflamed; and they received every encouragement,
to assert their title to the lands in question, and molest the settlers, by
killing their cattle, burning their stacks of hay, robbing and insulting them.
These insolences discouraged the people, 1720.
and caused many of them to remove. The garrisons were then reinforced; and
scouting parties were ordered into the eastern quarter, under the command of
Col. Shadrach Walton. By this appearance of force, the Indians, who dreaded the
power of the English, were restrained from open hostilities. They had frequent
parleys with the commanders of forts, and with commissioners who visited them
occasionally; and though at first they seemed to be resolute in demanding the
removal of the English, declaring that they had fought for the land three
times, and would fight for it again; Captain Penhallow's MSS.
yet when they were told that there was no alternative but perfect peace or
open war, and that if they chose peace they must forbear every kind of insult,
they seemed to prefer peace; and either pretended ignorance of what had been
done, or promised to make inquiry into it; and as an evidence of their good
intentions, offered a tribute of skins, and delivered up four of their young
men as hostages.

This proceeding was highly disrelished by the Governor of Canada; who renewed
his efforts to keep up the quarrel, and secretly promised to supply the Indians
with arms and ammunition; though as it was a time of peace between the two
crowns, Hutchinson II. 263.
he could not openly assist them.

The New England governments; though highly incensed, were not easily persuaded
to consent to a war. The dispute was between the Indians and the proprietors of
the eastern lands, in which the public were not directly interested. No blood
had as yet been shed. Canseau had been surprised and plundered, and some people
killed there; but that was in the government of Nova Scotia. Ralle was regarded
as the principal instigator of the Indians; and it was thought, that if he
could be taken off they would be quiet. It was once proposed to send the
Sheriff of York County with a posse of one hundred and fifty men, 1721.
to seize and bring him to Boston; but this was not agreed to. The next summer,
Ralle in company with Castine from Penobscot, and Croisil from Canada, appeared
among the Indians, at a conference held on Arrowsic Island, July.
with Capt. Penhallow, the commander of the garrison, and brought a letter,
written in the name of the several tribes of Indians, directed to Governor
Shute; in which it was declared, that if the English did not remove in three
weeks, they would kill them and their cattle, and burn their houses. An
additional guard was sent down; but the government, loath to come to a rupture,
and desirous if possible to treat with the Indians separately from the French
emissaries, invited them to another conference, which invitation they treated
with neglect.

In the succeeding winter, a party under Col. Thomas Westbrooke was ordered to
Noridgwog to seize Ralle. They arrived at the village undiscovered, but before
they could surround his house, he escaped into the woods, leaving his papers in
his strong box, which they brought off without doing any other damage. Among
these papers were his letters of correspondence with the Governor of Canada, by
which it clearly appeared, 1722.
that he was deeply engaged in exciting the Indians to a rupture, and had
promised to assist them.

This attempt to seize their spiritual father, could not long be unrevenged.
The next summer they took nine families from Merry-meeting bay, June 13.
Penhallow's Indian wars, p. 85.
and after dismissing some of the prisoners, retained enough to secure the
redemption of their hostages and sent them to Canada. About the same time they
made an attempt on the fort at St. George's; but were repulsed with
considerable loss. They also surprised some fishing vessels in the eastern
harbors; and at length made a furious attack on the town of Brunswick, which
they destroyed. This action determined the government to issue a declaration of
war against them, which was published in form at Boston and Portsmouth. July 25.


New Hampshire being seated in the bosom of Massachusetts, had the same
interest to serve, and bore a proportionable share of all these transactions
and the expenses attending them. Walton, who first commanded the forces sent
into the eastern parts, and Westbrooke, who succeeded him, as well as
Penhallow, the commander of the fort at Arrowsic, were New Hampshire men; the
two former were of the Council. A declaration of war being made, the enemy were
expected on every part of the frontiers; and the Assembly were obliged to
concert measures for their security, after an interval of peace for about ten
years.

The usual route of the Indians, in their marches to the frontiers of
New Hampshire, was by the way of Winipiseogee lake. The distance from Cochecho
falls in the town of Dover, to the southeast bay of that lake, is about thirty
miles. It was thought that if a road could be opened to that place, and a fort
built there, the enemy would be prevented from coming that way. Orders were
accordingly issued, and a party of two hundred and fifty men were employed in
cutting down the woods for a road; but the expense so far exceeded the benefit
which could be expected from a fort at such a distance, in the wilderness, to
be supplied with provisions and ammunition by land carriage, which might easily
be interrupted by the enemy, Assembly Records.
that the design was laid aside, and the old method of defense by scouts and
garrisons was adopted. Lieutenant Governor Wentworth, being Commander in Chief
in Shute's absence, was particularly careful to supply the garrisons with
stores, and visit them in person, to see that the duty was regularly performed;
for which, and other prudent and faithful services, he frequently received the
acknowledgments of the Assembly and grants of money, generally amounting to one
hundred pounds at every session, and sometimes more. They also took care to
inlist men for two years, and to establish the wages of officers and soldiers
at the following rates; a Captain, at seven pounds per month; a Lieutenant,
four pounds; a Sergeant, fifty-eight shillings; a Corporal, forty-five
shillings, and a private, forty shillings. A bounty of one hundred pounds was
offered for every Indian scalp. The difference between the currency and
sterling, was two and an half for one.

The first appearance of the enemy in New Hampshire, 723.
was at Dover; where they surprised and killed Joseph Ham, and took three of
his children; the rest of the family escaped to the garrison. Soon after they
waylaid the road, Penhallow page 96.
and killed Tristram Heard. Their next onset was at Lamprey River, where they
killed Aaron Rawlins and one of his children, August 29.
taking his wife and three children captive. This Aaron Rawlins (whose wife was
a daughter of Edward Tailor, who was killed by the Indians 1704) lived upon the
plantation left by Tailor, about half a mile west from Lamprey River landing,
at the lower falls on Piscasick River. The people there at that time, commonly
retired, at night, to the garrisoned houses, and returned home in the day time;
but that night they neglected to retire as usual. His brother Samuel also lived
about half a mile distant on the same river. It seems the Indian scout
consisted of eighteen, who probably had been reconnoitering some time* and
intended to have destroyed both the families, and for that purpose divided, and
nine went to each house; but the party that went to Samuel Rawlins's, beating
in the window, and finding the family gone, immediately joined their
companions, who were engaged at Aaron's. His wife went out at the door, perhaps
sooner than they would otherwise have assaulted the house, and was immediately
seized, and one or two of her children who followed her. Her husband being
alarmed, secured the door before they could enter, and with his eldest
daughter, about twelve years old, stood upon his defense, repeatedly firing
wherever they attempted to enter, and at the same time calling earnestly to his
neighbors for help; but the people in the several garrisoned houses near,
apprehending from the noise and incessant firing, the number of the enemy to be
greater than they were, and expecting every moment to be attacked themselves,
did not venture to come to his assistance. Having for some time bravely
withstood such unequal force, he was at last killed by their random shots
through the house, which they then broke open, and killed his daughter. They
scalped him, and cut off his daughter's head, either through haste, or probably
being enraged against her, on account of the assistance she had afforded her
father in their defense, which evidently appeared by her hands being soiled
with powder. His wife and two children, a son and a daughter, they carried to
Canada: The woman was redeemed in a few years. The son was adopted by the
Indians, and lived with them all his days; he came into Pennycook with the
Indians after the peace, and expressed to some people with whom he conversed,
much resentment against his uncle Samuel Rawlins, on supposing he had detained
from his mother some property left by his father, but manifested no desire of
returning to Newmarket again. The daughter married with a Frenchman, and when
she was near sixty years old, returned with her husband to her native place, in
expectation of recovering the patrimony she conceived was left at the deat hof
her father: But the estate having been sold by her grandfather Taylor's
administrator, they were disappointed, and after a year or two went back to
Canada.

This account was collected from some of the surviving sufferers, and other
aged persons who were witnesses of the scene, by Wentworth Cheswell, Esquire. of
Newmarket.




The next spring they killed James Nock, 1724.
one of the elders of the church at Oyster River, May 1.
MS of Rev. Hugh Adams.
as he was returning on horseback from setting his beaver traps in the woods.
Soon after they appeared at Kingston, where they took Peter Colcord and Ephraim
Stevens, May 16.
MS of Rev. Ward Clark.
and two children of Ebenezer Stevens. They were pursued by scouts from
Kingston and Londonderry, but in vain. Colcord made his escape in about six
months, and received a gratuity of ten pounds from the Assembly, for his
courage and ingenuity, Assembly Records.
and for the account he gave of the proceedings of the enemy.

May 24.
On a sabbath day they ambushed the road at Oyster River, and killed George
Chesley, Penhallow and Hugh Adams.
and mortally wounded Elizabeth Burnham, as they were returning together from
public worship. June 2.
In a few days more, New England Courant.
five Indians took Thomas Smith and John Carr at Chester; and after carrying
them about thirty miles, bound them and lay down to sleep; the captives
escaped, and in three days arrived safe at a garrison in Londonderry.

The settlements at Oyster River being very much exposed; a company of
volunteers under the command of Abraham Benwick, who went out on the
encouragement offered by the government for scalps, were about marching to make
discoveries. It happened that Moses Davis, June 10.
and his son of the same name, being at work in their corn field, went to a
brook to drink, where they discovered three Indian packs. They immediately gave
notice of this discovery to the volunteer company, and went before to guide
them to the spot. The Indians had placed themselves in ambush; and the unhappy
father and son were both killed. The company then fired, killed one and wounded
two others, Penhallow, p. 101.
who made their escape, though they were pursued and tracked by their blood to
a considerable distance. The slain Indian was a person of distinction, and wore
a kind of coronet of scarlet dyed fur, with an appendage of four small bells,
by the sound of which the others might follow him through the thickets. His
hair was remarkably soft and fine; and he had about him a devotional book and a
muster-roll of one hundred and eighty Indians; from which circumstances it was
supposed that he was a natural son of the Jesuit Ralle, Hugh Adams's MS.
by an Indian woman who had served him as a laundress. His scalp was presented
to the Lieutenant Governor in Council, by Robert Burnham, Assembly Records.
and the promised bounty was paid to Capt. Francis Matthews, in trust for the
company. June 12.


Within the town of Dover were many families of Quakers; who, scrupling the
lawfulness of war, could not be persuaded to use any means for their defense;
though equally exposed with their neighbors to an enemy who made no
distinction between them. One of these people, Ebenezer Downs, was taken by the
Indians, and was grossly insulted and abused by them, because he refused to
dance as the other prisoners did, for the diversion of their savage captors.
Another of them, John Hanson, who lived on the outside of the town, in a remote
situation, could not be persuaded to remove to a garrison, though he had a
large family of children. A party of thirteen Indians, called French Mohawks,
had marked his house for their prey; and lay several days in ambush, waiting
for an opportunity to assault it. While Hanson with his eldest daughter were
gone to attend the weekly meeting of friends, and his two eldest sons were at
work in a meadow at some distance; June 27.
the Indians entered the house, killed and scalped two small children, and took
his wife, with her infant of fourteen days old, her nurse, two daughters and a
son, and after rifling the house carried them off. This was done so suddenly
and secretly, that the first person who discovered it was the eldest daughter
at her return from the meeting before her father. Seeing the two children dead
at the door, she gave a shriek of distress, which was distinctly heard by her
mother, then in the hands of the enemy among the bushes, and by her brothers in
the meadow. The people being alarmed, went in pursuit; but the Indians
cautiously avoiding all paths, went off with their captives undiscovered. After
this disaster had befallen his family, Hanson removed the remainder of them to
the house of his brother; who, though of the same religious persuasion; yet had
a number of lusty sons, and always kept his firearms in good order, for the
purpose of shooting game. This account is given as collected from the
information of the family. A narrative of their distresses is in print. The
woman, though of a tender constitution, had a firm and vigorous mind, and
passed through the various hardships of an Indian captivity, with much
resolution and patience. When her milk failed, she supported her infant with
water, which she warmed in her mouth, and dropped on her breast, till the
squaws taught her to beat the kernel of walnuts and boil it with bruised corn,
which proved a nourishing food for her babe. They were all sold to the French
in Canada. Hanson went the next spring and redeemed his wife, the three younger
children and the nurse, but he could not obtain the elder daughter of seventeen
years old, though he saw and conversed with her. He also redeemed Ebenezer
Downs. He made a second attempt in 1727, but died at Crown-point, on his way to
Canada. The girl was married to a Frenchman, and never returned.


These and other insolences of the enemy being daily perpetrated on the
frontiers, caused the governments to resolve on an expedition to Norridgwog.
The Captains Moulton and Harman, both of York, each at the head of a company of
one hundred men, executed their orders with great address. August 12.
They completely invested and surprised that village; killed the obnoxious
Jesuit with about eighty of his Indians; Hutchinson II. 309.
recovered three captives; destroyed the chapel, and brought away the plate and
furniture of the altar, and the devotional flag, New England Courant.
as trophies of their victory. Ralle was then in the sixty-eighth year of his
age, and had resided in his mission at Norridgwog twenty-six years; having
before spent six years in traveling among the Indian nations, MS of Hugh Adams.
in the interior parts of America.

The parties of Indians who were abroad, continued to ravage the frontiers. Two
men being missing from Dunstable, a scout of eleven went in quest of them; they
were fired upon by thirty of the enemy, Sept. 5.
and nine of them were killed: New England Courant.
The other two made their escape, though one of them was badly wounded.
Afterward another company fell into their ambush and engaged them; Penhallow,
page 106.
but the enemy being superior in number overpowered them, killed one and
wounded four, the rest retreated. At Kingston, Jabez Colman and his son Joseph,
Sept. 7.
were killed as they were at work in their field. The success of the forces at
Norridgwog and the large premium offered for scalps, having induced several
volunteer companies to go out, they visited one after another of the Indian
villages, but found them deserted. The fate of Norridgwog had struck such a
terror into them, that they did not think themselves safe at any of their
former places of abode, and occupied them as resting places only, when they
were scouting or hunting.

One of these volunteer companies, under the command of Capt. John Lovewell of
Dunstable, was greatly distinguished, Penhallow, p. 107.
first by their success and afterward by their misfortunes. This company
consisted of thirty; at their first excursion to the northward of Winipiseogee
lake, they discovered an Indian wigwam in which were a man and a boy. Dec. 19.
They killed and scalped the man and brought the boy alive to Boston, where
they received the reward, promised by law, and a handsome gratuity besides.

By this success his company was augmented to seventy. They marched again, and
visiting the place where they had killed the Indian, New England Courant.
found his body as they had left it two months before. Their provision falling
short, 1725.
thirty of them were dismissed by lot and returned. The remaining forty
continued their march till they discovered a track, MS of Hugh Adams.
which they followed till they saw a smoke just before sunset, Feb. 20.
by which they judged that the enemy were encamped for the night. They kept
themselves concealed till after midnight; when they silently advanced, and
discovered ten Indians asleep, round a fire, by the side of a frozen pond.
Lovewell now determined to make sure work; and placing his men conveniently,
ordered part of them to fire, five at once, as quick after each other as
possible, and another part to reserve their fire: He gave the signal, by firing
his own gun, which killed two of them; the men firing according to order,
killed five more on the spot; the other three starting up from their sleep, two
of them were immediately shot dead by the reserve; the other, though wounded,
attempted to escape by crossing the pond, but was seized by a dog and held fast
till they killed him. Thus in a few minutes the whole company was destroyed,
and some attempt against the frontiers of New Hampshire prevented; for these
Indians were marching from Canada, well furnished with new guns, and plenty of
ammunition; they had also a number of spare blankets, mockaseens and snow-shoes
for the accommodation of the prisoners whom they expected to take, Penhallow,
p. 110.
and were within two days march of the frontiers. The pond where this exploit
was performed is at the head of a branch of Salmonfall River, in the township
of Wakefield, and has ever since borne the name of Lovewell's pond. The action
is spoken of by elderly people, at this distance of time, with an air of
exultation; and considering the extreme difficulty of finding and attacking
Indians in the woods, and the judicious manner in which they were so completely
surprised, it was a capital exploit.

The brave company, with the ten scalps stretched on hoops, and elevated on
poles, Feb. 24.
entered Dover in triumph, and proceeded thence to Boston; where they received
the bounty of one hundred pounds for each, out of the public treasury. March 9.


Encouraged by this success, Lovewell marched a third time; intending to attack
the villages of Pigwacket, April 16.
on the upper part of the river Saco, which had been the residence of a
formidable tribe, and which they still occasionally inhabited. His company at
this time consisted of forty-six, Symmer's Memoir^.
including a chaplain and surgeon: Two of them proving lame, returned: Another
falling sick, they halted and built a stockade fort, on the west side of great
Ossapy pond; partly for the accommodation of the sick man, and partly for a
place of retreat in case of any misfortune. Here the surgeon was left with the
sick man, and eight of the company for a guard. The number was now reduced to
thirty-four. Pursuing their march to the northward, they came to a pond, about
twenty-two The printed accounts say FORTY; it is probable that the march was
circuitous.
miles distant from the fort, and encamped by the side of it. Early the next
morning, while at their devotions, May 8.
they heard the report of a gun, and discovered a single Indian, standing on a
point of land, which runs into the pond, more than a mile distant. They had
been alarmed the preceding night by noises round their camp, which they
imagined were made by Indians, and this opinion was now strengthened. They
suspected that the Indian was placed there to decoy them, and that a body of
the enemy was in their front. A consultation being held they determined to
march forward, and by encompassing the pond, to gain the place where the Indian
stood; and that they might be ready for action, they disencumbered themselves
of their packs, and left them, without a guard, at the northeast end of the
pond, in a pitch-pine plain, where the trees were thin and the brakes, at that
time of the year, small. It happened that Lovewell's march had crossed a
carrying-place, by which two parties of Indians, consisting of forty-one men,
commanded by Paugus and Wahwa, who had been scouting down Saco river, were
returning to the lower village of Pigwacket, distant about a mile and a half
from this pond. Having fallen on his track, they followed it till they came to
the packs, which they removed; and counting them, found the number of his men
to be less than their own: They therefore placed themselves in ambush, to
attack them on their return. The Indian who had stood on the point, and was
returning to the village, by another path, met them, and received their fire,
which he returned, and wounded Lovewell and another with small shot. Lieutenant
Wyman firing again, killed him, and they took his scalp. This Indian has been
celebrated as a hero, and ranked with the Roman Curtius, who devoted himself to
death to save his country. ((...) Hutchinson's history, vol. II, page 315.)

Having been on the spot where this celebrated action happened, and having
conversed with persons who were acquainted with the Indians of Pigwacket,
before and after this battle; I am convinced that there (...) no foundation for
the idea that he was placed there as a decoy; and th^^ he had no claim to the
character of a hero. The point on which he stood is a noted fishing place; the
gun which alarmed Lovewell's company was fired at a flock of ducks; and when
they met him he was returning home with his game and two fowling pieces. The
village (...) situated at the edge of the meadow, on Saco river; which here
form^ a large bend. The remains of the stockades were found by the first
settlers, forty years afterward. The pond is in the township of Frieburg.


Seeing no other enemy, they returned to the place where they had left their
packs, and while they were looking for them, the Indians rose and ran toward
them with a horrid yelling. A smart firing commenced on both sides, it being
now about ten of the clock. Captain Lovewell and eight more were killed on the
spot. Lieutenant Farewell and two others were wounded: Several of the Indians
fell; but, being superior in number, they endeavored to surround the party,
who, perceiving their intention, retreated; hoping to be sheltered by a point
of rocks which ran into the pond, and a few large pine trees standing on a
sandy beach. In this forlorn place they took their station. On their right was
the mouth of a brook, at that time unfordable; on their left was the rocky
point; their front was partly covered by a deep bog and partly uncovered, and
the pond was in their rear. The enemy galled them in front and flank, and had
them so completely in their power, that had they made a prudent use of their
advantage, the whole company must either have been killed, or obliged to
surrender at discretion; being destitute of a mouthful of sustenance and an
escape being impracticable. Under the conduct of Lieutenant Wyman they kept up
their fire, and showed a resolute countenance, all the remainder of the day;
during which their chaplain, Jonathan Fry, Ensign Robbins, and one more, were
mortally wounded. The Indians invited them to surrender, by holding up ropes to
them, and endeavored to intimidate them by their hideous yells; but they
determined to die rather than yield; and by their well directed fire, the
number of the savages was thinned, and their cries became fainter, till, just
before night, they quitted their advantageous ground, carrying off their killed
and wounded, and leaving the dead bodies of Lovewell and his men unscalped. The
shattered remnant of this brave company, collecting themselves together, found
three of their number unable to move from the spot, eleven wounded but able to
march, and nine who had received no hurt. It was melancholy to leave their
dying companions behind, but there was no possibility of removing them. One of
them, ensign Robbins, desired them to lay his gun by him charged, that if the
Indians should return before his death he might be able to kill one more. After
the rising of the moon, they quitted the fatal spot, and directed their march
toward the fort, where the surgeon and guard had been left. To their great
surprise they found it deserted. In the beginning of the action, one man (whose
name has not been thought worthy to be transmitted to posterity) quitted the
field, and fled to the fort; where, in the style of Job's messengers, he
informed them of Lovewell's death, and the defeat of the whole company; upon
which they made the best of their way home; leaving a quantity of bread and
pork, which was a seasonable relief to the retreating survivors. From this
place, they endeavored to get home. Lieutenant Farewell and the chaplain, who
had the journal of the march in his pocket, and one more, perished in the
woods, for want of dressing for their wounds. The others, after enduring the
most severe hardships, came in one after another, and were not only received
with joy, but were recompensed for their valor, and sufferings; and a generous
provision was made for the widows and children of the slain.

A party from the frontiers of New Hampshire, were ordered out to bury the
dead; but by some mistake did not reach the place of action. Colonel Tyng, with
a company from Dunstable, went to the spot, and having found the bodies of
twelve, buried them, and carved their names on the trees where the battle was
fought. At a little distance he found three Indian graves, which he opened; one
of the bodies was known to be their warrior Paugus. He also observed tracks of
blood, on the ground, to a great distance from the scene of action. It was
remarked that a week before this engagement happened, Penhallow's Indian wars.
it had been reported in Portsmouth, at the distance of eighty miles, with but
little variation from the truth. Such incidents were not uncommon, and could
scarcely deserve notice, if they did not indicate that a taste for the
mavelous was not extinguished in the minds of the most sober and rational.

This was one of the most fierce and obstinate battles which had been fought
with the Indians. They had not only the advantage of numbers, but of placing
themselves in ambush, and waiting with deliberation the moment of attack. These
circumstances gave them a degree of ardor and impetuosity. Lovewell and his
men, though disappointed of meeting the enemy in their front, expected and
determined to fight. The fall of their commander, and more than one quarter of
their number, in the first onset, was greatly discouraging; but they knew that
the situation to which they were reduced, and their distance from the
frontiers, cut off all hope of safety from flight. In these circumstances,
prudence as well as valor dictated a continuance of the engagement, and a
refusal to surrender; until the enemy, awed by their brave resistance, and
weakened by their own loss, yielded them the honor of the field. After this
encounter the Indians resided no more at Pigwacket, till the peace. This
account of Lovewell's battle is collected from the authoriti^^ cited in the
margin, and from the verbal information of aged and intelligent persons. The
names of the dead, on the trees, and the (...) where balls had entered and been
cut out, were plainly visible, when I was on the spot in 1784. The trees had
the appearance of being ve^^ old, and one of them was fallen.


The conduct of the Marquis de Vandreuil, Governor of Canada, was so flagrant a
breach of the treaty of peace, subsisting between the Crowns of England and
France, that it was thought, a spirited remonstrance might make him ashamed,
and produce some beneficial effects. With this view, the General Court of
Massachusetts proposed to the Colonies of New York, Connecticut, Rhode Island
and New Hampshire, to join in sending Commissioners to Canada on this errand.
New Hampshire was the only one which consented; and Theodore Atkinson was
appointed on their part, to join with William Dudley and Samuel Thaxter on the
part of Massachusetts. Mr. Hutchinson in his history, has not said a word
respecting this embassy.


The instructions which they received from the Lieutenant Governors, Dummer and
Wentworth, by advice of the Council and Assembly of each Province, were nearly
similar. Massachusetts and N.-Hampshire Rec.
They were to demand of the French Governor, restitution of the captives who
had been carried into Canada; to remonstrate to him on his injustice and breach
of friendship, in countenancing the Indians in their hostilities against the
people of New England; to insist on his withdrawing his assistance for the
future; and to observe to him, that if in the farther prosecution of the war,
our Indian allies, should in their pursuit of the enemy commit hostilities
against the French, the blame would be entirely chargeable to himself. If the
French Governor or the Indians, should make any overtures for peace, they were
empowered to give them passports, to come either to Boston or Portsmouth, for
that purpose, and to return; but they were not to enter into any treaty with
them. The Commissioners were also furnished with the original letters of
Vaudreuil to the Governors of New England, and to the Jesuit Ralle, and with
copies of the several treaties which had been made with the Indians. Jan. 20.
The gentlemen went by the way of Albany, and over the lakes, on the ice, to
Montreal, March 2.
where they arrived after a tedious and dangerous journey.

The Marquis, who happened to be at Montreal, received and entertained them
with much politeness. Having delivered their letters, and produced their
commissions, they presented their remonstrance in writing, and made the several
demand^ agreeably to their instructions; using this among other arguments,
Those Indians dwell either in the dominions of the King of Great Britain, or in
the territories of the French King: If in the French King's dominions, the
violation of the peace is very flagrant, Atkinson's MS Journal.
they then being his subjects; but if they are subjects of the British Crown,
then much more is it a breach of the peace, to excite a rebellion among the
subjects of his Majesty of Great Britain.

The Governor gave them no written answer; but denied that the Abenaquis were
under his government, and that he had either encouraged or supplied them for
the purpose of war. He said that he considered them as an independent nation,
and that the war was undertaken by them, in defense of their lands, which had
been invaded by the people of New England. The Commissioners in reply, informed
him, that the lands for which the Indians had quarrelled, were fairly purchased
of their ancestors, and had been for many years inhabited by the English. They
produced his own letters to the Governors of New England, in which he had
(inconsistently, and perhaps inadvertently) styled these Indians subjects of
the King of France. They also alleged the several treaties held with them as
evidence that they had acknowledged themselves subjects of the British Crown;
and, to his great mortification, they also produced his own original letters to
the Jesuit Ralle, which had been taken at Norridgwog, in which the evidence of
his assisting and encouraging them in the war was too flagrant to admit of
palliation. Farther to strengthen this part of their argument, they presented
to the Governor, a Mohawk whom they had met with at Montreal, who, according to
his own voluntary acknowledgment, had been supplied by the Governor with arms,
ammunition and provision to engage in the war, and had killed one man and taken
another whom he had sold in Canada.

In addition to what was urged by the Commissioners in general; Mr. Atkinson,
on the part of New Hampshire, entered into a particular remonstrance; alleging
that the Indians had no cause of controversy with that Province, the lands in
question being out of their claim. To this the Governor answered, that
New Hampshire was a part of the same nation, and the Indians could make no
distinction. Atkinson asked him why they did not for the same reason make war
on the people of Albany? The Governor answered, The people of Albany have sent
a message to pray me to restrain the savages from molesting them; in a manner
very different from your demands: To which Atkinson with equal spirit replied,
Your Lordship then is the right person, for our Governments to apply to, if the
Indians are subject to your orders.

Finding himself thus closely pressed, he promised to do what lay in his power
to bring them to an accommodation, and to restore those captives who were in
the hands of the French, on the payment of what they had cost; and he engaged
to see that no unreasonable demands should be made by the persons who held them
in servitude; as to those who still remained in the hands of the Indians, he
said, he had no power over them, and could not engage for their redemption. He
complained in his turn, of the Governor of New York, for building a fort on the
river Onondago, and said, that he should look upon that proc^eding as a breach
of the treaty of peace; and he boasted that he had the five nations of the
Iroquois so much under his influence, that he could at any time, cause them to
make war upon the subjects of Great Britain.

The Commissioners employed themselves very diligently in their inquiries
respecting the captives, and in settling the terms of their redemption. They
succeeded in effecting the ransom of sixteen, and engaging for ten others. The
Governor obliged the French, who held them, to abate of their demands; but
after all, they were paid for at an exorbitant rate. He was extremely desirous,
that the gentlemen should have an interview with the Indians, who were at war;
and for this purpose, sent for a number of them from the village of St.
Francis, and kept them concealed in Montreal. The Commissioners had repeatedly
told him, that they had no power to treat with them, and that they would not
speak to them unless they should desire peace. At his request, the chiefs of
the Nipissins visited the Commissioners, and said that they disapproved the war
which their children the Abenaquis had made, and would persuade them to ask for
peace. After a variety of maneuvers, the Governor at length promised the
Commissioners, that if they would consent to meet the Indians at his house,
they should speak first. This assurance produced an interview; and the Indians
asked the commissioners whether they would make proposals of peace? they
answered, No. The Indians then proposed, that if the English would demolish all
their forts, and remove one mile westward of Saco river; if they would rebuild
their church at Norridgwog, and restore to them their priest, they would be
brothers again. The Commissioners told them that they had no warrant to treat
with them; but if they were disposed for peace, they should have safe conduct
to and from Boston or Portsmouth; and the Governor promised to send his son
with them to see justice done. They answered, that this was the only place to
conclude peace, as the nations were near and could readily attend. The Governor
would have had them recede from their proposals, which he said were
unreasonable, and make others; but father Le Chase, a Jesuit, being present,
and acting as interpreter for the Indians, embarrassed the matter so much that
nothing more was proposed. It was observed by the commissioners, that when they
conversed with the Governor alone, they found him more candid and open to
conviction, than when Le Chase, or any other Jesuit was present; and, through
the whole of their negotiation, it evidently appeared, that the Governor
himself, as well as the Indians, were subject to the powerful influence of
these ecclesiastics; of whom there was a seminary in Canada, under the
direction of the Abbe de Belmont.

Having completed their business, and the rivers and lakes being clear of ice,
the Commissioners took their leave of the Governor, and set out on their
return, with the redeemed captives, and a guard of soldiers, which the Governor
ordered to attend them, as far as Crown-point. They went down the river St.
Lawrence to the mouth of the Sorel, then up that river to Chamblee, and through
the lakes to fort Nicholson. After a pleasant passage, of seven days, May 1.
they arrived at Albany.

Here they found Commissioners of Indian affairs for the Province of New York,
to whom they communicated the observations which they had made in Canada, and
what the Marquis de Vaudreuil had said respecting the five nations, and the
fort at Onandago. There being a deputation from these nations at Albany, they
held a conference with them, and gave them belts; requesting their assistance
in establishing a peace with the Abenaquis. From this place Mr. Atkinson wrote
to M. Cavanielle, son of the Marquis, acknowledging the polite reception the
Commissioners had met with from the family; subjoining a copy of the
information which they had given to the Commissioners of New York; and
promising, that a due representation should be made, to the Kings of England
and France, on the subject of their negotiation.

The report of the Commissioners being laid before the Assemblies of
Massachusetts and New Hampshire, it was determined to prosecute the war with
vigor. Orders were issued for the defense and supply of the frontiers, and for
the encouragement of ranging parties, Assembly Records.
both volunteers and militia. A petition was sent to the King, complaining of
the French Governor, and desiring that orders might be given to the other
Colonies of New England, and to New York, to furnish their quotas of
assistance, in the further prosecution of the war; and letters were written to
the Governor of New York, requesting that such of the hostile Indians as should
resort to Albany, might be seized and secured.

The good effects of this mission to Canada were soon visible. One of the
Indian hostages who had been detained at Boston through the whole war, together
with one who had been taken, were allowed on their parole, to visit their
countrymen; and they returned with a request for peace. Commissioners from both
Provinces went to St. George's; where a conference was held, which ended in a
proposal for a farther treaty at Boston. In the mean time, some of the enemy
were disposed for further mischief. Those who had been concerned in taking
Hanson's family at Dover, in a short time after their redemption and return,
came down with a design to take them again, as they had threatened them before
they left Canada. When they had come near the house, they observed some people
at work in a neighboring field, Sept. 15.
by which it was necessary for them to pass, both in going and returning. This
obliged them to alter their purpose, and conceal themselves in a barn, till
they were ready to attack them. Two women passed by the barn, while they were
in it, and had just reached the garrison as the guns were fired. They shot
Benjamin Evans dead on the spot; wounded William Evans and cut his throat; John
Evans received a slight wound in the breast, which bleeding plentifully,
deceived them, and thinking him dead, they stripped and scalped him: He bore
the painful operation without discovering any signs of life, though all the
time in his perfect senses, and continued in the feigned appearance of death,
till they had turned him over, and struck him several blows with their guns,
and left him for dead. After they were gone off he rose and walked, naked and
bloody, toward the garrison; but on meeting his friends by the way dropped,
fainting on the ground, and being covered with a blanket was conveyed to the
house. He recovered and lived fifty years. A pursuit was made after the enemy,
but they got off undiscovered, carrying with them Benjamin Evans, junior, a lad
of thirteen years old, to Canada, whence he was redeemed as usual by a
charitable collection.

This was the last effort of the enemy in New Hampshire. In three months, the
treaty which they desired was held at Boston, Dec. 1^*
and the next spring ratified at Falmouth. A peace was concluded in the usual
form; which was followed by restraining all private traffic with the Indians,
and establishing truck-houses in convenient places, where they were supplied
with the necessaries of life, Hutchinson II.318.
on the most advantageous terms. Though the governments on the whole, were
losers by the trade, yet it was a more honorable way of preserving the peace,
than if an acknowledgment had been made to the Indians in any other manner.

None of the other Colonies of New England bore any share in the expenses or
calamities of this war; and New Hampshire did not suffer so much as in former
wars; partly by reason of the more extended frontier of Massachusetts, both on
the eastern and western parts, against the former of which the enemy directed
their greatest fury; and partly by reason of the success of the ranging
parties, who constantly traversed the woods as far northward as the White
Mountains. The militia at this time was completely trained for active service;
every man of forty years of age having seen more than twenty years of war. They
had been used to handle their arms from the age of childhood, and most of them,
by long practice, had become excellent marksmen, and good hunters. They were
well acquainted with the lurking places of the enemy; and possessed a degree of
hardiness and intrepidity, which can be acquired only by the habitude of those
scenes of danger and fatigue, to which they were daily exposed. They had also
imbibed from their infancy a strong antipathy to the savage natives; which was
strengthened by repeated horrors of blood and desolation, and not obliterated
by the intercourse which they had with them in time of peace. As the Indians
frequently resorted to the frontier towns in time of scarcity, it was common
for them to visit the families whom they had injured in war; to recount the
circumstances of death and torture which had been practiced on their friends;
and when provoked or intoxicated, to threaten a repetition of such insults, in
future wars. To bear such treatment required more than human patience; and it
is not improbable that secret murders were sometimes the consequence of these
harsh provocations. Certain it is, that when any person was arrested, for
killing an Indian in time of peace, he was either forcibly rescued from the
hands of justice, or if brought to trial, invariably acquitted; it being
impossible to impannel a jury some of whom had not suffered by the Indians,
either in their persons or families.

CHAP. XV. WENTWORTH'S administration continued. BURNET'S short administration.
BELCHER succeeds him. WENTWORTH'S death and character.
DURING the war, the Lieutenant Governor had managed the executive department
with much prudence; the people were satisfied with his administration, and
entertained an affection for him, which was expressed not only by words, but by
frequent grants of money, in the General Assembly. When he returned from
Boston, 1726.
where the treaty of peace was concluded, January 5.
they presented to him an address of congratulation, and told him that his
absence had seemed long; but the service he had done them filled their hearts
with satisfaction. General Court Records.
This address was followed by a grant of one hundred pounds. He had, just
before, consented to an emission of two thousand pounds in bills of credit, to
be paid, one half in the year 1735, and the other half in 1736. An excise was
laid for three years, and was farmed for three hundred pounds.

The divisional line between the Provinces of New Hampshire and Massachusetts
was yet unsettled, and in addition to the usual disadvantages occasioned by
this long neglect, a new one arose. By the construction which Massachusetts put
on their charter, all the lands three miles northward of the river Merrimack
were within their limits. On this principle, a grant had formerly been made to
Governor Endicot, of some lands at Penacook; which had been the seat of a
numerous and powerful tribe of Indians. The quality of the land at that place
invited the attention of adventurers from Andover, Bradford and Haverhill;
Massachusetts Rec.
to whom a grant was made of a township, seven miles square; comprehending the
lands on both sides of the Merrimack, extending southwardly from the branch
called Contoocook. This grant awakened the attention of others; and a motion
was made in the Massachusetts Assembly, Dec. 21.
for a line of townships, to extend from Dunstable on Merrimack, to Northfield
on Connecticut river; but the motion was not immediately adopted. The Assembly
of New Hampshire was alarmed. Newman, their agent, had been a long time at the
British Court, soliciting the settlement of the line, and a supply of military
stores for the fort. Fresh instructions were sent to him to expedite the
business, and to submit the settlement of the line to the King. A committee was
appointed to go to Penacook, to confer with a committee of Massachusetts, ^.
Hampshire Rec.
then employed in laying out the lands, and to remonstrate against their
proceeding. A survey of other lands near Winipiseogee lake, was ordered; that
it might be known, what number of townships could be laid out, independently of
the Massachusetts claim. On the other hand, the heirs of Allen renewed their
endeavors, and one of them, John Hobby, petitioned the Assembly to compound
with him for his claim to half the Province; but the only answer which he could
obtain was that 'the Courts of law were competent to the determination of
titles,' and his petition was dismissed.

Both Provinces became earnestly engaged. Massachusetts proposed to
New Hampshire the appointment of commissioners, to establish the line. The
New Hampshire Assembly refused, because they had submitted the case to the
King. The Massachusetts people, foreseeing that the result of this application
might prove unfavorable to their claim of jurisdiction, were solicitous to
secure to themselves the property of the lands in question. Accordingly, the
proposed line of townships being surveyed, pretenses were encouraged and even
sought after, to entitle persons to be grantees. Hutchinson II.3^1.
The descendants of the officers and soldiers, who had been employed in
expeditions against the Narraganset Indians, and against Canada, in the
preceding century, were admitted; and the survivors of the late Captain
Lovewell's company, Massachusetts Rec.
with the heirs of the deceased, had a select tract granted to them at Suncook.
There was an appearance of gratitude in making these grants, and there would
have been policy in it, had the grantees been able to comply with the
conditions. 1727.
New Hampshire followed the example, and made grants of the townships of Epsom,
Chichester, May 18 and 20.
Barnstead, Canterbury, Gilmantown and Bow. All these, excepting the last, were
undoubtedly within their limits; but the grant of Bow interfered with the
grants which Massachusetts had made, at Penacook and Suncook, and gave rise to
a litigation, tedious, expensive, and of forty years continuance.

These tracts of land granted by both Provinces were too numerous and
extensive. It was impracticable to fulfill the conditions, on which the grants
were made. Had the same liberal policy prevailed here as in Pennsylvania, and
had the importation of emigrants from abroad been encouraged, the country might
have been soon filled with inhabitants; but the people of Londonderry were
already looked upon with a jealous eye, and a farther intrusion of strangers
was feared, lest they should prove a burden and charge to the community. People
could not be spared from the old towns. Penacook was almost the only settlement
which was effected by emigrants from Massachusetts. A small beginning was made,
by the New Hampshire proprietors, at Bow, on Suncook river; but the most of the
intermediate country remained uncultivated for many years. Schemes of
settlement were indeed continually forming; meetings of proprietors were
frequently held, and an avaricious spirit of speculating in landed property
prevailed; but the real wealth and improvement of the country instead of being
promoted were retarded.

On the death of King George I; the Assembly, which had subsisted five years,
was of course dissolved; New Hampshire Records.
Nov. 21.
and writs for the election of another were issued in the name of George II.
The long continuance of this Assembly was principally owing to the absence of
Governor Shute, in whose administration it commenced; and the uncertainty of
his return or the appointment of a successor. It had been deemed a grievance,
and an attempt had been made in 1724 to limit the duration of Assemblies to
three years, in conformity to the custom of England. At the meeting of the new
Assembly, Dec. 15.
the first business which they took up was to move for a triennial act. The
Lieutenant Governor was disposed to gratify them. Both Houses agreed in framing
an act for a triennial Assembly, in which the duration of the present Assembly
was limited to three years (unless sooner dissolved by the commander in chief)
writs were to issue fifteen days at least, before a new election; the
qualification of a representative was declared to be a freehold estate of three
hundred pounds value. Edition of Laws in 1771, page 166.
The qualification of an elector was a real estate of fifty pounds, within the
town or precinct where the election should be made; but habitancy was not
required in either case; the selectmen of the town, with the moderator of the
meeting, were constituted judges of the qualifications of electors, saving an
appeal to the House of Representatives. This act having been passed, in due
form, received the royal approbation, and was the only act which could be
called a constitution or form of Government, established by the people of
New Hampshire; all other parts of their government being founded on royal
commissions and instructions. But this act was defective, in not determining by
whom the writs should be issued, and in not describing the places from which
Representatives should be called, either by name, extent or population. This
defect gave birth to a long and bitter controversy, as will be seen hereafter.

The triennial act being passed, the House were disposed to make other
alterations in the government. An appeal was allowed in all civil cases from
the inferior to the superior court; if the matter in controversy exceeded one
hundred pounds, another appeal was allowed to the Governor and Council; and if
it exceeded three hundred pounds, to the King in Council. The appeal to the
Governor and Council was first established by Cutts's commission, and continued
by subsequent commissions and instructions. In Queen Anne's time, it was
complained of as a grievance, that the Governor and Council received appeals
and decided causes, without taking an oath to do justice. An oath was then
prescribed and taken. The authority of this court had been recognized by
several clauses in the laws; but was disrelished by many of the people; partly
because the judges who had before decided cases, were generally members of the
Council; partly because no jury was admitted in this court of appeal; and
partly because no such institution was known in the neighboring Province of
Massachusetts. The House moved for a repeal of the several clauses in the laws
relative to this obnoxious court; the Council non-concurred their vote, and
referred them to the royal instructions. The House persisted in their
endeavors, and the Council in their opposition. Both sides grew warm, and there
was no prospect of an accommodation. The Lieuteunant Governor put an end to the
session, and soon after dissolved the Assembly by proclamation.

A new Assembly was called; the same persons, with but two or three exceptions,
1728.
were re-elected, and the same spirit appeared in all their transactions. They
chose for their speaker Nathaniel Wear, who had been speaker of the former
Assembly, and having as usual presented him to the Lieutenant Governor, he
negatived the choice. The House desired to know by what authority; he produced
his commission; nothing appeared in that, which satisfied them; and they
adjourned from day to day without doing any business. After nine days they
chose another Speaker, Andrew Wiggin, and sent up the vote, with a preamble,
justifying their former choice. The Lieutenant Governor approved the Speaker,
but disapproved the preamble; and thus the controversy closed, each side
retaining their own opinion. The speeches and messages from the chair, and the
answers from the House, during this session, were filled with reproaches; the
public business was conducted with ill humor, and the House carried their
opposition so far as to pass a vote for addressing the King to annex the
Province to Massachusetts; to this vote the Council made no answer. But as a
new Governor was expected, they agreed in appointing a committee of both Houses
to go to Boston, and compliment him on his arrival.

The expected Governor was WILLIAM BURNET, son of the celebrated Bishop of
Sarum, whose name was dear to the people of New England, as a steady and active
friend to civil and religious liberty. Mr. Burnet was a man of good
understanding and polite literature; fond of books and of the conversation of
literary men; but an enemy to ostentation and parade. He had been Governor of
New York and New Jersey, and quitted those Provinces with reluctance, to make
way for another person, for whom the British Ministry had to provide. Whilst at
New York, he was very popular, and his fame having reached New England, the
expectations of the people were much raised on the news of his appointment, to
the Government of Massachusetts and New Hampshire. Lieutenant Governor
Wentworth characterised him in one of his speeches as a gentleman of known
worth, having justly obtained an universal regard from all who have had the
honor to be under his government. July 22.
He was received with much parade at Boston, whither the Lieutenant Governor of
New Hampshire, with a committee of the Council and Assembly, went to compliment
him on his arrival. Mr. Hutchinson has represented Governor Burnet as a man of
humor, and given an anecdote respecting his indifference to the custom of
saying grace at meals. The following story of the same kind, perhaps will not
be disagreeable to the reader.

One of the committee, who went from Boston, to meet him on the borders of
Rhode Island, and conduct him to the seat of government, was the facetious Col.
Tailer. Burnet complained of the long graces which were said by clergymen on
the road, and asked Ta^ler when they would shorten. He answered, The graces
will increase in length, till you come to Boston; after that they will shorten
till you come to your government of New Hampshire, where your Excellency will
find no grace at all.




Mr. Burnet had positive instructions from the crown to insist on the
establishment of a permanent salary in both his Provinces. He began with
Massachusetts, and held a long controversy with the General Court to no
purpose. In New Hampshire, a precedent had been established in the
administration of Dudley, which was favorable to his views. Though some of the
Assembly were averse to a permanent salary; yet the Lieutenant Governor had so
much interest with them, Belcher's MS Letters
by virtue of having made them proprietors in the lately granted townships,
that they were induced to consent; on condition that he should be allowed one
third part of the salary, 1729.
and they should be discharged from all obligations to him. May 9.
This bargain being concluded, the House passed a vote, with which the Council
concurred, to pay, Governor Burnet, for the term of three years, or during his
administration, the sum of two hundred pounds sterling, Journal of the House of
Representatives.
or six hundred pounds in bills of credit; which sum was to be in full of all
demands from this Government, for his salary; and all expenses in coming to,
tarrying in, or going from this Province; and also for any allowance to be made
to the Lieutenant Governor; and that the excise on liquors should be
appropriated to that use. To this vote six of the Representatives entered their
dissent.

The Governor came but once into New Hampshire. His death, Sept. 7.
which happened after a few months, was supposed to be occasioned by the ill
effect, which his controversy with Massachusetts, and the disappointment which
he suffered, had on his nerves.

When the death of Governor Burnet was known in England, 1730.
the resentment against the Province of Massachusetts was very high, Letter^ of
Francis W^lks, Agent.
on account of their determined refusal to fix a salary on the King's Governor.
It was even proposed, to reduce them to 'a more absolute dependence on the
crown;' but a spirit of moderation prevailed; and it was thought that Mr.
JONATHAN BELCHER, then in England, being a native of the Province, and well
acquainted with the temper of his countrymen would have more influence than a
stranger, to carry the favorite point of a fixed salary. His appointment, as
Governor of New Hampshire, was merely an appendage to his other commission.

Belcher was a merchant of large fortune and unblemished reputation. He had
spent six years in Europe; Belcher's Letter to the Bishop of Lincoln. MS.
had been twice at the Court of Hanover, before the protestant succession took
place in the family of Brunswick; and had received from the Princess Sophia, a
rich golden medal. He was graceful in his person, elegant and polite in his
manners; of a lofty and aspiring disposition; a steady, generous friend; a
vindictive, but not implacable enemy. Frank and sincere, he was extremely
liberal in his censures, both in conversation and letters. Having a high sense
of the dignity of his commission, he determined to support it, even at the
expense of his private fortune; the emoluments of office in both Provinces
being inadequate to the style in which he chose to live.

Whilst he was in England, and it was uncertain whether he would be appointed,
or Shute would return, Wentworth wrote letters of compliment to both. Belcher
knew nothing of the letter to Shute, till his arrival in America, and after he
had made a visit to New Hampshire, and had been entertained at the house of the
Lieutenant Governor. He was then informed, that Wentworth had written a letter
to Shute, of the same tenor as that to himself. This he deemed an act of
duplicity. How far it was so, cannot now be determined. The persuasion was so
strong in the mind of Belcher, that on his next visit to Portsmouth, he refused
an invitation to Wentworth's house. This was not the only way in which he
manifested his displeasure. When the affair of the salary came before the
Assembly, Aug. 31.
he not only refused to make such a compromise as Burnet had done; but obliged
the Lieutenant Governor under his hand, to 'quit all claim to any part of the
salary, and to acknowledge that he had no expectation from, or dependence on
the Assembly, for any allowance, but that he depended wholly on the Governor.'
The same salary was then voted, and in nearly the same words, as to his
predecessor. He allowed the Lieutenant Governor, the fees and perquisites only
which arose from registers, certificates, licenses and passes, amounting to
about fifty pounds sterling. Wentworth and his friends were disappointed and
disgusted. He himself did not long survive; being seized with a lethargic
disorder, Dec. 12.
he died within five months; ^
but his family connexions resented the affront, and drew a considerable party
into their views. Benning Wentworth, his son, and Theodore Atkinson, who had
married his daughter, were at the head of the opposition. The latter was
removed from his office of Collector of the Customs, to make room for Richard
Wibird; the Naval Office was taken from him and given to Ellis Husk; and the
office of High Sheriff, which he had held, was divided between him and Eleazer
Russell. Other alterations were made, which greatly offended the friends of the
late Lieutenant Governor; but Belcher, satisfied that his conduct was agreeable
to his commission and instructions, disregarded his opponents and apprehended
no danger from their resentment. Atkinson was a man of humor, and took occasion
to express his disgust in a singular manner. The Governor, who was fond of
parade, had ordered a troop of horse, to meet him on the road, and escort him
to Portsmouth. The officers of government met him, and joined the cavalcade.
Atkinson was tardy; but when he appeared, having broken the Sheriff's wand, he
held one half in his hand. Being chi^^ by the Governor for not appearing
sooner, he begged his Excellency to excuse him, because he had but half a horse
to ride. (...) nominations; compassionate and bountiful to the poor; courteous
and affable to all; having a constant regard to the duties of divine worship,
in private and public, and paying a due deference to all the sacred
institutions of Christ.

He had sixteen children, of whom fourteen yet survive him.

CHAP. XVI. DUNBAR'S Lieutenancy and enmity to BELCHER. Efforts to settle the
boundary lines. Divisions. Riot. Trade. Episcopal Church. Throat distemper.
MR. WENTWORTH was succeeded in the Lieutenancy by DAVID DUNBAR, 1731.
June 24.
Esquire. a native of Ireland and a reduced Colonel in the British service; who was
also deputed to be surveyor of the King's woods. This appointment was made by
the recommendation of the Board of Trade; of which Col. Bladen was an active
member, who bore no good will to Governor Belcher. Hutchinson II.224 379.
Dunbar had been commander of a fort at Pemaquid, which it was in contemplation
to annex to Nova Scotia. He had taken upon him to govern the few scattered
people in that district, with a degree of rigor to which they could not easily
submit. This conduct had already opened a controversy, between him and the
Province of Massachusetts; and it was very unfortunate for Belcher to have such
a person connected with both his governments. What were the merits, which
recommended Dunbar to these stations, it is not easy at this time to determine;
the only qualifications, which appear to have pleaded in his favor, were
poverty and the friendship of men in power. He was an instrument of intrigue
and disaffection; and he no sooner made his appearance in New Hampshire, than
he joined the party who were in opposition to the Governor. Belcher perceived
the advantage which his enemies would derive from this alliance, and made all
the efforts in his power to displace him. In his letters to the ministry, to
the Board of Trade, and to his friends in England, he continually represented
him in the worst light, Belcher's MS letters.
and solicited his removal. It is not improbable, that his numerous letters of
this kind, written in his usual style, with great freedom and without any
reserve, might confirm the suspicions, raised by the letters of his
adversaries, and induce the ministry to keep Dunbar in place, as a check upon
Belcher, and to preserve the balance of parties.

July 10.
Within a few weeks after Dunbar's coming to Portsmouth, a complaint was drawn
up against Belcher, and signed by fifteen persons; alleging that his government
was grievous, oppressive and arbitrary, and praying the King for his removal.
This roused the Governor's friends, at the head of whom was Richard Waldron,
the secretary, who drew up a counter address, MS copies of Addresses.
and procured an hundred names to be subscribed. Both addresses reached England
about the same time. Richard Partridge, Mr. Belcher's brother in law, in
conjunction with his son Jonathan Belcher, then a student in the Temple,
applied for a copy of the complaint against him, at the Plantation office, and
obtained it; Belcher's letters.
but could not get sight of the letters which accompanied it, though, on the
foundation of those letters, a representation had been made by the Board of
Trade, to the King.

The only effect which Dunbar's letters had at that time, was to procure the
appointment of Theodore Atkinson, Benning Wentworth and Joshua Pierce, to be
Counselors of New Hampshire; and though Belcher remonstrated to the Secretary
of State against these appointments, and recommended other persons in their
room, he could not prevail, any farther than to delay the admission of the two
former for about two years; during which time, they were elected into the House
of Representatives, and kept up the opposition there. The recommendations,
which he made of other persons, were duly attended to when vacancies happened;
and thus the Council was composed of his friends, and his enemies. The civil
officers, whom he appointed, were sometimes superseded, by persons recommended
and sent from England; and in one instance, a commission for the naval office,
in favor of a Mr. Reynolds, son of the Bishop of Lincoln, was filled up in
England, and sent over with orders for him to sign it; which he was obliged
punctually to obey.

From the confidential letters of the leading men on both sides, which have
fallen into my hands in the course of my researches, the views of each party
may plainly be seen; Belcher's Waldron^s Atkinson's and Thomlinson's letters MS.
though they endeavored to conceal them from each other. The Governor and his
friends had projected an union of New Hampshire with Massachusetts; but were at
a loss by what means to bring it into effect. The most desirable method would
have been, an unanimity in the people of New Hampshire, in petitioning the
Crown for it; but as this could not be had, the project was kept out of sight,
till some favorable opportunity should present.

The other party contemplated not only the continuance of a separate
government, but the appointment of a distinct Governor, who should reside in
the Province, and have no connection with Massachusetts. The greatest obstacle
in their way, was the smallness and poverty of the Province, which was not able
to support a gentleman in the character of Governor. To remove this obstacle,
it was necessary to have the limits of territory, not only fixed, but enlarged.
They were therefore zealous, in their attemps for this purpose; and had the
address to persuade a majority of the people, that they would be gainers by the
establishment of the lines; that the lands would be granted to them and their
children; and that the expense of obtaining the settlement would be so
trifling, that each man's share would not exceed the value of a pullet.

The Governor's friends were averse to pressing the settlement of the line; and
their reasons were these. The controversy is either between the King and the
subjects of his charter government of Massachusetts; or else, between the heirs
of Mason or Allen and the people of Massachusetts. If the controversy be
settled even in favor of New Hampshire, the lands which fall within the line,
will be either the King's property, to be granted by his Governor and Council
according to royal instructions; or else the property of the heirs of Mason or
Allen, to be disposed of by them. On both suppositions, the people of
New Hampshire can have no property in the lands, and therefore why should they
be zealous about the division or tax themselves to pay the expense of it?

The Governor, as obliged by his instructions, frequently urged the settlement
of the lines in his speeches, and declared, that the Assembly of New Hampshire
had done more toward effecting it, than that of Massachusetts. A committee from
both Provinces met at Newbury in the autumn of 1731, Sept. 21.
on this long contested affair; but the influence of that party in
Massachusetts, of which Elisha Cook was at the head, prevented an
accommodation. Soon after this fruitless conference, the Representatives of
New Hampshire, of whom a majority was in favor of settling the line, determined
no longer to treat with Massachusetts; but to represent the matter to the King,
and petition him to decide the controversy. Assembly Records.
Newman's commission, Oct. 7.
as agent, having expired, they chose for this purpose, John Rindge, merchant,
of Portsmouth, then bound on a voyage to London. The appointment of this
gentleman was fortunate for them, not only as he had large connexions in
England; but as he was capable of advancing money, to carry on the
solicitation. The Council, a majority of which was in the opposite interest,
did neither concur in the appointment, nor consent to the petition.

Mr. Rindge, on his arrival in England, petitioned the King in his own name,
1732.
and in behalf of the Representatives of New Hampshire, Feb. 28.
to establish the boundaries of the Province; but his private affairs requiring
his return to America, he did, agreeably to his instructions, leave the
business in the hands of Capt. John Thomlinson, merchant, of London; who was
well known in New Hampshire, where he had frequently been in quality of a sea
commander. He was a gentleman of great penetration, industry and address; and
having fully entered into the views of Belcher's opponents, prosecuted the
affair of the line, 'with ardor and diligence;' employing for his solicitor,
Ferdinando John Parris; who being well supplied with money, was indefatigable
in his attention. The petition was of course referred to the Lords of Trade,
and Francis Wilks the agent of Massachusetts, was served with a copy to be sent
to his constituents.

Whilst the matter of the line was pending on the other side of the Atlantic,
the parties in New Hampshire maintained their opposition; and were on all
occasions vilifying and abusing each other, especially in their letters to
their friends in England. On the one side, Belcher incessantly represented
Dunbar, as the fomenter of opposition; as false, perfidious, malicious and
revengeful; that he did no service to the crown, nor to himself; but was a
plague to the Governor and a deceiver of the people. He was also very liberal
in his reflections, on his other opposers. On the other side, they represented
him as unfriendly to the royal interest; as obstructing the settlement of the
lines; conniving at the destruction of the King's timber, and partial to his
other government, where all his interest lay; and that he had not even a
freehold in New Hampshire. As an instance of his partiality, they alleged, that
in almost every session of the Assembly of Massachusetts, he consented to
grants of the disputed lands, 1733.
to the people of that Province; by which means, their Assembly raised money,
to enable their agent to protract the controversy, that they might have
opportunity to lay out more townships; while at the same time, he rejected a
supply bill of the New Hampshire Assembly, and dissolved them, because that in
it, they had made an appropriation for their agent. The truth was, that the
Council did not consent to the bill, because they had no hand in appointing the
agent, and the bill never came before the Governor. The frequent dissolution of
Assemblies was another subject of complaint; and in fact this measure never
produced the desired effect; for the same persons were generally re-elected,
and no reconciling measures were adopted by either party.

The Governor frequently complained, in his speeches, 1734.
that the public debts were not paid; nor the fort, prison, and other public
buildings kept in repair; because of their failure in supplying the treasury.
The true reason of their not supplying it was, that they wanted emissions of
paper money, to be drawn in, at distant periods; to this the Governor could not
consent, being restrained by a royal instruction, as well as in principle
opposed to all such practices. But one emission of paper was made in his
administration; and for its redemption a fund was established in hemp, iron,
and other productions of the country. When a number of merchants and others had
combined to issue notes, to supply the place of a currency, he issued a
proclamation against them; and in his next speech to the Assembly, condemned
them in very severe terms. The Assembly endeavored to vindicate the character
of the bills, but in a few days he dissolved them, with a reprimand; charging
them with trifling, with injustice and hypocrisy. It must be remembered, that
his complaints of an empty treasury were not occasioned by any failure of his
own salary, which was regularly paid out of the excise.

Belcher revived the idea of his predecessor Shute, which was also countenanced
by his instructions, that he was virtually present in New Hampshire, when
personally absent, and attending his duty, in his other Province; and therefore
that the Lieutenant Governor could do nothing but by his orders. Dunbar had no
seat in the Council, and Shadrach Walton being senior member, by the Governor's
order summoned them and presided. He also held the command of the fort, by the
Governor's commission, granted passes for ships, and licenses for marriage; and
received and executed military orders, as occasion required. The Lieutenant
Governor contested this point; but could not prevail; and finding himself
reduced to a state of insignificance, he retired in disgust, to his fort at
Pemaquid; where he resided almost two years. The Governor's friends gave out
that he had absconded for debt, and affected to triumph over the opposition, as
poor and impotent; but their complaints, supported by their agent Thomlinson,
and the influence of Bladen at the Board of Trade, made an impression there
much to the disadvantage of Mr. Belcher; though he had friends among the
ministry and nobility; the principal of whom was Lord Townsend, by whose
influence he had obtained his commission.

After Dunbar's return to Portsmouth, the Governor thought it good policy to
relax his severity; and gave him the command of the fort, with the ordinary
perquisites of office, amounting to about fifty pounds sterling. Not content
with this, he complained, that the Governor did not allow him one third of his
salary. The Governor's salary was but six hundred pounds currency; he spent at
least one hundred, in every journey to New Hampshire, of which he made two in a
year. At the same time Dunbar had two hundred pounds sterling, as Surveyor
General of the woods; which, with the perquisites, amounting to one hundred
more, were divided between him and his deputies. But it must be remembered that
he was deeply in debt, both here and in England.

The rigid execution of the office of Surveyor General had always been attended
with difficulty; and the violent manner, in which Dunbar proceeded with
trespassers, raised a spirit of opposition on such occasions. The statutes for
the preservation of the woods empowered the surveyor to seize all logs, cut
from white pine trees, without license; and it rested on the claimant, to prove
his property, in the court of Admiralty. Dunbar went to the saw-mills; where he
seized and marked large quantities of lumber; and with an air and manner to
which he had been accustomed in his military capacity, abused and threatened
the people. That class of men, with whom he was disposed to contend, are not
easily intimidated with high words; and he was not a match for them, in that
species of controversy, which they have denominated swamp law. An instance of
this happened at Dover, whither he came, with his boat's crew, to remove a
parcel of boards, which he had seized. The owner, Paul Gerrish, warned him of
the consequence; Dunbar threatened with death the first man who should obstruct
his intentions; the same threat was returned to the first man who should remove
the boards. Dunbar's prudence at this time, got the better of his courage, and
he retired.

With the like spirit, an attempt of the same kind was frustrated at Exeter,
whither he sent a company in a boat to remove lumber. Whilst his men were
regaling themselves at a public house, in the evening, and boasting of what
they intended to do the next day; a number of persons, disguised like Indians,
attacked and beat them; whilst others cut the rigging and sails of the boat,
and made a hole in her bottom. The party not finding themselves safe in the
house, retreated to the boat, and pushed off; but being there in danger of
sinking, they with difficulty regained the shore, and hid themselves till
morning, when they returned on foot to Portsmouth.

This was deemed a flagrant insult. Dunbar summoned the Council, April 26.
and complained to them of the riotous proceedings at Exeter, where there was a
conspiracy against his life, by evil minded persons, who had hired Indians to
destroy him. He proposed to the Council, the issuing of a proclamation,
offering a reward to apprehend the rioters. The major part of the Council were
of opinion, that no proclamation could be issued but by the Governor. This was
also the Governor's opinion; and in his letters he frequently asserts that
Dunbar had no command in New Hampshire, whilst he was in either of his
governments. To be consistent, he should have maintained, that the Lieutenant
Governor of Massachusetts had no command whilst he was in New Hampshire; but
there occurs ^^ instance of a proclamation issued by Lieutenant Governor P^ip^,
(March 25, 1737) on occasion of a riot at Boston, whilst the Governor was in
New Hampshire; and at his return, he issued another, in which he refers to the
former, not only without censuring it, but i^ terms of approbation.
Information being sent to the Governor, he issued a proclamation; commanding
all magistrates to assist in discovering the rioters.

This transaction afforded matter for complaint, and a memorial was drawn up by
Thomlinson, grounded on letters which he had received. It was suggested, that
the Governor's pretense to favor the surveyor was deceitful; that the rioters
at Exeter were his greatest friends; that the Council, MS letters.
wholly devoted to him, would not advise to a proclamation till they had sent
to Boston; that the proclamation was delayed; and when it appeared offered no
reward; though Dunbar had proposed to pay the money himself; and, that by
reason of this delay and omission, the rioters escaped with impunity.

In justice to Mr. Belcher, it must be said, that there was no delay on his
part, the proclamation being sent from Boston within six days. It also appears,
from the secret and confidential letters of the Governor, that he disapproved
the riot, and even called it rebellion; that he gave particular orders to the
magistrates, to make inquiry, and take depositions, and do their utmost to
discover the rioters. If he did not advertise a reward, it was because there
was no money in the treasury; and if Dunbar had been sincere in his offer to
pay it, he might have promised it, by advertisement. The true reason that the
rioters were not discovered, was, that their plan was so artfully conducted,
their persons so effectually disguised, and their confidence in each other so
well placed, that no proof could be obtained; and the secret remained with
themselves, till the danger was over, and the government had passed into other
hands.

A law had been made, for holding the Inferior Court of Common Pleas,
alternately in each of the four old towns; and the practice had been continued
for several years, much to the convenience and satisfaction of the people; but
Dunbar remonstrated against it, to the Board of Trade, and moved for a
disallowance of the act, because the people who had obstructed him in his
office deserved not so much favor. The act was in consequence disallowed, and
the courts were afterward confined to Portsmouth. 1735.
The order for disallowance, came to the hands of Dunbar, who called a meeting
of the Council, that they might advise to its publication. A majority of them
would not consent, till the original order was sent to Boston, and Governor
Belcher directed the publication of it. This transaction served as matter of
fresh complaint, June 13.
and was alleged as an argument for the appointment of a Governor, who should
reside constantly in the Province.

To finish what relates to Dunbar. He was caressed by the party in opposition
to Belcher, under the idea that he had interest enough in England, to obtain a
commission for the government of New Hampshire. In 1737 he went to England to
prosecute his design; where, by his old creditors, he was arrested and thrown
into prison. Thomlinson found means to liberate him; but perceived that he had
neither steadiness nor ability for the station at which he aimed, Thomlinson's
letters, MS.
nor interest enough to obtain it; though, by his presence in England, he
served to keep up the opposition to Belcher, and was used as a tool for that
purpose, till the object was accomplished. After which he was (1743) appointed,
by the East India Company, Governor of St. Helena.

The trade of the Province at this time consisted chiefly in the exportation of
lumber and fish to Spain and Portugal, and the Caribbee Islands. The mast trade
was wholly confined to Great Britain. In the winter small vessels went to the
southern Colonies, Belcher's Letters to the Board of Trade. MS.
with English and West India goods, and returned with corn and pork. The
manufacture of iron within the Province, which had been set up by the late
Lieutenant Governor Wentworth, and other gentlemen, lay under discouragement,
for want of experienced and industrious workmen. The woollen manufacture was
diminished, and sheep were scarcer than formerly; the common lands on which
they used to feed, being fenced in by the proprietors. The manufacture of linen
was much increased by means of the emigrants from Ireland, who were skilled in
that business. No improvements were made in agriculture, and the newly granted
townships were not cultivated with spirit or success.

There had not been any settled Episcopal Church in the Province from the
beginning, till about the year 1732; when some gentlemen who were fond of the
mode of divine worship, in the Church of England, contributed to the erection
of a neat building on a commanding eminence, in Portsmouth, which they called
the Queen's Chapel. Mr. Thomlinson was greatly instrumental of procuring them
assistance in England, toward completing and furnishing it. It was consecrated
in 1734; and in 1736 they obtained Mr. Arthur Brown for their minister, with a
salary from the society for propagating the gospel in foreign parts.

About this time, the country was visited with a new epidemic disease, which
has obtained the name of the throat distemper. The general description of it is
a swelled throat, with white or ash-colored specks, an efflorescence on the
skin, great debility of the whole system, and a strong tendency to putridity.
Its first appearance was in May 1735, at Kingston in New Hampshire, Douglass's
practical history of a new miliary fever.
an inland town, situate on a low plain. The first person seized, was a child,
who died in three days. About a week after, Fitch's Narrative.
in another family, at the distance of four miles, three children were
successively attacked, who also died on the third day. It continued spreading
gradually, in that township, through the summer, and of the first forty who had
it, none recovered. In August it began to make its appearance at Exeter, six
miles northeastward; and in September, at Boston, On its first appearance in
Boston, it was supposed to be nothing more than a common cold; but when the
report of the mortality in New Hampshire was received, and a young man from
Exeter, whose brother had died of it, was seized (October 1735) the house was
shut and guarded, and a general alarm spread through the neighboring towns and
colonies. Upon his death, no infection was observed in that house or
neighborhood; but the distemper appeared in other places, which had no
communication with the sick. The physicians did not take the infection, nor
convey it to their families, nor their other patients. It was therefore
concluded, that it was not like the small pox, or the plague, communicable by
infection, from the sick or from clothes; and the physicians, having by desire
of the selectmen, held a consultation, published their opinion; that it
proceeded entirely from 'some occult quality in the air.'

Weekly News Letter, April 29, 1736. Dr. Douglass computes the number of
persons who had the distemper in Boston at 4000; of whom 114 died, which is one
in 35. The whole number of inhabitants at that time was estimated at 16,000.


fifty miles southward, though it was October, before it reached Chester, the
nearest settlement on the west of Kingston. It continued its ravages through
the succeeding winter and spring, and did not disappear till the end of the
next summer.

The most, who died of this pestilence, were children; and the distress, which
it occasioned, was heightened to the most poignant degree. From three to six
children were lost out of some families; several buried four in a day, and many
lost their all. In some towns, one in three, and in others one in four of the
sick were carried off. In the parish of Hampton-Falls it raged most violently.
Twenty families buried all their children. Twenty seven persons were lost out
of five families; and more than one sixth part of the inhabitants of that place
died within thirteen months. In the whole Province, not less than one thousand
persons, of whom above nine hundred were under twenty years of age, fell
victims to this raging distemper.

Since the settlement of this country such a mortality had not been known. It
was observed, that the distemper proved most fatal, when plentiful evacuations,
particularly bleeding, were used; a great prostration of strength being an
invariable symptom. The summer of 1735, when the sickness began, was unusually
wet and cold, and the easterly wind greatly prevailed. But it was acknowledged
to be, not a creature of the seasons; as it raged through every part of the
year. Its extent is said to have been 'from Pemaquid to Carolina;' but with
what virulence it raged, or in what measure it proved fatal, to the southward
of New England, does not appear.

The same distemper has made its appearance at various times since. In 1754 and
1755, it produced a great mortality in several parts of New Hampshire, and the
neighboring parts of Massachusetts. Since that time it has either put on a
milder form, or physicians have become better acquainted with it. The last time
of its general spreading was in 1784, 5, 6 and 7. It was first seen at Sanford
in the county of York; and thence diffused itself, very slowly, through most of
the towns of New England; but its virulence, and the mortality which it caused,
were comparatively inconsiderable. Its remote, Dr. Hall Jackson's Observations,
1786
or predisposing cause, is one of those mysteries in nature, which baffle human
inquiry.

The following TABLE, drawn from an account published by Mr. FITCH, minister of
Portsmouth, July 26, 1736, is a BILL of MORTALITY for 14 months preceding.
TOWNS. Under 10. Between 10 and 20. Above 20. Abo. 30. Abo. 40 Abo. 90. Total.
Portsmouth 81 15 1 2 99 Dover 77 8 3 88 Hampton 37 8 8 1 1 55 Hampton-Falls 1^0
40 9 1 ^10 Exeter 105 18 4 127 New Castle 11 11 Gosport 34 2 1 37 Rye 34 10 44
Greenland 13 2 3 18 Newington 1^ 5 21 Newmarket 20 1 1 22 Stretham 18 18
Kingston 96 15 1 1 113 Durham 79 15 6 100 Chester 21 21 802 139 35 4 3 1 98^



After this account was taken 'several other children died of the throat
distemper. In the town of Hampton 13 more within the year 1736. So that the
whole number must have exceeded a thousand. In the town of Kittery, in the
County of York, died 122.

It appears also, from the church records of Hampton that from January 1754, to
July 1755, fifty-one persons died of the same distemper, in that town.

CHAP. XVII. State of parties. Controversy about lines. Commissioners
appointed. Their session and result. Appeals. Complaints.
WE have now come to that part of the History of New Hampshire, in which may be
seen, operating in a smaller sphere, the same spirit of intrigue which has
frequently influenced the conduct of princes, and determined the fate of
nations. Whilst on the one hand, we see Massachusetts stiffly asserting her
chartered claims; and looking with contempt, on the small Province of
New Hampshire, over which she had formerly exercised jurisdiction; we shall
see, on the other hand, New Hampshire aiming at an equal rank, and contending
with her for a large portion of territory; not depending solely on argument;
but seeking her refuge in the royal favor, and making interest with the
servants of the Crown. Had the controversy been decided by a court of law, the
claims of Massachusetts would have had as much weight, as those of an
individual, in a case of private property; but the question being concerning a
line of jurisdiction, it was natural to expect a decision, agreeable to the
rules of policy and convenience; especially where the tribunal itself was a
party concerned.

It must be observed, that the party in New Hampshire, who were so earnestly
engaged in the establishment of the boundary lines, had another object in view,
to which this was subordinate. Their avowed intention was to finish a long
controversy, which had proved a source of inconvenience to the people who
resided on the disputed lands, or those who sought an interest in them; but
their secret design was to displace Belcher, and obtain a Governor who should
have no connection with Massachusetts. To accomplish the principal, it was
necessary that the subordinate object should be vigorosly pursued. The
Government of New Hampshire, with a salary of six hundred pounds, and
perquisites amounting to two hundred pounds more, equal in the whole to about
eight hundred dollars per annum, was thought to be not worthy the attention of
any gentleman; but if the lines could be extended on both sides, there would be
at once an increase of territory, and a prospect of speculating in landed
property; and in future there would be an increase of cultivation, and
consequently of ability to support a Governor.

The people were told that the lands would be granted to them; and by this bait
they were induced to favor the plan; whilst the ministry in England, were
flattered with the idea, of an increase of crown influence in the plantations.

The leading men in Massachusetts were aware of the views of those in
New Hampshire, and determined to guard against them. They presumed, that a line
of jurisdiction would not affect property; and therefore endeavored to secure
the lands to themselves, by possession and improvement, as far as it was
practicable. The same idea prevailed among the Governor's friends in
New Hampshire. They perceived, that a tract of wilderness on the north eastern
side of Merrimack River, and the ponds which flow into it, must doubtless fall
into New Hampshire. For these lands they petitioned the Governor, and a charter
was prepared, in which this whole tract, called King's-Wood, was granted to
them. It contained all the lands not before granted, between the bounds of
New Hampshire on the south-west and north-east; which, according to the ideas
of those concerned, would have been sufficient for about four large townships.

Governor Belcher had a difficult part to act. He was at the head of two rival
Provinces; he had friends in both, who were seeking their own as well as the
public interest: He had enemies in both, who were watching him, eager to lay
hold on the most trivial mistake, and magnify it to his disadvantage. His own
interest was to preserve his commission, and counteract the machinations of his
enemies; but as the settlement of the line, and the removing of him from his
office, were carried on at the same time, and by the same persons, it was
difficult for him to oppose the latter, without seeming to oppose the former.
Besides, Mr. Wilks, the agent of Massachusetts, was well known to be his
friend; and when it was found necessary to increase the number, one of them was
his brother, Mr. Partridge. On the other hand, Mr. Rindge and Mr. Thomlinson
were his avowed enemies. There was also a difference in the mode of appointing
these agents. Those of Massachusetts were constituted by the Council and
Representatives, with the Governor's consent. Those of New Hampshire were
chosen by the Representatives only, the Council nonconcurring in the choice;
which, of course, could not be sanctioned by the Governor's signature, nor by
the seal of the Province.

When the petition which Rindge presented to the King, 1732.
had been referred to the Board of Trade, and a copy of it given to Wilks, to
be sent to his constituents, it became necessary that they should instruct him.
Their instructions were designedly expressed in such ambiguous terms,
Hutchinson II, 385. Wilks's petitions and report of Board of Trade MS.
that he was left to guess their meaning, and afterward blamed for not
observing their directions. His embarrassment on this occasion, expressed in
his petition and counter petition, to the Board of Trade, protracted the
business, and gave it a complexion, unfavorable to his constituents, but
extremely favorable to the design of New Hampshire.

To bring forward the controversy, 1733.
Parris, the solicitor for the agents of New Hampshire, moved a question,
Printed brief. MS report.
From what part of Merrimack river the line should begin? The Board of Trade
referred this question, to the Attorney and Solicitor General, who appointed a
day to hear council on both sides. The council for New Hampshire insisted, that
the line ought to begin three miles north of the mouth of the Merrimack. The
council for Massachusetts declared, that in their opinion, the solution of this
question would not determine the controversy, and therefore declined saying any
thing upon it. The attorney and solicitor reported, that whether this were so
or not, 1734.
they could not judge; but as the question had been referred to them, Jan. 5.
they were of opinion, that according to the charter of William and Mary, the
dividing line ough^ to be taken, from three miles north of the mouth of
Merrimack, where it run into the sea. Copies of this opinion were given to each
party; and the Lords of Trade reported, 1735.
that the King should appoint Commissioners, from the neighboring Provinces,
June 5.
to mark out the dividing line. This report was approved by the Lords of
Council.

Much time was spent in references, messages and petitions, concerning the
adjustment of various matters; 1737.
and at length, Feb. 4 and 9.
the principal heads of the commission were determined. The first was, that the
commissioners should be appointed, from among the Counselors of New York,
New Jersey, Rhode Island and Nova Scotia. These were all royal governments,
except Rhode Island; and with that Colony, as well as New York, Massachusetts
had a controversy, respecting boundaries. Connecticut, though proposed, was
designedly omitted, because it was imagined that they would be partial to
Massachusetts, from the similarity of their habits and interests. The other
points were, that twenty commissioners should be nominated, of whom five were
to be a quorum; that they should meet at Hampton, in New Hampshire, on the
first of August, Printed brief.
1737; that each Province should send to the Commissioners, at their first
meeting, the names of two public officers, on whom any notice, summons, or
final judgment might be served; and at the same time should exhibit, in
writing, a plain and full state of their respective claims, copies of which
should be mutually exchanged; and that if either Province should neglect to
send in the names of their officers, or the full state of their demands, at the
time appointed, then the Commissioners should proceed ex part. That when the
Commissioners should have made and signed their final determination, they
should send copies to the public officers, of each Province; and then should
adjourn for six weeks, that either party might enter their appeal.

These points being determined; the Board of Trade wrote letters to Belcher,
Feb. 18.
enclosing the heads of the proposed commission, and directing him to recommend
to the Assemblies of each Province, to choose their public officers, and
prepare their demands, by the time when the Commissioners were to meet. These
were accompanied with letters to the Governors of the several Provinces, from
which the Commissioners were elected, informing them of their appointment. The
letters were delivered to Parris, and by him to Thomlinson, Original letters of
Parris.
to be sent by the first ship to America. Those to Massachusetts and
New Hampshire, were directed, the one to Mr. Belcher, by name, as Governor of
Massachusetts; the other, to the commander in chief, resident in New Hampshire;
and it was required that the delivery of the letters should be certified by
affidavit. The design of this singular injunction was, that Dunbar, if present,
should receive the letter, and call the Assembly of New Hampshire immediately;
and that if Belcher should forbid or hinder it, the blame of the neglect should
fall on him. At the same time another letter, respecting a petition of a
borderer on the line, and containing a reprimand to Belcher, was sent in the
same manner, to be delivered by Dunbar, into Belcher's hands. These intended
affronts, both failed of their effect; Dunbar having, before the arrival of the
letters, taken his passage to England.

The anxiety of Thomlinson, to have the earliest notice possible, of the
intended commission sent to New Hampshire, led him not only to forward the
public letters; but to send copies of all the transactions, to his friends
there. Feb. 15.
In a letter to Wiggen and Rindge (the committee who corresponded with him) he
advised them, to make the necessary preparations, Original MS letter.
as soon as possible, to act in conformity to the commission and instructions;
and even went so far as to nominate the persons, whom they should appoint, to
manage their cause before the Commissioners.

These papers were communicated to the Assembly, at their session in March;
March 18.
and at the same time the Governor laid before them, a copy of the report of
the Board of Trade, in favor of a commission, which had been made in the
preceding December. In consequence of which, April 1.
the Assembly appointed a committee of eight Shadrach Walton, Of the Council.
George Jaffrey, Of the Council. Jo^ham O^iorne, Of the Council. Theodore
Atkinson. Of the Council. Andrew Wiggin, Of the House. John Rindge, Of the
House. Thomas Packer, Of the House. James Jaffrey. Of the House.

who were empowered to prepare witnesses, pleas and allegations, papers and
records, to be laid before the Commissioners; Assembly Records and printed
brief.
to provide for their reception and entertainment, and to draw upon the
Treasurer for such supplies of money as might be needful. This appointment was
made by the united voice of the Council and Representatives, and consented to
by the Governor; and though it was made, three weeks before the reception of
the letters, from the Lords of Trade, directing the appointing of public
officers, and preparing a statement of claims; yet it was understood to be a
full compliance with the orders and expectations of the government in England.

The same day on which this order passed, the Governor prorogued the Assembly
to the sixth of July; and on the twentieth of June he prorogued it again, to
the fourth of August.

The letters respecting the commission, were delivered to Mr. Belcher, on the
twenty-second of April; and he acknowledged the receipt of them, in a letter to
the Board of Trade, on the tenth of May. The commission itself was issued on
the ninth of April, and sent to Mr. Rindge; who kept it till the meeting of the
Commissioners, and then delivered it to them. The expense of it, amounting to
one hundred and thirty-five pounds sterling, was paid by the agents of
New Hampshire.

At the spring session of the General Court in Massachusetts; May 27.
Journal of Assembly.
the Governor laid before them the letter from the Lords of Trade, enclosing an
order from the Privy Council, and recommended to them to stop all processes in
law, respecting any disputes of the borderers, till the boundaries should be
determined. During the same session, he reminded them of the order, and desired
them to consider it; July 4.
telling them that he had no advice of the appointment of Commissioners. His
meaning was, that the commission itself, in which they were named, had not been
sent to him; nor was he actually informed that it was in America, till after he
had prorogued the Assemblies of both Provinces to the fourth of August. In
obedience to the royal order, the Assembly of Massachusetts appointed Josiah
Willard, Secretary, and Edward Winslow, July 5.
Sheriff of Suffolk, to be the two public officers; on whom, or at whose place
of abode, any notice, summons, or other process of the Commissioners, might be
served.

On the day appointed eight of the Commissioners met at Hampton. William Skene,
Presi. From Nova Scotia. Erasmus James Phillips, From Nova Scotia. Otho
Hamilton. From Nova Scotia. Samuel Vernon, From Rhode Island. John Gardner,
From Rhode Island. John Potter, From Rhode Island. Ezekiel Warner, From
Rhode Island. George Cornel. From Rhode Island.

They published their commission, August 1.
opened their court, chose William Parker their clerk, and George Mitchel
surveyor. On the same day, MS original minutes by Dr. Parker.
the Committee of eight, who had been appointed by the Assembly of
New Hampshire, in April, appeared; and delivered a paper to the court, reciting
the order of the King, for the appointment of two public officers; alleging
that the Assembly had not been convened since the arrival of that order; but,
that there should be no failure for want of such officers, they appointed
Richard Waldron, Secretary, and Eleazer Russell, Sheriff. They also delivered
the claim and demand of New Hampshire, in the following words. That the
southern boundary of said Province should begin at the end of three miles north
from the middle of the channel of Merrimack river, where it runs into the
Atlantic Ocean; MS Minutes, and Massachusetts Journal, p. 34.
and from thence should run, on a straight line, west, up into the main land
(toward the south sea) until it meets his Majesty's other governments. And that
the northern boundary of New Hampshire should begin at the entrance of
Piscataqua harbor, and so pass up the same, into the river of Newichwanock,
and through the same, into the farthest head thereof; and from thence
northwestward, (that is, north, less than a quarter of a point, westwardly) as
far as the British dominion extends; and also the western half of the Isles of
Shoals, we say, lies within the Province of New Hampshire.

The same day, Thomas Berry and Benjamin Lynde, Counselors of Massachusetts,
appeared and delivered the vote of their Assembly, appointing two public
officers, with a letter from the Secretary, by order of the Governor,
purporting, that at the last rising of the Assembly there was no account that
any commission had arrived; that the Assembly stood prorogued to the fourth of
August; that a committee had been appointed, to draw up a state of their
demands, which would be reported at the next session, and therefore praying
that this short delay might not operate to their disadvantage. Upon this, the
committee of New Hampshire drew up and presented another paper, August 2.
charging the government of Massachusetts with great backwardness, and aversion
to any measures, which had a tendency to the settlement of this long subsisting
controversy; and also charging their agent, in England, with having used all
imaginable artifices, MS Minutes.
to delay the issue; for which reason, the agent of New Hampshire had
petitioned the King, to give directions, that each party might be fully
prepared, to give in a state of their demands, at the first meeting of the
Commissioners; which direction they had faithfully observed, to the utmost of
their power; and as the Assembly of Massachusetts had made no seasonable
preparation, they did, in behalf of New Hampshire, except and protest against
any claim or evidence being received from them, and pray the court to proceed
ex part, agreeably to the commission.

It was alleged in favor of Massachusetts, that by the first meeting of the
Commissioners could not be meant the first day, but the first session. The
court understood the word in this sense, and resolved, that Massachusetts
should be allowed time, till the eighth of August, and no longer, to bring in
their claims; and that if they should fail, the court would proceed ex part.
The Court then adjourned to the eighth day.

The Assembly of New Hampshire met on the fourth; and the Secretary, August 4.
by the Governor's order, prorogued them to the tenth, then to meet at
Hampton-Falls. On the same day, Massachusetts Assembly Records.
the Assembly of Massachusetts met at Boston; and after they had received the
report of the committee, who had drawn up their claim, and dispatched expresses
to New York and New Jersey, to expedite the other Commissioners; and appointed
a committee to support their claims; This committee consisted of Edmund Quincy,
William Dudley, Samuel Wells, Thomas Berry, and Benjamin Lynde, of the
Council; and ELISHA COOK, Thomas Cushing, Job Almy, Henry Rolfe, and Nathaniel
Peas^ee, of the House. Cook died while the Commissioners were sitting. He had
been employed on the same affair at Newbury in 1731, and it was by his means
that the business was then obstructed. In reference to this, Belcher, in a
private letter says, 'Generations to come will rise up and call him CURSED.' On
account of Cooke's death, and the absence of another member, they appointed
John Read and Robert Auchmuty. August 1^.
the Governor adjourned them, to the tenth day, then to meet at Salisbury. Thus
the Assemblies of both Provinces were drawn within five miles of each other;
and the Governor declared, in his speech, that he would act as a common father
to both.

The claim of Massachusetts being prepared, was delivered to the Court, August
8.
on the day appointed. After reciting their grant and charters, and the
judicial determination in 1677, they asserted their claim and demand, Journal,
page 6.
still to hold and possess, by a boundary line, on the southerly side of
New Hampshire, beginning at the sea, three English miles north from the Black
Rocks, so called, at the mouth of the river Merrimack, as it emptied itself
into the sea sixty years ago; thence running parallel with the river, as far
northward as the crotch or parting of the river; thence due north, as far as a
certain tree, commonly known for more than seventy years past, by the name of
Endicot's tree; standing three miles northward of said crotch or parting of
Merrimack river; and thence, due west to the South Sea; which (they said) they
were able to prove, by ancient and incontestible evidence, were the bounds
intended, granted and adjudged to them; and they insisted on the grant and
settlement as above said, to be conclusive and irrefragable.

On the northerly side of New Hampshire, they claimed a boundary line,
beginning at the entrance of Piscataqua harbor; passing up the same, to the
river Newichwanock; through that to the farthest head thereof, and from thence
a due north west line, till one hundred and twenty miles from the mouth of
Piscataqua harbor be finished.

The Court ordered copies of the claims of each Province, to be drawn and
exchanged; and having appointed Benjamin Rolfe of Boston, an additional Clerk,
they adjourned to the tenth day of the month.

On that day both Assemblies met at the appointed places. Aug. 10.
A cavalcade was formed from Boston to Salisbury, and the Governor rode in
state, attended by a troop of horse. This procession occasioned the following
pasquinade, in an assumed Hibernian style.

'Dear Paddy, you never did behold such a sight,
At yesterday morning was seen before night.
You in all your born days saw, nor I didn't neither,
So many fine horses and men ride together.
At the head, the lower house trotted two in a row,
Then all the higher house pranc'd after the low;
Then the Governor's coach galloped on like the wind,
And the last that came foremost were troopers behin^*
But I fear it means no good, to your neck nor mine;
For they say it is to fix a right place for the line.'
Collection of Poems, p. 54.
He was met at Newbury ferry by another troop; who, joined by three more at the
supposed divisional line, conducted him to the George Tavern, at Hampton-Falls;
where he held a Council and made a speech to the Assembly of New Hampshire.
Whilst both Assemblies were in session; the Governor, with a select company,
made an excursion, of three days, to the falls of Amuskeag; an account of which
was published in the papers, and concluded in the following manner: His
Excellency was much pleased with the fine soil of Chester, Boston Week^y News
Letter, Aug. 25.
the extraordinary improvements at Derry, and the mighty falls at Skeag.

In the speech, which the Governor made to the Assembly of New Hampshire, he
recommended to them to appoint two officers, agreeably to his Majesty's
commission. The Assembly appeared to be much surprised at this speech; and in
their answer, said, that the committe^ before appointed had already given in
the names of two officers, Assembly Journal an^ ^^^nted brief.
which they approved of; for had it not been done, at the first meeting of the
Commissioners, they might have proceeded ex part.

Considering the temper and views of Mr. Belcher's opponents, this was rather
unfortunate for him, so soon after his profession of being 'a common father to
both Provinces.' For if the committee had a right to nominate the two officers,
then his recommendation was needless; if they had not, it might justly be
asked, why did he not call the Assemb^y together, on the sixth of July, to
which day they had been prorogued? The excuse was, that he did it, to avoid any
objection, which might be made to the regularity of their appointment; and to
give them an opportunity to ratify and confirm it. The truth was, that Mr.
Belcher highly resented the conduct of the committee of New Hampshire, who
concealed the commission, and never communicated it to him in form. Had he been
aware of the use, which his enemies might make, of his rigid adherence to
forms, when he could not but know the contents of the commission, and the time
when it must be executed, prudence might have dictated a more flexible conduct.
They did not fail, to make the utmost advantage of his mistakes, to serve the
main cause which they had in view.

The expresses which were sent by Massachusetts, to call the other
Commissioners, had no other effect than to add to the number, Philip
Livingstone, from New York; who, being senior in nomination, presided in the
Court.

To prevent the delay, which would unavoidably attend the taking of plans from
actual surveys; the Commissioners recommended, to both Assemblies, to agree
upon a plan, by which the pretensions of each Province should be understood;
but as this could not be done, a plan drawn by Mitchel was accepted, and when
their result was made this plan was annexed to it. They then proceeded to hear
the answers, which each party made, to the demands of the other, and to examine
witnesses on both sides. Neither party was willing to admit the evidence,
produced by the other, and mutual exceptions and protests were entered. The
points in debate were, whether Merrimack river, at that time, emptied itself
into the sea, at the same place where it did sixty years before? Whether it
bore the same name, from the sea, up to the crotch? and whether it were
possible to draw a parallel line, three miles northward, of every part of a
river; the course of which was, in same places, from north to south?

With respect to the boundary line, between New Hampshire and Maine; the
controverted points were, whether it should run up the middle of the river, or
on its north-eastern shore; and whether the line, from the head of the river,
should be due north-west, or only a few degrees westward of north.

The grand point on which the whole controversy respecting the southern line
turned, was, whether the charter of William and Mary granted to Massachusetts,
all the lands which were granted, by the charter of Charles the first? On this
question, the Commissioners did not come to any conclusion. Reasons of policy
might have some weight, to render them indecisive; but, whether it were really
so or not, they made and pronounced their result in the following words. Sept 2.
In pursuance of his Majesty's commission, MS Copy.
the Court took under consideration, the evidences, pleas, and allegations
offered and made by each party; Journal of Massachusetts Assembly, p. 35.
and upon mature advisement on the whole, a doubt arose in point of law; and
the Court thereupon came to the following resolution. That if the charter of
King William and Queen Mary, grants to the Province of Massachusetts Bay, all
the lands granted by the charter of King Charles the first, lying to the
northward of Merrimack river; then the Court adjudge and determine, that a line
shall run, parallel with the said river, at the distance of three English
miles, north from the mouth of the said river, beginning at the southerly side
of the Black Rocks, so called, at low water mark) and from thence to run to the
crotch, where the rivers of Pemigewasset and Winipiseogee meet; and from thence
due north three miles, and from thence due west, toward the south sea, until it
meet^ with his Majesty's other governments; which shall be the boundary or
dividing line, between the said Provinces of Massachusetts and New Hampshire,
on that side. But, if otherwise, then the Court adjudge and determine, that a
line on the southerly side of New Hampshire, beginning at the distance of three
miles north, from the southerly side of the Black Rocks aforesaid, at low water
mark, and from thence running due west, up into the main land, toward the south
sea, until it meets with his Majesty's other governments, shall be the boundary
line between the said Provinces, on the side aforesaid: Which point in doubt,
the Court humbly submit, to the wise consideration of his most sacred Majesty,
in his Privy Council; to be determined according to his royal will and pleasure.

As to the northern boundary, between the said Provinces, the Court resolve and
determine; that the dividing line shall pass up through the mouth of Piscataqua
harbor, and up the middle of the river of Newichwanock, (part of which is now
called Salmon-Falls) and through the middle of the same, to the farthest head
thereof, and from thence north, two degrees westerly, until one hundred and
twenty miles be finished, from the mouth of Piscataqua harbor aforesaid; or
until it meets with his Majesty's other governments. And, that the dividing
line shall part the Isles of Shoals, and run through the middle of the harbor,
between the islands, to the sea, on the southerly side; and that the
southwesterly part of said islands shall lie in, and be accounted part of, the
Province of New Hampshire; and that the north-easterly part thereof shall lie
in, and be accounted part of, the Province of Massachusetts Bay; and be held
and enjoyed by the said Provinces respectively, in the same manner as they now
do, and have heretofore held and enjoyed the same.

And the Court do further adjudge, that the cost and charge arising by taking
out the Commission, and also of the Commissioners and their officers, viz. the
two Clerks, Surveyor and Waiter, for their traveling expenses, and attendance
in the execution of the same, be equally borne by the said Provinces.

Thus this long depending question, after all the time, expense and argument,
which it had occasioned, remained undecided.

When this evasive decree was published, the Commissioners adjourned, to the
fourteenth of October, to receive appeals; and the same day, the Governor, at
the request of the Council only, adjourned the Assembly of New Hampshire to the
twelfth of October. By this sudden adjournment, it was impossible for them to
obtain a copy of the decree, before their dispersion, or to frame an appeal,
till two days before the time, when it must have been presented. The Assembly
of Massachusetts continued their session, at Salisbury, five days longer. On
the fifth of September, they obtained copies of the royal Commission, and the
decree of the Commissioners, which they entered on their journal. On the sixth,
they agreed upon an appeal; and on the seventh, at the united request of both
Houses, the Governor adjourned them to the 12th of October.

The sudden adjournment of the Assembly of New Hampshire, when that of
Massachusetts continued their session, was unfortunate for Governor Belcher;
and gave his opponents another advantage, to pursue their grand design against
him. The reasons assigned for it were, that the report of the Commissioners
being special, Printed brief.
the whole matter would of course come before the King, without any appeal from
either Province. For this reason, a majority of the Council were against an
appeal. That as the committee, appointed in April, had the same power to act in
the recess, as in the session of the Assembly; and, as the Council were against
appealing; so the appeal could not be made, by the whole Assembly, and
therefore the Governor thought, that the best service which he could do to the
Province, was to adjourn the Assembly, and leave the whole business in the
hands of the committee. With respect to the short time, between the 12th and
14th of October, it was observed, that the claim of New Hampshire was contained
in a few lines, and their exceptions to the judgment of the Commissioners might
be prepared in a quarter of an hour.

Both Assemblies met again, in the same places, at the appointed time. Oct. 12.
The Representatives of New Hampshire having, by the help of their committee,
in the recess of the Assembly, obtained the papers, framed their exceptions and
sent a message, to know if the Council were sitting; but the Council, being
determined against an appeal, had met and adjourned, without doing any
business. The House therefore was reduced to the necessity of desiring the
Commissioners to receive their appeal, without the concurrence of the Governor
and Council. The appeal, from the Assembly of Massachusetts, was presented in
due form, authenticated by the Speaker, Secretary and Governor. Their committee
entered a protest against the appeal of New Hampshire, because it was not an
act of the whole Legislature; nevertheless, the Commissioners received it, and
entered it on their minutes. Having received these appeals, the Commissioners
adjourned their Court to the first of August in the next year, but they never
met again.

The Assembly of Massachusetts appointed Edmund Quincy and Richard Partridge
Agents, Massachusetts Journal of Assembly.
to join with Francis Wilks, their former agent, in the prosecution of their
appeal before the King; and raised the sum of two thousand pounds sterling, to
defray the expense.

When the Representatives of New Hampshire proposed the raising of money, to
prosecute their appeal, the Council non-concurred the vote. Printed brief.
Their reasons were, that the appeal was not an act of the Council; that they
had no voice in the appointment of the agent; and, that at the beginning of the
affair, the House had declared to the Council, that the expense of it would be
defrayed by private subscription.

At this session of the Massachusetts Assembly, Mr. Belcher put them in mind
that he had suffered in his interest, by the continually sinking value of their
bills of credit, in which his salary was paid; a point which he had, often
before, Hutch. II, 390.
urged them to consider. In answer to this message, they made him a grant of L
333, 6, 8, Journal,
in bills of the new tenor. The same day, Oct. 19.
they made a grant of the like sum, to the President of Harvard College. Both
these sums appear to have been justly due; and at any other time, no exception
could have been made to either. But, because the grant to the Governor happened
to be made, at the same time with the grant of L 2000 sterling to the agents,
his opponents pretended, that he received it as a bribe, from the Assembly of
Massachusetts, for favoring their cause.

The appeal of New Hampshire, from the judgment of the Commissioners, MSS.
was founded on the following reasons. With respect to the southerly line;
because it made the Black Rocks, lying in a bay of Merrimack river, the point
from which the three miles were to be measured; which point was three quarters
of a mile north of the river's mouth; and, because a line, parallel with the
river, was not only impracticable, but founded on the old charter, which had
been vacated; and, if practicable, yet ought not to go farther than the river
held a westerly course. With respect to the northern boundary, they objected to
that part of the judgment only, which directed the line to run up the middle of
the river; alleging that the grant to Gorges was only of land, between that
river and Kenebec; and that New Hampshire had always been in possession of the
whole river, and had maintained a fortress which commanded its entrance.

The appeal of Massachusetts was grounded on the following reasons. That by the
charter of William and Mary, the old Colony of Massachusetts was
re-incorporated without any exception; that this charter empowered the Governor
and General Assembly to grant all lands, comprehended in the old Colony; that
the committee of New Hampshire acknowledged, that New Hampshire lay without the
late Colony of Massachusetts, by declaring that it was between that and the
Province of Maine; that the west line, claimed by New Hampshire, would cross
Merrimack river, thirty miles from its mouth, and exclude forty miles of said
river out of Massachusetts, though declared, by both charters, to be in it.
They objected to extending the line of New Hampshire till it should meet with
his Majesty's other governments; because according to Mason's grant,
New Hampshire could extend no farther than sixty miles from the sea. With
respect to the northern boundary, they objected to a line north, two degrees
westwardly, alleging that it ought to be on the northwest point; they also
excepted to the protraction of this line, till it should meet with his
Majesty's other governments; alleging that it ought to extend no farther than
one hundred and twenty miles, the fixed limits of the Province of Maine.

It was unfortunate for Massachusetts that their committee had brought Mason's
grant, in evidence to the Commissioners, and again recited it in their appeal;
for a line of sixty miles from the sea would cross Merrimack river, long before
the similar curve line, for which they contended, could be completed. Besides,
Mason's grant extended to Naumkeag; which was much further southward, than they
would have been willing to admit.

It may seem curious and unaccountable to most readers, that the Commissioners
should determine the northern, or rather eastern bounds of the northern part of
New Hampshire, to be a line drawn north, two degrees westerly, from the head of
Salmon-fall River; when the express words of Gorges' patent are 'north
westward.' The agents for Massachusetts, when this claim was put in by
New Hampshire, Hutchinson II, 389.
could hardly think it was seriously meant, when it was alleged that by
northwestward must be understood, north a little westward. MS minutes of the
Commissioners.
The only ostensible reason, given for this construction was, that if a
northwest line had been intended, then a southeast line, drawn from the mouth
of the harbor, would leave all the Isles of Shoals in New Hampshire; whereas,
the dividing line runs between them. On the other side, it might have been
said, with equal propriety, that a line drawn south, two degrees east, from the
mouth of the harbor, would leave all these islands in Massachusetts. For the
point where the islands are divided bears south, twentynine degrees east,
Observed 1781.
from the middle of the harbour's mouth; the variation of the needle being six
degrees west.

When this affair was again agitated in England, the agents of Massachusetts
obtained a certificate from the learned Dr. Halley, that a line northwestward
ought to run forty-five degrees westward of the north point. This was
demonstratively true; but there were political reasons for dissenting from
mathematical demonstration. One of them is thus expressed, in a private letter,
from a committee of the Assembly, to their agent Thomlinson. We hope that the
northern line will be but a few degrees, to the westward of north, that his
Majesty's Province may include the greatest number, and best mast trees for the
royal navy. Though this thought might never have occurred to a mathematician,
yet some of the Commissioners were doubtless acquainted with it; and it was too
important, not to have been communicated to the King's ministers. Another
political reason of dissent was, that by enlarging New Hampshire, there would
be a better prospect of obtaining a distinct Governor, which was the grand
object in view.

The new agent of Massachusetts, 1738.
Edmund Quincy, died of the smallpox, soon after his arrival in London. The
affair was then left in the hands of Wilks and Partridge, neither of whom
understood so much of the controversy as Thomlinson; who was also far superior
to them in address. In his letters, to his friends in New Hampshire, he
frequently blames them for their negligence, in not sending to him the
necessary papers in proper season; and when sent, for the want of correctness
and regularity in them. But their deficiency was abundantly compensated by the
dexterity of his solicitor, Parris; who drew up a long petition of appeal; in
which, all the circumstances, attending the whole transaction, from the
beginning, were recited, and colored, in such a manner, as to asperse the
Governor and Assembly of the vast, opulent, overgrown Province of
Massachusetts; while the poor, little, loyal, distressed Province of
New Hampshire was represented as ready to be devoured, and the King's own
property and possessions swallowed up, by the boundless rapacity of the charter
government. Concerning the manner in which this masterly philippic was framed,
and the principal object at which it was directed, there can be no better
evidence, than that which is contained in a letter, written by Parris to
Thomlinson, and by him sent to New Hampshire. Two nights ago, I received a heap
of papers from you, about the lines; and have been four times to the Colony
Office, Feb. 4.
and Board of Trade, to discover what I could in this imperfect affair; but
cannot see the case, till after Tuesday next. Notwithstanding which, I have, as
well as I can, without proper materials, drawn up a long petition of appeal, to
his Majesty; and as the Massachusetts have not yet presented theirs, I send you
the draught of it, and hope we shall have our appeal, as well as the petition,
from the New Hampshire Assembly, in, before the Massachusetts get theirs in.
Had your principals considered the great consequence of being first, surely, in
all this time, they would have sent you a copy of their proceedings, in order
to have enabled us to be first; but, as it is, I am forced to guess at matters,
and affirm facts at adventure, or upon dubious passages in letters; which is a
sad way of proceeding, and I wish we do not mistake some facts. They oblige us
to make brick without straw. Above all, why did they not send a copy of their
own appeal? For want of it, I have been forced to guess what that appeal was,
from loose passages in Mr. A's letters. Beg them, immediately to order, an
exact copy to be made of all their votes, from March to October last. Had these
votes come over regularly and authentically, his EXCELLENCY would have been
shaken quite down, in a few weeks by them. You Will observe, I have laid it on
him pretty handsomely, in my petition to the King. This petition is printed at
large, in the Journal of the Massachusetts Assembly for 1738, with their
vindication annexed, i^ which they call the petition a chain of blundering, if
not malicious falsehoods.


Thus the petition of appeal became a petition of complaint, against the
Governor and Assembly of Massachusetts. Copies were delivered to their agents,
and the Governor was ordered to make answer to the allegations against him. At
the same time, Thomlinson advised his friends in New Hampshire, to prepare
their proofs, as silently as possible; Thomlinson's MS letters.
and by no means to give any offense to the Governor; assuring them of the
favorable disposition of several Lords of the Privy Council, as well as the
Board of Trade, toward their cause; and that they had need to be (...) no pain,
about the event.

The death of Mr. Quincy at this critical period, and the length of time
necessary to prepare and send over answers, to the complaint which Parris had
thus artfully drawn up, obliged the agents of Massachusetts to suspend the
presenting of their appeal for several months.

CHAP. XVIII. Revival of MASON'S claim. Accusations against BELCHER, real and
forged. Royal censure. Final establishment of the lines. HUTCHINSON'S agency.
Spanish (...) BELCHER'S zeal and fidelity. His re^^al. Examination of his
character.
THE spirit of intrigue was not confined to New Hampshire; for the politicians
of Massachusetts, by bringing into view the long dormant claim of Mason, had
another game to play, besides proving the small extent of New Hampshire. They
perceived that the line, whether settled according to their own demand or that
of New Hampshire, would cut off a considerable part of several of their
townships; and though they had, by their agent, obtained a promise, that
private property should not be affected by the line of jurisdiction, yet they
thought it best to have some other security.

For what reason the government of Massachusetts did not purchase the Province
of New Hampshire, from Robert Mason, at the same time (1677) that they
purchased the Province of Maine, from the heirs of Gorges, we are not now able
precisely to determine. See Vol. I. p. 118.
It is probable that the purchase might then have been easily made, and much
controversy prevented. When it was sold, by John and Robert Mason, to Samuel
Allen (1691) the bargain was made in England; and the lands were, by fiction of
law, supposed to be there; In the process by which the entail was then docked,
the situation of the lands is expressed in these words.

In New Hampshire, Main, Masonia, Laconia, Mason-hall (...) Matiana, is
New England, in America, in the parish of Greenwich^^ MS in Proprietary Office.


by which means, the process respecting the fine and recovery was carried on in
the Court of King's bench. During the lives of the two Masons, no notice was
taken of the supposed flaw; and the sale to Allen was not disputed. The
brothers returned to America. John the elder, died without issue. Robert
married in New England, and had a son; who, after the death of his father,
conceived hopes of invalidating Allen's purchase, and regaining his paternal
inheritance; which it was supposed could not have been transferred by his
father and uncle, for any longer term, than their own lives. It was also said
that the fiction, by which the lands were described, to be within the
jurisdiction of the Courts of Westminster Hall, rendered the proceedings void;
and therefore that the entail was still good. Filled with these idea^, he made
strenuous exertions, to acquire money, to assist him in realizing his
expectations; but died in the midst of his days, at the Havanna, whither he had
made a voyage with this view. (1718)
His eldest son, John Tufton, was bred to a mechanical employment in Boston;
and came of age, about the time in which the controversy between the two
Provinces was in agitation. He inherited the enterprising spirit of his
ancestors, and the public controversy called his attention to his interest. On
this young man, 1738.
the politicians (...) their eyes; and having consulted council* on the
validity of his claim, and the (...) of the transfer; MS copy of Read's and
Auchmuty's opinions.
they encouraged him (...) hope, that this was the most favorable time to
assert his pretensions. Had (...) purchased his claim at once; they might
doubtless have obtained it for a trifle, (...) have greatly embarrassed the
views of their antagonists. Instead of such a stroke of liberal policy, they
treated with him, concerning the release of all those lands, in Salisbury,
Amesbury, Haverhill, Methuen and Dracut, which the line would cut off; and, for
five hundred pounds currency, obtained a quit-claim of twenty three thousand
six hundred and seventy five acres. July 1.
They also admitted his memorial to the Assembly; Journal of Assembly.
in which he represented to them, that his interest might probably be affected,
by the final determination of the line, and praying that the Province would be
at the expense of his voyage to England, to take proper measures for securing
it. To this they consented, on condition that he should prove his descent from
Captain John Mason, the original patentee. MS copies in the Proprietary office.
Depositions were accordingly taken in both Provinces, to which the public
seals were affixed; and they put him under the direction of their agents,
ordering his expenses to be paid, as long as they should judge his presence in
England serviceable to their views.

The agents stated his case to their Council, the King's solicitor; Agent's
letters in Secretary's Office of Massachusetts.
and asked his opinion, how they should proceed; but he advised them, not to
bring him into view, lest the Lords should think it an artifice, intended to
perplex the main cause. On this consideration, they dismissed him from any
farther attendance; and paid his expenses, amounting to above ninety pounds
sterling. Mr Hutchinson, in his History of Massachusetts, has passed over this
whole transaction in silence; tho it is well known that he was one of the
managers of it. See Journal of Mass. Rep. June 2, 1738, p. 11.


Such a transaction, though conducted as privately as the nature of the thing
would admit, did not escape the vigilance of Thomlinson; who, on finding Mason
detached from the agents of Massachusetts, entered into an agreement with him,
for the release of his whole interest, to the Assembly of New Hampshire; in
consideration of the payment of one thousand pounds, currency of New England.
This maneuver served to strengthen the interest of New Hampshire, and
Thomlinson was much applauded for his dexterity. He had the strongest
inducement, to continue his efforts in their favor; for no less than twelve
hundred pounds sterling had been already expended, in prosecuting the affair of
the line; which sum had been advanced by himself and Rindge. There was no
prospect of repayment, unless the Province could be put under a separate
Governor; and this point could not be obtained, till the removal of Belcher.

The agents of Massachusetts, after a long delay, July 18. October 9.
presented their appeal; and followed it with a petition, Printed brief and MS
letters.
for the benefit of their former protests, against the New Hampshire appeal;
objecting also to its regularity, as it contained matters of personal
complaint, against the Governor; which had been no part of the records of the
Commissioners. Thomlinson finding this new petition thrown in his way, applied
for its being immediately heard; and at the hearing, Nov. 30.
it was dismissed, but without prejudice to the agents of Massachusetts being
permitted, to object against the regularity of the New Hampshire appeal, when
it should come to a hearing. Such were the complaints against the Governor, and
the importunity of his adversaries to prosecute them, that it was necessary to
hear and dispatch them, before the appeal respecting the lines could be brought
forward.

It must be remembered, that Mr. Belcher had enemies, in his government of
Massachusetts as well as New Hampshire, who united their efforts to obtain his
removal from both; but, as they supposed him more vulnerable in his capacity of
Governor of New Hampshire, so they joined in strengthening the complaints, from
that quarter, as a preparatory step, to effect his complete removal. Whilst he
was engaged, in preparing for his defense, against the charges, in the petition
of appeal; other attacks were meditating, which were conducted with such
silence that it was impossible for him to guard against their effects. 1739.
One of these was a letter, purporting to have been written at Exeter, May 5.
subscribed by five persons, said to be inhabitants of that town, and directed
to Sir Charles Wager, first Lord of the Admiralty. In this letter it was said,
that finding his Lordship had ordered the Judge Advocate of the Court of
Admiralty to inquire into the riot, MS copy of Exeter letter.
which had been committed there, (1734) and the assault of the surveyor and his
officers; and fearing to be brought into trouble on that account, they would
confess the whole truth. That they had been indulged, by former surveyors, in
cutting all sorts of pine trees, till the appointment of Col. Dunbar to that
office; who had restrained and prosecuted them; but that Governor Belcher had
privately given them encouragement, to go on; by assuring them that they had
the best right to the trees; that the laws were iniquitous, and ought not to be
regarded; that although he must make a show of assisting that Irish dog of a
surveyor; yet he would so manage it with the Council and Justices, who were
under his influence, that they should not suffer; and further to encourage
them, he had made several of them justices of the peace, and officers of
militia. That he had also told them not to fear any inquiry into their conduct;
for that he would write to the Board of Admiralty, in their favor; and boasted,
that he had such an influence over their Lordships, that they would believe
every thing which he should say. That as they had now confessed the truth, they
hoped to be forgiven, and not prosecuted in the Admiralty Court; and begged
that this information might be kept secret till the Governor's removal, which
they hoped would soon be effected. That whatever might have been said to the
contrary, they could assure him that the Province of New Hampshire contained
the largest number of pine trees, and of the best quality, in all his Majesty's
American dominions; and, for further information, they referred his Lordship to
several persons then in London, particularly to Mr. Wentworth and Mr. Waldo;
the latter of whom, was agent to Mr. Gulston, for procuring masts for the royal
navy.

On the receipt of this letter, Sir Charles, with the candor of a gentleman,
sent a copy of it to Mr. Belcher; who immediately ordered an inquiry; and it
was proved to be an entire forgery; four of the persons whose names were
subscribed utterly disclaimed it, and the fifth was not to be found; no such
person being known in the town of Exeter. The evidence of this forgery was
transmitted to England, with all possible expedition; but not till it had made
an impression, to the disadvantage of the Governor.

Another artifice used against him, was a memorial of Gulston, the navy agent,
and others; complaining of the defenseless state of the Province; that the fort
lay in ruins, and that the militia were without discipline; notwithstanding the
probability of a war. This memorial was so artfully drawn, as to throw the
blame of the neglect on the Governor, without mentioning his name; Belcher's
letters MS.
which was intended, to prevent his obtaining a copy, and being allowed time to
answer. Another complaint was made in the form of a letter, respecting the
grant of the tract called Kingswood; in which he was represented, as partial to
his friends, in giving them an exclusive right, to the whole of that territory,
which they deemed, the unappropriated lands of the Province. Several parts of
his administration were also complained of; and in particular the infrequency
of his visits to New Hampshire. This letter was signed by six members of the
Council, and a majority of the Representatives.

Gulston's memorial was presented to the Lords of Council; and by them referred
to the Board of Trade, accompanied by the letter; and though Mr. Belcher's
brother and son applied for copies, and time to answer, the request was evaded;
and a report was framed, in favor of putting New Hampshire under a separate
Governor. When this report came before the Privy Council, Lord Wilmington, the
President, ordered it back again; that the Governor might have that justice
which his agents had asked. By this means, he had opportunity to answer in his
defense; that without money, the fort could not be repaired; that it was not in
his power to tax the people; that he had frequently applied to the Assemblies
for money, to repair the fort; to which they had constantly answered, that the
people were too poor to be taxed; and had solicited him to break through his
instructions, and allow them to issue paper money, without any fund for its
redemption; that the militia had always been trained according to law; and that
he had constantly visited New Hampshire, and held an Assembly, twice in the
year, unless prevented by sickness; for which he appealed to the journals. To
corroborate these pleas, the Governor's friends procured five petitions, in his
favor, and praying for his continuance, signed by about five hundred people.
The petitions, however, did not express the sense of the majority; who had been
persuaded into a belief, that they should receive much benefit by a separate
Governor; and accordingly, a counter petition being circulated, was signed by
about seven hundred of the inhabitants.

Things being thus prepared, the complaints were brought to a hearing, Nov. 21.
before the Lords of Council; Printed brief.
who reported to the King, that Governor Belcher had acted with great
partiality, by proroguing the Assembly of New Hampshire, from the sixth of
July, 1737, to the fourth of August following; in disobedience to his Majesty's
order in Council; which had been transmitted to him by the Lords of Trade, and
which was proved to have been delivered to him, in due time; and, also by
farther proroguing the said Assembly, from the second of September, 1737, to
the thirteenth of October; whereby the Province were deprived of the time,
intended by his Majesty's said order, to be allowed them, to prepare a proper
and regular appeal; thereby endeavoring to frustrate the intention of his
Majesty's commission. Dec. 27.
This report was approved by the King; and from this time, it may be concluded,
that Mr. Belcher's removal from the Government of New Hampshire was seriously
contemplated. The grant of Kingswood was also annulled; and he was prohibited
from making any other grants of land, till the lines should be determined.

This censure being passed on the Governor, 1740.
and the complaints being at an end; the way was prepared for a hearing of the
appeals, from both Provinces, March 5.
respecting the lines. Which being had, the determination of this long
controversy was made on a plan entirely new. The special part of the decree of
the Commissioners was set aside, and no regard was had to their doubt, whether
the new charter granted all the lands comprehended in the old. It was said,
that when the first grant was made, the country was not explored. The course of
the river, though unknown, was supposed to be from west to east; therefore it
was deemed equitable, 1739.
that as far as the river flowed in that course, the parallel line at three
miles distance should extend. But as on the one hand, if by pursuing the course
of the river, up into the country, it had been found to have a southern bend,
it would have been inequitable to have contracted the Massachusetts grant; so,
on the other hand, when it appeared to have a northern bend, it was equally
inequitable to enlarge it. Therefore it was determined; that the northern
boundary of the Province of Massachusetts be, a similar curve line, pursuing
the course of Merrimack river, at three miles distance, Council Records.
on the north side thereof, beginning at the Atlantic Ocean, and ending at a
point due north of Patucket falls; and a straight line drawn from thence due
west, till it meets with his Majesty's other governments. The other parts of
the decree of the Commissioners, respecting the northern line, and the payment
of expenses, were affirmed.

This determination exceeded the utmost expectation of New Hampshire; as it
gave them them a tract of country, fourteen miles in breadth, and above fifty
in length, more than they had ever claimed. It cut off from Massachusetts,
twenty eight new townships, 1740.
between Merrimack and Connecticut rivers; besides large tracts of vacant land,
which lay intermixed; and districts from six of their old towns, on the north
side of the Merrimack; and if, as was then supposed, the due west line were to
extend, to twenty miles east of Hudson's river, the reputed boundary of
New York; a vast tract of fertile country, on the western side of Connecticut
river, was annexed to New Hampshire; by which an ample scope was given, first
for landed speculation, and afterward for cultivation, and wealth.

When this determination was known, the politicians of Massachusetts were
chagrined and enraged. Belcher's letters.
They talked loudly of injustice; and some of the more zealous proposed trying
the merits of the cause, upon the words of the charter, before the Judges in
Westminster Hall; who, it was expected, would upon their oath and honor reverse
the judgment, and tell the King that he had mistaken the meaning of the royal
charter. This would indeed have been a bold stroke. But a more moderate and
pusillanimous scheme was adopted; which was to send over a new agent, to
petition the King, that he would re-annex to their government, the twenty eight
new townships, which had been cut off, and the districts of the six old towns.
It was also thought prudent, Thomlinson's observations on Massachusetts
petition. MS.
that the whole Province should not openly appear, in the affair; but that
petitions should be drawn, by the inhabitants of these towns, and that the
agent should be chosen by them. Accordingly town meetings were held; petitions
were prepared and subscribed; and THOMAS HUTCHINSON was appointed their agent,
and sent over to England; where he formed those connexion^, which afterward
served to raise him, to the chair of government in his native Province.

About the same time, Governor Belcher procured a petition, Thomlinson's MS
letters.
from his six friends, of the Council of New Hampshire, to the King; praying
that the whole Province might be annexed to the government of Massachusetts.
This matter had been long in contemplation, with these gentlemen; but was now
produced at the most unfortunate time, which could have been chosen. Their
petition was at once rejected. But that from the towns was kept in suspense a
long time; till Thomlinson was prepared, to answer all the pleas, which
Hutchinson could advance, and proved too hard an antagonist for him. It was
finally dismissed, The ill success of this agency was probably the reason, that
Mr. Hutchinson took no notice of it, in his History of Massachusetts.
because it was thought, that it never could be for his Majesty's service, Bow
brief.
to annex any part of his Province of New Hampshire, as an increase of
territory, to Massachusetts; but rather, that it would be for the benefit of
his subjects there, to be under a distinct government.

Though Belcher's removal was seriously feared, by his best friends; yet he had
so much interest with some of the Lords in high office, that they could not be
prevailed with to give him up. The war, which had commenced between Britain and
Spain, afforded him an opportunity, to signalize his zeal for the King's
service; and he determined to prove himself, a faithful servant to the Crown,
in every instance; in hope that a course of time and fidelity might efface the
impressions, which had been made, to his disadvantage.

It being resolved by the British Court, to undertake an expedition to the
Island of Cuba; Governor Belcher, agreeably to the orders which he had received
from the Duke of Newcastle, issued a proclamation, April 29.
for the encouragement of men who would enlist in the service; that they should
be supplied with arms and clothing; be in the King's pay; have a share of the
booty which should be taken; and be sent home, at the expiration of their time
of service; and that his Majesty would order a number of blank commissions, to
be filled up by the Governor, and given to the officers, who should command the
troops, to be raised in the Provinces. He afterward pressed this matter,
August 1.
closely, in his speech to the Assembly; and urged them, to make provision, for
one hundred men, and a transport, to convey them to Virginia; where all the
Colony troops were to rendezvous; and thence to proceed, under the command of
Col. Gooch, to the place of their destination. The Assembly voted, as much as
they judged sufficient for this purpose; and the Governor appointed a Captain,
and gave him beating orders; but the commissions and arms not being sent,
according to the royal promise, no men could be inlisted in New Hampshire. The
Governor received commissions and arms for four companies to be raised in
Massachusetts; Belcher's letters.
where he could easily have inlisted ten, had he been furnished according to
the engagement. To this failure, and not to any want of exertion, on his part,
in either of his governments, may be ascribed the paucity of troops raised in
them; and yet his enemies failed not of blaming him on this account. The
Representatives of New Hampshire took this occasion to frame a vote,
disapproving his administration; August.
and upon this vote, their agent founded another battery, Thomlinson's letters.
to attack his character.

In conformity to the royal determination of the boundaries, 1741.
orders were given to Belcher, to apply to both his governments, to join in
appointing Surveyors, to run out, and mark the lines; and that if either should
refuse, the other should proceed ex part. The Assembly of Massachusetts
delayed giving an answer in season, which was construed a denial. The Assembly
of New Hampshire appointed three Surveyors, to execute the service, who were
commissioned by the Governor. They were directed to allow ten degrees, for the
westerly variation of the needle; and the work was performed in the months of
February and March. George Mitchel surveyed and marked the similar curve line,
from the ocean, three miles north of Merrimack river, to a station north of
Patucket falls, in the township of Dracut. Richard Hazen began at that station
and marked the west line, across Connecticut river, to the supposed boundary
line of New York. Walter Bryent began the line, from the head of Salmon-falls
river, and marked it about thirty miles; MS returns in the files.
but was prevented from proceeding farther, partly by the breaking up of the
rivers, which rendered traveling impracticable; and partly by meeting a
company of Indians who were hunting, and took his men who for a scouting party.
In their return they found on one of the trees, which they had marked, the
figure of a man's hand grasping a sword; which they interpreted, as a signal of
defiance, from the Indians. Bryent's Journal.


The return of these lines to the Board of Trade was one of the last acts of
Mr. Belcher's administration. His enemies in both governments were
indefatigable in their endeavors to remove him; and by their incessant
applications to the ministry; by taking every advantage of his mistakes; by
falsehood and misrepresentation; and finally, by the diabolical arts of forgery
and perjury, Douglass I.481. Hutchinson II, 397.
they accomplished their views. He was succeeded in the government of
Massachusetts, by WILLIAM SHIRLEY; and in New Hampshire, by BENNING WENTWORTH.

At this distance of time, when all these parties are extinct, and every reader
may be supposed impartial; it may seem rather strange, that Governor Belcher
should meet with such treatment, from the British Court, in the reign of so
mild and just a Prince, as George the second. That Mr. Belcher was imprudent
and unguarded, in some instances, cannot be denied. He was indeed zealous to
serve his friends, and hearken to their advice; but, by this means, he laid
himself open, to the attacks of his enemies; to whom he paid no court, but
openly treated them with contempt. His language to them was severe and
reproachful, and he never spared to tell the world, what he thought of them.

This provoked them; but they had the art to conceal their resentment, and
carry on their designs, in silence, till they were ripe for execution. He had
by far too mean an opinion of their abilities, and the interest which they had
at Court; and when he knew that they had the ear of the Lords of Trade, he
affected to think them, not very mighty Lords, nor able to administer life and
death. He had a consciousness, of the general integrity of his own intentions;
and appears to have been influenced, by motives of honor and justice; but he
was not aware of the force of his own prejudices. It may admit of doubt,
whether, considering the extreme delicacy of his situation, it were within the
compass of human policy, to have conducted so as to give offense to neither of
his Provinces, in the management of such a controversy; but it is certain, that
his antagonists could not fairly fix but one real stigma, on his character; and
that when impartially examined, can amount to no more than an imprudent step,
at a critical time, grounded on an undue resentment of an affront; for to
suppose that his intention was to frustrate the commission, is inconsistent
with the whole tenor of his public declarations, and private correspondence.
When his enemies met him on fair and open ground, he was always prepared to
answer; but it was impossible to guard against their secret attacks. If the
cause which they meant to serve was a good one, why did they employ the basest
means to effect it?

The cruelty and hardship of his case may appear from the following
considerations. He had been one of the principal merchants of New England;
Belcher's letter to Doddington. MS.
but, on his appointment, to the Chair of Government, quitted every other kind
of business; that he might attend with punctuality and dignity to the duties of
his station. By the royal instructions, he was restrained from giving his
assent, to any grant of money, to himself; unless it should be a permanent
salary. What he received from New Hampshire was fixed, and paid out of the
excise; but the Assembly of Massachusetts could not be persuaded, to settle any
salary upon him. They made him a grant of three thousand pounds, (worth about
seven or eight hundred sterling) generally once in a year, at their session in
May. He was then obliged to solicit leave from the King, to accept the grant,
and sign the bill; and sometimes could not obtain this leave till the end of
the year; once not till five days before the dissolution of the Assembly. In
the mean time he was obliged to subsist on his own estate; and had he died
within the year, the grant would have been wholly lost, to his family. He was
earnest to obtain a general permission to sign these grants; but in that case
the clerks of offices, in England, through whose hands the permission must have
passed, would have lost their fees. He was now in the sixtieth year of his age;
he had a family of children and grand children, whose sole dependence was on
him; and he thought with reason, that if his course of faithful service, and
the unworthy arts of his enemies had been duly considered; the censure of his
superiors would have been less severe, than to deprive him of his bread and
honor.

Whilst he entertained the worst opinion possible of the characters of his
enemies, he had a strong confidence, in the justice of the government, before
which he was accused. In one of his letters to his son, he says, I must expect
no favor while Bladen is at the Board of Trade; but were the devil there, I
should expect justice, under the British Constitution, corroborated by the
Hanover succession. The event proved, that his confidence was not ill founded.
For, on being superseded, he repaired to Court; where, though his presence was
unwelcome to some, yet he had opportunity to bring the most convincing evidence
of his integrity, and of the base designs of his enemies. He was so far
restored to the royal favor, that he obtained a promise, of the first vacant
government in America, which would be worthy of his acceptance. This proved to
be the Province of New Jersey; where he spent the remaining years of his life;
and where his memory has been treated with deserved respect.

CHAP. XIX. The beginning of BENNING WENTWORTH'S administration. War opened in
Nova Scotia. Expedition to Cape-Breton; its plan, conduct and success, with a
description of the island, and of the city of Louisbourg.
BENNING WENTWORTH, Esquire. son of the deceased Lieutenant Governor, was a merchant
of good reputation in Portsmouth, and well beloved by the people. He had
represented his native town in the Assembly for several years, where he
distinguished himself in the opposition to Belcher. He afterward obtained a
seat in Council; where, sensible of the popularity of his family, and feeling
the pride of elevation, he continued the opposition, and joined in the measures
which were pursued for obtaining a distinct Governor, without any apprehension
that himself would be the person; till a series of incidents, at first view
unfortunate, prepared the way for his advancement to the chair.

In the course of his mercantile dealings, he had entered into a contract with
an agent of the Court of Spain, and supplied him with a large quantity of the
best oak timber; to procure which, he borrowed money in London. When he
delivered the timber at Cadiz, the agent with whom he had contracted, was out
of place, and the new officer declined payment. In returning to America the
ship foundered and he was saved with the crew in a boat. These misfortunes
deranged his affairs and reduced him to a state of bankruptcy. Afterward he
went again to Spain, hoping by the interest of Sir Benjamin Keen, the British
Minister, to obtain his due, but his suit was ineffectual. About that time
Thomlinson, despairing of Dunbar's advancement to the government of
New Hampshire, turned his thoughts toward Wentworth; Thomlinson's letters. MS.
and having procured him a letter of license from his creditors in London,
invited him thither. Wentworth represented his case to the British Court,
complained of the injustice of Spain, and petitioned for redress. Many British
merchants, who had suffered by the insolence of the Spaniards, were, at the
same time, clamorous for reparation. Gentleman's Magazine, for 1739.
The ministry were studious to avoid a war. A negotiation was begun, and the
Court of Spain promised restitution; but failed in the performance. War was
then determined on, and all negotiation ended. Disappointed in his plea for
justice, Wentworth made his suit for favor; and by the aid of Thomlinson, who
understood the ways of access to the great, he obtained a promise from the Duke
of Newcastle, that when New Hampshire should be put under a distinct Governor,
he should have the commission. MS letters of Thomlinson and Atkinson.
The expense of the solicitation and fees, amounting to three hundred pounds
sterling, was advanced by his friends in England, and repaid by his friends in
New Hampshire.

He was received in Portsmouth, after a long absence, 1741.
with great marks of popular respect. Dec. 12.
Among the compliments which were paid to him on that occasion, one was, that
he had been instrumental of rescuing New Hampshire from contempt and
dependence. Journal of A^s^mbly. Jan. 14.
In his first speech to the Assembly he reflected on the conduct of his
predecessor, not by name, but by implication; for not having taken early
measures to raise men for the expedition against the Spanish West Indies; and
intimated his apprehension, that the good intention of the Province in raising
money for that purpose, 1742.
would be frustrated, since the men who were willing to enter into the service
had enlisted in the other Provinces. He also complimented them, on their good
faith in regard to the several emissions of paper money; all of which were to
be called in within the present year. He did not forget to recommend a fixed
salary for himself, not subject to depreciation; nor the payment of expenses
which had arisen on account of the boundary lines; he informed them of the
King's indulgence, in giving him leave to consent to a farther emission of
bills of credit, to enable them to discharge their obligations to the Crown;
provided that no injury should be done to the trade of the mother country. He
also recommended to their attention the faithful services of their agents, one
of whom, Rindge, was dead, and the payment of the debt due to his heirs.

The Assembly, in their answer, acknowledged the wisdom and justice of the King
in determining the long controversy between them and Massachusetts; but as to
payment of the expense, they reminded him that one half ought to be paid by
Massachusetts, and desired him to use his influence for that purpose. With
respect to the failure of raising men for the expedition, they set him right by
ascribing it to the true cause; there being no commissions sent to the Province
for that service. Concerning the salary, they said, that as soon as they could
know what number of inhabitants would be added to them by the settlement of the
lines, and how the money could be raised, they should make as ample provision
for his honorable support as their circumstances would admit. They acknowledged
the fidelity and industry of their agents, and professed a good will to reward
them; but could not then promise adequate compensation.

The Assembly voted a salary of two hundred and fifty pounds, MS acts.
proclamation money, to the Governor, funded as usual on the excise; and having
obtained the royal license for emitting twenty-five thousand pounds on loan for
ten years, they granted the Governor two hundred and fifty pounds more, to be
paid annually out of the interest of the loan. When this fund failed, they made
annual grants for his 'further and more ample support,' and generally added
something for houserent. They presented their agent Thomlinson one hundred
pounds sterling, for his faithful services; but what they did for the heirs of
Rindge does not appear.

1743.
After Mr. Wentworth was quietly seated in the chair of government, an
opportunity presented to advance his interest still farther. For the sum of two
thousand pounds sterling, Dunbar was prevailed on to resign the surveyorship of
the woods, and Thomlinson negociated an appointment in favor of Wentworth, with
a salary of eight hundred pounds sterling, out of which he was to maintain four
Deputies. But to obtain this office, he was obliged to rest his claim on the
Crown of Spain for fifty-six thousand dollars.

These appointments of Mr. Wentworth gave the opposers of the former
administration great cause of triumph; but the spirit of opposition had only
changed sides. It was hoped and expected by some, that Mr. Belcher, by going to
England, would not only remove the ill impressions, which the malice of his
enemies had made; but return to his former station. Others, who had no
predilection for Belcher, looked with envy on the good fortune of Wentworth,
and aimed to undermine him; at the same time courting the friends of the former
administration to join in their measures. These things were managed with
secrecy, and a few hints only are left as evidence of the existence of designs,
which were never brought to maturity.

It was one of the royal instructions to Governors, that in any cases of
difficulty or sudden emergency, they should communicate with each other. Mr.
Wentworth had a high opinion of the abilities of the new Governor of
Massachusetts, and there being a strict friendship between them, consulted him
on all occasions. Shirley was gratified by this deference, and knew how to make
his advantage of it. Thus, though New Hampshire was under a Governor distinct
from that of Massachusetts, a point which had long been contended for; yet the
difference was not so great in reality as in appearance. MS (...) of W^ntworth
and Shirley.
This was a circumstance not much known at that time. The advice which Shirley
gave him was, in general, salutary and judicious.

The war which had been kindled between Britain and Spain, 1744.
extended its flame over a great part of Europe; and when France became
involved in it, the American Colonies were more nearly interested, because of
the proximity of the French, and of the Indians, who were in their interest.
War is so natural to savages, that they need but little to excite them to it.
An Indian war was a necessary appendage of a war with France. The scene of both
was opened in Nova Scotia.

That Province had been alternately claimed and possessed by the English and
French for more than a century. Ever since the peace of Utrecht it had been
subject to the Crown of Britain, and the French inhabitants who were under a
kind of patriarchal government of their priests, and devoted to the French
interest, were kept in awe, partly by the fear of having their dikes destroyed,
which they had erected to prevent the sea from overflowing their fields; MS of
(...) Morris.
and partly by a British garrison at Annapolis where a Governor and Council
resided. The Indian tribes maintained their native independence, though they
were attached to the French by religious, as well as interested obligations.
Canseau, an island on the northeastern part of Nova Scotia, was in possession
of the English. It was resorted to by the fishermen of New England. It was
desended by a block-house and garrisoned by a detachment of troops from
Annapolis. The island of Cape-Breton was possessed by the French, and lay
between the English of Canseau and those of Newfoundland. This was too near a
neighborhood for enemies, especially when both were pursuing one object, the
fishery.

The French at Cape-Berton having received early intelligence of the
declaration of war; March 15.
immediately resolved on the destruction of the English fishery at Canseau.
Duquesnel, the Governor, May 13.
sent Duvivier with a few small armed vessels, and about nine hundred men, who
seized and took possession of the island, burned the houses, and made prisoners
of the garrison and inhabitants. This was done, before the news of war had
arrived in New England. It was followed by an attempt upon Placentia, in
Newfoundland, which miscarried. An attack was also made upon Annapolis, the
garrison of which was reinforced by several companies of militia and rangers
from Massachusetts, and the enemy were obliged to retire. The Indians of
Nova Scotia assisted the French in this attack; which, with some other
insolences committed by them, occasioned a declaration of war, by the
government of Massachusetts, against them, Oct 1^.
Dougl^^^ I. 318.
with a premium for scalps and prisoners.

These proceedings of the French were rash and precipitate. They were not
prepared for extensive operations; nor had they any orders from their Court to
undertake them. What they had done, served to irritate and alarm the
neighboring English Colonies, and show them their danger in the most
conspicuous manner. Their sea coast, navigation and fishery lay exposed to
continual insults. Their frontier settlements on the western side were but
eighty miles distant from the French fort on Lake Champlain. The Indians who
lay between them, had not yet taken up the hatchet; but it was expected that
encouragement would be given them by the Governor of Canada, to insult the
frontiers. Several new settlements were wholly broken up; and many of the women
and children of other frontier places retired to the old towns for security.

In the autumn, Duquesnel the French Governor of Cape-Breton, died, and was
succeeded in the command by Duchambon, Prince and Douglass.
who had not so good a military character. Duvivier went to France to solicit a
force to carry on the war in Nova Scotia in the ensuing spring. The storeships,
expected from France at Cape-Breton, came on the coast so late in the fall; and
the winter there set in so early and fierce, as to keep them out of port, and
drive them off to the West Indies. The captive garrison of Canseau, with other
prisoners, who had been taken at sea, and carried into Louisburg, were sent to
Boston. From them, as well as from other informants, Governor Shirley obtained
such intelligence of the state of that island and fortress, as induced him to
form the project of attacking it. But before we open this romantic and
hazardous scene, it is necessary to give some account of the place which was to
be the theater of operations.

The Island of Cape-Breton, so denominated from one of its capes, Charlevoix
lies between the forty-fifth and forty-seventh degrees of north latitude; at
the distance of fifteen leagues from Cape Ray, the south-western extremity of
Newfoundland. It is separated from the main land of Nova Scotia by a narrow
strait, six leagues in length, the navigation of which is safe for a ship of
forty guns. The greatest length of the island, from north-east to south-west is
about fifty leagues and its greatest breadth thirty-three. It is about
eighty-eight leagues in circuit as seamen estimate distances. MS of S^r William
Peppere^^*
Its general form is triangular, but it is indented by many deep bays.

The soil of this island is by no mean^ inviting. It is either rocky and
mountainous, or else cold and boggy; and much less capable of improvement than
Nova Scotia. Its only valuable productions are of the fossil kind, pit-coal and
plaster. Its atmosphere in the spring and summer is an almost continual fog,
which prevents the rays of the sun from perfecting vegetation. Its winter is
severe and of long continuance; and as the island forms an eddy to the current
which sets through the gulf of St. Lawrence, its harbors are filled with large
quantities of floating ice, State of Trade by (...), p. 1^ 33.
with which its shores are environed till late in the spring.

Much has been said by French and English writers on the great importance and
advantage of this island, and some political and temporary purposes were
doubtless to be answered by such publications; but in fact the only real
importance of Cape-Breton was derived from its central situation, and the
convenience of its ports. On the north and west sides it is steep and
inaccessible; but the south-eastern side is full of fine bays and harbors,
capable of receiving and securing ships of any burden; and, being situated
between Canada, France and the West Indies, it was extremely favorable to the
French commerce. It was not so good a station for the fishery as several parts
of Nova Scotia and Newfoundland. The greater part of the French fishery was
prosecuted elsewhere; Hutchinson.
and they could buy fish at Canseau, cheaper than they could cure it at
Cape-Breton.

Whilst the French held possession of the coasts of Nova Scotia and
Newfoundland, this island was neglected; but after they had ceded these places
to the Crown of England, and the Crown of England had ceded this island to them
by the treaty of Utrecht (1713) they began to see its value. Charlevoix
Douglass, R^lt, Prince.
Instead of giving so much attention to the fur trade of Canada, as they had
before done, they contemplated building a fortified town on this island, as a
security to their navigation and fishery. For this purpose they chose a fine
harbor on the south-east side of the island, formerly called English harbor;
where they erected their fortifications, and called the place Louisbourg.

The harbor of Louisbourg lies in latitude 45 55; its entrance is about four
hundred yards wide. The anchorage is uniformly safe, and ships may run ashore
on a soft muddy bottom. The depth of water at the entrance is from nine to
twelve fathoms. The harbor lies open to the south-east. Upon a neck of land on
the south side of the harbor was built the town, two miles and a quarter in
circumference; fortified in every accessible part with a rampart of stone, from
thirty to thirty-six feet high, and a ditch eighty feet wide. Abbe Raynal.
A space of about two hundred yards was left without a rampart, on the side
next to the sea; it was enclosed by a simple dike and a line of pickets. The
sea was so shallow in this place that it made only a narrow channel,
inaccessible from its numerous reefs to any shipping whatever. The side fire
from the bastions secured this spot from an attack. There were six bastions and
three batteries, containing embrasures for one hundred and forty-eight cannon,
of which sixty-five only were mounted, and sixteen mortars. On an island at the
entrance of the harbor was planted a battery of thirty cannon, carrying
twenty-eight pounds shot; and at the bottom of the harbor, directly opposite
to the entrance, was the grand or royal battery of twenty-eight cannon,
forty-two pounders, and two eighteen pounders. On a high cliff, opposite to the
island battery, stood a light-house; and within this point, at the north-east
part of the harbor, was a careening wharf secure from all winds, and a
magazine of naval stores.

The town was regularly laid out in squares. The streets were broad; the houses
mostly of wood, but some of stone. On the west side, near the rampart, was a
spacious citadel, and a large parade; on one side of which were the Governor's
apartments. Under the rampart were casemates to receive the women and children
during a siege. The entrance of the town on the land side was at the west gate,
over a draw bridge, near to which was a circular battery, mounting sixteen guns
of twenty-four pounds shot.

These works had been twenty-five years in building; and though not finished,
had cost the Crown not less than thirty millions of livres. The place was so
strong as to be called 'the Dunkirk of America.' It was, in peace, a safe
retreat for the ships of France bound homeward from the East and West Indies;
and in war, a source of distress to the northern English Colonies; its
situation being extremely favorable for privateers to ruin their fishery and
interrupt their coasting and foreign trade; for which reasons, the reduction of
it was an object as desirable to them, as that of Carthage was to the Romans.

In the autumn, Shirley wrote to the British ministry, Nov. 10.
Shirley's letters to Wentworth. MS.
representing the danger of an attack on Nova Scotia, from the French, in the
ensuing spring; and praying for some naval assistance. These letters he sent by
Capt. Ryal, an officer of the garrison, which had been taken at Canseau, who,
from his particular knowledge of Louisbourg, and of the great consequence of
the acquisition of Cape-Breton, and the preservation of Nova Scotia, he hoped
would be of considerable service to the northern Colonies, with the Lords of
the admiralty. Thus early did Shirley conceive and communicate to Wentworth his
great design; and the most prudent step which he took in this whole affair was
to solicit help from England. His petition, supported by that worthy officer,
MS copy of D. Newcastle's letter, Jan. 3.
was so favorably received by the ministry, that as early as the beginning of
January, orders were dispatched to Commodore Warren, then in the West Indies,
to proceed to the northward in the spring, and employ such a force as might be
sufficient to protect the northern Colonies in their trade and fishery, and
distress the enemy; and for this purpose to consult with Governor Shirley.
Orders of the same date were written to Shirley, enclosed to Warren, directing
him to assist the King's ships with transports, men and provisions. These
orders, though extremely favorable to the design, were totally unknown in
New England, till the middle of April following, before which time the
expedition was completely formed.

It has been said, that a plan of this famous enterprise, Douglass, Bollan,
Hutchinson.
was first suggested by William Vaughan, a son of Lieutenant Governor Vaughan
of New Hampshire. Several other persons have claimed the like merit. How far
each one's information or advice, contributed toward forming the design, cannot
now be determined. Vaughan was largely concerned in the fishery on the eastern
coast of Massachusetts. He was a man of good understanding, but of a daring,
enterprising and tenacious mind, and one who thought of no obstacles to the
accomplishment of his views. An instance of his temerity is still remembered.
He had equipped, at Portsmouth, a number of boats to carry on his fishery at
Montinicus. On the day appointed for failing, in the month of March, though the
wind was so boisterous that experienced mariners deemed it impossible for such
vessels to carry sail, he went on board one, and ordered the others to follow.
One was lost at the mouth of the river, the rest arrived with much difficulty,
but in a short time, at the place of their destination. Vaughan had not been at
Louisburg; but had learned from fishermen and others, something of the strength
and situation of the place; and nothing being in his view impracticable, which
he had a mind to accomplish, he conceived a design to take the city by
surprise; and even proposed going over the walls in the winter on the drifts of
snow. This idea of a surprisal forcibly struck the mind of Shirley, and
prevailed with him to hasten his preparations, before he could have any answer
or orders from England.

In the beginning of January he requested of the members of the General Court,
1745.
that they would lay themselves under an oath of secresy, to receive a proposal
from him, of very great importance. This was the first request of the kind
which had ever been made to a legislative body in the Colonies. They readily
took the oath, and he communicated to them the plan which he had formed of
attacking Louisbourg. The secret was kept for some days; till an honest member,
who performed the family devotion at his lodgings, inadvertently discovered it
by praying for a blessing on the attempt. At the first deliberation, the
proposal was rejected; but by the address of the Governor and the invincible
perseverance of Vaughan, a petition from the merchants concerned in the
fishery, was brought into Court, which revived the affair; and it was finally
carried in the affirmative by a majority of one voice, Jan. 26.
in the absence of several members who were known to be against it. Circular
letters were immediately dispatched to all the Colonies, as far as
Pennsylvania, requesting their assistance, and an embargo on their ports.

With one of these letters, Feb. 1.
Vaughan rode express to Portsmouth, where the Assembly was sitting. Governor
Wentworth immediately laid the matter before them, and proposed a conference of
the two Houses to be held on the next day. The House of Representatives having
caught the enthusiasm of Vaughan, were impatient of delay, and desired that it
might be held immediately. It was accordingly held, and the Committee reported
in favor of the expedition; Feb 2.
Printed Journal of this session.
estimated the expense at four thousand pounds, and desired the Governor to
issue a proclamation for inlisting two hundred and fifty men, at twenty-five
shillings per month, one month's pay to be advanced; they also recommended that
military stores and transports should be provided, and that such preparations
should be made as that the whole might be ready by the beginning of March. All
this was instantly agreed to, on condition that proper methods could be found
to pay the charges. This could be done in no other way than by a new emission
of bills of credit, contrary to the letter of royal instructions. But, by the
help of Shirley, a way was found to surmount this difficulty; for on the same
day, he wrote to Wentworth, informing him that he had, in answer to repeated
solicitations, Private MS letters of Shirley.
obtained a relaxation of his instructions relative to bills of credit, so far,
as to have leave to consent to such emissions as the exigencies of war might
require; and advising him, that considering the occasion, it was probable, his
consenting to an emission would rather be approved than censured by his
superiors. Feb. 3.
The next day, he wrote again, assuring him that he might safely do it,
provided that the sum to be emitted, were solely appropriated to the service of
the expedition. He also sent him a copy of the instruction, enjoining him to
let no person know that he had sent it. Shirley himself had consented to an
emission of fifty thousand pounds, to be drawn in by a tax in the years 1747
and 1748.

The House of Representatives passed a vote for an emission of ten thousand
pounds toward defraying the charge of the expedition and farther carrying on
the war, and the support of government; Feb. 5.
to be drawn in by taxes in ten annual payments, to begin in 1755. The Council
objected and said, that the grant should be wholly appropriated to the
expedition and the payments should begin in 1751. The House adhered to their
vote. The Governor interposed, and an altercation took place, which continued
several days. The Governor adjourned the Assembly till he could again ask
Shirley's advice and receive his answer. At length the House altered their
vote, and appointed the year 1751 for drawing in the money; augmenting the sum
to thirteen thousand pounds, and at the Governor's express desire, they
publicly assured him that they could not find out any other way to carry on the
expedition, or in any degree shorten the period for bringing in the money. This
was done to serve as an apology for the Governor's consenting to the bill,
notwithstanding he had no liberty to recede from his instructions; and thus,
the matter being compromised, Feb. 13.
he gave his consent.

During this tedious interval, a report was spread, that the House had refused
to raise men and money for the expedition; and the author of the report was
sought out and called to account by the House for his misbehaviour. The next
day they altered their terms of inlistment, conformably to those offered in
Massachusetts, and by the 17th of February, Feb. 17.
two hundred and fifty men were inlisted for the service.

The person appointed to command the expedition was WILLIAM PEPPERRELL, Esquire. of
Kittery, Colonel of a regiment of militia; a merchant of unblemished reputation
and engaging manners, extensively known both in Massachusetts and
New Hampshire, and very popular. These qualities were absolutely necessary in
the Commander of an army of volunteers, his own countrymen, who were to quit
their domestic connexions and employments, and engage in a hazardous
enterprise, which none of them, from the highest to the lowest, knew how to
conduct. Professional skill and experience were entirely out of the question;
had these qualities been necessary, the expedition must have been laid aside;
for there was no person in New England, in these respects qualified for the
command. Fidelity, resolution and popularity must supply the place of military
talents; and Pepperrell was possessed of these. It was necessary that the men
should know and love their General, or they would not inlist under him. The
following private note was sent from Boston to Pepperrell, whilst at
Louisbourg, and found among his papers.

You was made General, being a popular man, most likely to raise soldiers
soonest. The expedition was calculated to ESTABLISH Sh --, and make his
creature W. Governor of Cape-Breton, which is to be a place of refuge to him
from his creditors. Beware of snakes in the grass, and mark their hi^^ing.




After this appointment was made, Shirley's private letters. MS.
and while it was uncertain whether the Assembly of New Hampshire would agree
with the Governor in raising money for the expedition, Shirley proposed to
Wentworth, the raising of men in New Hampshire, to be in the pay of
Massachusetts, and in the letter which he wrote on that occasion paid him the
following compliment. It would have been an infinite satisfaction to me, and
done great honor to the expedition, if your limbs would have permitted you to
take the chief command. Wentworth was charmed with the idea, and forgetting his
gout, made an offer of his personal service; but not till after the Assembly
had agreed to his terms and the money bill was passed. Shirley was then obliged
to answer him thus. Upon communicating your offer to two or three gentlemen, in
whose prudence and judgment I most confide, I found them clearly of opinion,
that any alteration of the present command would be attended with great risque,
both with respect to the Assembly and the soldiers being entirely disgusted.

Before Pepperrell accepted the command, he asked the opinion of the famous
George Whitefield, who was then itinerating and preaching in New England.
Whitefield told him, that he did not think the scheme very promising;
Whitefield's letters, No. 572.
that the eyes of all would be on him; that if it should not succeed, the
widows and orphans of the slain would reproach him; and if it should succeed,
many would regard him with envy, and endeavor to eclipse his glory; that he
ought therefore to go with 'a single eye,' and then he would find his strength
proportioned to his necessity. Henry Sherburne, the Commissary of
New Hampshire, another of Whitefield's friends, pressed him to favor the
expedition and give a motto for the flag; to which, after some hesitation, he
consented. The motto was, Nil desperandum Christo duce. This gave the
expedition the air of a crusade, and many of his followers inlisted. One of
them, a Chaplain, carried on his shoulder a hatchet, with which he intended to
destroy the images in the French churches.

There are certain latent sparks in human nature, which, by a collision of
causes, are sometimes brought to light; and when once excited, their operations
are not easily controled. In undertaking any thing hazardous, there is a
necessity for extraordinary vigor of mind, and a degree of confidence and
fortitude, which shall raise us above the dread of danger, and dispose us to
run a risque which the cold maxims of prudence would forbid. The people of
New England have at various times shown such an enthusiastic ardor, which has
been excited by the example of their ancestors and their own exposed situation.
It was never more apparent, and perhaps never more necessary, than on occasion
of this expedition. Nor ought it to be forgotten, that several circumstances,
which did not depend on human foresight, greatly favored this undertaking.

The winters in this country are often severe; but the winter in which this
expedition was planned, and particularly the month of February, was very mild.
The harbors and rivers were open, and the weather was in general so pleasant,
that every kind of labor could be done abroad. The fruitfulness of the
preceding season had made provisions plenty. The Indians had not yet molested
the frontiers; and though some of them had heard that an expedition against
Cape Breton was in hand, and carried the news of it to Canada, such an attempt
was so improbable, that the French gave no credit to the report, and those in
Nova Scotia did not receive the least intelligence of the preparations.
Douglass observes, that some guardian angel preserved the troops from taking
the small pox, which appeared in Boston about the time of their embarkation,
and was actually imported in one of the ships which was taken into the service.
A concurrence of happy incidents brought together every British ship of war
from the ports of the American continent and islands, till they made a
formidable naval force, consisting of four ships of the line and six frigates,
under the command of an active, judicious and experienced officer. On the other
hand, the garrison of Louisbourg was discontented and mutinous; they were in
want of provisions and stores; they had no knowledge of the design formed
against them; their shores were so environed with ice, that no supplies could
arrive early from France, and those which came afterward, were intercepted and
taken by our cruisers. In short, if any one circumstance had taken a wrong turn
on our side, and if any one circumstance had not taken a wrong turn on the
French side, Douglass 1, 336.
the expedition must have miscarried.

In the undertaking and prosecuting of an enterprise so novel to the people of
New England, it is amusing to see how many projects were invented; what a
variety of advice was given from all quarters, and what romantic expectations
were formed by advisers and adventurers. During the inlistment, one of the
officers was heard to say with great sobriety, that he intended to carry with
him three shirts, one of which should be ruffled, because he expected that the
General would give him the command of the city, when it should be taken. An
ingenious and benevolent clergyman, presented to the General a plan for the
incampment of the army, the opening of trenches and the placing of batteries
before the city. Private MS letters.
To prevent danger to the troops from subterraneous mines, he proposed, that
two confidential persons, attended by a guard, should, during the night,
approach the walls; that one should with a beetle strike the ground, while the
other should lay his ear to it, and observe whether the sound was hollow, and
that a mark should be set on all places suspected. Another gentleman, of equal
ingenuity, sent the General a model of a flying bridge, to be used in scaling
the walls of Louisbourg. It was so light, that twenty men could carry it on
their shoulders to the wall, and raise it in one minute. The apparatus for
raising it consisted of four blocks, and two hundred fathoms of rope. It was to
be floored with boards, wide enough for eight men to march abreast; and to
prevent danger from the enemy's fire, it might be covered with raw hides. This
bridge, it was said, might be erected against any part of the wall, even where
no breach had been made; and it was supposed that a thousand men might pass
over it in four minutes.

But the most extraordinary project of all, was Shirley's scheme for taking the
city by surprise, in the first night after the arrival of the troops, and
before any British naval force could possibly come to their assistance. It is
thus delineated in a confidential letter which he wrote to Wentworth, when he
urged him to send the New Hampshire troops to Boston, to proceed thence with
the fleet of transports. The success of our scheme for surprising Louisbourg
will entirely depend on the execution of the first night, March 2.
after the arrival of our forces. For this purpose it is necessary, that the
whole fleet should make Chappeau-rouge point just at the shutting in of the
day, when they cannot easily be discovered, and from thence push into the bay,
so as to have all the men landed before midnight; (the landing of whom, it is
computed by Capt. Durell and Mr. Bastide, will take up three hours at least.)
After which, the forming of the four several corpse, to be employed in
attempting to scale the walls of Louisbourg, near the east gate, fronting the
sea, and the west gate, fronting the harbor; to cover the retreat of the two
beforementioned parties in case of a repulse; and, to attack the grand battery;
(which attack must be made at the same time with the two other attacks) will
take up two hours more at least. After these four bodies are formed, their
march to their respective posts from whence they are to make their attacks and
serve as a cover to the retreat, will take up another two hours; which,
supposing the transports to arrive in Chappeau-rouge bay at nine o'clock in the
evening, and not before, as it will be necessary for them to do, in order to
land and march under cover of the night, will bring them to four in the
morning, being day break, before they begin the attack, which will be full late
for them to begin. Your Excellency will from hence perceive how critical an
affair, the time of the fleet's arrival in Chappeaurouge bay is, and how
necessary it is to the success of our principal scheme, that the fleet should
arrive there, in a body, at that precise hour.

It is easy to perceive that this plan was contrived by a person totally
unskilled in the arts of navigation and of war. The coast of Cape-Breton was
dangerous and inhospitable, the season of the year rough and tempestuous, and
the air a continual fog; yet, a fleet of an hundred vessels, after sailing
nearly two hundred leagues (for by this plan they were not to stop) must make a
certain point of land 'at a precise hour,' and enter an unknown bay, in an
evening. The troops were to land in the dark, amidst a violent surf, on a rocky
shore; to march through a thicket and bog three miles, to the city, and some of
them a mile beyond it to the royal battery. Men who had never been in action,
were to perform services, which the most experienced veteran would think of
with dread; to pull down pickets with grapling irons, and scale the walls of a
regular fortification, with ladders, which were afterward found to be too short
by ten feet; all in the space of twelve hours from their first making the land,
and nine hours from their debarkation. This part of the plan was prudently
concealed from the troops.

The forces which New Hampshire furnished for this expedition, were three
hundred and fifty men, including the crew of an armed sloop which convoyed the
transports and served as a cruiser. They were formed into a regiment,
consisting of eight companies, and were under the command of Col. Samuel Moore.
The sloop was commanded by Capt. John Fernald; her crew consisted of thirty
men. The regiment, sloop and transports, were, by Governor Wentworth's written
instructions to the General, put under his command. Besides these, a body of
one hundred and fifty men was inlisted in New Hampshire and aggregated to the
regiment in the pay of Massachusetts. Thus New Hampshire employed five hundred
men; about one eighth part of the whole land force. In the introductory part of
Dr. Ramsey's elegant history of the American Revolution (page 34) it is said,
that this enterprise was undertaken by the SOLE authority of the Legislature of
Massachusetts. This is not sufficiently accurate. It originated in
Massachusetts; but the Colonies of New Hampshire, Rhode Island and Connecticut,
by their legislative authority, furnished troops and stores. New York sent a
supply of artillery, and Pennsylvania of provisions; but the troops from
Rhode Island, and the provisions from Pennsylvania, did not arrive till after
the surrender of the city.
In these men, there was such an ardor for action, Wentworth's letters, MS.
and such a dread of delay, that it was impracticable to put them so far out of
their course, as to join the fleet at Boston. Shirley therefore altered the
plan, and appointed a rendezvous at Canseau; where the forces of New Hampshire
arrived, March 31.
two days before the General and his other troops from Boston.

The instructions which Pepperell received from Shirley, were conformed to the
plan which he had communicated to Wentworth, but much more particular and
circumstantial. He was ordered to proceed to Canseau, there to build a
block-house and battery, and leave two companies in garrison, and to deposit
the stores which might not immediately be wanted by the army. Original
instructions, in MS.
Thence he was to send a detachment to the village of St. Peter's, on the island
of Cape-Breton and destroy it; to prevent any intelligence which might be
carried to Louisbourg; for which purpose also, the armed vessels were to cruise
before the harbor. The whole fleet was to sail from Canseau, so as to arrive
in Chappeau-rouge bay about nine o'clock in the evening. The troops were to
land in four divisions, and proceed to the assault before morning. If the plan
for the surprisal should fail, he had particular directions where and how to
land, march, encamp, attack and defend; to hold councils and keep records; and
to send intelligence to Boston by certain vessels retained for the purpose,
which vessels were to stop at Castle William, and there receive the Governor's
orders. Several other vessels were appointed to cruise between Canseau and the
camp, to convey orders, transport stores, and catch fish for the army. To close
these instructions, after the most minute detail of duty, the General was
finally left to act upon unforeseen emergencies according to his discretion;
which, in the opinion of military gentlemen, is accounted the most rational
part of the whole. Such was the plan, for the reduction of a regularly
constructed fortress, drawn by a lawyer, to be executed by a merchant, at the
head of a body of husbandmen and mechanics; animated indeed by ardent
patriotism, but destitute of professional skill and experience. After they had
embarked, Prince's thanksgiving sermon, page 25.
the hearts of many began to fail. Some repented that they had voted for the
expedition, or promoted it; and the most thoughtful were in the greatest
perplexity.

The troops were detained at Canseau, three weeks, waiting for the ice which
environed the island of Cape-Breton, to be dissolved. They were all this time
within view of St. Peter's, Pepperell's letters to Shirley, MS.
but were not discovered. Their provisions became short; but they were supplied
by prizes taken by the cruisers. Among others, the New Hampshire sloop took a
ship from Martinico, and retook one of the transports, which she had taken the
day before. At length, to their great joy, Commodore Warrren, in the Superbe,
of sixty guns, April 23.
with three other ships of forty guns each, arrived at Canseau, and having held
a consultation with the General, proceeded to cruise before Louisbourg. The
General having sent the New Hampshire sloop, to cover a detachment which
destroyed the village of St. Peter's, and scattered the inhabitants, sailed with
the whole fleet; but instead of making Chappeau-rouge point in the evening,
April 29.
the wind falling short, they made it at the dawn of the next morning; and
their appearance in the bay, gave the first notice to the French, of a design
formed against them.

The intended surprisal being thus happily frustrated, the next thing after
landing the troops was to invest the city. Vaughan, the adventurer from
New Hampshire, had the rank and pay of a Lieutenant Colonel, but refused to
have a regular command. He was appointed one of the Council of War, and was
ready for any service which the General might think suited to his genius. He
conducted the first column through the woods, within sight of the city, and
saluted it with three cheers. He headed a detachment, consisting chiefly of the
New Hampshire troops, and marched to the north-east part of the harbor, in the
night; where they burned the warehouses, May 1.
containing the naval stores, and staved a large quantity of wine and brandy.
The smoke of this fire being driven by the wind into the grand battery, so
terrified the French, that they abandoned it and retired to the city, after
having spiked the guns and cut the halliards of the flag-staff. The next
morning as Vaughan was returning, May 2.
with thirteen men only, he crept up the hill which overlooked the battery, and
observed, that the chimnies of the barrack were without smoke, and the staff
without a flag. With a bottle of brandy, which he had in his pocket, (though he
never drank spiritous liquors) he hired one of his party, a Cape Cod Indian, to
crawl in at an embrasure and open the gate. He then wrote to the General,
Original MS.
these words, May it please your honor, to be informed, that by the grace of
God, and the courage of thirteen men, I entered the royal battery, about nine
o'clock, and am waiting for a reinforcement, and a flag. Before either could
arrive, one of the men climbed up the staff, with a red coat in his teeth,
which he fastened by a nail to the top. This piece of triumphant vanity alarmed
the city, and immediately an hundred men were dispatched in boats to retake the
battery. But Vaughan, with his small party, on the naked beach, and in the face
of a smart fire from the city and the boats, kept them from landing, till the
reinforcement arrived. In every duty of fatigue or sanguine adventure, he was
always ready; and the New Hampshire troops, animated by the same enthusiastic
ardor, partook of all the labors and dangers of the siege. They were employed
for fourteen nights successively, in drawing cannon from the landing place to
the camp, through a morass; and their Lieutenant Colonel Messerve, being a ship
carpenter, constructed sledges, on which the cannon were drawn, when it was
found that their wheels were buried in the mire. The men, with straps over
their shoulders, and sinking to their knees in mud, performed labor beyond the
power of oxen; which labor could be done only in the night or in a foggy day;
the place being within plain view and ^andom shot of the enemy's walls. They
were much disapappointed and chagrined, when they found that these meritorious
services were not more distinctly acknowledged in the accounts which were sent
to England, and afterward published. Wentworth's letters MS.


In the unfortunate attempt on the island battery by four hundred volunteers
from different regiments, May 26.
the New Hampshire troops were very active. When it was determined to erect a
battery on the lighthouse cliff; two companies of them (Mason's and Fernald's)
were employed in that laborious service, under cover of their armed sloop; and
when a proposal was made for a general assault by sea and land, Colonel Moore,
who had been an experienced sea commander, offered to go on board the Vigilant,
with his whole regiment, and lead the attack, if in case of success he might be
confirmed in the command of the ship; but when this was denied, most of the men
who were fit for duty, readily went on board the Princess Mary, to act as
marines on that occasion.

It has been said, that this siege was carried on in a tumultuary, Douglass I,
352.
random manner, resembling a Cambridge commencement. The remark is in a great
measure true. Though the business of the Council of War was conducted with all
the formality of a legislative assembly; though orders were issued by the
General, and returns made by the officers at the several posts; yet the want of
discipline was too visible in the camp. Those who were on the spot, have
frequently in my hearing, laughed at the recital of their own irregularities,
and expressed their admiration when they reflected on the almost miraculous
preservation of the army from destruction. They indeed presented a formidable
front to the enemy; but the rear was a scene of confusion and frolic. While
some were on duty at the trenches, others were racing, wrestling, pitching
quoits, firing at marks or at birds, or running after shot from the enemy's
guns, for which they received a bounty, and the shot were sent back to the
city. The ground was so uneven and the people so scattered, that the French
could form no estimate of their numbers; nor could they learn it from the
prisoners, taken at the island battery, who on their examination, as if by
previous agreement, represented the number to be vastly greater than it was.
The garrison of Louisbourg had been so mutinous before the siege, that the
officers could not trust the men to make a sortie, lest they should desert; had
they been united and acted with vigor, the camp might have been surprised and
many of the people destroyed.

Much has been ascribed, and much is justly due to the activity and vigilance
of Commodore Warren, and the ships under his command; much is also due to the
vigor and perseverance of the land forces, and the success was doubtless owing,
under God, to the joint efforts of both. Something of policy, as well as
bravery, is generally necessary in such undertakings; and there was one piece
of management, which, though not mentioned by any historian, yet greatly
contributed to the surrender of the city.

The capture of the Vigilant, a French sixty-four gun ship, commanded by the
Marquis de la Maison forte, and richly laden with military stores for the
relief of the garrison, May 19.
was one of the most capital exploits performed by the navy. This ship had been
anxiously expected by the French; and it was thought that the news of her
capture, if properly communicated to them, might produce a good effect; but how
to do it was the question. June. 1.
At length, MS letters of Warren and Pepperell.
the Commodore hit on this expedient, which he proposed to the General, who
approved, and put it into execution. In a skirmish on the island, with a party
of French and Indians, some English prisoners had been taken by them, and used
with cruelty. This circumstance was made known to the Marquis, and he was
requested to go on board of all the ships in the bay where French prisoners
were confined, and observe the condition in which they were kept. He did so,
and was well satisfied with their fare and accommodations. He was then desired
to write to the Governor of the city, and inform him how well the French
prisoners were treated, and to request the like favor for the English
prisoners. The humane Marquis readily consented, June 7.
and the letter was sent the next day by a flag, entrusted to the care of a
Capt. Macdonald. He was carried before the Governor and his chief officers; and
by pretending not to understand their language, he had the advantage of
listening to their discourse; by which he found, that they had not before heard
of the capture of the Vigilant, and that the news of it, under the hand of her
late commander, threw them into a visible perturbation. This event, with the
erection of a battery on the high cliff at the light house, under the direction
of Lieutenant Colonel Gridley, by which the island battery was much annoyed,
and the preparations which were evidently making for a general assault,
determined Duchambon to surrender; and accordingly, in a few days he
capitulated.

June 15 to 17.
Upon entering the fortress and viewing its strength, and the plenty and variety
of its means of defense, the stoutest hearts were appalled, and the
impracticability of carrying it by assault, was fully demonstrated.

No sooner was the city taken, and the army under shelter, Pepperell's letters,
MS
than the weather, which, during the siege, excepting eight or nine days after
the first landing, had been remarkably dry for that climate, changed for the
worse; and, an incessant rain of ten days succeeded. Had this happened before
the surrender, the troops who had then begun to be sickly, and had none but
very thin tents, must have perished in great numbers. Reinforcements of men,
stores and provisions arrived, Of the reinforcements, New Hampshire sent 115
men. The los^ which the New Hampshire troops suffered was but eleven, of whom
^ive were killed and six died of sickness. This was before the surrender. More
died afterward in garrison.

Shirley's letter to Wentworth, from Louisbourg, Sept. 2.
and it was determined in a Council of War to maintain the place and repair the
breaches. A total demolition might have been more advantageous to the nation;
but in that case, individuals would not have enjoyed the profit of drawing
bills on the navy and ordnance establishments. The French flag was kept flying
on the ramparts; and several rich prizes were decoyed into the harbor. The
army supposed that they had a right to a share of these prizes; but means were
found to suppress or evade their claim; nor did any of the Colony cruisers
(except one) though they were retained in the service, under the direction of
the Commodore, reap any benefit from the captures.

The news of this important victory filled America with joy, and Europe with
astonishment. The enterprising spirit of New England gave a serious alarm to
those jealous fears, which had long predicted the independence of the Colonies.
Great pains were taken in England to ascribe all the glory to the navy, and
lessen the merit of the army. However, Pepperell received the title of a
Baronet, as well as Warren. The latter was promoted to be an Admiral; the
former had a commission as Colonel in the British establishment, and was
empowered to raise a regiment in America, to be in the pay of the Crown. The
same emolument was given to Shirley, and both he and Wentworth acquired so much
reputation as to be confirmed in their places. Vaughan went to England to seek
a reward for his services, and there died of the smallpox. Solicitations were
set on foot for a parliamentary reimbursement, Bollan's MS letters.
which, after much difficulty and delay, was obtained; and the Colonies who had
expended their substance were in credit at the British Treasury. The
reimbursement to New Hampshire was sixteen thousand, th^^e hundred and
fifty-five pounds sterling.

Thomlinson's MS. letter.
The justice and policy of this measure must appear to every one, who
considers, that excepting the suppression of a rebellion within the bowels of
the kingdom, this conquest was the only action which could be called a victory,
on the part of the British nation, during the whole French war, and afforded
them the means of purchasing a peace.

CHAP. XX. Projected Expedition to Canada. Alarm by the French fleet. State of
the Frontiers. Peace.
WHILST the expedition to Cape-Breton was in hand, the active mind of Governor
Shirley contemplated nothing less than the conquest of all the French dominions
in America; and he consulted with Governor Wentworth and Mr. Atkinson on the
practicability of such a design. After Louisbourg was taken, he made a visit
thither, and held a consultation with Sir Peter Warren and Sir William
Pepperell; Shirley's MS letters.
and from that place wrote pressingly to the British ministry on the subject.
His solicitation, enforced by the brilliant success at Louisbourg, and the
apparent danger in which Nova Scotia and the new conquest were involved, had
such an effect, that in the spring of the following year, 1746.
a circular letter was sent from the Duke of Newcastle, April 6.
Secretary of State, to all the Governors of the American Colonies, as far
southward as Virginia; requiring them to raise as many men as they could spare,
and form them into companies of one hundred; to be ready to unite, Douglass I,
315.
and act according to the orders which they should afterward receive. The plan
was, that a squadron of ships of war, and a body of land forces, should be sent
from England against Canada; that the troops raised in New England should join
the British fleet and army at Louisbourg, and proceed up the river St.
Lawrence; that those of New York and the other Provinces at the southward,
should be collected at Albany, and march against Crown Point and Montreal. The
management of this expedition was committed to Sir John St. Clair, in
conjunction with Sir Peter Warren and Governor Shirley. St. Clair did not come
to America. Warren and Shirley gave the orders, while Warren was here; and
afterward Commodore Knowles, who succeeded him, was joined with Shirley; but as
Knowles was part of the time at Louisbourg, most of the concern devolved on
Shirley alone.

Beside the danger of losing Nova Scotia and Cape-Breton, there were other
reasons for undertaking this expedition. The Indians, instigated by the
Governor of Canada, Shirley's sp^ech.
were ravaging the frontiers, destroying the fields and cattle, June 28.
burning houses and mills, killing and carrying away the inhabitants. Though
scouts and garrisons were maintained by the governments; yet to act altogether
on the defensive, was thought to be not only an ineffectual, but a disgraceful
mode of carrying on the war; especially after the success which had attended
the arms of the Colonists in their attempt against Louisbourg. The continuance
of such a mode of defense, would neither dispirit the enemy, nor secure the
frontiers from their depredations.

The design was pleasing, and the Colonies readily furnished their quotas of
men. In New Hampshire, the same difficulty occurred as on occasion of the
Louisbourg expedition. The Governor had no authority to consent to the emission
of bills of credit, Shirley's MS letters,
May 31.
but Shirley removed that obstacle, by suggesting to him, that as the ministry
did not disapprove what he had done before, so there was no reason to fear it
now; and that the importance of the service, and the necessity of the case,
would justify his conduct. The demand at first, was for levy money and
victualing. The arms and pay of the troops were to be furnished by the Crown;
but it was afterward found necessary that the several governments should
provide clothing, transports and stores, and depend on a reimbursement from the
British Parliament.

The Assembly was immediately convened, and voted an encouragement for
inlisting a thousand men, June.
or more, if they could be raised; with a bounty of thirty pounds currency, and
a blanket, to each man, besides keeping two armed vessels in pay. Col. Atkinson
was appointed to the command of the troops. Atkinson's MS letters.
Eight hundred men were inlisted and ready for embarkation by the beginning of
July. Transports and provisions were prepared, and the men waited, impatiently,
all summer for employment. Neither the General nor any orders arrived from
England; the fleet, which was said to be destined for the expedition, sailed
seven times from Spithead, and as often returned. Two regiments, only, were
sent from Gibraltar, to Louisbourg, to relieve the New England men, who had
garrisoned it since the conquest. It is much easier to write the history of an
active campaign, than to trace the causes of inaction and disappointment; and
it is in vain to supply the place of facts by conjecture. The last war was
ruinous in the expense, and unsuccessful in the end, for want of consideration,
and a reasonable plan at the beginning.

Doddington's Diary. May 27, 1755. Page 330.


In this time of suspense, Sir Peter Warren, and Sir William Pepperell, having
arrived at Boston, from Louisbourg, Shirley had an opportunity of consulting
them, and such other gentlemen as he thought proper, on the affair of the
Canada expedition. The season was so far advanced, Shirley's and Warren's MS
letters.
that a fleet could hardly be expected from England; August 25.
or if it should arrive, it would be too late to attempt the navigation of the
river St. Lawrence. But, as a sufficient body of the troops might be assembled
at Albany, it was judged prudent to employ them in an attempt against the
French fort at Crown Point. At the same time, Clinton, Governor of New York,
solicited and obtained the friendly assistance of the Six Nations of Indians,
on the borders of his Province. It was thought, that if this attempt should be
made, the alliance with these Indians would be strengthened and secured; and
the frontiers would be relieved from the horrors of desolation and captivity,
to which they were continually exposed. In pursuance of this plan, the forces
of New Hampshire were ordered to hold themselves in readiness, to march to
Albany; MS letter of Secretary Willard.
but, Sept. 1.
it being discovered that the smallpox was there, the rendezvous was appointed
at Saratoga and the adjacent villages.

No sooner was this plan resolved on, and preparations made to carry it into
execution, than accounts were received of danger which threatened Annapolis,
from a body of French and Indians at Minas, Shirley's and Warren's MS letters,
and the probable revolt of the Acadians. It was thought that Nova Scotia would
be lost, Sept. 12.
if some powerful succor were not sent thither. Orders were accordingly
issued, for the troops of Massachusetts, Rhode Island and New Hampshire, to
embark for that place, and drive the enemy out of Nova Scotia. But, within a
few days more, the whole country was alarmed, Sept. 20.
and thrown into the utmost consternation, by reports of the arrival of a large
fleet and army from France, at Nova Scotia, under the command of the Duke
D'Anville. It was supposed that their object was to recover Louisbourg; to take
Annapolis; to break up the settlements on the eastern coast of Massachusetts;
and to distress, if not attempt the conquest of the whole country of
New England. On this occasion, the troops destined for Canada found sufficient
employment at home, and the militia was collected to join them; the old forts
on the sea coast were repaired, and new ones were erected. A new battery,
consisting of sixteen guns, of thirty-two and twenty-four pounds shot, was
added to fort William and Mary, at the entrance of Pascataqua harbor; and
another, of nine thirty-two pounders, was placed at the point of Little
Harbor. These works were supposed to be sufficient to prevent a surprisal.
Military guards were appointed; and in this state of fear and anxiety, the
people were kept for six weeks, when some prisoners, Oct. 25.
who had been released by the French, brought the most affecting accounts of
the distress and confusion on board the fleet. It was expected, by the people
in New England, that an English fleet would have followed them to America. This
expectation was grounded on some letters from England, which Shirley had
received and which he forwarded by express to Admiral Townsend, at Louisbourg.
The letters were intercepted by a French cruiser, and carried into Chebucto,
where the fleet lay. They were opened in a Council of War, and caused a
division among the officers; which, added to the sickly condition of the men,
and the damage which the fleet had sustained by storms, and their loss by
shipwrecks, dejected their commander to that degree, that he put an end to his
life by poison; and the second in command fell on his sword. These melancholy
events, disconcerted their first plan. They then resolved to make an attempt on
Annapolis; but when they had sailed from Chebucto, they were overtaken by a
violent tempest, off Cape Sable; and those ships which escaped destruction,
returned singly to France. Never was the hand of divine Providence more
visible, than on this occasion. Never was a disappointment more severe, on the
side of the enemy; nor a deliverance more complete, without human help, in
favor of this country.

Nova Scotia was not yet out of danger. The French and Indians, who, during the
stay of the fleet at Chebucto, had appeared before Annapolis, but on their
departure retired, were still in the peninsula; and it was thought necessary to
dislodge them. For this purpose Shirley sent a body of the Massachusetts
forces, and pressed the Governors of Rhode Island and New Hampshire to send
part of theirs. Those from Rhode Island, and one transport from Boston, Nov. 10.
were wrecked on the passage. The armed vessels of New Hampshire, with two
hundred men, went to Annapolis; but the commander of one of them, instead of
landing his men, sailed across the bay of Funda, into St. John's river; where,
Dec. 13.
Shirley's MS letters, and affidavits of the crew.
meeting with a French snow, and mistaking her for one of the Rhode Island
transports, he imprudently sent his boat with eight men on board, who were made
prisoners, and the snow escaped. The sloop, instead of returning to Annapolis,
came back to Portsmouth. These misfortunes and disappointments had very serious
ill consequences. The Massachusetts forces, 1747.
who were at Nova Scotia, being inferior in number to the French, and deceived
by false intelligence, were surprised in the midst of a snow storm, at Minas;
and after an obstinate resistance, Jan. 31.
were obliged to capitulate. Their commander, Boston Evening Post.
Col. Arthur Noble, and about sixty men, were killed, and fifty were wounded.
The enemy being provided with snow shoes, made forced marches; and ours being
destitute of them were unable to escape.

When the alarm occasioned by the French fleet had subsided, Atkinson's
regiment marched into the country to cover the lower part of the frontiers, and
encamped near the shore of Winipiseogee lake; where they passed the winter and
built a slight fort. They were plentifully supplied with provisions, and had
but little exercise or discipline. Atkinson's MS letters.
Courts martial were not instituted, nor offenses punished. The officers and
men were tired of the service; but were not permitted to enter on any other
business, lest orders should arrive from England. Some were employed in
scouting; some in hunting or fishing, and some deserted.

Shirley was so intent on attacking Crown Point that he even proposed to march
thither in the winter, Shirley's MS letters.
and had the address to draw the Assembly of Massachusetts into an approbation
of this project. He enlarged his plan, by proposing that the New Hampshire
troops should at the same time go, by the way of Connecticut river, to the
Indian village of St. Francis, at the distance of two hundred miles, and
destroy it; while the troops from Massachusetts, Connecticut and New York,
should go by the way of the Lakes to Crown Point. The Governor of New York
would have consented to this wild projection, on account of the Indian allies,
who were impatient for war; but it was happily frustrated, MS copy of
Connecticut Resolves.
by the prudence of the Connecticut Assembly; Jan. 28.
who deemed the winter an improper season for so great an undertaking, and
deferred their assistance till the ensuing spring. At the same time the small
pox prevailed in the settlements above Albany, through which the forces must
have marched; and that distemper was then an object of much greater dread, than
the storms of winter, or the face of an enemy.

To finish what relates to the Canada forces, it can only be said, that
excepting some who were employed on the frontiers, they were kept in a state of
military indolence, till the autumn of the ensuing year; October, 1747.
when by order from the Duke of Newcastle they were disbanded, and paid at the
same rate as the King's troops. The Governors drew bills on the British
treasury; which were negociated among the merchants at seven and eight hundred
per cent. and the Parliament granted money, Shirley's MS letters.
to reimburse the charges of the equipment and subsistence of these forces.

The state of the frontiers now demands our attention. 1745.
By the extension of the boundaries of the Province, several settlements which
had been made by the people of Massachusetts, and under the authority of grants
from their General Court, had fallen within New Hampshire. In one of them stood
Fort Dummer, on the west side of Connecticut river, and within the lately
extended line of New Hampshire. This fort had been erected and maintained, at
the expense of Massachusetts; but when it was found to be within New Hampshire,
the Governor was instructed by the Crown to recommend to the Assembly, the
future maintenance of it. In the same Assembly, which had so zealously entered
upon the expedition against Cape Breton, this matter was introduced; but a
considerable majority of the lower House declined making any grant for this
purpose, Printed Journal,
May 3.
and adduced the following reasons, viz. That the fort was fifty miles distant
from any towns which had been settled by the government or people of
New Hampshire; that the people had no right to the lands which, by the dividing
line, had fallen within New Hampshire; notwithstanding the plausible arguments
which had been used to induce them to bear the expense of the line; namely,
that the land would be given to them or else would be sold to pay that expense;
that the charge of maintaining that fort, at so great a distance, and to which
there was no communication by roads, would exceed what had been the whole
expense of government before the line was established; that the great load of
debt contracted on that account, and the yearly support of government, with the
unavoidable expenses of the war, were as much as the people could bear; that if
they should take upon them to maintain this fort, there was another much better
and more convenient fort at a place called Number-four, besides several other
settlements, which they should also be obliged to defend; and finally that
there was no danger that these forts would want support, since it was the
interest of Massachusetts, by whom they were erected, to maintain them as a
cover to their frontier.

When these reasons were given, the Governor dissolved the Assembly and called
another, to whom he recommended the same measure in the most pressing terms;
telling them, June 7.
that it was of the last consequence to the present and future prosperity of
the government; that their refusal would lessen them in the esteem of the King
and his ministers, and strip the children yet unborn of their natural right;
and deprive their brethren who were then hazarding their lives before the walls
of Louisbourg of their just expectations, which were to sit down on that
valuable part of the Province. But his eloquence had no effect. They thought it
unjust to burden their Constituents with an expense which could yield them no
profit, and afford them no protection.

When it was determined, that New Hampshire would make no provision for fort
Dummer, the Assembly of Massachusetts continued its usual support, and also
provided for the other posts on Connecticut river and its branches, which were
within the limits of New Hampshire. They afterward petitioned the King, to
deduct that charge out of the reimbursement, which the Parliament had granted
to New Hampshire, for the Canada expedition; but in this they were defeated, by
the vigilance and address of Thomlinson, the agent of New Hampshire.

Most of the frontier towns of New Hampshire, at that time, were distinguished
by no other than by Indian or temporary names. It may be convenient to compare
them with their present names. On Connecticut river, and its eastern branches,
were Number-four, which are now called Charlestown, Great Meadow, which are now
called Westmoreland, Great Fall, which are now called Walpole, Fort Dummer,
which are now called Hinsdale, Upper Ashuelot and which are now called Keen
and Lower Ashuelot, which are now called Swansey.
On Merrimack river and its branches, were Penacook, which are now called
Concord, Suncook, which are now called Pembroke, Contoocook, which are now
called Boscawen, New Hopkinton, which are now called Hopkinton, Souhegan east
and which are now called Merrimack and Souhegan west, which are now called
Amherst.
On Pascataqua river, and its branches, were the townships of Nottingham,
Barrington and Rochester.

Besides the forts which were maintained at the public expense, there were
private houses enclosed with ramparts, or palisades of timber; to which the
people who remained on the frontiers retired; these private garrisoned houses
were disstinguished by the names of the owners. The danger to which these
distressed people were constantly exposed, did not permit them to cultivate
their lands to any advantage. They were frequently alarmed when at labor in
their fields, and obliged either to repel an attack, or make a retreat. Their
crops were often injured, and sometimes destroyed, either by their cattle
getting into the fields where the enemy had broken the fences, or because they
were afraid to venture out, to collect and secure the harvest. Their cattle and
horses were frequently killed by the enemy; who cut the flesh from the bones,
and took out the tongues, which they preserved for food, by drying in smoke.
Sometimes they were afraid even to milk their cows; though they kept them in
pastures as near as possible to the forts. When they went abroad, they were
always armed; but frequently they were shut up for weeks together in a state of
inactivity.

The history of a war on the frontiers can be little else than a recital of the
exploits, the sufferings, the escapes and deliverances of individuals, of
single families or small parties. July 5.
The first appearance of the enemy on the western frontier was at the Great
Meadow, Doolittle's Memoirs, page 2.
sixteen miles above fort Dummer. Two Indians took William Phips, as he was
hoeing his corn. When they had carried him half a mile, one of them went down a
steep hill to fetch something which had been left. In his absence, Phips, with
his own hoe, knocked down the Indian who was with him; then seizing his gun,
shot the other as he ascended the hill. Unfortunately, meeting with three
others of the same party, they killed him. The Indian whom he knocked down died
of his wound. The same week they killed Josiah Fisher of upper Ashuelot. July
10.


No other damage was done for three months; when a party of twelve Indians
approached the fort at Great Meadow, Oct. 11.
and took Nehemiah How, How Is narrative.
who was at a little distance from the fort, cutting wood. The fort was
alarmed, and one Indian was killed by a shot from the rampart; but no attempt
was made to rescue the prisoner. As they were leading him away, by the side of
the river, they espied a canoe coming down, with two men, at whom they fired,
and killed David Rugg; but Robert Baker got to the opposite shore and escaped.
Proceeding farther, they met three other men, who, by skulking under the bank,
got safe to the fort. One of them was Caleb How, the prisoner's son. When they
came opposite to Number-four, they made their captive write his name on a piece
of bark, and left it there. Having traveled seven days westward, they came to
a lake, where they found five canoes, with corn, pork and tobacco. In these
canoes they embarked; and having stuck the scalp of David Rugg on a pole,
proceeded to the fort at Crown-Point; where How received humane treatment from
the French. He was then carried down to Quebec, where he died in prison. He was
a useful man, greatly lamented by his friends and fellow captives.

The next spring, a party of Indians appeared at Number-four, 1746.
where they took John Spafford, April 19.
Isaac Parker and Stephen Farnsworth, (...) memoirs.
as they were driving a team. Their cattle were found dead, with their tongues
cut out. The men were carried to Canada, and, after some time, returned to
Boston, in a flag of truce.

Within a few days, a larger party, consisting of fifty, April 23.
laid a plan to surprise the fort, at Upper Ashuelot. They hid themselves in a
swamp, in the evening; intending to wait till the men had gone out to their
work, in the morning, and then rush in. Ephraim Dorman, who was abroad very
early, Doolittle's memoirs, ^ Sumner's MS letter.
discovered them and gave the alarm. He bravely defended himself against two
Indians, and stripped one of his blanket and gun, which he carried into the
fort. John Bullard, and the wife of Daniel Mc Kenny were killed. Nathan Blake
was taken and carried to Canada, where he remained two years. They burned
several houses and barns; and from the human bones found among the ashes, it
was thought that some of the enemy fell and were concealed in the flames.

About the same time, a party came down to New Hopkinton, where they entered a
garrisoned house, April 27.
and found the people asleep; the door having been left open by one who had
risen early and gone out to hunt. Eight persons were thus taken; How Is
narrative, and Norton's narrative.
Samuel Burbank and his two sons, David Woodwell, his wife, two sons, Boston
Post Boy.
and a daughter. Burbank and the wife of Woodwell, died in captivity. Woodwell
and three of the children returned in a flag of truce to Boston.

The enemy were scattered in small parties, on all the frontiers. May 2.
At Number-four, Doolittle's narrative.
some women went out to milk their cows, with Major Josiah Willard, and several
soldiers, for their guard: Eight Indians who were concealed in a barn, fired on
them, and killed Seth Putnam; as they were scalping him, Willard and two more
fired on them, and mortally wounded two, whom their companions carried off.

At Contoocook, five white men and a negro were fired at. May 4.
Norton's and How Is narratives.
Elisha Cook and the negro were killed. Thomas Jones was taken, and died in
Canada.

At lower Ashuelot, they took Timothy Brown and Robert Moffat, May 6.
who were carried to Canada and returned. At the same time, a party lay about
the fort at Upper Ashuelot. As one of them knocked at the gate in the night,
the sentinel fired through the gate and gave him a mortal wound. Doolittle's
narrative.


May 24.
The danger thus increasing, a reinforcement was sent by the Massachusetts
Assembly, to these distressed towns. Capt. Pain, with a troop, came to
Number-four; and about twenty of his men, going to view the place where Putnam
was killed, fell into an ambush. The enemy rose and fired, and then endeavored
to cut off their retreat. Capt. Phinehas Stevens, with a party, rushed out to
their relief: A skirmish ensued; in which five men were killed on each side,
and one of ours was taken. The Indians left some of their guns and blankets
behind.

In about a month after this, another engagement happened at the same place.
June 19.
As Captain Stevens and Captain Brown were going into the meadow, to look for
their horses, the dogs discovered an ambush, Doolittle's narrative.
which put the men into a posture for action, Boston Even^ng P^^t.
and gave them the advantage of the first fire. After a sharp encounter, the
enemy were driven into a swamp, drawing away several of their dead. In this
action one man only was lost. Several blankets, hatchets, spears, guns and
other things, were left on the ground, which were sold for forty pounds old
tenor. This was reckoned a great booty from such beggarly enemies.

At Bridgman's fort, near Fort Dummer, June 24.
William Robins and James Baker were killed in a meadow. Daniel How and John
Beeman were taken. How killed one of the Indians before he was taken.

When the people wanted bread they were obliged to go to the mills, July 3.
with a guard, every place being full of danger. A party who went to Hinsdale's
mill, with Colonel Willard at their head, in searching round the mill,
discovered an ambush. The enemy were put to flight with the loss of their packs.

At Number-four, one Phillips was killed; Aug. 3.
and as some of the people were bringing him into the fort, they were fired
upon; but none were hurt. Having burned some buildings, and killed some cattle,
the enemy went and ambushed the road near Winchester, where they killed Joseph
Rawson. Aug. 6.


Whilst the upper settlements were thus suffering, the lower towns did not
escape. A party of Indians came down to Rochester, within twenty miles of
Portsmouth. June 27.
Haven's MS. letter.
Five men were at work in a field, having their arms at hand. The Indians
concealed themselves; one of them fired, with a view to induce the men to
discharge their pieces, which they did. The enemy then rushed upon them before
they could load again. They retreated to a small deserted house and fastened
the door. The Indians tore off the roof, and with their guns and tomahawks
dispatched Joseph Heard, Joseph Richards, John Wentworth and Gershom Downs.
They wounded and took John Richards; and then crossing over to another road,
came upon some men who were at work in a field, all of whom escaped; but they
took Jonathan Door, a boy, as he was sitting on a fence. Richards was kindly
used, his wounds were healed, and after eighteen months he was sent to Boston
in a flag of truce. Door lived with the Indians and acquired their manners and
habits; but, after the conquest of Canada, returned to his native place.

Soon after this, another man was killed at Rochester. Aug. 6.
Two men were surprised and taken at Contoocook; and a large party of Indians
lay in Ambush at Penacook, with an intention to attack the people, while
assembled for public worship; but seeing them go armed to their devotions, they
waited till the next morning, when they killed five and took two.

In these irritating skirmishes the summer was spent; Aug. 20.
till a large body of French and Indians attacked Fort Massachusetts, at
Hoosuck. Norton's narrative.
This fort was lost for want of ammunition to defend it. After this success,
the enemy remained quiet during the rest of the summer.

The prospect of an expedition to Canada had induced many of the soldiers who
were posted on the frontiers to inlist into the regiments, because they
preferred active service to the dull routine of a garrison. The defense of the
western posts was not only hazardous, but ineffectual; and some persons in the
north-western part of Massachusetts thought it inexpedient, to be at the charge
of defending a territory, which was out of their jurisdiction. Novembe^.
Their petitions prevailed with the Assembly, to withdraw their troops from the
western parts of New Hampshire. The inhabitants were then obliged to quit their
estates. They deposited in the earth, such furniture and utensils as could be
saved by that means; they carried off on horseback such as were portable; and
the remainder, with their buildings, was left as a prey to the enemy, who came
and destroyed or carried away what they pleased. Four families, who remained in
Shattuck's fort (Hinsdale) defended it against a party of Indians, Sum^er's and
Ol^ott's MS ^etters.
who attempted to burn it. Six men only were left in the fort at Number-four,
who, in the following winter deserted it; and it was wholly destitute for two
months. In this time some gentlemen, who understood the true interest of the
country, prevailed on the Assembly of Massachusetts, to resume the protection
of those deserted places; and to employ a sufficiency of men, not only to
garrison them, but to range the woods and watch the motions of the enemy.

In the latter end of March, Captain Phinehas Stevens, 1747.
who commanded a ranging company of thirty men, came to Number-four; and
finding the fort entire, determined to keep possession of it. He had not been
there many days, when he was attacked by a very large party of French and
Indians, April 4.
commanded by M. Debeline. The dogs, by their barking, discovered that the
enemy were near; which caused the gate to be kept shut, Stevens's letter, in
Boston Evening Post, April 27.
beyond the usual time. One man went out to make discovery and was fired on;
but returned with a slight wound only. The enemy, finding that they were
discovered, arose from their concealment and fired at the fort on all sides.
The wind being high, they set fire to the fences and log-houses, till the fort
was surrounded by flames. Captain Stevens took the most prudent measures for
his security; keeping every vessel full of water and digging trenches under the
walls in several places; so that a man might creep through, and extinguish any
fire, which might catch on the outside of the walls. The fire of the fences did
not reach the fort; nor did the flaming arrows which they incessantly shot
against it take effect. Having continued this mode of attack for two days,
accompanied with hideous shouts and yells; they prepared a wheel carriage,
loaded with dry faggots, to be pushed before them, that they might set fire to
the fort. Before they proceeded to this operation, they demanded a cessation of
arms till the sunrising, which was granted. In the morning Debeline came up
with fifty men, and a flag of truce which he stuck in the ground. He demanded a
parley, which was agreed to. A French officer, with a soldier and an Indian,
then advanced; and proposed that the garrison should bind up a quantity of
provisions with their blankets, and having laid down their arms should be
conducted prisoners to Montreal. Another proposal was, that the two commanders
should meet, and that an answer should then be given. Stevens met the French
commander, who, without waiting for an answer, began to enforce his proposal,
by threatening to storm the fort, and put every man to death, if they should
refuse his terms, and kill one of his men. Stevens answered, that he could
hearken to no terms till the last extremity; that he was entrusted with the
defense of the fort, and was determined to maintain it, till he should be
convinced that the Frenchman could perform what he had threatened. He added,
that it was poor encouragement to surrender, if they were all to be put to the
sword for killing one man, when it was probable they had already killed more.
The Frenchman replied, Go and see if your men dare to fight any longer, and
give me a quick answer. Stevens returned and asked his men, whether they would
fight or surrender. They unanimously determined to fight. This was immediately
made known to the enemy, who renewed their shouting and firing all that day and
night. On the morning of the third day, they requested another cessation for
two hours. Two Indians came with a flag, and proposed, that if Stevens would
sell them provisions they would withdraw. He answered, that to sell them
provisions for money was contrary to the law of nations; but that he would pay
them five bushels of corn for every captive, for whom they would give a
hostage, till the captive could be brought from Canada. After this answer, a
few guns were fired, and the enemy were seen no more.

In this furious attack from a starving enemy, no lives were lost in the fort,
and two men only were wounded. No men could have behaved with more intrepidity
in the midst of such threatening danger. An express was immediately dispatched
to Boston, and the news was there received with great joy. Commodore Sir
Charles Knowles was so highly pleased with the conduct of Capt. Stevens, that
he presented him with a valuable and elegant sword, as a reward of his bravery.
From this circumstance, the township, when it was incorporated, took the name
of Charlestown.

Small parties of the enemy kept hovering, and sometimes discovered themselves.
Sergeant Phelps killed one, near the fort, and escaped unhurt, though fired
upon and pursued by two others.

Other parties went farther down the country; and at Rochester, they ambushed a
company who were at work in a field. The ambush was discovered by three lads,
June 7.
John and George Place, Haven's MS. letter.
and Paul Jennens. The Indians fired upon them. John Place returned the fire
and wounded an Indian. Jennens presented his gun but did not fire; this
prevented the enemy from rushing upon them, till the men from the field came to
their relief and put the Indians to flight.

July 28.
At Penacook, a party of the enemy discovered themselves by ^^ring at some
cattle. Boston Evening Post.
They were pursued by fifty men; and retreated with such precipitation, as to
leave their packs and blankets, with other things behind. One man had his arm
broken in this conflict. About the same time, a man was killed there, who had
just returned from Cape Breton, after an absence of two years. Another was
killed at Suncook; and at Nottingham, Robert Beard, John Folsom and Elizabeth
Simpson, Upham's MS letter.
suffered the same fate.

In the autumn, Major Willard and Captain Alexander, wounded and took a
Frenchman, near Winchester, who was conducted to Boston and returned to Canada.
Soon after, the enemy burned Bridgman's fort; (Hinsdale) and killed several
persons, and took others from that place, and from Number-four, in the ensuing
winter. No pursuit could be made, because the garrison was not provided with
snow shoes, though many hundreds had been paid for by the Government.

The next spring, Captain Stevens was again appointed to command at
Number-four, with a garrison of an hundred men; 1748.
Capt. Humphrey Hobbs being second in command. A scouting party of eighteen,
Olcott's MS letter.
was sent out under Capt. Eleazer Melvin. May 25.
They discovered two canoes in lake Champlain, at which they fired. Doolittle's
narrative.
The fort at Crown Point was alarmed, and a party came out to intercept them.
Melvin crossed their track, and came back to West River; where, as his men were
diverting themselves by shooting salmon, the Indians suddenly came upon them
and killed six. The others came in at different times to Fort Dummer.

On a Sabbath morning, at Rochester, the wife of Jonathan Hodgdon was taken by
the Indians, May 1.
as she was going to milk her cows. Haven's MS letter.
She called aloud to her husband. The Indians would have kept her quiet, but as
she persisted in calling, they killed her, apparently contrary to their
intentions. Her husband heard her cries, and came to her assistance, at the
instant of her death. His gun missed fire, and he escaped. The alarm,
occasioned by this action, prevented greater mischief.

The next month, they killed three men belonging to Hinsdale's fort, June 16.
Nathan French, Joseph Richardson and John Frost. Seven were taken; one of
whom, William Bickford, died of his wounds. Capt. Hobbs, and forty men, being
on a scout near West River, June 26.
were surprised by a party of Indians, with whom they had a smart encounter, of
three hours continuance. Hobbs left the ground, having had three men killed and
four wounded. The same party of the enemy killed two men and took nine, between
fort Hinsdale and fort Dummer. July 14.


The cessation of arms between the belligerent powers did not wholly put a stop
to the incursions of the enemy; 1749.
for after it was known here, and after the garrison of Number-four was
withdrawn, June 17.
excepting fifteen men, Olcott's MS letter.
Obadiah Sortwell was killed, and a son of Capt. Stevens was taken and carried
to Canada; but he was released and returned.

During this affecting scene of devastation and captivity; there were no
instances of deliberate murder nor torture exercised on those who fell into the
hands of the Indians; and even the old custom of making them run the gantlet
was in most cases omitted. On the the contrary there is an universal testimony
from the captives who survived and returned, in favor of the humanity of their
captors. When feeble, they assisted them in traveling; and in cases of
distress from want of provision, they shared with them an equal proportion. A
singular instance of moderation deserves remembrance. An Indian had surprised a
man at Ashuelot; the man asked for quarter, and it was granted: Whilst the
Indian was preparing to bind him, he seized the Indian's gun, and shot him in
one arm. The Indian, however, secured him; but took no other revenge than, with
a kick, to say You dog, how could you treat me so? The gentleman from whom this
information came, has frequently heard the story both from the captive and the
captor. Olcott's MS letter.
The latter related it as an instance of English pers^dy; the former of Indian
lenity.

There was a striking difference between the manner in which this war was
managed, on the part of the English and on the part of the French. The latter
kept out small parties continually engaged in killing, scalping and taking
prisoners; who were sold in Canada and redeemed by their friends, at a great
expense. By this mode of conduct, the French made their enemies pay the whole
charge of their predatory excursions, besides reaping a handsome profit to
themselves. On the other hand, the English attended only to the defense of the
frontiers; and that in such a manner, as to leave them for the most part
insecure. No parties were sent to harrass the settlements of the French. If the
whole country of Canada could not be subdued, nothing less could be attempted.
Men were continually kept in pay, and in expectation of service; but spent
their time either in garrisons, or camps, or in guarding provisions when sent
to the several forts. Though large rewards were promised for scalps and
prisoners, scarcely any were obtained, unless by accident. A confusion of
councils, and a multiplicity of directors, caused frequent changes of measures,
1747.
and delays in the execution of them. The forts were ill supplied with
ammunition, provisions, clothing and snow-shoes. When an alarm happened, it was
necessary, either to bake bread, or dress meat, or cast bullets, before a
pursuit could be made. The French gave commissions to none but those who had
distinguished themselves by some exploit. Among us, persons frequently obtained
preferment, for themselves or their friends, by making their court to
Governors, and promoting favorite measures in town meetings, or General
Assemblies.

A community recovering from a war, like an individual recovering from
sickness, is sometimes in danger of a relapse. This war was not decisive, and
the causes which kindled it were not removed. One of its effects was, that it
produced a class of men, who, having been for a time released from laborious
occupations, and devoted to the parade of military life, did not readily listen
to the calls of industry. To such men peace was burdensome, and the more so,
because they had not the advantage of half pay. The interval between this and
the succeeding war was not long. The peace took place in 1749, and in 1754
there was a call to resume the sword.

CHAP. XXI. Purchase of Mason's claim. Controversy about Representation. Plan
of extending the settlements. Jealousy and resentment of the savages.
WHILST the people were contending with an enemy abroad, an attempt was making
at home, to revive the old claim of Mason, which their fathers had withstood,
and which for many years had lain dormant, till recalled to view by the
politicians of Massachusetts, as already related. After Thomlinson had engaged
with Mason, for the purchase of his title, nothing more was heard of it, till
the controversy respecting the lines was finished, and Wentworth was
established in the seat of government, and in the office of Surveyor of the
Woods. 1744.
The agreement which Thomlinson had made, was in behalf of the Representatives
of New Hampshire; and the instrument was lodged in the hands of the Governor,
who sent it to the House for their perusal and consideration. Oct. 30.
It lay on their table a long time, without any formal notice. Assembly Records.
Quickening messages were sent time after time; but the affairs of the war, and
Mason's absence at sea, and in the expedition to Louisbourg, where he had a
company, together with a disinclination in the House, which was of a different
complexion from that in 1739, prevented any thing from being done.

In the mean time Mason suffered a fine and recovery, 1745.
by which the entail was docked, in the Courts of New Hampshire, Feb. 22.
and he became entitled to the privilege of selling his interest. He also
presented a memorial to the Assembly, in which he told them that he would wait
no longer; 1746.
and unless they would come to some resolution, he should take their silence as
a refusal. Intimations were given, that if they would not ratify the agreement,
a sale would be made to other persons, who stood ready to purchase. At length
the House came to a resolution, that they would comply with the agreement, and
pay the price; Jan. 29.
and that the waste lands should be granted by the General Assembly, to the
inhabitants, as they should think proper. A committee was appointed to treat
with Mason, about fulfilling his agreement, and to draw the proper instruments
of conveyance; but he had on the same day, by deed of sale, for the sum of
fifteen hundred pounds currency, conveyed his whole interest to twelve persons,
Jan. 30.
in fifteen shares. When the House sent a message to the Council to inform them
of this resolution, the Council objected to that clause of the resolve, that
the lands be granted by the General Assembly, as contrary to the royal
commission and instructions; but if the House would address the King, for leave
to dispose of the lands, they said that they were content.

These transactions raised a great ferment among the people. Angry and menacing
words were plentifully thrown out against the purchasers; but they had
prudently taken care to file in the Recorder's office a deed of quit claim to
all the towns which had been settled and granted within the limits of their
purchase. Records of deeds.
The purchasers of this claim were Theodore Atkinson, three fifteenths. M. H.
Wentworth, two fifteenths. Richard Wibird. John Wentworth (son of the
Governor.) George Jaffrey. Samuel Moore. Nathaniel Messerve. Thomas Packer.
Thomas Wallingford. Jotham Odiorne. Joshua Pierce. John Moffat, one fifteenth
each.


The towns quit claimed were, Portsmouth, Dover, Exeter. Hampton, Gosport,
Kingston, Londonderry, Chester, Nottingham, Barrington, Rochester, Canterbury,
Bow, Chichester, Epsom, Barnstead, and afterward Gilmantown.



In this quit claim, they inserted a clause in the following words, excepting
and reserving our respective rights, titles, inheritance and possessions, which
we heretofore had, in common or severalty, as inhabitants or proprietors of
houses or lands, within any of the towns, precincts, districts or villages
aforesaid. This precaution had not at first its effect. A committee of both
Houses was appointed to consider the matter, and they reported, that for
quieting the minds of the people, and to prevent future difficulty, it would be
best for the Province to purchase the claim, for the use and benefit of the
inhabitants; Assembly Record^.
provided that the purchasers would sell it for the cost and charges. This
report was accepted, concurred and consented to, by every branch of the
legislature. A committee was appointed to consult Council, Aug. 4
and agree on proper instruments of conveyance. The same day, this committee
met with the purchasers, and conferred on the question, whether they would sell
on the terms proposed? At the conference, the purchasers appeared to be
divided, and agreed so far only, as to withdraw their deed from the Recorder's
office. The committee reported that they could make no terms with the
purchasers; Aug. 12.
Aug. 28.
in consequence of which the deed was again lodged in the office and recorded.

Much blame was cast on the purchasers, for clandestinely taking a bargain out
of the hands of the Assembly. They said in their vindication, that they saw no
prospect of an effectual purchase by the Assembly, Sept. 4.
MS letter, in Proprietary Office.
though those of them who were members, voted for it, and did what they could
to encourage it; that they would have gladly given Mason as much money, for his
private quit-claim to their several rights in the townships already granted and
settled; that Mason's claim had for many years hung over the Province, and that
on every turn they had been threatened with a proprietor; that Mason's deed to
a committee of Massachusetts, in behalf of that Province, for a tract of land
adjoining the boundary line, had been entered on the records, and a title under
it set up, in opposition to grants made by the Governor and Council; that it
was impossible to say where this evil would stop, and therefore they thought it
most prudent to prevent any farther effects of it, by taking up with his offer,
especially as they knew that he might have made a more advantageous bargain,
with a gentleman of fortune in the neighboring Province; but that they were
still willing, to sell their interest to the Assembly, for the cost and
charges; provided that the land be granted by the Governor and Council; and
that the agreement be made within one month from the date of their letter.

Within that month, the alarm caused by the approach of D'Anville's fleet, put
a stop to the negotiation. After that danger was over, the affair was revived;
but the grand difficulty subsisted. The purchasers would not sell, but on
condition that the lands should be granted, by the Governor and Council. The
Assembly thought that they could have no security that the land would be
granted to the people; because the Governor and Council might grant it to
themselves, or to their dependents, or to strangers, 1747.
and the people who had paid for it might be excluded from the benefit which
they had purchased. Aug. 20.
A proposal was afterward made, that the sale should be to feoffees in trust
for the people; and a form of a deed for this purpose was drawn. To this
proposal, the purchasers raised several objections; and as the Assembly had not
voted any money to make the purchase, they declined signing the deed; and no
farther efforts being made by the Assembly, the purchase rested in the hands of
the proprietors. In 1749 they took a second deed, comprehending all the
Masonian grants, from Naumkeag to Pascataqua; Records of deeds.
whereas the former deed was confined to the lately established boundaries of
New Hampshire. This latter deed was not recorded till 1753.

After they had taken their first deed, the Masonians began to grant townships,
1748.
and continued granting them to petitioners, often without fees, and always
without quit-rents. They quieted the proprietors of the towns, on the western
side of the Merrimack, which had been granted by Massachusetts, before the
establishment of the line; so that they went on peaceably with their
settlements. The terms of their grants were, that the grantees should, within a
limited time, erect mills and meeting houses, clear out roads and settle
ministers. In every township, they reserved one right for the first settled
minister, another for a parsonage, and a third for a school. They also reserved
fifteen rights for themselves, and two for their attorneys; all of which were
to be free from taxes, till sold or occupied. By virtue of these grants, many
townships were settled, and the interest of the people became so united with
that of the proprietors, that the prejudice against them gradually abated; and,
at length, even some who had been the most violent opposers, acquiesced in the
safety and policy of their measures, though they could not concede to the
validity of their claim.

The heirs of Allen, menaced them by advertisements, and warned the people
against accepting their grants. They depended on the recognition of Allen's
purchase, in the Charter of Massachusetts, as an argument in favor of its
validity; and supposed, that because the ablest lawyers in the kingdom were
consulted, and employed in framing that charter, they must have had evidence of
the justice of his pretensions, before such a reservation could have been
introduced into it. So strong was the impression, which this argument had made,
MS letters of Thomlinson.
on the minds of speculators in England, that large sums had been offered, to
some of Allen's heirs, in that kingdom; and, Thomlinson himself, the first
mover of the purchase from Mason, in behalf of New Hampshire, had his doubts;
and would have persuaded the associates to join in buying Allen's title also,
even at the price of two thousand pounds sterling, to prevent a more expensive
litigation, the issue of which would be uncertain. But they, being vested with
the principal offices of government; being men of large property, which was
also increased by this purchase; and having satisfied themselves, of the
validity of their title, by the opinions of some principal lawyers, both here
and in England, contented themselves with the purchase which they had made; and
by maintaining their possession, extended the cultivation of the country within
their limits.

The words of the original grants to Mason, describe an extent of sixty miles,
from the sea, on each side of the Province, and a line to cross over from the
end of one line of sixty miles, to the end of the other. The Masonian
proprietors pleaded, that this cross line should be a curve, because, no other
line would preserve the distance of sixty miles from the sea, in every part of
their western boundary. No person had any right to contest this point with
them, but the King. It was not for the interest of his Governor and Council to
object; because several of them, and of their connections, were of the Masonian
propriety; and no objection was made by any other persons, in behalf of the
Crown. Surveyors were employed, at several times, to mark this curve line; but
on running, first from the southern, and then from the eastern boundary, to the
river Pemigewasset, they could not make the lines meet. Controversies were thus
engendered, between the grantees of Crown lands and those of the Masonians,
which subsisted for many years. In some cases, the disputes were compromised,
and in others, left open for litigation; till, by the revolution, the
government fell into other hands.

This was not the only controversy, which, till that period, remained
undetermined. When the extension of the boundary lines gave birth to a demand,
for the maintenance of fort Dummer, the Governor had the address, Printed
Journal,
to call to that Assembly, Jan. 1744.
into which he introduced this demand, six new members; who appeared as
representatives for six towns and districts, some of which had been, by the
southern line, cut off from Massachusetts. It was supposed that his design, in
calling these members, was to facilitate the adoption of fort Dummer. Other
towns, which ought to have had the same privilege extended to them, were
neglected. When the new members appeared in the House, the Secretary, by the
Governor's order, administered to them the usual oaths; after which, they were
asked, in the name of the House, by what authority they came thither? They
answered, that they were chosen by virtue of a writ, in the King's name,
delivered to their respective towns and districts, by the Sheriff. The House
remonstrated to the Governor, that these places had no right, by law, nor by
custom, to send persons to represent them, and then debarred them from the
privilege of voting, in the choice of a Speaker; two only dissenting, out of
nineteen. Several sharp messages passed, between the Governor and the House, on
that occasion; but the pressing exigencies of the war, and the proposed
expedition to Cape-Breton, obliged him, for that time, to give way, and suffer
his new members to be excluded, till the King's pleasure could be known.

The House vindicated their proceedings, by appealing to their records; from
which it appeared, that all the additions, which had been made to the House of
Representatives, were, in consequence of their own votes, either issuing a
precept themselves, or requesting the Governor to do it; from which they
argued, that no town, or parish, ought to have any writ, for the choice of a
Representative, but by a vote of the House, or by an act of the Assembly. On
the other side, it was alleged, that the right of sending Representatives was
originally founded on the royal commission and instructions, and therefore,
that the privilege might, by the same authority, be lawfully extended to the
new towns, as the King, or his Governor, by advice of Council, might think
proper. The precedents on both sides were undisputed; but neither party would
admit the conclusion drawn by the other. Had this difficulty been foreseen, it
might have been prevented when the triennial act was made in 1727. The defects
of that law, began now to be severely felt; but could not be remedied.

The dispute having thus subsided, was not revived during the war; but as soon
as the peace was made, and be King had gone on a visit to his German dominions,
Dougla^^, II, 35.
an additional instruction was sent from the Lords Justices, who presided in
the King's absence, directing the Governor to dissolve the Assembly then
subsisting; June 30.
and when another should be called, to issue the King's writ to the Sheriff,
commanding him to make out precepts to the towns and districts, whose
Representatives had been before excluded; and that when they should be chosen,
the Governor should support their rights.

Had this instruction extended to all the other towns in the Province, which
had not been before represented, it might have been deemed equitable; but as it
respected those only, which had been the subject of controversy, it appeared to
be grounded on partial information, and intended to strengthen the prerogative
of the Crown, without a due regard to the privileges of the people at large.

The party in opposition to the Governor became more acrimonious than ever.
1749.
Richard Waldron, Jan. 3.
the former Secretary, and the confidential friend of Belcher, appeared in the
new Assembly and was chosen Speaker. The Governor negatived him; and ordered
the House to admit the new members, and choose another Speaker. They denied his
power of negativing their Speaker and of introducing new members. The style of
his messages was peremptory and severe; their answers and remonstrances were
calm, but resolute, and in some instances satirical. Neither party would yield;
no business was transacted; though the Assembly met about once in a month, and
was kept alive, by adjournments and prorogations, for three years. Had he
dissolved them, before the time for which they were chosen had expired, he
knew, that in all probability, the same persons would be re-elected.

The effect of this controversy was injurious to the Governor, as well as to
the people. The public bills of credit had depreciated since this
administration began, in the ratio of thirty to fifty-six; and the value of the
Governor's salary had declined in the same proportion. The excise could neither
be farmed nor collected; and that part of the Governor's salary, which was
funded upon it, failed. The Treasurer's accounts were unsettled. The soldiers,
who had guarded the frontiers in the preceding war, were not paid; nor were
their muster-rolls adjusted. The public records of deeds were shut up; for the
Recorder's time having expired, and the appointment being by law vested in the
Assembly, no choice could be made. No authenticated papers could be obtained,
though the agent was constantly soliciting for those which related to the
controversy about Fort Dummer, at that time before the King and Council.

1749. 1750. 1751.
When the situation of the Province was known in England, an impression to its
disadvantage was made on the minds of its best friends; and they even imagined
that the Governor's conduct was not blameless. August 10, 1749, Mr. Thomlinson
wrote thus to Mr. Atkinson. I am sorry to find by your letters, and by every
body from your country, the confusion your Province is in. I wish I could set
you right. I cannot help thinking that the Governor has done some imprud^^t
things; but the other party is fundamentally wrong, and the Governor will
always be supported as long as he conducts himself by his Majesty's
instructions, and in his right of negativing a speaker. Notwithstanding this, I
am surprised that he, or any other Governor, should not think it their
interest, to behave so to all sorts of people under their government, as to
make all their enemies their friends, rather than to make their friends their
enemies.

October 19, 1749, Mr. Atkinson wrote thus in answer. I am supposed by many
people to be privy to all the Governor's transactions here, which is totally
without foundation. I never saw a letter which he wrote home, nor any he
received, only, when any of them were communicated to the Council or Assembly;
nor any of his speeches or messages. So that, really, I cannot be said to
advise. Neither do I see what reason the people have to complain. His greatest
enemies are now of the Assembly, and in all the controversy, not one particular
instance of injustice or oppression has been mentioned by them; and when you
read over their several messages, and votes, you will not discover any
inclination to conceal the least failing he had been the author of.


The language at Court was totally changed. The people of New Hampshire who had
formerly been in favor, as loyal and obedient subjects, were now said to be in
rebellion. Their agent was frequently reproached and mortified on their
account, Thomlinson's MS ^etters.
and was under great apprehension, that they would suffer, not only in their
reputation, but in their interest. The agent of Massachusetts was continually
soliciting for repayment of the charges of maintaining fort Dummer, and it was
in contemplation, to take off a large district from the western part of
New Hampshire, and to annex it to Massachusetts, to satisfy them for that
expense. Besides this, the paper money of the Colonies was under the
consideration of Parliament; and the Province of Massachusetts was rising into
favor for having abolished that system of iniquity. The same justice was
expected of New Hampshire, since they had the same means in their power by the
reimbursement granted to them by Parliament for the Cape-Breton and Canada
expeditions. This money, amounting to about thirty thousand pounds sterling,
clear of all fees and commissions, had lain long in the treasury; and when it
was paid to the agent, he would have placed it in the funds, where it might
have yielded an interest of three per cent; but having no directions from the
Assembly, he locked it up in the bank. This was a clear loss to them of nine
hundred pounds per annum. There were some who reflected on the agent, as if he
had made an advantage to himself of this money. Had he done it, his own capital
was sufficient to have answered any of their demands; but it was also
sufficient to put him above the necessity of employing their money, either in
trade or speculation.

It had also been suggested, that Thomlinson, at the Governor's request, had
solicited and procured the instruction, which had occasioned this unhappy
stagnation of business. When this suggestion came to his knowledge, MS letter
of Thomlinson to H. Sherburne,
he exculpated himself from the charge, in a letter which he wrote to a leading
member of the Assembly; Nov. 13, 1749.
and gave a full account of the matter as far as it had come to his knowledge.
He said, that the Governor himself had stated the facts in his letters to the
ministry; concerning his calling of the new members, in 1745, and their
exclusion from the Assembly, with the reasons given for it; and had desired to
know the King's pleasure, and to have directions how to act. That the ministry,
without any exception or hesitation, had pronounced his conduct conformable to
his duty. That nevertheless, the Board of Trade had solemnly considered the
matter, and consulted Council, and had summoned him, as agent of the Province,
to attend their deliberation. Their result was, that as the Crown had an
indisputable right to incorporate any town in England, and qualify it to send
members to Parliament, so the same right and power had been legally given to
all the Governors in America; by means of which, all the Assemblies in the
King's governments had increased in number, as the Colonies had increased in
settlements. That any other usage in calling Representatives was wrong;
although it might have been indulged, when the Province was under the same
Governor with Massachusetts. This was all which passed before the additional
instruction came out, which was sent through the hands of the Agent. As it was
founded on a question concerning the rights and prerogatives of the Crown; he
argued the absurdity of supposing, either that it had been solicited, or that
any attempt to have it withdrawn could be effectual. His advice was, that they
should submit to it; because, that under it, they would enjoy the same rights
and privileges with their fellow subjects in England, and in the other
Colonies; assuring them, that the then reigning Prince had never discovered the
least inclination to infringe the constitutional rights of any of his subjects.

This advice, however salutary, had not the intended effect. Instead of
submitting, the party in opposition to the Governor, framed a complaint against
him, and sent it to London, to be presented to the King. If they could have
prevailed, their next measure would have been, to recommend a gentleman of
Massachusetts for his successor. This maneuver came to the ears of Thomlinson;
but he was under no necessity to exert himself on this occasion; for the person
to whose care the address was entrusted, considering the absurdity of
complaining to the King, MS letters of Thomlinson.
against his Governor, for acting agreeably to his instructions, was advised
not to present it. This disappointment vexed the opposition to such a degree,
that they would have gladly dissolved the government, and put themselves under
the jurisdiction of Massachusetts, had it been in their power. But, finding all
their efforts ineffectual, either to have the instruction withdrawn, or the
Governor removed, they consoled themselves with this thought, that it was
better to have two privileges taken from them, than voluntarily to give up one.

The time for which this Assembly was elected having expired, 1752.
a new one was called in the same manner. Jan. 2.
They came together with a spirit of moderation, and a disposition to transact
the long neglected business. The members, from the new towns, quietly took
their seats. An unexceptionable Speaker was elected. A Recorder was appointed.
Records of Assembly.
A committee was chosen to settle the Treasurer's accounts, and a vote was
passed for putting the reimbursement money into the public funds in England.
Atkinson's MS letters.
The Governor's salary was augmented, and all things went on smoothly. The
party which had been opposed to the Governor, declined, in number and in
virulence: Some were removed by death; others were softened and relaxed. A
liberal distribution of commissions, civil and military, was made, and an era
of domestic reconciliation commenced.

The controversy respecting Fort Dummer, and the fear of losing a district in
that neighborhood, quickened the Governor to make grants of several townships
in that quarter, on both sides of Connecticut river; chiefly to those persons
who claimed the same lands, under the Massachusetts title. The war being over,
the old inhabitants returned to their plantations, and were strengthened by
additions to their number. It was in contemplation, to extend the settlements,
farther up Connecticut river, to the rich meadows of Cohos. The plan was, to
cut a road to that place; to lay out two townships, one on each side of the
river, and opposite to each other; to erect stockades, with lodgments for two
hundred men, Atkinson's MS letters.
in each township, enclosing a space of fifteen acres; in the center of which
was to be a citadel, containing the public buildings and granaries, which were
to be large enough to receive all the inhabitants, and their movable effects,
in case of necessity. As an inducement to people to remove to this new
plantation; they were to have Courts of Judicature, and other civil privileges
among themselves, and were to be under strict military discipline. A large
number of persons engaged in this enterprise; and they were the rather
stimulated to undertake it, because it was feared, that the French, who had
already begun to encroach on the territory claimed by the British Crown, would
take possession of this valuable tract, if it should be left unoccupied.

MS letters of Col. Israel Williams.
In pursuance of this plan, a party was sent up in the spring of 1752, to view
the meadows of Cohos, and lay out the proposed townships. The Indians observed
them, and suspected their intentions. The land was theirs, and they knew its
value. A party of the Arosaguntacook, or St. Francis Tribe was deputed, to
remonstrate against this proceeding. They came to the fort at Number-four, with
a flag of truce; pretending that they had not heard of a treaty of peace, which
had been made with the several Indian tribes. They complained to Captain
Stevens, of the encroachment which was meditating on their land; and said, that
they could not allow the English to settle at Cohos, when they owned more land
already than they could improve; and, that if this settlement were pursued,
they should think the English had a mind for war, and would resist them. This
threatening being communicated to the Governor of Massachusetts, and by him to
the Governor of New Hampshire, threw such discouragement on the project that it
was laid aside.

The Indians did not content themselves with remonstrating and threatening. Two
of the same tribe named Sabatis and Christi, came to Canterbury; April.
MS depositions.
where they were entertained in a friendly manner for more than a month. At
their departure, they forced away two negroes; one of whom escaped and
returned; and the other was carried to Crown Point and sold to a French
officer. A party of ten or twelve of the same tribe, commanded by Captain
Moses, met with four young men who were hunting on Baker's river. One of these
was John Stark. When he found himself surprised and fallen into their hands,
May. Shirley's printed conference, 1754.
he called to his brother William Stark, who being in a canoe, gained the
opposite shore, Information* (...) W. St^rk.
and escaped. They fired at the canoe and killed a young man who was in it.
John received a severe beating from the Indians for alarming his brother. They
carried him and his companion, Eastman, up Connecticut river, through several
carrying places, and down the Lake Memphrimagog to the head quarters of their
tribe. There they dressed him in their finest robes and adopted him as a son.
This early captivity, from which he was redeemed, qualified him to be an expert
partisan, in the succeeding war; from which station, he afterward rose to the
rank of Major General in the armies of the United States.

The next year Sabatis, with another Indian named Plausawa, 1753.
came to Canterbury; June, MS depositions.
where, being reproached with the misconduct respecting the negroes, he and his
companion behaved in an insolent manner. Several persons treated them very
freely with strong liquor. One followed them into the woods, and killed them,
and by the help of another, buried them; but so shallow, that their bodies were
devoured by beasts of prey, and their bones lay on the ground. By the treaties
of peace, it had been stipulated, on the one part, that if any of the Indians
should commit an act of hostility against the English, their young men should
join with the English in reducing such Indians to submission; and on the other
hand, that if an Englishman should injure any of them, no private revenge
should be taken; but application should be made to the government for justice.
In the autumn of the same year, a conference being held, with the eastern
Indians, by the government of Massachusetts, a present was made to the
Arosaguntacook tribe, Printed conference, 1753.
expressive of an intention to wipe away the blood. They accepted the present,
and ratified the peace which had been made in 1749.

The two men who killed Sabatis and Plausawa, 1754.
were apprehended and brought to Portsmouth. MS letters of Gove^^nor Wen^^worth.
A bill was found against them by the Grand Jury, and they were confined in
irons. In the night, before the day appointed for their trial, an armed mob
from the country, with axes and crows, forced the prison, and carried them off
in triumph. A proclamation was issued, and a reward offered by the Governor for
apprehending the rioters; but no discovery was made, and the action was even
deemed meritorious. The next summer, another conference was held at Falmouth,
at which Commissioners from New Hampshire assisted. Printed conference
The Arosaguntacooks did not attend; but sent a message, purporting that the
blood was not wiped away. The Commissioners from New Hampshire made a handsome
present, to all the Indians, who appeared at this conference; which ended as
usual, in fair promises of peace and friendship.

CHAP. XXII. The last French and Indian war, which terminated in the conquest
of Canada. Controversy concerning the lands westward of Connecticut river.
BY the treaty of Aix la Chappelle, in 1748, it was stipulated, that all things
should be restored, Printed treaty.
on the footing they were before the war. The island of Cape-Breton was
accordingly restored to France; but the limits of the French and English
territories on the continent, were undetermined; and it was the policy of both
nations to gain possession of important passes, to which each had some
pretensions, and to hold them, till the limits should be settled by
Commissioners mutually chosen. These commissioners met at Paris; but came to no
decision. By the construction of charters and grants from the Crown of England,
her colonies extended indefinitely westward. The French had settlements in
Canada and Louisiana, and they meditated to join these distant Colonies, by a
chain of forts and posts, from the St. Lawrence to the Missisippi; and to
extend the limits of Canada, as far eastward, as to command navigation in the
winter, when the great river St. Lawrence is impassable. These claims of
territory, extending on the one part from east to west, and on the other from
north to south, necessarily interfered. The Colonies of Nova Scotia, New York
and Virginia, were principally affected by this interference; and the
encroachments made on them by the French, were a subject of complaint, both
here and in Europe.

It was foreseen that this controversy could not be decided but by the sword;
and the English determined to be early in their preparations. 1754.
The Earl of Holderness, Shirley's letters and speeches.
Secretary of State, wrote to the Governors of the American Colonies,
recommending union for their mutual protection and defense. A meeting of
Commissioners from the Colonies, at Albany, having been appointed, for the
purpose of holding a conference with the Six Nations, on the subject of French
encroachments, within their country; it was proposed, by Governor Shirley, to
the several Governors, that the delegates should be instructed on the subject
of union.

At the place appointed, the Congress was held; June 19.
consisting of delegates from Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island,
Connecticut, Pennsylvania and Maryland; with the Lieutenant Governor and
Council of New York. Atkinson's MS Journal.
They took their rank in geographical order, beginning at the north. One member
from each Colony was appointed to draw a plan of union; Hutchinson of
Massachusetts, Atkinson of New Hampshire, Hopkins of Rhode Island, Pitkin of
Connecticut, Smith of New York, Franklin of Pennsylvania, and Tasker of
Maryland. The substance of the plan was, that application be made, for an act
of Parliament, to form a grand Council, consisting of delegates from the
several legislative Assemblies, subject to the control of a President-General,
to be appointed by the Crown, with a negative voice. That this Council should
enact general laws; apportion the quotas of men and money, to be raised by each
Colony; determine the building of forts; regulate the operations of armies; and
concert all measures for the common protection and safety. The delegates of
Connecticut alone, entered their dissent to the plan, because of the negative
voice of the President-General. It is worthy of remark, that this plan, for the
union of the Colonies, was agreed to, on the fourth day of July; exactly
twenty-two years before the declaration of American independence, and that the
name of FRANKLIN appears in both. At this Congress, a present from the Crown
was distributed to the Indians. The Commissioners of New Hampshire, Atkinson,
Wibird, Sherburne and Wea^e, by direction of the Assembly, made them a separate
present. It is a custom among the Six Nations, to give a NAME to their
benefactors on such occasions. The name which they gave to the Province of
New Hampshire was So-saguax-^wane. I have inquired of the Rev. Mr. Kirkland,
the meaning of this name: He informed me that So signifie^, AGAIN; s^guax, a
DISH; and owane^ LARGE.


With the plan of union, a representation was made to the King, of the danger
in which the Colonies were involved. Copies of both were laid before the
several Assemblies. They were fully sensible of their danger from the French;
but they apprehended greater danger from the plan of union. Its fate was
singular. It was rejected in America, because it was supposed to put too much
power into the hands of the King; and it was rejected in England, because it
was supposed to give too much power to the Assemblies of the Colonies. The
ministry made another proposal; that the Governor, Franklin's Examination. 1766.
with one or two members of the Council, of each Colony, should assemble, and
consult for the common defense, and draw on the British treasury for the sums
expended; which should be raised by a general tax, laid by Parliament, on the
Colonies. But this was not a time to push such an alarming innovation; and when
it was found impracticable, the ministry determined to employ their own troops,
to fight their battles in America, rather than to let the Colonists feel their
own strength, and be directed by their own Counsels.

To draw some aid however from the Colonies was necessary. Their militia might
serve as guards, or rangers, or laborers, or do garrison duty, or be employed
in other inferior offices; but British troops, commanded by British officers,
must have the honor of reducing the French dominions in North America.

The savage nations in the French interest were always ready, on the first
appearance of a rupture, to take up the hatchet. It was the policy of the
French government, to encourage their depredations, on the frontiers of the
English Colonies, to which they had a native antipathy. By this means, the
French could make their enemies pay the whole expense of a war; for all the
supplies, which they afforded to the Indians, were amply compensated, by the
ransom of captives. In these later wars, therefore, we find the savages more
dextrous in taking captives, and more tender of them when taken, than in former
wars; which were carried on with circumstances of greater cruelty.

No sooner had the alarm of hostilities, which commenced between the English
and French, in the western part of Virginia, spread through the continent; than
the Indians renewed their attacks on the frontiers of New Hampshire. A party of
them made an assault, Aug. 15.
on a family at Baker's-town, on Pemigewasset river; where they killed a woman,
and took several captives. Within three days they killed a man and woman at
Steven's town in the same neighborhood; Aug. 18.
upon which the settlements were broken up, Council minutes.
and the people retired to the lower towns for safety, and the government was
obliged to post soldiers in the deserted places. After a few days more, Aug. 29.
they broke into the house of James Johnson, at Number-four, early in the
morning, before any of the family were awake; and took him, with his wife and
three children, her sister Miriam Willard, and two men, Peter Laboree and
Ebenezer Farnsworth. The surprisal was complete and bloodless, Olcott's MS
letter.
and they carried them off undisturbed. The next day Johnson's wife was
delivered of a daughter, who from the circumstances of its birth was named
Captive. The Indians halted one day, on the woman's account, and the next day
resumed their march; carrying her on a litter, which they made for the purpose,
and afterward put her on horseback. On their march, they were distressed for
provision; and killed the horse for food; the infant was nourished, by sucking
pieces of its flesh. When they arrived at Montreal, Johnson obtained a parole,
of two months, to return and solicit the means of redemption. He applied to the
Assembly of New Hampshire, and after some delay obtained one hundred and fifty
pounds sterling. Dec. 19.
Assembly Records.
But the season was so far advanced, and the winter proved so severe, that he
did not reach Canada till the spring. He was then charged with breaking his
parole; a great part of his money was taken from him by violence; and, he was
shut up with his family in prison; where they took the small pox, which they
happily survived. After eighteen months, the woman, with her sister, and two
daughters, were sent in a cartel ship to England; and thence returned to
Boston. Johnson was kept in prison three years; and then, with his son,
returned and met his wife in Boston; where he had the singular ill fortune, to
be suspected of designs unfriendly to his country, and was again imprisoned;
but no evidence being produced against him, he was liberated. His eldest
daughter was retained in a Canadian nunnery.

The fort and settlement at Number-four, being in an exposed situation,
required assistance and support. It had been built by Massachusetts when it was
supposed to be within its limits. It was projected by Colonel Stoddard, of
Northampton, and was well situated, in connection with the other forts, on the
western frontier, Shirley's MS letters.
to command all the paths, by which the Indians traveled from Canada to
New England. It was now evidently in New Hampshire; and Shirley, by advice of
his Council, applied to Wentworth, recommending the future maintenance of that
post, to the care of his Assembly; but they did not think themselves interested
in its preservation, and refused to make any provision for it. The inhabitants
made several applications for the same purpose; but were uniformly
disappointed. They then made pressing remonstrances to the Assembly of
Massachusetts, Massachus^ Records.
who sent soldiers for the defense of that post, and of Fort Dummer, till 1757;
when they supposed that the commander in chief of the King's forces would take
them under his care, as royal garrisons. It was also recommended to the
Assembly of New Hampshire to build a fort at Cohos; but this proposal met the
same fate.

The next spring, three expeditions were undertaken against the French forts.
1755.
One against Fort Duquesne, on the Ohio, was conducted by General Braddock; who
was defeated and slain. Another against Niagara, by Governor Shirley, which
miscarried; and a third against Crown Point, by General Johnson. For this last
expedition, New Hampshire raised five hundred men, and put them under the
command of Col. Joseph Blanchard. The Governor ordered them to Connecticut
river, to build a fort at Cohos, supposing it to be in their way to Crown
Point. They first marched to Baker's-town, where they began to build batteaux,
and consumed time and provisions to no purpose. By Shirley's advice they
quitted that futile employment, and made a fatiguing march through the woods,
by the way of Number-four, to Albany. Whilst Johnson lay encamped at Lake
George, with his other forces, he posted the New Hampshire regiment at Fort
Edward. On the eighth of September, he was attacked in his camp, by Baron
Dieskau, commanding a body of French regular troops, Sept. 8.
Canadians and Savages. On the morning of that day, a scouting party from Fort
Edward discovered wagons burning in the road; upon which Captain Nathaniel
Folsom was ordered out, with eighty of the New Hampshire regiment, and forty of
New York under Capt. McGennis. When they came to the place, they found the
waggoners and the cattle dead; but no enemy was there. Hearing the report of
guns* toward the lake, they hasted thither; and having approached within two
miles, found the baggage of the French army, under the care of a guard, whom
they attacked and dispersed. When the retreating army of Dieskau appeared,
about four of the clock in the afternoon, Folsom's information.
Folsom posted his men among the trees, and kept up a well directed fire, till
night; the enemy retired, with great loss, and he made his way to the camp,
carrying his own wounded, and several French prisoners, with many of the
enemy's packs. This well-timed engagement, ^ohnson's printed letter.
in which but six men on our side were lost, deprived the French army of their
ammunition and baggage; the remains of which were brought into camp the next
day. After this, the regiment of New Hampshire joined the army. The men were
employed in scouting, Atkinson's MS letters.
which service they performed in a manner so acceptable, that no other duty was
required of them. Parties of them frequently went within view of the French
fort at Crown-Point; and at one time they brought off the scalp of a French
soldier, whom they killed near the gate.

After the engagement on the 8th of September, when it was found necessary to
reinforce the army; a second regiment, of three hundred men, was raised in
New Hampshire, and put under the command of Col. Peter Gilman. These men were
as alert, and indefatigable as their brethren, though they had not opportunity
to give such convincing evidence of it. The expedition was no farther pursued;
and late ^n autumn the forces were disbanded and returned home.

The exertions made for the reduction of Crown Point, not only failed of their
object, but provoked the Indians, to execute their mischievous designs, against
the fron^iers of New Hampshire; which were wholly uncovered, and exposed to
their ^ull force. Between the rivers Connecticut and St. Francis, there is a
safe and easy communication by short carrying-places, with which they were
perfectly acquainted. The Indians of that river, therefore, made frequent
incursions, and returned unmolested with their prisoners and booty.

At New-Hopkinton, they took a man and a boy; but perceiving the approach of a
scouting party, Sum^er's MS letter.
they fled and left their captives. At Keen, they took Benjamin Twitchel, and
at Walpole they kill-Daniel Twitchel, and a man named Flynt. At the same place
Colonel Bellows, at the head of twenty men, Fessenden's MS letter.
met with a party of fifty Indians; and having exchanged some shot, and killed
several of the enemy, he broke through them and got into the fort; not one man
of his company being killed or wounded. After a few days, these Indians, being
joined by others to the number of one hundred and seventy, assaulted the
garrison of John Kilburne, in which were himself, John Pike, two boys and
several women; who bravely defended the house and obliged the enemy to retire,
with considerable loss. Pike was mortally wounded. Some of these Indians joined
Dieskau's army, and were in the battle at Lake George. At Number-four, they
killed a large number of cattle, and cut off the flesh. At Hinsdale, they
attacked a party, who were at work in the woods; killed John Hardiclay and John
Alexander, and took Jonathan Colby; Gay's MS letter.
the others escaped to the fort. Within a few days afterward, they ambushed
Caleb How, Hilkiah Grout, and Benjamin Gaffield, as they were returning from
their labor in the field. How was killed; July 27.
Gaffield was drowned in attemping to cross the river; and Grout made his
escape. The Indians went directly to Bridgman's fort, where the families of
these unfortunate men resided. They had heard the report of the guns, and were
impatient to learn the cause. By the sound of feet without, it being in the
dusk of the evening, they concluded that their friends had returned, and too
hastily opened the gate to receive them; when to their inexpressible surprise,
they admitted the savages, and the three families, consisting of fourteen
persons, were made captives. One of these, the wife of Caleb How, was the FAIR
CAPTIVE, of whom such a brilliant account is given in the life of General
Putnam, published by Col. Humphreys. She is still living at Hinsdale, and has
obliged the author with a particular narrative of her sufferings and
deliverance. T^is account, drawn up by the Rev. Mr Gay, is too long to be here
inserted, and too entertaining to be abridged; but will probably be published
at some future time. As to that part of the story, that the people of Hinsdale
chose her to go to Europ^, as their agent in a case of disputed lands; it was
never known or thought of by them till the li^e of Putn^m appeared in print.

Gay's MS letter.


1756.
After the defeat and death of Braddock, the chief command of the operations
against the enemy fell into the hands of Shirley; Shirley's letters.
who called another Congress, at New York, and planned another expedition
against Crown Point; for which purpose, he called on the several governments to
raise men and provide stores. A regiment was raised in New Hampshire, the
command of which was given to Col. Nathaniel Messerve. They also appointed two
Commissaries, Peter Gilman and Thomas Westbrooke Waldron, who resided at
Albany, to take care of the stores, whilst the regiment, with the other troops,
assisted in building forts and batteaux. In the midst of this campaign, Shirley
was superseded by the Earl of Loudon; July 23.
Loudon's MS letters.
but the summer passed away in fruitless labor; whilst the French, by their
superior alertness, besieged and took the English fort at Oswego; and the
regiments of Shirley and Pepperell who garrisoned it, were sent prisoners to
France. During this summer, the Indians killed Lieutenant Moses Willard, Gay,
Sumner and Olcott's MS letters.
and wounded his son at Number-four; and took Josiah Foster, with his wife and
two children, from Winchester. They also wounded Zebulon Stebbins, of Hinsdale,
who, with Reuben Wright, discovered an ambush, and prevented the captivity of
several persons for whom the Indians were lying in wait.

The soldiers of New Hampshire were so expert, in every service which required
agility, and so habituated to fatigue and danger; that, Lord Loudon's MS
letters.
by the express desire of Lord Loudon, three ranging companies were formed of
them; who continued in service during the winter as well as the summer. The
command of these companies was given to Robert Rogers, John Stark, and William
Stark. They were eminently useful in scouring the woods, procuring
intelligence, and skirmishing with detached parties of the enemy. These
companies were kept during the war, in the pay of the Crown; and after the
peace, the officers were allowed half pay on the British establishment.

The next year, another Crown Point expedition was projected by Lord Loudon.
1757.
The Crown was at the expense of stores and provisions, and required of the
Colonies, to raise, arm, clothe, and pay their quotas of men. Another regiment
was raised in New Hampshire, of which Messerve was commander; who went to
Halifax with part of his regiment, a body of one hundred carpenters, and the
three companies of Rangers, to serve under Lord Loudon, whilst the other part
of the regiment under Lieutenant Col. Goffe, was ordered by General Webb, who
commanded at the westward, in the absence of the Earl of Loudon, to rendezvous
at Number-four. Before their arrival, a large party of French and Indians
attacked the mills in that place, and took Sampson Colefax, David Farnsworth
and Thomas Adams. (...) MS letter.
The inhabitants, hearing the guns, advanced to the mills; but finding the
enemy in force, prudently retreated. The enemy burned the mills; and in their
retreat, took two other men, who were coming in from hunting, viz. Thomas
Robins and Asa Spafford. Farnsworth and Robins returned; the others died in
Canada.

Goffe with his men marched through Number-four and joined General Webb at
Albany; who posted them at fort William Henry, near Lake George, under the
command of Col. Munroe, of the thirty-fifth British regiment. The French
General Montcalm, at the head of a large body of Canadians and Indians, with a
train of artillery, Aug. ^.
invested this fort; and in six days, the garrison, after having expended all
their ammunition, Aug. 9.
capitulated; on condition, that they should not serve against: the French for
eighteen months. They were allowed the honors of war, and were to be escorted
by the French troops to Fort Edward, with their private baggage. The Indians,
who served in this expedition, on the promise of plunder, were enraged at the
terms granted to the garrison; and, as they marched out unarmed, fell upon
them, (...) No. 49.
stripped them naked, and murdered all who made any resistance. The
New Hampshire regiment happening to be in the rear, felt the chief fury of the
enemy. Out of two hundred, eighty were killed and taken.

This melancholy event threw the whole country into the deepest consternation.
Webb, who remained at Fort Edward, expecting to be there attacked, sent
expresses to all the Provinces for reinforcements. The French, however, did not
pursue their advantage, but returned to Canada. A reinforcement of two hundred
and fifty men was raised in New Hampshire, under the command of Major Thomas
Tash; which, by the orders of General Webb, MS letters of Gov^^nor (...).
was stationed at Number-four. This was the first time that the troops of
New Hampshire occupied that important post.

Hitherto the war had been, on our part unsuccessful. The great expense, the
frequent disappointments, the loss of men, of forts, and of stores, were very
discouraging. The enemy's country was filled with prisoners, and scalps,
private plunder, and public stores and provisions, which our people, as beasts
of burden, had conveyed to them. These reflections were the dismal
entertainment of the winter. The next spring called for fresh exertions; and
happily for America, the British ministry had been changed, and the direction
of the war, in answer to the united voice of the people of England, was put
into the hands of that decisive statesman WILLIAM PIT.

In his circular letter to the American Governors, 1758.
he assured them; that to repair the losses and disappointments of the last
inactive campaign, it was determined to send a formidable force, to operate by
sea and land, against the French in America; and he called upon them to raise
as large bodies of men, (...) MS.
within their respective governments, as the number of inhabitants might allow;
leaving it to them, to form the regiments and to appoint officers at their
discretion. He informed them that arms, ammunition, tents, provisions, and
boats would be f^^nished by the Crown; and he required the Colonies to levy,
clothe and pay their men; assuring them that recommendations would be made to
Parliament 'to grant them a compensation.'

Notwithstanding their former losses and disappointments, Governor's
Procl^mation, April 1.
the Assembly of New Hampshire, on receiving this requisition, cheerfully voted
eight hundred men for the service of the year. The regiment commanded by Col.
John Heart, marched to the westward, and served under General Abercrombie. A
body of one hundred and eight carpenters, under the conduct of Col. Messerve,
embarked for Louisbourg, to serve at the second siege of that fortress, under
General Amherst. Unhappily the small pox broke out among them, which disabled
them from service; Amherst's printed journal.
all but sixteen were seized at once, and these attended the sick. June 28.
Messerve Colonel Messerve, was a gentleman of a fine mechanical genius. Being
a shipwright by profession, he attained to eminence in his business, and
acquired a handsome fortune. His moral and social character was unblemished,
and, in the military line, he was highly respected. The Earl of Loudon had such
a sense of his merit, as to present him a piece of plate, with an inscription,
acknowledging 'his capacity, fidel^^ty, and ready disposition in the service of
his country.'

New-Ham^shire (...), No. 97.
and his eldest son died of this fatal disorder. This year was remarkable for
the second surrender of Louisbourg; the unfortunate attack on the lines of
Ticonderoga, where Lord How was killed; the taking of fort Frontenac by Col.
Bradstr^et, and the destruction of fort du Quesne on the Ohio, the contention
for which, began the war.

In the course of this year, the Indians continued to infest the frontiers. At
Hinsdale, they killed Capt. Moore, and his son, took his family, and burned his
house. At Number-four, Gay's and Ol^ott's MS letters.
they killed Asahel Stebbins, and took his wife, with Isaac Parker and a
soldier. The cattle of this exposed settlement, which fed chiefly in the woods,
at a distance from the fort, often served the enemy for provisions.

The next year, a similar requisition being made by Secretary Pit, 1759.
New Hampshire raised a thousand men for the service, who were regimented under
the command of Col. Zaccheus Lovewell, son of the famous partisan, who lost his
life at Pigwacket. This regiment joined the army at the westward, and served
under General Amherst in the actual reduction of Ticonderoga and Crown Point,
and in building a new fortress at the last place. The success of this summer
was brilliant, beyond former example. The French fort at Niagara surrendered to
General Johnson; and the strong city of Quebec was taken by the British troops
under General Wolf, who, with the French General Montcalm, was slain in the
decisive battle.

When the British arms had obtained a decided superiority over the French, it
was determined to chastise the Indians who had committed so many devastations
on the frontiers of New England. Major Robert Rogers was dispatched from Crown
Point, by General Amherst, Sept. 13.
with about two hundred rangers, to destroy the Indian village of St. Francis.
After a fatiguing march of twenty-one days, he came within sight of the place,
which he discovered from the top of a tree, and halted his men at the distance
of three miles. Oct. ^.
In the evening, N. Hampshire (...), No. 165.
he entered the village in disguise with two of his officers. The Indians were
engaged in a grand dance, and he passed through them undiscovered. Having
formed his men into parties, and posted them to advantage; he made a general
assault, just before day, whilst the Indians were asleep. They were so
completely surprised that little resistance could be made. Some were killed in
their houses; and of those who attempted to flee, many were shot or tomahawked
by parties placed at the avenues. The dawn of day disclosed a horrid scene; and
an edge was given to the fury of the assailants by the sight of several hundred
scalps of their countrymen, elevated on poles, and waving in the air. This
village had been enriched with the plunder of the frontiers and the sale of
captives. The houses were well furnished, and the church was adorned with
plate. The suddenness of the attack, and the fear of a pursuit, did not allow
much time for pillage; but the rangers brought off such things as were most
convenient for transportation; among which were about two hundred guineas in
money, a silver image weighing ten pounds, a large quantity of wampum and
clothing. Having set fire to the village, Rogers made his retreat up the river
St. Francis, intending that his men should rendezvous at the upper Cohos, on
Connecticut river. They took with them five English prisoners, whom they found
at St. Francis, and about twenty Indians; but these last they dismissed. Of the
rangers, one man only was killed; and six or seven were wounded. In their
retreat, they were pursued, and lost seven men. They kept in a body for about
ten days, passing on the eastern side of lake Memfrimagog, and then scattered.
Some found their way to Number-four, after having suffered much by hunger and
fatigue. Others perished in the woods, and their bones were found near
Connecticut river, by the people, who after several years began plantations at
the upper Cohos.

After the taking of Quebec, the remainder of the season was too short to
complete the reduction of Canada. The next summer General Amherst made
preparations to approach Montreal, 1760.
by three different routes; intending, with equal prudence and humanity, to
finish the conquest, without the effusion of blood. For the service of this
year, eight hundred men were raised in New Hampshire, and put under the command
of Col. John Goffe. They marched, as usual, to Number-four; but instead of
taking the old route, to Albany, they cut a road This new road began at
Wentworth's ferry, two miles above the fort at No. 4, and was cut 26 miles; at
the end of which, they found a path, made the year before; in which they passed
over the mountains, to Otter Creek; where they found a good road, which led to
Crown Point. Their stores were brought in wagons, as far as the 26 miles
extended; and then transported on horses over the mountains. A drove of cattle
for the supply of the army went from No. 4, by this note, to Crown Point.
through the woods, directly toward Crown Point. In this work they made such
dispatch, as to join that part of the army which Amherst had left at Crown
Point, July 31.
twelve days before their embarkation. Aug. 11.
They proceeded down the lake, under the command of Col. Haviland. The enemy
made some resistance at Isle au Noix, Mac^lint^ck's MS journal.
which stopped their progress for some days, and a few men were lost on both
sides. But this post being deserted, the forts of St. John and Chamblee became
an easy conquest, Sept. 8.
and finally Montreal capitulated. This event finished the campaign, and
crowned Amherst with deserved laurels.

Whilst the New Hampshire regiment was employed in cutting the new road; signs
of hovering Indians were frequently discovered, though none were actually seen.
But they took the family of Joseph Willard, from Number-four, and carried them
into Montreal, Olcott's MS letter.
just before it was invested by the British army.

The conquest of Canada, gave peace to the frontiers of New Hampshire, after a
turbulent scene of fifteen years; in which, with very little intermission, they
had been distressed by the enemy. Many captives returned to their homes; and
friends who had long been separated, embraced each other in peace. The joy was
heightened by this consideration, that the country of Canada, being subdued,
could no longer be a source of terror and distress.

The expense of this war, was paid by a paper currency. Though an act of
Parliament was passed in 1751, prohibiting the Governors, from giving their
assent to acts of Assembly, made for such a purpose; yet, by a proviso,
extraordinary emergencies were excepted. Governor Wentworth was slow to take
advantage of this proviso, and construed the act in a more rigid sense than
others; but his friend Shirley helped him out of his difficulties. In 1755
paper bills were issued under the denomination of new tenor; of which, fifteen
shillings were equal in value to one dollar. Of this currency, the soldiers
were promised thirteen pounds ten shillings per month; but it depreciated so
much in the course of the year, that in the muster rolls, their pay was made up
at fifteen pounds. In 1756 there was another emission from the same plates, and
their pay was eighteen pounds. In 1757, it was twenty-five pounds. In 1758,
Atkinson's MS letters.
they had twenty-seven shillings sterling. In the three succeeding years, they
had thirty shillings sterling, besides a bounty at the time of their
inlistment, equal to one month's pay. At length sterling money became the
standard of all contacts; and though the paper continued passing as a currency,
its value was regulated by the price of silver, and the cours^ of exchange.

It ought to be remembered as a signal favor of divine Providence; that during
this war, the seasons were fruitful, and the Colonies were able to supply their
own troops with provisions, and the British fleets and armies with refreshments
of every kind which they needed. No sooner were the operations of the war in
the northern Colonies closed, 1761.
than two years of scarcity succeeded; (1761 and 1762) in which the drought of
summer was so severe, as to cut short the crops, and render supplies from
abroad absolutely necessary. Had this calamity attended any of the preceding
years of the war, the distress must have been extreme, both at home and in the
camp. During the drought of 1761, a fire raged in the woods, in the towns of of
Barrington and Rochester, and passed over into the county of York, burning with
irresistible fury for several weeks, and was not extinguished till a plentiful
rain fell, in August. An immense quantity of the best timber was destroyed by
this conflagration.

For the succeeding part of the war, a smaller body of men was required to
garrison the new conquests; 1762.
whilst the British troops were employed in the West India islands. The
success which attended their operations in that quarter, brought the war to a
conclusion; and by the treaty of peace, though many of the conquered places
were restored, yet, the whole continent of North America remained to the
British Crown, and the Colonies received a reimbursement of their expenses.

The war being closed, a large and valuable tract of country, situated between
New England, New York and Canada, was secured to the British dominions; and it
became the interest of the Governors of both the royal Provinces of
New Hampshire and New York, to vie with each other, in granting this territory
and receiving the emoluments arising from this lucrative branch of their
respective offices. The seeds of a controversy on this subject had been already
sown. During the short peace which followed the preceding war, Governor
Wentworth wrote to Governor Clinton, 1749.
that he had it in command from the King, Nov. 17.
to grant the unimproved lands within his government; Council minutes.
that the war had prevented that progress, which he had hoped for in this
business; but that the peace had induced many people, to apply for grants in
the western parts of New Hampshire, N. York printed narrative. Appendix, No. 3.
which might fall in the neighborhood of New York. He communicated to him a
paragraph of his commission, describing the bounds of New Hampshire, and
requested of him a description of the bounds of New York. Before he received
any answer to this letter; Wentworth, presuming that New Hampshire ought to
extend as far westward as Massachusetts; that is to the distance of twenty
miles east from Hudson's river, granted a township, six miles square, called
Bennington; situate twenty-four miles east of Hudson's river, 1750.
and six miles north of the line of Massachusetts. Clinton having laid
Wentworth's letter before the Council of New York; N. Hampshire book of
Charters.
by their advice answered him, that the Province of New York was bounded
easterly by Connecticut river. This claim was founded on a grant of King
Charles the second; in which, all the land from the west side of Connecticut
river, to the east side of Delaware bay, was conveyed to his brother James,
Duke of York; by whose elevation to the throne, the same tract merged in the
crown of England, and descended at the Revolution to King William and his
successors. The Province of New York had formerly urged this claim against the
Colony of Connecticut; but for prudential reasons had conceded that the bounds
of that Colony should extend, as far as a line drawn twenty miles east of
Hudson's river. The like extent was demanded by Massachusetts; and, though
New York affected to call this demand 'an intrusion,' and strenuously urged
their right to extend eastward to Connecticut river; yet the original grant of
Massachusetts, being prior to that of the Duke of York, was a barrier which
could not easily be broken. These reasons, however, it was said, could be of no
avail to the cause of New Hampshire, whose first limits, as described in
Mason's patent, did not reach to Connecticut river; and whose late extent, by
the settlement of the lines in 1741, was no farther westward than till it meets
with the King's other governments. Though it was agreed, between the two
Governors, to submit the point in controversy to the King; yet the Governor of
New Hampshire, continued to make grants, on the western side of Connecticut
river, till 1754; when the renewal of hostilities not only put a stop to
applications; but prevented any determination of the controversy by the Crown.
1754.


During the war, the continual passing of troops through those lands, caused
the value of them to be more generally known; and, when by the conquest of
Canada, tranquillity was restored, they were eagerly fought by adventurers and
speculators. Wentworth availed himself of this golden opportunity, and by
advice of his Council, ordered a survey to be made of Connecticut river for
sixty miles, and three lines of townships on each side, 1761.
to be laid out. As applications increased, the surveys were extended. ^uly 1.
Townships of six miles square were granted to various petitioners; and so
rapidly did this work go on, that during the year 1761, not less than sixty
townships were granted on the west, and eighteen on the east side of the river.
Besides the fees and presents for these grants, which were undefined; a
reservation was made for the Governor, of five hundred acres in each township;
and of lots for public purposes. These reservations were clear of all fees and
charges. A^k^ns^n's M^.
1763.
The whole number of grants on the western side of the river, amounted to one
hundred and thirty-eight; and their extent was from Connecticut river to twenty
miles east of the Hudson, as far as that river extended northerly; and after
that, westward to Lake Champlain. The rapid progress of these grants filled the
coffers of the Governor. Those who had obtained the grants were seeking
purchasers in all the neighboring Colonies; whilst the original inhabitants of
New Hampshire, to whom these lands had formerly been promised, as a reward for
their merit in defending the country, were over-looked in the distribution;
unless they were disposed to apply in the same manner, as persons from abroad;
or unless they happened to be in favor. Information of the late P. Gilman and
M. W^are.
When remonstrances were made to the Governor on this subject, his answer was,
that the people of the old towns had been formerly ly complimented with grants
in Chichester, Barnsted and Gilmantown, which they had neglected to improve;
and that the new grantees were better husbandmen and would promote the
cultivation of the Province.

The passion for occupying new lands rose to a great height. These tracts were
filled with emigrants from Massachusetts and Connecticut. Population and
cultivation began to increase with a rapidity hitherto unknown; and from this
time may be dated the flourishing state of New Hampshire; which before had been
circumscribed and stinted in its growth, by the continual danger of a savage
enemy.

The grants on the western side of Connecticut river, alarmed the government of
New York; who, by their agent, made application to the Crown, representing that
it would be greatly to the advantage of the people settled on those lands, ^
to be annexed to New York; and submitting the cause to the royal decision. In
the mean time, Dec. 28.
a proclamation was issued by Lieutenant Governor Colden, reciting the grant of
King Charles to the Duke of York; asserting the jurisdiction of New York as far
eastward as Connecticut river; and enjoining the Sheriff of the County of
Albany, to return the names of all persons, who, under color of the
New Hampshire grants, held possession of lands westward of that river. This was
answered by a proclamation of Governor Wentworth, 1764.
March 13.
declaring the grant to the Duke of York to be obsolete, and that the western
bounds of New Hampshire were co-extensive with those of Massachusetts and
Connecticut; encouraging the grantees to maintain their possessions, and
cultivate their lands; and commanding civil officers to execute the laws and
punish disturbers of the peace.

The application from New York was referred to the Board of Trade; July 20.
Original MS.
and upon their representation, seconded by a report of a committee of the
privy council, an ^rder was passed, by the King in Council; ^eclaring the
western banks of Connecticut river, from where it enters the Province of
Massachusetts Bay, as far north as the forty-fifth degree of latitude, TO BE
the boundary line, between the two Provinces of New Hampshire and New York.

This decree, like many other judicial determinations, while it closed one
controversy, opened another. The jurisdiction of the Governor of New Hampshire,
and his power of granting land, were circumscribed by the western bank of
Connecticut river; but the grantees of the soil, ^ound themselves involved in a
dispute with the government of New York. From the words TO BE, in the royal
declaration, two very opposite conclusions were drawn. The government supposed
them to refer to the time past, and construed them as a declaration that the
river always ^ad been the eastern limits of New York; consequently, that the
grants made by the Governor of New Hampshire, were invalid, and that the lands
might be granted again. The grantees understood the words in the future tense,
as declaring Connecticut river from that time to be the line of jurisdiction
only, between the two provinces; consequently that their grants, being derived
from the Crown, through the medium of one of its Governors, were valid. To the
jurisdiction, they would have quietly submitted, had no attempt been made to
wrest from them their possessions. These opposite opinions, proved a source of
litigation for ten succeeding years; but, as this controversy belongs to the
history of New York, it is dismissed, with one remark only. That though it was
carried on with a degree of virulence, unfriendly to the progress of
civilization and humanity, within the disputed territory; yet it called into
action, a spirit of vigorous self defense, and hardy enterprise, which prepared
the nerves of that people for encountering the dangers of a revolution, more
extensive and beneficial.

CHAP. XXIII. Beginning of the controversy with Great Britain. Stamp act.
Resignation of BENNING WENTWORTH.
FROM the earliest establishment of the American Colonies, a jealousy of their
independence had existed among the people of Great Britain. At first, this
apprehension was perhaps no more than a conjecture founded on the vicissitude
of human affairs, or on their knowledge of those emigrants who came away from
England, disgusted with the abusive treatment which they had endured at home.
But from whatever cause it arose, it was strengthened by age; and the conduct
of the British government toward America, was frequently influenced by it. In
the reign of James the first, speculative reasoners raised objections to the
planting of these Colonies; and foretold, Hume.
that after draining the mother country of inhabitants, they would shake off
her yoke and erect an independent government. Some traces of this jealousy
appeared in every succeeding reign, See vol 1. page 309.
not excepting that of William, whom America, as well as Britain, was proud to
style our great deliverer. But it became most evident, and began to produce its
most pernicious effects, at a time when there was the least reason for
indulging the idea.

During the administration of PIT, a liberal kind of policy had been adopted
toward the Colonies; which being crowned with success, had attached us Though
It may be accounted a deviation from the proper style of history, for the
author to speak in the first person; yet he hopes to be excused in expressing
the feelings of an American, whilst be relates the history of his own time, and
his own country.
more firmly than ever, to the kingdom of Britain. We were proud of our
connection with a nation whose flag was triumphant in every quarter of the
globe; and by whose assistance we had been delivered from the danger of our
most formidable enemies, the French in Canada. The accession of George the
third, 1760.
at this critical and important era, was celebrated here, with as true zeal and
loyalty, as in any part of his dominions. We were fond of repeating every
plaudit, which the ardent affection of the British nation bestowed on a young
monarch, rising to the throne of his ancestors, and professing to glory in the
name of Briton. At such a time, nothing could have been more easy, than by
pursuing the system of commercial regulation, already established, and
continuing the indulgencies which had been allowed, to have drawn the whole
profit of our labor and trade, into the hands of british merchants and
manufacturers. This would have prevented a spirit of enterprise in the
Colonies, and kept us in as complete subjection and dependence, as the most
sanguine friend of the British nation could have wished.

We had, among ourselves, a set of men, who, 1763.
ambitious of perpetuating the rank of their families, Bernard's select letters.
were privately seeking the establishment of an American Nobility; out of
which, Oliver's letters.
an intermediate branch of legislation, between the royal and democratic
powers, should be appointed. Plans were drawn, and presented to the British
ministry, for new modelling our governments, and reducing their powers; whilst
the authority of Parliament should be rendered absolute and imperial. The
military gentlemen of Britain, who had served here in the war, and on whom, a
profusion of grateful attention had been bestowed, carried home reports of our
wealth; whilst the sons of our merchants and planters, who went to England for
their education, exhibited specimens of prodigality which confirmed the idea.
During the war, there had been a great influx of money; and at the conclusion
of it, British goods were largely imported; by which means, the cash went back
again with a rapid circulation.

In no age, perhaps, excepting that in which Rome lost her liberty, was the
spirit of venality and corruption so prevalent as at this time, History of the
minority, 1^65, page 286.
in Britain. Exhausted by a long war, and disgraced by a peace which deprived
her of her most valuable conquests, the national supplies were inadequate to
the continual drain of the exchecquer. A new ministry, raised on the ruin of
that by which America was conquered and secured, looked to this country as a
source of revenue. But, neglecting the 'principles of law and polity, which had
been early suggested to them by an officious correspondent; Bernard's select
letters.
and by which they might have gradually and silently extended their system of
corruption into America; they planned measures by which they supposed an
addition to the revenues of Britain might be drawn from America; and the
pretense was, to defray the expenses of protecting, defending and securing it.
The fallacy of this pretense was easily seen. If we had not done our part
toward the protection and defense of our country, why were our expenditures
reimbursed by Parliament? The truth is, that during the whole war, we had
exerted ourselves beyond our ability; relying on a promise from a Secretary of
State, that it should be recommended to Parliament to make us compensation. It
was recommended; the compensation was honorably granted, and gratefully
received. The idea of drawing that money from us again by taxes to repay the
charges of our former defense, was unjust and inconsistent. If the new
conquests needed protection or defense, those who reaped the gain of their
commerce, or enjoyed the benefit of grants and offices within those
territories, might be required to contribute their aid. Notwithstanding this
pretext, it was our opinion, that the grand object was to provide for
dependents, and to extend the corrupt and venal principle of crown influence,
through every part of the British dominions. However artfully it was thrown
out, that the revenue to be drawn from us would ease the taxes of our brethren
in Britain, or diminish the load of national debt; it was not easy for us to
believe that the ministry had either of these objects sincerely in
contemplation. But if it had been ever so equitable that we should contribute
to discharge the debt of the nation, incurred by the preceding war; we supposed
that the monopoly and control of our commerce, which Britain enjoyed, was a
full equivalent for all the advantages, which we reaped from our political
connection with her.

The same gazette, which contained the definitive treaty of peace, N. Hampshire
Gazette, May 27.
announced the intentions of the British ministry to quarter troops in America,
and support them at our expense. The money was to be raised by a duty on
foreign sugar and molasses, and by stamps on all papers legal and mercantile.
These intentions were at first thrown out in the form of resolves, and
afterward digested into acts of Parliament. The first of these acts,
restricting the intercourse which the American Colonies had enjoyed with the
West India islands, 1764.
caused a general uneasiness and suspicion, but was viewed as a regulation of
trade, and was submitted to, though with reluctance. The effect of this act was
to call forth a spirit of frugality, particularly in the introduction of a less
expensive mode of conducing funerals. Petitions and remonstrances were sent to
England by some of the Colonies; but instead of any redress, 1765.
a new act of Parliament was made for raising a revenue by a general stamp duty
through all the American Colonies. The true friends of constitutional liberty
now saw their dearest interests in danger; from an assumption of power in the
parent state to give and grant the property of the colonists at their pleasure.
Even those who had been seeking alterations in the colonial governments, and an
establishment of hereditary honors, plainly saw that the ministry were desirous
of plucking the fruit, Bernard's select letters.
before they had grafted the stock on which it must grow. To render the new act
less odious to us, some of our fellow citizens were appointed to distribute the
stamped paper, which was prepared in England and brought over in bales. The
framers of the act ^oasted that it was so contrived as to execute itself;
because no writing could be deemed legal without the stamp; and all
controversies which might arise, were to be determined in the Courts of
Admiralty, by a single judge, entirely dependent on the Crown.

This direct and violent attack on our dearest privileges at first threw us
into a silent gloom; and we were at a loss how to proceed. To submit, was to
rivet the shackles of slavery on ourselves and our posterity. To revolt, was to
rend asunder the most endearing connection, and hazard the resentment of a
powerful nation. In this dilemma, the House of Burgesses in Virginia, May 28.
passed some spirited resolves, asserting the rights of their country, and
denying the claim of parliamentary taxation. The Assembly of Massachusetts
proposed a Congress of Deputies from each Colony, June 6.
to consult upon our common interest, as had frequently been practiced in times
of common danger. Several speeches made in Parliament by opposers of the
stamp act were reprinted here; in one of which the Americans were styled 'Sons
of liberty,' and the speaker ventured, Col. Bar^^.
from his personal knowledge of this country, to foretell our opposition to the
act.

The spirit of the Virginian resolves, like an electric spark, diffused itself
instantly and universally; and the cautious proposal of Massachusetts was
generally approved. The anxious mind, resting on the bold assertion of
constitutional rights, looked forward with pleasure, to the time when an
American Congress would unite in a successful defense of them. The title 'Sons
of liberty,' was eagerly adopted by associations in every Colony; determining
to carry into execution the prediction of him, who with such noble energy, had
^spoused the cause of our freedom. They began the opposition at Boston; by
publicly exhibiting effigies of the enemies of America, and obliging the
stamp-officer to resign his employment. The popular commotions in that town
were afterward carried to an unjustifiable excess; but the spirit of opposition
animated the body of the people in every Colony.

The person appointed distributor of stamps for New Hampshire, was George
Messerve, son of the late Colonel, who died at Louisbourg. He received his
appointment in England, and soon after embarked for America, and arrived at
Boston. Before he landed, he was informed of the opposition which was making to
the act; Sept. ^.
and that it would be acceptable to the people if he would resign, which (...)
readily did, and they welcomed him on ^hore. An exhibition of effigies at
Portsmouth had prepared the minds of the people there for his reception; Sept.
12.
Sept. 18.
and at his coming to town he made a second resignation, on the parade, before
he went to his own house. This was accepted with the usual salutation; Sept. 3^.
and every one appeared to be satisfied with the success of the popular
measures. Soon after, the stamped paper destined for New Hampshire arrived at
Boston in the same vessel with that intended for Massachusetts; but there being
no person in either Province who had any concern with it, it was, by order of
Governor Bernard, lodged in the castle.

The stamp act was to commence its operation on the first day of November;
previously to which the appointed Congress was formed at New York, consisting
of delegates from the Assemblies of Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut,
New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, the Delaware Counties, Maryland and
South Carolina. Having, like the Congress at Albany in 1754, formed themselves
in geographical order; they framed a bill of rights, for the Colonies; in which
the sole power of taxation was declared to be in their own assemblies. They
prepared three distinct addresses to the King, Lords and Commons, stating their
grievances, and asking for redress. These were subscribed by the delegates of
six Colonies; the others who were present were not empowered to sign; but
reported their proceedings to their constituents, who approved them in
Assembly, and forwarded their petitions. No delegates went from New Hampshire
to this Congress; but the Assembly at their next meeting adopted the same
measures, and sent similar petitions to England, which they committed to Barlow
Trecothick, their agent, Assembly Records.
and John Wentworth, a young gentleman of Portsmouth, who was then in England,
to be by them presented to the King and Parliament. These measures were the
most respectful and prudent which could be devised; and were attended with some
prospect of success from a change which had been made in the British ministry.

In the mean time, the newspapers were filled with essays, in which every plea
for and against the new duties was amply discussed. These vehicles of
intelligence were doomed to be loaded with a stamp; and the printers felt
themselves interested in the opposition. On the last day of October, the
New Hampshire Gazette appeared with a mourning border. A body of people from
the country approached the town of Portsmouth, under an apprehension that the
stamps would be distributed; but being met, by a number from the town, and
assured that no such thing was intended, they quietly returned. The next day,
the bells tolled, and a funeral procession was made for the Goddess of Liberty;
Nov. 1.
but on depositing her in the grave, some signs of life were supposed to be
discovered, and she was carried off in triumph. By such exhibitions, the spirit
of the populace was kept up; though the minds of the most thoughtful persons
were filled with anxiety.

It was doubtful, whether the Courts of Law could proceed without stamps; and
it was certain that none could be procured. Some licentious persons began to
think that debts could not be recovered, and that they might insult their
creditors with impunity. On the first appearance of this disorderly spirit,
associations were formed at Portsmouth, Exeter and other places, to support the
Magistrates and preserve the peace. The fifth of November had always been
observed as a day of hilarity, in remembrance of the powder plot. On the
following night, a strong guard was kept in Portsmouth. By these precautions,
the tendency to riot was seasonably checked, and no waste of property or
personal insult was committed; though some obnoxious characters began to
tremble for their safety.

When Messerve arrived, the people supposed that he had brought his commission
with him, and were content that it should remain in his own hands, being
rendered void by his resignation. But, in fact, he did not receive it till
after the time fixed for the operation of the act. Having shown his
instructions to the Governor, and some other public officers, it was suspected
that he intended to commence the execution of his office. The sons of liberty
were alarmed; 1766.
they assembled by beat of drum, J^n. 9.
and obliged him publicly to deliver up his commission and instructions; which
they mounted on the point of a sword, and carried in triumph through the town.
An oath was administered to him by Justice Claget, purporting that he would
neither directly nor indirectly attempt to execute his office. The master of a
ship, then ready to sail for England, was also sworn to deliver the packet
containing the commission and instructions, as it was directed. It was first
addressed to the Commissioners of the stamp-office in London; but afterward it
was enclosed in a letter to the agents of the Province, refering the disposal
of it to their discretion. It happened to arrive, when great exertions were
making, and a strong probability existed, of the repeal of the stamp act. The
agents therefore concealed the packet, and had the good fortune to suppress the
intelligence of all these proceedings; that no irritation might ensue to
prevent the expected repeal.

During all these commotions, Governor Wentworth was silent. The ministry,
either by accident or design, had neglected to send authentic copies of the
stamp act, to some of the American Governors, and to him among others. There
had been no tumults, which rendered his interposition necessary. He was in the
decline of life, and his health was much impaired. His fortune was made, and it
lay chiefly in his native country. One of the reasons given, for the removal of
his predecessor, was, that he had enjoyed his office ten years; Mr. Wentworth
had been twenty-five years in the chair, and expected soon to be superseded. It
was therefore his interest, not to put himself forward in support of unpopular
measures. His example was followed by most of the gentlemen in the Province,
who held offices under the Crown. If any of them were secretly in favor of the
act, they were restrained by fear, from contradicting openly the voice of the
people.

The popular spirit was sufficiently roused to join in any measures which might
be necessary for the defense of liberty. All fear of the consequence of
proceeding in the public business without stamps, was gradually laid aside. The
courts of law, and custom houses were kept open. Newspapers circulated, and
licenses for marriage, without stamps, were publicly advertised. As it was
uncertain, what might be the event of the petitions to the King and Parliament,
it was thought best, to awaken the attention of the merchants and manufacturers
of England, by an agreement to import no goods, until the stamp act should be
repealed. To provide for the worst, an association was formed by the 'sons of
liberty' in all the northern Colonies, to stand by each other, and unite their
whole force, for the protection and relief of any who might be in danger, from
the operation of this, or any other oppressive act. The letters which passed
between them, MS letters of the sons of liberty.
on this occasion, are replete with expressions of loyalty and affection to the
King, his person, family and authority. Had there been any disaffection to the
royal government, or desire to shake off our allegiance, where would the
evidence of it be more likely to be found, than in letters which passed between
bodies of men, who were avowedly endeavoring, to form an union, to resist the
usurped authority of the British Lords and Commons? From an intimate
acquaintance with many persons, of all ranks, who were instrumental of
conducting the American revolution, through all its stages; and from a perusal
of many of their confidential letters; the author of these sheets is fully
satisfied, that the public professions of loyalty, made by his countrymen, were
sincere; and that the most determined opposers of the claims of Parliament,
were very far from desiring a disunion of the British empire, till they were
driven to it by necessity.


The idea which we entertained of our political connection with the British
empire, was, that the King was its supreme head; that every branch of it was a
perfect State, competent to its own internal legislation, but subject to the
control and negative of the sovereign; that taxation and representation were
correlative, and therefore that no part of the empire could be taxed, but by
its own Representatives in Assembly. From a regard to the general interest, it
was conceded, that the Parliament of Great Britain, representing the first and
most powerful branch of the empire, might regulate the exterior commerce of the
whole. In Britain, the American governments were considered as corporations,
existing by the pleasure of the King and Parliament, who had a right to alter
or dissolve them. Our laws were deemed bye-laws; and we were supposed to be, in
all cases of legislation and taxation, subject to the supreme, undefined power
of the British Parliament. Between claims so widely different, there was no
arbitrator to decide. Temporary expedients, if wisely applied, might have
preserved peace; but the most delicate and judicious management was necessary,
to prevent irritation.

When the commotions which had happened in America, were known in England, a
circular letter was written to the several governors, by Secretary Conway, Oct.
24. 1765.
in which it was hoped that the resistance to the authority of the mother
country, had only found place among the lower and more ignorant of the people.
To the constitutional authority (as we understood it) of the King and
Parliament, there had been no resistance; but to the assumed authority, of our
fellow subjects in Britain, over our property, the resistance began, and was
supported by the Representatives of the people, in their Assemblies. Those who
appeared under the name of 'the sons of liberty' were chiefly tradesmen of
reputation, who were occasionally assisted by lawyers, clergymen, and other
persons of literary abilities. The writings of Sydney and Lock were produced,
in evidence of the justice of our claims; and the arguments which had formerly
been used in England, against the usurpations of the house of Stuart, were
adopted and repeated by us, in favor of our rights and liberties. Political
inquiries were encouraged, and the eyes of the people were opened. Never was a
sentiment more generally adopted, on the fullest conviction, than that we could
be constitutionally taxed by none but our own Representatives; and that all
assumption of this power, by any other body of men, was usurpation which might
be lawfully resisted.

The petitions of the American Assemblies, enforced by the agreement for
non-importation, and aided by the exertions of the British merchants and
manufacturers, induced the new ministry to recommend to Parliament, a repeal of
the odious stamp act. March 18.
It was accordingly repealed; not on the true principle of its repugnancy to
the rights of America; but on that of political expediency. Even on this
principle, the repeal could be obtained by no other means; than by passing, at
the same time, a declaratory act, asserting the right and power, of the British
Parliament, to bind America, in all cases whatsoever, and annulling all the
resolutions of our Assemblies, in which they had claimed the right of exemption
from Parliamentary taxation.

The rejoicings which were occasioned by the repeal of the stamp act, in this
country, were extravagantly disproportioned to the object. We felt a transient
relief from an intolerable burden; but the claim of sovereign power, in our
fellow subjects, to take our property, and abridge our liberty at their
pleasure, was established by law. Our only hope was, that they would profit by
their recent experience; and whilst they enjoyed the pride of seeing their
claim exist on paper, would suspend the exercise of it in future.

With the repealing and declaratory acts, a circular letter came from Secretary
Conway; in which, the lenity and tenderness, the moderation and forbearance of
the Parliament toward the Colonies were celebrated in the language of
panegyric, and we were called upon, to show our respectful gratitude and
cheerful obedience, in return for such a signal display of indulgence and
affection. This letter enclosed a resolution of Parliament, that those persons
who had suffered any injury or damage, in consequence of their assisting to
execute the late act, ought to be compensated, by the Colonies, in which such
injuries were sustained.

When Governor Wentworth laid this letter before the Assembly, he told them
with pleasure and satisfaction, June 25.
that he had no requisition of this kind to make. Messerve, however, applied to
the Assembly to grant him a compensation for the injuries which he said he had
suffered. A committee, being appointed to inquire into the ground of his
petition, reported, that he had suffered no real damage either in person or
property; but that when any danger had been expected, guards had been appointed
to protect him. Upon this report, his petition was dismissed. He afterward went
to England and obtained the office of Collector of the the Customs.

At this session, the Assembly prepared a respectful address to the King and
both Houses of Parliament, on account of the repeal; which was sent to England,
at the same time that the stamped paper and parchment, which had been deposited
at castle in Boston, were returned.

Complaints had been made in England against some of the American Governors,
and other public officers, that exorbitant ^ees had been taken for the passing
of pa^ents for land; and a proclamation had been issued by the Crown and
published in the Colonies, New Hampshire Gazette.
threatening such persons with a removal from office. August 29. 1764.
Governor Wentworth was involved in this charge. He had also been accused of
negligence in corresponding with the King's ministers; of informality and want
of accuracy in his grants of land; and of passing acts of Assembly respecting
private property, without a suspending clause till his Majesty's pleasure could
be known. In his office of Surveyor-General he had been charged with neglect of
duty, and with indulging his deputies in selling and wasting the King's timber.
By whom these complaints were made, and by what evidence they were supported, I
have not been able to discover. Certain it is, that such an impression was made
on the minds of the ministry, that a resolution was taken to remove him; but
the difficulties attending the stamp act, caused a delay in the appointment of
a successor. When the ferment had subsided, the attention of the ministry was
turned to this object. JOHN WENTWORTH, son of Mark Hunking Wentworth, and
nephew of the Governor, was then in England. He had appeared at Court, as a
joint agent with Mr. Trecothick in presenting the petition of the Province
against the stamp act. He had become acquainted with several families of high
rank and of his own name, in Yorkshire, and in particular with the Marquis of
Rockingham, then at the head of the ministry. By his indulgence, Mr. Wentworth
prevailed to soften the rigor of government against his uncle. Instead of being
censured and removed from office, he was allowed opportunity to resign, and the
appearance of resigning in favor of his nephew, who was destined by the
Marquis, to be his successor. Having received his commissions. as Governor of
New Hampshire, and Surveyor of the King's woods in North America, August 11.
Mr. Wentworth sailed from England, and arrived at Charlestown, in
South Carolina. 1767.
Thence he traveled through the continent, March.
registering his commission of Surveyor in each of the Colonies, and was
received at Portsmouth, with every mark of respect and affection. This
appointment, June 13.
made by a popular ministry, was peculiarly grateful to the people of
New Hampshire, by whom Mr. Wentworth was well known and much esteemed.

In addition to what has been said, of the superseded Governor, it may be
observed; that his natural abilities were neither brilliant nor contemptible.
As a private gentleman he was obliging, and as a merchant honorable. He was
generous and hospitable to his friends; but his passions were strong and his
resentments lasting. He was subject to frequent and long continued visits of
the gout; a distemper rather unfriendly to the virtue of patience. In his
deportment there was an appearance of haughtiness, contracted by his residence
in Spain, where he learned the manners of the people of rank; as well as the
maxims of their government. He thought it best that the highest offices, should
be filled with men of property; and though in some instances he deviated from
this principle, yet, in others, he adhered to it so closely, as to disregard
more necessary qualifications.

In the former part of his administration, he was scrupulous in obeying his
instructions, and inflexible in maintaining the prerogative. In conducting the
operations of two successive wars, his attention to the service was very
conspicuous; and he frequently received letters of thanks, from the Generals,
and other officers of the British troops employed in America.

He was closely attached to the interest of the church of England; and in his
grants of townships, reserved a right for the society for propagating the
gospel, of which he was a member. A project was formed during his
administration, to establish a college in New Hampshire. When he was applied to
for a charter, he declined giving it, unless the college were put under the
direction of the Bishop of London. But, when a grant was made by the Assembly,
of three hundred pounds sterling, to Harvard College, where he had received his
education, to repair the destruction which it had suffered by fire; he
consented to the vote, and his name is inscribed on an alcove of the library,
as a benefactor, in conjunction with the name of the Province.

In his appointment of civil and military officers, he was frequently governed
by motives of favor, or prejudice to particular persons. When he came to the
chair he found but twenty-five Justices of the Peace in the whole Province; but
in the first commission which he issued, he nominated as many in the town of
Portsmouth only. In the latter part of his time, appointments of this kind
became so numerous, and were so easily procured, that the office was rendered
contemptible. The following pasquinade was published in the Portsmouth Mercury
of October 7, 1765. It was supposed to have been written by the (...) Judge
Parker, and was entitled THE SILVER AGE.
In days of yore, and pious times,
Great care was had to punish crimes;
When conservators pacis sought
To keep good order as they ought.
This office then, was no great booty,
Small were the fees, though great the duty.
But when a law, the old restriction
Dock'd -- and enlarged the jurisdiction;
His Worship had a right to hold,
In civil plea, a pound twice told.
The post was then thought worth possessing,
For 'twas attended with a blessing.
But still, in after times it grew
Much better, as our tale will show;
When, as it goes by common fame,
Two pounds and forty were the same. [By depreciation]
Then civil suits began to thrive,
And claims grown obsolete revive.
But when their Worships, manifold,
Like men divinely blessed of old,
Were bid 't' increase and multiply,'
Obsequious rose a numerous fry,
Who, ever prompt, and nigh at hand,
Could scatter justice through the land.
Then, with important air and look,
The sons of Lyttleton and Coke
Swarming appeared, to mind the Squires;
What honors such a post requires!
These skilful clerks, always attending,
Helped to dispatch all matters pending;
Took care that judgment (as it should)
Was rendered for the man that sued;
Aided their honors to indite,
And signed for those who could not write.
Who but must think these, happy times,
When men, adroit to punish crimes
Were close at hand? and what is better,
Made every little tardy debtor
Fulfill his contract, and to boot,
Pay twice his debt in costs of suit.
This was the happy silver age
When magistrates, profoundly sage*
Overspread the land; and made, it seems,
'Justice run down the streets in streams.'

Notwithstanding some instances, in which a want of magnanimi^y was too
conspicuous, his administration was, in other respects, beneficial. Though he
was highly censured, for granting the best lands of the Province to the people
of Massachusetts and Connecticut, with views of pecuniary reward; yet, the true
interest of the country was certainly promoted; because the grantees in
general, were better husbandmen than the people of New Hampshire.

In those cases, where dissatisfaction appeared, it was chiefly owing to the
nature of a royal government, in which the aristocratic feature was prominent,
and the democratic too much depressed. The people of New Hampshire, though
increasing in numbers, had not the privilege of an equal representation. The
aim of most of those gentlemen, who received their appointments from abroad,
was rather to please their masters, and secure the emoluments of their offices,
than to extend benefits to the people, or condescend to their prejudices. They
did not feel their dependence on them, as the source of power; nor their
responsibility to them for its exercise. And, the people themselves had not
that just idea of their own weight and importance, which they acquired, when
the controversy with the British government called up their attention to their
native rights.

CHAP. XXIV. Administration of JOHN WENTWORTH the second. New attempt to force
a revenue from America. Establishment of Dartmouth College. Division of the
Province into Counties. Death of BENNING WENTWORTH. Complaint of PETER LIVIUS
against the Governor. Its issue. Progress of the controversy with
Great Britain. War. Dissolution of British government in New Hampshire.
THE genius, as well as the interest of the new Governor, led him to cultivate
the good will of the people. 1767.
He was grandson, by his mother, to the late agent John Rindge, who had been
instrumental of establishing the boundaries of the Province, and had advanced a
large sum for that purpose. His family, who had long complained of ingratitude
and neglect, were now amply gratified, not only by the advancement of the new
Governor, but by his recommending several other gentlemen, who were connected
with it, to fill vacant seats at the Council board, and other offices of
government. Several gentlemen of other respectable families, who had been
treated with neglect, in the preceding administration, were also taken into
favor; and a spirit of conciliation, among those who had formerly been at
variance, seemed to mark the beginning of this administration with fair omens
of peace and success.

Being in the prime of life, active and enterprising in his disposition, polite
and easy in his address, and placed in the chair by the same minister who had
procured the repeal of the stamp act, to which event his own agency had
contributed; Mr. Wentworth enjoyed a great share of popular favor; which was
much heightened when his conduct was viewed in contrast with that of some other
Governors in the neighboring Provinces. Though bred a merchant, he had a taste
for agriculture, and en^^red vigorously into the spirit of cultivation. He
frequently traversed the forests; explored the ground for new roads; and began
a plantation for himself in the township of Wolfborough, on which he expended
large sums, and built an elegant house. His example was influential on other
landholders, who also applied themselves in earnest to cultivate the wilderness.

The improvement of the country at this time occupied the minds of the people
of New Hampshire, and took off their attention, in a great measure, from the
view of those political difficulties, which were occasioned by a new act of
Parliament, laying duties on paper, glass, painters' colors, and tea; and the
establishment of a board of Commissioners for collecting the American revenue.
In the other Colonies, particularly in Massachusetts, these duties had become a
subject of altercation and serious alarm, being grounded on the right which the
Parliament had assumed of binding America in all cases whatsoever. The only
remedy was to be found in frugality, non-importation, and domestic
manufactures. These things were recommended, and, in some measure, complied
with; and by means of these exertions, the revenue fell short of the sanguine
expectations which its advocates had formed.

The popularity of the Governor of New Hampshire, and the influence of his
numerous friends and connexions, who were of the principal families and the
richest merchants in the Province, prevented the adoption of a non-importation
agreement ^n Portsmouth, We cannot depend on the countenance of many persons of
the first rank here; for royal commissions and family connexions influence the
principal gentlemen among us, at least to keep silence in these evil times. The
press here has never been openly attacked; but the printer remembers what he
once suffered, at Boston; and is easily kept in awe by more private rebukes.

MS letter of the Sons of Liberty, in Portsmouth, to those in Boston.
till the merchants in some of the other Colonies threatened to withhold any
mercantile intercourse with them. A plan of the same kind was then (1770)
formed; and the union of so many Colonies, in this measure, caused the
manufacturers in Great Britain to experience distresses of the same nature with
those occasioned by the stamp act; and to exert their influence for a repeal of
the new revenue law, which was in part effected. All the duties, excepting that
on tea, were taken off. This relaxation, on the other side of the Atlantic,
produced a relaxation here. The ministry in Great Britain was frequently
changed; and no uniform system either of coercion or lenity was adopted. The
opposition on this side languished for want of unanimity. The more candid among
us were willing to suppose that Britain would never lay any more duties; and
there was some foundation for this supposition, as far as letters from
ministers of state, and speeches from provincial Governors might be depended
on. The tax on tea was reserved as a latent spark to rekindle the controversy.

When the Governor, at his first meeting the Assembly, according to the custom
on such occasions, recommended to them the establishment of an 'adequate,
honorable and permanent salary, Journal of Assembly.
' they made some hesitation, on account of a report, that the salaries of the
American Governors were to be paid out of the revenue. On being assured, that
if such a general establishment should take place, it would be so guarded as to
prevent his receiving any reward from the Assembly; they framed a vote,
granting seven hundred pounds per annum during his administration (dollars
being then fixed at six shillings. Sept. 30.
) The fund appropriated to the salary was the excise, and in case of its
insufficiency, other provision was made. But the vote was limited with an
exception, unless provision shall be made by Parliament. When the question was
put, the House was equally divided, and the Speaker, Peter Gilman, turned it
against a permanent salary. It was therefore voted from year to year, and
generally amounted to seven hundred pounds; besides which an allowance was made
for house-rent, from sixty or seventy to one hundred pounds.

Among the improvements which, during this administration, were made in the
Province, one of the most conspicuous, was the establishment of a seminary of
literature. It was founded on a projection of Doctor Eleazer Wheelock, of
Lebanon in Connecticut, for the removal of his Indian charity school.

The first design of a school of this kind was conceived by Mr. John Sergeant,
Missionary to the Indians at Stockbridge. Hopkins's memoirs of the Housatonnock
Indians, 1736.
A rambling mode of life, and a total want of letters, were ever unfriendly to
the propagation of religious knowledge among the savages of America. That
worthy missionary, intent on the business of his profession, and having
observed the progress made by some of the younger Indians, who resided in the
English families, in reading and other improvements, conceived the benevolent
idea of changing their whole habit of thinking and acting; and raising them
from their native indolence to a state of civilization; and at the same time,
by introducing the English language, instead of their own barren dialect, to
instill into their minds the principles of morality and religion.

To accomplish this design, he procured benefactions from many well disposed
persons both here and in England; and began a school at Stockbridge; where the
Indian youth were to be maintained, under the instruction of two masters; one
to oversee their studies, and the other their field labor; whilst a matron
should direct the female children in acquiring the arts of domestic life. (1749)
Death put an end to the labors of this excellent man before his plan could be
accomplished.

This design was revived by Wheelock. Having made some experiments, he was
encouraged to proceed, by the tractable disposition of the Indian youths, (1754)
and their proficiency in learning; but especially, by the numerous
benefactions, which he received from the friends of religion and humanity.
Wheelock's printed narrative.
Among which, a donation of Joshua Moor, of Mansfield, being the largest, in
the infancy of the institution, determined its name 'Moor's school.'

To increase the means of improvement, charitable contributions were solicited
in different parts of America, in England, and in Scotland. The money collected
in England, was put into the hands of a Board of Trustees, of whom the Earl of
Dartmouth was at the head; and that collected in Scotland was committed to the
society for promoting christian knowledge.

As an improvement on the original design, a number of English youths were
educated with the Indians, both in literary and agricultural exercises; that
their example might invite the Indians to the love of those employments, and
abate the prejudice which they have universally imbibed, that it is beneath the
dignity of man to delve in the earth.

As the number of scholars increased, it became necessary to erect buildings,
and extend cultivation. That part of the country in which the school was first
placed, being filled with inhabitants, a removal was contemplated. When this
intention was publicly known, offers were made by private and public persons in
several of the neighboring Colonies. The wary foresight of the founder, aided
by the advice of the Board of Trustees, in England, led him to accept an
invitation made by the Governor, and other gentlemen of New Hampshire. The
township of Hanover, on the eastern bank of Connecticut river, was finally
determined on, as the most convenient situation for the school; to which the
Governor annexed a charter of incorporation for an university, Dec. 13.
which took the name of Dartmouth College, from its benefactor, the Earl of
Dartmouth. Of this university, Doctor Wheelock was declared the founder and the
President; with power to nominate his successor, in his last will. A Board of
twelve Trustees was constituted, with perpetual succession; and the college was
endowed with a large landed estate, consisting of one whole township (Landaff)
besides many other tracts of land, in different situations, amounting in the
whole, to forty-four thousand acres. One valuable lot, of five hundred acres,
in the township of Hanover, given by the late Governor, Benning Wentworth, was
fixed upon as the site of the school and college. Besides these donations of
land, the amount of three hundred and forty pounds sterling, was subscribed, to
be paid in labor, provisions, and materials for building. With these
advantages, and the prospect of a rapidly increasing neighborhood, in a fertile
soil, on both sides of Connecticut river, Doctor Wheelock removed his family
and school into the wilderness. 1770.
At first, their accommodations were similar to those of other settlers,
September.
on new lands. They built huts of green logs, and lived in them, till a proper
edifice could be erected. The number of scholars, at this time, was
twenty-four; of which eighteen were whites, and the rest Indians.

Experience had taught Doctor Wheelock, that his Indian youths, however well
educated, were not to be depended on for instructors of their countrymen.
Narrative No. 5. p. 20, 21.
Of forty who had been under his care, twenty had returned to the vices of
savage life; and some whom he esteemed subjects of divine grace, had not kept
their garments unspotted. It was, therefore, in his new, necessary that a
greater proportion of English youths should be educated, to serve as
missionaries, and oversee the conduct of the Indian teachers. This was given as
the grand reason, for uniting the college with the Indian school, and placing
it under the same government; though the appropriations were distinctly
preserved. That the general concerns of the institution might be better
regulated, and the intrusion of vicious persons within the purlieus of the
college prevented; a district of three miles square was put under its
jurisdiction, and the President was invested with the office of a magistrate.
In 1771, a commencement was held, and the first degrees were conferred, on four
students; one of whom was John Wheelock, the son and successor of the founder.

Another improvement was made about the same time, by dividing the Province
into counties. This had been long sought, but could not be obtained. The
inconvenience to which the people in the western parts of the Province were
subject, by reason of their distance from Portsmouth, where all the Courts were
held, was extremely burdensome; whilst the convenience and emoluments of office
were enjoyed by gentlemen in that vicinity. Some attempts to divide the
Province had been made in the former administration; but without effect. The
rapid increase of inhabitants for several years, made a division so necessary,
that it had become one of the principal subjects of debate, in the Assembly,
from the time of the Governor's arrival. Several sessions passed before all
points could be adjusted. The number of counties, and the lines of division,
were not easily agreed to, and a punctilio of prerogative about the erecting of
Courts, made some difficulty; but it was finally determined, that the number of
counties should be five; and the Courts were established by an act of the whole
legislature. It was passed with a clause, suspending its operation, 1771.
till the King's pleasure should be known. The royal approbation being
obtained, it took effect in 1771. The five counties were named by the Governor,
after some of his friends in England; Rockingham, Strafford, Hillsborough,
Cheshire, and Grafton. The counties of Strafford and Grafton being much less
populous, than the others, were to remain annexed to the county of Rockingham,
till the Governor, by advice of Council, should declare them competent to the
exercise of their respective jurisdictions; which was done in 1773.

The year 1771 was also distinguished by the abolition of paper currency.
Silver and gold had been gradually introduced, and the paper had for several
years been called in by taxes. The time limited for its existence being now
come, it totally disappeared.

The death of the late Governor produced consequences which materially affected
his successor. Oct. 14* 1770. Aetat 75.
This family had been for many years of the first rank in the Province, and
some of its members and connexions had held the principal offices. In such a
case, domestic union may be considered as necessary to preserve public honor.
The late Governor, though superseded, had been treated with every mark of
respect; and having no children, it was expected that his successor would be
his principal heir. A later will, made in favor of his young widow, and unknown
till after his death, caused a sudden disappointment; which, if it had
evaporated in private reflections only, might have passed among the infirmities
incident to humanity, and with them might have been consigned to oblivion; for
it is beneath the dignity of history, to record the altercations of families,
unless they are connected with public transactions, or events.

Antiquated claims upon the late Governor's estate were revived; and lawsuits
were commenced, which probably would not have been agitated, if the expected
disposition had been made. But the most alarming effect of this unhappy
disappointment was a question, which the Governor moved in Council, whether the
reservations of five hundred acres, in several townships, March 19.
made by the late Governor, Benning Wentworth, ^
in the charter grants, conveyed the title to him? The Council determined this
question in the negative. The Governor then asked, whether they would advise
him to grant the said tracts, to such of his Majesty's subjects, as should
settle and cultivate the same? To this they gave their assent. Seven of the
Counselors present on this occasion were the Governor's relations. The eighth
was Peter Livius, a gentleman of foreign extraction, who entered his dissent.
He had for several years served as a Justice of the Common Pleas; but on the
division of the Province into counties, it was necessary to issue new
commissions. Finding himself overlooked in the appointment of officers, and his
private affairs calling him abroad, he sailed for England, and there exhibited
to the Lords of Trade, 1772.
articles of complaint against the Governor and his Council. July 9.


The first was, that the Governor and Council, without any legal process,
Printed compl^^n.
or the intervention of a jury, had deprived the grantees under the Crown of
their lands, on suggestion only that the conditions had not been fulfilled.

The second was, that the duty paid by foreign shipping, commonly called powder
money, had not been accounted for, since the year 1741; and that the Council
had refused to join with the Representatives in an inquiry into this matter in
the year 1768.

The third was, that the Governor had moved in Council, that the lands reserved
to the late Governor, in the charters of townships, should be regranted to
himself, through the medium of another person; and that the protest of the
complainant, against the legality of this proceeding, was rejected.

The fourth was, that in consequence of the opposition, which he was in duty
bound thus to make, he had been injuriously treated, and had received personal
abuse from the Governor.

The fifth was, that pending an action in the Common Pleas, brought by the
Governor, though in other names, the Judges had several times been changed,
till a question on a point of law was determined in favor of the Governor.

The sixth article stated, that the complainant had expected to prove several
of the above facts, by referring to copies of the Council records in their
Lordship's office; but was surprised to find that the Governor had disobeyed
his instructions in not sending them.

The memorial concluded with a general charge or partiality arising from the
family connexions of the Governor and Council.

Copies of this memorial were sent to the Governor and Council, who separately
prepared and returned distinct answers to the several articles of complaint. MS
copies.


To the first, it was said, that the re^umption of grants forfeited by
noncompliance with the conditions of settlement was supported by the opinion
of the Attorney and Solicitor General, given in 1752; that the invariable usage
in these cases, had been to issue notice to delinquent proprietors, that they
should appear on a set day, and show cause why their shares should not be
forfeited and regranted; that their allegations had been always treated with
proper respect, and that no complaint of injustice had been made by any persons
whose grants had been thus resumed.

To the second it was answered, that the amount of powder-money, during the
former administration, though long neglected, had been lately recovered; and
that since 1768, it had been regularly accounted for. The reason for the
nonconcurrence of the Council, with the vote for inquiring into this matter,
was their respect to the royal prerogative, conceiving that the House had no
concern with the matter.

To the third article, it was said, that the late Governor, conscious of the
insufficiency of his title, had solicited his successor for grants of these
reservations, which he had declined giving, unless a mandamus from the King
could be procured; that this uncertainty had prevented his alienating them;
that in consequence, they were uncultivated and forfeited; that some of these
lands had been regranted to other persons; but that the present Governor had no
interest directly or indirectly in them. The Council denied, that the Governor
had ever proposed the granting of these lands to himself, through another
person. They also denied that the dissent of the memorialist had been refused.

The charge of personal abuse, in the fourth article, was contradicted and
retorted; but it was conceded, that the Governor had told him that his reasons
of dissent were not founded in truth.

In answer to the fifth article, it was acknowledged, that the action was
brought for the Governor's benefit; but that any unfair means were used to
influence the Court was denied. This denial was corroborated by the depositions
of the Judges themselves, and of the Attorneys who were concerned in the suit.
It was also proved that the judgment of the Court on the question of law, was
of no moment, being reversed by the Superior Court, before which the cause was
carried by appeal.

To the sixth article, it was answered, that the Governor had directed the
Secretary to furnish him with copies of all the public transactions which had
usually been sent to England, and that he had regularly transmitted them. But
it appeared from the affidavit of the Secretary, that in June 1760, the late
Governor had ordered him not to transcribe the minutes of the Council, when
sitting without the Assembly, unless specially directed; and since that time it
had been usual to send the journal of the Council when sitting as a House of
Assembly, and not as a Council of State.

In fine, the Council denied that they had ever acted, in their public
capacity, from any private or family interest; but asserted, that they had
frequently given their judgment directly against it; and they concluded with
very severe reflections on the complainant.

With these answers, 1773.
were transmitted a great number of depositions, MS copies.
from persons of all ranks and professions, testifying in favor of the
Governor, These being laid before the Lords of Trade, and the memorialist being
heard in reply, the Board represented to the King, May 10.
Printed representatio^*
that the complaint against the Governor 'had been fully verified.' At the same
time they thought it their duty to represent, that the reports which they had
received, through different channels, of the situation of affairs within
New Hampshire, did all concur in representing the colony to have been, since
Mr. Wentworth's appointment, in a state of peace and prosperity; that its
commerce had been extended, and the number of its inhabitants increased; and
that every attempt made to excite the people to disorder and disobedience, had
been, by the firm and temperate conduct of Mr. Wentworth, suppressed and
restrained.

When the cause was reheard before a committee of the Privy Council, it was
observed by the Governor's advocate, (...) 29.
that peace, prosperity and obedience, were not compatible with oppression and
injustice; and that however the Lords of Trade had in the beginning of their
report condemned the Governor, they had, by the praise bestowed upon him, in
the end contradicted themselves.

The Lords of the committee reported to the King in Council, their judgment
upon several articles of the complaint, August 26.
Printed report.
in substance as follows.

'That by the law of England, when ^^nds were granted, upon condition, the
breach of that condition must be found by a jury under a commission from the
Court of Chancery; but that no such Court existed in New Hampshire; and though
the general rule was that the law of England extended to the Colonies, yet it
must be understood to mean, such part of the law as is adapted to the state and
constitution of them. That though the Governor had resumed and regranted lands,
yet there was no evidence that such resumptions had been made without proof or
public notoriety, that the conditions of former grants had not been complied
with; and that no complaint had been made by any person supposed to be injured.
That it had not been proved that resumptions had been made without notice to
the proprietors; and it had not even been suggested, in cases where time had
been allowed, that grants were resumed before the expiration of it. That the
lands granted to the late Governor were granted in the name of the King, which
was sufficient to convey a title; and that the Council was mistaken in thinking
otherwise. That the Governor, by their advice, did resume and regrant several
tracts of land which had been granted to the late Governor; but it had not been
proved that the said lands were regranted in trust for himself; and in many
instances such lands were regranted to different inhabitants for their own use
and benefit; and that the late Governor's widow had not complained of any
injury, by such resumption. That it appeared to have been the constant practice
when any standing Justice of a Court was interested in a suit, for a special
Justice to be appointed; that other causes were depending at the same Inferior
Court of Common Pleas, in which the standing Justices were interested, and
there was no proof that special Justices were appointed on account of that
particular cause in which the Governor was concerned; but that the commission
was solicited in the common form; and that the defendant himself had testified
that he had no objection to the commission or to the special Justices. With
respect to the transmission of the records of Council, it was their opinion
that it might be proper to revive that practice, as it had been conducted
previously to the year 1760. But upon the whole, they ^ubmitted their judgment
that there was no foundation for any censure upon the said Governor, for any of
the charges contained in the complaint, and that the general conduct of his
administration had tended greatly to the peace and prosperity of the said
Province.

This report was approved by the King in Council, Oct^be^ 8.
and the complaint was dismissed. But the Governor was strictly enjoined, to
transmit to the Lords of Trade, authentic copies of the journals of of the
Council, as a Council of State.

In this controversy Mr. Livius met with great support, from the interest of
those who wished to displace the Governor; and they became so deeply engaged to
him, as to procure for him an appointment to be the Chief Justice of
New Hampshire; but, upon more mature consideration, this was thought too likely
to produce discord and confusion, and he obtained an appointment to a more
lucrative office in the Province of Quebec.

When the final issue of the complaint was known in New Hampshire, a general
satisfaction appeared among the people. At the next session of the Assembly,
the House of Representatives presented to the Governor, an adddress of
congratulation, in the name of their constituents; and the citizens of
Portsmouth gave a splendid ball, to which the Governor and both Houses of
Assembly were invited.

Hitherto the Governor had preserved his popularity; and the people, in
general, were satisfied with his administration. But, the obligation which lay
on him to support the claims of Britain, and aid the plans of her ministry,
rendered his situation extremely delicate, and his popularity very precarious.
The controversy between Britain and the Colonies was drawing to a crisis. By
the reservation of the duty on tea, the Parliament insisted on it as their
right, to tax their American brethren without their consent; and the Americans,
by withholding the importation of tea from Britain, made use of the only
peaceable mode, in their power, effectually to oppose that claim. The revenue
failed, and the warehouses of the East India company were filled with an
unsaleable commodity. The ministry and the company, thus severely disappointed,
formed a plan, by which it was expected, that the one would enforce their
claim, and the other secure their traffic.

It was therefore enacted in Parliament, that the duty on the exportation of
tea, from Britain, should be taken off; and the East India company be enabled
to send tea, on their own account, to America, subject to a duty only of three
pence on the pound; by which means it would come to us, cheaper than before, or
than it could be procured by illicit trade.

This measure caused a general alarm, through the Colonies; and united the
interest of the merchants, with the views of the politicians, and the general
sense of liberty in the people. The trading towns set the example, which the
others followed, of passing resolves, not to permit tea, freighted by the East
India company, to be landed or sold. These resolutions were effectual. In some
places the consignees were obliged to relinquish their appointments, and the
tea was returned unladen. In other places it was deposited in stores, till it
could be reshipped. In Boston, where the obstinacy of Governor Hutchinson drove
the people to desperation, it was destroyed. In New Hampshire, the prudence of
Governor Wentworth, the vigilance of the magistrates and the firmness of the
people were combined, and the hateful commodity wa^ sent away without any
damage, and with but little tumult.

The first cargo of tea, consisting of twenty-seven chests, 1774.
was landed and stored at the custom house, ^une 25.
before any people could assemble to obstruct it. A town meeting was called,
and a proposal was made to Mr. Parry, the consignee, to reship it: To this he
consented. A guard was appointed by order of the town, to watch the custom
house. The tea having been entered, it was necessary that the duty should be
paid; which was done openly, by the consignee. The Governor convened the
Council, and kept the magistrates and peace officers in readiness to suppress
any riotous appearances; but there was no need of their exertion. The tea was
peaceably reshipped and sent to Halifax.

A second cargo, of thirty chests, which came consigned to the same person,
Sent. 8.
raised a small ferment; and the windows of his lodgings were broken. He
applied to the Governor for protection. The Governor, as before, summoned the
Council and magistrates. The town, by their committee, prevailed on the
consignee to send the tea to Ha^^fax, after having paid the duty, without which
the ship could not legally be cleared at the custom house.

A general detestation of the measures, ^ursued by the British ministry, to
rivet ^he chains on America, universally pre^ailed. The towns had severally
passed ^^solves, asserting their right of exemption ^^om all taxation by
Parliament; con^emning the importation and use of tea; (...) appointing
committees of inspection (...) carry their resolutions into effect. The
^^mmittees were vigilant; and being aid^^ by the general sentiment of the
people, their exertions were successful.

The controversy had now advanced, to (...) stage, which excited the most
serious ap^rehensions. The Parliament had assum^^ judicial, as well as
legislative powers; (...) directed their vengeance against Bos^on. Its port was
shut, and guarded by ^^ips of war; its commerce was interdict^^; its tradesmen
were without employ^ent; and its poor without bread. A military Governor
presided there, and was ^^awing together all the British troops ^^om every part
of America; that he might be prepared, to make any sanguinary experiment,
which, in the ministerial plan (...) coercion, might be judged necessary.

The sympathy of their American bre^^ren, raised contributions, for the relief
^f the numerous poor in Boston, who were regarded as suffering in the common
cause. But, to guard ourselves effectually against the gathering storm, a union
of the Colonies was thought absolutely necessary; and recourse was had to the
same measure which had formerly been tried in cases of common danger, to hold a
CONGRESS of delegates from each Colony.

The enemies of America have uniformly censured this measure as unprecedented,
illegal and dangerous. That it was dangerous to the designs of the British
administration, is admitted; but for that reason, it was to us the means of
safety. Though it was not supported by any written law, yet it was evidently
founded on self preservation, the first law of nature. But that it was
unprecedented, is a very great mistake. From the middle of the preceding
century, the united Colonies of New England, held annual, or semiannual
meetings of Commissioners, on their common concerns, for above forty years.
From the reign of Queen Anne, to that of George the second, Governors, and
delegates from Councils and Assemblies* occasionally met in central places, to
hold conferences relative to the operations of war, or treaties with the Indian
tribes. May 6, 1754. A question was moved in Counci^ by the Governor, Whether
it be not an in^^ingement of the pr^^ogative, for the House to join with the
Council, in appointing delegates to the Congress at Albany? To which the
Council answered; that the House had no inherent right* but it had (...) l^ng
the cust^^, at such interviews, for the lower House to nominate persons, to be
joined with such as the Council should appoint.

Council minute.
These meetings, usually called by the name of CONGRESSES, though unknown, or
disregarded in Britain, were familiar to the people of America; and what could
be a more natural or obvious step, in a time of common danger, than to assemble
by deputies, and confer on the means of safety? Precedents were numerous, that
Governors and delegates had held these Assemblies, when their interests were
united; what then should hinder the people from following the example, when
their interest required them to meet, without their Governors, who were
endeavor^ng to maintain a separate interest?

At the meeting of the Assembly of New Hampshire, in the spring, May 10.
the House of Representatives, conformably to the proceedings of the Assemblies
in the oth^^ Colonies, appointed a committee of correspondence. The Governor,
who ^ad in vain labored to prevent this meas^re, adjourned the Assembly, June ^.
and after a few days, dissolved it; hoping, by this means, to dissolve the
committee also. But they were not restricted by forms. On a summons issued by
the committee, the Representatives met again, in their own chamber. The
Governor, attended by the Sheriff of the county, J^ly 6.
went among them. They rose at his entrance. He declared their meeting illegal,
and directed the Sheriff to make open proclamation, for all persons to
disperse, and keep the King's peace. When he had retired they resumed their
seats; but, on further consideration, adjourned to another house; and after
some convers^tion, wrote letters to all the towns in the Province; requesting
them to send deputies, to hold a Convention at Exeter, who should choose
delegates for a general Congress; and to pay their respective quotas of two
hundred pounds, agreeably to the last proportion of the Provincial tax. They
also recommended a day of fasting and prayer, to be observed by the several
congregations, on account of the gloomy appearance of public affairs. The day
was observed, with religious solemnity. The money was collected. Ju^y ^4.
Eighty-five duputies were chosen and met at Exeter, where they delegated
Nathaniel Folsom and John Sullivan, J^ly 21.
Esquires, to attend the proposed Congress, at Philadelphia, in September, and
delivered to them the money which had been collected, to defray their expenses.
They also recommended the distressed state of Boston, to the commiseration of
their brethren in New Hampshire; and contributions were raised in many of the
towns for their relief.

The Governor was now convinced, and in his letters to the ministry
acknowledged, ^
that the union of the Colonies would not be lost in New Hampshire. At the same
time, he did the people the justice to say, that they had abstained from
^iolence and outrage, and that the laws ^ad their course. In his letters which
were published by the ministry, there appears a spirit of candor toward the
people* as well as a desire to recommend himself to the approbation of his
superiors. Though he saw another authority rising in the Province, founded on
the broad basis of public opinion, and unrestrained representation, an
authority over which he had no influence or control* yet he endeavored to
preserve the shadow of the royal government, and keep up its forms as long as
possible.

But it was impracticable for a person, circumstanced as he was, to withstand
the spirit of the people. The fo^lowing paragra^h, of one of his private
letters, written at that (...), to a co^^^dential f^^end, deserves to be
remembered.

O^^ hemisphere threatens a hu^^icane. I have in vain strove, al^^^^ to death,
to prevent it. If I can, at last, bring out of it, safety to my country, and
^onor to our sove^^^gn, my labors will be joyful. My heart (...) devoted to it,
and you kn^w its sincerity.

MS letter to T. W. W.
That his wish was to prevent a rupture, there is sufficient evidence, for
candor to believe. But it cannot be thought strange, that in his endeavors to
comply with the expectations of the ministry, and their instruments, which he
conceived to be his duty, he should fall into such a snare, as to (...) the
affe^tions of the people; for it wa^ impossible to please both.

The troops in Boston wanted barracks, to secure them against the approaching
winter. The artificers of the town, were, by the popular voice, restrained from
working in the service of government. General Gage was therefore obliged to
send for assistance to the neighboring Governors, and, among others, to
Governor Wentworth. Instead of convening his Council for their advice, or
issuing a proclamation, inviting help and promising reward, he privately
employed a person to hire carpenters to go to Boston. It was impossible that
the secret should be kept, and when it was known, his best friends reprobated
his conduct. The Committee of Portsmouth, at the head of which, was his uncle,
Hunking Wentworth, bore their public testimony against it; and censured him,
not by name, but by implication, as 'an enemy to the community,' and the men
whom he had employed, as 'unworthy of society.' The agent in this secret
business, was brought on his knees before the committee of Rochester, and made
an humble acknowledgment. This prudent step of the committee, disarmed the
popular rage, and prevented any injury to his person or property.

The transactions of the Congress which met at Philadelphia, Sept. ^.
were universally approved. The spirit of them was firm* but pacific. The mode
of opposition, to the arbitrary claims of Britain, which they recommended, was
non-importation and non-consumption. But in the close of their address, to
their constituents* they advised them to extend their views to the most unhappy
events, and to be in all respects prepared for every contingency. Not long
after this advice was made public, a contingency presented itself, in which the
people of New Hampshire gave an example of that spirit, by which the whole
country was animated.

An order having been passed by the King in Council, prohibiting the
exportation of gunpowder and other military stores, to America; a copy of it
was brought by express to Portsmouth, Dec 13.
at a time, when a ship of war was daily expected from Boston, with a party of
troops, to take possession of fort William and Mary, at the entrance of the
harbor. The committee of the town, with all possible secresy and dispatch,
collected a company, from that and some of the neighboring towns; and before
the Governor had any suspicion of their intentions, they proceeded to
Newcastle, and assaulted the fort. The Captain and his five men (which was the
whole garrison) were confined, and one hundred barrels of powder were carried
off. The next day, another company went and removed fifteen of the lightest
cannon, and all the small arms, with some other warlike stores; which they
distributed in the several towns, under the care of the committees. Major John
Sullivan, and Captain John Langdon, distinguished themselves, as leaders in
this affair. It was transacted with great expedition and alacrity, and in the
most fortunate point of time; just before the arrival of the Scarborough
^rigate, and Cans^au sloop, with several companies of soldiers; who took
possession of the fort, and of the heavy cannon which had not been removed.

The Governor put the five men, who belonged to the fort, on board the ships of
war, to be reserved as evidences in case of a prosecution of the offenders for
high treason; and having consulted Council in this and the neighboring
Province, thought it his duty; that he might prevent any charge of misprision
of treason against himself; to dismiss from public trust, all those persons
concerned in the assault of the fort, who had held any of^ice under the
government, and concerning whose proceedings he had authentic testimony. He
also issued a proclamation, commanding all officers, civil and military, to
assist in detecting and securing the offenders; and exhorting all the people to
beware of being seduced, by the false arts and menaces of abandoned men.

It was thought proper by the Governor and some of his friends, to form an
association, for the support of the royal government, and for their mutual
defense. They boasted, that an hundred men could be procured, from the ships,
at a minute's warning. This transaction exposed the weakness of the cause,
which they meant to support; 1775.
for what could an hundred men do against the whole country?

J^^. ^5.
A second convention of deputies met at Exeter, to consult on the state of
affairs, and appoint delegates for the next general Congress, to be holden on
the tenth of May, at Philadelphia. Major Sullivan and Captain Langdon were
chosen; and the sum of two hundred and fifty pounds, was orde^^d to defray
their expenses. This convention issued an address to the people, warning them
of their danger; exhorting them to union, peace and harmony, frugality,
industry, manufactures, and learning the military art* that they might be able,
if necessary, to defend the country against invasi^n. They appointed a
committee of correspondence, with power to call another convention, when they
should judge it necessary.

The winter passed away in gloomy apprehension and anxiety. Men of
consideration saw that a wide breach was made, and that it could not easily be
closed. Some happy geniu^ was wanted to plan, and wisdom on both sides to
adopt, a constitution for Britain and America. Royal charters and instructions,
acts of Parliaments and precedents of all kinds, were at best but a rotten
foundation. The store of temporary expedi^nts was exhausted. It was doubtful
whether force could generate submission, or whether resistance could enervate
force. Neither country was sensible of the strength and resources of the other.
The press teemed with arguments on both sides; but no plan of conciliation was
adopted. A fair and candid representation of our grievances could not be
received, in the Court of Britain. Each side was tenacious of its claims, and
there appeared no disposition to relax. When two independent nations are in
such a state, they generally find among their friends and allies, some
mediating power, to bring them to terms and prevent a rupture. Between Britain
and America, no mediator could be found. The controversy could be decided only
by the supreme Arbiter of nations.

The first ships, which arrived in the spring, brought us news that the
petition of Congress was graciously received by the King; and that the
merchants of England were petitioning in our favor. This revived our hopes.
Soon after we were informed, that the Parliament had voted the existence of a
rebellion in Massachusetts; and that the other Colonies were aiding and
assisting: That the Lords and Commons had addressed the King, to enforce the
revenue-acts, and had assured him, that they would stand by him, with their
lives and fortunes: That the King had demanded an augmentation of his forces,
by sea and land: That the commerce of the New England Colonies was to be
restrained, and their fishery prohibited; and that an additional number of
troops, horse and foot, were ordered to America. These tidings threw us into
distress. A war seemed inevitable; and a gloom overspread the whole country.
The people of Boston began to remove from the town; and those, who could not
remove, were solicitous to secure their most valuable effects. In the midst of
this distress, a frigate arrived express from England; (...) 14.
with an account of a proposal made and voted in Parliament, which was called
Lord North's conciliatory proposition. It was this; that when any Colony by
their Governor, Council and Assembly, shall engage to make provision, for the
support of civil government, and administration of justice, in such Colony; it
will be proper, if such proposal be approved by the King and Parliament, for so
long time as such provision shall be made, to forbear to levy any duties or
taxes in such Colony, except for the regulation of commerce; the ^eat proceeds
of which shall be carried to the account of such Colony respectively. The
troops, however, were ^o remain; and the refractory Colonies were to be
punished. This proposition ^as said to be founded on some advice, received from
New York, that if concessions ^ere made by Parliament, they would ^ensure the
proceedings of Congress, and break the union of the Colonies. The proposal was
evidently a bait thrown out ^o divide us, and tempt us to desert the Colony of
Massachusetts; who could not ^omply, without submitting to the alteration,
lately made by Parliament in their ^harter.

What might have been the effect of this proposition in the other Colonies, if
it ^ad been allowed time to operate, is un^ertain. The conduct of General Gage,
^n receiving this news, was in the highest degree absurd and inconsistent. He
had been blamed in Parliament for his inactivity. He had friends in Boston, who
constantly assured him, that the people in the country would not dare to face
his troops. He had been informed of a magazine of provisions and stores, at
Concord, laid up by the Provincial Congress, in case of extremity. With the
news of the conciliatory proposition, he received orders to make an experiment
of its success. On the eighteenth day of April, April 18
he issued writs for calling a general Assembly, to comply with the proposed
terms of reconciliation; and in the night following, he privately dispatched a
body of his troops, to destroy the magazine at Concord; and to seize some of
the leaders of opposition, who had retired from the town. He was induced to
believe, that if between the issuing of his writs, and the meeting of the
Assembly, he could strike a bold stroke; it would so intimidate the people, and
unfit them for defense, that they would easily comply with the terms proposed.
But he totally mistook the genius of the people of New England. Nor were his
designs carried on so secretly as he imagined. The popular leaders were
seasonably apprised of their danger, and kept themselves out of his reach. The
country was alarmed, by expresses sent off in the night, before he had taken
the precaution to shut the avenues of the town. A company of armed citizens
kept guard at Lexington, on the road to Concord. The British troops, when they
appeared in the morning, having ordered them to disperse, fired upon them, as
they were retiring, and killed ^everal on the spot. April 19.
They then proceeded (...) Concord, and destroyed such of the ^tores as had not
been removed; and having accomplished their object, as far as they were able,
they retreated through ^howers of musquetry from the people, ^ho suddenly
collected from all quarters ^o oppose them.

On the alarm of this act of hostility, the people of New Hampshire, and of the
other Colonies, took arms, and flew to the assistance of their brethren.

Notwithstanding this ill-advised and unsuccessful attempt of Gage, Governor
Wentworth had very sanguine hopes of the good effect of the 'conciliatory
proposition;' and determined, as he said, to plant the root of peace in
New Hampshire. He summoned a new Assembly; and in his speech, entreated them,
as the only legal and constitutional Representatives of the people, May ^.
to direct their counsels to such measures, as might tend to secure their peace
and safety; and effectually lead to a restoration of the public tranquillity;
and an affectionate reconciliation with the mother country. The House desired a
short recess, that they might advise with their constituents on so momentous a
question; and the Governor reluctantly consented to adjourn them to the twelfth
day of June.

In the mean time, the officers and men of the Scarborough began to dismantle
the fort; they also stopped two vessels laden with provisions, which were
coming into the harbor; and notwithstanding the most pressing remonstrances of
the inhabitants, and solicitation of the Governor, refused to release them.
Upon this, a body of armed men, went to a battery on Jerry's point, at Great
Island, and took away eight cannon of twenty-four and thirty-two pound shot,
May 26.
which they brought up to Portsmouth; and whilst they were engaged in this
work, the Canseau sloop convoyed the two provision vessels to Boston, for the
supply of the fleet and army.

A new convention was at this time siting at Exeter; in which the Province was
more fully and equally represented, than it ever had been before. They passed
votes of thanks to those who had taken the powder and guns from the fort, in
the preceding winter, and to those who had removed the cannon from the battery.
They also instructed the Representatives, how to act at the next meeting of the
Assembly; and the voice of the conven^^on was regarded by the House, as the
^oice of their constituents.

At the adjournment, June 12.
the Governor ^gain recommended 'the conciliatory proposition.' The first step
which the House took, was in obedience to the ^^ice of the convention, to expel
three members whom the Governor had called by the King's writ, from three new
townships; whilst many other towns, of much older standing, and more populous,
were neglected, and never enjoyed the privilege of representation, but in the
newly-established conventions. The Governo^ then ad^ourned the Assembly to the
elevent^ of July. One of the expelled mem^ers, having spoken his mind freely
without doors, was assaulted by the populace, and took shelter in the
Governor's house. The people demanded him, and brought a gun, mounted on a
carriag^ to the door; upon which the offender was delivered up, and conveyed to
Exeter. The Governor, conceiving himself insulted, retired to the fort; and his
house became a scene of pillage.

When the Assembly met again, July 11.
he sent a message from the fort, and adjou^ned them to the twenty-eighth of
Septem^er; but they never met any more. He continued under the protection of
the Scarborough, and another ship of war, till all the remaining cannon of the
fort were taken on board, Aug. 24.
and then sailed for Boston. In September he came to the Isles of Shoals, and
there issued a proclamation, adjourning the Assembly to the next April. This
was the last act of his administration, and the last time that he set his foot
in the Province. Thus an end was put to the British Government in
New Hampshire, when it had subsisted ninety-five years.

From this view of the administration of Governor Wentworth, it is easy to
conclude, that his intentions were pacific; and whilst the temper of the times
allowed him to act agreeably to his own principles, his government was
acceptable and beneficial; but when matters had come to the worst, his faults
were as few, and his conduct as temperate, as could be expected from a servant
of the Crown. If a comparison be drawn, between him and most of the other
Governors on this continent, at the beginning of the revolution, he must appear
to advantage. Instead of widening the breach, he endeavored to close it; and
when his efforts failed, he retired from (...) situation, where he could no
longer ex^^cise the office of a Governor; leaving ^is estate and many of his
friends; and ^^eserving only his commission, as surveyor of the King's woods;
the limits of which ^ere much contracted by the succeeding ^^volution.

CHAP. XXV. War with Britain. Change of Government. Temporary Constitution.
INDEPENDENCE. Military exertions. Stark's expedition. Employment of troops
during the war.
1775.
WHEN the controversy with Britain showed symptoms of hostility, and the design
of the Ministry and Parliament to provoke us to arms became apparent; the
people of New Hampshire began seriously to meditate the defense of their
country. It was uncertain in what manner the scene would open; for this and
other reasons no regular plan of operations could be formed. By the old militia
law, every male inhabitant, from sixteen years old to sixty, was obliged to be
provided with a musket and bayonet, knapsack, cartridge-box, one pound of
powder, twenty bullets and twelve flints. Every town was obliged to keep in
readiness one barrel of powder, two hundred pounds of lead and three hundred
flints, for every sixty men; beside a quantity of arms and ammunition for the
supply of such as were not able to provide themselves with the necessary
articles. Even those persons who were exempted from appearing at the common
military trainings, were obliged to keep the same arms and ammunition. In a
time of peace, these requisitions were neglected, and the people in general
were not completely furnished, nor the towns supplied according to law. The
care which the Governor had taken to appoint officers of militia and review the
regiments, for some years before, had awakened their attention to the duties of
the parade; which were performed with renewed ardor, after the provincial
convention had recommended the learning of military exercises and maneuvers.
Voluntary associations were ^ormed for this purpose, and the most experienced
persons were chosen to command on these occasions. To prevent ^alse rumors and
confusion, the commit^ees of inspection in each town were also committees of
correspondence, by whom all intelligence concerning the motions of the British,
were to be communicated; and proper persons were retained to carry expresses
when there should be occasion.

In this state of anxiety and expectation; when an early spring had invited the
husbandman to the labor of the field; April 19.
General Gage thought it proper to open the drama of war. The alarm was
immediately communicated from town to town through the whole country, and
volunteers flocked from all parts; till a body of ten thousand men assembled in
the neighborhood of Boston, completely invested it on the land side, and cut
off all communication with the country.

On the first alarm, about twelve hundred men marched from the nearest parts of
New Hampshire, to join their brethren, who had assembled in arms about Boston.
Of these, some returned; others formed themselves into two regiments, under the
authority of the Massachusetts Convention. May 17.
As soon as the Provincial Congress of New Hampshire met, they voted to raise
two thousand men, to be formed into three regiments; those which were already
there to be accounted as two, and another to be inlisted immediately. These men
engaged to serve till the last day of December, unless sooner discharged. The
command of these regiments was given to the Colonels John Stark, James Reed and
Enoch Poor. The two former were present in the memorable battle on the heights
of Charlestown, June 17.
being posted on the left wing, behind a fence; from which they sorely galled
the British as ^^ey advanced to the attack, and cut them ^own by whole ranks at
once. In their retreat they lost several men, and among others, the brave Major
Andrew McClary, who was killed by a cannon shot after he had passed the isthmus
of Charlestown. On the alarm occasioned by this battle, the third regiment
collected and marched (...) the camp; June 2^.
and with the other New Hampshire troops was posted on the left ^^ing of the
army at Winter-Hill, under ^^e immediate command of Brigadier General Sullivan,
who with the other general officers, received his appointment from Congress.

It had been a common sentiment among the British troops, that the Americans
would not dare to fight with them. This battle effectually convinced them of
their mistake. They found that fighting with ^s was a serious thing; and the
loss which they sustained in this battle, evidently had an influence on their
subsequent operations.

Whilst the Scarborough frigate remained in the harbor of Piscataqua, frequent
bickerings happened between her crew and the inhabitants. Captain Berkeley
^eized all inward bound vessels, and sent them to Boston. He also prevented the
boats belonging to the river from going out to catch fish. This conduct was
conformable to the orders which he had received to execute the restraining act.
In return, his boats were not permitted to fetch provisions from the town; and
one of them was fired upon in the night, by some of the guards stationed on the
shore. A compromise, at length, was made between him and the committee of the
town; open boats were permitted to pass, to catch fish for the inhabitants; and
his boats were allowed to take fresh provisions for the use of the ship. This
agreement subsisted but a short time, and finally all intercourse was cut off.

After the departure of the ship, the people went in volunteer parties, August
24.
under the direction of Major Ezekiel Worthen, whom the convention appointed
Engineer, and built forts on the points of two islands, which form a narrow
channel, about a mile below the town of Portsmouth. One of these was called
Fort Washington, and the other Fort Sullivan. The cannon which had been saved
from the old fort and battery were mounted here, and the town was thought to be
secure from being surprised by ships of war.

The tenth of September was the last day of exportation fixed by the general
Congress. Sept. 10.
Most of the vessels which sailed out of the harbor were seized by the British
cruisers and carried into Boston. One was retaken by a priva^eer of Beverly and
carried into Cape-Anne.

In the following month, several British ^rmed vessels were sent to burn the
town of Falmouth; which was in part effected, Oct. 18.
by throwing carcases and sending a party on shore, under cover of their guns.
It was suspected that they had the same design against Portsmouth. General
Washington dispatched Brigadier General Sullivan from the camp at Cambridge,
with orders to take the command of the militia and defend the harbor of
Pascataqua. On this occasion, the works erected on the islands were
strengthened; a boom, constructed with masts and chains, was thrown across the
Narrows, which was several times broken by the rapidity of the current, until
it was found impossible to secure the passage by such means; an old ship was
scuttled and sunk in the northern channel of the river; a company of rifle-men,
from the camp, was posted on Great-Island; and fire-rafts were constructed to
burn the enemy's shipping. These preparations served to keep up the spirits of
the people; but many families, not thinking themselves safe in Portsmouth,
removed into the country, and there remained till the next spring.

A spirit of violent resentment was excited against all who were suspected of a
disposition inimical to the American cause. Some persons were taken up on
suspicion and imprisoned; some fled to Nova Scotia, or to England, or joined
the British army in Boston. Others were restricted to certain limits and their
motions continually watched. The passions of jealousy, hatred and revenge were
freely indulged, and the tongue of slander was under no restraint. Wise and
good men secretly lamented these excesses; but no effectual remedy could be
administered. All commissions under the former authority being annulled, the
courts of justice were shut, and the sword of magistracy was sheathed. The
Provincial Convention directed the general affairs of the war; and town
committees had a discretionary, but undefined power to preserve domestic peace.
Habits of decency, family government, and the good examples of influential
persons, contributed more to maintain order than any other authority. The value
of these secret bonds of society was now more than ever conspicuous.

In the convention which met at Exeter, in May, MS Records o^ convention.
and continued sitting with but little interruption (...) November, one hundred
and two towns were represented, by one hundred and thirty-three members. Their
first care was to establish post offices; to appoint a committee of supplies
for the army, and a committee of safety. To this last committee, the general
instruction was similar to that, given by the Romans, to their Dictators, to
take under consideration, all matters in which the welfare of the Province, in
the security of their rights, is concerned; and to take the utmost care, that
the public sustain no damage. 'Ne quid detrimenti respublica c^pla^.'
Particular instructions were given to them, from time to time, as occasion
required. They were considered as the supreme executive; and during the recess
of the convention, their orders and recommendations had the same effect as the
acts and resolves of that whole body.

By an order of the convention, the former Secretary, Theodore Atkinson, Esquire.
delivered up the Province records, to a committee which was sent to receive
them, and Ebenezer Thompson, Esquire. was appointed in his place. The records of
deeds, and of the probate office, for the county of Rockingham, were also
removed to Exeter, as a place of greater safety than Portsmouth. The former
Treasurer, George Jaffrey, Esquire. was applied to for the public money in his
hands, which, to the amount of one thousand five hundred and sixteen pounds
four shillings and eight pence, he delivered; and Nicholas Gilman, Esquire. was
appointed Treasurer in his room.

During this year, three emissions of paper bills were made. The first, of ten
thousand and fifty pounds; the second, of ten thousand pounds; and the third,
of twenty thousand pounds. For the amount of those sums, the Treasurer gave his
obligation in small notes, which passed for a time, as current money, equal in
value to silver and gold. But as emissions were multiplied, as the redemption
of the bills was put off to distant periods, and the bills themselves were
counterfeited, it was impossible for them long to hold their value.

Beside the three regiments which made part of the American army at Cambridge,
a company of artillery was raised to do duty at the forts. A company of rangers
was posted on Connecticut river; and two companies more were appointed, to be
ready to march wherever the committee of safety should direct. The whole
militia was divided into twelve regiments; the field officers were appointed by
the convention, and the inferior officers were chosen by the companies. Out of
the militia were insisted four regiments of minute-men, so called, because they
were to be ready at a minute's warning. They were constantly trained to
military duty, and when called to service, were allowed the same pay as the
regiments in the continental army. In the succeeding winter, when the
Connecticut forces had withdrawn from the camp, because their time of service
was expired, sixteen companies of the New Hampshire militia, of sixty-one men
each, supplied their place, till the British troops evacuated Boston.

The convention having been appointed for six months only; before the
expiration of that time, applied to the general Congress for their advice,
respecting some mode of government for the future. In answer to which, the
Congress recommended to them, to call a full and free representation of the
people; that these Representatives, Nov. 3.
if they should think it necessary, might establish such a form of government,
as, in their judgment, would best conduce to the happiness of the people, and
most effectually tend to secure peace and good order in the Province, during
the continuance of the dispute between Great Britain and the Colonies. On
receiving this advice, the convention took into their consideration the mode in
which a full and free representation should be called; Nov. 14.
and finally agreed, that each elector should possess a real estate of twenty
pounds value, and every candidate for election, one of three hundred pounds;
that every town, consisting of one hundred families, should send one
Representative, and one more for every hundred families; and that those towns
which contained a less number than one hundred should be classed. They had
before ordered a survey to be made of the number of people in the several
counties; and having obtained it, they determined, that the number of
Representatives to the next convention, should bear the following proportion to
the number of people, viz. Rockingham, 37850 people 38 Representatives.
Strafford, 12713 13 Hillsborough, 16447 17 Cheshire, 11089 15 Grafton, 4101 6
In all 82200 89 These Representatives were to be empowered, by their
constituents, to assume government as recommended by the general Congress, and
to continue for one whole year from the time of such assumption. The wages of
the members were to be paid by the several towns, and their traveling expenses
out of the public treasury. Having formed this plan, and sent copies of it to
the several towns, the convention dissolved. Nov. 16.


This convention was composed chiefly of men who knew nothing of the theory of
government, and had never before been concerned in public business. In the
short term of six months, they acquired so much knowledge by experience, as to
be convinced, that it was improper for a legislative Assembly to consist of one
House only. As soon as the new convention came together, they drew up a
temporary form of government; and, Dec. 21.
agreeably to the trust reposed in them by their constituents, having assumed
the name and authority of a House of Representatives, 1776.
they proceeded to choose twelve persons, Jan. 5.
to be a distinct branch of the legislature, by the name of a Council. Of
these, five were chosen from the county of Rockingham, two from Strafford, two
from Hillsborough, two from Cheshire and one from Grafton. These were empowered
to elect their own President, and any seven of them were to be a quorum. It was
ordained, that no act or resolve should be valid, unless passed by both
branches of the legislature; that all money bills should originate in the House
of Representatives; that neither House should adjourn for more than two days,
without the consent of the other; that a Secretary, and all other public
officers of the Colony, and of each County, for the current year, all general
and field officers of militia, and all officers of the marching regiments,
should be appointed by the two Houses; all subordinate militia officers by
their respective companies; that the present Assembly should subsist one year,
and if the dispute with Britain should continue longer, and the general
Congress should give no directions to the contrary, that precepts should be
issued annually to the several towns on or before the first day of November for
the choice of Counselors and Representatives, to be returned by the third
Wednesday in December.

In this hasty production, there were ^ome material defects. One was the want
of an executive branch of government. To remedy this, the two Houses, during
their session, performed executive as well as legislative duty; and at every
adjournment appointed a committee of safety, to fit in the recess, with the
same powers, as ^ad been given in the preceding year, by the convention. The
number of this committee varied from six to sixteen. The President of the
Council was also President of this executive Committee. The person ^hosen to
fill this chair was an old, tried, faithful servant of the public, the
honorable MESHECH WEAR, Esquire. who was also appointed Chief Justice of the
Superior Court. So great was the confidence of the people in this gentleman,
that they scrupled not to invest him, at the same time, with the highest
offices, legislative, executive, and judicial; in which he was continued by
annual elections during the whole war.

This constitution was prefaced with several reasons for adopting government,
viz. That the British Parliament had, by many grievous and oppressive acts,
deprived us of our native rights; to enforce obedience of our native rights; to
enforce obedience to which acts, the ministry of that kingdom had sent a
powerful fleet and army into this country, and had wantonly and cruelly abused
their power, in destroying our lives and property; that the sudden and abrupt
departure of our late Governor, had left us destitute of legislation; that no
judicial Courts were open to punish offenders; and that the continental
Congress had recommended the adoption of a form of government. Upon these
grounds the convention made a declaration in these words, We conceive ourselves
reduced to the necessity of establishing a form of government, to continue
during the present unhappy and unnatural contest with Great Britain; protesting
and declaring, that we never sought to throw off our dependence on
Great Britain; but felt ourselves happy under her protection, whilst we could
enjoy our constitutional rights and privileges; and that we shall rejoice, if
such a reconciliation between us and our parent State can be effected, as shall
be approved by the continental Congress, in whose prudence and wisdom we
confide.

Such was the language, and such were the sentiments of the people at that
time; and had the British government, on the removal of their troops from
Boston, ^reated with us, in answer to our last pe^ition, upon the principle of
reconciliation; and restored us to the state in which we were before the
stamp act was made, they might even then, have preserved their connection with
us. But in the course of ^ few months, we not only found our pe^itions
disregarded, and our professions of ^ttachment to the parent state treated as
^ypocritical; but their hostile intentions ^ecame so apparent, and our
situation was ^o singular, that there could be no hope ^f safety for us,
without dissolving our connection with them, and assuming that equal rank among
the powers of the earth ^or which nature had destined us, and to which the
voice of reason and Providence ^oudly called us. Britain had engaged foreign
mercenaries to assist in subjugating ^s; justice required that we should in our
^urn court foreign aid; but this could not be had, whilst we acknowledged
ourselves ^ubjects of that Crown against whose pow^^ we were struggling. The
exertions which we had made, and the blood which we had shed, were deemed too
great a price for reconciliation to a power which still claimed the right to
bind us in all cases whatsoever, and which held out to us unconditional
submission, as the only terms on which we were to expect even a pardon.
Subjection to a Prince who had thrown us out of his protection; who had ruined
our commerce, destroyed our cities and spilled our blood; and who would not
govern us at all, without the interposition of a legislative body, in whose
election we had no voice, was an idea too absurd to be any longer entertained.
These sentiments, being set in their just light by various publications and
addresses, had such force as to produce a total change of the public opinion.
Independence became the general voice of the same people, who but a few months
before had petitioned for reconciliation. When this could not be had, but on
terms disgraceful to the cause which we had undertaken to support, we were
driven to that as our only refuge. The minds of the people at large in most of
the Colonies being thus influenced, they called upon their delegates in
Congress to execute the act which should sever us from foreign dominion, and
put us into a situation to govern ourselves. On the 11th of June 1776, a
committee was chosen by the Assembly of New Hampshire to make a draught of a
declaration of the General Assembly for the INDEPENDENCE of the united Colonies
on Great Britain, to be transmitted to our delegates in Congress.


It ought ever to be remembered, that (...) declaration of our independence was
^ade, at a point of time, July 4.
when no royal Governor had even the shadow of au^^ority in any of the
Colonies; and when (...) British troops had any footing on this Continent. The
country was then abso^^tely our own. A formidable force was ^^deed collected on
our coasts, ready to in^^de us; and in the face of that armament his decisive
step was taken. The decla^^tion was received with joy by the Ame^^can army then
assembled at New York. Within fourteen days it was published by ^eat of drum in
all the shire towns of New Hampshire. July 1^.
It relieved us from a state (...) embarrassment. We then knew the ^^ound on
which we stood, and from that ^^me every thing assumed a new appear^nce. The
jargon of distinctions between ^he limits of authority on the one side, and of
liberty on the other, was done ^way. The single question was, whether ^e should
be conquered Provinces, Observations on the American Revolution p. 57, ^^.
or free (...) independent States. On this question, ^very person was able to
form his own ^udgment; and it was of such magnitude that no man could be at a
loss to stake his life on its decision.

It is amusing to recollect, at this distance of time, that one effect of
independence was an aversion to every thing which bore the name and marks of
royalty. Sign boards on which were painted the King's arms, or the crown and
scepter, or the portraits of any branches of the royal family, were pulled down
or defaced. Pictures and escutcheons of the same kind in private houses were
inverted or concealed. The names of streets, which had been called after a King
or Queen were altered; and the halfpence, which bore the name of George III,
were either refused in payment, or degraded to farthings. These last have not
yet recovered their value.

The new Assembly began their administration by establishing Judicial Courts,
on the same system as before, excepting that the Court of Appeals, which had
long been esteemed a grievance, was abolished, and all appeals to Great Britain
were prohibited. Appeals from the Probate Courts, which formerly came before
the Governor and Council, were transferred to the Superior Court, whose
judgment was now made final. Encouragement was given to fit out armed vessels,
and a maritime Court was established for the trial of captures by sea. A law
was made to punish the counterfeiting of the paper bills of this and of the
United States; and to make them a tender for any money due by deed or simple
contract. After the declaration of independence the style of Colony was changed
for that of the STATE of New Hampshire. A new law was enacted to regulate the
militia. More paper bills were issued to pay the expenses of the war; and
provision was made for drawing in some of the bills by taxes. Doubts had
arisen, whether the former laws were in force; a special act was therefore
passed, reviving and re-enacting all the laws which were in force, at the time
when government was assumed; as far as they were not repugnant to the new form,
or to the independence of the Colonies, or not actually repealed.

The Congress having ordered several frigates to be built in different places;
May 21.
one of thirty-two guns, called the Raleigh, was launched at Portsmouth, in
sixty days from the time when her keel was laid; but for want of guns and
ammunition, and other necessaries, it was a long time before she was completely
fitted for the sea. The making of saltpeter was encouraged by a bounty; and
many trials were made before it was produced in purity. Powder mills were
erected, and the manufacture of gunpowder was, after some time, established;
but notwithstanding all our exertions, foreign supplies were necessary.

For the service of this year, two thousand men were raised, and formed into
three regiments, under the same commanders as in the former year. Three hundred
men were posted at the forts in the harbor. Supplies of fire arms and
ammunition were sent to the western parts of the State, and a regiment was
raised in that quarter, under the command of Col. Timothy Bedel, to be ready to
march into Canada.

The three regiments went with the army under General Washington to New York;
and thence were ordered up the Hudson, and down the lakes into Canada, under
the immediate command of Brigadier General Sullivan. The design of this
movement was to succor and reinforce the army, which had been sent, the
preceding year, against Quebec; and which was now retreating before a superior
force, which had arrived from Britain, as early as the navigation of the St.
Lawrence was opened. Our troops having met the retreating army at the mouth of
the Sorel, threw up some slight works round their camp. General Thomas, who had
commanded the army after the fall of the brave Montgomery, was dead of the
smallpox. Arnold was engaged in stripping the merchants of Montreal, under
pretense of supplying the army; and Thompson was taken prisoner in an
unsuccessful attack on the village of Trois Rivieres. The command therefore
devolved on Sullivan, who, finding a retreat necessary, conducted it with great
prudence. At this time the American troops, and in particular the regiments of
New Hampshire, had taken the infection of the smallpox. The sick were placed
in batteaux, and with the cannon and stores, were drawn against the rapid
current, by the strength of men on shore, or wading in the water; and so close
was the pursuit of the enemy, that they could scarcely find time to kindle a
fire to dress their victuals, or dry their clothes. At St. John's the pursuit
ceased. July 1*
On the arrival of our army at Ticonderoga, Sullivan, being superseded by
Gates, returned to the main army at New York. The troops in the northern
department being reinforced by the militia of the neighboring States,
fortified the posts of Ticonderoga and Mount Independence. Beside the
smallpox, a dysentery and putrid fever raged among them; and it was computed,
that of the New Hampshire regiments, nearly one third part died this year by
sickness.

When the danger of an attack on Ticonderoga for that season, was passed, the
remaining part of the New Hampshire troops marched by the way of the Minisinks*
into Pennsylvania. There they joined General Washington, and assisted in the
glorious capture of the Hessians at Trenton, and afterward in the battle of
Princeton. Though worn down with fatigue, and almost destitute of clothing, in
that inclement season, December ^ ^anuary.
they continued in the service six weeks after the term of their inlistment had
expired; and two regiments of the militia which were sent to reinforce the army
remained till March.

By this time the inconvenience of maintaining an army, 1777.
by annual inlistments and temporary levies, was severely felt, and generally
reprobated; and the Congress, though slow in listening to remonstrances on this
head, were obliged to adopt a more permanent establishment. In recruiting the
army for the next year, the officers were appointed by Congress, during the
war; and the men inlisted either for that term, or for three years. The
commanders of the three regiments of New Hampshire, were the Colonels Joseph
Cilley, Nathan Hale and Alexander Scammell. These regiments were supplied with
new French arms; and their rendezvous was at Ticonderoga, under the immediate
command of Brigadier General Poor. There they remained, till the approach of
the British army under General Burgoyne, July 6.
rendered it eligible to abandon that post. On the retreat, Col. Hale's
battalion was ordered to cover the rear of the invalids, by which means, he was
seven miles behind the main body. The next morning he was attacked, by an
advanced party of the enemy at Hubberton. In this engagement, Major Titcomb of
the New Hampshire troops, was wounded. Col. Hale, Captains Robertson, Carr, and
Norris, Adjutant Elliot, and two other officers were taken prisoners, with
about one hundred men. The main body of the army continued their retreat to
Saratoga. On their way they had a skirmish with the enemy at Fort Anne, in
which Captain Wear, son of the President, was mortally wounded, and died at
Albany.

Immediately after the evacuation of Ticonderoga, the committee of the
New Hampshire Grants (who had now formed themselves into a new State) wrote in
the most pressing terms, July 8.
Original letters in Eles.
to the committee of safety at Exeter for assistance, and said that if none
should be afforded to them, they should be obliged to retreat to the
New England States for safety. When the news of this affair reached
New Hampshire, the Assembly had finished their spring session and returned
home. A summons from the committee brought them together again; ^^ly 17.
and in a short session of three days only, they took the most effectual and
decisive steps for the defense of the country. They formed the whole militia of
the State into two Brigades; of the first they gave the command to William
Whipple, and of the second to John Stark. They ordered one fourth part of
Stark's brigade, and one fourth of three regiments of the other brigade, to
march immediately under his command, to stop the progress of the enemy on our
western frontiers. They ordered the militia officers, to take away arms, from
all persons, who scrupled or refused to assist, in defending the country; and
appointed a day of fasting and prayer, which was observed with great solemnity.

The appointment of Stark, to this command, with the same pay as a Brigadier in
the Continental service, was peculiarly grateful to the people as well as to
himself. In an arrangement of general officers, in the preceding year, a junior
officer had been promoted, whilst he was neglected. He had written on this
subject to Congress, and his letters were laid on the table. He therefore
quitted the army, and retired to his own estate. He was now by the unanimous
voice of his fellow-citizens, invested with a separate command, and received
orders to repair to Charlestown on Connecticut river; MS copy of orders on file.
there to consult with a committee of the New Hampshire Grants, respecting his
future operations and the supply of his men with provisions; to take the
command of the militia and march into the Grants; to act in conjunction with
the troops of that new State, or any other of the States, or of the United
States, or separately, as it should appear expedient to him; for the protection
of the people and the annoyance of the enemy.

In a few days he proceeded to Charlestown, and as fast as his men arrived, he
sent them forward, to join the forces of the new State, under Col. Warner, who
had taken post at Manchester, twenty miles northward of Bennington. Here Stark
joined him, Aug. 7.
and met with General Lincoln, MS copy of Lincoln^ let^er*
who had been sent from Stillwater, by General Schuyler, commander of the
northern department, to conduct the militia to the west side of Hudson's river.
Stark informed him of his orders, and of the danger which the inhabitants of
the Grants apprehended from the enemy, and from their disaffected neighbors;
that he had consulted with the committee, and that it was the determination of
the people, in case he should join the Continental army and leave them exposed,
that they would retire to the east of Connecticut river; in which case
New Hampshire would be a frontier. He therefore determined to remain on the
flank of the enemy, and to watch their motions. For this purpose he collected
his force at Bennington, Aug. 9.
and left Warner with his regiment at Manchester. A report of this
determination was transmitted to Congress, and the orders on which it was
founded were by them disapproved; but the propriety of it was evinced by
subsequent facts.

Aug. 9.
General Burgoyne, with the main body of the British army lay at Fort Edward.
Thence he detached Lieut. Col. Baum, with about fifteen hundred of his German
troops, and one hundred Indians, to pervade the Grants as far as Connecticut
river, with a view to collect horses to mount the dragoons, and cattle, MS copy
of Burgoyne's orders.
both for labor and provisions; and to return to the army with his booty. He
was to persuade the people among whom he should pass, that his detachment was
the advanced guard of the British army, which was marching to Boston. He was
accompanied by Colonel Skeene, who was well acquainted with the country; and he
was ordered to secure his camp by night.

The Indians, who preceded this detachment, Aug 13 (...) MS letters in the
files.
being discovered about twelve miles from Bennington; Stark detached Col. Greg,
with two hundred men, to stop their march. In the evening of the same day, he
was informed that a body of regular troops, with a train of artillery, was in
full march for Bennington. Aug. 14.
The next morning he marched with his whole brigade, and some of the militia of
the Grants, to support Greg, who found himself unable to withstand the superior
number of the enemy. Having proceeded about four miles, he met Greg retreating,
and the main body of the enemy pursuing, within half a mile of his rear. When
they discovered Stark's column, they halted in an advantageous position; and he
drew up his men on an eminence in open view; but could not bring them to an
engagement. He then marched back, about a mile, and encamped; leaving a few men
to skirmish with them; who killed thirty of the enemy and two of the Indian
chiefs. The next day was rainy. Stark kept his position, Aug. 15.
and sent out parties to harrass the enemy. Many of the Indians took this
opportunity to desert; because, as they said, 'the woods were full of yankees.'

On the following morning Stark was joined by a company of militia from the
Grants, Aug. 16.
and another from the county of Berkshire in Massachusetts. His whole force
amounted to about sixteen hundred. He sent Col. Nichols, with two hundred and
fifty men, to the rear of the enemy's left wing; and Col. Hendrick, with three
hundred, to the rear of their right. He placed three hundred to oppose their
front and draw their attention. Then sending Colonels Hubbard and Stickney,
with two hundred to attack the right wing, and one hundred more to reinforce
Nichols in the rear of their left, the attack began in that quarter precisely
at three of the clock in the afternoon. It was immediately seconded by the
other detachments; and at the ^ame time Stark himself advanced with the main
body. The engagement lasted two hours; at the end of which he forced their
breastworks, took two pieces of brass cannon and a number of prisoners; the
rest retreated.

Just at this instant, he received intelligence that another body of the enemy
was within two miles of him. This was a reinforcement for which Baum had sent,
when he first knew the force which he was to oppose. It was commanded by Col.
Breyman. Happily Warner's regiment from Manchester came up with them and
stopped them. Stark rallied his men and renewed the action; it was warm and
desperate; he used, with success, the cannon which he had taken; and at sunset
obliged the enemy to retreat. He pursued them till night, and then halted, to
pre^ent his own men from killing each other, in the dark. He took from the
enemy two other pieces of cannon, with all their baggage, wagons and horses.
Two hundred and twenty-six men were found dead on the field. Their commander,
Baum, was taken and died of his wounds; beside whom, thirty-three officers, and
above seven hundred privates, were made prisoners. Of Stark's brigade four
officers and ten privates were killed and forty-two were wounded.

In the account of this battle, which Stark sent to the committee of
New Hampshire, A^g. 18.
he said, our people behaved with the greatest spirit and bravery imaginable.
Had every man been an Alexander, or a Charles of Sweden, they could not have
behaved better. He was sensible of the advantage of keeping on the flank of the
enemy's main body; and therefore sent for one thousand men to replace those
whose time had expired; but intimated to the committee that he himself should
return with the brigade. They cordially thanked him for the very essential
service which he had done to the country, but earnestly pressed him to continue
in the command; and sent him a reinforcement, assuring the men that they were
to serve under General Stark. This argument prevailed with the men to march,
and with Stark to remain.

The prisoners taken in this battle were sent to Boston. The trophies were
divided between New Hampshire and Massachusetts. But Congress heard of this
victory by accident. Having waited some time in expectation of letters, and
none arriving* inquiry was made why Stark had not written to Congress? He
answered, that his correspondence with them was closed, as they had not
attended to his last letters. They took the hint; and though they had but a few
days before resolved, that the instructions which he had received were
destructive of military subordination, and prejudicial to the common cause; yet
they presented their thanks to him, and to the officers and troops under his
command, and promoted him to the rank of a Brigadier General, in the army of
the United States.

This victory gave a severe check to the hopes of the enemy, and raised the
spirits of the people after long depression. It wholly changed the face of
affairs in the northern department. Instead of disappointment and retreat, and
the loss of men by hard labor and sickness; we now were convinced, not only
that our militia could fight without being covered by intrenchments; but that
they were able, even without artillery, to cope with regular troops in their
intrenchments. The success thus gained was regarded as a good omen of farther
advantages. Let us get them into the woods, was the language of the whole
country. Burgoyne was daily putting his army into a more hazardous situation;
and we determined that no exertion should be wanting on our part to complete
the ruin of his boasted enterprise. The northern army was reinforced by the
militia of all the neighboring States. Brigadier Whipple marched with a great
part of his brigade; besides which, volunteers in abundance from every part of
New Hampshire flew to the army under General Gates. Two desperate battles were
fought, the one at Stillwater and the other at Saratoga; in both of which, the
troops of New Hampshire had a large share of the honor due to the American
army. In the former action, two Lieutenant Colonels, Adams and Colburne, and
Lieutenant Thomas, were slain in the field; and several other brave officers
were wounded, one of whom, Captain Bell, died in the hospital. In the latter,
Lieut. Col. Conner and Lieut. McClary were killed, with a great number of their
men; and Col. Scammel was wounded. The consequence of these battles was the
surrender of Burgoyne's army. This grand object being attained, the
New Hampshire regiments performed a march of forty miles, and forded the Mohawk
river, below the falls, in the space of fourteen hours. The design of this
rapid movement was to check the progress of a detachment, commanded by the
British General Clinton; who threatened Albany with the same destruction which
he had spread in the country below; but on hearing the fate of Burgoyne, he
returned quietly to New York. The regiments then marched into Pennsylvania and
passed the winter in huts at Valley-sorge. Beside those officers slain at the
northward, we sustained a loss in the death of Major Edward Sherburne, Aid de
Camp to General Sullivan, who was killed in a bold, but unsuccessful action at
Germantown.

After the capture of Burgoyne's army, all danger of invasion from Canada
ceased; 1778.
and the theater of the war was removed to the southward. The troops of
New Hampshire, being formed into a distinct brigade, partook of all the
services and sufferings, to which their brethren were exposed. In the battle of
Monmouth, a part of them were closely engaged, under the conduct of Col. Cilley
and Lieut. Col. Dearborn; and behaved with such bravery as to merit the
particular approbation of their illustrious General. They continued with the
main body, all that campaign, and were hutted, in the following winter, at
Reading.

In the summer of 1778, when a French fleet appeared on our coast, to aid us in
the contest with Britain; an invasion of Rhode Island, then possessed by the
British, was projected, and General Sullivan had the command. Detachments of
militia and volunteers, from Massachusetts and New Hampshire, formed a part of
his troops. But a violent storm, having prevented the cooperation of the
French fleet, and driven them to sea; the army, after a few skirmishes, was
under the disagreeable necessity of quitting the island; and the retreat was
conducted by Sullivan with the greatest caution and prudence.

When an expedition into the Indian country was determined on, 1779.
General Sullivan was appointed to the command, and the New Hampshire brigade
made a part of his force. His route was up the river Susquehanna into the
country of the Senekas; a tract imperfectly known, and into which no troops had
ever penetrated. The order of his march was planned with great judgment, and
executed with much regularity and perseverance. In several engagements with the
Savages, the troops of New Hampshire behaved with their usual intrepidity.
Capt. Cloyes and Lieut. McAulay were killed, and Major Titcomb was again badly
wounded. The provisions of the army falling short, before the object of the
expedition was completed, the troops generously agreed to subsist on such as
could be found in the Indian country. After their return, they rejoined the
main army, and passed a third winter in ^uts, at Newtown in Connecticut. In the
^^tter end of this year Sullivan resigned his command and retired.

In the following year, 1780.
the New Hampshire regiments did duty at the important post of West-Point, and
afterward marched into New Jersey, where General Poor ^^ed. Three regiments of
militia were employed in the service of this year. The fourth winter was passed
in a hutted can^onment, at a place called Soldier's Fortune, near Hudson's
river. In the close of this year, the three regiments were reduced to two,
which were commanded by the Colonels Scammel and George Reid.

The next year, a part of them remained in the State of New York, 1781.
and another part marched to Virginia, and were present at the capture of the
second British army, under Earl Cornwallis. Here the brave and active Col.
Scammel was killed. In the winter, the first regiment, commanded by Lieut. Col.
Dearborn, was quartered at Saratoga, 1782.
and the second on Mohawk river; in which places they were stationed, till the
close of the following year; when the approach of peace relaxed the operations
of war. In a few months, the negotiations were so far advanced, that a treaty
was made; and the same royal lips, which from the throne had pronounced us
'revolted subjects,' now acknowledged us as 'FREE AND INDEPENDENT STATES.'

CHAP. XXVI. Paper-money. Confiscations. State Constitution. Controversy with
Vermont.
THE war in which we became involved with Britain, found us not destitute of
resources, but unskilled in the art of finance. Former wars had been maintained
by a paper currency; which, though it depreciated in some measure, yet was
finally redeemed by the reimbursements which we received from the British
Treasury. We had been also used to issue bills on loan, and receive landed
property as security for its redemption. To the same mode we had recourse on
this occasion, without either of the foundations on which our former currencies
had been supported. Bills of credit were emitted with no other fund for their
redemption than taxation, and that deferred to distant periods. It was imagined
that the justice of our cause, and the united ardor and patriotism of the
people, would preserve the value of these bills during the contest which we
were very sanguine would be short; and in fact the circulation of them for the
first year was supported by no other means. 1776.
But being counterfeited, they began to depreciate, and then it was thought
necessary to enact a law against forging them, and to make them a legal tender
in all payments. ^^ly 3.
In some of the States, these bills were made a tender for the interest, but
not for the principal of former debts; but in New Hampshire, if the creditor
should refuse them when offered in payment, the whole debt was cancelled. Had
this law regarded future contracts only, every man would have known on what
terms to make his engagements; but to declare it legal to pay debts, already
contracted, with money of an inferior value, was altogether unjust. It was not
in human power to prevent a depreciation of the bills; and the enforcing of
their currency accelerated the destruction of their value. The fraudulent
debtor took advantage of this law to cheat his creditor, under color of
justice; whilst the creditor had no other refuge, than in some cases privately
to transfer the written obligation; and in other cases to refuse the tender, at
the risque indeed of losing the debt; but in hope that justice would at some
future time have its course. Husbandmen, who lived remote from the scene of
hostilities, and who had the produce of the earth at their command, were able
to keep their property good. Hawkers and monopolisers, who crept from obscurity
and assumed the name of merchants, could even increase their substance in these
perilous times. But those persons whose property was in other men's hands; or
whose living depended on stated salaries; or whose honest minds could not
descend to practice knavery, though established by law, were doomed to suffer.

To palliate these evils, at one time, a law was enacted against monopoly and
extortion; and when found impracticable, 1777.
it was repealed. At other times, the prices of different articles were stated
under severe penalties; but ways were soon found to evade these establishments;
and when found ineffectual, the laws were repealed. It is not consistent with
the nature of commerce to bear such restrictions; and the laws increased the
evils which they pretended to cure. At another time public sales by auction
were prohibited, because it was said that they were the means of depreciating
the currency; but in fact they served only to demonstrate its real value. There
was a disposition in the governing part of the people to keep out of sight the
true cause of this growing mischief. Even the general Congress, in a public
address which they ordered to be read in the congregations, Circular letter of
Sept. 1^, 1779.
assembled for religious worship, after saying much in praise of paper money,
told us, that it was the only kind of money whi^^ could not make to itself
wings and fly away. Had this been intended as the language of burlesque, it
might have been received with a smile; in any other sense, it was an insult to
the feelings of honest men.

In the midst of these distresses, frequent meetings of different bodies of men
were held, to consult on some practicable modes of relief. Committees of
counties, and of different States, at various times, formed projects, and
issued public addresses; but palliatives in this, as in all other cases, soon
lost their efficacy. From one of these Conventions, holden at Springfield, and
composed of delegates from the New England States and New York; July and
August. MS minutes of Convention.
a letter was addressed to the general Congress, which put them on devising
means to surmount the existing difficulties. Among other expedients they
recommended effectual taxation, the opening of loan-offices, and that the
States individually should emit no more bills of credit. These were salutary
proposals; but the most notable effect of this letter was a recommendation from
Congress to the several States to confiscate and make sale of all the real and
personal estates of such of their inhabitants and other persons as had
forfeited the same, Journal of Congress,
Nov. 27.
and the right to the protection of their respective States; and to invest the
money arising from the sales in continental loan certificates, to be
appropriated as the respective States should direct.

This was a delicate point, and required the most critical discussion. It
involved a question of national law; and some persons who were acquainted with
the subject, thought such a step not only illegal, but impolitic and dangerous.
In cases of war between independent nations, Vatte^^
acknowledging no common superior, the acquisition of immovable property is
not complete till confirmed by a treaty of peace. The war between America and
Britain was so far a war between two independent nations, that the common laws
of war ought to have been observed. Had the estates of absentees been taken
into possession, and the income arising from them been applied to the support
of the war; and had the question of property remained undecided till the
conclusion of a peace, there is no doubt that the State would have been a
gainer both in reputation and interest; but when we were daily cheating and
deceiving ourselves with a fraudulent paper medium, it is not strange that the
voice of justice toward those whom we deemed our enemies could not be heard.

The first step toward executing this recommendation of Congress, 1778.
was an act proscribing certain persons, to the number of seventy-six, who had
at various times, and for various reasons, quitted this State. These were
forbidden to return without leave, under the penalty of transportation; and in
case of a second return, they were to suffer death.

The next step, was to confiscate the whole estate, real and personal, of
twenty-eight of the proscribed; of whom it was declared that they had justly
forfeited all right to protection from the State; and also their right to any
farther enjoyment of their interest and property within it.

In these acts, no distinction was made between those persons who had withdrawn
themselves from the State, by a sense of their duty; those who were in fact
British subjects, but occasionally resident here; those who had absconded
through timidity; and those who had committed crimes against express law, and
had fled from justice. No conditional offer of pardon was made; no time was
allowed for any to return and enter into the service of the country; but the
whole were put indiscriminately into one black list, and stigmatized as having
basely deserted the cause of liberty, and manifested a disposition inimical to
the State, and a design to aid its enemies in their wicked purposes.

Some persons who had legal demands on these estates, had for the security of
their debts laid attachments on them; but by another act, all attachments which
had been made since the commencement of hostilities, were declared null and
void, and the Courts were required to dismiss them.

Trustees were appointed in each county to take possession of all these
estates, real and personal; and to sell the personal immediately at public
auction; with a discretionary power to leave out of the sale, such articles as
they should deem necessary, to the support of the families of the proscribed.
To preserve some farther appearance of justice, the creditors of these estates,
though they were not allowed to bid at the auctions without payment, were
ordered to exhibit their claims to the trustees, and in cases of insolvency,
all claims were to be settled by the Judges of Probate.

Whilst the settlement of these estates was going on, the money was rapidly
depreciating. After the year 1777, the State issued no more bills, and the
former were called in and exchanged for Treasurer's notes on interest, of a
value not less than five pounds. The Continental bills continued passing and
depreciating till the spring of 1781, when suddenly, and by general consent,
they went out of circulation, and solid coin succeeded in their place. Then a
scale of depreciation for the preceding years of the war was framed, and all
past payments were regulated by it. The treaty of peace obliged us to proceed
no farther in the matter of confiscations. By a subsequent act, the Judges of
Probate were empowered to liquidate by the scale of depreciation, March 1* 1783.
the sums paid into the Treasury by the Trustees; to receive claims against the
estates, and to adjust and certify the same to the President, who was
authorized to order the Treasurer, to issue notes, bearing interest from the
time when the said sums were paid into the Treasury; (...) the ^editors were to
receive (...) if any of the estates should prove insolvent, then the creditors
were to receive their average. In this manner some of these estates have been
settled and the creditors paid; others remain unsettled. Some of them barely
paid the expenses of their management; others were rendered insolvent. The
estate of the late Governor paid all the demands upon it excepting that of his
father; who generously withdrew his claim that the other creditors might be
paid in full. The following papers are taken from the Registry of Probate for
the county of Rock^ngham.

Rockingham, ss. Feb. 16, 1786. I hereby certify, that the sums against each
person's name herein set down, were respectively due to them the last day of
July 1782, from the estate of the late Governor, John Wentworth, Esquire. at which
time it ap^ears there had been received into the Treasury, a sufficiency to pay
a^^ the demands, exhibited against him, except his father's; who has withdrawn
his, that the others might be paid in full.

P. White, Judge of Probate.

Portsmouth, Feb. 6, 1785. Sir, After considering the great delays in settling
the demands against the estate of my son, Governor Wentworth, and the
probability, from the ill management thereof, before it fell under your
direction, that it will be greatly insolvent; and feeling for the distress of
many of the creditors, and wishing that all may have their just demands paid, I
have determined to remove their embarrassment as far as I can, by withdrawing
my account and claim, until theirs be fully adjusted and discharged, by you or
other proper officers. Reserving to myself still the right of claiming, if
there should be found a surplus or balance in his favor. For as proved by my
account and authentic vouchers ready to be produced, that, exclusive of my
account before, I have paid off several creditors to a considerable amount,
since he left this government; and had also greatly augmented the value of his
estate at Wolfborough, by my advances and care thereof, all to the benefit of
his present creditors. I shall therefore be greatly obliged, by your directing
that my account be sent me; and I shall hope for your future ^riendly
interposition, if it should be found necessary; being, with the highest esteem
and respect, your most humble servant,

Mark H. Wentworth.
Phillips White, Esquire.

A general statement of the claims against the confiscated estate of the late
Governor John Wentworth, and the neat proceeds from the sale of it; the account
being not yet settled. April, 1791.

Dr. The claim of M. H. Wentworth, proved by authentic vouchers, L 13680 10 11
Amount of other claims, proved as above, 3877 15 3 Paid (...) several other
creditors, since the Governor's absence, by M. H. Wentworth, 819 11 6 L 18377
17 8 ^r. Paid into the Treasury by the Trustee for said estate, L 10435 8 6


The clear profit to the State from all these confiscations, as far as it has
been ascertained, is inconsiderable.

Power, when delegated without restrictions, and for the abuse of which the
delegate is not held accountable, has a strong tendency toward despotism. The
temporary constitution which we had adopted at the beginning of the war, was
found, by experience, to have many imperfections; and the necessity of checks
and exclusions became every day more evident. Other States were forming
constitutions on certain established principles, and defining their rights as a
preliminary to the delegation of power. An attempt of the like kind was made in
New Hampshire. 1779.
A convention of delegates, chosen for the purpose, drew up and sent abroad a
system of government; but so deficient was it in its principles, and so
inadequate in its provisions, that being proposed to the people, in their
town-meetings, it was rejected. Another convention was appointed, which had
more advantage than the former, the neighboring State of Massachusetts having
digested and adopted a constitution, which was supposed to be an improvement on
all which had been framed in America. This convention had no less than nine
sessions, From June 1781, to Oct. 1783.
and continued for more than two years. In the first plan of government which
they composed, they distinctly stated the alienable and unalienable rights of
the people. They divided the government into three branches, legislative,
executive and judicial, and defined the limits of each. The legislative branch
was composed of a Senate and House of Representatives. The Senate was to
consist of twelve persons, 1781.
five for the county of Rockingham, two for Strafford, two for Hillsborough,
two for Cheshire and one for Grafton. These were to be voted for in
town-meetings, and the votes sealed and returned to the Secretary's office. The
number of Representatives was limited to fifty, and apportioned among the
counties, thus; twenty for Rockingham; eight for Strafford; ten for
Hillsborough; eight for Cheshire; and four for Grafton. These were to be
elected by County Conventions, consisting of one delegate for every fifty
rateable polls. This mode was recommended, to prevent those interested views
and that party spirit, which too often-appear in single towns in the election
of Representatives. The executive power was vested in a Governor, whom the
convention, in their address to the people, described in the following terms:
They have arrayed him with honors, they have armed him with power and set him
on high; but still he is only the right hand of your power, and the mirror of
your majesty. But though armed with power and liable to be impeached for
misconduct, he was shrouded from responsibility, by a Council, without whose
advice he could not take one step of any importance. The judicial department
was to be appointed by the executive and supported by the legislative; but the
Judges were removeable for misconduct, by the Governor and Council, on the
address of both Houses of the Legislature. Justices of the Peace were to hold
their commissions five years only. Provision was made for the exclusion of
persons from holding several offices at the same time; the reason of which was
thus expressed. Besides the interference of several offices held by the same
person in point of time, which we have seen, and the difficulty of one man's
giving his attention to many matters sufficiently to understand them all, which
we have too often felt; there is a still stronger reason, which is the
difficulty of a man's preserving his integrity in discharging the duties of
each. The encouragement of literature was also recommended as essential to the
preservation of a free government, and it was declared to be the duty of
legislators to cherish its interests.

This plan was printed and sent to every town. Sept. 14.
The inhabitants were requested to state their objections distinctly to any
particular part, and return them at a fixed time. The objections were so many
and so various, that it became necessary to alter the form and send it out a
second time. The name of Governor, and most of his powers, were still retained;
1782.
but the mode of representation was altered. Aug. 21.
Instead of being elected, by county conventions, the Representatives were to
be chosen immediately by the towns; every incorporated township containing one
hundred and fifty rateable polls, having the privilege of choosing one; and
every one containing four hundred and fifty, of choosing two. Particular
attention was given to the mode of appointing officers of militia. Instead of
superior officers being chosen by their inferiors, and inferior officers by the
privates, as had been practiced since the beginning of the war, the order of
appointment was reversed, and the privates had no power of choice at all. This
was said to be nece^^ary to the preservation of harmony, subordination and
discipline. The second plan being sent out was generally approved; but it was
not completed at the time when the news of peace arrived. The old form having
expired with the war, it was, 1783.
by the votes of the people in their town-meetings, March and April.
revived and continued for one year longer. In the following autumn, the new
form was finished; Oct. 31.
and the name of Governor being changed to President, it was a third time
printed and declared to be 'the civil constitution for the State of
New Hampshire.' It took place on the second day of the following June, 1784.
and was introduced at Concord by a religious solemnity, which has since been
repeated at every annual election.

To the convention which formed this constitution several towns in the western
part of the State did not send delegates. The cause of this omission, and of
some other eccentricities in the conduct of the people in that quarter must now
be explained.

The inhabitants of the district on the western side of Connecticut river,
which was severed from New Hampshire in 1764, had been engaged in a long and
bitter controversy with the government of New York. They had even been obliged
to have recourse to arms in defense of their estates; and frequent acts of
violence had been committed. There was among them a set of intrepid men, ready
to encounter dangers, and trained to hardy enterprise. At the commencement of
hostilities, by the advice of some principal opposers of the British
Government, in the other Colonies, a company of those people styling themselves
Green Mountain Boys, marched to Ticonderoga, and wrested that fortress,
together with Crown-Point, 1775.
out of the hands of the British garrisons. A regiment of them was embodied by
order and in the pay of the general Congress. Their exertions in the common
cause were meritorious and their services were acceptable.

Soon after the declaration of independence, 1776.
the inhabitants of that territory assembled in convention to consider their
peculiar situation and concert measures for their safety. The opportunity which
then presented for a change in their political connexions, was too precious to
be lost. By the dissolution of the bonds which had held America in subjection
to the Crown of Britain, they conceived themselves free from the government of
New York, to which the most of them had never voluntarily submitted; and, being
as they said, reduced to a state of nature, they thought that they had a right
to form such connexions as were agreeable to themselves. Accordingly they made
and published a declaration; that they would at all times consider themselves
as a free and independent State; 1777.
Jan. 15.
capable of regulating their own internal police; that they had the sole
exclusive right of governing themselves, in such manner as they should choose,
not repugnant to the resolves of Congress; and that they were ready to
contribute their proportion to the common defense. Under the influence of these
principles, they formed a plan of government and a code of laws, and petitioned
Congress to receive them into the union.

The inhabitants on the eastern side of Connecticut river were very
conveniently situated to unite with those on the western side, 1778.
and many of them had the same principles and views. They argued that the
original grant of New Hampshire to Mason was circumscribed by a line drawn at
the distance of sixty miles from the sea; that all the lands westward of that
line, being royal grants, had been held in subjection to the government of
New Hampshire by force of the royal commissions, which were vacated by the
assumed independence of the American Colonies; and therefore that the
inhabitants of all those lands had 'reverted to a state of nature. Observations
on the (...) ju^^^diction over N ^. Grants. Printed 1778.
' By this expression, however, they did not mean that each individual was
reduced to such a state; but that each town retained its corporate unity,
unconnected with any superior jurisdiction. They distinguished between
commissions derived from the King, which were revokable at his pleasure, Public
defense of the right of N. Hampshire Grant^ (...). Printed 1779.
and incorporations held on certain conditions, which being performed, the
powers and privileges granted by the incorporations were perpetual. They
asserted that jurisdictions established by royal commissions could bind a
people together no longer than the force which first compelled continues to
operate; but when the coercive power of the King was rejected, and its
operation had ceased, the people had a right to make a stand at the first legal
stage, viz. their town incorporations. T^ese by universal consent were held
sacred; hence they concluded that the major part of each one of those towns had
a right to control the minor part; and they considered themselves as so many
distinct corporations, until they should agree to unite in one aggregate body.

In these sentiments the people were not all united. The majority of some towns
was in favor of their former connection, and in those towns where the majority
inclined the other way, the minority claimed protection of the government.

They supposed that the existence of their town-incorporations, and of the
privileges annexed to them, depended on their union to New Hampshire; and that
their acceptance of the grants was in effect an acknowledgment of the
jurisdiction, and a submission to the laws of the State; from which they could
not fairly be disengaged without its consent; as the State had never injured or
oppressed them.

Much pains, were taken, by the other party, to disseminate the new ideas.
Conventions were held, pamphlets were printed, and at length a petition was
drawn in the name of sixteen towns 1 Cornish, 2 Lebanon, 3 Dresden, a name
given to the district belonging to Dartmouth College; but now disused. 4 Lime,
5 Orford, 6 Piermont, 7 Haverhill, 8 Bath, 9 Lyman, 10 Apthorp now divided into
Li^tleton and Dalton. 11 Ensield, 12 Canaan, 13 Cardigan, now O^ange, 14
Landaff, 15 Gunthwaite, now New Concord. 16 Morris-town, now Franconia.

on the eastern side of Connecticut river, requesting the new State, which had
assumed the name of VERMONT, to receive them into its union, alleging, MSS in
N. Hampshire fi^es.
that they were not connected with any State, with respect to their internal
police. The Assembly at first appeared to be against receiving them; but the
members from those towns which were situated near the river on the west side,
declared that they would withdraw and join with the people on the east side, in
forming a new State. The question was then referred to the people at large, and
means were used to influence a majority of the towns to vote in favor of the
union, June 11.
which the Assembly could not but confirm. The sixteen towns were accordingly
received; and the Vermont Assembly resolved, that any other towns on the
eastern side of the river might be admitted on producing a vote of a majority
of the inhabitants, or on the appointment of a Representative. Being thus
admitted into the State of Vermont, they gave notice to the government of
New Hampshire, of the separation which they had made, and expressed their wish
for an amicable settlement of a jurisdictional line, June 25.
and a friendly correspondence.

The President of New Hampshire, in the name of the Assembly, Aug. 22.
wrote to the Governor of Vermont, claiming the sixteen towns as part of the
State, the limits of which had been determined prior to the revolution;
reminding him that those towns had sent delegates to the convention in 1775;
that they had applied to the Assembly for arms and ammunition, which had been
sent to them; that their military officers had accepted commissions and obeyed
orders from the government; that the minority of those towns was averse to a
disunion, and had claimed protection of the State, which the Assembly thought
themselves bound to afford; and beseeching him to use his influence with the
Assembly of Vermont to dissolve the newly formed connection.

At the same time, the President wrote to the delegates of the State in
Congress; Aug. 19.
desiring them to take advice and endeavor to obtain the interposition of that
body; intimating his apprehension, that without it, the controversy must be
decided by the sword, as every condescending measure had been used from the
beginning and rejected.

The Governor and Council of Vermont sent a messenger to Congress to see in
what light the new State was viewed by them. On his return he reported, that
the Congress was unanimously opposed to the union of the sixteen towns with
Vermont; otherwise they (excepting the delegates of New York) had no objection
to the independence of the new State.

At the next session of the Vermont Assembly at Windsor, October.
when the Representatives of the sixteen towns had taken their seats, a debate
arose on a question, whether they should be erected into a new county, which
passed in the negative. Conceiving that they were not admitted to equal
privileges with their brethren, the members from those towns withdrew; and were
followed by several others belonging to the towns adjoining the river on the
west side. They formed themselves into a convention, and invited all the towns
on both sides of the river to unite, and set up another State by the name of
New-Connecticut. This secession had nearly proved fatal to the State of
Vermont. A ridge of mountains which extends from south to north through that
territory, seemed to form not only a natural, but a political line of division.
A more cordial union subsisted between the people on the eastern side of the
Green Mountains, and the eastern side of Connecticut river, than between the
latter and those on the western side of the mountains; but these alone were
insufficient, without the others, to make a State. The Governor, and other
leading men of Vermont, who resided on the west side of the Mountains, wrote
letters to the Assembly of New Hampshire, informing them of the separation, and
expressing their disapprobation of a connection with the sixteen towns. The
Assembly regarded these letters as ambiguous, and as not expressing a
disinclination to any future connection with them. Jealousy is said to be a
republican virtue; it operated on this occasion, and the event proved that it
was not without foundation.

A convention of delegates from several towns on both sides of the river
assembled at Cornish and agreed to unite, Dec 9.
without any regard to the limits established by the King in 1764; and to make
the following proposals to New Hampshire, viz. either to agree with them on a
dividing line, or to submit the dispute to Congress, or to arbitrators mutually
chosen. If neither of these proposals were accepted, then, in case they could
agree with New Hampshire on a form of government, they would consent that the
whole of the grants on both sides of the river should connect themselves with
New Hampshire, and become one entire State, as before the royal determination
in 1764. Till one or other of these proposals should be complied with, they
determined to trust in Providence and defend themselves.

An attempt was made in the following year to form a constitution for
New Hampshire, 1779.
in which the limits of the State were said to be the same as under the royal
government, reserving nevertheless our claim to the New Hampshire Grants west
of Connecticut river. Though this form of government was rejected by a majority
of the people; yet there was a disposition in a great part of the Assembly to
retain their claim to the whole of the grants westward of the river. At the
same time the State of New York set up a claim to the same lands, and it was
suspected, perhaps not without reason, that intrigues were forming to divide
Vermont between New Hampshire and New York, by the ridge of mountains which
runs through the territory. Certain it is that the Vermontors were alarmed;
and, that they might have the same advantage of their adversaries, they
extended their claim westward into New York and eastward into New Hampshire;
and thus not only the sixteen towns, but several other towns in the counties of
Cheshire and Grafton, became incorporated with Vermont by articles of union and
confederation.

It is not easy to develope the intrigues of the several parties, or to clear
their transactions from the obscurity which surrounds them. The author has
spared no pains to gain as perfect a knowledge of these things as the nature of
them will admit. If he has not succeeded in obtaining materials, for a just and
full account, it is his request that those who are better acquainted with the
subject would oblige the public with more accurate information.
He who looks for consistency in the proceedings of the Conventions and
Assemblies which were involved in this controversy, will be disappointed.
Several interfering interests conspired to perplex the subject. The people on
the western side of the Green Mountains, wished to have the seat of government
among them. Those adjoining Connecticut river, on both sides, were desirous of
bringing the center of jurisdiction to the verge of the river. The leading men
in the eastern part of New Hampshire, were averse to a removal of the
government ^^om its old seat. Vermont had assumed ^ndependence; but its limits
were not de^^ned. New York had a claim on that ^erritory as far as Connecticut
River, from which there was no disposition to recede. That State had been
always opposed to the independence of Vermont. New Hampshire at first seemed to
acquiesce in it; and some letters which the President wrote to the Governor of
Vermont, when threatened with invasion in 1777, were understood as an
acknowledgment of it. Had there been no attempt to unite with the towns on the
eastern side of the river, New Hampshire would perhaps never have opposed the
independence of Vermont. But the Assembly was afterward induced to claim all
that territory, ^^ich before the year 1764, had been supposed to be within the
limits of the State. This interfered with the claim of New York; and at the
same time Massachusetts put in a claim to a part of Vermont. The controversy
had become so intricate, that it was thought necessary to be decided by
Congress; and application being made to that body, Sept. 24.
they recommended to the three States of New York, Massachusetts and
New Hampshire, to pass acts which should authorize Congress to determine their
boundaries; Journals of Congress.
and at the same time they advised the people of Vermont to relinquish
jurisdiction over all persons on the west or east sides of Connecticut river,
who had not denied the authority of New York and New Hampshire; and to abstain
from granting lands, or confiscating estates, within their assumed limits, till
the matter should be decided. The States of New York and New Hampshire passed
these acts; but Massachusetts did not. The Vermont Assembly proceeded in
granting lands and confiscating estates; and Congress could only resolve that
their proceedings were unwarrantable.

It was necessary that nine States should be present in Congress, beside those
whose claims were to be heard. A deficiency in the representation caused a long
delay; but after the expiration of another year the question was brought on.
The claims of New York and New Hampshire were put in; 1780.
Sept ^^.
and both pleaded that Vermont had no right to independence. The agents of the
new State asserted their right, and offered to become part of the union;
intimating, that if they could not be admitted, they should be reduced to the
necessity of making the best terms with the British government. How far
intrigues of this kind were carried on it may be difficult to ascertain; but
that the British Government had some dependence on the defection of Vermont
appears from the following paragraph of an intercepted letter from Lord George
German, to Sir Henry Clinton, dated Whitehall, Feb. 7, 1781.

The return of the people of Vermont to their allegiance, is an event of the
utmost importance to the King's affairs; and at this time* if the French and
Washington really meditate ^n irruption into Canada, ^
may be considered as opposing an insurmountable bar to the attempt. General
Haldiman, who had the same instructions with you to draw over those people and
give them support, will, I doubt not, push up a body of troops, to act in
conjunction with them, to secure all the avenue^* through their country into
Canada; and when the seas^n admits, take possession of the upper parts of the
Hudson's and Connecticut rivers, and cut off the communication between Albany
and the Mohawk country. How fa^ they may be able to extend themselves southward
and eastward, must depend on their numbers* and the disposition of the
inhabitants.




The cause was farther perplexed by a constitutional question, whether Congress
had any power to form a new State within the limits of the union? 1781.
The decision was deferred; and after eleven months, Aug. 2^.
Congress had proceeded no farther, than to lay it down as an indispensable
preliminary, to the recognition of Vermont, as a member of the union; that they
should explicitly relinquish all demands of land and jurisdiction on the east
side of Connecticut river, and on the west side of a line drawn twenty miles
eastward of Hudson's river to Lake Champlain.

When this resolution was laid before the Assembly of Vermont, Oct. 19.
which met at Charlestown, MS copy of Vermont resolve^, in N. Hampshire files.
they determined to remain firm in the principles on which they first assumed
government, and to hold the articles of union inviolate; that they would not
submit the question of their independence to the arbitrament of any power
whatever; but they were willing at present to refer the question of their
jurisdictional boundary to Commissioners mutually chosen, and when they should
be admitted into the American union, they would submit any such disputes to
Congress.

The state of society within the seceding towns, at this time, was very
unhappy. The majorities attempted to control the minorities; and these were
disposed not to submit, but to seek protection of the government with which
they had been connected. At the same time and in the same place, Justices,
Sheriffs and Constables, appointed by the authority of both States, were
exercising jurisdiction over the same persons. Party rage, high words and deep
resentment, were the effect of these clashing interests. An affray which began
in the town of Chesterfield, threatened a scene of open hostility, between the
States of New Hampshire and Vermont.

A Constable, appointed by the authority of Vermont, had a writ, in an action
of debt against a man who was in the interest of New Hampshire. He found the
man in company with a number of people of his own party, Nov. 14.
and attempted to arrest him. The owner of the house interposed. MS deposit^^ns
and letters in the files.
The Constable produced a book which he said contained the laws of Vermont, and
began to read. The owner of the house forbad him. Threatening words were used;
and the officer was compelled to retreat. By a warrant from a Vermont Justice,
the householder, and another of the company, were committed to prison in
Charlestown. They sent a petition to the Assembly of New Hampshire for relief.
Nov. 2^
The Assembly empowered the committee of safety to direct the Sheriff of
Cheshire to release the prisoners; they farther empowered the committee to
cause to be apprehended and committed to prison, in any of the counties, all
persons acting under the pretended authority of the State of Vermont, to be
tried by the Courts of those counties where they might be confined; and for
this purpose the Sheriffs were empowered to raise the posse Comitatus.

In attempting to release the two prisoners from Charlestown gaol, the Sheriff
himself was imprisoned by the Vermont Sheriff, under the authority of a warrant
from three Justices. The imprisoned Sheriff applied to a Brigadier General of
New Hampshire, to raise the militia for his liberation. This alarmed the
Vermonters; and orders were issued by the Governor for their militia to oppose
force with force. 1782.
A committee of Vermont was sent to Exeter, ^
to agree on measures to prevent hostilities. One of this committee was the
Vermont Sheriff; he was immediately arrested and thrown into prison at Exeter,
and there held as a hostage for the release of the Sheriff of Cheshire. The
Assembly issued a proclamation, allowing forty days for the people in the
revolted towns to repair to some Magistrate of New Hampshire, and subscribe a
declaration, that they acknowledged the extent of New Hampshire to Connecticut
river; and that they would demean themselves peaceably as good citizens of the
State. They also ordered the militia of all the counties to hold themselves in
readiness to march against the revolters.

Whilst affairs wore such a threatening aspect between the two States, means
were used at Congress to take up the controversy on more general ground. A
committee, who had under consideration the affair of admitting Vermont into the
union and determining its boundaries, prevailed on General Washington, then at
Philadelphia, Jan. 1*
to write to the Governor of Vermont, advising to a relinquishment of their
late extension, as an indispensible preliminary to their admission into the
union; intimating also, that upon their noncompliance, they must be considered
as having a hostile disposition toward the United States, Append^x* No. 6.
in which case coercion on the part of Congress, however disagreeable, would be
necessary.

This letter had the desired effect. The Assembly of Vermont, taking advantage
of the absence of the members from the eastern side of the river, Feb. 2^
obtained a majority for complying with the preliminary, and resolved, that the
western bank of Connecticut river on the one part, and a line drawn from the
north-west corner of Massachusetts, northward, to Lake Champlain on the other
part, be the eastern and western boundaries of the State of Vermont, and that
they relinquished all claim of jurisdiction without those limits. When the
members from the eastern side of Connecticut river arrived, they found
themselves excluded from a seat in the Assembly, and took their leave with some
expressions of bitterness.

After this compliance, it was expected that Vermont would be admitted into the
union, and the question was solemnly put in Congress; April 14.
but a majority decided against it; to the no small disappointment of many
persons, beside the inhabitants of the disputed territory. The pretense for
this decision was, that they had exceeded the limited time; but they had
complied with the 'indispensible preliminary;' and the order of Congress,
requiring it, stood unrepealed.

Though cut off from their connection with Vermont, the revolted towns did not
at once return to a state of peace; but the divisions and animosities which had
so long subsisted, continued to produce disagreeable effects. The judicial
Courts of New Hampshire had sat without much interruption, in the counties of
Cheshire and Grafton, whilst the officers of Vermont held jurisdiction also;
but when the latter were excluded by the act of the Vermont Assembly, a spirit
of opposition began to arise against the sitting of the former.

When the Inferior Court was holden at Keen, a number of persons appeared,
September.
to oppose its proceedings, and effected their purpose so far as to make an
adjournment necessary; but three of the leaders of the opposition were arrested
and bound over to the Superior Court. In the mean time efforts were made to
raise a party who should oppose the Superior Court; and it was reported that
two hundred men had associated and armed themselves for that purpose. On the
morning before the Court was opened, October.
several of the leaders came to the Judges' chambers and presented a petition,
praying, that the Court might be adjourned, and that no judicial proceedings
might be had, whilst the troubles in which the country had been involved still
subsisted. They were told that the Judges could come to no determination on the
subject, but in open Court. When the Court was opened, their petition was
publicly read; and the consideration of it was postponed to the next day. The
Court then proceeded to its common business. The Grand Jury being impannelled,
the doors of the house where they met were kept open, whilst the Attorney
General laid before them the case of the rioters at the inferior Court. A bill
was found against them. They were arraigned, they pleaded guilty, and cast
themselves on the mercy of the Court. The Court remitted their punishment on
condition of their future peaceable behavior. This well judged combination of
firmness and lenity disarmed the insurgents; and they quietly dispersed. From
that time the spirit of opposition to government in that quarter gradually
abated; and the people returned to their connection with New Hampshire.

CHAP. XXVII. Popular discontent. Efforts for paper currency. Tender-acts.
Insurrection. Dignity and lenity of government. Federal Constitution.
THE American revolution had been crowned with success, as far as it respected
our emancipation from foreign jurisdiction, the establishment of forms of
government among ourselves, and our deliverance from war. It remained, to
accommodate the mind^ and manners of the people, under the new administration,
to a regular course of justice, both public and private; to perfect the union
of the States; and to establish a system of finance. These things were
necessary to make the revolution complete.

The extremes of despotism on the one hand, and of licentiousness on the other,
are equally to be avoided. In a just medium between these, a government well
balanced and executed with vigor, is capable of producing the most valuable
benefits. To this point it was necessary to conduct our revolution. But it was
equally necessary, that it should proceed by slow degrees; that errors in
principle should be gradually reformed; and that men should be taught, by their
own experience, the folly of relying on any system of politics, which, however
supported by popularity, is not founded in rectitude.

A large debt, accumulated by the war, remained to be discharged. For this
purpose, requisitions were made by Congress, as well as by the State
Government. Silver and gold, which had circulated largely in the latter years
of the war, were returning, by the usual course of trade, to those countries,
whence large quantities of necessary and unnecessary commodities had been
imported. Had any general system of import been adopted, some part of this
money might have been retained, and some part of the public debt discharged;
but the power of Congress did not extend to this object; and the States were
not united in the expediency of delegating new and sufficient powers to that
body. The partial imposts, laid by some of the States, were ineffectual, as
long as others found their interest in omitting them. Recourse therefore was
had to the usual mode of taxation on polls and estates; by which means, a heavy
burden was laid on the husbandman and the labourer. Those who were punctual in
their payments, saw no probable end of their exertions, whilst the negligence
of others occasioned repeated demands. Private creditors, who had suffered by
long forbearance, were importunate for their dues; and the Courts of Law were
full of suits.

The people who felt themselves distressed, held conferences with a view to
devise means of redress. The most easy remedy which appeared to many of them,
was a new emission of paper bills, funded on real estate, and loaned on
interest. To effect this, petitions were addressed to the Legislature; and to
remedy the grievance, 1785.
as far as it was occasioned by a debt of the State, an act was passed, Feb. 24.
to draw into the Treasury all notes issued by the State, and give certificates
for the interest, and for fifteen per cent. of the principal, annually; which
certificates were to be received by the Treasurer for taxes, in lieu of* and
equal to silver and gold. By this means, it was expected that the debt would
gradually be extinguished* and that the people would easily be enabled to pay
at least one species of their taxes.

This was far from satisfying the complainants. The public securities, they
said, were engrossed by rich speculators, and the poor were distressed for the
means of paying their taxes and their private debts. The cry for paper money
was incessant; and the people were called upon in the public papers, to assert
their own majesty, as the origin of power, and to make their Governors know,
that they are but the executors of the public will.

To this clamor, the voice of reason and justice calmly answered; that it was
not in the power of the Legislature to establish any fund, which should secure
paper money from depreciation; that there was so much paper then in
circulation, and the time of its redemption was so distant, that the notes
passed at a discount of sixty, and the certificates of twenty per cent; that if
the quantity were increased, the depreciation would increase in proportion;
that if bills were issued and made a tender in all payments, it would never be
in the power of government to redeem them by silver and gold, because none
could be collected; and in that case, no part of the continental or foreign
debt could be discharged; that if bills were loaned on land security, it would
be in the power of the public debtor to purchase the bills at a reduced value,
and with them to make his payment at the Treasury, in which case, though the
public chest might be filled with paper, yet the government would suffer all
the embarrassment of poverty. It was added, that the Legislature were by the
Constitution expressly forbidden to make retrospective laws, and had no right
to alter the nature of private contracts; and that should the majority of the
people petition the government to make pap^^ a lawful tender, it would be their
duty to reject the petition as unconstitutional. When it was proposed, that the
paper should not be a tender for past but only for future contracts; it was
answered, that this would not relieve the debtor, who was suffering for his
past engagements, and the difficulties which it pretended to cure would still
exist.

In vain were agriculture and manufactures, industry and frugality recommended
as the only adequate sources of relief; the complainants had no disposition to
apply a remedy so slow in its operation; and indeed it was doubtful whether the
utmost exertions in that way would have been sufficient, completely to
extricate us out of these difficulties, without some alteration in our
confederated government.

Similar difficulties, at the same time, existed in the neighboring State of
Massachusetts; to remedy which, among other palliatives, a law was passed
called a tender-act, by which it was provided that executions issued for
private demands, Minot's History of the Insurrections, page 15.
might be satisfied by cattle and other enumerated articles, at an appraisement
of impartial men under oath. For such a law the discontented party in
New Hampshire petitioned; and to gratify them the Legislature enacted, that
when any debtor shall tender to his creditor, Nov. 8.
in satisfaction of an execution for debt, either real or personal estate
sufficient, the body of the debtor shall be exempt from imprisonment, and the
debt shall carry an interest of six per cent; the creditor being at liberty
either to receive the estate, so tendered, at a value estimated by three
appraisers, or to keep alive the demand by taking out an alias, within one year
after the return of any former execution, and levying it on any estate of the
debtor which he can find. At the same time an act was made, enlarging the power
er of Justices of the Peace, to try and determine actions of debt and trespass
to the value of ten pounds. These laws were complained of as unconstitutional;
the former as being retrospective, and changing the nature of contracts; the
latter as depriving the creditor, in certain cases, of a right to trial by
Jury. But so strong was the clamor for redress of grievances; and so
influential was the example of the neighboring State, that some of the best
men in the Legislature found it necessary to comply; whilst another part were
secretly in favor of worse measures.

The tender-act, at first, was made for two years only; before the expiration
of which it was revived, with some alterations, and continued for three years
longer. The effect of this law, in cases where an attempt was made to execute
it, was, that the most valuable kinds of property were either concealed or made
over to a third person; and when the Sheriff came with an execution, it was
levied on such articles as were of little use to the creditor. But the most
general effect of the law was to prevent any demand on the pa^^ of the
creditor, and to encourage the debtor in neglecting payment.

The scarcity of money was still a grievance which the laws had not remedied,
1786.
but rather had a tendency to increase. To encourage its importation into the
country the Legislature exempted from all port duties, except light-money,
every vessel which should bring gold and silver only; and from one half of the
duties, if a sum of money equal to one half of the cargo should be imported*
But it was to no purpose to import money, unless encouragement were given for
its circulation, which could not be expected whilst the tender-act was in
force; for every man who owned money thought it more secure in his own hands,
than in the hands of others.

The clamor for paper currency increased, and, like a raging fever, approached
toward a crisis. In every town there was a party in favor of it, and the public
papers were continually filled with declamations on the subject. It was said
that an emission of bills of credit would give a spring to commerce and
encourage agriculture; that the poor would be able to pay their debts and
taxes; that all the arguments against issuing paper were framed by speculators,
and were intended to serve the wealthy part of the community, who had
monopolised the public securities, that they might raise their value and get
all the good bargains into their own hands; that other States in the union had
issued paper bills, and were rejoicing in the happy effects of their currency
without any depreciation; that the people had a right to call upon their
Representatives to stamp a value on paper, or leather, or any other substance
capable of receiving an impression; and that to prevent its depreciation, a law
should be enacted to punish with banishment and outlawry, every person who
should attempt by any means to lessen its value. A specimen of the language
used on this occasion is as follows. Seven States are now blessed with harmony,
plenty and happiness. Worthy, industrious men can go to market with a penny in
their pockets; their benevolent friends, the farmers, meet them half way with
cheerfulness, and are as ready to receive as they to offer; now one greets the
other with social benedictions, trade flourishes, agriculture increases, mutual
confidence is restored, and harmony reigns triumphant. Elysian fields these!
when contrasted with the bondage of the inhabitants of New Hampshire; for 'in
the midst of life, they are in death,' death of the worst kind, penury and want
of the common blessings of Providence. How long, freemen of New Hampshire, can
ye bear the yoke of oppression!

New Hampshire Gazette, July 20, 1786.


The same party who were so zealous in favor of paper currency, and against
laws which obliged them to pay their debts, proceeded to inveigh against Courts
and lawyers. The Inferior Courts were represented as sinecures for Judges and
Clerks; the defaulting, appealing, demurring, abatements, fees and bills of
costs, without any decision, were complained of as burdens, and an abolition of
these Courts became a part of the popular cry. But the party did not content
themselves with writing in the public papers. An attempt was made to call a
convention, at Concord, whilst the Assembly was sitting there, who should
petition the Legislature in favor of the plan; and it was thought, that the
presence of such a body of men, convened at the same time and place, would have
great weight. This attempt was defeated in a manner singular and humorous.

At the first sitting of the Assembly, when five only of the members of the
proposed convention were in town, June.
some wags, among whom were several young lawyers, pretended to have been
chosen by the towns in which they lived for the same purpose. In conference
with the five, they penetrated their views, and persuaded them to post an
advertisement, for all the members who were in town to assemble immediately; it
being of the utmost importance to present their petition as early in the
session as possible. By this means, sixteen pretended members, with the five
real ones, formed themselves into a convention, choosing one of the five their
President, and one of the sixteen their Clerk. They carried on their debates
and passed votes with much apparent solemnity. Having framed a petition,
complaining in the most extravagant terms of their grievances; praying for a
loan of three millions of dollars, funded on real estate; for the abolition of
Inferior Courts, and a reduction of the number of lawyers, to two only in a
county; and for a free trade with all the world; they went in procession to the
Assembly, (some of whom had been previously let into the secret) and with great
formality presented their petition, which was suffered to lie on the table, and
was afterward withdrawn. The convention then dissolved; and when others, who
had been really chosen by the towns arrived, they were exceedingly mortified on
finding their views for that time so completely frustrated.

The next effort of the party was to call County Conventions. Of what class of
people these were composed, some idea may be formed from this circumstance. An
innholder, at whose house one of these conventions first met, refused to take
their promise for lumber to pay the expense of their meeting; upon which they
adjourned to a warehouse, belonging to one of the party, and were treated with
liquor gratis.

From two of these conventions, and from several towns in different parts of
the State, petitions were presented to the Legislature, Sept. 13.
at their session in Exeter. On calm deliberation, these petitions appeared to
be inconsistent with each other, with the constitution, with justice and public
faith. But to still the clamor and collect the real sense of the people on the
subject of paper currency; the Assembly formed a plan for the emission of fifty
thousand pounds, to be let at four per cent. on land security; to be a tender
in payment of State taxes, and for the fees and salaries of public officers.
This plan was immediately printed, and sent to the several towns; and the
people were desired to give their opinions in town-meetings for and against it,
and to make return of their votes to the Assembly at their next session.

This (...) of proceeding did not coincide with (...) views of the party; the
principal directors of which endeavored to conceal themselves, whilst they
persuaded a considerable number of persons of various characters, to appear
openly in support of the petitions. They took pains to spread false reports
through the country; and among other things, it was said that the Assembly had
passed an act, to refund the value of the confiscated estates, which was to be
immediately assessed on the people.

It must be observed, that at this time, causes of a similar nature had excited
numbers of people in some counties of Massachusetts, to assemble in arms and
prevent the Judicial Courts from sitting. This example, aided by false reports,
and a sense of grievances, partly real and partly imaginary, operated so
powerfully on the minds of a number of people, in the western part of the
county of Rockingham; that on the morning of the twentieth of September, Sept.
20.
about two hundred men assembled at Kingston, six miles from Exeter, where they
chose leaders and procured a drum. By the help of some militia officers they
formed themselves into military order, and in the afternoon marched to Exeter;
about one third of them being armed with muskets, and the others with swords
and clubs. Having entered the confines of the town, they halted; and sent a
paper to the Assembly, signed by one of them who styled himself moderator,
demanding an answer to their former petition immediately. They then marched
through the town, and paraded before the meeting house, where both Houses of
Assembly were holding a conference. The doors were open, and as many of them as
were disposed, entered. The President, in a cool and deliberate speech,
explained the reasons on which the Assembly had proceeded in rejecting the
petitions; exposed the weakness, inconsistency and injustice of their request;
and said, that if it were ever so just and proper in itself, and if the whole
body of the people were in favor of it, yet the Legislature ought not to comply
with it, whilst surrounded by an armed force. To do this, would be, to betray
the rights of the people, which they had all solemnly sworn to support. He
concluded by declaring, that no consideration of personal danger would ever
compel them to violate the rights of their constituents.

This speech being ended, the drum beat to arms; as many as had guns were
ordered to load them with balls; sentries were placed at the doors, and the
whole Legislature were held prisoners; the mob threatening death to any person
who should attempt to escape, till their demands were granted. The Assembly
went on with their business, taking no farther notice of the rioters, till the
approach of evening; when the President attempted to go out, but was stopped by
an impenetrable column. He then reasoned with them, and warned them of the
fatal tendency of their conduct, assuring them, that the force of the country
would support the government. Their answers to him were insolent and
reproachful. They raised a cry for paper-money, an equal distribution of
property, and a release from debts. The inhabitants of Exeter had all this time
beheld with silence the insult offered to the Legislature; having no orders to
take arms, they restrained their indignation, till the dusk of the evening;
when some of them beat a drum at a distance, and others cried, Huzza for
government! Bring up the artillery! At the sound of these words the mob were
struck with a panic, and began to disperse. Their moderator ordered them to
meet again, at nine of the clock the next morning, and they scattered in every
direction.

The Assembly being thus at liberty, requested the President to call out the
force of the State to quell the insurrection. In the evening he issued his
orders, and before morning companies of militia, well armed, began to come in
from the neighboring towns. By ten of the clock in the morning a sufficient
body of horse and foot, Sept. 21.
with fieldpieces and military music, having arrived; the President put them
in motion against the insurgents, who were then parading, about a mile distant.
Having by their spies obtained intelligence of the motion of the militia, the
unarmed part of the insurgents retreated to a hill beyond the river; the others
kept their ground till a party of light horse appeared in view, and then the
whole body retired. Some of them were taken by the pursuers; others recovered
the bridge at King's-fall, and being met by those who had first retreated, made
an appearance as if they would dispute the passage. Orders were given by one of
their leaders to fire; but the force of the government appeared so formidable
that they dared not to obey. The officers of the militia rushed in among them,
seized their moderator and others to the number of forty, the rest fled with
precipitation, and no farther pursuit was made. The prisoners were disarmed and
conducted to the town; where they were brought to an examination before the
President and Council. Had these men been engaged in a good cause, and
commanded by proper officers, they would have maintained the honor of their
country, and fought her battles with ardor and perseverance; but, conscious
that they were opposing a government of their own establishing, their native
fortitude forsook them; and being taken in arms, they gave an example of the
most humiliating submission. Most of them professed to be ashamed of their
conduct, and their shame appeared to be sincere.

The dignity of government being thus vindicated, its lenity was equally
conspicuous. Six only of the prisoners were detained, and a party of
light horse was sent to apprehend two others of the most culpable. They were
taken out of their beds and brought to Exeter. This maneuver had an excellent
effect, for some, who knew themselves equally guilty, were afraid to sleep in
their own houses. The Superior Court being then in session at Exeter, Sept. 25.
these eight prisoners were arraigned on an indictment for treason. One
dropping on his knees, pleaded guilty; others hesitated when they pronounced
the words 'not guilty.' They were ordered to recognize for their appearance at
the next Superior Court, when their bonds were discharged. Some of them, who
belonged to the Presbyterian Churches, were cited before the ecclesiastical
session, and there censured, as opposers of just government. Others, being
militia officers, were tried by a general Court Martial; of these, some were
cashiered, but not incapacitated for future service; some were reprimanded, and
others were acquitted. The whole opposition was completely subdued; wavering
minds became settled; converts were made to the side of government; and the
system of knavery received a deep wound, from which it has not since recovered.

The plan which had been issued by the Assembly, 1787.
for emitting paper-money, was in course referred to the people, in their
town-meetings; and at the next session the returns were made, when a majority
appeared against it. J^n. 4.
To finish the whole matter, two questions were put in the Assembly. The first
was, whether the Legislature can, consistently with the constitution, and their
oaths, pass an act making paper bills of credit, a tender to discharge private
contracts, made prior to the passing such act? The other was, whether
paper-money be emitted on any plan which has been proposed? Both these
questions were determined in the negative.

To observe the progress of wisdom and virtue, and the obstacles which are laid
in the way of vice, is a most pleasing entertainment to the philanthropist; and
it is but just, in such a contemplation, to acknowledge that superintending
influence, which brings good out of evil. It was feared by many, that the
American revolution would not produce that sum of political happiness which its
warmest advocates had fondly predicted. The efforts of faction in several of
the States were very alarming. In New Hampshire, the assault being made
directly at the supreme head of the government, the force of the State
immediately rose and crushed it. In Massachusetts, the attacks were made on the
Judicial Courts, which of themselves had no power effectually to oppose them.
The disaffection there rose to a higher degree; it was more extensively
diffused, and with more difficulty quelled. But at length the constitutional
powers of government being exerted with vigor, the spirit of anarchy was
suppressed. In another neighboring State, the same spirit reigned triumphant.
A depreciating currency was established by law, and pertinaciously adhered to
by the government.

The imbecility of the confederation by which the States were united, had long
been felt, and some attempts had been making to strengthen it; but the view of
our situation at this time demonstrated the total inefficacy of that
constitution, to bind together thirteen distinct sovereignties, over which no
coercive power was established, which could prevent or cure such evils as
threatened the destruction of all public and private credit. Happily for the
American union, the remedy existed within itself. The good sense and public
virtue of the great body of our citizens readily adopted the idea of a
CONVENTION OF THE STATES. The first proposal came from Virginia, where American
liberty was first publicly asserted, when it was flagrantly violated by the
stamp act. The name of Patrick Henry will ever be illustrious in the American
annals for moving the resolves of 1765; and the name of James Madison will be
equally distinguished for proposing the Convention of 1787.

To this Convention, which was holden at Philadelphia, all the States, except
one, sent their delegates. After a close and particular investigation, they
produced a new federal Constitution; containing adequate remedies for those
political disorders, which had threatened with extinction, the liberty and
independence of the American States.

Among other wise provisions, to establish justice and secure the blessings of
liberty, those which respect public and private credit are not the least
conspicuous. To support the former, the Congress has a power which, by the
first confederation, was not delegated, to lay and collect taxes, duties,
imposts, and excises, to pay the debts and provide for the common defense and
general welfare of the United States. For the latter it is declared, that no
State shall coin money, emit bills of credit, make any thing but gold and
silver coin a tender in payment of debts, pass any bills of attainder or ex
post facto law, or any law impairing the obligation of contracts.

When this new Constitution was proposed to the people, conventions were called
in each State to consider it. In these bodies, composed of persons who
represented impartially every class and description of the people, and who were
themselves equally various in their principles, habits and views; the
Constitution underwent the most critical and severe discussion. Whilst it was
in debate, the anxiety of all parties was extended to the utmost degree, and
the efforts of its friends and its opposers were unremitted.

After the Constitution had been, with the help of some proposed amendments,
1788.
adopted by Massachusetts, Feb. 13.
a convention was called at Exeter in New Hampshire. At its first meeting, a
debate which continued ten days ended in an adjournment for four months; at the
expiration of which term, in a short session of three days only at Concord,
June 21.
the question for adopting and ratifying the Constitution, was, with the same
help as in Massachusetts, carried in the affirmative, by a majority of eleven;
the whole number present being one hundred and three. This was the ninth State
in the union which accepted the Constitution; and thus the number was completed
which was necessary to put in motion the political machine. In about a month,
two more States were added. Then a Congress was formed, and the illustrious
WASHINGTON, 1789.
by the unanimous suffrage of the people, was placed in the first seat of
government. Three other States, of which one is Vermont, have since been
admitted into the union; and there is now in operation a general system of
energetic government, 1790.
which pervades every part of the United States, and has already produced a
surprising alteration for the better. By the funding of the Continental debt,
and the assumption of the debts of the individual States, into one general
mass, a foundation is laid for the support of public credit; by which means the
American revolution appears to be completed. Let it be the sincere prayer and
endeavor of every thoughtful citizen, that such harmony may prevail between
the general government, and the jurisdiction of each State, as the peculiar
delicacy of their connection requires; and that the blessings of peace, liberty
and safety, so dearly obtained, may descend inviolate to our posterity.

APPENDIX.
No. I. A chronological detail of the different forms of government in
New Hampshire, from the beginning of its settlement to the present time; with
the names of the chief Magistrates.
1623 SEVERAL families of fishermen and planters, under the direction of the
company of Laconia and their agents. 1638 Three voluntary associations for
government, at Portsmouth, Dover and Exeter. Hampton being considered as part
of Massachusetts. 1641 All the settlements by a voluntary act submitted to
Massachusetts, and were comprehended in the county of Norfolk, which extended
from Merrimack to Piscataqua rivers. 1680 A royal government was established by
commission from Charles II. John Cutts, Presidents. 1681 Richard Waldron,
Presidents. 1682 Edward Cranfield, Lieutenant Governor. Since writing the first
volume, I have met with a gentleman of Jamaica, who is a great grandson of
Lieut. Governor Cranfield. From him I learned, that Mr. Cranfield was of the
family of Lord Monteagle, who was instrumental of discovering the popish plot
in the reign of James I. That after his departure from New Hampshire, and
whilst he resided at Barbados, he suggested the expediency of the 4 and an half
per cent. duty on sugars to the British government, which was granted by the
Assemblies of the islands, and has ever since been continued. That in the reign
of King William III, he procured a ship of war, at his own expense, and
presented it to the Crown. That he died about the beginning of the present
century, and was buried in the Cathedral Church, at B^th, in England.
1685 Walter Barefoote, Deputy Governor. 1686 A general government was
established over the territory called New England, by James II. Joseph Dudley,
President. 1687 Sir Edmund Androsse, Governor. 1689 After the deposition of
Androsse, New Hampshire, by a voluntary act, became again united with
Massachusetts, as under the old charter. 1692 John Usher published the
commission of Samuel Allen, and officiated as Lieutenant Governor. 1697 William
Partridge was appointed Lieutenant Governor. School Samuel Allen took the chair
as Governor, and restored Usher to his seat as Lieutenant Governor. 1699
Richard, Earl of Bellomont, Governor of New York, Massachusetts and
New Hampshire, opened his commission in New Hampshire, under whom William
Partridge officiated as Lieutenant Governor. 1702 Joseph Dudley, Governor of
Massachusetts and New Hampshire. John Usher reappointed Lieutenant Governor.
1715 George Vaughan, Lieutenant Governor. 1716 Samuel Shute, Governor of
Massachusetts and New Hampshire. 1717 John Wentworth, Lieutenant Governor; and
after Shute's departure in 1722, Commander in Chief. 1729 William Burnet,
Governor of Massachusetts and New Hampshire. 1730 Jonathan Belcher, Governor of
Massachusetts and New Hampshire. 1731 David Dunbar, Lieutenant Governor; he
returned to England in 1737. 1741 Benning Wentworth, Governor. No Lieutenant
Governor for 25 years. 1762 John Temple, Lieutenant Governor, merely titular;
he never officiated. 1767 John Wentworth, Governor. 1775 The British government
was dissolved, and the people formed a Provincial Convention, of which Matthew
Thornton was President. 1776 A temporary Constitution was framed to continue
during the war with Great Britain. Under this Constitution, Meshech Wear was
annually elected President. 1784 A new and permanent Constitution took place,
under which the following Presidents of the State have been annually elected.
Meshech Wear, President Wear, b^ing worn out with public services, resigned
(...) office before the expiration of the year; and after languishing under the
infirm^ties of age, died on the 15th of January, 1786, aetat ^3.

His ancestors had been in public stations, from the first establishment of the
Province. He himself had been employed in public business about forty-five
years. He was chosen Speaker of the House in 17^^, Commissioner to the Congress
at Albany in 1754; afterward one of the Justices of the Superior Court; and in
1777, Chief Justice. He wa^ not a person of an original and inventive genius,
but had a clear discernment, extensive knowledge, accurate judgment, a calm
temper, a modest deportment, an upright and benevolent heart, and a habit of
prudence and diligence in discharging the various duties of public and private
life.


1785 John Langdon, 1786 John Sullivan, 1787 John Sullivan, 1788 John Langdon,
1789 John Sullivan, 1790 Josiah Bartlett. 1791 Josiah Bartlett.
N. B. In case of a vacancy within the year, the sen^or Counsel^or presides.

No. II. A catalogue of Counselors in New Hampshire under the royal
government. With the years when they were appointed, and the times of their
death, as far as either can be ascertained.
N. B. Where a (...) placed in the first column, the date of the appointment is
the (...) as the preceding. Where no dash is placed, the time is uncertain.

Appointment. Names. Death. 1680 JOHN Cutts, President. 1681 -- Richard Martyn,
Treasurer. 1693 -- William Vaughan, Recorder. 1719 -- Thomas Daniel. 1683 --
John Gilman. 1708 -- Christopher Hussy. 1685 -- Richard Waldron, President.
1689 -- Elias Stileman, Secretary. 1695 -- Samuel Dalton. 1681 1680 Job
Clements. 1717 -- Robert Mason, Chancellor. 1688 1681 Richard Waldron. 1730 --
Anthony Nutter. 1682 Walter Barefoote, Deputy Governor. -- Richard
Chamberlayne, Secretary. 1683 Nathaniel Friar, President. -- Robert Elliot. --
John Hinckes, President. -- Edward Randolph. 1684 James Sherlock. -- Francis
Champernoon. -- Robert Wadleigh. 1685 Henry Green. 1700 1692 John Usher,
Lieutenant Governor. 1726 -- Thomas Gra^^ort, named in Usher's commission, but
not in the Council books. -- John Walford, named in Usher's commission, but not
in the Council books. -- John Love, named in Usher's commission, but not in the
Council books. -- Peter Cossin. -- John Gerrish. 1714 -- Nathaniel Wear,
Agent. 1718 1697 William Partridge, Lieutenant Governor. School Joseph Smith,
appointed by Governor Allen, during his short administration. -- Kingsley Hall,
appointed by Governor Allen, during his short administration. -- Sampson
Sheafe, appointed by Governor Allen, during his short administration. -- Peter
Wear, appointed by Governor Allen, during his short administration. 1702
Samuel Penhallow, Treas. and Recorder. 1726 -- John Plaisted. -- Henry Dow.
1707 -- George Jaffrey. 1706 1710 Mark Hunking, Recorder. 1712 John Wentworth,
Lieut. Governor. 1730 1715 George Vaughan, Lieut. Governor. 1724 1716 Richard
Gerrish. 1717 -- Theodore Atkinson. 1719 -- Shadrach Walton, President. --
George Jaffrey, Treasurer. 1749 -- Richard Wibird. 1732 -- Thomas Westbrooke.
1736 1719 Thomas Packer. 1723 1722 Archibald McPhedris. 1723 John Frost. 1724
Jotham Odiorne. 1728 Henry Sherburne. 1758 Richard Waldron, Secretary. 1753
1732 Joshua Pierce, Recorder. 1743 1734 Benning Wentworth, Governor. 1770 --
Theodore Atkinson, Secretary. 1779 -- Ephraim Dennet. Benjamin Gamblin. 1737
1739 Richard Wibird. 1765 Ellis Husk. 1755 Joseph Sherburne. 1744 1740 John
Rindge. 1740 John Downing. 1766 Samuel Smith. 1760 Joseph Blanchard. 1758
Sampson Sheafe. 1753 Samuel Solley. -- Daniel Warner. 1778 1754 Joseph
Newmarch. 1765 1759 Mark Hunking Wentworth. 1785 1759 James Nevin. 1768 1761
John Nelson. 1787 1762 William Temple. 1789 -- Theodore Atkinson, Secretary.
1769 -- Nathaniel Barrel. 1765 Peter Livius. 1766 Jonathan Warner. -- Daniel
Rindge. -- Daniel Pierce, Recorder. 177^ -- George Jaffrey, Treasurer. -- Henry
Sherburne. 1767 -- Daniel Rogers. 1772 Peter Gilman. 1787 -- Thomas Westbrooke
Waldron. 1785 1774 John Sherburne. -- John Phillips. 1775 George Boyd. 1787

No. III. Alphabetical list of Delegates to Congress, before and during the
Confederation.
N. B. Those marked thus * are dead.

JOSIAH Bartlett, *Jonathan Blanchard, *Nathaniel Folsom, Abiel Foster, George
Frost, John Tailor Gilman, Nicholas Gilman, John Langdon, Woodbury Langdon,
Samuel Livermore, *Pierce Long, Nathaniel Peabody, John Sullivan, Matthew
Thornton, *John Wentworth, *William Whipple, Phillips White, Pain Wingate.
Delegates to the Convention of the United States, in 1787.

John Langdon, Nicholas Gilman.
Under the present Federal Constitution.

Senators,
John Langdon, Pain Wingate.
Representatives.
Samuel Livermore, Nicholas Gilman, Abiel Foster, Jeremiah Smith.
No. IV. A table of the number of rateable polls; amount of rateable estate,
and number of Representatives in the several counties, in the Province of
New Hampshire, A. D. 1773.
Counties. Representatives. No. of rateable polls. Amount of rateable estate.
Rockingham 21 7570 L 10,528 Strafford 6 2292 3,101 Hillsborough 4 2946 3,888
Cheshire 3 2052 2,445 Grafton 642 686 34 15502 L 20,648 34 Members representing
46 towns 8729 rateable polls. Unrepresented 101 towns 6773 rateable polls. 147
15502 polls.

No. V. An exact table, showing the state of Representation, in the Legislature
of the Province of New Hampshire, A. D. 1773, with the proportion of such
representation to the taxation of the several towns.
Names of towns represented. No. of Represent. The proportion each town paid to
every L1000. Proportion to each Represent. PORTSMOUTH 3 58 20 19 70 Dover 2 25
13 0 Madbury 11 20 36 15 0 18 76 Hampton 2 14 90 Northampton 9 14 0 24 30 12 16
Hampton Falls 1 10 17 0 10 17 0 Exeter 2 24 40 Brentwood 14 10 0 Epping 23 10 0
Poplin 6 50 68 90 34 46 Newcastle 2 5 16 0 Rye 11 20 16 18 0 8 90 Kingston 1 14
90 East-Kingston 7 50 Sandown 7 12 0 Hawke 7 15 0 37 10 37 10 Newington 1 9 13
0 9 13 0 Stratham 1 18 30 18 30 Londonderry 1 35 15 0 Windham 5 0 0 40 15 0 40
15 0 Greenland 1 10 17 0 10 17 0 Durham 1 17 12 0 Lee 12 6 0 29 18 0 29 18 0
Newmarket 1 17 10 0 17 10 0 Southampton 1 7 15 0 7 15 0 Chester 1 22 8 0 Candia
8 6 0 Raymond 7 13 0 38 7 0 38 7 0 Plastow 1 7 7 0 Hampstead 7 15 0 Atkinson 9
13 0 24 15 0 24 15 0 Salem 1 14 10 0 Pelham 9 11 0 24 1 0 24 1 0 Somersworth 1
16 0 0 16 0 0 Hollis 1 16 18 0 16 18 0 Merrimac 1 7 5 0 7 5 0 Nottingham West 1
8 9 0 Litchfield 5 6 0 13 15 0 13 15 0 Kensington 1 14 0 0 14 0 0 Rochester 1
18 15 0 18 15 0 Barrington 1 14 0 0 14 0 0 Amherst 1 19 7 0 Bedford 7 5 0 26 12
0 26 12 0 Winchester 1 8 4 0 8 4 0 Keen 1 10 12 0 10 12 0 Charlestown 1 9 4 9
4 0 46 Towns represented by 34 memb. and pay 629 4 0 of each L1000 101 Towns
not represented which pay 370 16 0 of each L1000 147 Towns. 34 memb. L 1000 0 0

This and the foregoing table were calculated by Wentworth Cheswill, Esquire. of
Newmarket.

No. VI. Copy of a letter from his Excellency General WASHINGTON, to THOMAS
CHITTENDEN, Esquire. [Certified by Tobias Lear, Esquire. private Secretary to the
President of the United States.]
Philadelphia, 1 st January, 1782. SIR,
I RECEIVED your favor of the 14th of November, by Mr. Brownson. You cannot be
at a loss to know why I have not heretofore, and why I cannot now, address you
in your public character, or answer you in mine: But the confidence which you
have been pleased to repose in me, gives me an opportunity of offering you my
sentiments, as an individual, wishing most ardently to see the peace and union
of his country preserved, and the just rights of the people of every part of it
fully and firmly established.

It is not my business, neither do I think it necessary now, to discuss the
origin of the right of a number of inhabitants to that tract of country
formerly distinguished by the name of the New Hampshire Grants, and now known
by that of Vermont. I will take it for granted that their right was good,
because Congress, by their resolve of the 7th of August, imply it; and by that
of the 21st, are willing fully to confirm it, provided the new State is
confined to certain described bounds. It appears, therefore, to me, that the
dispute of boundary is the only one that exists, and that the being removed all
further difficulties would be removed also, and the matter terminated to the
satisfaction of all parties. Now I would ask you heartily, whether the claim of
the people of Vermont, was not, for a long time, confined solely, or very
nearly, to that tract of country which is described in the resolve of Congress
of the 21st of August last; and whether, agreeable to the tenor of your own
letter to me, the late extention of your claim upon New Hampshire and New York,
was not more a political maneuver, than one in which you conceived yourselves
justifiable. If my first question be answered in the affirmative, it certainly
bars your new claim. And if my second be well founded, your end is answered,
and you have nothing to do but withdraw your jurisdiction to the confines of
your old limits, and obtain an acknowledgment of independence and sovereignty,
under the resolve of the 21st of August, for so much territory as does not
interfere with the ancient established bounds of New York, New Hampshire and
Massachusetts. I persuade myself you will see and acquiesce in the reason, the
justice, and indeed the necessity of such a decision.

You must consider, Sir, that the point now in dispute is of the utmost
political importance to the future union and peace of this great country. The
State of Vermont, if acknowledged, will be the first new one admitted into the
confederacy; and if suffered to encroach upon the ancient established
boundaries of the adjacent ones, will serve as a precedent for others, which it
may hereafter be expedient to set off, to make the same unjustifiable demands.
Thus, in my private opinion, while it behooves the Delegates of the States now
confederated, to do ample justice to a body of people sufficiently respectable
by their numbers, and entitled by other claims to be admitted into that
confederation, it becomes them also to attend to the interests of their
constituents, and see, that under the appearance of justice to one, they do not
materially injure the rights of others. I am apt to think this is the
prevailing opinion of Congress, and that your late extension of claim has, upon
the principle I have above mentioned, rather diminished than increased your
friends; and that, if such extension should be persisted in, it will be made a
common cause, and not considered as only affecting the rights of those States
immediately interested in the loss of territory; a loss of too serious a nature
not to claim the attention of any people. There is no calamity within the
compass of my foresight, which is more to be dreaded than a necessity of
coertion on the part of Congress; and consequently every endeavor should be
used to prevent the execution of so disagreeable a measure. It must involve the
ruin of that State against which the resentment of the others is pointed.

I will only add a few words upon the subject of the negociations, which have
been carried on between you and the enemy in Canada and in New York. I will
take it for granted, as you assert it, that they were so far innocent, that
there never was any serious intention of joining Great Britain in their
attempts to subjugate your country; but it has had this certain bad tendency,
it has served to give some ground to that delusive opinion of the enemy, and
upon which they, in a great measure, found their hopes of success; that they
have numerous friends among us, who only want a proper opportunity to show
themselves openly; and that internal disputes and feuds will soon break us in
pieces. At the same time the seeds of distrust and jealousy are scattered among
ourselves by a conduct of this kind. If you are serious in your professions,
these will be additional motives for accepting the terms which have been
offered, (and which appear to me equitable) and thereby convincing the common
enemy, that all their expectations of disunion are vain, and that they have
been worsted at their own weapon -- deception.

As you unbosom yourself to me, I thought I had the greater right of speaking
my sentiments openly and heartily to you. I have done so, and if they should
produce the effect which I most sincerely wish, that of an honorable and
amicable adjustment of a matter, which, if carried to hostile lengths, may
destroy the future happiness of my country, I shall have attained my end, while
the enemy will be defeated of theirs.

Believe me to be, with great respect,

Sir, Your most obedient servant, GEORGE WASHINGTON.

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
CORRECTIONS.
In the first volume.
Page ^8, l^ne 19, f^r settlement, read sentiment. Page 291, line 10 and 21,
for from, read to. Page 310, line 8, (in some copies) after township, and, the
other for ascertaining the bounds of them.

In the second volume.
Page 176, line 8, dele who. Page 2^8, line 20, for Major, read Brigadier.


