AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED JULY 4th, 1791, AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF
THE TOWN OF BOSTON, IN COMMEMORATION OF THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN
INDEPENDENCE, BY THOMAS CRAFTS, JUN. A. M.

O LIBERTY, thou Goddess, heavenly bright,
Profuse of bliss, and pregnant with delight!
Eternal Pleasures in thy presence reign,
And smiling PLENTY leads her wanton train,
Eased of her load, SUBJECTION grows more light,
And POVERTY looks cheerful in thy sight;
Thou make the gloomy face of Nature gay,
Giv'st beauty to the Sun, and pleasure to the day.
ADDISON. PRINTED BY BENJAMIN RUSSELL, IN BOSTON, MASSACHUSHTTS,

MDCCXCI.

AT a Meeting of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the Town of BOSTON,
duly qualified and legally warned, in public TownMeeting assembled, at
Faneuil-Hall, on Monday the 4th Day of July, A. D. 1791.

VOTED,

THAT the Selectmen be, and hereby are, appointed a Committee to wait upon
THOMAS CRAFTS, jun. Esquire. and, in the Name of the Town, to thank him for the
spirited and elegant ORATION this Day pronounced by him, at the Request of the
Town, upon the Anniversary of the INDEPENDENCE OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA;
in which, according to the Institution of the Town, he considered the Feelings,
Manners and Principles, which led to that great National Event -- and to
request of him a Copy thereof for the PRESS.

Attest, WILLIAM COOPER, Town Clerk.

GENTLEMEN,
THE candor of my Fellow-Citizens, already so amply experienced, emboldens me
to consent to give for the Press a copy of the Oration delivered on the 4th
Instant, at their request.

Under a conviction that the same liberal allowance will be extended at the
perusal,

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of esteem, GENTLEMEN,

Your obedient humble Servant, THOMAS CRAFTS, jun.
Boston, July 5, 1791.
AN ORATION.
THE animated appearance of this numerous audience, the joy visible in every
countenance, the universal display of satisfaction, pervading this Metropolis,
speak the occasion for which we are assembled.

IN perusing the ample page of History, the eye is often led to survey the
Revolutions of mighty States and Empires. The causes which have produced these
great Phenomena are fraught with lessons instructive to mankind. Among others
none is more conspicuous, than that Oppression has uniformly generated a spirit
of Freedom. Had this important maxim been remembered, Monarchs would not so
often have tottered on their thrones, nor so large a portion of mankind at this
day have tasted the blessings of Liberty. It is unnecessary to enter into the
nature and end of civil government, to evince that men, though willing to
surrender some of their natural privileges, to enjoy the benefits of society,
still reserved to themselves, certain rights, in their nature sacred and
unalienable. And though venal writers (nurtured in the idea that Kings are born
to rule, and Men to obey) have treated the doctrine as the dream of visionary
Democracy, the experience of modern times teaches, that when these rights are
infringed, brave men will never fail to resist.

THE Declaration of American Independence is one of those great AEras in the
history of mankind, pregnant with such important consequences as well to
posterity as ourselves, that an inquiry into the causes which gave it birth, is
naturally suggested. In doing this it may be useful to mark with precision the
first dawnings of that spirit of oppression, which gradually ripening into acts
of Tyranny, terminated in the dismemberment of a vast Empire. From the original
emigration of our ancestors from Great Britain, the policy of that country
toward them for a long series of years, was founded solely on the principle of
commercial advantage. The right of regulating trade so as best to sub serve the
" 'Till the year 1764 the colonial regulations seem to have no other object,
but the common good of the whole Empire." RAMSAY'S Hist. Revolution p. 43.
mutual interest of both countries, was all they pretended to claim. -- This
right however illegal was tacitly submitted to, as long as the good resulting
from its exercise outweighed the evil. Until the arrival of the fatal period
which induced a deviation from this policy, the commercial benefits she reaped
from the Colonies, were immense; and we can scarcely believe that in the year
See BURKE'S Speech in Parliament on moving his resolutions for conciliation
with the colonies, March 22d, 1775, where the calculation is accurately stated.
1772, her export trade to America was nearly equal to what she carried on at
the beginning of the century with the whole world!

AT this time Great Britain had reached the zenith of national glory, her
fleets rode triumphant in every quarter of the globe, and the terror of her
arms kept the European world in awe.

HAD she continued to keep in view, the means by which she had risen to that
glory, she would not now deplore the loss of so valuable a portion of her
Empire, nor should we, My Friends, so soon have had reason to rejoice, on an
occasion so glorious as the present. But in the conduct of nations as well as
individuals, we always discover the traits of human imperfection. As early as
the year 1764, when Great Britain had scarcely emerged from a long and
expensive War, in which an enormous debt had accumulated, a weak, short-sighted
Ministry, deluded by the suggestions of designing men in this country,
conceived the fatal project of drawing from America, a revenue by direct
internal taxation.

FORGETTING in one moment the wise policy, under the influence of which they
had seen the Colonies increase, with a rapidity unparalleled in the growth of
any former country, In BURKE'S Speech, mentioned in a former note, speaking of
the importance of the colonies to GREAT BRITAIN, he says, "NOTHING IN THE
MISTORY OF MANKIND IS LIKE THEIR PROGRESS."
unmindful of the immense advantages of an exclusive trade; the nation listened
to the wretched expedient.

THE ridiculous and false (...) ^^^imentary Debate, -- Speech of Col. BARKE'S
in reply to one at (...) Act.
pretense that as we were planted by their care and nourished by their
indulgence, we ought to share in the public burden, was swallowed with
avidity. For the paltry advantage of being cased in a small degree of the
weight of their debt, they consented to the violation of one of the first
principles of their Constitution, "That no tax should be levied on the subject
but by his consent or that of his Representative in Parliament." Various and
disgraceful were the expedients employed by the Ministry, to obtain the consent
of the nation in the pursuit of this their favorite object.

To an audience so well informed, it would be needless to enumerate the various
oppressive acts of Parliament, framed in pursuance of the original plan, all
grounded on the false idea of a right to bind us in all cases. In contempt of
Petitions, dictated by the purest loyalty, in opposition to the sentiments of
the wisest and best Among others, LORD CAMDEN in the House of Peers, and
WILLIAM PIT, in the House of Commons. The latter in one of his Speeches uses
this language "You have no right to tax America. I rejoice that America has
refisted: three millions of our fellow subjects so lost to every sense of
virtue as tamely to give up their liberties, would be fit instruments to make
slaves of the rest."
men in the nation; an obstinate Ministry pursued the phantom, with undeviating
vigor. An uniform system of arbitrary measures was invariably pursued on one
side, and firmly resisted on the other.

THE insulted colonies were compelled, no longer to regard Great Britain as the
kind parent who had boasted that she had reared and protected them; but saw her
arm extended, to wrest from them those rights, which as Englishmen they had
been taught to hold sacred.

VARIOUS were the causes, which combined to produce an early resistance to
these measures.

OUR ancestors happily for us their posterity, left Great Britain at a period
of her history, when the slavish doctrines of non-resistance and passive
obedience were growing out of fashion; and brought with them those principles
of Liberty, and that spirit of Freedom which afterward enabled their
descendants to check the first inroads of arbitrary power. This spirit thus
early imbibed, was effectually aroused at the Stamp Act, and though at ^he
repeal of that odious measure, it seemed for a moment to subside, it burst out
afresh whenever new occasions called for its exertions.

ACCUSTOMED, from their earliest establishment, to Forms of Government little
short of Independent, subject only to checks, which being rarely exerted, were
scarcely felt, they were more readily alarmed at the slightest attempts on
their liberties. Having felt the effects of civil and religious persecution,
they early saw the necessity of instilling principles of resistance into their
offspring, and their excellent institutions for the education of youth, may be
ranked among the most powerful causes that led to the Revolution.

BUT I pass to the more immediate causes which brought on the great Event we
this day celebrate.

THE tragic scene acted on the memorable plains of Lexington, taught Americans
what they might expect, from a nation intoxicated with power, and determined to
enslave them. Hosts of foreign mercenaries, the disgraceful tools of Tyrants,
were employed to enforce their arbitrary edicts, and the Day rapidly advanced,
in which we were compelled to withdraw our allegiance from that power, which
had long before withdrawn its protection.

LET p^^^^rity be informed, that on that day when our Country was invaded by
one of the most powerful nations on earth, without foreign aid, or internal
resource, a band of Patriots, the Representatives of an injured people,
sanctioned the great Decree which gave existence to an Empire. This important
Declaration was not dictated by ambitious leaders grasping at supreme power; by
men who meant to raise themselves on the ruins of that allegiance they had
abjured; but by the unanimous voice of three millions of Freemen presering
death to servitude. As often as this great Event is brought to our view the
distinguished Patriot who has so long and honorably presided in this
Commonwealth, will call for our warmest acknowledgments. The conspicuous part
he took at this all-important crisis has justly secured him the wreath of
immortality.

To detail the occurrences of the long and bloody war, which terminated so
gloriously for our country, would be to open wounds already closed, but justice
to the long train of HEROES who fought in defense of the dearest rights of men
demands the tribute of our grateful remembrance. May their illustrious
achievements in the cause of virtue endear them to posterity.

NOR can we in calling to mind this eventful period withhold the tribute of
applause from the Illustrious Man, under whose command our Patriot Army, were
so often led to victory and success. The mingled sensations of gratitude and
admiration which crowd on the mind, at the recollection of his important
services, render it impossible to do justice to his exalted character. While
gratitude retains her seat in the human breast; posterity shall enrol the name
of WASHINGTON among the great Benefactors of Mankind!

FROM the Treaty of Peace until the adoption of our present form of National
Government, the affairs of America wore a gloomy aspect. The disjointed fabric
of our union was tending fast to dissolution. The Articles of Confederation,
framed while we were young in the science of politics, were ineffectual to
secure us in the possession of those blessings, we had so nobly obtained.
Disunion threatened us on all sides, and the friends of Liberty in both
hemispheres anxiously dreaded the approaching catastrophe. But lights and
shades are sound blended in the great Portrait of human affairs. The glory of
America though dimmed, was not ^^^^^guished. I ulled to rest in the arms of a
slothful peace, the readily awoke at the call of danger. The native and sense
of her sons was again aroused and brought into action. A Council was called,
composed of Heroes, who had shed their blood in defense of Freedom, and Sages,
who by their counsels had aided the same cause.

THE result of their deliberations is well known. At this crisis America
exhibited an example dignifying to human nature. Thirteen Independent
Sovereignties, differing in climate, manners and habits, assembling for the
purpose of reconciling their clashing interest, mutually sacrificing private
prejudice on the altar of public good, agreeing on a form of Government that
should bind the whole, is an instance without a parallel.

WITHOUT adducing particular examples, (...) the history of all ages informs
us, that Revolutions in Government have been uniformly attended with
convulsions in the State.

BLOODSHED, and the violation of the rights of property, have been too often
the fatal preludes to the establishment of peace and good order.

THE magnanimity which gave existence to the National Government, (...) been
less conspicuous, in its unanimous adoption, and the ready obedience which has
attended it in every stage of its progress. And this we owe to the enlightened
state of our country.

TAUGHT a useful lesson from past experience, they readily acquiesce in the
administration of a Government, which sedulously guarding against the abuse of
power on one hand, vests the supreme head with that authority only, which is
essential to the preservation of public happiness. It is not my business here,
to pass an encomium on the Federal Constitution. The pleasing aspect of our
public affairs is its best eulogium.

IN a period short of three years, we have seen our country raised from
contempt, to the important rank she now holds among the nations of the earth.
Our national faith is redeemed and established on a permanent foundation. The
value of every species of property has appreciated. The husbandman, no longer
groaning beneath the weight of taxes, enjoys in peace the abundant fruit of his
labors. Commerce also begins to rear (...) drooping head; new sources of
wealth are daily opening to her view; her harbors are thronged with Ships,
pouring into her lap, the rich exuberance of every clime. Manufactures thrive,
our public (...) of (...) of Learning flourish; and the voice of (...) is
heard throughout the land!

THESE, My Friends, are some of the happy effects which have already flowed
from the Auspicious Epoch we now celebrate. Nor are the happy effects of the
American Revolution confined to us alone. Influenced by our glorious example,
Nations who have for ages languished under the galling yoke of despotism, begin
to assert their native rights. The heart of every American must exult that the
Gallant Nation who so generously aided us in our struggle for Freedom begin to
reap its happy fruits. Let us congratulate the Illustrious Leaders of the
French Revolution, on the success which has hitherto attended their virtuous
efforts, in the cause of mankind! No longer, in that happy country, shall the
liberty of the subject, depend on the will of a vindictive Minister, or the
caprice of an offended Favorite. No more shall the treasures of the nation be
exhausted in decking the sumptuous palaces of lordly Prelates, but henceforth
employed, in promoting those useful Arts and Sciences, which adorn and dignify
a nation.

NOR shall the progress of Liberty stop here -- Let us indulge the pleasing
(...) that the period is fast approaching, when the ^^motest corners of the
earth shall catch the fla^^. That Countries, where now the wretched vassal bows
his neck to some imperious Lord, shall hear the glorious sound, and burst those
chains asunder which have so long held (...) in ignominious bondage. -- When
man shall no longer be the slave, of man -- but the principle "That men are
born free and equal," shall be recognized throughout the world!

IF we look around us what ample reason have we to rejoice. While carnage and
devastation mark the footsteps of armies, in some parts of the earth, and At
the late capture of ISMAIL, 30000 Turks are said to have been slain, after they
surrendered.
thousands are massacred (...) blood to satiate the revenge of a cruel
conqu^^^r; we enjoy tranquillity under one of the best forms of government
human wisdom has devis^^ Locally remote from the causes of quarrel which drench
the European world in blood, what have we to do, but cultivate in peace those
virtues which make a nation great as well as happy? The GODDESS OF LIBERTY has
condescended to reside among us -- Let us cherish the lovely guest; for where
with the find an asylum if driven from these happy shorts? To look before us --
a field presents itself, over which the excursive wing of Fancy might fear
unwearied. In a few years our extensive (...) shall be crowded with Ships,
charged with (...) produce of yes unfurrowed soils. On the banks (...) where
human footstep yet has never trod, cities shall rear their gilded spires!. The
trackless wilderness where now the tawny Aboriginals in frantic yells celebrate
their orgies, shall become the peaceful abodes of civilized life! And America
shall be renowned for the feat of Science and the Arts, as she already has been
for the wisdom of her Councils, and the valor of her Arms!


