(...), CALCULATED TO EXEMPLIFY THE MODE OF CONDUCT WHICH WILL RENDER YOUNG
LADIES BOTH AMIABLE AND (...) WHEN THEIR SCHOOL EDUCATION IS COMPLETED.

IN THREE VOLUMES.

VOLUME I. CONTAINING THE GOOD MOTHER-IN-LAW, AND THE GOOD DAUGHTER-IN-LAW:

NEW HAVEN: PRINTED BY ABEL MORSE. M.DCC.XCI.

PREFACE.
I HAVE been a reader of the useful publications for children with which the
world abounds, till I feel myself inspired with emulation, to devote my own
leisure hours to the same benevolent purpose, that so properly employs the pens
of many of my sex. The ladies who are already engaged in furnishing a
succession of books, fit for children in their early years, seem to stand in no
need of an auxiliary; being possessed, both of talents, and industry, equal to
their laudable undertaking; nor do I wish to invade their province; but, as I
observe, that these respectable writers content themselves with conducting
their pupils to a cerain period; I think I may with propriety follow them, and
offer some hints to young ladies preparatory to (what they are too apt to
regard as the a^^ of liberty) the time of their leaving school; when numbers of
unexperienced young persons suppose themselves capable of forming just opinions
of people and things, and of regulating their own conduct.

With a view of preventing, in some degree, this improper SELF-CONFIDENCE,
which naturally produces pride, impatient of control, and various other
intellectual deformities, I have projected a design of presenting to the
public, a few domestic scenes; calculated to show, the happy effects of filial
affection, sweetness of temper, and steadiness of mind, when exercised in the
season of YOUTH, toward either good or bad parents.

Were all persons to discharge their duty to their offspring, it would be
unjust to exhibit, even fictitious characters of parents in an unamiable light;
and it certainly is commendable, in every one concerned in the education of
children, to throw a veil over the imperfections of those, whom nature and
religion require to be honored and obeyed. But it must be acknowledged and
lamended, that many parents indulge themselves in faults, which are productive
of much unhappiness to their families (...) faults, which they an nor strive to
hide, and are therefore unavoidably discovered to their children; as soon as
they are permitted to dwell under the paternal roof, from whence they are
almost totally excluded, till they are old enough to distinguish characters:
the effect of this is, that many an amiable girl, when she returns from school,
where she has been accustomed to practice regularity, and receive good
instruction, is continually at a loss how to act at home, where she sees
nothing but idleness, dissipation, passion and fretfulness; and consequently
through the insinuations of servants, or the inconsiderate a (...) of young
friends, may be induced to think that she is excusable for omitting to pay
attention and obedience to these, who neglect to act a parent's part. Would it
not, therefore, be a benevolent office, in those who superintend the education
of female youth in particular, prudently to prepare them for the conflicts they
may be engaged in, by strongly inculcating the duty of a daughter in its almost
extent; and enforcing a per^^sion that their felicity principally depends on
rectitude of their own conduct; that they may be fortified to bear, with
dutiful submission, the many evils which the improper behavior of bad parents
may expose them to; or learn to feel the comforts of their situation, of they
are blessed with good ones?

SECOND MARRIAGES, though in many cases highly expedient, are frequently
productive of family discord; for children are usually, by some means or other,
prejudiced against a mother-in-law; and disinclined to obey or respect her. I
have therefore fixed on this as the subject of the present Volume; and have
adapted the dramatic style, as most likely to engage attention.

In the first of the following little pieces I have attempted to show what kind
of behavior is most likely to produce harmony, where all parties have good
sense and good dispositions: and in the second to point out, that affection for
a parent should guard young minds from revolting against him, even should he
form a disagreeable connection.

If my labors are honored with the approbation of the public, I shall pursue my
plan, with the hope, that the lessons I inculcate may be conducive toward
establishing such habits of patience, meekness and complacency, as are
essentially necessary to render young ladies happy in themselves, and to
qualify them for the discharge of the various duties, which particularly belong
to the FEMALE CHARACTER.

P. I.

THE GOOD MOTHER-IN-LAW. A DRAMA, IN THREE ACTS.
ACT I.
SCENE, a Room in Mrs. Sutton's House.
[ Enter Mr. and Mrs. Sutton.] Mr. Sutton. WELCOME! my dear Mrs. Sutton, to
this house, once the abode of your beloved friend; by your kind compliance with
her dying request, that you would supply to her dear children the loss of a
tender parent, you have restored peace to my long afflicted bosom, and engaged
my warmest gratitude.


Mrs. Sutton. I doubt not, sir, the sincerity of your profession; ^y frequent
residence in your house, during the life of my most valued friend, convinced me
of your merit, and you were long in possession of my esteem, I therefore gladly
accepted your hand, and will endeavor to imitate, as much as possible, the
character of her, whose memory is as dear to me as to yourself. -- But where
are the dear children? I long to fold them to my heart.


Mr. Sutton. O! madam, you know not the arduous talk you have undertaken; for
some months before her death, Sophia had been obliged to remit her usual
attention to them; she perceived the unhappy effects of her involuntary
neglect, and her last hours were embittered apprehensions, that the faults she
perceived arising in their tempers would increase for want of proper
management. Whilst I beheld her languishing with sickness, I could not myself
attend to their instruction; and the fatal stroke which deprived me of her for
ever, totally disqualified me for domestic duties; all I could do, was, to weep
over my children. But I now resolve to banish unavailing sorrow, and be again a
father. I will immediately introduce them to you, and may they improve the
happy advantage I have procured them! but I fear your reception will not be
very agreeable, as I understand, since my return, that my elder daughters are
greatly displeased at my marriage. I thought to give them an agreeable
surprise, by bringing you home as their mother, as they were once so
affectionately attached to you.

[ Mr. Sutton goes out.
Mrs. Sutton. I foresee, from Mr. Sutton's account of his young family, that I
shall have many difficulties to encounter; I am sorry to hear that he did not
make his elder daughters acquainted with his intentions. However, I will think
of dear Sophia, and endeavor to acquit myself like a real parent, for her sake.
All ceremonial visits shall be deferred till I have attended to this important
concern.

[ Enter Mr. Sutton, introducing Miss Fanny, Miss Caroline, and Master William.
The elder ladies appear reluctant to approach Mrs. Sutton.]
Mr. Sutton. Receive from my hands, my dear Mrs. Sutton, Isabella and Fanny; I
hope they have not forgot your former kindness, and will be happy to show you
duty and affection.


Mrs. Sutton [Takes them by the hand, and offers to kiss them; they turn from
her with disdain.] Have you forgot me my dears? Do not you remember her how
fond I used to be of you? I have the same sentiments for you as formerly, and I
will be a kind mamma to you.

[ Miss Sutton and Miss Fanny burst into tears.]
Miss Sutton. O! my dear own mamma, I wish you were alive!


Mr. Sutton. That wish, my love, must be suppressed. It was the Divine will to
take her from us; she is, I trust, in a state of happiness, and we must resign
ourselves to the loss of her. I have provided you a new mamma* one, who I am
sure loves you; and if you treat her with duty and respect, she will be as
attentive to your improvement as your own mamma would have been. -- But retire
at present; I will not blame you for this tribute of tears, due to the
remembrance of so tender a parent. Reflect on the blessing I have procured for
you, and endeavor to rejoice with me, that the dear friend of your departed
mother, now supplies her place in my family.

[ Miss Sutton and Miss Fanny go out.
Mr. Sutton. Caroline and William! why do not you run to your new mamma? I
thought you would be glad to see her.


Miss Caroline. O! no, papa; Mary says, we shall never be happy now we have got
a mother-in-law; and though I loved Mrs. Greenhill, and liked she should come
to see us when poor mamma was alive, I am sure I shall never love her now.


Master William. I dare say, my mamma-in-law will never let me have any
play-things, and I shall not be permitted to run about in the garden.


Mr. Sutton. Who, my dear children, can have put such strange notions into your
heads? However, we will talk of this another time. Try your new mamma; ask her
to let you go into the garden. -- What I both silent? Why, Caroline, she has
brought you the nicest doll I ever saw; but I think you must not have it, as
you behave so ill.


Mrs. Sutton. O! yes, Mr. Sutton, I must have the pleasure of presenting it to
her now; we shall soon understand each other better: and to convince Master
William that I have no intention to shut him up in the house, as he apprehends,
I will not only permit him to go out to play, but provide him with the means of
amusing himself. Here, sir, Will you accept these nine pins?


Miss Caroline. O! what a sweet doll! will you, new mamma, be kind to me
indeed? Well, I will not mind Mary. -- What a sweet doll? Come, doll, I am your
new mamma!


Master William. I dare say I can knock down four of these nine-pins at once.
Do, pray, papa, open the door.


Mr. Sutton. Kiss your mamma first, and I will. You, Caroline, may take your
child, and show it to your sisters. Desire the maid to bring down Charles.

[Caroline and William go out.
Mrs. Sutton. I am sorry the dear children are so much set against me. However,
a little time and patience will put these matters to rights.


Mr. Sutton. I am concerned, my dear madam, at the thoughts of the task you
will have; but I will do my part toward removing the unhappy prejudices which
my children have unaccountably imbibed. Here comes one, who surely has not yet
received any wrong impression.

[ Enter maid, with Master Charles.]
Master Charles [ Crying.] I will not have a new mamma! I will not have a new mamma!
I will stay with Nanny!


Mrs. Sutton [ Aside to Mr. Sutton.] Do not, Mr. Sutton, force the child to
come to me; let him stay till he is done crying, and when he has examined my
countenance and finds nothing terrific in it, he will perhaps be ready to come
to me. Send the nursery-maid away, and take him yourself.

Nanny, leave Charles here; he shall stay with me.


Nanny. O! pray, sir, let Master Charles go with me; I can quiet him in a
minute. Poor little dear! It will break its little heart if you cross him.


Mr. Sutton. Leave him this instant! I guess how you will quiet him; by
indulging his perverseness, and telling him, I suppose, that papa is naughty.

The Maid goes out. Thus it is that servants who are hired for assistants, ruin
the tempers of children; and so give us more trouble than they save.


Charles [ Continues crying.] I will go with Nanny! I will go with Nanny! I
will not go to my new mamma, she will beat me!


Mr. Sutton. Well, you shall not go to your new mamma; you shall come to me,
Charles; and instead of crying after Nenny, tell me, whether you should like to
see William play at nine-pins? His new mamma hat given him some very pretty
ones.


Master Charles [ Ceases crying.] O! dear, let me see the nine-pins! Will my
new mamma give me some?


Mr. Sutton. Yes, my dear, I dare say she will, when you are a good boy. She
sent for you to give you a little chaise; but if you will not go to her, you
will never have it.


Master Charles. Do new mammas give play-things? I thought they took them away.


Mr. Sutton. Yes, my love; they give play-things; and when children are good,
they do every thing that is kind to them. Go to yours.


Charles [ Running to Mrs. Sutton.] Now, mamma, pray give me the chaise.


Mrs. Sutton. O! your servant, sir! what you will come to me now? Well, there
it is; give me a kiss. Now go into the nursery, and play with it.

[ Master Charles goes out:
Mr. Sutton. We have been obliged to practice a little bribery.


Mrs. Sutton. But no corruption I hope. Well, in time the little dears may love
me on a better principle. I have gained one point, and shall endeavor to
improve it.


Mr. Sutton. In the afternoon I expect Edward and George from school; I have
desired their master to spare them from their studies for one day, that they
may pay their respects to you; but from the specimen you have had of your
children-in-law, madam, you cannot much wish for the interview.


Mrs. Sutton. O! my dear Mr. Sutton, I had prepared my mind for all I have
hitherto met with; I shall manage the young gentlemen, I do not doubt.

Enter a Footman. Sir, Mr. Steady is below.


Mrs. Sutton. My worthy old friend, the rector! pray let me be of your party.


Mr. Sutton [ To the Footman.] Show him into the drawing room. Madam, I attend
you.

[ Mr. and Mrs. Sutton go out..]
SCENE -- Changes to the Nursery.
Miss SUTTON and Miss FANNY. -- MARY and NANNY, Nursery-maids.
Miss Sutton. Well, Fanny! my new mamma is come, and we have made our first
appearance before her; I expected a lecture for our crying, but she knew better
than to begin the first day.


Miss Fanny. I am sure I shall never be happy with her; and I dare say she will
be always complaining of us to papa, and then we shall lose his love.


Miss Sutton. I don't care for her; she has no reason to expect duty and
obedience from me.


Mary. O! ladies, I know such stories of mothers-in-law, you would be quite
frightened to hear them. They always use children ill.


Nanny. Yes, ladies, they are the vilest people in the world; if folks have
been ever so good before, as soon as they are mothers-in-law, they grow
hard-hearted directly. I am quite certain that Mrs. Sutton has set my master
against poor little Charles already; for do you know, ladies, that for all the
dear child cried as if he would break his heart to come to me, and I begged, as
if I was begging for my life, that I might take him, my master would not let
him? O! I hear him upon the stairs!


[ Enter Master Charles.] Master Charles. Nanny, I will not believe you any more;
you said my new mamma would beat me; and see she has given me this nice chaise,
and she kissed me too.


Nanny. La! what a foolish trumpery, little chaise; if your own mamma had been
alive, she would have bought you a rocking horse.


Master Charles. Well, I am not afraid of my new mamma now; I will ask her for
one.


Nanny. No, don't; for she will think I put it in your head. I have had one
scolding about you already; but if ever you tell a tale of me, I will not love you
any more. I will not give you any more cakes, or fruit; and if I see your new
mamma going (...) you, I will not try to save you; and I will le^^ (...) know all
your ^^ricks, that I will.


Master Charles. Well, my chaise is a very pretty one. I only want a long
string to draw it by. Pray give me a bit Nanny.


Nanny. Do you think I have nothing else to do but to wait on you? I shall not
fetch any.


Miss Fanny. Do not be cross to the child, Nanny; you should indulge him in
such trifles.


Nanny. I am sure, Miss, I have always indulged him in every thing; but now my
master is married again, I shall not like to stay in my place; and as Master
Charles likes his new mamma better than me, I will go away from him.


Master Charles. I will love my new mamma; but if you are cross I shall not love
you, Nanny; and you may go if you will.


Miss Fanny. Well, Bell, I suppose we shall be called to tea: how do you intend
to behave?


Miss Sutton. I hardly know. I would not go down into the parlor at all if I
could help it. -- Oh, dear! dear! what a sad thing it is to have a
mother-in-law.


Miss Fanny. It is indeed! Now we shall never have a will of our own; we must
always be starch and prim, and shall have no pleasure in the world.


Nanny. No, Miss, that you will not. I knew a mother-in-law who half starved her
children, and shut them quite up from company, and made them learn hard tasks,
and would never let them go out. But, if I were you, I would never submit; and
when Mrs. Sutton finds you don't mind her, she will let you do as you please;
besides, your papa ought to be punished for marrying again.


Miss Sutton. Well, Nanny, talk no more about it, for I shall go distracted, If
you do submit, Fanny, I positively will not.


Miss Fanny. Nor I! But I wonder where William and Caroline are?


Mary. O, Miss, I can tell you. My new mistress has to coax them, given Miss
Caroline a fine doll, and Master William a set of nine-pins; he is playing with
them in the garden, and she is in the little parlour diverting herself with her
new baby. I left them below, because I thought we could have no chat if they
were by, for they are old enough to tell tales. For my part, I never will live
nursery maid again where there are children who can talk. When the poor little
dears are in arms there is pleasure in nursing them; for if a friend, or one's
sweetheart comes, one can toss them into a cradle, or tie them in a chair, and
if they cry, a lump of sugar will pacify them. But I shall have it if I leave
Master William and Miss Caroline any longer. [ A bell rings.] Bless me! madam
rings her bell I protest.

[Nanny runs out.
Miss Sutton to Miss Fanny. It is to summon us to tea I dare say.


[ Enter Nanny.] Ladies, your company is desired. Madam looks as cross as
patch, and Master seems very grumpy. They have found out that Caroline and
William are left, so you will have it, Madam Mary.


Mary. Who cares? not I, believe me.


Miss Sutton. I have a great mind to stay a little, just to show that I will not
be commanded by her.


Miss Fanny. And, if it were not for papa, I positively would not (...) at all.
However, let us go.


Nanny. Poor dear young ladies! how I pity you.

[ Miss Sutton and Miss Fanny go out.
Nanny to Mary. Have not I funned them well? If I must leave my place, as I
know will be the case, I will do as much mischief as I can before I go.


Mary. I shall not stay long after you, for I shall give warning to her if she
does not to me. As for these young ladies, I care no more for them than I do
for their mother-in-law; but when one flatters them they speak their minds
before us, and then they dare not tell tales. But come, let us sit down to a
comfortable dish of tea, and then get the childrens suppers ready. -- Oh la! I
had forgot Caroline and William. Set the cups and tea*pot; make a nice toast,
be sure butter it well; I will bring some water from Cook's boiler, and then we
will enjoy ourselves. A bit of our toast will keep the children quiet.

[Nanny goes out.
(The Scene closes.)
SCENE. -- The Parlour, the Tea-table set.
Mr. and Mrs. SUTTON, to them enter Miss SUTTON and Miss FANNY. Mr. Sutton.
Well, my dear girls, take your seats. How have you employed yourselves this
afternoon? I must begin to enquire how you dispose of your time. But your mamma
will make us all regular.


Miss Sutton. I hope, papa, I am not to be always confined to books and work; I
am sure I shall have no spirit to do any thing if I am.


Mrs. Sutton. It is not my wish, Miss Sutton, to lay any unreasonable restraint
upon you; and I am sure a young lady of your good sense will distinguish what
is intended for your benefit. But we will not talk on this subject for the
present; tomorrow I shall inform you of the plan I have projected, and hope to
have your ready acquiesence, as I mean to mingle affection and kindness with
instruction.


Miss Fanny. I thought we were to have masters to teach us: we are not little
babies.


Mr. Sutton. You shall have masters, Fanny; but, as your mamma is a very
accomplished lady, and has undertaken to instruct you in many things; what she
is disposed to teach, I hope you will be disposed to learn. -- Answer me not,
for I dislike your countenance.


Miss Sutton. I am sure, papa, my sister does not wish to offend you; but you
cannot expect we can love Mrs. Sutton, who is no relation to us.


Mr. Sutton. Impertinent girl! be silent. I will not hear your best friend
insulted in this manner.


Mrs. Sutton. Restrain your anger, Mr. Sutton; consider the disadvantages these
ladies have long been under. I flatter myself I shall soon convince them, that
I have their happiness at heart, and then I am sure their love will follow.


Mr. Sutton. Much as it distresses me, to see your merit thus slighted, I will
suppress my anger. -- My dear girls! behold me softened by the kind
interposition of that very friend whom you so unworthily contemn: believe me,
the heart of your own dear mother was not adorned with more lovely qualities
than fall to the share of this amiable lady. Though I had the sincerest esteem
for Mrs. Greenhill, who supplies her place, I never should have thought of a
second marriage but for your sakes; and since she has condescended to leave a
delightful retreat, and sacrificed ease to friendship. I will not have her life
made unhappy by the perverseness of any of you.


Mrs. Sutton. I assure you, Mr. Sutton, my mind presages a happy event to these
little disturbances. We shall all be very comfortable in a short time, I dare
say.


Miss Sutton. I am sure, papa, I will do all in my power to please you; and it
afflicts me that I have incurred your displeasure. -- Oh! continue to love us,
or what shall we do?


Mr. Sutton. My affection for you all was never more ^ervent than when I
entered into the engagement at which you have taken such unreasonable offense.
If you deserve my tenderness you will always have it; but, remember, I cannot
love rebellio^s children. -- Sure. I see my dear boys! Excuse me, Mrs. Sutton,
I cannot restrain my impatience to receive them. I must myself introduce them
to your pre^^^.

[Mr Sutton goes out.
Mrs. Sutton. I see, my dears, displeasure against me still dwells upon your
countenances* you are not disposed to receive my professions, yet I cannot
forbear entreating you to calm your minds. Employ yourselves as is most
agreeable to you this evening, and endeavor to meet me at breakfast tomorrow
morning, with sentiments answerable to those which I feel for you.


Miss Sutton. Madam, we dare not go from you till papa returns -- besides, we
wish to see our brothers.


Mrs. Sutton. Then stay; I am by no means tired of your company.


Enter Mr. Sutton. Mr. Sutton (greatly disturbed.) Surely there is a general
combination amongst my children to distress their father. The boys absolutely
refuse to come in. (To the young ladies) Have you, Bell and Fanny, been
corresponding with your brothers; and instilling into their minds the
sentiments you have so unhappily imbibed.


Miss. Sutton. I had no occasion, papa, to say any thing to my brothers; they
have other friends to advice them besides us; and nobody can wonder that
children, who have been so long indulged, should be averse to such restraint as
will now fall to our share.


Mr. Sutton. Have you already forgot, Bell, that I enjoined you not to repeat
your impertinence?


Miss Fanny. Mrs. Sutton said, Sir, that we might withdraw. We long to see our
brothers, but would not go without your leave. I am sure I do not wish to be
disobedient to you.


Mr. Sutton. Obey my commands then, in paying proper respect to your mamma; but
I dismise you. -- Such a reception as this I expected not to find from my
children. These are the effects of relaxing parental authority!

[ Miss Sutton and Fanny go out.
Mrs. Sutton. Indeed, my dear Mr. Sutton, you take up this matter too
seriously. I know that the elder ladies have naturally good dispositions, but
their minds have long been uncultivated, and therefore ill habits have sprung
up, I hope they are not deeply rooted. But let us proceed with gentleness and
caution, "lest in plucking up the tares, we root up the wheat also." It is an
ill compliment to you, for me already to request your absence; but if you will
find engagements for tomorrow, I will try what I can do by myself. Let me
obtain your permission to discharge the nursery-maids, for I am certain we
shall not thoroughly succeed till they are gone; my own woman will do what is
necessary for the younger children, till I can hire other servants; and her
task will not be difficult, for I propose to keep them as much as possible
under my own eye.


Mr. Sutton. Excellent woman! now do your virtues rise upon me! Pursue your own
plans, I will cheerfully cooperate with you in them; but find it difficult to
restrain my anger at such perverseness.


Mrs. Sutton. Then let me beg you to leave Master Edward and George to follow
their own inclinations. -- I have an idea that the hopes of a piece of
apple-pie will attract them in the parlor, if love for me will not. Send the
footman, therefore, to tell them that they may sit up to supper if they please,
but leave it to their own choice. I will not frighten them with my looks, if I
can help it.


Mr. Sutton. I approve your scheme; and am convinced that gentle methods are
the most likely to be attended with success. -- O! how my heart longs for the
day, when I can see my beloved family surrounding me with contented minds and
cheerful countenances. I will tomorrow breakfast with Mr. Steady, and take my
two elder boys with me; for in their present disposition, my family will be
better dispersed than collected. -- You will, I fear, have enough to do with
the girls.


Mrs. Sutton. Perhaps I may succeed better than you expect; remember, that they
had good principles once instilled into their minds; those cannot, I think, be
totally extinguished: but let my task prove ever so difficult, respect to you,
and the memory of SOPHIA, will fortify my mind with patience to endure it. --
No child of here is shall have just reason to accuse me of unkindness. The young
ones are more than half subdued already; another day will, I think, win them to
me; and if I once engage their affections, I will not easily suffer them to be
estranged from me; and I have no doubt, but that Miss Sutton and Miss Fanny
will give such voluntary testimony in my favor, when their brothers come home
next time, that they will no longer fly my presence.


Mr. Sutton. My heart cannot so easily admit the pleasing hopes you kindly
endeavor to inspire me with, though I have the highest idea of both your
goodness and your understanding. -- But I will see what is become of my
ungracious sons.


Mrs. Sutton. In the mean time I will inspect the domestic economy of the
house. -- Happy shall I be to retain your own servants, if I find them
deserving of your favor.


Mr. Sutton. I fear there is not one among them who is worthy of being
retained; for there seems to have been a cabal among them to consult their
mutual interests, without the least regard to mine.

[They go out.
END OF ACT I.
ACT II.
SCENE. -- Mrs. Sutton's Dressing Room.
Mrs. SUTTON and SIMPSON.
Mrs. Sutton. BELIEVE me, Simpson, I have not done any thing more painful to
myself a great while, than warning Mr. Sutton's servants to leave their places;
many unkind censures will be passed on me by the world, as I shall put my own
in their stead. This is certainly a disagreeable circumstance, but there was an
absolute necessity for my doing as I have done.


Simpson. Whatever ill-natured persons may say of you, madam, assure yourself,
the benefits you will confer, will soon make you as much beloved in this
neighborhood as in that which you have left.


Mrs. Sutton. At least, Simpson, I shall enjoy the consciousness of having
acted right. I hope the nursery maids are preparing to depart. Their behavior
was so very insolent, that I could not suffer them to stay another day. -- You
will be kind enough to attend to the younger children, till I have supplied
their place: in the mean while I will dispense with your attendance on me.


Simpson. Any commands of yours, madam, I shall be happy to obey; none can be
more agreeable to me, than taking charge of Master William, Miss Caroline, and
Master Charles. I am sure they are good tempered children, though sadly
spoiled. Whether the elder ladies will accept of my services, I much doubt.


Mrs. Sutton. Well, Simpson, fetch the little ones to me; I am really impatient
to see them.

[Simpson goes out.
Mrs. Sutton. Come, let me prepare for my young pupils.

[Opens a table-drawer, and takes out a box of ivory letters, and some little
books.]
[ Enter, Simpson with the Children.] Simpson [ To the Children.] I told you,
mamma had got something very pretty for you. See now! I never tell fibs to
little ladies and gentlemen, I assure you.


Master Charles. Don't you? Why, Mary was always promising me something if I
would do as she desired me, and yet she never gave me any thing; that made me
think you would serve me the same.


Mrs. Sutton. Mary was a very naughty maid, my dear; for it is extremely wicked
to tell fibs.

[The Children run to the table.
Miss Caroline. Dear William! see what a number of pretty books.


Mrs. Sutton. Yes, these are to please and divert you; I bought them on
purpose, I assure you.


Master Charles. And what is that box for?


Mrs. Sutton. That is full of letters, which I shall teach you the names of?
and here are some pretty little pictures, when you can tell me the name of any
letter, you shall have a picture as a reward. And when you, my little friends,
[ To Caroline and William] can read one of these pretty books, then you shall
have that for your own.


Miss Caroline. O! I wish I could read well! pray, ma'am, teach me.


Mrs. Sutton. That I will, with the greatest pleasure.


Master William. And will you teach me?


Mrs. Sutton. Most willingly; when shall we set about it?


Miss Caroline and Master William. O! now, now


Mrs. Sutton. Well, I believe I must begin with the youngest first, that he may
not disturb you; look at the books, my dears, you can read a little to
yourselves, I dare say; and whilst I teach Charles his letters, you can fix
upon those you would wish to read first. -- Come, my little friend, do you know
that you are my child now?


Master Charles. Yes, mamma, and I will love you dearly. -- I am sure you will
not beat me! Will you?


Mrs. Sutton. I dare say you will not deserve it; and if you are not naughty, I
am sure I never shall punish you. Take the letters out of your box; come, lay
them nicely on the table yourself. [ Guides him to place them properly.] I will
tell you their names -- A, B, C, D,etc. -- Now tell me what they are called.


Master Charles. O! there are so many I can only remember Z.


Mrs. Sutton. That is beginning at the wrong end, to be sure; but you have
gained a reward. Which picture do you choose? [Charles points to one.] Very
well; now we will take only a few at a time. Let us see; one, two, three, four:
put the rest into the box. This is A, that B, that C, and that D. -- Repeat
after me, A, B, C, D. -- Which is A?


Master Charles. This is A; now my picture! my picture! I will have my picture.


Mrs. Sutton. Well! do not be impatient; next time say, Pray mamma. give me
(...).


Master Charles. I think this is B. -- No, it is not. -- This is it. Pray,
mamma, give me a picture?


Mrs. Sutton. There it is, dear child! now look for C. [ Charles points to it.]
Very well. Now there is none left but poor D; and you will soon find that out.
-- Yes, that is it, indeed. O! you will get all my pretty pictures away! show
them to your sister.


Master William. When shall we read? I will read first; it is my turn.


Miss Caroline. No, I am eldest, I will read first.


Mrs. Sutton. Do not contend, my dears, I will determine that matter presently.
Charles, take your pictures, my love, and I will put by your box of letters.


Master Charles. And shall I learn them again tomorrow? O, my good, good
mamma, I love you very dearly!


Mrs. Sutton. Give me a kiss then, make me one of your best bows, and go with
Simpson into the garden.

[ Master Charles and Simpson go out. (Whilst Mrs. Sutton is talking to
Charles, Caroline and William continues quarreling till both cry.)
Mrs. Sutton (Turning to them.) My dear children, what can be the matter with
you? both in tears! Are you ill? have you hurt yourselves?


Miss Caroline. William has snatched my book away, and says he will read first.


William. Caroline is very ill-natured to me; it is my turn.


Mrs. Sutton. Well! I protest, I am quite astonished! what, a brother and
sister quarrelling for such a trifling thing as this! Do not you know that it
depends upon me, whether either of you shall read at all? And if you do not end
your quarrel and become friends, I shall not teach you any thing. But pray hear
what I say; if not, I shall put up my books till you are better children. -- It
is really a fright^ul thing to see a young lady in a passion; and it is u^manly
for a gentleman to quarrel with a lady; now as you have both been in fault,
kiss and be friends.


Miss Caroline. Come, William, kiss me!


William. I will, because I must.


Mrs. Sutton. Did ever any body hear such a rude speech? believe I must let you
read first, and select a story for you too. -- Let me see, O, here is one to
the purpose, read it.


William reads. "There was a little boy who, though a gentleman's son, was as
rude as the naughtiest boy in the street; he never made a bow when he came into
a room; would not say Sir, or Madam, when a lady or gentleman spoke to him; and
was always quarreling with his sisters. His papa, finding all he could say did
not reclaim him, supposed he did not like being a young gentleman; and
therefore put him apprentice to a dustman, so he helped him about all his dirty
work, and never was called Master Thomas, but plain, Tom. At length he grow
ashamed of such employment, and promised to behave as he ought to do if his
papa would take him home again; which he very kindly did immediately, and
Master Thomas ever after was very good indeed."


Mrs. Sutton. How should you like to be served so, Master William? Not at all,
I am sure. -- Well, I see you are sorry for your fault, and as you really took
pains to read. I will give you the book as a foundation for your library, there
are stories in it that will afford you more entertainment than that which you
have read; but remember that you are to read the other books through before I
give them to you.


Master William. Come, Caroline, next time I will let you read first.


Miss, Caroline reads. "There was a young lady who had a number of brothers and
sisters, with whom she might have lived very happily; but she was of so
impatient a temper, that she was never pleased unless she had her own way. She
did not, as she ought to have done, consider that there was more real pleasure
to be found in obliging her brothers and sisters, than in consulting her own
will in every thing; but because she was the eldest, she insisted upon their
complying with all her humors; at length they were obliged to complain to their
papa and mamma, who made this little girl live in a distant part of the house,
where all her playthings were carried to her; but she was not permitted to see
her brothers and sisters. At first she was pleased with the thought, that she
should have nobody to contradict her; but in a very short time, she found
herself so dull without their company, that she was glad to promise to behave
well to them, in order to get leave to return to the nursery; and ever
afterward was as ready to oblige them as they were to please her."


Mrs. Sutton. Very well, my love, observe the instruction it contains. Another
day I will give you a longer lesson, and you shall fit to work with me and your
sisters; but today I have something particular to do, I therefore wish you and
William to go into the garden to your brother; you know how to divert
yourselves I dare say. -- O! where are you running in that hasty manner? You
have not given me one kiss; are you offended with (...)


Miss Caroline. No, indeed, mamma, I am sure I shall love you; but I must go to
my child!


Mrs. Sutton. Well, make me a genteel curtsey first; and I hope you have a bow
for me, Sir! your servant.

[ The Children go out.
Mrs. Sutton. So far I have succeeded beyond my expectations. Little Charles
already thinks me his best friend. Caroline has, I perceive, a mind as gentle
and pliant as her dear mother's was, and capable of a very good impression.
William, (...) to promise very fair, and I hope to see a daily improvement. --
But now comes the most disagreeable part of my business; I will not send a
footman to there perverse girls, left they should refuse to come; but walk a
(...) with the other children, whilst I send my maid to (...) their company.
She is so discreet that I a^ sure she will not Irritate them.

[ Mrs. Sutton goes out.
SCENE changes to the young Ladies Apartment.
Miss SUTTON and Miss FANNY.
Miss Sutton. I suppose my new mamma will be highly provoked when she hears
that we breakfasted in our own apartment; but, as papa was gone out, I was
determined I would not go down.


Miss Fanny. I am really frightened to think what a fuss there will be about
it; and if it were not for your spirit, Bell, I should soon give up to this new
mamma; indeed she was very patient last night, considering how we provoked her.


Miss Sutton. Patient, do you call it? All more artifice, depend upon it, only
to make papa think what a good gentle wife he has got, and what undutiful
daughters; now he is out of the way she will treat us very differently you will
see. -- Do as you please -- desert your poor sister, if you would rather be
your mother-in-law's favorite, and leave me to hear the whole of her
displeasure. But conquer me, she never shall.


Miss Fanny. Do not disturb, yourself, my dear, I do not mean to desert you;
where you lead I will certainly follow; but let us not go too far, lest we make
our sad case worse instead of better. -- I wish there were a law to binder men
from marrying second wives.


Miss Sutton. O, that there were! -- Here I, who in a few years might have ^at
at the head of papa's table, and commanded all the servants, must now put on
leadingstrings again, and submit to all the humors of a mother-in-law!


Miss Fanny. Dear Bell. you disturb yourself so, that you will be quite ill; I
beg you will be composed.


Miss Sutton. Talk not of composure; tell me how I may pl^gue this hateful
mother-in-law! -- O, here is the fine do^l she bought to ^cax Caroline with;
thus I dash it to the ground, and fling it out of the window, as I would do the
giver of it, if I dared!


Miss Fanny. Bless me, Bell! you perfectly terrify me. -- I never beheld you in
such a passion before in my life; you certainly will repent it. It will be
enough to be plagued with Mrs. Sutton; do not torment yourself.

[ Miss Sutton bursts into a flood of tears.]
[ Enter Simpson.] Simpson. Young ladies, I wait upon you, by my lady's
command, to request the pleasure of your company; for my master is gone out,
and Master Edward and Master Geroge with him; the little gentry are at play in
the garden, and she is quite alone. -- Is not Miss Sutton well?


Miss Fanny. To be sincer^ Mrs. Simpson, my sister and I are very unhappy at my
papa's marrige.


Simpson. I am amazed to hear you say so, Miss; my lady is the best of women;
were you to know how she is respected at Clapham, you would have a better
opinion of her. Why there was a general lamentation at her coming away; it was
the most affecting sight to see the poor people --


Miss Sutton. Well, pray have done with your encomiums, Mrs. Simpson; if the
had been a good woman she would not have made a whole family unhappy by
marrying into it; and as soon as she was married have turned the whole house
topsy turvy -- discharged the servants -- controuled daughters, who have not
been used to control --


Miss Fanny (interrupts her). Sister, dear sister, be calm! go down with me I
in-^reat you, I am sure it will not be so bad as you expect.


Simpson. I mean not to be impertinent, ladies; but upon my word, you do not at
all know my lady. Pray go down.


Miss Fanny. We will follow you immediately, Mrs. Simpson.

[Simpson goes out.
Miss Sutton. You may go, Fanny, but I positively will not.


Miss Fanny. Why will you distress me so, Bell?


Miss Sutton (after a pause.) Well, perhaps I can plague and mortify her, Come
along.

[ Goes out, followed by Miss Fanny.
SCENE changes to Mrs. Sutton's Dressing Room.
Mrs. SUTTON at work.
[ Enter Miss SUTTON and Miss FANNY.] Mrs. Sutton. Good morning to you, ladies;
pray sit down. I was in hopes of having your company at breakfast, but hearing
you chose to stay in your own apartment, I supposed you had some study to
pursue, and would not interrupt you.


Miss Fanny. We had nothing particular to do, but imagined you would be glad to
be without us.


Mrs. Sutton. And why should you think so, Miss Fanny? Have ever given you any
reason yet, to suppose that I disliked your company? my wish is to live with
you all in the strictest harmony.


Miss Sutton. Did any body ever hear of harmony in a family where there is a
mother-in-law?


Mrs. Sutton. Yes, my dear Miss Sutton, and I have been eye witness of it too.
Nay, I was convinced in my own mind that I should experience it, or I never
should have become one.


Miss Sutton. You deceived yourself then, Madam; and I wish you had let me know
your intentions of marrying my papa, and I would have told you that you must
not expect obedience from me.


Miss Fanny. Nor me either, we are too old now to bear unkind treatment with
patience.


Mrs. Sutton. As you know that all your papa's friends advised him to marry, he
supposed he should rather please than distress you, by making choice of me. I
have no children of my own; it is not my intention to put your patience to a
severe trial; I will exercise my own to the utmost, before I proceed to any act
bordering on unkindness. But let us put an end to this disagreeable
altercation. Permit me to inform you, ladies, that I have promised Mr. Sutton
to assist in your education, let me therefore enquire what proficiency you have
made in the different branches of it? French, I suppose --


Miss Sutton (abrubtly) You can hardly suppose, Madam, my papa would neglect
our education? We have plenty of masters, and do not want a governess, I hope.


Mrs. Sutton. Your answer is not so polite, Miss Sutton, as I should have
expected from a young lady, who seems to fancy she stand, in no need of
tuition. I meant not to act the part of a governess, but of a friend.


Miss Sutton. If you were our friend, why did you marry my papa?


Mrs. Sutton. I hope you will have no reason to regret that I did so; but
instead of pursuing this argument, favor me with a lesson on the harpsicord,
Miss Fanny.


Miss Fanny. I cannot play when I see my sister unhappy.


Mrs. Sutton. I do not condemn your affection for each other, ladies; but to
encourage your sister in affronting an innocent person, Miss Fanny, is
certainly very wrong.


Miss Sutton. Did I not tell you, Fanny, how we should be treated? Our
mother-in-law has discharged all the servants, and is now going to set us
against each other.


Mrs. Sutton. This accusation is too cruel to be passed over in silence. Though
I have an undoubted right, as mistress of this family, to act as I please in
respect to the domestics of it; I had better reasons than caprice, or a
blamable partiality for my own servants, for discharging them; and when you are
cool, Miss Sutton, I will explain them to you. -- In the mean time, if any of
the present set wastes your papa's property, or treats any of you with
impertinence, they shall leave the house; and that you may see I wish to please
you, I will not hire one in Mary's place, who is not quite agreeable to you and
your sister.


Miss Fanny. If you keep your word, it will be very well.


Mrs. Sutton. If I keep my word, Miss Fanny! is that an expression to be used
to a gentlewoman, and your father's wife? It was not thus your dear mamma
treated me. O, my Sophia! little did you think how much mortification your poor
friend would find in fulfilling your dying request! Is it possible your
daughters can have already forgotten the amiable candor, the gentleness which
shone in every action of your life, which displayed themselves in every word
you uttered?

[ Miss Fanny bursts into tears, and a footman enters, and gives Mrs. Sutton a
letter.] [ Mrs. Sutton [ Reads her letter, then speaks to the footman.]
Desire the bearer to wait for an answer.

[The footman goes out. Mrs. Sutton. This letter affords me some consolation;
permit me to read it, ladies.

[ Miss Fanny continues crying.]
Miss Sutton. We can have no concern in any thing which relates to you, and I
am too unhappy to attend to indifferent things.


Mrs. Sutton. Whether you will attend or not, I must indulge myself in the
pleasure of reading it. Perhaps your curiosity may be excited, when I tell you
it comes from your elder brothers*


Miss Fanny [ Suppressing her tears.] From my brothers? what can they possibly
have to say? -- Madam, I will attend.

[ Miss Sutton remains sullen and silent.]
Mrs. Sutton. This instance of obliging compliance delights me: hear then the
welcome lines, which I regard as harbingers of returning peace.

Dear and honored Mamma,
We write to entreat your for giveness; Mr. Steady and papa have convinced us
we were very wrong in behaving to you as we did: we therefore beg you will be
so good as to see us before we return to school; and you may depend on our
being for the future

Your dutiful, and obedient sons-in-law, Edward and George Sutton.



Mrs. Sutton. I will not yet ask your sentiments concerning this letter,
ladies; for the bearer of it waits to carry back an answer.

[She sits down and writers; when the letter is finished, she rises.] Before I
seal this I will read it to you: from its contents, judge of my sentiments
toward all of you.

[She Reads.] My dear sons,
I received with inexpressible pleasure your kind letter, and shall be glad to
see you immediately with your papa: assure yourselves of my sincere affection;
and believe I most servently wish for your happiness, which I shall constantly
endeavor to promote, and will prove, on all occasions,

Your affectionate mother, M. Sutton.



Mrs. Sutton. Heaven knows with what sincerity I wrote it!

[ Seals the letter, rings the bell. A footman enters, to whom she delivers the
letter. As soon as he is gone, Miss Fanny rises, and with great emotion runs to
her mamma, throws herself on her kne^s, hiding her face in Mrs. Sutton's lap,
and bursts into tears. Mrs. Sutton tenderly embraces her.] Rise, my dear love!
your tears tell me every thing I wish to know; spare yourself the pain of
confessing a fault which, I am sure you are so conscious of, that you never
will repeat it; let me fold you to a bosom, glowing with affection truly
maternal. Henceforth repose confidence in me, and let us have but one interest.

[ Miss Fanny returns her mamma's embrace.] Indeed, my dear mamma, I will
endeavor from this time to deserve your kindness.


Miss Sutton. I am so amazed at what I have lately heard and seen, that I can
scarcely fetch my breath! My brothers have been over-persuaded by papa and Mr.
Steady; but for you, Fanny! I really thought you loved me better than to do as
you have done.

[ Just as she had finished this speech, little Caroline hastly enters with her
wax doll broken all to-pieces, and its cloths dirtied and spoiled.]
Miss Caroline [ Crying.] O! my doll! my sweet, sweet doll! see, my dear mamma,
some na^ghty person has broken her all to-pieces. Her cap is quite spoiled; her
gauze frock torn; her silk coat dirtied; what shall I do? what shall I do?


Mrs. Sutton. Where did you leave your doll, my love? and where did you find it
in this condition?


Miss Caroline. Indeed. mamma, I took great care of her, and had put her to-bed
very nicely in a chair, in Bell's room: for I thought she would not let it be
hurt. -- Bell, why did you let any body have my poor doll to spoil it?

[ Miss Sutton looks quite confounded.]
Mrs. Sutton. Comfort yourself, my dear Caroline, for your loss; I will repair
it. Since you took care of your doll, I will, as soon as possible, procure you
another equally pretty; and your sisters, I hope, will teach you to make cloths
for it.


Caroline. I am afraid there is not such another sweet pretty doll to be had!
Look now at her face; the nose broken all to-pieces, one eye out, her pretty
red lips spoiled. O! dear, dear! I wish I knew who broke her, Do you know,
Fanny? Do you know, Bell?

[They continue silent.]
Mrs. Sutton. From your silence, ladies, I perceive you are able to account for
this disaster. It is, to be sure, of trifling consequence in itself, but must
have been done with a malignant design; and as the dear child is greatly
distressed, I will find out the truth. I hope there is not a servant in the
house, bad as some of them are, capable of so mean an action. Neither would the
little children be so very mischievous as to destroy to pretty a toy for the
purpose. -- Who could it be?


Miss Fanny. The person who did it, madam, will, I am persuaded, do so no more.
-- I must not tell you. [ Aside to Bell.] Consess it, sister; papa will return
very soon: what will he say?


Miss Sutton. I am sure, Fanny, I had no thoughts of distressing Caroline; you
know I was in a very great passion when I broken it; but I will buy her another
myself, and dress it too, if she will leave off crying.


Miss Caroline. Naughty Bell, to break my pretty doll! I would not hurt any
thing of yours!


Mrs. Sutton. And is it possible that what I hear is true? or do my ears
deceive me? Could a daughter of my amiable friend be guilty of such an action
as this? What! so far forget yourself, Miss Sutton, as to fall into a passion,
and vent it by d^stroying your sister's doll! What could irritate you to such
an extreme?


Miss Fanny [ Aside to her sister.] Indeed, Bell, you ought to acknowledge your
fault; I am sure you will meet with forgiveness, if, like me, you seek it. O!
that you did but know how much satisfaction I feel from being reconciled to
this good lady.


Mrs. Sutton. As I have little reason, Miss Sutton, to hope you will listen to
my admonition, I must refer this matter to your papa. It is a very serious
affair; I dread to give him pain, and hoped he would find us all in harmony at
his return: but I must for the present content myself, and trust, that when you
have been for a little time witness, to my behavior, you will do me more
justice.


Miss Fanny. My dear Bell, think of your papa! he has ever been a kind parent
to us: but remember his words: "I cannot love rebellious children!"


Miss Sutton. Well, Fanny, lead me to mamma, [ They advance to Mrs. Sutton, who
kindly takes a hand of each.]


Mrs. Sutton. Thanks for your kind offices, my amiable Fanny! May I flatter
myself, dear Miss Sutton, that your heart relents toward me? The tear which
arises in your eye tells me that you do. Thus I wipe it away; and thus before
you ask, I seal your forgiveness. -- Let all the past be forgotten, and let us
look forward to scenes of peace and tranquillity.


Miss Sutton. I am sincerely sorry for my past behavior; if I could have
supposed you would have treated me with so much kindness, I should not have
thrown myself into the passion which I am now ashamed to think of. Tell me,
madam, how I shall repair my fault?


Mrs. Sutton. That I leave to your own good sense. But I expect your papa and
brothers to dinner: perhaps, my dears, you will be able to compose your spirits
better when by yourselves. Retire, therefore, if you please, to your own
apartment.

[The scene closes.]
END OF ACT II.
ACT III.
SCENE, Miss Sutton's Apartment.
Miss SUTTON and Miss FANNY.
[Miss Sutton sits down, and bursts into a flood of tears.] Miss Fanny. I FEAR,
my dear sister, you are offended at the part I have acted; but indeed, I could
not help it. I hope you will have no just cause to blame me.


Miss Sutton. No, my dear sister, I am not offended with you. O! that I had no
more reason to be angry with myself! Never more will I give way to passion. I
shall be ashamed to look the little children, and even the servants in the
face. What must every body who hears poor little Caroline's lamentation for her
doll, think of her ill natured sister? Do pray fetch her to me; I will make her
amends if possible.


Miss Fanny. Well, compose yourself, and I will.

[ Miss Fanny goes out.
Miss Sutton. I am sure I would submit to the cruelest treatment the worst
mother-in-law could inflict, rather than endure what I have suffered this day
in my own mind: but, though still very uneasy, I am not quite so unhappy as I
was. Here comes the dear creature whom I have, through my own turbulence,
cruelly distressed.

[ Enter Miss Fanny and Miss Caroline.]
Miss Sutton. Come hither, Caroline; I suppose you are very angry with me, my
love! Indeed, I have been a naughty sister; but I shall never break any more of
your dolls, so you must kiss me, and be friends.


Miss Caroline. I will kiss you! but I hope the next time you are in a passion,
Bell, the new doll mamma is to give me, will not be in your way; I shall hide
her in a very cunning place, and will not tell any body where, for fear they
should tell you.


Miss Sutton. O! you need not fear me, Caroline; you may safely trust me with
your secret, for I hope I shall never be in a passion again; and I will tell
you what I intend to do, to make you amends: I have got by me a very nice
little bed, with curtains, and a quilt of my own work which I will give to you.


Miss Caroline. That will be nice indeed! Then I will put my new doll, when I
have got it, into this pretty bed, and will not hide it in the cunning place.


Miss Fanny. And I, Caroline, will make you a present of some silk, and gauze,
and muslin for your doll's clothes; and Bell and I will help you to make them.


Miss Caroline. But I must go and bury my old doll; William has dug a grave for
her.

[Caroline goes out
Miss Sutton. I hope papa will not be told of my ill behavior: If he is, I
must submit to the shame; but I would give the world I had not acted so.


Miss Fanny. I am persuaded, sister, that if he should chance to hear it, Mrs.
Sutton -- I mean my mamma (for so she deserves to be called) will give a
good-natured turn to it; let us therefore prepare to meet him with cheerfulness.


Miss Sutton. Cheerfulness, my dear Fanny! I cannot so easily resume, for I am
thoroughly mortified. -- However, I am resolved to behave well to my mamma, and
the sooner we go down the better.


Miss Fanny. I am entirely of your opinion; going of our own accord, will be
more respectful than staying till we are sent for. -- If we find Mrs. Sutton is
busy, we can but return.


SCENE changes to Mrs. Sutton's Dressing Room.
Mrs. SUTTON. -- CAROLINE.
[ Miss Caroline [ Enters hastily.] Indeed, my dear mamma, you must not be
angry with Bell for breaking my doll; she has given me a sweet little bed, and
promises she will never be in a passion again.


Mrs. Sutton. I have quite forgiven her, my love; but you are a good child to
intercede for her. Will you go and tell her, and Miss Fanny, I shall be glad to
see them. -- O! here they come.


[ Enter Miss Sutton and Miss Fanny.] Miss Caroline. Bell, it is all made up.
-- Now I will go and play again.

[Caroline goes out.
Mrs. Sutton. This is very kind of you indeed ladies; I was just going to
dispatch a little messenger, to beg you would come down before your papa
returned; but this voluntary visit is flattering to my hopes.


Miss Fanny. I do assure you, Madam, it was Bell's own motion to come down, and
I was very glad to comply with it.


Mrs. Sutton. You delight me, ladies; thus may we ever live together! -- I
remember, Miss Sutton, that you had a taste for fancy work; I shall be glad of
your opinion of a piece I have lately finished.

[She produces a piece of embroidery.]
Miss Sutton. O, how beautiful! I never beheld any thing so like natural
flowers in my life, and the vase is charming. I shall never bear my own work
after this.


Mrs. Sutton. I shall be very happy to give you any instruction in my power, my
dear. I am provided with all materials, and you shall, if you please, begin a
companion for it; in the mean time do me the favor to accept of this as a
token of friendship.


Miss Sutton. I return you many thanks, madam, and accept with pleasure both
your present and kind offer to instruct me.


Mrs. Sutton. I think, Miss Fanny, you have a taste for reading? I have brought
down a few new publications, which I hope you will admit into your library.


Miss Fanny. You are extremely obliging, Madam. I have not lately been very
attentive to my books, for indeed papa has not purchased any new ones this year
past, and I have read the old ones till I am tired.


Mrs. Sutton. I shall take care that you are supplied for the future* Do you
read French ladies?


Miss Sutton. We have a French master, Madam, who regularly attends to teach us
the grammar rules; and we can write and translate tolerably well -- but for
talking, we cannot boast.


Miss Fanny. No indeed, Bell, we ought not, as you say, to boast; for both of
us made a resolution that we never would speak a word of it when our master was
absent.


Mrs. Sutton. You could not speak it with much advantage to each other, perhaps
I may be able to make it more pleasing to you; I resided near two years in
Paris. It is particularly agreeable to understand French, because there are so
many pleasing books in that language continually coming out.


Miss Sutton. I shall like to talk it when I have a person to correct my
faults; but to chatter it, as I hear many young ladies do, is quite ridiculous.


Mrs. Sutton. Have you a music master still, ladies? I remember when very
little you could sing prettily; if you have made such proficiency as I expect,
we shall be able to form a little concert now and then. I suppose you have
friends in the neighborhood who play? Mr. Adderly was a very fine performer:
is he among you still?


Miss Fanny. Yes, Madam; but we must apply more closely than we have done
lately, or I am sure we shall make sad discord; our master's music is so very
old fashioned, that we play the same d^ll tune over till we are tired.


Mrs. Sutton. I shall be able to furnish you with a variety of lessons. I hope
his evening to hear you practice.


Miss Sutton. I will, for my part, do the best I can; but I fear that will
appear horrid.


Mrs. Sutton. O, no; it will give me pleasure, I dare say. How often does your
dancing master attend?


Miss Fanny. We have no dancing master at present, Madam, for papa would not
suffer us to dance whilst we were in mourning for poor mamma! but he talked
lately of sending for him again.


Mrs. Sutton. I will remind him of it. Dancing is very good for the health, and
I think it will be very agreeable to have a little ball sometimes, if we can
make up a set; for I prefer private parties to public assemblies.


Miss Sutton. I have never yet been at a public assembly. My dear mamma thought
us too young to be introduced, and since her death papa has not been himself.


Miss Fanny. I am excessively fond of dancing. There are young ladies and
gentlemen sufficient to make up eight or nine couple.


Mrs. Sutton. Well, my dears, as soon as my ceremonial visits are over, and I
have been introduced to your neighbors, I will consult you about proposing a
party. I hope you will be with me, ladies, when I receive company, and also
when I return my visits.


Miss Sutton. Certainly, Madam, if you will allow us the honor.


Mrs. Sutton. I shall be very happy to make you a party in every pleasure I
take.


Miss Fanny. This is a very agreeable neighborhood, and, as you seem inclined
to be sociable, Madam, I dare say we shall pass our time very cheerfully.


Mrs. Sutton. I make no doubt but you will; at least I can answer for my own
intentions, to promote innocent cheerfulness as much as possible. But, as I am
very fond of regularity, ladies, I must beg leave to propose a little plan for
the usual division of our time: early rising is of the utmost consequence, for
nothing can be done effectually without that; I have always been accustomed to
family prayers, after which, I hope, you will find an hour before breakfast for
walking, if the weather permit; it is my wish that all assemble at eight
o'clock, and after breakfast is over I shall attend to domestic arrangements;
in the mean time I hope you will apply to your various studies, and by ten
o'clock I shall be at your service.


Miss Fanny. We will conform to whatever you think proper, Madam: I answer for
my sister as well as myself.


Miss. Sutton. I must declare my own assent also: for I would not give my dear
mamma cause to think I would be again refractory.


Mrs. Sutton. I shall endeavor to make your compliance productive of as much
pleasure to you, my dears, as it will to me. You find that I do not mean to
confine your entirely to your studies and work; besides those amusements I
mentioned, I shall be ready to allow of your visiting and being visited by the
young ladies of your acquaintance without me, provided they are such as your
papa approves of. -- You do not play at cards?


Miss Fanny. My own dear mamma had such an aversion to cards, that she never
would allow us to touch them; and since her death papa absolutely forbade them.


Miss Sutton. I must own that we were not perfectly obedient to him in this
particular, for the nursery maids brought cards to us, and, I blush to say, we
joined in a party with them.


Mrs. Sutton. Since you are so sensible of its impropriety; I will not speak my
own thoughts on the subject. But, let me entreat you, ladies, to avoid
familiarity with low* bred people, particularly the domestics of your own
family. It will be more prejudicial to you than you can imagine.


Miss Fanny. We have too much occasion to lament the unhappy effects of
familiarity with servants, ever to submit to it again; depend upon us, madam,
we will keep them at a proper distance.


Mrs. Sutton. Let me advise you, however, my dear, not to run into the contrary
extreme of haughtiness. Ever treat servants with civility and kindness; this
they have an undoubted right to.


Miss Sutton. Since you were so good as to say, madam, that you would not hire
a servant in Mary's place without consulting us; will you permit me to
recommend a young person, whom I dare say you will approve? She is the daughter
of a very worthy man, who has lately fallen into unexpected misfortunes, and
this poor girl, who has been well educated, is obliged to go to service.


Mrs. Sutton. I will hire her without the least hesitation; your account of her
is a sufficient recommendation. -- There is another particular, ladies, in
which I must request your assistance; and that is in respect to objects of
charity, such persons whom you think your own dear mamma would have relieved, I
am sure will excite your compassion; and I shall heartily concur with you in
giving them assistance.


Miss Fanny. We are not so well acquainted, madam, with the distresses of the
poor, as we used to be in mamma (...) time; but, for the future, we certainly
will enquire concerning them. Papa was so afflicted, that he scarcely admitted
any company, and the servants would not inform him of any cases of distress;
pretending, that they would make him more melancholy.


Mrs. Sutton. Hard-hearted creatures! but their motive was self-interest. The
case will soon be altered; my own servants, who are coming, are a set of humane
people, and I hope we shall find out the poor, and relieve them as much as is
in our power.


Miss Sutton (In great agitation.) Bless me, Fanny! I see my papa, with my
brothers, at the gate! -- O hide me! hide me! dear mamma. What shall I say if
he should chance to hear of my cruelty to poor Caroline, and insolence to you?


Mrs. Sutton. Do not be agitated, my love; the affair ended so much to your
honor, that, I am sure, when your papa hears the whole of it, he will praise,
rather than condemn your conduct. It has been productive of such happy effects
to me, in being the mean of overcoming your prejudices, that I shall with
delight make a fair representation of it, if occasion requires. But Caroline is
fatisfied, and I dare say will not mention it.


[ Enter Mr. Sutton with his elder sons.] Mr. Sutton. I now bring you two good
sons, madam; they are sensible of their error, and having received your kind
pardon in answer to their letter, now claim your affection.


Mrs. Sutton. My dear boys! you shall certainly experience it. Happy shall I be
to treat you with such indulgent kindness as to deserve your love.

[The boys look ashamed, and make no answer.] Talk on no painful subject. --
Nothing but the company of you and your sons, Mr. Sutton, was wanting to
complete my happiness. -- Give me a kiss of reconciliation, young gentlemen,
and then pay your compliments to your sisters. [ She kisses the boys.


Mr. Sutton. I observe, with inexpressible pleasure, an alteration in the
countenances of my dear girls.


Mrs. Sutton. Revive not disagreeable remembrances, Mr. Sutton; the young
ladies and I perfectly well understand each other. Henceforth we shall be all
harmony and love, I hope.


Mr. Sutton. Come to my arms, my dear girls! let me press you to my fond heart,
and give you the blessing of a happy father! O! did children know the pleasures
it is in their power to to give to a parent by dutiful behavior, and the cruel
pangs which disobedience inflicts, they would be constantly attentive to their
conduct. [ Whilst he speaks, Bell and Fanny kneel to him, be embraces them.
Bell bursts into tears.]


Mr. Sutton. How is this, Bell! what construction must I put upon your tears?


Mrs. Sutton. Receive the explanation from me, Mr. Sutton; They are, believe
me, the marks of regret for faults, which no longer have existence in her mind;
they are proofs of gentleness, and promises of peace.


Miss Sutton. How kind are you to me, may dear mamma! -- I shall not be easy
till papa knows what I am ashamed to tell him myself.


Mrs Sutton. Well, my dear, I will take the first opportunity. Let us drop the
subject now.


Miss. Fanny. My dear papa, let me thank you, with the utmost gratitude, for
marrying this good lady; for I am sure we shall bless the day you made her our
mother.


Mr. Sutton. This speech, Fanny, is worthy of yourself.


Miss Sutton. I am still more indebted to you for the choice you have made,
than even my sister is; for I stood more in need of a kind friend, a generous
adviser.


Mr. Sutton. Such, I am confident, you will ever find in this am^able lady. --
But where are my little ones?


Mrs. Sutton. Pursuing their innocent sports. Perhaps the young gentlemen will
be so kind as to desire them to come hither.

[Edward and George go out.
Mrs. Sutton. I must take advantage of the young gentlemen's absence, to
entreat that you will permit them to pass a day or two with us, before they
return to school; I would not make my request before them, lest it should not
be agreeable to you, and a denial might make them unhappy.


Mr. Sutton. You are kind in every instance. -- This is a request which I
cannot refuse. Indeed, if it were not for the fear of giving additional trouble
to you, I should not send them to school any more. Mr. Steady has been
examining them this morning in Latin, and finds them very deficient; they are
besides so invincibly bashful in company, and so intolerably rude in their
sports, that I fear they will lose every idea of politeness. It would be a
great pleasure to me to assist in their education, and how can I employ myself
better than in instructing my children?


Mrs. Sutton. So far from opposing your plan, Mr. Sutton, I most heartily
recommend it; especially, as our vicinity to London enables you to procure the
best masters to assist you.


Enter Master Edward and Master George with the children. [ The little ones run
to Mrs. Sutton.] Master William. Mamma, I have played at nine-pins till I am
quite tired! what shall I have now?


Mrs. Sutton. O, I will find something for you, Sir; but go to papa.


Master William. Papa! dear papa! where have you been? My new mamma teaches me
to read.


Mr. Sutton. Does she indeed? Do not you think her very good for doing so?


Master William. O, yes and I am very good too now.


Mr. Sutton. Then give me a kiss.


Master Charles. Mamma, I have broke a wheel off my chaise, will you mend it?


Mrs. Sutton. I cannot say, my love, that I understand such work as that; but
give your chais^ to me, and before you want it again it shall be mended some
way or other. -- Have you forgot dear papa?


Master Charles. No! no! I love papa too; but give me a kiss, mamma. Where did
you put my box of letters? I must show papa that.


Mrs. Sutton. Here it is, my love; but bring it to me again, for fear it should
be lost. [ Giving him the letters.]


Master Charles. Pray look, papa; I know some of them, let me show them to you.


Mr. Sutton. I have no time to look at them now, Charles; tomorrow I will.
Caroline, have you nothing to show me?


Miss Caroline (hesitates.) Yes, I have this little book -- I had a sweet doll
-- but that is gone. -- Bell, I will not tell papa.


Mrs. Sutton. No, my dear; never tell tales, I have promised you a new doll,
and you shall have it very soon, I as^ure you.


Mr. Sutton. My dear Mrs. Sutton, your time has been fully employed in my short
absence.


Mrs. Sutton. I am glad you do not think me idle. But the young gentlemen have
not spoke one word to me yet. Will you give me leave to tell them that you have
consented to let them stay at home a day or two? I wished to give them an
opportunity of trying whether the kite I have bought for them will fly well,
and whether their bats are good.


Master Edward. Thank you, Madam; I will be good indeed.


Master George to Miss Sutton. Bell, tell mamma I will be good too.


Miss Sutton. Indeed, Sir, you must speak for yourself. -- Madam, this shy boy
is ashamed to tell you he will be good too!


Mrs. Sutton. Well, I am contented, my dear, with your telling me so; but you
positively must tell me yourself, Sir, whether you can love me?


Master George. Yes, Madam.


Mrs. Sutton. Then I suppose you have no objection to leaving school entirely,
and living at home with your papa, your brothers and sisters, and me?

Ask your brother what he says to this.


Master Edward. Shall you like to live at home, George?


Master George. O! yes, yes!

[The young gentlemen here express their joy, by jumping about the room. They
run to their sisters.]
Master Edward. We shall not go to school any more, sisters.


Mr. Sutton. No, you will not go to school any more, my dear boys; but you must
fag a little for all that: Latin must not be neglected* you must do your
business with great industry, and then you shall have play enough.


Master George. Where are the kites, and the ^ats, and balls?


Mrs. Sutton. O! you shall see them by-and-by. I should suppose you would like
to eat a little first; are you not half starved with waiting so long for your
dinner?


Mr. Sutton. No, no! their friend, Mrs. Steady, has taken care of us all; a
good dish of chocolate for me, and a piece of plum-cake for them, has staid our
stomachs effectually. -- But if not, the feast of love you have provided for me
at home, would have prevented my feeling the sensation of hunger.


Mrs. Sutton. I hope to see you eat, notwithstanding.


Mr. Sutton. Depend upon it you will; I shall sit down to this meal with that
heart felt delight which gives a relish to all earthly enjoyments. -- O! that
the history of this day were recorded for the benefit of the world! then would
mothers -- in-law know, that the way to gain the affections of the children
they adopt, is, by exercising patience and gentleness. Then would children, who
have lost their real mother, learn, that the behavior likely to win the
affections of those who supply their loss, is, dutiful submission and polite
acquiescence. But the dinner-bell rings. -- Come, my dear Mrs. Sutton, I will
attend you to the dining parlour: there let me place you at the head of my
table, surrounded by my olive branches: consider them as engrafted on you by
the hand of your dear departed friend. -- Nourish their budding virtues with
your kind instructions. Be a parent to them, and may they be children to you!


THE END.
THE GOOD DAUGHTER-IN-LAW. A DAMA, IN THREE ACTS.
PERSONS of the DRAMA.
Mr. LOVELESS. Mrs. LOVELESS. Mrs. GROVES, Governess of a School. Miss TATE,
Teacher. Miss LOVELESS, aged 14. Miss BLOMBERG, 15. Miss AMELIA BLOMBERG, 13.
Miss RAWLING, a Boarder at Mrs. GROVES'S, 15. Miss GOWER, another Boarder, 14.
Mrs. CARTWRIGHT, Housekeeper to Mr. Loveless. Servants and other Attendants.
THE GOOD DAUGHTER-IN-LAW. A DRAMA, IN THREE ACTS.
ACT I.
SCENE, a parlour in Mrs. Groves's House.
[Mrs. Groves sitting at work, enter to her Miss Tate.] Mrs. GROVES. I SENT for
you Miss Tate, to communicate a circumstance which gives me great uneasiness. I
have this instant received a letter from Mr. Loveless, to inform me, that he
has been married a month, and has just brought his lady home; and that he will
send his housekeeper today to fetch his daughter, in order to be introduced to
her new mamma.


Miss TATE. I am both surprised and concerned at your intelligence, madam.


Mrs. GROVES. He has, I fear, been tempted into this second marriage by the
wealth of the lady, as she was the rich widow of a nabob. -- But my sweet pupil
-- Miss Tate, what will become of her! if this lady, blinded by riches and the
splendour around her, should find no, attraction in innocent simplicity, and
modest worth


Miss TATE. Let us hope the best; I am myself an instance, that it is possible
to be happy in a Mother-in Law: but pray, madam, do you know the name of the
lady?


Mrs. GROVES. She was called the pretty widow Blomberg; but I know nothing more
of her.


Miss TATE. Alas! madam, I am sorry to say I do, but nothing that can afford
pleasure in the information, or a prospect of comfort for our sweet little girl.


Mrs. GROVES. You shock me greatly by thus prefacing your account? but pray
Miss Tate how did you become acquainted with her?


Miss. TATE. She was a half boarder at the same school I was educated at. O!
madam, but for my worthy Mother in Law I had been poor, dependent, and wreched;
but she, when my father died and left me destitute, kindly appropriated a share
of a small jointure settled on her by her first husband, to give me an
education that might enable me to get a genteel livelihood; or I might now have
been a common servant. Through her goodness I became a school-fellow with Miss
H arris, who though her condition was rather an humiliating one, had a spirit
so haughty, that she domineered over the whole school, nor would Mrs. Bladon
have suffered her to remain there, but out of compassion to her Father, who was
a subaltern officer, and had very little more than his pay, therefore almost
starved himself to place her in the situation he did.


Mrs. GROVES. How then did she become so rich a widow?


Miss. TATE. Her father died when she was about sixteen; she lost her mother
some years before, nor had she a relation capable of providing for her: many
schemes were proposed, but the insolence of her temper prevented them all from
taking effect. At length the colonel of her father's regiment, from a regard to
his memory, proposed sending her to the East-Indi^s and contributed very
largely toward the necessary expenses. Here she soon married a rich husband,
and I heard no more of her for some years; but just before I became you^
teacher I was with Mrs. Trusty one morning in Queen-Square, when she brought
her two daughters to school? I immediately recollected my old school fellow,
though she did not choose to know me, and then such a scene ensued, as soon
convinced me Miss Harris had changed nothing but her name.


Mrs. GROVES. Your little history pains me extremely; yet, go on, and tell me
you know of this unamiable lady.


Miss. TATE. Mrs. Pl^mberg was drssed in the extreme of fashion and folly,
accompanied by two young ladies, whose countenances at once betrayed pride and
ill nature? when all the bustle of seating them was over, "I have brought you,'
said she," my daughters to receive their education under you; but I hope, Mrs.
Trusty, you will not think of poring my girls eyes over work, or unnecessary
reading, they are not designed for teachers, and I see no use ladies have for
work, unless indeed they choose to do a piece of embroidery; and I suppose if
they should grow tired of it you can let somebody finish it? As to music, I
would have them excel in that, it is so much in fashion, that I should be
miserable if they had not voices." "Indeed, mamma," said one of the girls
interrupting her, "I do not like music, you know not how hard it is to learn;
and why should we be troubled with that, any more than reading and working?"
"Because, my dear, it is the fashion so Mrs. Trusty, do you hear, make them
learn music. singing, dancing, and French; as to every thing else, it is of
little use to young ladies of their fortunes.


Mrs. GROVES, I am surprised that Mrs. Trusty had patience to listen to such
absurdity.


Miss. TATE. Indeed, madam, Mrs. Trusty's countenance was so expressive of the
contempt she held her in, that I wonder Mrs. Blomberg did not perceive it.


Mrs. GROVES. No doubt she was too full of herself to look at any body else,
and perhaps fancied that she was conferring a great honor on Mrs. Trusty, in
placeing the Miss Blombergs as she called them, with her? but pray, Miss Tate,
tell me what answer Mrs. Trusty made.


Miss. TATE. She was silent, madam; but afterward told me it was with
difficulty she suppressed her indignation, at having it supposed she would take
any young ladies with such directions; but the hope of gently leading them from
their follies, and instilling better principles, induced her to stifle her
resentment.


Mrs. GROVES. I hope she succeeded for all their sakes; here is was a worthy
motive, and deserved reward.


Miss. TATE. Mrs. Blomberg sent so frequently for her daughters to go home,
that had their dispositions been pliant, her vanity must have subverted every
good impression imbibed from their worthy governess; but I staid only two
months after they came, and therefore know nothing farther about them.


Mrs. GROVES. I am sure, Miss Tate, you have communicated enough to give me
inexpressible concern; but, go now, and send Miss Loveless to me; it is
necessary that I should break this unpleasant news in the gentlest manner. [
Miss TATE goes out.


[ Mrs. GROVES alone.] How shall I find words to communicate this painful
intelligence to my sweet pupil? alas! if parents did but consider how fleeting
the joys of wealth are, surely they would not sacrifice the happiness of their
children to so trifling a consideration!


[ Enter Miss LOVELESS, who courtesies, and advances to the table where Mrs.
GROVES is sitting. Mrs. GROVES. You have often assured me, my dear Miss
Loveless, that you can even give up your play hours with pleasure, to sit and
converse with me; will you, therefore, favor me with half an hours'
conversation with you?


Miss LOVELESS. Indeed, my dear madam, the favor and pleasure will be conferred
on me, for I always feel wiser and better, after every conversation you are so
good as to hold with me.


Mrs. GROVES, You are very polite, my dear; it has certainly always been my
endeavor to improve you, and I am extremely gratified in perceiving, that your
seize are equal to my most sanguine wishes: nor, when I say seize,
do I mean to confine my expression to your outward accomplishments, which,
however necessary, can be rendered pleasing only by a gentle temper and an
engaging behavior.


Miss LOVELESS. You cannot imagine, madam, how happy I am when you praise me;
my utmost ambition is to be like my dear departed mamma; her excellencies are
ever before my eyes, and as she lived long enough for me to be sensible of her
worth, it would be unpardonable if I did not endeavor to make her example the
guide for my conduct


Mrs. GROVES. Continue your endeavors, my dear, and I doubt not your success;
in the mean time you must learn to submit to the various changes in this life,
in hope of being rewarded in that which is to come.


Miss LOVELESS. Pray, my dear madam, have you heard lately from my papa? I
begin to think his long silence extraordinary.


Mrs. GROVES. It was to communicate the contents of a letter from him that I
sent for you, my dear: prepare your mind for a surprise; for, indeed, I have
wonderful news to tell you.


Miss LOVELESS. And thing but my papa's being married again, I could bear with
composure.


Mrs GROVES. And why not that? your papa has surely an undoubted right to do as
he pleases.


Miss LOVELESS. Very true madam; but then you know how much pains I have taken
to improve in my education, that I might the sooner return home, and become his
housekeeper; besides, he has never been to see me at school, without telling me
my leaving it, depended entirely on myself; for as soon as I was qualified he
should be happy to make me mistress of his family.


Mrs GROVES. Notwithstanding that disappointment, dear Miss Loveless, you must
submit to whatever your papa chooses; a mother-in law may add to your comforts;
you are very young, and have no idea of the trouble there is in governing a
family. But why should I argue on a subject with you who have too much
understanding, and too much good nature to repine at any event that conduces to
the happiness of a parent you so tenderly love?


Miss LOVELESS [ s^ghs deeply.] Then I am to understand that my papa is already
married, madam? -- Alas! what will become of me?


Mrs. GROVES [ taking her hand] My dear Miss Loveless! I never saw you so
dejected before -- become of you? why have not you the same good father, and
may not this marriage have gained you a sincere and valuable friend?


Miss LOVELESS. I know it is proper I should hope so, madam; but suppose she
should be like the mothers-in-law we sometimes hear of, and set my dear papa
against me, what can I do then?


Mrs. GROVES. Though it is improper to encourage in yourself such melancholy
apprehensions, yet, in case such should be your lot, you must exert the
sweetness of your disposition, and the goodness of your heart, as a support to
yourself, that you may be a comfort to your father, who will deserve more pity
than you, for having undesignedly brought such a misfortune upon you, as it
will fall with double weight on him.


Miss LOVELESS. Believe me, madam, though your goodnes^ ^^boldens me to lay my
heart open to you, I have no idea of appearing to repine at any action of my
p^pa's. However the new Mrs. Loveless may behave to me, I shall think myself
bound to treat her with duty and respect; nor shall my dear papa find any
obstacle to his happiness which I have the power of removing.


Mrs. GROVES. Your determination is charming, and bespeaks a mind fraught with
propriety. As you are more calm, I can tell you that your new mamma was a
widow, and that she has two daughters nearly of your own age.


Miss LOVELESS. That news has, in some measure, reconciled me to my papr's
marriage. You know I always lenged for a sister, and now I shall have two! --
Do you know madam that I begin to be impatient to see all (...) new


Mrs. GROVES. That is a pleasure I believe you will have very shortly, for your
papa's housekeeper is coming this day in the coach to fetch you home, and I
expect her every instant -- go, therefore, and take leave of your
school-fellows, whilst I look over, and pack up your clothes.

[ Miss Loveless curtsies and goes out]

[ The Scene closes.]


SCENE the School Room.
[ Miss Tate sitting at one end working.] [The young ladies playing in separate
parties in different parts of the room.] [ Miss Loveless enters wiping her
eyes; they all crow^ round her, and at once ask what is the matter?] [ Miss
LOVELESS. Nothing very bad is the matter, my dears; only I am going to leave
you.

[Several voices together.] Going to leave us -- what are you never to return
to school again?


Miss LOVELESS. I hope I shall come back very soon -- but [ sighing] my papa is
married again, and I am sent for to be introduced to my new mamma.


Miss RAWLINS. O! then I do pity you extremly; no wonder you should be unhappy
when you are going home to be ill-treated.


Miss TATE. For shame! Miss Rawlins, to use such expressions; does it follow,
that because Miss Loveless has a new mother, she is to be ill used?


Miss RAWLINS. I speak from experience, madam; have not I a mother-in-law?
therefore you must allow me to be a judge of this matter. But you are always
taking me up so. Miss Tate. You cannot bear that I should speak. Upon such a
subject you ought to be the greatest comforter of Miss Loveless, if you did
your mamma justice; for, you know, that but for your perverse temper, you never
would have been sent to school.


Miss RAWLINS. Very well! Miss Tate, I am always in the wrong in your opinion,
when I speak. Never mind, only stay till Miss Loveless returns to school, and
then hear what she will say.


Miss TATE. Whatever may be Miss Loveless,s fate, I have too high an opinion of
her understanding, and the goodness of her heart, to believe she will openly
condemn her father and his lady. Comfort yourself, dear Miss Loveless, and hope
every thing; retain but the sweetness of your temper and you cannot be unhappy.


Miss LOVELESS. Indeed, Miss Tate, I am rather disposed to be happy at present,
for my governess tells me my new mamma has two daughters, and I am impatient to
be introduced to them: yet, I cannot leave my worthy governess, (who has so
amply made up to me the loss of my own dear mamma,) and my school fellows, and
you, without feeling the tenderest regret.


Miss TATE. Your sensibility, my dear Miss Loveless! is very commendable, and
we are much obliged to you for your affection to us; yet, I sincerely hope you
will meet such a reception at home as will make you forget us.


Miss LOVELESS. Forget you! I hope I never can; but yet, if my mamma is kind,
and my sisters affectionate, to be sure I would rather stay at home than return
to school.


Enter Mrs. Groves. [ The dinner-bell-rings.] Mrs. GROVES. Mrs. Cartwright is
arivied, my dear Miss Loveless; but I thought you might wish to remain with
your school-fellows, and therefore persuaded her to have some refreshment
before you saw her.


Miss LOVELESS. You are very obliging, madam, to a most excellent woman, who,
though my father's housekeeper, is a gentlewoman, reduced by misfortunes to her
present station: my dear mamma was much attached to her, and taught me, from my
earliest infancy to respect her. I am, impatient to see her, and ask ten
thousand questions.


Mrs. GROVES. That is very natural, my love; but first go and get your dinner
with they ungladies, during which time I will finish my preparations for your
departure. When you have dined come to me in the parlour, and there you will
find your worthy domestic.

[ Mrs. Groves goes out. [The Scene closes, as the young ladies are putting
away their playthings, and appearing to be going down to dinner.]
SCENE Mrs. GROVES'S Parlour.
[ Mrs. Groves packing a band box with caps, flowers, etc..] [ Mrs. Cartwright
sitting by her.] Mrs. GROVES. The many quastions I have asked you, Mrs.
Car^wright arose not, beleve me, from impertinent curiosity, but an anxious
solicitude for the happiness of my amiable scholar.


Mrs. CARTWRIGHT. I ought not to form too hasty an opinion of my new mistress;
she may be more amiable than she appears to me; my sentiments of her may arise
from my ignorance of the present modes of the world, and my fears for the
happiness of my dear Miss Loveless: a fine lady is an entirely new character to
me.


Mrs. GROVES I hope her daughter are untinctured with their mother's vanity --
with them Miss Loveless may find comfort.


Mrs. CARTWRIGHT. I have not yet seen them; they are expected from school
today: it was for that reason my master sent for his daughter. He does not yet
appear to see the foibles of his wife, and, with his usual goodness of heart,
was talking to her with delight of their children returning home together; but
by the chilling indifference with which she heard him, I am sure she did not
wish Miss Loveless to be of the party; and, I fear, this going home will be
productive of nothing but sorrow and mortification to her.


Mrs. GROVES. If your Lady's heart is accessible to goodness, her
daughter-in-law will find the avenue; gentleness, and its attendant virtues,
inhabit the bosom of Miss Loveless.


Mrs. CARTWRIGHT. She is formed on the model of my late mistress, who was all
amiable sweetness and mild condescension. I long, yet dread to see the dear
young lady! she will ask me ten thousand questions. I cannot distress her by
mentioning my fears, nor have I a right to judge from appearances.


Mrs. GROVES. It will be better to divert her mind, if possible, from dwelling
on this change in her situation. Her father's house is not many miles from
this, If you prepare her for what may follow, her artless temper may betray
that she is under a restraint. Let all her actions, therefore, flow naturally.
-- I hear her coming.


[ Enter M iss Loveless. [ Mrs. Cartwright- rises at her entrance, and
continues standing.] M iss LOVELESS. My dear! Cartwright, how do you do? I am
glad to see you look so well. So, you have great alterations at home since I
saw you!


Mrs. CARTWRIGHT. My new lady has been come to us but a week, and we expect the
young ladies, her daughters today. Your papa is very well, and I am delighted
to see you, miss, so much grown and improved.


Miss LOVELESS. So, you have not seen my new sisters yet? I am sorry for that;
I long to know what sort of girls they are. How do you like my new mamma?


M rs. CARTWRIGHT. She is very pretty and genteel in her person; but she has
never spoken to me yet, as she does not like strangers; her woman, therefore,
brings to me all her orders.


Miss LOVELESS. Pray sit down, Mrs. Cartwright; I am sure my governess will
permit you. Nay, I insist upon your sitting; what, are you to fatigue yourself
for the child who has so frequently tired you, when she could not help herself?


M rs. CARTWRIGHT [ wiping her eyes.] I see you are as good as ever, and the
image still of my late dear lady. With your permission, miss, I think we had
better order the coach.


Miss LOVELESS. If my governess pleases, I have not objection. Tell me, Mrs.
Cartwright, how long am I to stay at home? or am I never to return again to
school?


Mrs. GROVES. I have prepared all your things now, my dear Miss Loveless, and
will give directions for the coach to be ordered. Are there any of the young
ladies you would particularly wish to take leave of?


Miss LOVELESS. I have, in general, said farewell to all; but as you are so
kind, madam, I should like to see Miss Gower again.


Mrs. GROVES. I will send her to you, my dear, and will now (...) and see your
clothes put into the hands of your papa's footman, and order the coach.

[M rs. Groves goes out.
Miss. LOVELESS. This unexpected marriage of my papa's, Cartwright, fills me
with many fears; but I am delighted at going home; and yet I am very sorry,
indeed, to leave my worthy governess, and all my young companions here.


[ Enter M iss Gower, who curtsis.] M iss GOWER. My governess sent me to you,
my dear M aria, but I am afraid it is only to take leave of you. I am very
sorry to part from you.


Miss LOVELESS. And I am equally sorry to leave you, and yet the hope of being
happy at home is a great consolation. But if I do not return to school again, I
shall certainly ask papa to let me come and see you: in the mean time I am sure
my governess will let you write to me, that I may have the pleasure of hearing
that she and all my school-fellows are well.


Enter Mrs. GROVES. The coach is almost ready.

Miss LOVELESS [ burst into tears.] How shall I leave you, madam?


Mrs. GROVES. Compose your spirits, dear Miss Loveless. It will be but an ill
compliment to carry a sorrowing countenance to a house of joy; and may
displease your papa.


Miss LOVELESS. He shall see no traces of concern, for I will endeavor to wipe
away all my tears on the journey: besides, I know the joy of seeing him will
overcome every kind of sorrow; but yet, madam, what an ungrateful creature must
I be, if I did not leave you with regret?


M rs. GROVES. I should be sorry, my dear young friend, to think you could
forget one who loves you so tenderly as I do: but something presages that we
shall meet again soon; let that thought console us for the present distress.

Miss Gower, my love, restrain your tears, indeed they affect your friend too
much.


Miss. GOWER [ sobbing.] I will try, madam.


Mrs. GROVES. I have put up the eight shirts you made for your papa, my love,
and the frock you worked for yourself. Your copy-book also I have sent, as I
suppose he will like to see your improvements: reading he can try you in. I
hope you will return to finish your embroidery; but you must tell your papa,
that the reason you were so long about it, was my fears of your growing awry,
if you sat too long at a frame. I must beg you, Mrs. Cartwright to give Mr,
Loveless this letter, containing my compliments and congratulations.


Mrs. CARTWRIGHT. I shall certainly execute your commands, madam.

Enter Footman. The coach is ready, madam.

[Miss Loveless throws her arms round her governess's neck, and hides her face
in her bosom.]
Mrs. GROVES. [ embraceing her.] God bless you! my dear, my amiable child! may
you meet a tender parent in Mrs. Loveless, and every blessing this world can
afford you.


Mrs. CARTWRIGHT. I will go to the coach first; Mrs. Groves, your servant.

[M rs Cartwright goes out. [M iss Loveless disengages herself from her
governess, and kissed Miss Gower; then sobbing says]
Farewell, dear madam! adieu! my much loved Lucy! think of me sometimes -- I
never shall forget you!

[Goes out hastily with her handkerchief at her eyes. M rs. GROVES. If my
wishes succeed, my sweet girl will be happier than I have reason to expect. Go,
my dear, into the school room, (...) some acounts to settle.

(...)]
END of ACT I.
ACT II.
SCENE, a Parlour in ^r. Loveless's House.
[ Enter Miss Loveless followed by Mrs. Cartwright and a footman.] Miss
LOVELESS. WILL you let Mrs. Loveless know I am here, and ready to pay my duty
to her?


FOOTMAN, Yes Madam.

[Bows and goes out.
Miss LOVELESS. I am so agitated, Cartwright, I don't know what to do, only
feel how my heart bea^s.


Mrs. CARTWRIGHT. You should compose yourself, my dear young lady, or you will
be unfit to appear before your mamma.


Miss LOVELESS. If she behaves kindly to me I shall soon recover all my
agitation -- But there is the fear.

Enter FOOTMAN. My lady is dressing and cannot admit you yet Miss.

[Footman goes out.
Miss LOVELESS. Could not she let me attend her at her toilet? that was the
time my own mamma always desired my company; you know, Cartwright, I liked to
supply your place, and help her to dress.


Mrs. CARTWRIGHT. My dear you must consider that this lady and you are at
present strangers; besides, it will be unfair to compare all her actions with
your own mamma's; it is unreasonable to expect at first sight such love as a
mother showed you.


Miss LOVELESS. Well, I believe it will be best not to think at all about it,
so give me an account of my children as I used to call them; where is my
faithful Fidelle? why does not he come and welcome me as he used to do?


M rs. CARTWRIGHT. The dog was so much encouraged by your papa and you, that
the night my new lady came home he jumped, and made so much of her, she was
excessively alarmed, for she has very week nerves. -- She gave her coachman
immediate orders to secure it in the stable, but the confinement drew such
howlings form it that I desired your papa to suffer me to give it away, which I
did to farmer Cooper's little daughter Jenny, and she takes as much care of it
as you did, and is proud of the charge.


Miss LOVELESS. Poor Fidelle! I am sorry you are gone; but I must go and see
him by-and-by, Cartwright. -- Where are my two pretty cats, that I have fondled
from kittens;


M rs. CARTWRIGHT. I am sorry to say I could not perserve them. Mrs. Loveless
faints at the sight of a cat, she therefore commanded them to be drowned, and
her own footman obeyed her.


Miss LOVELESS. Poor Jesse and Tib (...) -- I wish I had known in time; that
you would be so disagreeable to my mamma, I would have given you to my
governess, and so have saved your lives; I am almost ashamed to tell you how
sorry I am for their loss. -- I wish my papa would come home from his ride; he
did not use to stay out so long. -- Well, but how are my ducks and chickens?
Have you any new broods?


M rs. CARTWRIGHT. I fear my account of them will distress you, my dear young
lady, but they have only been neglected these few days, for my mistress has
given possitive orders that I should never leave my employment in the house to
attend to any thing else, and her own woman is always watching me; so that I
dared not even look at the little creatures, you committed to my care. I gave
Sam the stable-boy orders to seed and attend to them, but I fear he does not
understand them sufficiently to clean their nests or set them prop^rly.


Miss LOVELESS. How ill-natured this mamma must be to let dumb animals be
neglected! -- My own mamma told me, I might judge of any person's temper by
their condu^ct to the helpless part of the creartion. -- We must fix on some
plan for their relief, indeed they had better be dead than kept in such a state.


Mrs. CARTWRIGHT. I will endeavor to attend you if you can obtain permission
from your mamma; but I dare not go to ask her myself, for she has such an
aversion to fat women that she cannot endure me, and therefore I am only
admitted when sent for by your papa.


Miss LOVELESS. I am afraid then she will dislike me also, for as my mamma
would never suffer me to wear tight stays, my w^ist is not yet quite taper
enough for the fashion.

Enter Mrs. Loveless' s woman and says, My lady is now in the drawing room, and
you may go to her Miss, when you please.


M iss LOVELESS (trembling.) I shall certainly attend her immediately.

Goes out hastily.
WOMAN. Miss is a good fi^e girl I think -- but she will be terribly eclipsed
by my young ladies.


M rs. CARTWRIGHT. They cannot eclipse her in mind however she is the most
amiable creature I ever knew.


WOMAN with an impertinent toss.) That is your opinion.

[They go out at different doors,
SCENE a Drawing Room,
[M rs. Loveless lolling on a soph^, twirling her pocket handkerchief -- M iss
Loveless enters -- advances toward her, then stops irresolute what to do --
after a pause she speaks.] M iss LOVELESS. Your woman, Madam --


M rs. LOVLESS, (starts.) Bless me, who is that? your sudden intrusion has
alarmed me excessively. Did any body ever hear of a young lady bouncing into a
room without a footman to announce her? -- I am all over in a fit of trembling.


M iss LOVELESS. (abashed.) I beg your pardon Madam -- but your woman told me I
might come; and I had not been used to send a servant before me; for the future
I will be more circumspect.


M rs. LOVELESS. You have not been used to send a servant! no child, it is
visible enough you have not been used to any thing genteel.

[M iss Loveless in great confusion looks at a chair, but seems fearful of
sitting down.]
M rs. LOVELESS. I suppose, by the awkward figure you make you have been used
to stand in the middle of the room; pray seat yourself. [ She sits, Mrs.
Loveless stares at her, and surveys her from head to foot] Ha! ha! ha! is your
dress your own or your Governess's taste.


M iss LOVELESS, [ endeavoring to refrain from crying] Neither, Madam. My own
mamma disliked finery, I am therefore dressed now as I was in her life time.


M rs. LOVELESS. She had a charming idea of dress ( with a sneer) but I might
have known that from a picture of her in my dressing room, the dress of which
no doubt was her own taste.


M iss LOVELESS, (extremely affected.) My mamma was very good, Madam. -- I
think I hear my papa's voice; may I go to him?


M rs. LOVELESS, Stay where you are child; I must have the pleasure of seeing
you meet.

[A footman throws open the door.
Enter M r. LOVELESS. [M iss Loveless jumps from her seat in great agitation,
advances toward her papa, then stops,] M r. LOVELESS. to his wife. How do you
do my dear. M aria, my love, ( he embraces her with great affection) come and
let me press you to my fond heart: your good governess writes me word that you
are as amiable as ever, consequently dearer to me. Have you paid your d^^y to
your new mamma? let me present to you, Mad^^, a daughter who I am certain will
pay you as much duty and respect as you claim from your own. Salute your mamma,
M aria. [M rs. Loveless takes her hand with great indifference.]


M rs. LOVELESS. There, child, that is enough. Kissing is so vulgar I cannot
endure it. Sit down. I wonder. Mr. Loveless, the coach is not yet returned with
the Mis Blombergs! Surely no accident has happened!


M r. LOVELESS [ who appears much hurt.] What accident should happen? [ he goes
and sits by his daughter, and takes her hand] you are very much grown, my dear
child, and I hear are extremly improved in every branch of your education.


M rs. LOVELESS. Her seize are, no doubt, very great, brought up, as she
has been, at a country boarding school. Why, the girl has no more idea of
breeding than her governess. -- H^! ha! [ Laughs sneeringly.


M r. LOVELESS. She is good, however, Mrs. Loveless; and, as to her breeding, I
see no awkwardness but what proceeds from that bashfulness natural to modesty.


Enter a servant and announces the M iss Blombergs. They are dressed with the
greatest elegance and expense; after advanceing slowly to their mamma, whom
they salute, they pay their compliments to Mr. Loveless, make a slight curtsey
to Miss Loveless. and then take their seats.] M rs. LOVELESS. You look
charmingly* my dears -- and your manner of entering a room is graceful and
elegant, and does credit to the school I have placed you in. London is the
place for good breeding. A country education is only proper for rustics.


Miss BLOMBERG. We have studied grace more than any thing else, mamma; because
my sister and I did not find much trouble in that.


M rs. LOVELESS. No, my dears, that qualification you possess from nature, or
you could not so easily have acquired it. dinner is nearly ready now, I must
therefore defer my enquiries after your other improvements, till the afternoon;
but if they are equel to your appearance I shall be perfectly satisfied.


[ A footman enters.] Dinner is on the table.

Mrs. Loveless rises; her daughters follow. Mr. Loveless takes his daughter's
hand, and advances toward the door.


Mrs. LOVELESS. I understood from Gardner that you had dined, child. if you are
accustomed to eat two dinners no wonder you are so (...).


Miss LOVELESS. Indeed, Madam, I have no appetite to make a second dinner: and,
if you will permit me, I wish rather to go into the garden.


Mrs. LOVELESS. Follow your own inclination, ma'am. I do not intend to
interfere Come, young ladies, I will show you where the d^ing parlour is.

[ Mr. LOVELESS Stops and kisses his daughter.] Go, my love; into the garden
and divert your-self. I will send for you again soon.

[Goes out distrssed.
Miss LOVELESS. I must go and seek Cartwright, and tell her all my troubles. I
am so unhappy I cannot express it.

[She bursts into tears and goes out.
SCENE the garden.
[Mrs. CARTWRIGHT and Miss LOVELESS walking.] M rs. CARTWRIGHT. Your
description of the reception you met with from Mrs. Loveless exceeds even my
fears, It might be cruel not to prepare you; but indeed I thought it unbecoming
my station to mention the observation her conduct naturally excited.


Miss LOVELESS. Your reason was a proper one; and yet, Cartwright, what will
become of me? I can never be happy at home. My mamma despises me, and my new
sisters cast such glances of contempt at me, that it is plain their sentiments
agree with here is.


Mrs. CARTWRIGHT. Their mamma's example, and the manner they have been educated
in, will, no doubt, prevail over every tender sentiment of the heart. If
fashionable education produces such effect, how thankful ought you to be for
being bred in the country!


Miss LOVELESS. So I should if it did not add to my mamma's prejudices; but I
see in all her words and actions, that my education and manners are subjects
for her ridicule.


Mrs. CARTWRIGHT. I will not enter so fully into this subject as I might do,
Let me advise you to keep up your spirits; nor will I suffer you to give way to
sorrow, till some worthy person, whose good opinion is worth gaining, despises
you for possessing the country virtues you can boast, or prefers show and
splendour to unaffected goodnature and tenderness of disposition. Persevere in
the amiable conduct that has hitherto marked your character, and the
consciousness of doing right, will relieve the unhappiness your mamma's strange
conduct may occasion you!


Miss LOVELESS. Strengthened by the advice of my governess, the love of my
papa, and the regard you show me I will try by patience and submissions to
overcome the visible dislike Mrs. Loveless has conceived against me. It is some
comfort that my papa seems as fond of me as ever.


M rs. CARTWRIGHT. He is, indeed, doatingly fond of you, and seems delighted
when he comes into my apartment to talk of you, and dwell on your
accomplishments.


M iss LOVELESS. The idea of pleasing him will at length render me easy; and I
will try to make this new mamma relent -- who knows but I may succeed? You love
me -- my governess loves me -- so do the teachers, and all my school-fellows --
at least they appear as if they did, and why should not Mrs. Loveless in a
little time?


Mrs. CARTWRIGHT. I will leave you now, my dear young lady: I fancy your papa
has dined, for I see the Miss Blombergs coming this way; perhaps when you are
alone together you may get acquainted, and find them more pleasing than you
expect.

[ Mrs. Cartwright goes ont.
Miss LOVELESS. [ Look out with great attention -- then speaks] They are very
elegant to be sure, and those long trains extremely graceful -- but then they
must be in their way -- they could not jump over styles as I can --

[She continues silent, as if thinking.]
[ Enter Miss Blombergs.] Miss BLOMBERG. We are come to walk about the garden,
Miss; your papa says you may show us the grounds and the buildings.


M iss LOVELESS. It will afford me great pleasure, young ladies to make myself
agreeable to you. I will most readily attend you.


Miss BLOMBERG. To tell you the truth, my sister and I are no great admirers of
the country; we had rather not go any farther; indeed, I have walked thus far
in a fright, for sear I should spoil my shoes.


M iss LOVELESS. They are, indeed, too elegant for a country walk. When you
have worse clothes on it will be better to visit the garden and grounds.


Miss BLOMBERG. O! we are never worse dressed than you see us now; my mamma
would faint if our clothes were not like (...) own, in the first of the mode. I
dare say she will soon alter every part of your dress.


M iss. LOVELESS. I shall be very happy to conform to her commands in every
thing, and will never appear before her in any dress, but one like yours, is
she requires it; but then I hope I shall be allowed to walk and skip about, as
I have been used to do in my present dress sometimes,


Miss AMELIA. La, Miss! I am sure you can never have been in London, to talk in
such raptures as you do of green fields. My mamma says it is odious to be fond
of the country. She spends all the summer at the watering places, before
Christmas at Bath, and dear London in the spring!


Miss BLOMBERG. O! how I long to leave school; and perhaps as mamma praised our
gracefulness, we may soon do so. I do love plays and operas, and Vauxhall and
Ranelaugh!


Miss LOVELESS. Why, have you been at all those places, and are still a shcool
girl?


Miss BLOMBERG. Well, Miss, I vow, as my mamma says, you are preciously vulgar.
School girl, indeed! -- Young ladis, bred as I have been, are not usually
called so.


M iss LOVELESS. I beg your pardon, Miss Blomberg; I did not mean to offend --
but my surprise at hearing you talk of having been at such a variety of public
places accasioned it.


Miss AMELIA. O! Miss, there is no great offense, only Juliana affects to be a
fine lady, because mamma tells her it is becoming: but as to public places we
scarcely miss going to one or other every evening when mamma is in town.


Miss LOVELESS. I cannot think then what time you have to learn all that is
taught at school. I know my hours were fully employed, without any amusement,
but such as I found after school hours.


Miss BLOMBERG. O! Miss, but you must not compare your education with ours.
Consider how different our situations are. We have very great fortunes, and
mamma says there is no occasion to spoil our eyes, and deaden our undersandings
with any learning but what is fashionable -- but I detest trouble so much that
I am afraid she will not think me accomplished ^^ough; for I have never
attended to music, it was so difficult: nor would I have talked French, but
that I must have been silent if I had not spoken in that language: my governess
was so illnatured and strict about it. However, though I can talk pretty well,
I know no more about writing it than if it was Greek. I can dance very well,
that will please her; b^t I learned that because dancing days were nice
holidays, and I was dressed in my best, and people came to admire us, or else I
would have attended to that as little as any thing else. As to work I protest I
scarcely know how to handle my needle, but I have bought a piece of embroidery
of one of the half boarders, and that I shall produce as my own. Don't tell
though, pray Miss. What do you employ yourself about at your country school?


Miss LOVELESS. We learn to read French and English, and to write it correctly;
are well grounded in plain work, and then my governess suffers us to choose and
kind of ornamental work that we please. Embroidery is remarkably well done at
my school. In addition to this we learn writing, arithmetic, and the use of the
globes; those who have taste are also instructed in drawing and painting. We
likewise learn to dance; and an Italian master attends those whose parents are
desirous of their knowing that language.


Miss AMELIA. Well! what a ridiculous burlesque upon learning! Pray, Miss, what
can you do? for I am sure it is impossible any one person can learn so many
different things.


Miss LOVELESS. Indeed it is not Miss; many young ladies at our school excel in
them all. Music is the most difficult to gain, because, unless the young ladies
will practice in their play hours, they have too little time to make a
proficiency.


Miss AMELIA. Learning to sing is at least above you, I suppose, for in your
catalogue you forgot to mention a singing master.


M iss LOVELESS. We are, indeed, too far distant from London to admit of my
governess's procuring a fashionable one; but even that deficiency is in some
measure supplied to us by the teacher; she has naturally a fine voice, and had
an opportunity of improving her taste, at a school she formerly lived in; where
it was part of her business to attend the young ladies, while their music and
singing masters were with them, who were both very capital performers.


Miss BLOMBERG. So then you fancy your teacher can instruct you to sing as well
as Sqalini.. Well, I vow and protest your ignorance makes me die with laughing.
But you will not say so when you come to perform before mamma I fancy.


M iss LOVELESS. Indeed you strangely mistake my meaning, ladies; I am very far
from supposing my advantage in this particular, e^ual to yours, and only
answered your questions to the best of my ability, without any intention of
offending.


M iss AMELIA. O! you wont offend us. Mamma says you will be an excellent foil
to my sister and me; and your ideas will make you appear more absurd than we
could have expected. Pray, miss, what is your name?


M iss BLOMBERG. O! la! miss, that is the very thing I wish to know; do tell us
your Christian name, for I am terribly at a loss what to call you when I am
talking to you.


M iss LOVELESS, My name is M aria, after my grand-mamma.


Miss AMELIA. Maria! Maria! is not that one of the names mamma has such an
aversion to, because it is so common? Do recollect July.


[M iss BLOMBERG.] For goodness sake, Amelia, do not call me July; you make my
name as vulgar as Maria. What use was there in mamma's studying so long as she
says she did to give me a genteel name, if you shortten it i^ so shocking a
manner?


Miss AMELIA. I beg your pardon, Julia^^^ I know mamma thinks you superior to
me, because your name is more uncommon; but she will never be able to pronounce
yours M aria. She says she alway^ judges of people's accomplishments by the
names they give to their children.


Miss LOVELESS. I am sorry my name is likely to be so offensive. I own I like
it very much myself.


Miss BLOMBERG. As you have praised your own, without saying a word of ours,
you may possibly want fashion sufficiently to prefer plain Maria to elegant
Juliana and Amelia?


Miss LOVELESS. Your names are uncommon ones, and such as I have been unused
to; but I think Amelia a very soft name.


Miss AMELIA. O! then you perfer my name to my sister's* well, I am so
delighted with you for that, I have a great mind to make you my friend. But who
comes here is such haste?


[Enter footman. FOOTMAN. I am sent, ladies, to inform you, that my master and
lady desire your company in the drawing room.


Miss BLOMBERG. We will atend them immediately. Come, Mari^^, you must follow
my sister. Mamma says you are not on an equality with us.


Miss LOVELESS. I shall never contend that point, nor I hope any other, ladies,
with either your mamma or you.

[They go out. [The Scene closes.]
SCENE the drawing room.
[ Mr. Loveless looking out at the window.] [ Mrs. Loveless picking her teeth,
with a small pocket glass in her hand, which she frequently looks in*] Mrs.
LOVELESS. Pray, Mr. Loveless, what age is your daughter?


Mr. LOVELESS. She is just fourteen, madam.


Mrs. LOVELESS. She appears much older. But she is so horribly grave and
affectedly wise, that there is no making any thing of her.


Mr. LOEVELESS. Her disposition is truly amiable; and at times she has as much
cheerfulness as a girl ought to have^ but: consider, madam, she is now among
strangers.


Mrs. LOVELESS. And consider too the awkward bashfulness a country education
gives. Let her go to school with the Miss Blombergs, and perhaps she my acquire
their elegance of manners


Mr. LOVELESS. Maria has a small fortune, and I should be sorry to educate her
above her circumstances; she is, therefore, better at Mrs. Groves's than at a
more refined school. Examine her seize, and ^hen I hope you will
perceive, that there is no cause for removing her to any other school.


Mrs. LOVELESS. The idea of accomplishments acquired in the country is truly
ridiculous. But I hear the young ladies coming: let us now see the difference
between gracefulness and rusticity.


[ Enter the Miss Blombergs followed by Miss Loveless. The former advance with
an affected ^^^^liness; the latter comes in with great ease and good hun^ur;
makes a curte^y, and advances to her papa.] Mr. LOVELESS. You have had a long
walk, my love. I hope you are not fatigued.


Miss LOVELESS. Not at all, my dear papa.


Mr. LOVELESS. You have not paid your compliments to your mamma, my dear Maria.


Mrs. LOVELESS. Oh! I do not expect any thing like civility from her; she is
too awkward.


Miss LOVELESS. I hope, madam, you will never find me wanting in any instance
of dutiful attention to you.


Mrs. LOVELESS. I protest the girl speaks! -- Come, my own dear children, dance
me a minuet.


Miss BLOMBERG. Who can play one? -- Can you Maria?


Miss LOVELESS. I should be very happy to make myself useful.

[She sits down to the harpsichord, and plays to their dancing,]
Mrs. LOVELESS. Very well, indeed; and wonderful, considering your music was so
indifferent.


Mr. LOVELESS. Indifferent do you Maria's playing! -- She is allowed by all the
judges in this neighborhood to be a great performer for her age; and it was by
sparing time from her play hours that she was able to make this proficiency.


Mrs. LOVELESS. Well, if you think she plays well, that is enough. Come, my
dear Juliana, let him hear from you what good playing is.


Miss BLOMBERG. Indeed, mamma, I had rather not play now. I am very much out of
practice.


Mrs. LOVELESS. I insist on your obeying me. [ Miss Blomberg sits down with
great reluctance; plays very indifferently, and looks cross the whole time]


Miss BLOMBERG. There, mamma; I never can play well on a strange harpsichord,
and out of other people's books. Come, sister, take my seat.


Miss AMELIA. I would rather be excused. I am all impatience to hear Maria
sing. Do you know, mamma, she says her teacher instructs her as well as our
singing master could do!


Mrs. LOVELESS [ quite out of humor.] I dare say she thinks so. Pray, miss,
let us hear your fine taste in singing.


Mr. LOVELESS [ seeing his daughter look confused.] Don't be abashed, my
beloved Maria. Go to your instrument, and sing one of your favorite songs.

[ Miss Loveless goes to her harpsichord, and sings a song in a very pleasing
and graceful manner.]
Mrs. LOVELESS Why, child, you cannot be quite so bashful as I thought you, to
sing and squall before company, without showing any signs of fear.


Miss LOVELESS. I sung at your command, and the Mis s Blomberg's request, and
to entertain my papa; when such my motives, I hope there is no cause for shame,
madam.


Mrs. LOVELESS. I must inform you, Miss Loveless, that I have not been
accustomed to such i^pertinent answers: curb, therefore, at least in my
presence, the insolence of your temper.

[ Miss Loveless advances to her seat, wiping her eyes, and sits down by her
papa, who affectionately takes her hand.]
Mr. LOVELESS. Your new mamma does not know you yet, my sweet girl, when she
does it will be impossible for her to wound that gentle disposition with unkind
speeches: support your spirits, therefore, with this assurance, that I shall
ever be a tender and affectionate parent, while you remain a dutiful and
tractable child.


Miss LOVELESS. Indeed, my dear papa, I will endeavor to be all my mamma and
you can desire. Believe me, madam, I had no intention of being impertinent.


Mrs. LOVELESS. I do not trouble myself about you. I will pay so much regard to
you as to desire your father to let you accompany my daughters to Queen's-
square.

[Maria looks alarmed.
Mr. LOVELESS. What says my child? you shall do as you like.


Mrs. LOVELESS. O! then you may be sure she will not like what I do. What say
you miss?


Miss LOVEL^SS. I hope you will permit me, madam, to return to my kind
governess? I think removing me from her would break my heart, and make her very
unhappy.


Mr. LOVELESS. You shall go again to Mrs. Groves? she is a most worthy woman,
and has blended your accomplishments with your virtues so naturally, that they
seem imbibed together. This afternoon, madam, [ to Mrs. Loveless] I will again
send Maria to school, and if your disposition in future should still recoil at
her, she shall live with a sister of mine in Yorkshire Her distance from us
will occasion you and me to be more frequently separated than I could wish; but
I will sacrifice a great deal to promote harmony at home. I will ever be a
tender friend to your daughters, and sincerely hope the education you have
given them will prove to their advantage, and your (...) satisfaction.

[ During this speech (...) appears (...) ^^^^cted, and frequ^^tly presses her
p^pa's (...) Loveless impatient, and endeavors to stop his continuing it.]
Mr. LOVELESS. We will dispute no more on this or any other subject, [ he
rises.] Give me your hand, my dear; I have ordered coffee in the pavillion in
the garden; let us go and enjoy ourselves: after which, Maria, you will be
prepared to return to school, and I will see you there in a few days.

[ Mrs. Loveless rises and gives him her hand very sullenly. The Miss Blombergs
push by Maria, and follow them. Miss Loveless wipes her eyes, and composes
herself. [They go out.
End of ACT II.
ACT III.
SCENE a parlour in Mrs. Groves's house.
(Mrs. Groves and Miss Tate drinking tea.) Mrs. GROVES. I AM so anxious about
Miss Loveless, that I am really incapable of attending to any thing else.


Miss TATE. My feelings are also strongly interested about her; but there is
one whose anxiety exceeds even ours. I never saw a greater instance of
sensibility and real friendship, than in Miss Gower, who is more affected than
one would imagine so young a person capable of being.


Mrs. GROVES. How pleasing it is to observe such a friendship arising between
young ladies of the present age. I make no doubt but they will ever, remain
strict friends. Their dispositions are formed for the regard they profess for
each other; nor will it, I am persuaded, end but with their lives.


Miss TATE. I contemplate with great delight their growing virtues. If young
ladies could but be prevailed on to think how preferable inward goodness
renders them, to the glitter of empty show and chatter without meaning, they
would surely give up fashionable folly, and court more useful seize.


Mrs. GROVES. Your observation, Miss Tate, is very natural to every thinking
mind; there is not an object, in my opinion, more deserving pity then young
people, born of parents whose sole delight proceeds from gaiety and dress. The
children, it is true, for a few years, are kept from partaking their pleasures,
but where such is the conduct of the master and mistress of a family, servants
catch the infection, and instill gay ideas into the minds of children. even
from their cradle. Thus prepared, they long to grow up, merely to be introduced
into every scene of dissipation and folly, without imagining there is any other
end proposed by their existence, and measure each other's happiness by the
greatest number of times they are allowed to partake in every public
entertainment.


Miss TATE. It is thus, indeed, madam, they become bad wives and mothers; with
such a foundation is it wonderful, that all the attention of a governess cannot
overcome prejudices so unhappily imbibed, growing as it were with their
strength, and interwoven in their natures; We who have the care of so many
different young ladies easily discern the advantage of children's having
mothers who have been attentive to them from their earliest infancy; nor can it
be more strongly marked than in the characters we were speaking of. Contrast
them with Miss Rawlins. Her own mother was pretty, gay, dissipated to excess.
In her way she doated on her child; who was trained to all the fancies of her
mother, introduced into company at three years old; and taught to talk on every
subject but what she ought! Poor unthinking Mrs. Rawlins soon lost a life she
took so little care to preserve, and died a martyr to fashionable amusements. A
worthey woman became, after her, Mr. Rawlins's wife, but she could not overcome
the unhappy errors of this poor unthinking girl, who calls advice ill nature,
and moral rectitude absurdity. Mrs. Loveless was the most amiable of women;
these two ladies left the impression of their own characters on their children,
and if they could be permitted to see what passes in this world, how would one
parent be blessed in beholding the virtues her attention brought forth! and how
severe the punishment of the other to perceive, that neither argument,
indulgence, or punishment, can overcome the fatal prejudices her conduct
instilled!


Mrs. GROVES. What a noble example, also, does Mrs. Gower set, who, in the
prime of her life, gives up all amusement but what she can partake with her
children, teaching them herself almost every branch of their education, and
thus converting those talents, which were uncommonly cultivated by her father,
to the most useful and pleasing end. She was an only child, and had a very
large fortune; but being blessed with a numerous family, and her husband's
circumstances much reduced during the American war, he has at her desire laid
down his coach, given up his house in town, and they now reside throughout the
year in the country. All the day Mrs. Gower employs in her domestic duties, and
in the evening relaxes, by joining in, or promoting innocent amusements with
her children. I have heard her say, that when leading a dance with them, she
thinks herself happier, and more to be envied, than when she first made her
appearance at Court, adorned with all the pomp of dress, and glittering in
jewels.


Miss TATE. I wonder, Madam, she could spare our sweet pupil, for she was
qualified to assist, and be a great comfort to her mamma.


Mrs. GROVES. The sending her to my school was indeed a high compliment, and
arose from a knowledge and regard for me of many years standing; but even that
would not have influenced Mrs. Gower, had not her regard for Miss Loveless,
induced her to yield this point to her solicitation. These two amiable girls
were bred in friendship from their infancy; their mothers set them the example:
and when Mrs. Loveless died, she besought her friend to let them be as little
separated as possible. When Mr. Loveless found it necessary to send Maria to
school, mine was recommended strongly by Mrs. Gower, and then they united in
entreating they might not be parted. But this subject has led us to converse so
long Miss Tate, that we forget time; ring the bell, therefore, to have the tea
things removed; you must now go into the school room. -- Send Miss Gower to me,
she shall be my companion this evening; I must endeavor to lessen her
distress, however amiable, and give her advice that may teach her to submit,
since sorrows and disappointments are the lot of every one who goes through
life.

[ Miss Tate rings the bell and goes out. A servant enters and removes the
things]
[ Enter Miss GOWER, who courtesies, and advances to her Governess.] Mrs. GROVES
[ Taking her kindly by the hand.] I am going to walk in the garden, and divert
myself with cutting off the dead roses, and making the trees look ^eat again.
Will you like to be my companion?


Miss GOWER. Certainly, madam. It will make me very happy to be so much
indulged.


Mrs. GROVES. Well, put on your calash, and we will go immediately.


Miss GOWER [ surprised.] Surely, madam, that coach which is drawing to the
house is the same that came for Miss Loveless this morning. Do pray look madam,
[ agitated]


Mrs. GROVES [ surprised.] (...) is indeed, what can be the meaning of its
return^^ (...) soon?


Miss GOWER. Perhaps, madam, Miss Loveless may have obtained permission to send
for me. I know she intended to make her mamma that request if she was kindly
received.


Mrs. GROVES. We shall soon have our doubts resolved, for the carriage is gone
round to the door; but I think Miss Loveless is in it, and I could plainly
discern Mrs. Cartwright.


Miss GOWER. We shall at least know what reception my dear Maria met with from
her mamma; but I think it impossible it could be unkind; for her gentleness
would melt a savage.

[The door is thrown open; Miss Loveless runs in, throws her arms round her
Governess's neck and bursts into tears. She is followed by Mrs. Cartwright, who
looks full of concern.]
Mrs. GROVES. My dear Miss Loveless! I am rejoiced to see you again, but
greatly distressed at these mari^s of sorrow. Compose yourself, I entreat you.
We will have some tea brought in immediately, and that will (...) of service to
you.


Miss LOVELESS. Oh! no my dear Governess, I drank coffee before I left my
papa's, and have no inclination for any thing but crying; I never can tell you
how unhappy I am.


Miss GOWER. [ bursts into tears.] Maria! my dear Maria! do not cry so. I am
sure mamma will let you live with us, and then I will take care to prevent your
being unhappy.


Miss LOVELESS, [ embraces M iss Gower.] I did not see you before Lucy. You are
all goodness; but what can make me happy now? I have a mamma who hates me.


Mrs. GROVES. Do not make use of so harsh an expression, my (...) girl; nor
fancy, because every wish you form is (...) gratified, that you are to be for
ever miserable. Go frequently comes out of evil, and this little trial is
perhaps only intended to sweeten some future blessing.


Miss LOVELESS. I know I have a great deal to learn, my good Governess; but
this is the hardest task I ever set about in my life; under your instruction I
hope to make my mind easier, but you must allow me to be very unhappy for I
have a mother who despises me, and treats me with every mark of indifference
and contempt.


Mrs. GROVES. Your trial of her has been very short, and though your wishes
have been disappointed at present* do not despond; time brings mighty things to
pass; trust then to its lenient hand, and hope, that if you endeavor to
overcome your mamma's prejudices you will meet success.


Miss LOVELESS. Oh! madam, I would do any thing to please her; but what she
thinks perfection I have been taught to call inperfection. How then can I hope,
that even time will render me pleasing to her.


Mrs. GROVES. You engross me so entirely I am quite rude to Mrs. Cartwright;
pray, madam, sit down. Come, young ladies, we will all be seated, and then
perhaps we may learn the cause of this extreme despondency.


Mrs. CARTWRIGHT. I rejoice that my dear young lady is with friends so
considerate; indeed, madam, she has passed a most uncomfortable day; and I fear
her mamma is not capable of thinking beyond herself and her own daughters.


Mrs. GROVES. I am sorry Mrs. Cartwright that you are obliged to confirm this
sad intelligence; yet still I indulge hope. I have known many bad
mothers-in-law prevailed on by the respectful duty of their adopted children,
to be tender and fond of them; why then should my amiable Maria despair, if she
exerts the perfections Nature has given her to so laudable a purpose?


Miss GOWER. Oh! madam, you always raise depressed spirits by the wisdom of
your discourse; I could almost persuade my friend to forget sorrow, and smile
among us once more.


Miss LOVELESS. I wish it were possible to forget the unkind treatment I have
received. Cartwright knows all I have suffered; and after enduring every slight
throughout the day, my mamma was cruel enough to continue it even to the last,
though she knew I was so soon to return to school; her daughters too, unlike
you, my dear Lucy, only looked at me to sneer and find fault.


Mrs. GROVES. I allow it is a very trying situation, and calls for all your
good sense to be easy under it; but no difficulties can be overcome without
attempts. I had once a scholar in a situation similar to yours; her
mother-in-law continued her as long as she could at school, an when forced by
the censures of the world to take her home, treated her with every species of
neglect; and nor contented with the misery she herself inflicted, suffered her
own daughters to use her ill, and made her as subservient as if their domestic.
For her papa's sake she bore this treatment without a complaint; at length it
pleased God to afflict her mother with a severe illness, her daughter-in-law
never left her bedside; she administ^^ (...) her medicines; attended to the
making every (...) thought good for her, and gave up every (...) One day,
thinking her mamma asleep, she stole into the next room, where her sisters were
making a great noise, entreated them to desist, and begged they would consider
that perhaps their mother's life depended on her sleep not being disturbed: her
entreaties were without effect, they only abused her, nay, even beat her, she
therefore shut them in, and returned slowly to her mamma, and again seated
herself by her bedside. The lady heard all that passed, and struck with her
amiable disposition, when she returned, put back the curtain, and taking her
hand, begged her pardon for having been so unjust to her, promising, when she
recovered, to make her every amends in her power. This promise she faithfully
kept, and the good daughter now reaps the reward of her patience and
perseverance.


Miss LOVELESS. So sweet a story gives me emulation at least; to be sure I have
been sadly disappointed, but I know it is unbecoming in me to appear to see any
thing improper in my father's wife; from henceforth, therefore, I will try to
forget her unkind treatment, and never will I mention it out of this company.
Concealment is my duty, and that at least I am capable of practicing.


Mrs. GROVES. You distinguish very properly, my dear Miss Loveless. We should
be perfect ourselves, before we venture to arraign the conduct of another.
Sport not with the character of a parent, it is a sacred deposit when placed in
our hands, and it would be treachery to show any thing but the bright side.
Miss Rawlins would tell me a mother in-law is no parent, but I am of a
different opinion, and think your father's wife claims every kind of dutiful
respect that ought to be paid to a real mother; nay more, the child who behaves
improperly to a mother-in-law, would have treated her own mother worse.


Miss LOVELLSS. It is my determination, dear madam, to follow your advice in
all things; experiencing, as I do, hourly, your kindness, I should be
ungrateful to retain my grief. Your narrative gives me hope; besides, my papa
assured me solemnly that he would make me happy. Cartwright, I begin already to
recover my spiris,


Mrs. CARTWRIGHT. I rejoice to see it my dear miss; reflect always that many
have greater sorrows than yours' without your comforts; but I must now leave
you, as it is, I shall not be in time to send in my lady's supper, although she
never has it till ten o'clock.. The leaving you as I do with such worthy
friends, relieves my heart from its uneasiness on your account. One
affectionate embrace, my dear, my beloved child! may you be blessed and happy!
cherish your good disposition, and it will relieve, if it can-not cure your
sorrows.

[A knock at the door,
^rs. GROVES. I wonder what visitor is coming at this unusual hour. Go, my dear
girls, it is prayer time, and Miss Tate will wait for you.

[ As they rise to go out, enter Mr. Loveless. His daughter starts with
surprise!]
Mr. LOVELESS. Start not at seeing me, my dear Maria; I come to give you
pleasure. He takes her hand, leads her to her seat, and sits down by her.] Pray
Mrs. Groves be seated; my sweet little Lucy, how do you do? Cartwright, return,
I shall go home in the coach as it is late, and make the servant lead my
horses, we shall with ease get back in two hours.


Miss. LOVELESS. Who, my dear papa, could have thought of seeing you tonight.
I hope you will not catch cold.


Mr. LOVELESS. I have not rode farther than I do every fine evening; but if I
had, do you think I should mind any fatigue that was to be a mean of relieving
your anxiety, my beloved child? You were, when you left me, in visible
distress, and I come once more to entreat you will banish sorrow; rely on the
assurances of a tender parent, and believe, that while I have breath, you shall
he made as happy as I can render you.


Miss LOVELESS, [ throwing her arms ronnd his neck.] My dear! dear papa! how
shall I thank you for this goodness? Indeed I will do every thing you desire
me; and try to be as happy as you wish to make me.


Mr. LOVELESS. That determination is spoken like yourself, my dear Maria. Mrs.
Groves, I speak without reserve before you. Your tenderness and care of my
daughter demand my warmest gratitude and confidence. Maria shall never be
rendered unhappy by any act of mine; nor shall she find an unpleasant home. Her
aunt, who is the worthiest of women, will rejoice to be a mother to her; it was
her wish to be so at the time Maria lost her own; but I knew her fondness for
her niece would even prevent her being taught such necessary accomplishments as
were requisite. When therefore you, madam, have completed these, my sister
shall be gratified and made happy, by having her dear Maria to live with her.


Mrs. GROVES. Your affectionate attention, sir, must give Miss Loveless peace
and joy; she has ever hitherto been all we could wish her, and I doubt not her
becoming shortly sufficiently instructed in every branch of her education, to
be the adopted child of her worthy and respectable aunt.


Miss LOVELESS. How ungrateful must I be, if I did not take pains to please
such a father, and such friends! Believe me, dear papa, I will never designedly
offend you, or forget the many benefits your goodness has conferred upon me.


Mr. LOVELESS. I have all that reliance upon your conduct which I think the
goodness of your disposition demands; but could wish your peace of mind
restored by other reasons, in addition to my assurances. You are, now, Maria,
come to an age to distinguish, and are blessed with an understanding capable of
so doing; hitherto you have known but one misfortune, that indeed a great one,
and I should hope you incapable of ever forgetting it; the loss of a good and
tender mother is hard to supply; yet how many alleviations have you to be
thankful for?-that dear parent's life was spared long enough to form your young
mind, and direct your understanding; you knew and felt her worth, and were
sensible that imitating her in every thing would be the height of perfection in
yourself; this one consideration ought to over-balance any little distress, as
you know that it is the lot of persons in every rank and degree to meet with
some disappointments.


Mrs. GROVES. I, Sir will venture to answer for Miss Loveless, that she will
think as you very sensibly advise her: sentiments similar to yours she
expressed to me before you came, and I doubt not her persevering in resolutions
that are calculated to render both herself and her friends happy.


Miss LOVELESS. Indeed, madam, I will do every thing I can to please you all,
and hope, if ever you find me forgetful of my promises, that you will kindly
tell me, and one word will restore my obedience.


Mr LOVELESS. This once I speak to you of your new sisters; but as I am become
their father I am determined, if I cannot alter their mode of thinking, I will
never expose their follies. They are to be pitied, because they never were
taught better; nor could the attention and care they met with at one of our
best schools overcome their perverted ideas; the elegant accomplishments so
easily acquired there, have only, in them, added to their errors, because they
increased their conceit without increasing their knowledge, and Mrs. Trusty,
hurt at having scholars whom she could not mould to her wishes, has written to
me, desiring I will inform your mamma, that she must decline receiving them any
more. Thus you see, Maria, that ignorance and conceit bring their own
punishment; yet these unhappy girls will not, I fear, profit even by so glaring
a proof of it, and will only despise the woman who could act with so much
honor.


Miss GOWER. How ashamed I should be if my governess would not let me remain at
school! but while I copy you, my dear Maria, there will not be any danger of my
being so disgraced.


Mrs. GROVES. No, my dears; I am thankful that there is no cause to apprehend
my being reduced to so disagreeable an alternative on your accounts, but I much
fear there will be a necessity of sending away Miss Rawlings; she is quite
incorrigible, and though I shall be very sorry to distress her worthy
mother-in-law, yet I cannot risque the injury her example may be to my other
scholars.


M r. LOVELESS. I am sorry, madam, you have among your young ladies one so
little deserving. It is to be lamented that children are so apt to be led by
bad examples, when they may always, is they please, set a good one before their
eyes. I have now, Cartwright, something to say to you. [ She rises from her
(...) very respectfully] Sit down; I look upon you a^ a friend^ (...) domestic,
and I am sure your late worthy mistress would lament your being in that
situation to any person but herself. Accept, therefore, of this deed, it
settles on you for life thirty pounds a year: do me the favor to witness it
Mrs. Groves.


Mrs. CARTWRIGHT. Oh! Sir! how shall I speak my thanks?


Miss LOVELESS [ in great joy.] Thank you! thank you! dear papa! I wish you
joy, my good Cartwright; my second mother.


Mr. LOVELESS. Pray no more thanks; you distress me. My gift is neither equal
to your merit or misfortunes; but my abilities will not permit more. I must
request the favor of you to continue in your place as long as we now stay in
the country, which will not be many days more, Mrs. Loveless dislikes
retirement, and I do not imagine she will again pay this part of the world a
visit. If, therefore, you like it, still take the care of my house; under this
promise, that if ever my family come to reside here I will send you timely
notice to remove.


Mrs. CARTWRIGHT. I will certainly, Sir, do every thing you wish me; indeed, to
speak the truth, it would break my heart to leave you, and my dear young lady,
as long as I live.


Mr. LOVELESS. Then you never shall; my Maria shall be your mistress in future,
subject to no other control, but that of seeing that she makes your days easy
and happy.


M rs. CARTWRIGHT. My heart will break with joy; but for my late dear mistress,
sorrow would long ago have ended my life. Sure the most wretched should never
despair, when good so constantly comes out of evil.


Mr. LOVELESS. Well, my worthy friend, we shall meet often, and when I come for
a night or two we must indulge in talking of past scenes My dear child will
draw me frequently to this part of the world; with you and her, I shall forget
that I have any vexations.


Miss LOVELESS. I shall be impatient to see you again, papa, for you know it is
a great whil since I passed any time with you.


Mr. LOVELESS. Very well, my love, I understand you however, I will come down
again soon, perhaps in a fortnight, and, if you can obtain the permission of
your governess, you and my little Lucy shall come and pass a week with me, and
then I think, Cartwright, you will repent of your promise.


Mrs. CARTWRIGHT. I do not fear, Sir; the pleasure of seeing you and the dear
children once more together will renew my youth,


M r. LOVELESS. [ looks at his watch] It is near time; we must go now. Do not
look grave, Maria; let your father have the comfort of leaving you with a
smiling countenance. Consider my happiness depends on you; if you are content,
my heart will be at ease.


Miss LOVELESS. Indeed, my dear papa, I am truly happy. I shall do nothing but
smile for a great while. Pray offer my duty to my mamma, and love to my
sisters. I shall still indulge the hope of making them love me. Much as I am
attached to my dear aunt, I will not desert you to live with her, till every
effort that I can devise for gaining the affection of my new relations fails of
success.


Mr. LOVELESS. My dear, my amiable girl! may your dutifulness and generosity
meet with their just reward. Depend on me, I will say every thing that is
proper; and this attention endears you to me more than ever. God bless you! [
He embraces her with great affection, then kisses Lucy.] I shall, my dear Lucy,
carry a good account of you to your parents, and brothers and sisters. Farewell;
do not dream too much of the week we are to pass together. Mrs. Groves, I wish
you a good evening. Cartwright, you will follow me.

[Goes out.
Mrs. CARTWRIGHT. I will only stay to give my dear Miss Loveless one kiss.
Adieu* my beloved girl; and my other child, my sweet Miss Gower. [ Salutes them
both.]

Mrs. Groves good night.

[Goes out hastily.
Mrs. GROVES. Well, my dear girls, I think we may now make ourselves perfectly
contented. You have such a father, Miss Loveless, that you can never be unhappy
whilst he lives. Go into the little parlour, I will follow you; where I shall
permit you to sup with me, as all the young ladies have been in bed this hour;
we will there talk over the accurrences of the day, and I shall relate to you
several other little histories that recur to my memory, which I flatter myself
will confirm your hopes of gaining the affection of Mrs: Loveless and the Miss
Blombergs. For my own part, I am fully convinced, that when there are
dissensions in mixed families, there are usually faults on both sides; and that
if one party has but good sense enough to yield, they may in time overcome both
ill nature and prejudice.

[They go out severally, [The curtain drops.]
END OF VOL. I.
VOLUME II.

THE REFORMATION. AND THE MATERNAL SISTER.

A DRAMA, IN THREE ACTS

PREFACE.
IN pursuance of the plan laid down in the former part of this little work, I
now present my Readers with two additional Dramatic Pieces; in which I have
endeavored to show, that a life of dissipation is dreadful in its
consequences, as it puts a ^^op to mental improvements, destroys domestic
harmony, is highly injurious to society, and endangers the loss of eternal
happiness.

It is impossible, in the compass of so short a work as the present, to place
this important matter in its strongest ligh^; neither can advice given in this,
or any other mode, be expected to have due weight, unless enforced by parental
authority and example; a proper exertion of the one, and circumspection in
regard to the other, would spare many mothers the sorrow of seeing their
blooming offspring sink into untimely graves; and the bitter re^^^rse that most
succeed [ if any sense of religion remains in the mind] for neglecting to
prepare them for so awful a change.

Full of health and gaiety, young persons, are apt to imagine their strength
equal to every exertion which their love of insatiable pleasure may require.
They expose themselves alternately to the excesses of heat and cold; they defy
fatigue; they abridge themselves of their rest, or they take repose in those
hours, when the air, cleared from noxious vapors by the morning sun, is full
of invigorating freshness; which would give strength to their bodies, and
improve the natural cheerfulness of their minds; not considering, that till
their growth is completed, the utmost care is requisite to establish a good
constitution. For such imprudent irregularities, the inexperience and
impetuosity of youth may be admitted as an apology; but what can excuse the
mother who, frequently for her own gratification, leads on her daughters in so
dangerous a career? Many instances does the present day afford, of persons, who
like Mrs. Loveless encourage, nay cherish those very faults, which it is their
duty to eradicate.

Sorry I am to say, that such reformations as are exhibited in these Dramatic
Pieces, are not so much pictures of what really happens in the world, as ideal
representations of such as ought to take place; yet, I flatter myself, they
will prove acceptable to mothers of another description, and useful to those
for whom they are particularly designed; young ladies, whose school-education
is completed, and who are arrived at that period of their lives, when the
instruction given them, should have for its immediate object the cultivation of
the Domestic Virtues, with a view to their filling, with propriety, the
important offices of WIVES and MOTHERS.

Could the elder daughters of families be prevailed on to imitate, as far as
opportunity admits, the example of the MATERNAL SISTER. they would certainly
find the benefit of it in their own improvement, the increase of their parents
affections, the attachment and respectfulness of their younger brothers and
sisters, the esteem of the world, and the blessing of Heaven.

PERSONS of the DRAMA.
Mrs. SUTTON. Miss SUTTON. Miss FANNY SUTTON. Mr. LOVELESS, Mrs, LOVELESS. Miss
LOVELESS. Miss BLOMBERG. Miss AMELIABLOMBERG. Mrs. BENFIELD. Doctor BURGESS.
Nurse, Servant.
THE REFORMATION A DRAMA, IN THREE ACTS,
ACT I.
SCENE, a Parlour.
Miss Loveless and Miss Sutton sitting at a Table working. Miss SUTTON. HOW
fortunate has my life hitherto been, dear Maria! an invariably kind
mother-in-law, succeeded to the tenderest of real ones; and for some time I
have been blessed with the constant society of my most esteemed friend, whose
amiable virtues endear her to every heart.


Miss LOVELESS Do not let your partiality over-rate my worth, Isabella; when
you consider what examples I have had before my eyes from my infancy, it is
rather wonderful that I am not a perfect character, than that I should
endeavor to be an humble copy of their excellencies.


Miss SUTTON. What astonishes me in your conduct, is, the sweetness with which
you bear misfortune and disappointment. I for my part, have no merit in being
contented and happy, because every circumstance has commenced to make me so;
but you, on the contrary, have known sorrow and mortification without
complaining.


Miss LOVELESS. If I really possess the fortitude you kindly attribute to me,
my dear friend, I am chiefly indebted for it to my honored mother, who from
the dawn of reason, studied to strengthen my mind to bear disappointments; her
kind endeavors were seconded by the arguments of my worthy governess; and at
length, strongly confirmed by the conduct and precepts of my good aunt, during
the two years I lived with her as her adopted daughter. The loss of such dear
instructors, called into practice the lessons which had been so repeatedly
taught me.


Miss SUTTON. But now that you have lost all these dear connections, you are
still contented.


Miss LOVELESS. And so I ought to be. It is true, I do, and ever shall regret
them; no time will wear out the remembrance of their perfections, or my
gratitude for their kindness to me. But ought I to repine for blessings past,
who have not only the tenderest of fathers, but, in Mrs. Sutton, one of the
kindest of friends? she has taken me as one of her own family, and never
suffers me to feel any other ill effects from the death of my relations, than
the loss of their society.


Miss SUTTON. And yet, Maria, you have great sensibility; therefore, the steady
calmness of your temper must have been acquired, and I should suppose with some
difficulty?


Miss LOVELESS. It is true, that by observing the good instructions that have
been given me, I have been able to subdue a natural quickness in my temper, and
I have had many opportunities of remarking the advantages of a meek resigned
spirit, in comparison of a fretful discontented mind; the former lessens every
evil, nay, often turns them into blessings; whilst the latter (...) real
misfortune, and casts a gloom over the (...) scenes in life.


Miss SUTTON. You reason very justly, my dear Maria. (...) convinced by my own
experience, that discontent (...) greatest of all tormentors. I was for a short
tim^ a prey to its corrosive bitterness; but thanks to the prudence of my good
mother-in-law, I have long been free from its pangs and hope never more to
endure what cannot be recollected even at this dista^^ period without pain;
because the remembrance of what I then felt, is inseparably connected with a
sense of my own folly, which alone subjected me to such uncomfortable feelings.


Miss LOVELESS. Through the unremitting attention of my dear mamma, to point
out to my observation every circumstance by which I might improve my temper,
two instances in particular made indelible impressions on my mind. The one was,
of a lady who had, amongst several other fine children a son that was afflicted
with fits from his birth, which had so impaired his faculties, that he was
become an idiot. The poor miserable object was suddenly taken off in one of his
fits, whilst we were visiting at her house. His mother, instead of being
thankful for so great a merry, threw herself into agonies of sorrow, refused to
be comforted, and uttered such shocking expressions, as I cannot recollect
without horror.


Miss SUTTON. She certainly was very blameable; but I suppose the other
instance was a contrast to this?


Miss LOVELESS. It was indeed. Poor Mrs. Colding! I think I now have you before
my eyes! This amiable woman was deprived of the best of husbands by a
consumption. Scarcely had she reconciled herself to this severe loss when her
only son, a promising youth of sixteen, was seized with a frenzy fever, which
put an end to his life in three days. My mother, who was her nearest friend,
prevailed on her to come to our house, in hope of giving her comfort; by which
means, I had an opportunity of seeing the power of patient resignation, in its
full force. This excellent woman struggled with her grief; she opened her m^nd
to consolation -- never was heard to utter one repining word, but actually
overcame her sorrow; and rejoiced, that those so dear to her were removed to a
happier state! When I was deprived of my dear mother. I called to my mind the
different behavior of these two Indies, and the lessons which had been given
me on their examples, and found them very useful. I assure you, Isabella.


Miss SUTTON. Without witnessing such instances as you mention my dear, my
mind, which was once likely to become the seat of the Furies, has not only been
calmed and improved by the instructions of my present dear mamma, but also by
attention to opinons given in company, concerning people judged to possess
violent uncontrouled passions, and others who submitted to the decrees of
Providence like christians. -- But here comes my dear mamma.


[ Enter Mrs. Sutton.] Miss LOVELESS. You have made a long stay at the
Pump-room, dear madam; but I assure you, Isabella and I have not triffled in
your absence. We have been conversing on the advantages of patient resignation
to the evils incident to mortality.


Mrs. SUTTON. It is a fortunate circumstance that your conversation has brought
your minds into a proper state, to hear the news I bring you, which will
occasion you much concern.


Miss LOVELESS. You alarm me greatly, madam! I fear to name my father!


Mrs. SUTTON He is perfectly well, my dear, I have just parted with him. His
late silence has been occasioned by a particular hurry of business, and
frequent journies. To keep you no longer in suspense, poor Miss Blomberg is
dying of a consumption, brought on entirely by habits of dissipation; nor could
your father prevail with her to try the Bristol waters, until the full season
commenced, for she would stay in town to go to court on the birth day; and
since she came here, has, until within this week, gone to every ball. At the
last she fainted three times. Now she is too bad even to walk from her bed to a
sofa, but is carried; yet they carefully conceal her danger from her; suffer
her to hear nothing but the most trifling novels; amuse her mind with planning
the most becoming dresses for a sick person, and admit all company that she may
not be melancholy.


Miss LOVELESS. Poor unhappy girl! a very few days may terminate her present
existence. Surely folly, at least, should be kept from her, and death be
accompanied by decency.


Mrs. SUTTON. I was surprised at meeting Mr. Loveless this mouring; he rejoiced
exceedingly at seeing me. Indeed it is fortunate that our yearly ramble, to
show you different parts of England, brought us at this time to the Wells, as
it will certainly be productive of comfort to him, and may give us an
opportunity of being serviceable to Mrs. Loveless and Amelia; as for the other
poor thing, she is beyond relief I fear.


Miss LOVELESS. Should I not go immediately to my papa's lodgings, madam, and
wait upon him and the ladies?


Mrs. SUTTON. Certainly, my dear. But arm your mind with resolution: the
interview with Juliana must be a trying one. Can any sight be more affecting,
than to behold a young creature, who might long have been an ornament to
society, falling a victim to fashion and folly! [ Mrs. Sutton rings the bell.]
Thomas shall attend you as he knows their house, for I sent him from the
Pump-room with a complimentary message, to which they returned for answer, that
they were all well, excepting Miss Blomberg, and should be glad to see us when
agreeable. But still I think you ought to go first alone; for you must consider
yourself as a child of the family.


Miss LOVELESS [ sighs.] I wish with all my heart they would regard me in that
light.

[Thomas opens the Door.]
Mrs. SUTTON. Attend Miss Loveless.

[ Miss Loveless goes out attended by Thomas.]
Miss SUTTON. How I pity poor Maria! Suppose Miss Blomberg should die while she
is with her?


Mrs. SUTTON. Distressing as such an event would be to a feeling mind, I hope
the desire of affording comfort to her surviving friends will support her under
it. I have no doubt of Maria's fortitude, she is not one of those week selfish
persons who pay attention to their own feelings only; these she can nobly
restrain, when the distress of others requires such an exertion.


Miss SUTTON. Rich in every virtue yourself, my dear mamma, you attribute the
same goodness to others; and indeed, in this instance I perfectly agree with
you; for I believe, Maria wants only your experience to make her your very
counterpart.


Mrs. SUTTON. On every occasion her conduct does honor to her instructors. But
where is Fanny?


Miss SUSSON. She is writing to Caroline, and giving her an account of our
journey.


Mrs. SUTTON. That is kind. I have written to your papa and our dear boys. The
worthy Mrs. Cartwright will be their mother during our absence; her living with
us gives you these excursions, I could not otherwise leave my younger children.


Miss SUTTON. You are all goodness, madam, and have made us a truly happy
family.


Mrs. SUTTON. And you have all contributed to my felicity, by so kindly
accepting my endeavors to promote yours. But, come my love, by this time the
coach waits to carry us to Clifden. Let us seek your sister.

[they go out.
SCENN changes to Mr. Loveless's Lodgings.
[Miss Blomberg lying on a Sofa, Mrs. Benfield waiting on her.] Miss BLOMBERG,
[ in a hollow faint voice.] How hard this confinement is upon me! How
provoking, that at eighteen, I must be obliged to give up pleasures which court
me with inviting smiles, because I have a tiresome cough, and cannot walk
across the room!


Mrs. BENFIELD. I am sorry, madam, to hear you regret the loss of such
pleasures as a misfortune; you may live, I hope, to enjoy greater than those.


Miss BLOMBERG. O, it is impossible I should ever add to the round of amusement
I was in before my illness. You know, Benfield, there were not hours for every
engagement. And now to come to Bristol for the first time, and be forced by
illness, to give up going to the Rooms! It is the greatest misfortune that ever
befell one.


Mrs. BENFIELD. It is without doubt a great mortification to you, madam, and
your illness is to be sure a misfortune; but how many people would smile to
hear you call the loss of going to the Rooms, by such a name?


Miss BLOMBERG. How can you talk so absurdly? Have I not youth, beauty, riches,
and a mamma who wishes me to partake of every amusement; and am I not prevented
by a weekness which hinders my even standing on my feet? Can any thing be more
provoking? [ Bursts into tears of peevishness.] But you have no feeling?


Mrs. BENFIELD. Indeed, my dear lady, I have the greatest compassion for you;
but must confess, it is excited by your declining health, not by your loss of
amusement.


Miss BLOMBERG. Every body is unfeeling to me. My mamma and sister have no time
to spare for me; and if they had, my spirits are now so low, and I am so weak,
I should make them melancholy. All my acquaintance too forsake me, because I
can no longer contribute to their amusement, and I have not a friend in the
world!


Mrs. BENFIELD. Yes, you have, and now at Bristol. Your papa has just informed
me, that Miss Loveless is unexpectedly come to this place with Mrs. Sutton, and
her two eldest daughters. They travel, it seems, every summer for pleasure and
improvement.


Miss BLOMBERG. How can you call her my Friend? A girl none of us have ever
been fond of -- one whom I hate -- and yet I know not why.


Mrs. BENFIELD. O, madam! I also once disliked her, but must confess, my
dislike arose from envy of her superior goodness and accomplishments.


Miss BLOMBERG Surely you dream, Benfield. Miss Loveless has never visited us
since you lived with me. How then can you know her?

[ Enter a Maid.]
MAID. Miss Loveless is in the breakfast parlour, madam, and begs to be
admitted to you.


Miss BLOMBERG [in great agitation.] I will not see her. -- I cannot see her.
-- I hate her company more than that of any one.


Mrs. BENFIELD. Pray compose yourself, Miss Blomberg. I will, if you please,
attend Miss Loveless, and beg her to postpone her visit to you.


Miss BLOMBERG. Postpone it! She shall never come. I know she only wants to
triumph over me, because her odious country life preserved her in health, while
the pleasures of the world have deprived me of mine. [ She bursts into tears
and faints away.


Mrs. BENFIELD, [supporting her.] Poor lady! Mary run for the Nurse, we must
lay her down.

[ Exit Maid.
[ Enter Nurse.] NURSE. Is Miss Blomberg dead?

[ Mrs. Benfield assists in laying Miss Blomberg down, then speaks.
Mrs. BENFIELD. I hope she revives. I must leave her to your care, Nurse, as I
am wanted below.

[ Exit Mrs. Benfield.
Miss BLOMBERG [recovering. Where am I? O, Nurse, I am very bad. Do you think I
shall die?


NURSE. Lack-a-day! No, my lady. You are worth twenty dead ones: If you will
but take your good stuff, we shall soon see you again all glittering in gold
and jewels, sweeping your long trail behind you, going to the Ball-room, where
all the fine gentlemen will crowd about to dance with you.


Miss BLOMBERG. Did you ever see any one as ill as me, recover?


NURSE. Have I? Aye, twenty, and twenty at the end of that. Never think of
Death. You cannot die until your time is come.


Miss BLOMBERG. Do not mention the word Death any more, Nurse; I cannot bear to
hear it. I shall faint again if you say that dreadful word.


NURSE. Well, well I will not, I will not. Never fear the old skeleton. Lie
still, my good lady, and try if you can sleep.

[The Scene drops.]
[SCENE changes to a Parlour, where Miss Loveless sits by herself reading a
News-paper, which, upon hearing footsteps, she throws down, then speaks.] Miss
LOVELESS. What can all this hurrying mean? Poor Juliana! much I fear her end
approaches. By my father's account of her, there can be no hope? and yet I met
her mother and sister as gay as ever. Is it that they deceive themselves? Or is
the fashion to have no feeling? But my father told me her situation in their
hearing -- Ah! poor infatuated mother and sister, too soon, for your own peace,
will you be convinced of her danger.

[ Enter Mrs. Benfield, [ weeping.]
Mrs. BENFIELD. I am sorry, madam --

Miss LOVELESS, [ surprised.] Miss Rawlins! I did not expect the pleasure of
meeting you here. Are these the lodgings belonging to Mr. Loveless?


Mrs. BENFIELD. They are, Miss Loveless. And grieved am I to tell you, that
Blomberg is too ill to see you.


Miss LOVELESS. I dread to ask your opinion of her situation?


Mrs. BENFIELD. I sear she cannot survive many days, and will die as she has
lived, thoughtless of futurity.


Miss LOVELESS. Surely, somebody should gently lead her mind to think of her
situation, and, without alarming, sooth her to reflection. But, my dear
school-fellow, how kind you are in thus leaving the amusements of this gay
place to attend a dying friend. I did not know you were acquainted in the
family.


Mrs. BENFIELD, [confused.] I have no claim, believe me, dear Miss Loveless, to
your good opinion. -- Is it possible my improprieties should not have reached
your ears?


Miss LOVELESS. Perhaps the situation I have been in since we parted, which
prevented my making enquiries after you, might also occasion your never being
mentioned, to me. I was sent for by my aunt soon after you left school, who, in
a very short time, fell into a decline; two years put a period to her life.
During her illness, I had but little intercourse with the world, for I confined
myself almost constantly to her apartment. Since her death, I have lived with
Mrs. Sutton, my aunt's intimate friend. As long as my worthy governess lived, I
kept up a correspondence with her, and was going to pay her a visit, where
probably I should have heard of my old play-fellow, but Mrs. Groves's sudden
death, deprived me of the pleasure I promised my self, in the society of so
inestimable a friend.


Miss. BENFIELD. It would be cruel to take up your time in relating a story
which will give you pain, although my unhappiness is entirely the consequence
of my own perverseness. I will not therefore, madam, trouble you with the
particulars which have reduced me to the humiliating condition of waiting maid
to two fine ladies.


Miss LOVELESS. And are your really in that unhappy state? I am impatient to
hear your story; -- perhaps it may be in my power to mitigate some of your
woes, at least my inclination is good. Proceed therefore, I am all attention.


Mrs. BENFIELD. How can I sufficiently thank you, my dear Miss Loveless, for
your kind indulgence to an unhappy creature! I cannot give you now the whole
history of my shameful misconduct, for I expect every minute to be called to
Miss Blomberg, I must therefore, hasten to tell you, that after treating my
dear father and his amiable wife, with the utmost ingratitude and disrespect,
in return for their unparalleled kindness and indulgence, I formed a connection
with a worthless man, of low degree, and consented to a clandestine marriage.
-- An unhappy step which I have had cause to repent from the first moment I was
rash enough to take it! I exchanged my dear father's house for a mean miserable
lodging. And soon as the wretch, I had married, found he was deceived in the
information which had been given him, that I could claim my mother's jointure
on the day of my marriag, he began to treat me in the cruelest manner; in
consequence of such inhumanity, I was soon seized with a violent illness, in
which he abandoned me, and I have never since heard of him. I happily recovered
through the tender care of my landlady; and finding an absolute necessity for
doing something for a livelihood, [for I had not courage to return to my
father] I requested this good woman to make enquiries for me; and by her
recommendation, I now wait upon the Miss Blombergs. So far from repining at the
mortifications I endure, I regard them as the just punishment of my
disobedience.


Miss LOVELESS. I am greatly affected with your narrative. It confirms me in
the opinion I have heard my dear mother often express, "that clandestine
marriages are generally unhappy ones."Do not think, that by saying this, I mean
to cast reflections on you, my friend; it would be cruel to do so, as you are
sensible of your errors, and are so great a sufferer by them. I would not add
to your afflictions, but if I could lessen them, it would give me much
satisfaction. Parhaps, with the assistance of my good Mrs. Sutton, I may be a
mean of conciliating matters between you and your parents, if you will allow me
to act as a mediatrix.


Mrs. BENFIELD. O, my dear Miss Loveless! I am unworthy of the kind regard you
express for me. Throw not away your charity on so undeserving an object.
Distress not my dear parents with any solicitations in my favor. I have
offended them beyond forgiveness; and am in a much happier situation than after
my inexcusable folly I could ever have expected to be.


Miss LOVELESS. Well, we will resume this subject at another opportunity; in
the mean time, assure yourself of my best office. -- We were talking of Miss
Blomberg's insensibility of her danger. Is it possible that she can stand
thoughtless of death on the verge of eternity? What a melancholy picture! What
a sacrifice to pleasure! To pleasure? It is a profanation of the word to call
it so.


Mrs. BENFIELD. Indeed you say true, madam; the lives which the ladies in this
family lead, are too fatiguing for the strongest constitutions. -- Yet they go
on in their career, left they should miss any place of fashionable resort, or
that the world should suppose they are not at the top of the ton; and I verily
believe, that frequently, when a good deal indisposed, they stifle their
complaints, and affect to be in perfect health, rather than give up a party,
which it is impossible for them to enjoy.


Miss LOVELESS. It is my good fortune to be so far ignorant of the manners of
the fashionable world, as to be unable to give my judgment on this subject from
my own observation; and I have more cause then ever to rejoice, that the
accidents of my life, have, until very lately, kept me in retirement. -- But
let me not detain you any longer from Miss Blomberg. Should she, or any of the
family, express a desire to see me, do me the favor of sending for me, and I
will attend them immediately. Our lodgings are but a few doors off. This card
will direct you to them. Farewell! May our prospects brighten!


Mrs. BENFIELD. Could my wishes avail, no could should obscure the bright
sunshine of your days. O, my dear, my amiable friend, how little do I appear in
my own estimation, when conscience draws a comparison between your excellencies
and my indiscretion.


Miss LOVELESS. I blush to receive such praises. Remember me to Miss Blomberg.
Adieu.

[ She goes out.


Mrs. BENFIELD. What an amiable creature! Lost and undone as I am, it is a
blessing that I can still admire what is right and regret that I have swerved
from it. But I must attend my mistress. What a word from me who was born to
command! -- And had I known how to respect myself, I should never have been
reduced to a state of servitude.

[ She goes out.


END of ACT I.
ACT II.
Miss Loveless and the two Miss Suttons sitting together. [ Enter Mrs. Sutton
with a Letter in her hand.] Mrs. SUTTON. THERE, my dear Maria, read what I have
written to Mrs. Rawlins; her goodness will make our best advocate in behalf of
the poor pentitent; and I hope she will be able to prevail on her father to
grant her forgiveness.


Miss LOVELESS, [reads, -- then speaks.] I think, madam, you have said every
thing that a feeling mind could dictate; and sincerely do I join my wishes to
yours, that this letter may be successful.


Miss SUTTON. I am astonished, to think it should be in human nature, for a
young person well brought up, to act as Miss Rawlins has done.


Mrs. SUTTON. Nor is it in human nature, my dear, to commit such enormities,
where the better part of that nature, Reason, is suffered to prevail. Miss
Rawlins's behavior is a melancholy instance, among a thousand others that
might be produced, of the ill effects of indulging headstrong passions. In vain
does parental authority exert its influence over a mind resolved to resist it;
the ear of the self-willed is deaf to the kindest admonitions. All that a
parent can do, is to recommend the best path; but if the child will think her
knowledge superior to that of her instructors, and refuse to obey the advice of
experience, she must fall, and become miserable, like poor Miss Rawlins.


Miss FANNY SUTTON. What a rock have we escaped, my dear mamma, left, as we
were, for a time, to our own guidance, or rather to the fatal influence of
servants. How thankful ought we to be, that our minds were not so entirely
depraved, as to make us insensible of your kindness, and to prevent our seeing
the advantages of obeying you, otherwise, we might have involved ourselves in
similar distresses with this unfortunate young lady.


Mrs. SUTTON. It is very true, my dear. But though I can by no mean acquit Miss
Rawlins, yet I must say, that she has an excuse which you could not have
pleaded. Her mamma was the very reverse of yours, and lived just long enough to
strengthen the weeds springing in her child's mind, which was the proper
business of maternal care to eradicate. The unfortunate prejudice, which in
common with many other young people, Miss Rawlins took up against a
mother-in-law, prevented her listening to the admonitions of hers, which
increased her stubborness to such pitch, that nothing but the miseries she has
endured, could have evercome them.


Miss LOVELESS. How different has been my lot! Had I been blessed with such a
friend in my father's wife, my happiness would have been complete.


Mrs. SUTTON. Perfect happiness, my dear girl, is not the lot of mortals; the
greatest share of it we can obtain, is from a self-approving conscience.
Endeavor to do your duty in every relation of life, and this blessing will be
yours, from whence will spring, as its natural fruits, peace of mind, and
cheerfulness of temper. These, I am much deceived, if you do not all three
already enjoy.


Miss SUTTON. I hope we do, in general, mamma. But the dreadful state of Miss
Blomberg, and the misfortunes of Miss Rawlins, have cast a gloom over our
minds, which we find it difficult to remove.


Mrs. SUTTON. By admitting the tender feelings of humanity for the distresses
of others, you act agreeably to the principles of benevolence and christianity.
But let me warn you against indulging them to excess. Take a tender part in the
affliction of your fellow creatures of every degree, -- relieve their wants, --
give them consolation to the utmost of your power; -- But, at the same time,
support your own spirits, or your life will be a burden to you, and your
company, disagreeable to your friends; nay, you will incapacitate yourselves
for the kind offices you engage in.

[ A knock at the door, a Servant enters, and announces Mrs. Loveless and Miss
Amelia Blomberg. The ceremony of meeting and sitting down ended, Mrs. Loveless
speaks.]


Mrs. LOVELESS. You cannot imagine what distress we are in! Only think of the
stage omitting to bring our new dresses for to-night's ball! and we would
rather stay away than appear in those we have been seen in before.


Miss AMELIA. It is horribly provoking. I wish we had sent one of our own
carriages for them. I suppose, madam, [ addressing herself to Mrs. Sutton,]
that you and these young ladies will be there, and that adds to the
disappointment.


Mrs. SUTTON. I intended, when I came to Bristol, to give my dear girls a taste
of all the entertainments the place affords; and we had determined to go to the
ball this evening; but Miss Loveless was so exceedingly affected with hearing
of Miss Blomberg's situation,, that I am sure she will decline going, and I
know my daughters would on no account leave her by herself.


Mrs. LOVELESS. [confused] I see no reason that Miss Loveless should deny
herself those pleasures her age entitles her to. Besides, Miss Blomberg will
soon be better; she is only weak, and I make no doubt but that she will in a
short time be restored to perfect health.


Miss LOVELESS. Surely, madam, some illness must have brought on that excessive
weakness, and until the cause is removeed, how can she possibly recover her
strength?


Miss AMELIA. La, Maria! You are so fanciful? Juliana has only over racketted
herself. Perhaps you will say, that I am ill, when I tell you, that I fainted
away twice this ^orning,


Miss FANNY SUTTON. Indeed I wonder how you have strength or courage even to
walk about after it, much less to talk of going to a ball.


Miss LOVELESS. Whether you choose to call me fanciful or not, my dear Miss
Amelia, I am exceedingly concerned, nay alarmed, at hearing you say so;
especially, when you really appear to me considerably thinner than when I saw
you last; but yet, the bloom in your cheeks gives me hopes that my fears, are
groundless.


Miss AMELIA. And do you think I would go about in public with pale cheeks when
fashion authorizes me to supply the want of natural ^oses with artificial ones!
I am not ashamed to say that I use rouge; and you must have very unfashionable
eyes, not to have discerned it at the first glance, for I took no pains in
laying it on, to imitate vulgar nature, I assure you. I adore the lady who
first ventured to appear in public with painted cheeks, in defiance of the
prejudice which so long prevailed in the English nation against it; and should
even wish, like Narcissa mentioned by Mr. Pope in his Essays, to be painted in
my coffin.


Mrs. SUTTON. You must excuse their ignorance, Miss Amelia, for you know the
Miss Suttons and Miss Loveless also have been introduced into the world by an
old fashioned woman, in whose mind the prejudice you ridicule is so strongly
rooted, that no arguments can possibly eradicate it; and you must excuse my
saying, that it shall be my earnest endeavor to prevent every young person,
over whom I have any influence, from adopting a custom, which sober sense and
reason must condemn.


Mrs. LOVELESS. Then you must not take the young ladies into public, for there
is absolutely no such thing as being seen without rouge.


Miss AMELIA. What would you say, Mrs. Sutotn, if you were to see Juliana then?
She is frequently obliged to lie down, which rubs the rouge off, and as soon as
she rises, is impatient to have it repaired. Poor thing! I wish she was well
enough to do it herself, for our maid is possitively the a^^wardest creature at
it in the world. She declares she never saw such a thing before. I wonder what
b^utes she has lived with!


Miss LOVELSS. Her youth is some excuse for her ignorance. She appears to be
very young.


Miss AMELIA. A demure little puss! She has not half life and spirit enough for
me Instead of diverting my sister, she has always tears in her eyes. I declare,
were she my maid only I would soon send her away.


Miss LOVELESS. Perhaps some private sorrow of her own may oppress her heart.
She looks genteel and well-bred. But if her sensibility arises from her concern
for Miss Bhomberg, I honor and esteem her for it.


Mrs. LOVELESS. If I find out that she is unhappy, I shall desire Julian^ to
let me provide another servant for her I would have nothing melancholy come
near her.


Mrs. SUTTON. It is certainly proper to endeavor to keep up the spirits of
sick people; but mirth, is in my opinion, full as impertinent as sorrow in the
countenance and behavior of their attendants. Have you advice for Miss
Blomberg, madam?


Mrs. LOVELESS. O yes, Dr. Burgess attends her every day. He seems to think her
exceedingly ill, but it is the way with those sort of people, to pretend their
patients are very bad, that their own skill in curing them may appear the
greater. -- Will not you come and see her, ladies, during her confinement?


Miss SUTTON. Most willingly, madam. But as Miss Loveless was not admitted, we
could not hope to be received, so intended to defer paying our compliments,
until she had been sent for.


Mrs. LOVELESS. Well then, if you are determined not to grace the ball this
evening, will you drink your tea with her? Amelia and I are engaged in a large
party; you must excuse us.


Mrs. SUTTON. Certainly, madam.


Mrs. LOVELESS. We must now wish you a good morning. Come, Amelia.

[ They go out.


Miss LOVELESS, [bursts into tears.] It is to too much? I cannot see them
running thus blindly to misery, without the deepest concern, yet dare not speak
my thoughts.


Mrs. SUTTON. Comfort yourself, my dear, and be thankful that you had friends
to snatch you from so perilous a state.


Miss LOVELESS. I meant, what I said about Miss Rawlins, as a pre^^de to her
story; but finding Mrs. Loveless and Amelia so ^^^man to her feelings, as a
servant, I know not how to proceed.


Mrs. SUTTON. We will concert our measures as soon as we have sufficient
grounds to go upon. [ A loud knock at the door.

[ Enter Mr. Loveless greatly agitated.]


Mr. LOVELESS. Fly, I beseech you, my dear Mrs. Sutton, to my wretched wife and
her daughter! Juliana is now, I fear, actually dying.


Miss. LOVELESS. Let us go this instant, my dear madam.


Mrs. SUTTON. We will attend you, sir.

[ Mr. LOVELESS, goes out with Mrs. Sutton and Miss. Loveless]


Miss. SUTTON. I wonder how Mrs. Loveless will bear this dreadful event, for
which her mind was so unprepared.


Miss FANNY SUTTON. I should think it would break her heart. What at trying
scene will mamma and poor Maria have!


Miss. SUTTON. I do not know two people better qualified for such scenes than
they are. Capable of deriving instruction themselves from the faults of others
and of mitigating sorrow with tender sympathy, accompanied with a constant
presence of mind; for want of which, many people increase the distresses they
attempt to soothe.


Miss FANNY. I have not yet attained this happy presence of mind. I am all
agitation, and could not have courage to go to Mr. Loveless now on any account.


Miss SUTTON. I could wish to avoid it; but if occasion required, would summon
up all my fortitude; for it certainly is very wrong to run away from our
friends in affliction. Suppose, my dear, as you are so affected, we take a turn
in the garden?


Miss FANNY. With all my heart. For I really feel myself quite uncomfortable.
Perhaps the air will be of service to me.

[ They go out.

SCENE changes to Mr. Loveless's House. Mrs. Loveless weeping, Miss Amelia
Blomberg sitting by her.

[ Enter Miss Loveless, endeavoring to suppress her tears; but on her
attempting to speak, is unable to restrain them.]


Mrs. LOVELESS. Why do you weep? Why lament? You are innocent. You have not
killed a child!


Miss AMELIA. Pray, mamma, do not talk so, my sister may yet recover.


Mrs. LOVELESS. O, name not such an impossibility! These eyes beheld her in the
last agonies. -- These ears heard her dying groans. The look she cast on me,
seemed to accuse me as the author of all her misery. What cause has she now to
wish that she had been born to poverty, that she might have been blessed with
health?


Miss AMELIA. I wish you had not gone into the room.


Miss LOVELESS. Surely, my dear, it was natural and proper for a mother to
attend her dying child.


Miss AMELIA. I know it was; but I cannot bear to see my mother so affected. It
will be misfortune enough to lose my sister so unexpectedly.


Mrs. LOVELESS. Not unexpectedly to any, but to those as wilfully blind as I
was. Had I but believed, what even my common acquaintance told me, I might have
been prepared for this dreadful stroke. Had I listened to the admonitions of my
husband, who saw the danger I exposed my dear child to, by suffering her to
trust a constitution, naturally delicate, to night air, and excessive fatigue
she might now long live in health and peace, instead of -- O Heaven! do I not
hear groans?

[ She gets up and walks about the room in violent agitation, wringing her
hands. Miss Loveless follows, and leads her to her feat.]
Miss LOVELESS. Compose yourself, dear madam, for our sake. Be calm^ --
Recollect, that if Juliana should die, you have still a daughter left. Nay,
daughters, if you will but accept me as such.


Mrs. LOVELESS. Talk not of comfort, it can never reach a wretch like me.
Bewildered in a labyrinth of folly! Wandering in darkness, my eyes could only
be opened by a stroke like this. Fate has taken its revenge upon me, and made
me the most miserable creature existing!


Miss LOVELESS. Look round in the world, madam, and weigh your sorrows against
those which fall to the share or many, and they will appear light in the scale;
consider also your remaining blessings.


Mrs. LOVELESS. [after a long pause.] I am sensible that I am blessed with many
circumstances capable of alleviating sorrow, had I a different mind. But can I
reflect on the ill use I have made of riches, without horror? Have I relieved
the wa^^s of others? Alas, no. The widow, and the fatherless, have been sent
from my door unrelie^^^, ^ay (...) My own life has been a constant (...) of
dissipation. My children too! One already (...) -- The other! [ looking at
Amelia with (...).] O! (...), take care of yourself, those faintings are
indications of a declining constitution. Let me not kill you also! -- Can I
think of these things, Miss Loveless, and receive comfort?


Miss LOVELESS. Whoever sincerely repents of their indiscretions, my dear
madam, may with confidence hope for pardon. It would be presumptuous in me to
say, that you have not been guilty of a great offense in the eyes of the
Supreme Being. And I would not be so insincere and wicked, as to flatter you
into further errors, at a time, when such proper convictions fill your mind, as
will, I trust, effect that change, which must end in peace and happiness.
Cherish and improve these convictions, and you will have no cause to despair.


Mrs LOVELESS. You too, my dear Maria how cruelly have I used you. Jealous of
your worth, I banished you from your father's house, nay, endeavored to
eradicate you from his heart; but in that, I now with thankfulness reflect, I
was unsuccessful. Go then from such a monster, I am undeserving of your sweet
attention.


Miss LOVELSS. No, my dear mamma, I will not abandon you in this hour of your
distress. It shall be my darling task to soothe your sorrows, by every instance
of dutiful attention; and if I prove so happy as to calm your troubled mind and
gain your affections, shall think myself amply repaid for all your neglect.


Mrs. LOVELESS. Come to my arms, my dear, my amiable child. she embraces her.]
Amelia, receive your sister.


Miss AMELIA. [embracing Miss Loveless.] And can you forgive me too, Maria! I
blush to call you sister.


Miss LOVELESS. O happy moment, when I may be allowed to use, and appropriate
to myself that desirable appellation! My dear sister! accept my sincerest
assurances, of tender friendship, and unremitting assection.


Mrs. LOVELESS. In the midst of those sorrows which oppress my heart, this
reconcilliation gives me inexpressible comfort. Where is your father, my dear?
I fear he must in his heart despise me; yet, with what patience has he
submitted to my caprices. I long, yet dread to see him.


Miss LOVELESS. I fancy he is below with Mrs. Sutton.


Miss AMELIA, [bursting into tears.] O, my dear Juliana, would that you could
live to partake of our pleasure, which would then be free from the bitter
mixture of grief for your loss. Now you are gone, as I fear you must by this
time be, I feel my love for you stronger than it was possible for me to do,
while engaged in a constant round of amusements, which left no time for the
cultivation of social affections.


Mrs. LOVELESS. Amelia my dear child, do not rend my heart with your
lamentation. Consider how your sorrow adds to my afflictions. Follow,
henceforth, dear Maria's example. Your mother has confessed her faults before
you; let her example warn you from a youth of folly* Incur not the painful
remorse for misspent time, which now drives me almost to distraction.


Miss AMELIA. Penetrated with grief, and a variety of feelings, which I never
experienced before, I cannot recover myself at once; but if I may but have the
advantage of Maria's example, will endeavor to imitute her virtues. Take me
under your guidance my dear sister, and teach me the happy art of being amiable
and beloved.


Miss LOVELESS. If you resolve, my dear, to devote some of those hours to the
improvement of your mind, which you have been accustomed to spend in mere
amusement every desirable end may be attained.


Miss AMELIA. That I must seriously do, for I see my late folly in the
strongest light.


Mrs. LOVELESS. Much as I now wish for this dear girl's company, I feel too
great a regard for her to press it. How can I ask her to share our sorrows,
since I have refused to make her the companion of our pleasures?


Miss LOVELESS. You will forgive me, dear madam, if I say, that I regret not
the loss of those pleasures. I have had greater than any the gay world can
afford in a calm retirement, with friends I esteem, and by whom I am, I flatter
myself, equally beloved. Yet these pleasures I am ready to relinquish for your
sake. I will, with the utmost readiness, live with you, as long as assidnous
duty can render my company agreeable. If you find me troublesome, I will then
seek another abode.


Miss AMELIA. That you can never be. You will assist me in comforting my dear
mamma. Let us now endeavor to make her take some refreshment; dinner must be
nearly ready.


Mrs. LOVELESSS. At least till I know whether my dear child's sufferings are at
an end, I cannot eat.


Miss LOVELESS. If it is only a crust of bread and a glass of wine.


Mrs LOVELESS. Indeed I cannot -- but I beg that you two will go.


Miss LOVELESS. Indeed, my dear Madam, we cannot leave you thus: permit us to
attend you to your chamber; and let me prevail on you to lie down and endeavor
to compose your spirits, and prepare yourself for the worst.


Mrs. LOVELESS. Do with me as you please; convinced that I am unfit to guide
myself, I now wish to be led by those who ^^ow better, and will take that
trouble upon them. -- But where is Mrs. Sutton?


Miss LOVELESS. Engaged in some necessary attention, depend on it. -- Whilst
Miss Amelia waits on you, I will, with your permission, seek for Mrs. Sutton,
and enquire after poor Juliana.


Mrs. LOVELESS. Do so, my love; and now, my dear Amelia, let (...) retire and
endeavor to reconcile our minds to the misfortune which has brought us into
this state of humiliation. O (...) what a weak creature am I, that I cannot
have resolution to perform the last offices of maternal affection!

[They go out.
SCENE changes to a Dressing Room.
Mrs. Sutton and Dr. Burgess.
Mrs. SUTTON. And you really think, Doctor, that Miss Blo^^berg may recover?


Dr. BURGESS. With great care, madam, I think she may. The convulsions, which
so alarmed you, were critical. Now that the abscess on her lungs is broken, I
do not apprehend she will have a return of them. And I should hope she will
have no more faintings; but I entreat that she may be kept very still for a few
days, and then, perhaps she may drink the waters with success for a little
while? after which, if she mends according to my expectations, I shall consign
her to country air, a retired life, and butter milk. I must now take leave,
madam, having many patients to visit.

[ Exit Doctor.
Mrs. SUTTON What a providential event! I wonder I see none of the family! O!
here comes Maria.


[Enter Miss Loveless.] Mrs. SUTTON. Where have you been, my love, and what is
become of Mrs. Loveless and Amelia?


Miss LOVELESS. O! my dear madam, I have been engaged in a most affecting
scene, and long to tell you the happy effects of my endeavors to comfort them.
You will be surprised and rejoiced to hear of the change in their sentiments,
and of their perfect reconciliation to me. Mrs. Loveless is gone to lie down,
and Amelia to sit by her. -- I suppose, by seeing you here by yourself, that
poor Juliana has breathed her last.


Mrs. SUTTON. Indeed she has not. -- A happy crisis has taken place; and Dr.
Burgess, who is this instant gone, and for whom, indeed, I have been waiting,
gives great hopes of her recovery.


Miss LOVELESS. You astonish and delight me! O! let me fly to impart this
welcome news to the unhappy mother and sister.


Mrs. SUTTON. No, my dear, let me do that. Perhaps Mrs. Loveless may get a
little repose; after which she will be better able to bear this unexpected
happiness. -- I left Juliana in a fine sleep; let us sit down here till some
one comes out of her room.


[Enter Mrs. Benfield.] Mrs. BENFIELD. Miss Blomberg is just awaked, madam, but
seems in great agitation of mind: I beg you will come to her. She has just
asked for Miss Loveless.


Mrs. SUTTON. Come with me then, Maria; you may enter unperceived, as the
curtains are drawn, and act as occasion requires.

[They go out.
SCENE changes to Miss Blomberg's Bedchamber.
Miss Blomberg in bed. Miss Loveless enters and sits down on one side concealed
by the curtains; Mrs. Sutton goes to the other. Mrs. Benfield and Nurse
attending. Miss BLOMBERG. O! my dear Mrs. Sutton, what an escape have I had. I
thought I was dying, and am sure I was in danger of it. How could my friends
tell me that there was none? Perhaps I am only re^^^d for a little while. O!
what will become o^ me in another world?


Mrs. SUTTON. I have the pleasure to tell you, my dear, that there are well
gronnded hopes of your recovery. I would not deceive you on any account: nor do
I wish to take your thoughts off from a future state. Resolve ^o improve the
mercy granted you, to forsake a life of disspation, and devote some of your
time to me practice of piety and morality, and you may be sure that you will be
happy both in this world and the (...). -- But, my dear, you mu^^not talk too
much, the Doctor has given positive orders that you should not.


Miss BLOMBERG. Well, I will not. -- But will you pray for me. Alas! I know not
how to pray for myself. O! that I had lived such a life as Maria has. Dear
Maria! whom my conscience reproaches me for having refused to see this morning.
If she is in the house I must speak to her; I can have no peace till I do. --
Suppose I should die?


Mrs. SUTTON. Maria is in the room; but you positively must not talk to her. --
Maria, my love, come to your sister.


Miss LOVELESS. I will only stay to give you this kiss of affection, and to
assure my dear Juliana, that as soon as her strength will admit of her having
her friends about her, she will find me one of the first to attend her. -- Adiu!

[She goes out
Miss BLOMBERG. Kind creature! I hope I shall live to deserve your love. -- Are
mamma and Amelia gone out on some party' O! that they saw Amusements in the
light which the prospect of death has made me regard them (...)


Mrs. SUTTON. Indeed, my dear, they are not on the contrary, they are now
mingling their tears for the supposed loss of you, for I have had no
opportunity of telling them of your amendment, and do not choose to trust the
news to a servant. But why will you still exert yourself, and oblige me to talk
to you?


Miss BLOMBERG, Talking will not hurt me half so much as my own thoughts would
have done, had I not given them vent. -- Where is poor Benfield? I must speak
to her. [ Mrs. Benfield approaches.] I have used you very unkindly, Benfield;
but if I live, I will make you amends. -- Benfield, can you wash the rouge off
my cheek. Poor vain wretch that I was, how could I think of wearing it, at such
a time especially? Be sure you throw away every dust of it, and tell Amelia,
that if ever she should come to be as ill as I have been, she will repent the
use of it, as I do. Take all the novels out of the room, and bring me a bible
and a prayer book. -- Say you forgive me, Benfield.


Mrs. BENFIELD. If the fear of injuring you did not restrain me, my dear madam,
I would give you repeated assurances that I have felt more grief for your
suffering than resentment for any unguarded expression which pain may have
caused you to utter. Compose yourself, I entreat you.


NURSE. Indeed you must lie still, madam. Why, if the doctor was to come in the
midst of this fabulation, the first thing he would do would be to fling me down
stairs. Come it is time to take your stuff, and then I shall shut all the
windows, for you must go to sleep.


Mrs. SUTTON. You are quite in the right, nurse. Miss Loveless and I will
retire, and I think if Mrs. Benfield endeavors to get a little rest too, it
will be as well. So adieu! my love.

[They go out, and the Scene shuts.
END of ACT II.
ACT III.
SCENE, the Drawing Room.
[ Mrs. Sutton, and Mr. and Miss Loveless, sitting waiting for Mrs. Loveless
and Miss Amelia, who enter from the Bedchamber.] Mr. LOVELESS. HOW are you, my
dear, Mrs. Loveless! I sought for you before, but you were just retired, and I
was fearful of disturbing you.


Mrs. LOVELESS, [bursts into tears.] O! Mr. Loveless! how contemptible must I
have appeared in your eyes! but believe me, you cannot have a meaner opinion of
me, than I have of myself! O! pity my weakness, and aid me by those
instructions, which I must confess, you were always ready to give me, though I
disdained to receive them: aid me, I say, to be what you would wish me!


Mr. LOVELESS. Cease, my dear love, thus to distress me with your self
reproaches! I come to comfort you, not to accuse you: here is our good friend
Mrs. Sutton too, who always diffuses happiness in every family which she honors
with her intimacy: and here is my good Maria, who I am confident will love you
and delight to render you any services. By adopting her, as I understand you
have done, you have obliterated from my memory every displeasing circumstance.

Mrs. LOVELESS, [ addressing Mrs. Sutton.] There is a question which I wish,
yet dread to ask: O! my dear Mrs. Sutton! my dear Maria! did not Juliana accuse
me with her dying breath? When did she expire?


Mrs. SUTTON. Compose yourself, my dear madam; I can assure you that Miss
Blomberg cast no reproaches upon you. Perhaps we have better news for you than
you expect: your child is not dead.


Mrs. LOVELESS. Not dead! may I trust my ears? did you say that Juliana is not
yet dead;


Mrs. SUTTON. She really is not, madam.


Mrs LOVELESS. And does she still lie in those dreadful agonies, of which I
shall never lose the idea. O! that she was released! that the worst was over!
The worst! -- that may perhaps begin when her bodily sufferings cease. Mr.
Loveless, I have conducted my child to the edge of a precipice from whence she
may plunge into a bottomless abyss. O! that I had prepared her for a future
state! I cannot support the thoughts of what she may suffer to all eternity
through my inexcusable folly. O! that her life could be spared! with what
assiduity would I strive to repair the injury I have done her!


M^^ LOVELESS. The opportunity you wish for is likely to be granted you, my
dear; there has, I find, been a happy crisis, and Juliana is very likely to
recover.


Mrs. LOVELESS. O! do not give me false hopes, Mr. Loveless they will only
aggravate my distress. I saw her actually dying.


Mr. SUTTON. I thought the same when I went to her immediately after you left
the room; but during her convulsive struggles, an abscess burst within her. I
sent immediately for Dr. Burgess, who gives us great hopes indeed.


Miss AMELIA. O! Maria! could I ever have expected this happy turn in her
disorder? Shall I see my dear Juliana again?


Miss LOVELESS. I have already had that pleasure? and think she is much better.


Mrs. LOVELESS. How shall I express my thankfulness for so unexpected a
blessing? It shall be the study of my future life to deserve it. I am impatient
to see my Juliana! My suffering child!


Mrs. SUTTON. That you must on no account attempt till tomorrow at soonest.
Her life depends on the strictest quietness. Now you know of the happy change,
I hope, my dear madam, that you and Miss Amelia will use your utmost efforts to
calm your spirits, that your interview with Miss Blomberg may not be productive
of violent emotions in either party.


Mrs. LOVELESS. Favor me with your company then, madam, and I will strive to
bring myself into that temper of mind you wish me to possess.


Mrs. SUTTON. I would most readily comply with your obliging invitation, but
that I have just received a message from Isabella, informing me, that a lady is
waiting for me at home upon very particular business; I would not go till I had
seen you, being impatient to communicate the happy intelligence, which I should
not have deferred so long, but that I knew not what hopes to form till the
doctor had been here; and afterward Miss Blomberg herself detained me:
immediately on our quitting her. Maria and I seated ourselves in this room as
guards to prevent the entrance of any domestic who might, by telling you
suddenly, have occasioned an agitation which would perhaps have been injurious
to your health. I must now take my leave.


Mr. LOVELESS. A thousand thanks to you, my dear madam, for your friendly
offices. We shall see you again soon, I hope?


Mrs. SUTTON. I will endeavor to wait on you when my company leaves me. Maria,
I trust your friend's cause in your hands.

[She goes out.
Mrs. LOVELESS. Are we to receive directions from you, Maria, respecting the
management of Juliana?


Miss LOVELESS. No, my dear madam; Mrs. Benfield has ample instructions; and
both she and nurse are so careful that you may safely depend on them. It was
the cause of another friend which Mrs. Sutton recommended to my care. A very
distressed friend, who is at this time under your roo^.


Mrs. SUTTON. A friend of yours in distress, my love? Then hasten to offer her
all the relief and assistance which it is in our power to give her: but who can
she be?


Miss AMELIA. It strikes my mind, that it must be Mrs. Benfield She has the
appearance of a person genteely educated; and sorrow is strongly impressed on
her features. I can now recollect with pity the looks of anguish which I have
sormerly contemned.


Miss LOVELESS. You are perfectly right in your surmises. Mrs. Benfield is the
person I mean. She was once my school fellow; and little did I expect to meet
her here in a state of servitude. I cannot enter into every circumstance of her
story, it will be sufficient to engage your compassion, if I tell you, that
whatever sollies she may have been guilty of, she has, I am convinced, most
sincerely repented of them. Her distress is occasioned by an imprudent marriage.


Mrs. LOVELESS. It would ill become us to reproach others who have so much
cause for self-accusation: assure Mrs. Benfield, therefore of our
commiseration, and tell us in what way we can be serviceable to her?


Mr. LOVELESS. I have often thought her face was no stranger to me, and she
seemed to shun my observation. Where can I have seen her?


Miss LOVELESS. At Mrs. Grove's, my dear sir. Do you recollect Miss Rawlins?


Mr. LOVELESS. I think I do; and if her father lives at Southampton, I know him
well, he was my fellow collegian: I have been at his house since he married the
present lady; but his daughter was not then at home; at least I saw her not.


Miss LOVELESS. Your knowing Mr. Rawlins is a very happy circumstance; for you
may perhaps be able to lend assistance in the plan Mrs. Sutton has formed for
bringing about a reconciliation with his daughter.


[Enter a Footman.] Mrs. Sutton's compliments, sir, and begs the favor of your
company at her house immediately.


[Exit Footman. Mrs. LOVELESS. What can be the matter?


Mr. LOVELESS. Do not alarm yourself, my dear Mrs. Loveless. I will be with you
again, as soon as possible.


Mrs. LOVELESS. Do so. I shall be impatient for your return. Will you, Miss
Loveless, see where Mrs. Benfield is, and conduct her hither?


Miss LOVELESS. I will, dear madam.

[She goes out.
Miss AMELIA. I shall be quite ashamed to see Mrs. Benfield in the character of
a gentlewoman, whom I have treated so ill as a servant.


Mrs. LOVELESS. All we can do is to repair our past faults by acts of future
kindness.


[ Enter Miss Loveless and Mrs. Benfield.] Mrs. LOVELESS. [ Taking Mrs.
Benfield' s hand. Be seated, dear madam. We have many apologies to make to you;
but we were ignorant who did my daughter the honor of attending her. Mrs.
BENFIELD. Indeed, madam, I cannot seat myself in your presence. Suffer me to
consider myself still as a servant to the Miss Blombergs.


Mrs. LOVELESS. On no account; you are the friend of Miss Loveless; and that
circumstance alone would be sufficient to entitle you to our regard; but it
seems Mr. Loveless knows Mr. Rawlings.


Mrs. BENFIELD, [in an agony.] O! name not, I beseech you, my dear father, whom
I have offended beyond the possibility of forgiveness! Did you know, madam,
what a disobedient wretch I have been to the best of parents, you would banish
me from your house. You would never suffer me to stand before you. O! that I
could hide my wretched head in the grave; but I fear I shall live to break my
father's heart!


Miss LOVELESS. I beg, my dear Mrs. Benfield, that you will accept of the
consolation and assistance which is offered you. If you give way to despair you
will frustrate all our kind endeavors to accommodate matters, and restore you
to your parents.


Mrs. BENFIELD. Pardon me, my amiable friend; but your innocent and dutiful
mind can form no idea of the pangs which tear the wretched heart of a child,
conscious of disobedience to a tender parent. Surely no wickedness on earth can
exceed this crime! -- I am distracted with the thoughts of what I have done,
and what may be the consequence.


Mrs. LOVELESS. I have no doubt but that Mr. Rawlins will be easily reconciled
to you, when it is represented to him, that you are really sorry for your
offense, and ^^insist on your considering yourself amongst us as on a footing
of equality.


Mrs. BENFIELD. O! madam! I can never summon resolution to meet his eyes. -- I
can never show my face in the world as his daughter: whatever rank I may claim
from my relation to him, I have degraded myself to the lowest by an imprudent
connection. O! hide me from mankind! -- hide me, if possible, from my-self! Let
me expiate by humility the guilt of disobedience.


Miss AMELIA. I think, my dear Maria, you had best go into another room with
Mrs. Benfield. Perhaps, when alone, your efforts to sooth her may be more
successful.


Miss LOVELESS. I will take your advice, my dear. Come, Mrs. Benfield. [ They
go out.


Miss AMELIA. I am sure poor Mrs. Benfield's distress is enough to warn any
young person from marrying without the consent of their parents.


Mrs. LOVELESS. It is indeed. I wonder where your (...) is? I long for his
return: since we must not see poor Juliana yet, let us go and amuse ourselves
with a book; step into papa's parlour and fetch me one from the bookcase.


Miss AMELIA. It will be a new kind of amusement to me. I wish I had more
relish for books; but perhaps a taste for reading may come in a retired life. [
She goes out and returns with two books, then speaks; during her absence. Mrs.
Loveless sit ^^s a pensive posture.] I have brought the two first I cast my
eyes on, for I have no judgment or knowledge to direct my choice.


Mrs. LOVELESS. Well, give me one my dear: it is a chance but it will furnish
me with new instruction.

[ They both sit down and read; in a short time Mrs. Loveless puts down her
book and speaks.] I am sorry to say, that though what I have been reading,
exactly suits my present circumstances. I am not capable of fixing my attention
on the subject.


Miss AMELIA. I have been reading in the Adventurer the journal of a fine lady,
which so properly ridicules the life of one, that I feel quite confounded and
shocked at having been ambitious of this character; and am determined for the
future to act like a rational creature.


Mrs. LOVELESS. I have formed the same resolutions; but, alas! my dear, ill
habits have taken deeper root in my mind than in yours, and will require more
pains to eradicate: however, I will not despair.


[Enter Mr. Loveless.] Mr. LOVELESS, [taking up the books which the ladies laid
down.] Your servant ladies. So you have taken possession of my books during my
absence?


Mrs. LOVELESS. We have indeed: since we have resolved to relinquish frivolous
amusements, what can we ^^o in the absence of our friends, but seek
entertainment from the works of the learned? If Amelia and I pursue our plan,
we perhaps shall, in time, surprise you as much with our erudition, as we have
before shocked you with our ignorance: but you and Mrs. Sutton must direct our
studies.


Mr. LOVELESS. You cannot appoint me to a more pleasing office: I long to
present dear Amelia with a little library, and shall set about the selection of
it the first leisure hour, in order to make the purchase of the books as soon
as I go to town; but I shall not proceed without Mrs. Sutton's advice, of
whose taste I have the highest opinion.


Miss AMELIA. You are very good, sir; I shall endeavor to derive advantage
from your kindness.


[ Enter Mrs. Sutton accompanied by Miss Sutton and Miss Fanny. Mrs. SUTTON.
Well, my dear ladies, how do you find yourselves now? you see I have left you
but to return with enreased forces.


Mrs. LOVELESS. They are your auxiliaries, and engaged in the cause of
friendship, and as such must be welcome to me: I am indebted to your kindness,
madam, for more serenity of mind than I could possibly have obtained by my own
weak efforts, after such affecting conflicts. But I have met with a great
mortification during your absence, from an unsucces^ful attempt which I have
made to amuse myself with a book of morality. I have so accustomed myself to
the reading of Novels, that I fear I have lost the capacity of deriving
instruction from other books.


Mrs. SUTTON. O! that is not the case, I dare say! But you must wean your mind
by degrees from the light reading you have beed used to, and not attempt very
grave authors at once. Fable and Allegory, with an agreeable mixture of Poetry,
would, in my opinion, be proper to begin with, from which you might proceed to
History, and gradually bring yourself to take delight in books of piety and
morality. Miss Amelia, I have a new publication, which, as I subscribed for
several sets, I will beg leave to present to you; it is called the Six
Princesses of Babylon, and relates the history of their travels toward the
Temple of Virtue The author of these Drantas has not the least personal
knowledge of the writer of the above mentioned work; but thinking it an
ingenious performance, and understanding from the dedication, that an extensive
sale was of consequence to her, was willing to give what little assistance she
could toward promoting it.
.


Miss AMELIA. I shall read whatever you recommend, madam, with my best
attention. I am sure I have great need of a guide to the Temple of Virtue. How
do you do, my dear Miss Sutton and Miss Fanny? I was impatient to see you: you
have heard, to be sure, that dear Juliana is likely to be restored to us again?


Miss. SUTTON. With the highest satifaction, we have; and I most sincerely
congratulate you on the happy and unexpected change.


Miss FANNY SUTTON. Accept of my congratulations also, my dear. I hope we shall
all enjoy many happy days together; but where is Miss Loveless?


Mrs. LOVELESS. She retired with her friend Mrs. Benfield, in hopes of
composing her spirits, which were greatly agitated.

I never saw a poor creature so humbled in my life! I will send for Miss
Loveless, [ she rings the bell a servent enters,] If Miss Loveless is
disengaged, tell her, we wish for her company [ servant goes out.] I apprehend,
that you, Mrs. Sutton, and Mr. Loveless, have been using some means torestore
Mrs. Benfield to her parents.


[ Enter Miss Loveless.] Mrs. LOVELESS. How have you left your friend, dear
Maria?


Miss LOVELESS. I have at length succeeded so far, as to prevail on her to lie
down, and endeavor to get to sleep; but I fear (...) will long be a prey to
the bitterest remorse.


Mrs. LOVELESS. I hope her constitution will sustain the shock, and do, most
sincerely pity her; but is not her father a still greater object of compassion,
who does not deserve the misery of mind which she has brought to him? But you
were enquiring, Mrs. Loveless, what means Mr. Loveless and I had been employing
in her behalf? you were right in your conjecture, that it was on her account I
summoned him to my house, which, on a less important business, would, at such a
time, have, been impertinent. I hope you excuse me?


Mrs. LOVELESS. Most certainly, my dear madam! I have this day felt so
powerfully the comfort of your friendship, that I should be sorry you should be
restrained from exerting it for others, by those ceremonious punctilios, which,
I hope, my mind has now got above; but what could Mr. Loveless do?


Mrs. SUTTON. I must first tell you, that on my return to my lodging, I found
Mrs. Rawlins and Miss Gower waiting for me. It seems Mr. and Mrs. Rawlins came
the day before to spend a week or two with Mr. Gower at Redlands where he has
lately taken a house; Miss Gower having visited us since we came to Bristol,
mentioned this circumstance to Mrs. Rawlins, who resolved to call on me, in
hopes that Maria might be able to give her some information concerning the
unhappy fugitive. The letter I sent this morning, of course has not yet reached
her hands; but by conversing with Mrs. Rawlins, I had an opportunity of saying
more in Mrs. Benfield's favor, than a letter could comprise; and I took the
liberty of sending for Mr. Loveless as a joint advocate.


Miss LOVELESS. And what success have you had, my dear madam?


Mrs. SUTTON. As much, my love, as I could reasonably expect: Mrs. Rawlins is
all gentleness and compassion, and would, I am sure, immediately receive her
daughter home; but Mr. Rawlins's consent must be obtained first; and that she
cannot ask at present, because his mind has been greatly irritated by the ill
behavior of his son-in-law, who has been insolent enough to go to his house
and demand his wife, under pretense, that she has eloped from him: not that he
wants to live with her, but merely to extort money from her father.


Miss LOVELESS. I am shocked to hear this, perhaps we shall soon have the
wretch amongst us.


Mr. LOVELESS. I can remove your fears on that head, my dear; for Mrs. Rawlins
informed us, that Mr. Rawlins has prevailed (...) to go to the East Indies,
where he has procured him a post, and has put a sum of money into the hands of
the captain who takes him over, to equip him for the voyage, and supply him
with necessaries on his arrival in India.


Miss LOVELESS I rejoice to hear it!


Miss AMELIA. Mrs. Benfield has, I dare say, lived in constant dread of his
discovering her retreat, and molesting her quiet.


Miss FANNY SUTTON. I imagine she has. What a miserable life must a poor poor
young creature lead who has formed such a disgraceful connection! I cannot
conceive a more mortifying circumstance than to be married to a wretch ones
family is ashamed to own.


Mrs. SUTTON. I could give you histories of several young ladies who have
involved themselves in the utmost difficulties by such acts of indiscretion;
but as I have no reason to think my dear girls, or any of the young ladies now
present, stand in need of farther admonition on this subject, there is no
occasion to multiply instances. That before their eyes would be a sufficient
antidote for them, were any necessary.


Miss LOVELESS. I flattered myself, dear madam, you would have been able to
restore my friend to the favor of her parents. What will become of her if her
father should, after all, reject her? I am sure she would break her heart.


Mrs. LOVELESS. She may continue, here, my dear, till the reconciliation is
completed, which I make no doubt will in time be brought about, as her cause is
in such good hands,


Miss FANNY SUTTON. Surely, my good sir, if it was represented to Mr. Rawlins
how very penitent his daughter is, he must ^elent.


Mr. LOVELESS. Mr. Rawlins is a very good man, Miss Fanny, and will act as a
Christian, I make no doubt: but consider, his feelings must have been very
distressing ones, and some time must be allowed to conquer them. Consider also,
the disgrace his daughter has brought upon a reputable family, and her former
disobedient behavior, and then you cannot wonder if he withholds his
forgiveness, at least till he is sure that her penitence is sincere.


Miss LOVELESS. I would answer for that, papa.


Mr. LOVELESS. Well. Maria, the day may be near, and I sincerely hope it is,
when your testimony in her favor may be heard by Mr Rawlins. In the mean time,
have patience, and rejoice that Mrs. Rawlins is her friend, who will certainly
exert her influence, from which we may expect success.


Mrs. SUTTON. You may depend upon it, Miss Loveless, that I shall take every
step in my power to effect the desired reconciliation, and to comfort the poor
mourner. It may perhaps be better for her that it is brought on by degrees,
than that in her present weak state of spirits she should be called to a trial
which she has not yet fortitude to sustain.


Miss LOVELESS. I know, my dear madam, the benevolence of your disposition will
lead you to pay a ready attention to this deplorable case; and I am sure my
dear papa will not be remiss. My dear mamma has promised Mrs. Benfield an
asylum, and Amelia has assured her of her friendly offices. I have been told of
Juliana's kindness to her since her recovery, all which must contribute to
restore her tranquillity; and I think things are in such a train, that I may
venture to comfort her with hopes, that her good fat^er will be induced to wipe
the tears of repentant sorrow from her eyes, and that she may once more know
the sweets of peace.


Mrs. LOVELESS. She will receive the forgiveness of all good people, but much I
fear she will never obtain her own.


Mrs. SUTTON. Her self condemnation is very commendable, madam, and I hope her
follies will ever be remembered by her, with that degree of regret, which will
make her abhor the thoughs of repeating them. But if her reformation is
sincere, she may enjoy a great deal of happiness in striving to repair her
faults, by future good behavior, and seeing her endeavors kindly accepted.
Not so much, to be sure, as if she had never deviated from the path of duty.


Mrs. LOVELESS. I hope I shall myself experience this kind of satisfaction. My
eyes are now open; I despise the allurements of the gay world, and long for a
quiet retreat. It is my earnest wish, Mr. Loveless, to go to that house which I
once so foolishly despised. There it should be my daily endeavor to restore
the comforts you once enjoyed in it. My own desiciencies will prevent my
succeeding in my desire of imitating the excellencies of Maria's mother: but
you shall find me dutiful to you, and affectionate to your child.


Mr. LOVELESS. Your proposal delights me: I will write to have the house got
ready for our reception immediately. But I now particularly miss an old friend,
whose assistance on this occasion would be very useful.


Mrs. LOVELESS. You mean Mrs. Cartwright. I was myself thinking of her, but
fear she is too valuable to Mrs. Sutton to be given up; besides, I used her so
unkindly, that she will be afraid to live with me again.


Mrs. SUTTON. Mrs. Cartwright, madam, has so liberal a mind, that I am sure she
retains no resentment for behavior, which proceeded from your not knowing her
worth. I will engage to say, she will be very ready to superintend your family
in a house which she left with regret; but I shall have a great loss; you
really commit cruel depredations upon me -- What! rob me of two of my household
at once? I must have my revenge -- and thus I will take it. Mrs. Benfield shall
possitively supply the place of Mrs. Cartwright to me and Miss Juliana, when
she is dismissed by Dr. Burges, shall be my guest.


Mrs. LOVELESS. I cannot resist your kind offer: it will be a great advantage
to dear Juliana to be under your good management; for my part, I am so ignorant
in respect to invalids, that it is probable I might commit some fatal error:
but one more condition I must make, my dear madam, which is, that as soon as we
are settled, you favor me with your company at my house. Remember I am your
scholar, and if you leave me too long by myself I may relapse into my former
follies.


Mrs. SUTTON. I agree to your condition, with all my heart; and as the distance
between us is not very great, we may frequently interchange visits. I shall
make a point of staying at Bristol as long as you do, in order to take Miss
Juliana and Mrs. Benfield with me.


Mr. LOVELESS. What a happy day is this to me! I now look forward with
expectation of enjoying, once more, the dear delight of domestic peace.


Mrs. LOVELESS. I flatter myself with the hopes that I shall be a sincere
partaker of it, and heartily bid adieu to the delusives pleasures of the gay
world.


Miss AMELIA. Balls! masquerades! and all the fatiguing, satiating murderers of
time, which I have hitherto courted, I relinquish you without a sigh! and shall
cheerfully welcome the joys of rural life, which I have formerly despised. No
more shall my cheeks be painted but by the hand of health.


Mrs. SUTTON. Whilst you form this wise resolution, my dear young friend, of
altering your course of living, be careful of not running into a contrary
extreme. Moderate amusements were intended to sweeten the cares of life, and
may be innocently enjoyed; it is making them the business of it that is
blameable.


Miss LOVELESS. I am under your direction, madam; mould me to your wishes.


Mrs. SUTTON. I shall have great cause to be proud of my scholar, I make no
doubt, since I have humility to build on as a foundation, on which every virtue
may be erected; without which, none can be brought to perfection. If I may be
allowed to begin my first lesson now, I would recommend to your immediate
practice, my dear, these few short rules. Entertain a moderate opinion of your
own abilities; consider that you have much to learn, and exert your industry to
redeem lost time: instead of coveting the applauses of the gay world, endeavor
to obtain the esteem of the worthy and rational part of it; and in every action
have a regard to the glory of God, and the good of your fellow creatures.
Command my best services ever -- But, my dear girls, [ to Miss Suttons] it is
time for us to take our leave; tomorrow, ladies, we shall have the pleasure of
enquiring after Miss Juliana, and hope to see her much recovered. [ They take
leave and the scene closes,


THE END.
THE MATERNAL SISTER, A DRAMA, IN THREE ACTS.

PERSONS of the DRAMA.
Mr. CLEVELAND. Miss CLEVELAND, aged 18. Miss CLARISSA, 15. Miss EMMA, 14 Miss
CATHERINE, 11 Miss SOPHIA, 8 Master EDWARD, 10 Master HENRY, 9 Miss FRANCES, 9
months. Miss FOWLER, 16 years. Attendants.
SCENE -- Mr. CLEVELAND's House in London.

THE MATERNAL SISTER. A DRAMA, IN THREE ACTS.
ACT I.
SCENE, the Breakfast Parlour at Mr. Cleveland's
[Mr. and Miss Cleveland at breakfast.] Mr. CLEVELAND. GIVE me another dish of
tea, Jemima, and I will be gone.


Miss CLEVELAND. Shall we not have the pleasure of your company to dinner, sir,*


Mr. CLEVELAND. To dinner, child! What pleasure can I have in dining at home,
where there is nothing but noise, confusion, and disturbance? Happy is the man,
who is not plagued with a family of children! What a fool was I to marry, and
involve myself in endless expense! Not a day passes but I am pestered with some
tradesman's bill or other. From the butchers and bakers, that one would think
every person in this house was a cormorant: from the linen-drapers,
shoe-makers, and hosiers, that instead of children, I had an army of soldiers
always upon the march to provide for; they (...) their things out at such a
rate^


Miss CLEVELAND. I have reason to believe, dear sir, that the servants have
taken advantage of poor mamma's ill state of health, and have been wasteful and
extravagant in every respect, and by this means your expenses are increased
beyound what they would naturally be.


Mr. CLEVELAND. Ill state of health! yes, your mother has brought herself unto
a fine condition by her continual racketing; and because I had not charge
enough before, she must now be supplied with money to spend at the South of
France. I cannot go on at this rate! my estate is out at el^ows already!


Miss CLEVELAND, [with emotion.] Pardon me, sir! but give me leave to observe,
that my poor mamma lived in the fashionable world; her connections required,
that she should enter a great deal into the gaieties of life: her ill health
surely deserves compassion!


Mr. CLEVELAND. True, my dear girl; and sincerely do I regret her situation;
but my mind is so distressed with the state of my finances, that I scarcely
know what I do or say.


Miss CLEVELAND. We must then, all of us, study to live accordingly; for my
part, sir, I am willing to do every thing in my power to lessen your expenses:
my good aunt has taken great pains to instruct me in the different branches of
domestic economy, and has promised to favor me with her advice. I will
endeavor to practice her lessons in the best manner I can: my errors you will
kindly excuse; and I hope, by assiduous attention, to improve daily. If
agreeable to you, sir, I will undertake to supply the house-keeper's place
myself. Mrs. Newton has, this morning, expressed her desire to go away, on my
objecting to some superfluous articles in the bill of fare for today.


Mr. CLEVELAND. Then let her go!


Miss CLEVELAND. I will also, for the present, undertake the instruction of the
younger children, if agreeable to you, sir. My aunt says, she cannot think the
school Catherine and Sophia were at, before they came home to be inoculated, by
any means a good one, and to send them to a better will be very expensive: to
teach them in the best manner I can, will be a delightful employment to me: and
if you will permit Clarissa and Emma to leave school, I make no doubt they will
readily assist me in it. They are now great girls, and what their school
education at present costs you, will be a considerable saving. The coach is
gone to fetch them home for the holidays; will you give me permission to
communicate my scheme to them, and try if they will concur with it.


Mr. CLEVELAND. You talk like a good girl Jemima-an excellent girl! but I fear
undertake too much; however, do as you will; my expenses must be drawn into a
narrower compass by some means or other; I shall be absolutely ruined else. [
Rising from the tea-table] Adieu, my dear! I shall see you again in the evening.


Miss CLEVELAND. And will you not dine with me, dear sir? consider how long I
have been absent from you -- that my sisters are coming home. -- Indeed your
presence is necessary to give me consequence in the house, and to enforce the
authority you have been pleased to invest me with. I shall not, without your
countenance, be able to put my plans in execution: besides, what shall I do if
the servants, who are already ripe for rebellion, should insult me? Upon my
word, my courage will fail me, if you will not stay at home this day at least.


Mr. CLEVELAND. Jemima, you have a most engaging way with you; there is no
denying you any thing: I will stay at home; but how to employ myself here is
the question? It is a strange place to me, in which for many years I have been
accustomed merely to sleep and breakfast, unless the necessity of entertaing
company obliged me to dine and sup; but on these occasions, the thoughts of my
family and expenses were drowned in mirth and gaiety. If I sit alone and
reflect I shall go distracted.


Miss CLEVELAND. You shall not be alone, I will bring my work and sit with you
as soon as I have given some necessary directions: in the mean time, I will
send two little companions, who will, I am sure, delight you; Edward and Henry
came home a month ago on account of a fever in the school; and I have another
pleasure in store for you -- The sight of dear little Frances.


Mr. CLEVELAND. Frances! How am I to see her? She is ten miles off; her nurse
can scarcely have brought her at this early hour.


Miss CLEVELAND. I hope, dear sir, you will not think I have presumed too much
on the honor you have done me, in appointing me to be my mother's deputy, when
I inform you, that I have ventured to bring Frances home, without first
obtaining your permission for doing so: but indeed I found her in such a
situation as I could not have left her in for the world; and I am sure you
would have been angry with me if I had waited for your return.


Mr CLEVELAND. I cannot comprehend your meaning, Jemima: the nurse was well
recommended, as I understood; and the child appeared to be in a very thriving
state when I last saw her.


Miss CLEVELAND. She was greatly altered then indeed, sir, when I found her;
and I have reason to think would have perished through neglect and bad
management, if I had not been fortunate enough to call on her as I did. You
know, that nurse's house is in the road from my aunt's hither, so affection led
me to stop as I was coming home, in order to see my little sister: but what was
the surprise, both of my aunt and me, at finding the cottage door wide open,
though exposed to the cold easterly wind; the floor of the room wet; several
panes in the casements broken; and the dear little baby lying in a cradle, as
dirty as a beggar, crying in the most pitious manner imaginable? I approached
the cradle with an agitation of mind not to be described, and took the dear
little creature up; at the same time desiring my aunt's maid, who accompanied
us, to search the house for the nurse; but her search was fruitless; at last,
in the garden, she found a boy of six years old, who, it seems had been left by
his mother to rock the cradle; but who, tired of his employment, had escaped to
play, and left her by herself.


Mr. CLEVELAND. But what was become of the nurse?


Miss CLEVELAND. On enquiring in the neighborhood, we learnt, that this
inhuman woman, who had undertaken to perform a mother's part made it a daily
custom to neglect her infant charge, that she might range from house to house,
hearing and relating idle tales, thoughtless of the dear babe's wants,
unmindful of her own obligation: so with my aunt's advice, I resolved to take
her home with me.


Mr. CLEVELAND. Say no more, Jemima, or I shall be ready to cast reflections on
your mother, who, if she was not able to nurse herself, should at least have
been more circumspect in the choice of a substitute. If she would have done as
I at first desired her, and acted a mother's part by you her eldest, I have
reason to think we should have been a united happy family, for I once loved
little children; and had mine been managed properly, should have placed my
delight in them: but alas! I have known no comfort with them. Whilst at nurse,
they were so shy, there was no inviting them to come near one; and when they
returned home, they were so unmanageable I was glad to have them kept in the
nursery, and from thence sent to school as soon as possible. But let me see the
little sufferer. I am exceedingly affected with the account you have given me
of her. I hope she is not in danger of dying?


Miss CLEVELAND. No, sir; my good aunt staid with us till Friday last, when she
was obliged to go home for a few days; by my following her directions, Frances
is quite charmingly. I left her in a fine sleep, and ordered the maid to take
her after breakfast into the park, from whence I suppose she is not yet
returned; when she comes in I will bring her to you. In the mean time, will you
permit me to fetch Edward and Henry? but before they make their appearance, I
must confess, that I have taken advantage of being here a month before you
returned from the West, and have elected myself into the office of their
governess, as I thought even my poor instrustion was better then none at all.
Not without their consent though I assure you, sir: Catherine and Sophia have
also done me the honor of submitting to my tuition, so that I have really a
little school here. Should my dear papa find cause to give me a smile of
approbation, when my young pupils exhibit their performances to him, how happy
shall I think myself.


Mr. CLEVELAND. My dear, my amiable child! in what words shall I express my
admiration of your conduct? The present emotions of my heart are too much for
me. I must compose my mind before I shall be fit to receive my other children.


Miss CLEVELAND. Well, my dear sir, I will then, with your leave, retire. I
expect to find my scholars waiting for me; but believe I must give them a
holiday, as we are in expectation of my sisters.

[ Miss Cleveland goes out.
Mr. CLEVELAND. Sick of the world, and almost weary of my own own existence,
little did I expect ever to find such pleasure as I at this moment feel, in my
own house especially -- the last place in which I should have gone in search of
it. What a delightful girl is Jemima! How was it possible that I should be so
blind to her merit, as to consent to her leaving us to live with her aunt?
Alas! for a long time it has been my endeavor to forget all my tender
connections. But I will strive to recover those feelings which I have taken so
much pains to suppress. My heart already glows with paternal affection. I long
to weep over my children -- to press them to my bosom -- to show a father's
fondness. O, Jemima! Jemima! I must follow you: I can no longer restrain the
ardent desire I have to behold you, acting in the double character of mother
and sister.

[He goes out hastily.
SCENE changes to another apartment.
Miss Cleveland sits at a table, on which are a pair of globes, a book of
prints, several maps, etc. Miss Catherine, Miss Sophia, Master Edward and
Master Henry standing by her. Miss CATHERINE. I wish you had time, Jemima, to
teach me to draw maps again to day. -- I should like, when I am old enough, to
make a little Atlas.


Miss CLEVELAND. So you shall, my love, if you please, but today I cannot
conveniently attend to you; so I have looked up some nice pieces of gauze and
silk, and should be glad if you would begin dressing the doll which you bought
for Miss Maria Dawson.


Miss CATHERINE. So I will then. -- Will you help me, Sophia?


Miss SOPHIA. With all my heart, Catherine, since we are not to draw maps.


Master EDWARD. And what shall I do, Jemima?


Miss CLEVELAND. Please yourself, my dare. I dear say you will not get into any
mischief. But you had best consult with your brother Henry. You certainly do
not wish to play by yourself?


Master EDWARD. I should like to look over this book of drawings, to see if
there is one I can copy, and then to go into the garden.

[ Mr. Cleveland, who must be supposed to have entered at the beginning of the
scene, but to have stopped at the door, after viewing his little family,
unobserved by them, turns aside to hide his emotion, which having in some
measure suppressed, he advances, and catches Miss Cleveland in his arms, as she
rises to offer him her chair; -- after kissing her affectionately, he speaks.


Mr. CLEVELAND. Thus, my dear Jemima, do I confirm you in your offices -- My
dear boys and girls, what a kind sister you have got! Come, let me kiss each of
you. [ He kisses them all.] Now go on with your various employments. But I
think you said, Jemima, that you would give the little ones a holiday today?
Who will walk with me?


Master EDWARD. I will, papa, if you please; and if it is agreeable to Henry to
go, Jemima says we shall always be happiest together, so we have agreed to go
partners in all sports and all play-things.


Mr. CLEVELAND. Jemima is perfectly right; brothers and sisters should have but
one interest. I am glad to find you so ready to take your sister's advice; it
will be always for your advantage to do so, I will engage to say. -- well,
Henry, are you for a walk?


Master HENRY. O, yes, papa! May I take my skip^^ing rope?


Mr. CLEVELAND. By all means, and let Edward take his. I shall (...) to see
which of you is the most active. -- Give me another kiss, Catherine and Sophia.
-- Adieu! Jemima. I am going to take a walk in Hyde Park; I dare say we shall
be back soon after your sisters arrive.

[He goes out with his sons.
Miss CATHERINE. I belive I must beg the favor of you, sister, to cut out a
shift for this doll.


Miss SOPHIA. And a petticoat for me to make, if you please, sister. I wish I
could cut out things myself.


Miss CLEVELAND. All in good time, Sophia. When you can make them properly, I
will teach you to cut them out; in the mean time, I will readily do it for you.


Miss CATHERINE. Now for a needle and some thread, and then I shall have done
troubling you.


Miss CLEVELAND. O! this puts me in mind of the present I have g^t for each of
you.

[Stepping to a closet she takes out two work baskets, and presents one to each
of her sisters.] Here, Catherine! Here, Sophia! I bought these little baskets
on purpose for you. In them you will, I hope, find all you at present stand in
need of. But one condition I must make, -- that you always keep them in very
nice order.


Miss SOPHIA. Thank you, sister! Look, Catherine! here is a pincushion, a
huswife, a set of thread papers, a pair of scissars, and a thimble.


Miss CATHERINE. I have got the same exactly. -- Thank you, Jemima.


Miss CLEVELAND. Well, my dears, now you may, if you please, go and work in the
nursery.

[ The young ladies put their work into the baskets, and as they are going out,
Miss Sophia speaks.]
Miss SOPHIA, Be sure to call us down when our sisters come.


Miss CLEVELAND. Most certainly, my love. [ They go out] What a happy prospect
presents itself to my view. The dear children improve daily. My father, though
greatly agitated, seems much happier than when we first met in the morning. I
cannot help flattering myself that he will settle his heart amongst us; and
perhaps my mother may recover, and we may yet be a united family.

[ Enter a Maid.] MAID. O! Miss Cleveland! I have been waiting for you these
two hours. I have got a letter for you, and from such a sweet, pretty, fine
gentleman, you cannot think.


Miss CLEVELAND. I am surprised, Betty, that you dare to take such a liberty
with me. -- Pray return the letter to the person you (...) it from, and tell
him, were he a Prince, I should not encourage a clandestine correspondence. I
shall not open the letter, I assure you, Betty, but will take care to inform my
papa what kind of a servant he has in the house.


MAID. What kind of a servant, indeed! I believe if I go, I shall not leave my
betters behind me. -- La! Miss! most young ladies like to have lovyers. Why
Miss Clarissa ha^ one, I assure you; and I do not know but what Miss Emma may
too.


Miss CLEVELAND, [ aside.] I am shocked at this intelligence; -- however, it
may be of use to me. [ To the maid.] I do not believe you, Betty, my sisters
would not be so indiscrete.


BETTY, [ smiling.] Would not they, though? I know better; and if Miss Clarissa
does not take a trip to Scotland one of these days, it will not be her fault.


Miss CLEVELAND. I assure you, Betty, I will not allow you to take such
freedoms with my sisters. -- I desire you to go and pursue your proper business.


MAID. Well, Miss, if you well not take the letter, I must carry it back; but I
fear the poor gentleman will break his heart.


Miss CLEVELAND. How dare you mention to me again the letter I before reproved
you for offering to me? -- Leave me this instant.


MAID. Dear me, miss! I am sure your mamma was not so proud to poor servants as
you are, nor yet so hard -- hearted to gentlemen. She could not have contrived
to run away from school so cleverly, if she had. I dare say my master sent many
and many a letter by a servant to her, so he has no right to find fault with me.


Miss CLEVELAND I will not hear another disrespectful word of my parents. -- If
you do not leave me I will acquaint my papa with your insolence immediately.


MAID, [ as she is going out.] If you tell of one you must tell of all, and a
fine job that will be.


Miss CLEVELAND. I am hurt beyond description with the discovery this girl has
made, respecting my sisters, and her insolence to my parents distresses me
beyond measure. However, I trust that time and patience, with the blessing of
heaven, will carry me through the difficulties in which I am at present
involved. -- I wonder Clarissa and Emma are not arrived; the coach went for
them very early this morning.

[Enter a footman announcing a lady.]
FOOTMAN. Miss Fowler, madam.

[ Enter Miss Fowler.]
Miss CLEVELAND. Good morning to you, my dear Miss Fowler! I almost despaired
of having the pleasure of seeing you. Why I have been at home a month, my dear.


Miss FOWLER. I should have waited on you before, Miss Cleveland, but when you
came home, I was preparing to go to Lady Newland's. You do not visit that
family you know, and I could not come myself, for we had engagements for every
hour of the day. I left her ladyship but yesterday, and have again so much work
to do, that I knew not well how to spare time to come even now.


Miss CLEVELAND. Pardon me, Miss Fowler, but I really cannot help expressing my
surprise, that a young lady, who has no brothers and sisters to work for, and
whose mamma is so very notable, can have so much to do, as scarcely to find
time to visit an old friend and school-fellow.


Miss FOWLER. You do not consider, my dear, how the fashions change, and that I
am obliged to do all the work myself; for mamma will not suffer me to have my
things made at a milliner's and the last mantua-maker's bill papa paid he made
such a fuss about it, only because I had my gown altered, to look like other
people, you cannot think. I am sure I worked so hard for a fortnight before I
went to Lady Newland's, that when I got there I was quite ill. Every night did
I sit up till one or two o'clock. papa insisted on my being at breakfast by
eight notwithstanding, and I heard nothing but grumbling all day against ladies
of quality. I am sure I am so unhappy at home I know not what to do. Every
thing is in such a different style to what I find it in the families I have
lately visited amongst, that ^span^ myself in the least.


Miss CLEVELAND. I am sorry to hear you say so, my dear. I cannot think your
papa and mamma would deny you any reasonable gratification. But give me leave
to say, I was afraid, nay, I sometimes took the liberty of telling you at
school, that your ambition of making intimacies with the young ladies of the
highest ranks there, and your great love of dress, would expose you to many
inconveniences and mortifications.


Miss FOWLER. I think it is very natural, Miss Cleveland, for young people who
have tolerable good persons, to wish to appear to the best advantage, and, to
keep the best company they can. Why is a girl, of inferior rank, sent to one of
the first schools but with a view to form connections, and to put her into the
way of making her fortune.


Miss CLEVELAND. I rather supposed our parents made choice of those schools,
from an idea that the instruction was proportionable to the expense. To be
sure, it is expected that every one who goes to them should make an elegant
appearance; and on this account many people are of opinion, that they should be
appropriated to the children of persons whose situation in life will enable
them to continue to dress them in the same manner, and give them an adequate
fortune. -- It is certainly a sad thing to have desires beyond one's
circumstances.


Miss FOWLER. I positively cannot be happy without fine clothes and jewels, and
my father says he cannot offord to let me dress in a splendid way. I hate to
walk on foot, and to ride in a hackney coach is intolerable. I therefore intend
to ask him to send me over to the East Indies. I doubt not but I shall make my
fortune there; and instead of being obliged to make my own things, as I now do,
shall have all my work done for me, and shall have slaves to wait on me, and
carry me, in a (...).


Miss CLEVELAND. We differ widely in sentiment, my dear Miss Fowler. -- I
should think it the greatest punishment in the world to go to India on such an
expedition. All the riches of Peru would not tempt me to place my self in so
indelicate a situation. Can a young lady so far lay aside the modesty of her
sex, as to embark in a ship, where, for months she will be under the necessity
of associating with men only? On her arrival at the place of her destination,
can she take out her ornaments, and emblellish her person in the most
advantageous manner, that she may attract the notice of some man of whom she
has not the least knowledge, who, desirous of having a handsome wife, stands
waiting to see what cargo of ladies the ship has brought over?


Miss FOWLER. You have a strange idea of going to India, Miss Cleveland, -- You
are so grave, my dear! -- When ambition is in view, such punctilious must be
laid aside. Go, I positively will, so do not say any more against it. Perhaps I
may be a Nabo^'s lady. Miss Danvers, our school fellow, I hear is married
extremely well: -- and then think of Mrs. Dennison. What splendor she lives in!


Miss CLEVELAND. As for Miss Danvers, I understand she is married to a very old
gentleman, disagreeable in his temper to the greatest degree. Whatever her
fortune may be, I do not think her happiness is increased, my dear. And as for
Mrs. Dennison, she does, to be sure, live in a most splendid manner; but would
you change constitutions with her, Miss Fowler? Her health fell a sacrifice to
her ambition. Would you be content to purchase grandeur at the same price?


Miss FOWLER. La! my dear! you are conjuring up all the bugbears in the world
to frighten me from my purpose, How do you know that the climate of India will
disagree with me?


Miss CLEVELAND. Very true, my dear; naturally it might not do so; but few
constitutions can stand against East Indian luxury. Their chaian pepper, their
spices, and other instruments of death, as I must call them, are enough to
undermine the strongest constitution.


Miss FOWLER. As for luxury, Miss Cleveland, there is enough of that in
England. I am sure the East Indies themselves cannot exceed us in that
particular; if I may form a judgment from the people I have lately been amongst.


Miss CLEVELAND. And even this, as I have heard it observed by people of
understanding, was originally imported from India; but it does not universally
prevail here? Let me persuade you, my dear Miss Fowler, to change your purpose.
If the East India gentlemen must have English wives, let them come here and
seek them. Change your purpose -- accommodate your mind to your circumstances:
moderate your ambition. Your papa can afford to dress you as well as you ought
to dress, and I dare say, is willing to do so. Can you bear the thoughts of
leaving both your parents to set out on an adventure which may turn out
contrary to your expectation? would it not be better to leave jewels, and other
rich ornaments, to people whose rank in life require them to distinguish
themselves from their inferiors, by the splendor of their attire, and to enjoy
with thankfulness the blessings you already possess?


Miss FOWLER. It is a pity, my dear friend, that you did not live in the golden
days of queen Bess. I dare say you would have liked a good grogram suit of
clothes, strong enough to last your life; and would have been glad to breakfast
with the maids of honor on cold round of beef! How happy would it be for the
nation, if you were queen of England that you might explode luxury from our
tables, and make sumptuary laws for dress!


Miss CLEVELAND. Unless I were an arbitray monarch, I fear I should not succeed
in such an attempt, Miss Fowler. As far as example can go our present gracious
queen instructs her subjects, by observing the utmost propriety and moderation
in both the particulars you mention. But I am sorry to say her amiable example
has not its due influence. There seems to be a general emulation among all
sorts of people to outdo each other. Every rank presses upon the next above it,
and by this means each seems under a kind of necessity to go beyond its proper
bounds in order to preserve the distinction due to it.


Miss FOWLER. I protest, Miss Cleveland, you preach excellently well! What was
your text, my dear? I declare I have forgot. I will learn shorthand that I may
write down such fine discourses. It is pity you were not a man! you would
certainly have been Archbishop of Canterbury. I hope you will marry a parson.
If I meet with a reverend divine, that has more sense in his countenance than
in his brain, I will speak a good word for you. A wife that can make sermons
will be very acceptable to such an one.


Miss CLEVELAND. I have been so accustomed to this kind of raillery, Miss
Fowler, that I do not take offense at it; but it grieves me to see a friend
under such an unhappy infatuation.


Miss FOWLER. Well then, to be serious. You really think my unhappiness is all
of my own making? Tell me now, would it not hurt you exceedingly to cut a mean
figure amongst your companions? and should you not ardently wish to be on an
equality with them.


Miss CLEVELAND. I have, you know had the same opportunities as yourself of
making intimacies with ladies of rank, and still keep up an acquaintance with
some of them; but believe me, my dear, I have not the most distant wi^h to vie
with them in appearance. I think it much more desirable to be distinguished by
the propriety of one's dress than by the elegance of it. Nay, I esteem it bad
policy for any young woman to affect to appear what she is not. It naturally
le^ds to an enquiry, When she is and draws contempt and ridicule upon her.


Miss FOWLER. Propriety of dress, I understand to be an exact conformity to the
mode. How ridiculous and awkward a young lady looks who wears an unfashionable
cap for instance. Why, my dear, if you were to go into a polite circle in that
you have got on, you would be laughed at; beside, how horridly you put on your
handkerchief! why I actually see your chin, and the fall of your shoulders!


Miss CLEVLAND. I should, I hope, have, sufficient fortitude to withstand the
shock. I really thought my cap was, to use a tonish expression, a very decent
one. It certainly was in fashion when I made it. I do not affect singularity,
Miss Fowler; on the contrary, when I have new things, give directions to have
them made like other peoples; but then I neither throw them away nor cut them
to pieces in conformity to every new whim. -- But are you resolutely bent upon
going to India?


Miss FOWLER Positively and absolutely. Lady Newland advises me to it of all
things. Bless me! it is two o'clock! I am going to Ranclegh in the evening; and
have got my gown (...) trim, a hat to make, and a hundred things be sides to do.


Miss CLEVELAND I understood that you had made a number of (...) things within
this month; will not some of those do?


Miss FOWLER. Dear me, how you talk! Do not you know that articles of taste and
fashion, if ever so charming when first made, become frightful in a fortnight?


Miss CLEVELAND. I often hear those terms applied, as I think, very
inconsistently.


Miss FOWLER. Those who are votaries of fashion must bid adieu to consistency.
Well, I must take my leave: I am sorry you disapprove my scheme, but I shall
find enough to encourage me in it. I shall see you soon I hope: good morning, my
dear.


Miss CLEVELAND. Your servant, Miss Fowler. [rings the bell, then takes leave
of Miss Fowler, who goes out.] I am glad my sisters were not present at this
conversation. It shall be my care to keep them from an intimacy with Miss
Fowler. How shocking it is to see ingenuity and industry perverted to such
unworthy purposes! My friend may be justly denominated one of the slaves of
fashion. I am all impatience to hear the secret which Betty wished to tell me;
but it would be a meanness to be the confident of one's servant. I will try if
I can prevail on Clarissa to explain the matter to me herself. I think I now
hear the coach stop at the door. I will go and receive my sisters.

[She goes out.
END of ACT I.
ACT II.
SCENE, Mrs. Cleveland's Dressing Room.
[Miss Cleveland, Miss Clarissa, and Miss Emma, engaged in conversation] Miss
CLEVELAND. THE account which papa gave of mamma's health when he left her, was
a very indifferent one. I have great apprehensions that she will not re^^ver.


Miss EMMA. I wish she could have taken me with her. I should have liked of all
things to finish my education in France.


Miss CLEVELAND. My dear Emma, your wish is a very inconsiderate one. Why
should you desire to go to France, when every polite and useful accomplishment
may be acquired in England?


Miss EMMA I am quite tired with staying at Mrs. Thoroughgood's, and long to
see a little of the world; but as my mamma is abroad, I suppose we must
continue at school a great while longer.


Miss CLARISSA. I mean to ask papa to let us be parlour boarders after the
holidays.


Miss CLEVELAND. And have you considered, my dear, that if he complies, the
expense* of your education will be greatly increased? Have you reflected that
his expenses must already be a heavy burden, as his family is so numerous?


Miss EMMA. (...) of con^^^rable fortune, and (...) make no doubt, can afford
to pay for us as parlour boarders, which will not be equal to what it would
cost him to introduce us into the world. I must say, that Clarssa's scheme
appears to me a very good one. But I suppose, you are to set us all to rights,
Jemima?


Miss CLEVELAND. I will pass over the infinuation in the latter part of your
speech without resentment, Emma, though it was a very unkind one. Let us not
embitter this our first meeting for a long time with any disagreeable
altercation. But since you have both formed those ideas respecting your papa's
fortune, which you seem to suppose inexhaustible, I think it incumbent on me to
give you some information which will, I hope, make a change in your sentiments.
My father's expenses already exceed his income: his heart is weighed down with
care on this account. If we add to this oppression, we shall perhaps see him
sink into the grave. Does not duty require that each of his children should
exert themselves according to their different abilitics, to lessen his
disquietudes? I know not how you may be affected, Clarissa and Emma, but I feel
the most ardent desire to make him happy.


Miss CLARISSA. Are you sure of what you say, Jemima? That papa has been very
cross, and, as I thought, stingy, for some time past, I have with pain observed
-- indeed I suffered severely by this circumstance last holidays. What with
mamma's fr^^^fulness and papa's ill humor, I am sure I had no comfort the
whole month I was at home. I would not pass such another for the world.


Miss CLEVELAND. I was exceedingly sorry it fell out so that I was in scotland
with my aunt at so unfortunate a time, I should otherwise have made a point of
being at home (...) I might have attended upon mamma and kept you company But,
from the letters which were (...) to us, we only supposed that she had some
slight indisposition; and it was a great shock to me indeed, to receive an
account that the physicion thought it necessary for her to go immediately to
the South of France; that my father was going over with her, and wished to find
me at home when he returned, as he wanted me to superintend the family. My aunt
set off with me directly, and I arrived here a month ago; but my father did not
come home till last night, having, since his arrival in England, made a circuit
to view his estates. My aunt favored me with her company here as long as she
could, and will, I hope, soon return.


Miss EMMA. Clarissa and I were sent for home one day to ^^ke leave of mamma.
She looked dreadfully indeed, and had a most shocking cough. When she parted
with us, she seemed greatly affected, and said, she feared she should never see
us any more.


Miss CLARISSA. She desired to be affectionately remembered to you Jemima, and
said, she made no doubt you would supply her place in the family, in case she
should die, much better than she had done. And, indeed I must say, that would
be no difficult task, for never were children more neglected by a mother than
we have all been by ours.


Miss CLEVELAND I am shocked to hear you talk in this manner, Clarisa! surely
you forget that you are speaking of a parent?


Miss CLARISSA. A parent, Jemima! Does a woman who takes nature, and pays no
attention to her children. deserve so endearing an appellation? You may say
what you will, but you cannot blind our eyes to mamma's faults nor can you ever
expect us to love or reverence her as we should have done, had she performed
the mother's part?


Miss CLEVELAND. And who, my dear sisters, has given you authorit authority to
cancel the divine law, that you thus c^enly profess not to love and reverence
your mother, when GOD has expressly enjoined us to honor our parents? You
really speak as if the relation between your mamma and you was dissolved.


Miss EMMA. We have had but little reason Jemima, to think of the connection;
and I am really astonished to hear you, who have been treated like an alien,
talk in defense of mamma's indifference. Had she felt like many mothers whom I
know, she could not have parted with her eldest child to live with a relation
who passes so much of her time at such a distance from her.


Miss CLEVELAND. I must ^treat my dear Emma, that you will not arraign my
mother's conduct in respect to me: I assure you, that I (...) myself as under
obligations to both my parents, which I can never return; and so are every one
of their children.


Miss CLARISSA. Obligations, Jemima! I beseech you to name them?


Miss CLEVELAND. I must beg of you, my dear, to carry your thoughts back to the
time when you first came into the world, a little helpless infant; and tell me,
were you then able to provide for yourself? if not, by what means have you been
supplied with the necessaries of life from that time to the present hour?


Miss CLARISSA. O! to be sure! papa and mamma have furnished us with the
necessaries of life; that it was their indiscensible duty to do.


Miss CLEVELAND. We will allow that it was, as you say, their indiscensible
duty; but is there no reciprocal duty on the child's part? Is there no return
of affection required or fifteen years comfortable subsistence? Look down upon
the lower ranks of life, and see what extremities -- of wretchdness many of the
poorer sort of children endure for want of food and raiment; and surely the
reflection which the view will excite, must kindle in your heart a spark of
gratiude toward those who have so amply provided for your defense against
those evils.


Miss CLARISSA. To be sure we could not have provided for (...) own wants in
the helpless state of infancy; but I never thought of this before.


Miss EMMA. All this may be very true; but still I think mamma has been greatly
to blame in not keeping us under her own eye, and instructing us herself.


Miss CLEVELAND. In respect to your first objection, my dear -- are you sure
that your mother had strength of constitution to bear the fatigue? And in
regard to the other -- are you certain that she had leisure for it? Let me ask
you, my dear sister -- have you been suffered to grow up without the
instruction suitable to your ^^uation in life? Has no expense been bestowed on
your education? I am rather inclined to think that our dear parents have been
put to many inconveniences through their desire to procure us the usual
advantages.


Miss EMMA. It must be owned that we elder ones have had a very genteel
education, and were placed under a worthy governess.


Miss CLEVELAND. Then I must desire you, my dear, as I just now did Clarissa,
to look down on the lower rank of life. Consider the deplorable ignorance of
those poor children, who are destitute of instruction; and before you presume
to say again, Why did not my mamma teach me herself? ask your own heart,
Whether you have been grateful to her for the benefits she has bestowed upon
you? and whether you have endeavored to repay them as you ought to do? Make
this enquiry with impartiality, my dear, and depend upon it, you will find more
reason to condemn yourself than your parents.


Miss CLARISLA. I really believe, Jemima, that if you had the worst parents in
the world, you would find excuses for them!


Miss CLEVELAND. I would endeavor to do so, Clarissa; for I entertain the
highest idea of filial duty, and cannot conceive what pleasure there can be in
discovering a parent's faults. To me it appears a great crime to ferutinize
their characters, unless with a view of discovering their virtues, in order to
copy them. All human beings are liable to error, and why should we expect our
parents in particular to be exempt from them? For my part, I am firmly of
opinion, that no children can delight in pointing out defects in a father or
mother's conduct, who are not conscious of improprieties in their own, which
they hope to excuse to the world, by throwing the blame on their parents.
Pardon me, Clarissa; but if you were a little older I should really suspect
from the complaints you have exhibited against yours, thet you were going to
throw off their authority by a clandestine marriage.


Miss CLARISSA, [with great confusion.] What do you mean, Jemima? Is it
possible you can have heard? --


Miss CLEVELAND. I will not keep you in painful suspense, Clarissa. I am
informed, that you have such a scheme in agitation as I hinted at, But surely
my intelligence, which came from one of the inferior servants, is without
foundation. How ever it is, make me your confident in the affair. Fear no
^eproaches, but assure yourself, of every (...) which a friend and sister can
give toward exricating you from so perplexing a situation.


Miss CLARISSA. You are very good, Jemima; but how shall I will tell you of my
indiscretion? Yet I must hasten to do so, lest my father should return, from
whom I hope it will ever be concealed.


Miss CLEVELAND. As far as is consistent with my duty to him, assure yourself
it shall be by me, proceed therefore, my dear.


Miss CLARISSA. You can scarcely figure to yourself a more distracted place
than this house was when we came home to pass the lastholidays. Whenever it was
possible for mamma to bear the fatigue of dressing she went out, but seldom
took us with her, because my papa objected to the expense attending our being
introduced into the world; and not only to that, but really seemed to grudge
money for housekeeping. This produced dreadful altercations between them. Papa
would sometimes be in such violent passions that you would have been frightened
to see him, and generally left the house for the whole day afterward; and then
mamma would sit and fre^ to such a degree, that there was no such thing as
being comfortable with her. You shed tears, Jemima! what is the matter with you;


Miss CLEVELAND. O! Clarissa! how can you ask that question? Is filial
affection extinguished in your heart? I hope not! rather let me suppose, that
the indifference with which you speak of altercations that distress me even to
hear of, arises from want of reflection. Depend on it, my dear, there must have
been some very material cause for such a change in papa's temper, which is
naturally a very good one. A cause, which, from what I just now told you of his
circumstances, you can no longer be at a loss to guess. But go on with your
story.


Miss CLARISSA. O! Jemima! you affect me so that I can scarcely restrain my own
tears; but I will try to proceed. (...) in our parents company, (...) Emma and
I used to avoid it as much as possible. sometimes we had whole days to
ourselves; for mamma was frequently too ill to leave her room, and papa from
home. Not knowing how to amuse ourselves, and wanting to vent our uneasiness,
we made a confident of Carter, my mamma's, woman, who aggravated every thing
that appeared to us a fault either in papa or mamma's conduct; and we were
persuaded to think ourselves worse treated than ever children were before.


Miss EMMA. If we were to tell you half what Carter said, you would not be so
ready to blame us, Jemima.


Miss CLEVELAND. I am not forward to censure you, my dear sisters, but surely
affection and friendship require that I should not flatter you. I suppose,
Clarissa, this base woman had some private ends of her own to answer, which
induced her to act this cruel part.


Miss CLARISSA. She had; and what I am going to tell you will unfold them to
you. I will therefore proceed to inform you, that she employed every artifice
to infinuate herself into our good opinions, and persuaded us to come into her
room, when she had company, which was always the case when mamma was out; and I
assure you, that they had cards, and sometimes dancing too, and every thing in
style: nay, even the inferior servants had their parties. Among Mrs. Carter's
visitors was a young man of very smart appearance, who she assured me, was
really a young gentleman, who had, like us, bad parents. He paid particular
attention to me; and at his second visit, professed himself my lover, and Mrs.
Carter informed me, that he was most desperately enamoured with me.


Miss CLEVELAND. And were you credulous enough to believe her? O! Clarissa!
hasten to tell me the event of this ^lamable weakness.


Miss CLARISSA. My lover, as Carter called him, repeated his visits; and I
confess to you, my dear sister, so far suceeded on his design, that I suffered
him to talk of an elopement with him to scotland, and fear I should, if he had
^ersisted, have consented to it these holidays, had I ^ound things in the same
situation in which I left them. But by bribling Betty, he prevailed on her to
convey this letter to me at school, which she soon found means to do. I blush
to give it to you, but it is necessary to may the whole of this affair before
you.


[she gives Miss Cleveland a letter Miss CLEVELAND, [reads] Madam,
I will no longer deceive you, as the purpose for which I professed myself your
lover is destroyed by your mother's going abroad, and taking my relation Mrs.
Carter, with her, who, I find, has since left her. To be a ^artaker of the
festivity at your house, was my original motive for coming thither; and the
attention I paid to (...) was with a view of preventing your betraying our
(...) If you are bent on a trip to Sotland you must ^use another companion; for
I have no money to spare (...) such expeditions, nor any inclination to involve
myself (...) by marrying a fine lady, I therefore take (...) leave of you, and
am, Madam,

Your humble servant.



Miss CLEVELAND. I am shocked, Clarissa, to an inexpressible degree! (...) not
your delicacy wounded to the quick, by such an ^^dignity as this?


Miss CLARISSA, [after a flood of tears.] O! Jemima! I can scarcely look you in
the face!


Miss CLEVELAND. For my part, Clarissa, I am more inclined to pity (...) to
blame you. But can we persuade the world to (...) tain the same sentiments of
your conduct?


Miss EMMA. Let us hope that the story will not transpire; and and if it even
does, surely allowance will be made for my sister's youth and inexperience.


Miss CLEVELAND. Form no such expectations, my dear Emma! Men of such character
as the author of that latter, are too vain of their conquests to conceal them;
and though perhaps the fear of papa's resentment may prevent his doing it
publicly; depend on it, he has hi^ confidence to whom he boasts of his success,
and laughs at my sister's credulity.


Miss CLARISSA. Spare me! for pity's sake, dear Jemima! I shall die with shame
else!


Miss CLEVELAND. I will spare you Clarissa! But indeed I never felt more angry
in my life. I am hurt for the honor of the family. I am hurt for that of my
sex. Let it be your study henceforth to retrieve the injury you have done to
both.


Miss CLARISSA. Believe me, it shall.


Miss EMMA. Dear Jemima! if Clarissa had been guilty of them greatest
indiscretion in life, you could not say more about it than you do.


Miss CLEVELAND. I am sorry to find, my dear Emma. that at you early years,
your mind should be insensible to that grief which every sister should feel,
when so near relation deviates from the paths of rectitude. Clarissa has
fortunately escaped the most dreadful consequence which might have ensued; but
if you are inclined to justify her errors, you will perhaps be led to imita^^
her example, and may not be so happy as to come of with impunity.


Miss CLARISSA. I hope she will not be so foolish: neither can I b^ said to
escape with impunity, Jemima. The conviction of my own mind, added to your
censure, is a very severe punishment, I assure you: and then the world! I shall
be afraid to go to any public place, lest I should see this man; and shall
dread to enter into company, lest any one I meet there, should have heard of my
indiscretion: And if the conversation should, at any time, turn upon the
imprudence of young girls, I am sure my confusion will betray me.


Miss CLEVELAND. Since your conscience is so fully awakened to the impropriety
of your conduct, my dear, I will forbear all farther reproaches. But for the
sake of Emma, who seems to think me severe in my censures, I cannot forbear
adding, that the indiscretions, and too frequent levities in the young women of
these days, arise from the want of prescribing to themselves certain rules of
decorum, which nothing should tempt them to depart from. Thanks to my dear
aunt's care, those principles are, I hope, so firmly rooted in my own mind,
that I would on no consideration, violate them.


Miss CLARISSA. Unfortunately for me, I have been taught no rules of decorum,
any farther than the common forms of politeness extend; if there are any that I
can yet practice, teach them to me, my dear sister, I entreat you; surely,
though I have, for want of a kind hand to guide me, wandered out of the right
^oad. I have not deviated so far but I may return to again.


Miss CLEVELAND. By no means, my dear, and gladly will I afford you all the
direction in my power. Favor me therefore with attention whilst I repeat to
you some of those instructions which have been useful to me in the regulation
of my conduct.


Miss CLARISSA. Most willingly, Jemima.


Miss CLEVELAND. You know, my dear, that immediately on my leaving school, I
went to live with my aunt; I was then fifteen years old; and I well remember,
that the first time we were alone together, she addressed me in this manner: I
promise myself great pleasure, dear Jemima, in having you for a companion, and
mean to introduce you as such wherever I go; but as my acquaintance is large, I
wish before I do so, to give you a few cautions which may preserve you from
many inadvertency, fail into. In the first place, said she have a nice regard
to your reputation, and with this view guard against all levity of conduct:
avoid familiarity with servants; for let them be ever so faithful or just, few
of them are competent judges of what delicacy and decorum require of young
ladies. Be careful how you form confidential friendships with persons of your
own sex and age; but be still more circumspect in regard to young gentleman;
encourage no freedom under the idea of romping; neither lend a willing eat to
compliment, which is in general, but another name for flattery Resolve to carry
on no clandesline correspondence: and in order to defend your heart against
forming an improper attachment, fill up those hours which you devote to
reading, not with novels, but in the perusal of such books as will improve your
mind.


Miss EMMA. I was just going to say, Jemima, that I was certain from your
conversation, you were no novel reader: they teach other things, I assure you.


Miss CLEVELAND. I am not wholly a stranger to novels, my dear; I have read
some, but they were of my aunt's selecting.


Miss EMMA. I believe that I have read all that ever were published in the
English language, and many French ones besides. Carter subscribed for us, and
supplied us well, I assure you.


Miss CLEVELAND. Then I hope you have had enough of them, and will the more
readily lay them aside for books of another kind, which I shall take the
liberty of recommending to you.


Miss CLARISSA. I am sensible of the pernicious tendency of many novels, and
cannot help imputing the success of Carter's scheme, in some measure, to the
examples which are there exhibited.


Miss EMMA. O! she was an artful creature! How, my dear Jemima, could Clarissa,
circumstanced as she was, avoid the artful snare (...) was laid for her.


Miss CLEVELAND. It was not my intention, my dear, to say any thing father on
the subject; and I fear, Clarissa, will think I must in draw an invidous
comparison, if I answer your question.


Miss CLARISSA. By no means, Jemima, the friend and the sister shine forth in
every word you say, declare your full sentiments on the subject.


Miss CLEVELAND. Thus called upon my dear, I will inform you what I think I
should have done at least what I ought to have done: I should have endeavored
to bear with my mother fretfulness, and to avoid enercating my father's anger,
by any irritating expressions, or improper behavior. If these endeavors had
been unsuccessful, I do not say that I could have supported the disappointment
with indifference; but I would have lamented it in silence. Your making a
confident of Mrs. Carter, encouraged her to attempt what I dare say she would
not have thought of, if you had kept her at a proper distance.


Miss EMMA. That was undoubtedly a wrong step, and I must confess that instand
of paying such attention to our parents as you recommend, Jemima, we used to
make sharp answers; and when we were dismissed with resentment, which we had
provoked, would go into Carter's room and talk over our grievances, till with
the aid of her animadversions, we fancied our parents the worst enemies we had
in the world.


Miss CLARISSA. It is very true, but I am now convinced they certainly are, as
Jemima hunted, our greatest benefactors; for allowing them to have been remiss
in some particulars, who, besides, would have conferred such benefits upon us
as they have done? Were such a poor credulous girl as I to be abandoned by my
parents, what might be my lot? I lately foolishly wished to forsake their
house; to throw myself into the power of a stranger, with an idea of being my
own mistress; but I am resolved to follow, in future, your plan, my dear
sister, as far as I have opportunity of doing, and hope to repair my fault to
my father by (...) obedience for the remainder of my life. What would I give,
could I do the same by my another! O! my dear Jemima! if she dies, I shall feel
remorse as long as I live, for the uneasiness which, I fear I gave her when she
was ill able to bear it.


Miss CLEVELAND. If such are your regrets, my dear, for smaller offenses, what
would have been your feelings had you married without the consent of your
parents?


Miss CLARISSA. What, indeed! But I never considered the matter before. I
thought I could plead their example as an excuse, and concluded, that they
could do no less than forgive me on that account.


Miss EMMA. I do not believe, Clarissa, that if you had married Mrs. Carter's
relation, papa would ever have owned him for a son-in-law: all our relations
would have contemned such a mean alliance.


Miss CLEVELAND. And with justice, my dear; for in marriages regard should be
had to equality of rank for many reasons. But let us choose another subject. I
should really be ashamed were any body to overhear such young persons as us
conversing on this. Before we think of marrying let us endeavor to acquit
ourselves well in our present relations of life. Let us, my dears, strive to
fulfill the duties of daughters and sisters. Let us learn the rules of a^conomy
and good (...). Perfect ourselves in the virtues of submission, meekness. and
patience; and adorn our minds with every branch of useful knowledge, before we
venture to form important connections, in which, if we are not possessed of
those qualifications, and do not practice those virtues, we shall certainly be
unhappy, and the cause of unhappiness to others. But the interesting
conversation we have been engaged in, has made us forget the dear children. You
promised to go up to them again, Clarissa and Emma.


Miss EMMA. Very true; let us go up. Will accompany us, Jemima?


Miss CLEVELAND. Most willingly! I am their governess now; but hope that both
you and Clarissa will lend me your assistance, as well as in the management of
the house.


Miss CLARISSA. Surely you jest with us, Jemima! and only mean to make us feel
our own deficiencies?


Miss CLEVELAND. Can you suspect me of so ungenerous a design? No, my dear
sisters, I wish on the contrary to call into action those abilities which I
know your possess; and give you opportunities of testifying your gratitude and
affection to our good father, who will, I am confident reward your endeavors
to please him, with such a degree of paternal love as you have never yet
experienced. Had you seen with what tenderness he pressed me to his heart this
morning, you would have wished to be a sharer of my happiness.


Miss CLARISSA. You have inspired me with the most fervant desire to obtain the
good opinion of my father. Perhaps I should have been even now in full
possession of it, had I been careful to deserve it. Let us hasten to the dear
girls, that we may be ready to receive him when he returns from his walk.


Miss CLEVELAND. I will, with pleasure, attend you.

[They go out.
END of ACT II.
ACT III.
[Enter Mr. Cleveland, with Master Edward and Master Henry, returning from
their walk. Mr. CLEVELAND. HOW do you find yourselves, my dear boys, after your
walk?


Master EDWARD. I am very well, thank you, papa; but so hungry, that, with your
leave, I will go and get something to eat. I must see Clarissa and Emma first
though.


Mr. CLEVELAND. Do so, and desire them to come down to me. How is your stomach
affected Henry? Has jumping procured you an appetite also?


Master HENRY. Indeed it has. sir.


Mr. CLEVELAND. Then go and satisfy it by all means. I suppose you will kiss
your sisters first?


Master HENRY. Certainly, papa. I would go even without my dinner to do that. [
Master Edward and Henry go out.


Mr. CLEVELAND. What charming boys! I have had inexpressible pleasure this
morning! their cheerfulness has enlivened me. I feel my spirits refreshed, and
have a presentiment that my affairs will come round, and I shall he happy with
my family. Here come my girls.


[ Enter Miss Clarissa and Miss Emma.] [ Mr. Cleveland meets them, and taking
first one, then the other in his arms, kisses them affectionately; they appear
confused.] Mr. CLEVELAND, [surprised.] What is the matter, my dear girls! Why
do you not return the affection of your father?


Miss CLARISSA. That I most sincerely do; but the remembrance of my ill
behavior to you and mamma last holidays, tells me I am unworthy of your
tenderness; and I am confounded in your presence. Pardon me, I entreat you, and
give me your blessing!


Miss EMMA, [sobbing.] And me too! Dear papa, forgive me too!


Mr. CLEVELAND. Come to my arms, my dear girls! Most cordially do I forgive
every thing that is past. Receive my warmest benediction. May the choicest
blessings of heaven be your lot! And may I be the dispenser of them as far as
paternal love can extend!


Miss CLARISSA. I am resolved, dear papa, to copy Jemima in every thing I can;
and then I doubt not but I shall be able to contribute to your happiness.


Miss EMMA. [having suppressed her tears.] It shall be my endeavor to do the
same, and to avoid such provocation as I gave you last holidays.


Mr. CLEVELAND. Let us talk no more of the last holidays, my dear girls; the
recollection of them is painful to me, upon many accounts. Instead of reverting
to so disagreeable a subject, let us form some plan for the enjoyment of the
present vacation, to me as welcome as to you, believe me.


Miss CLARISSA. Jemima has a scheme to propose, sir, which we are all impatient
to obtain your approbation of.


Mr. CLEVELAND. Has she? then I am sure it is a good one; call her to me, my
love.


Miss CLARISSA. I will, sir. Emma, you promised to return to Catherine and
Sophia, as soon as you had paid your duty to papa. I make no doubt, but he will
permit you to retire.


Mr. CLEVELAND. By all means, my dear. I do not wish to detain you from any
innocent amusement. You will fetch Jemima, Clarissa?


Miss CLARISSA. I will, sir,

[ The young ladies go out.


Mr. CLEVELAND. I am all amazement at the scene that has passed, though I
endeavored to conceal it. What can have effected this surprising change in
girls whom I regarded as unmanageably turbulent. In the last holidays, there
was no bearing their pertness; they had a retort for every thing which either
their mamma or I said to them. O! Jemima! this is your work! Your sweetness is
capable of changing even a savage nature!


[ Enter Miss Cleveland, bringing the baby in her arms.] Miss CLEVELAND. My
sisters informed me, sir, that you required me to attend you. I was just coming
to present this little stranger to you. Go to papa, Frances.

[Mr. Cleveland takes the child in his arms, and kisses her; but not knowing
him, she cries, on which he gives her back again to Miss Cleveland.]
Mr. CLEVELAND. Here! take your lovely change, Jemima! I hope the day will soon
come, when she can behold her father without terror.


Miss CLEVELAND. I will, sir.

[She goes out.
Mr. CLEVELAND. I dismissed Jemima, because I would not distress her by
reproaches of her mother, which, with pain, I suppressed as they rose to my
lips. Had she kept my infants at home, they would have returned my endearments.
But let me ask my own heart, have I nothing to condem^^ myself for -- alas!
yes! I fear I have been as much to blame as my wife. O! that she could recover,
and partake my present happiness!

[ Enter Miss Cleveland.]


Mr. CLEVELAND. You are soon returned, Jemima.


Miss CLEVELAND. I wish to execute my dear father's orders as soon as possible
on every occasion. You commanded me to attend you.


Mr. CLEVELAND. I did so, my love, Clarissa tells me you have a scheme to
propose for the enjoyment of the present holidays?


Miss CLEVELAND. Not for the present holidays only, sir, but for a continuance,
if it merits your approbation.


Mr. CLEVELAND. Name it, my dear; that it is yours will be a sufficient
recommendation of it to me.


Miss CLEVELAND. O! my dear sir! how does your kind conde^cension encourage me!
My scheme then is this: to leave the townhouse entirely; to discharge the
present set of servants, who are extravagant, waste^ul, and deslolute beyond
description; and to retire into the country.


Mr. CLEVELAND. You astonish me, Jemima! Notwithstanding the high opinion I
entertain of your good-sense, I could not have expected such a proposal from a
girl of eighteen. What! resign all the amusements of the gay world, to which
your youth entitles you, to immure yourself in a country village an hundred
miles from the metropolis, where there are not above half a dozen families with
whom you can expect any society?


Miss CLEVELAND. I have considered all this, sir, and have no doubt, but we
shall be very comfortable in the country. We are a little society of ourselves,
and shall contrive a hundred modes of diversion for our leisure hours. Besides,
I have, from my good aunt, had a very agreeable account of the neighboring
gentry, whose company will afford us a pleasing variety. My only fear is, that
we shall not be able to entertain you, sir. But you can come to town when you
please, we will take the same care at home during your absence, as if your eye
was upon us.


Mr. CLEVELAND. But that I am certain, from the goodness of your heart, Jemima,
that you did not mean it as such; I should take what you said last as a reproof
to me. I hope, my love, I shall for the future, find my amusements in my own
family. Believe me, when I assure you, that I have been more truly diverted
with my two boys this morning than I could have been at any public place
whatever.


Miss CLEVELAND. I have reason to think, sir, that every one of your children
will contribute to your amusement; there is a general emulation amongst us to
do so.


Mr. CLEVELAND. To you I attribute it, my dear girl: you are the kind ^^spirer
of it. Assure yourself of my ready concurrence with all your plans. But how, at
such a distance from London are the younger children to be instructed? they
have not yet, as I may say, received any education.


Miss CLEVELAND. The education which you had the goodness to bestow upon me,
and my elder sisters, has enabled us to instruct the younger ones in many
things. C^^rassa and Emma have agreed to assist me, and the rest have promised
a ready attention; happy in the thoughts of being brought up at home, instead
of going to school!


Mr. CLEVELAND. This plan, my dear, may do very well for a little while; but
Edward and Henry must go on with the Classics, and there you cannot teach them
[ after a pa^se.] But surely I can instruct them myself; for the present, I
will do so, and when we are settled, get a private ^^tor for them; I will write
this day to Mrs. Atkinson, the curate's wife, and entreat the favor of her to
hire a set of servants; and honest Mary, the gardener's wife, who at present
takes care of the house, can, by the direction of Mrs. Atkinson, get it in
order for us. I will let her live in a little lodge which was originally built
for the gardener's residence. What furniture is wanted for mine may be sent
from hence; and we will soon bid adieu to this racketing town, in which I have
found but little real enjoyment.

[A Footman enters.]
FOOTMAN. A gentleman, sir, who says he came from France, begs the favor of
seeing you.


Mr. CLEVELAND. Show him into my study. I will wait on him immediately, [
Footman goes out.] A gentleman from France! Perhaps my wife is dead! Forbid it
Heaven!

[He goes out hastily.
Miss CLEVELAND. I tremble with apprehension! I hope my dear mother's life will
be spared, that she may enjoy more happiness than she has done for many years.


[Enter Miss Clarissa and Miss Emma.] Miss CLARISSA. Do you know who that
French gentleman is, sister, who is now in the study with papa? I met John in
the hall, who told me, that he believed he came from mamma.


Miss CLEVELAND. I can give you no intelligence, my dear, but am in a state of
most painful suspense, till I am informed of his business.


Miss EMMA. Have you communicated your scheme to papa, Jemima?


Miss CLEVELAND. I have, my dear, and he readily agrees to our putting it in
execution. You and Clarissa are to leave school, and the little ones to be
educated at home, as we proposed.


Miss CLARISSA. I am glad of it with all my heart. By retiring into the
country, I shall, I hope, escape the mortification of having my indiscretion
made public; and flatter myself I shall establish a good reputation in the
neighborhood I am going to.


Miss EMMA. By assisting you in the instruction of the children, Jemima, we
shall be likely to keep up our French, Geography, Embroidery, and other things,
which we have learnt at school. Then I am delighted with the idea of the dances
you have promised us, and the hopes, that amongst our neighbors we may find
some agreeable companions.


Miss CLEVELAND. I dare say we shall; and I suppose we can have masters to give
us farther instruction; for there is a capital ladies school within two miles
of our house.


Miss CLARISSA. Are you coming up to the children, Jemima? Catharine and
Sophia, seem quite tired of working. I was desired to ask you, how you wish
them to be employed?


Miss CLEVELAND. It was my intention that they should take a little walk in the
Park till dinnertime; but I cannot conveniently attend them, as I am in hopes
my father will return and relieve my mind from its present anxiety. Will you
Emma, have the goodness to accompany them?


Miss EMMA. Upon condition that you will send for me as soon as you know what
news the French gentleman has brought of mamma. Shall Edward and Henry go with
me?


Miss CLEVELAND. With all my heart, if they are not already tired with walking;
but if they are so, or have fixed upon some other amusement, you had best not
interrupt them. I have promised them a holiday.


Miss CLARISSA. Suppose, Emma, that nurse carries Frances with you? The dear
little creature seems to know me already, Jemima! I hope she will be fond of
me: you cannot think how diverted she has been with some of Emma's droll tricks.


Miss EMMA. I can play no more of them, till I know what news this Frenchman
brings. I will go to her, however.

[She goes out.
Miss CLEVELAND. My father's conference with this foreigner is a very long one,
at least it appears so to me, through my impatience to know how my mother does.


[ Enter Mr. Cleveland in great agitation, with a letter in his hand; he throws
himself into a chair, both the young ladies hasten to him. Miss Cleveland takes
his hand, and after some hesitation speaks.] Miss CLEVELAND It is needless to
ask you the contents of that letter, sir! I have no longer a mother.

[ She sinks down almost fainting.]


Mr. CLEVELAND. Jemima! my dear Jemima! your fears are groundless! Your mother
is much (...). The emotion you observed in me, proceeded not from sorrow, but
excess of joy. I must make you, my dear girls, my con^i^ents on this occasion.
Your prudence will teach you not to repeat our conversation to the younger
children. Read this letter, Jemima, and read it aloud; it has thrown my spirit
into such a tumult of joy, that I have only a confused remembrance of its
contents.


Miss CLEVELAND. Indeed, my dear sir, I am not equal to the task of reading it
aloud.


Mr. CLEVELAND. Then give it me again my love, I am more composed now.

[ He^^eads,

I HAVE the pleasure to inform you, my dear, that I already find great benefit
from the salubrious air of this mild climate. The fever has left me; my cough
is almost gone; my appetite restored; and the physician flatters me, that in
another month, I may be in a condition to return to my native country. I cannot
doubt but that humanity will incline you to rejoice at the prospect of my
recovery: happy should I be, could you do so from a higher motive! That my
children also could delight in the restoration of a mother! but, alas! fear the
life of dissipation which I have led for many years, careless of domestic
duties, has eradicated your affection for me, and prevented the growth of
theirs. Permit me, however, to assure you, that my illness has awakened those
reflections, which, till lately, I have not allowed myself time to indulge; and
my resolution is formed (...) begin a new course of life, and to seek for
happiness^^ my own family. I could wish at my return to England, to retire to B
--;as I fear a town life will overset my constitution again; and country air
will be necessary to complete my recovery. It would be a great pleasure to me
to have my family with me; and I hope to be indulged with the little ones
atleast. I beg that Frances may be taken from (...). Remember me with affection
to all the children, who are dearer to me than ever; and believe me, etc.


Mr. CLEVELAND. Now you have heard the letter, Jemima, can you wonder at my
emotion?


Miss CLEVELAND. Indeed, sir, I cannot. My mother's happy recovery, and her
desire for retirement, are so agreeable to our wishes, that I am delighted
beyond expression!


Mr. CLEVELAND. It is impossible to describe to you the present sensations of
my heart. I know, I feel, that I shall be happy with my family. If I do not
mistake my own disposition, nature has formed me for a domestic character; for
though fashion and folly have tempted me to deviate from her paths, I have
secretly despised the very amusements I have appeared to promote: and could I
but have had a happy home, should long ago have forsaken them. Not that I mean
at this time to reflect on your mother. I have been at least as blameable as
she. A steady resolution, enforced with good humor on my part, would I dare
say, have had its due influence on her.


Miss CLEVELAND. Spare us the pain, dear sir, of being witnesses to your
self-reproaches. Permit us to retire; when you are more composed we will wait
on you again.


Mr. CLEVELAND. No, my love, stay. There has been one material error in my
conduct, which I am desirous of pointing out to you as a warning; for though I
hope you are not in immediate danger, no one knows what temptations may fall in
your way. The fault I allude to was ain inconsiderate precipitate marriage
without the consent of parents. That my example may not be an encouragement to
any of you to be guilty of the same fault, let me tell you now, as I shall your
brothers and sisters at a proper age, that I regard it as the source of all the
unhappiness of my life.


Miss CLEVELAND. Assure yourself, dear sir, I never will entertain a thought of
marriage without your entire approbation; and I dare say, I may answer for
Clarissa.

[ Miss Clarissa appears confused, but strives to conceal it.


Mr. CLEVELAND. I do not say this, Clarissa, because I have the least distrust,
either of you or Jemima; my only design is by my advice, to furnish you with an
antidote against the contagion of my example. I would not wish that any child
of mine should feel the same kind of pangs which I have selt, and therefore
must tell you the first consequences of this rash step; the succeeding ones you
have, without doubt, yourselves observed.


Miss CLEVELAND. You are very good, sir! but indeed this subject is too painful
to me. I have ever accustomed myself to look up to you with reverence,
gratitude and love. I cannot bear a word that has the remotest tendency to show
you in another light; no, not even from your own lips.


Mr. CLEVELAND. Amiable creature! Hear me this once, Jemima! My heart is so
full I must relieve it. I cannot be satisfied if I do not. It is certainly my
duty.


Miss. CLEVELAND: Well, sir, if it must be so, I obey.


Mr. CLEVELAND. I was, my dear, the second son of my father, who possessed, as
you know, a considerable estate; but as I had an elder brother and four
sisters, my expectations of fortune were moderate, and my father intended me
for the bar. With a view to my advancement in life, he placed me with an
eminent batri^^er. This gentleman had two daughters, the eldest (your good aunt
Jemima) having lost her mother, lived with a relation; but the youngest was
kept as a parlour boarder at one of the first schools in England; she, however,
came home occasionally, and at those recesses I became acquainted with her, and
the consequence of our acquaintance was an elopement to Scotland. This journey
quite exhausted my finances; and being entirely at a loss how to provide for
our future subsistence, we were under the necessity of throwing ourselves at
the feet of our parents.


Miss CLEVELAND. Pardon the interruption, sir; but what must have been the
distess both of you and mamma, when you came into the presence of your parents,
after taking so important a step, without their knowledge and consent?


Mr. CLEVELAND. Greater than you can imagine, my dear. Their just reproaches
were like daggers to our hearts. My wi^e's father, being a man of the nicest
honor was at first inexorable, for he seared the world would suspect him of
being privy to the match; and mine treated me with a coolness which the
consciousness of having deserved it rendered doubly afflicting; however, he
kindly continued the sum he had allotted for my annual allowance, with some
addition; and then my father-in-law was induced to give my wife a small
portion. We took a little house in town: and had we understood domestic
economy, might have lived very comfortably; but instead of redoubling my
assiduities at the law, I entirely neglected my studies; and your mother having
no judgment in respect to the expenditure of money, was liable to numberless
impositions; this, added to a taste for public diversions, which we foolishly
substituted for domestic pleasures, involved us in a variety of difficulties, [
Miss Clarissa bursts into tears. My dear Clarissa, why are you so greatly
affected?


Miss CLEVELAND. Indeed my good sir, my feelings are very great as well as
Clarissa's. The idea of what our parents must have suffered is enough to awaken
the tenderest emotion.


Mr. CLEVELAND. Well, my dear girls, I will hasten to a conclusion of my story.
To add to our embarrassment a young family came on. I wished your mother to
nurse you herself, Jemima; but some of her fashionable acquaintance persuaded
her, that it would ruin her health, and confine her constantly at home, so she
was prevailed on to put you to nurse. And thus was one of the greatest delights
in life, that of enjoying our children in their infancy, turned out of doors;
for every succeeding child was, like you, consigned to the care of a stranger;
two we buried.


Miss CLEVELAND. I doubt not, sir, but that, notwithstanding we were put to
nurse, both you and my dear mother had a great deal of care and trouble, as
well as expense on our account.


Mr. CLEVELAND. We had indeed, my dear. After we had been married seven years,
my elder brother died of a fever, and I became my father's heir; he lived but
six months after his son, and, with his dying breath, urged me to leave the
idle course of life I was in, and pass my time like a christian. I fully
intended to obey him; but both your mother and I found it difficult to shake
off our old companions, who enticed us on from day to day, till having money at
command, we became more dissipated than ever; fortunately, neither of us had
any taste for gaming, or we might have totally ruined our family. The events of
this day have recalled to my mind my father's dying injunctions, which I am
resolved, though late to fultil. -- O! my dear, my honored parent! how does my
heart reproach me for ingratitude to your memory!


Miss CLARISSA. My dear sir, you afflict yourself beyond measure!


Mr. CLEVELAND. No, Clarissa, my remorse, though great, is not equal to my
offenses. Obedience to parents is one of the first of moral duties; no one can
violate it without offending their heavenly Father, whose representatives our
earthly parents are to us. Nay, disobedience naturally leads to the breach of
other duties. Had I been a good son, and followed my father's early advice,
which was to settle my principles, establish a good character, and have a
prospect of providing for a family before I thought of marrying, I think I
should have been an affectionate husband and a tender father.


Miss CLEVELAND. I have always considered you as such, sir, and as such will
ever revere you.


Mr. CLEVELAND. Henceforth you shall find me all a parent should be; but I lose
the thread of my narration. After my fathers death, my fortune was very
considerable; but neither your mother or I had used ourselves to any
calculations; and as our family increased, expenses increased, so that for some
time past, I have lived beyond it, and have been under the necessity of
borrowing money on a mortgage. However, the prudent plan you have proposed, my
dear Jemima, will I think, in a few years bring my affairs round, and I hope to
live in such a manner as to give my children cause to bless me.


Miss CLARISSA. We already do, my dear, my honored parent!


Mr. CLEVELAND. Well, my dear girls, I will now retire to my study till dinner
is ready, by which time I hope we shall all be sufficiently composed, to meet
together with cheerful hearts and happy countenances.

[He goes out.
Miss CLARISSA. O! my dear Jemima, what distress have I endured whi^st my
father related the history of his past life!


Miss CLEVELAND. I doubt not but you have. I sincerely sympathized with you.
What condescension has he ^hewn?


[Enter Miss Emma.] Miss EMMA. How could you serve me so, Jemima? you promised
to send for me as soon as the Frenchman was gone.


Miss CLEVELAND. I did so, indeed, Emma; but papa detained us. I have now the
pleasure of informing you, that mamma is better, and will come home in a short
time; therefore, let us look forward to the happiness in store for us. Let each
of us study to do every thing in our power toward establishing good order in
the house we are going to, that at mamma's return she may find a comfortable
family.


Miss CLARISSA. For my part, Jemima, I am so fully convinced, that happiness
depends on the proper discharge of the domestic virtues, that I resolve from
this day to make them my study; and never will I again think of marrying, till
I have qualified myself to fill the offices of wife, mother, and mistress of a
family.


Miss CLEVELAND. Then, my dear, you may, with great probability of success,
promise yourself the attainment of the happiness you aspire to. Would every
young woman form such a resolution, and abide by it, I have reason to think,
there would be few indifferent husbands and careless fathers. However, let us
make the experiment. If we acquit ourselves properly as daughters and sisters.
we shall at least form no improper connections; neither shall we be in danger
of deviating from the paths of propriety, while we fill up our time with useful
employments.


THE END OF VOL. II.
VOLUME III.

THE TRIUMPH OF REASON, AND THE CONTRAST,

PREFACE
IN the first of those Dramatic Pieces, which constitute the present volume, I
have endeavored to point out the folly and odiousness of pride, the beauty and
amiableness of humility, and the advantages which may be derived from the
different acquirements of a liberal education, in a state of adversity. In the
second, an attempt is made to exhibit a striking contrast between the manners
of a daughter, brought up under the tuition of a sensible and tender mother,
and those of a poor young creature, who is supposed to have been vanished by a
mistaken parent to a foreign land, where she wasted some of her most valuable
years in the acquisition of vanity, conceit and pertness, under the idea of
politeness and refinement.

It is really wonderful to think, how parents can thus bring themselves to send
their children from under the eye of tenderness, and watchful solicitude? At
nine or ten years of age, many girls are separated from every relation or
friend, who would kindly correct their growing errors, and are placed as
boarders in convents. It is the interest of the Superiors to send the most
flattering accounts of the dispositions and improvements of those committed to
their care. The mother is naturally precluded from any knowledge of the real
truth, neither can she ascertain the treatment which her child meets with, who
is subimitted to the chance of becoming the object of ill-natured severity,
without an affectionate friend to soothe her affliction, or redress her
grievances. But these are trifling considerations, in comparison with a still
greater danger to which children, sent for education to a catholic country, are
exposed. That of imbibing the principles of an erroneous and superstitious
religion; one great tenet of which is the merit of making converts. How then
can it be expected, that the zealous professors of it, with forbear employing
their endeavors to bias those tender minds which are thus exposed to their
delusions? but allowing that the persons entrusted with the children of
Protestants are true to their trust: what better can be expected, than that
their pupils return home without any religion at all?

Having in this volume brought my work to a conclusion, I must entreat my
Readers to consider it, as particularly intended for young ladies just entering
into the world, who are supposed to be preparing themselves for those relations
in life, which it is natural for them to look forward to. For their benefit
only, have I been induced to bring forth to view, the faults of parents. I hope
it will appear, from the execution of my plan, that nothing is farther from my
design than the exciting in young female minds, premature thoughts of love and
marriage; though I do not agree in opinion with many parents, who would on no
account converse on those subjects with their daughters, till they are just
entering the marriage state. Under proper regulations they ought frequently to
be referred to, so far, I mean, as is necessary to point out the errors which
prove fatal to the happiness of numbers, that young ladies may know, before
they engage in the most important connections of life, the danger of improper
conduct; and be qualified when they have an opportunity of marrying with a good
prospect, and the full consent of their friends, to make a "well ordered home,
their husbands best delight."To instruct their children, govern their servants,
and regulate their expenses; instead of fancying, as is too frequently the case
with the modern fair, that when they leave school they have nothing to do but
to display their beauty and accomplishments, to adorn their persons, in order
to gain admiration, and to run the giddy round of incessant amusement. Wretched
must be the man who calls such an one his wise! miserable the lot of her
neglected children^^

PERSONS of the DRAMA.
Mrs. ALLWORTHY. Mrs. FREEMAN. Mrs. FREEMAN, aged 14, Miss C^ARA FREEMAN, 13.
Miss FOLEY, 16. Miss HARRIET FOLEY, 14. Servants and Attendants.
THE TRIUMPH OF REASON, A DRAMA, IN THREE ACTS.
ACT I.
SCENE, a Parlour.
[Miss Clara Freeman fitting at work, enter Miss Freeman in great haste.] Miss
FREEMAN. O, SISTER, you are here! I have been seeking you this half hour, that
we might be together when the mantua-maker comes to try on our new dresses.


Miss CLARA. I am at present very busy in making the children's things.


Miss FREEMAN. That is an employment in which you will never receive any
assistance from me; I should not have thought of troubling myself about a
parcel of tiresome bra^s.


Miss CLARA. You were once a little brat, as you call it, yourself; what would
have become of you if every body had been of your opinion?


Miss FREEMAN. O, but I was the eldest, and a rarity -- and had people now to
wait upon me? and so ought my brothers and sisters to have -- for mamma cannot
reasonably expect that I should throw my time away upon them.


Miss CLARA. And yet, how do we in all companies hear Miss True-worth praised;
because she takes so much pains with her brothers and sisters, and teaches them
every thing they learn?


Miss FREEMAN. That may do very well for her, who has no great fortune to boast
of -- but my papa, though he is a tradesman, has money enough for a lord; and
my aunt told me, he could make us as rich as ladies.


Miss CLARA. It may be so, but mamma teaches a different lesson; she says, we
had better be good than great, and that humility is a most amiable virtue.


Miss FREEMAN. Do you know the reason of that? because she herself had no
fortune, but was a pennyless colonel's daughter, and, therefore, as my aunt
told me, she despises money.


Miss CLARA. I am sure mamma is the most agreeable woman I ever saw. She is so
gentle and kind to every one, I think it very strange that my aunt should have
spoken against her, and to her own child too!


Miss FREEMAN. I do not see much harm in what my aunt said. When my papa
consented to my living with her, she endeavored to eradicate many sentiments
which differed from her own; It was natural for her to try to persuade me to
think like herself.


Miss CLARA. Perhaps ^o. But I know your going to live with her was contrary to
mamma's inclination, and (...) have often seen her (...) ^ears about it.


Miss FREEMAN. I am only sorry my poor aunt died, which obliged me to return
home, for I shall never be so happy again as I was with her. Mamma confines me
and will not let me have a variety of fine clothes. I was forced to get at papa
alone, and coax him to consent to our going to Monsieur De Fierville's ball,
and to allow us new dresses for the occasion; and I can perceive that mamma is
displeased because I have gained my point.


Miss CLARA. Fie! Matilda, you accuse my dear mother very wrongfully; indeed
she is delighted to give us pleasure under proper restrictions; and surely she
must be a better judge of propriety than either you or I can pretend to be.


Miss FREEMAN. Perhaps so; but her notions are very strange. The other day she
chid me for not giving Mrs. Molly, the housemaid an answer. Why, I cannot think
there is any necessity for showing civility to such sort of people.


Miss CLARA. And I should be ashamed of treating them otherwise than civilly.
Whilst they do their duty, they have a right to our regard; and the best method
of insuring respect from them, is setting a good example, which cannot be done
without feeling both for them and ourselves.


Miss FREEMAN. Well, I always treated my aunt's servants just as I pleased, and
they were forced to submit to it: some times I made them play with me, and at
other times, used them as ill as ever I could.


Miss CLARA. I should be ashamed, even if mamma permitted it, to act so by any
body inferior to me; if they are honest, they are as good as I am, and much
more necessary.


Miss FREEMAN. So are the cat and the dog, I consider them all on a footing.


Miss CLARA. Christians to be looked on in such a light! indeed sister, you
shock me. I never made companions of the servants; but if they behaved well,
always thought them full as worthy as myself.


Miss FREEMAN. So do not I: but you have no spirit. I suppose, the other
afternoon, you would have submitted to Miss Foley's ^itting above us; yet I
soon sent the lady ^o her proper station.


Miss CLARA. To confess the truth, I never was so much confused in my life as
at your conduct on that occasion; for I am sure, Harriet Foley would not for
the world, be guilty of rudeness to any one.


Miss FREEMAN. What business had she to set herself above me? I shall always
act so by every body I think beneath me.


Miss CLARA. Mamma sets us a very different example; and yet she is every where
treated with great respect.


Miss FREEMAN. To be sure does not money make the man; and has not mamma an
elegant coach, a great house and riches enough to outdo most of her neighbors?


Miss CLARA. But she does not plume herself upon these advantages. You know,
"the humble shall be exalted."


Miss FREEMAN. And "the exalted may be abased for me." I shall never think of
such precepts while I am rich, poor I cannot be; for I know my aunt left me
handsomely.


Miss CLARA. I never heard so much about rickes before; my mamma has always
armed my mind to bear a reverse of fortune, and I think papa must have had
great losses lately, or he would not have discharged several servants, and
given up his house in the country.


Miss FREEMAN. It will be horrid indeed, if he reduces his circumstances;
though it will not trouble me, for he must always support me as I have been
used to live; I cannot submit to a reverse.


Miss CLARA. It would be a great shame if we murmured at any employment which
my mamma sets us the example of. To save her trouble, I offered to make these
frocks, as the maid, who used to work for the children, is one of those who are
discharged.


Miss FREEMAN. One comfort is, I do not know how either to make or mend, and I
am not ambitious of learning, believe me.


Miss CLARA. I never saw my mamma at such employment till very lately, yet she
does it with as much cheerfulness as embroidery, or any other fancy work.


Miss FREEMAN. To tell you the truth, I hate work, nor will I do any. My aunt
never made me, and why should any other person?


Miss CLARA. And I cannot bear idleness. My mamma's example has taught me to
love employment, and I am by that means, free from the danger of having my time
ever hang heavily on my hands.


Miss FREEMAN. I have found time sadly heavy since my return home, but never
did so at my aunt's; for there I used, when tired of the parlour, to go into
the kitchen, or garden, and make the servants romp with me; but now it is in
vain to speak to a domestic, for they have orders not to hold conversation, or
be more with me than their business requires, on pain of losing their places.


Miss CLARA. You wasted time in passing it so unprofitably; the attention to my
education, mamma's conversation, and playing with the little ones, fills up all
my hours without leaving a moment to spare. Apropos, have you seen the fan
mounts I painted, let me show them to you.

[She takes them from a large port folio, and spreads them on the table.]
Miss FREEMAN. They look pretty; but I do not understand any thing about
painting, nor can I discover what use there is in young ladies of fortune
knowing how to draw.


Miss CLARA. It is the pleasantest employment imaginable, and assists us in
discerning the bountiful goodness of our Creator, who gave us such beautiful
flowers and plants to gratify our senses of seeing and smelling.


Miss FREEMAN. I do not like flowers, and therefore never regard them; indeed,
the very sweet ones make me faint.


Miss CLARA. There are some too powerfully fragrant for a room, but in the open
air their odours are delightful.


Miss FREEMAN. You talk very affectedly on this subject, I think; pray who
taught you?


Miss CLARA. My ever dear mamma, she is never tired of studying the beauties of
nature, nor I of being instructed by her.


Miss FREEMAN. But you cannot paint from the flowers?


Miss CLARA. Yes, I do; and am so entertained, that it is with regret I leave
off. Try to draw, sister, and you will be as fond of it as I am.


Miss FREEMAN. I could never discover one charm in any thing that required
taking pains, and shall not begin now. I had masters, but would not attend to
them.


Miss CLARA. My mamma was my instructress: perhaps, had you been taught by her,
your aversion to learning would have ceased.


Miss FREEMAN. I believe not. For with all mamma's hoasted cleverness, I cannot
suppose her quite so capable of teaching as masters are who gain their
livelihood by it.


Miss CLARA. She might not be more capable, but I see no reason to doubt her
being on an equality with them; what one person can learn, another may; and it
is visible that my mamma is elegantly accomplished, though she only shows it
for the advantage of her children.


Miss FREEMAN. From whence you infer, that you are as clever as any young lady
can be.


Miss CLARA. You pervert my meaning strangely, Matilda. I hope I am not so
conceited; but if my capacity is a good one, I see no reason why I may not
improve as well under my mamma's tuition as under any master's whatever.


Miss FREEMAN. Mamma has done one thing to gratify herself, she has taught you
to have as high an opinion of her cleverness as she has; my aunt instructed me
otherwise.


Miss CLARA. We seem to differ on a very material point, and therefore had
better never mention it again. I reverence my mother, she is kindness itself; I
never yet saw any person equal to her; but that probably i^ owing to my not
having opportunity of observing other people's actions ^o clearly as I do
here is. Her mind is composed of gentleness, charity, and humanity.


Miss FREEMAN. You are quite in heroics; and had better write a poem in praise
of her.


Miss CLARA. If I were capable, I could not choose a more pleasing subject.


[ Enter Mary.] MARY. The mantua-maker is come, ladies, and begs to know if you
are ready to have your cl^^ths fitted?


Miss FREEMAN. Ready! She has kept me waiting for her these two hours -- order
her to walk in.

[The maid goes out.
Miss CLARA. Pray, sister, do not show any displeasure to poor Mrs. Ga^es.
Consider she was once a gentlewoman, and that she is now desirous to oblige
every body.


Miss FREEMAN. And is that a reason I am to be confined here attending her
leisure. I shall tell her my mind indeed.


Miss CLARA. Let me entreat you to have more compassion. If she is wrong, it is
mamma's place to reprove her, and not ours.


[Enter Mrs. Gates.] Miss FREEMAN, [to her sister.] I tell you I will not be
controlled. -- A fine time you have made us wait, madam; you did not dare do so
at my aunt's, she would soon have turned you off if you had.


Mrs. GATES. I was detained at Lady Jenkins's longer than I expected; her
ladyship was kind enough to beg of me, as a favor, to stay half an hour for
her; how then could I refuse? Yet I beg your pardon, ladies, if it has
materially interfered with your employment, I am sincerely sorry for it.


Miss;FREEMAN. And what compensation is begging our pardon? I insist on its
never happening again. Have not you prepared my dress for putting on. Prithee,
hurry yourself a little more.

Mrs. Gates puts it on, and takes great pains to make it set neatly.]


Miss FREEMAN. How horribly it is made -- no taste -- the train is frightful. I
wish mamma had been persuaded. I did all I could to have a better mantua-maker.


Mrs. GATES. I have taken a deal of pains to make it fashionable; and Lady Mary
Bennet (...) the one she wore at the Fes^ino, as a pattern.


Miss FREEMAN. Perhaps you have made it as well as you could, but it is second
hand work, in my opinion.


Mrs. GATES, [Turning to Miss CLARA.] Do you think it wants any improvement,
madam?


Miss CLARA. I am not sufficiently accustomed to fashionable dress to be a
competent judge; but it appears, in my eyes, very complete indeed. However, my
mamma is the properest person to determine, and she is in her dressing room:
had you not better go to her, Matilda?


Miss FREEMAN. I suppose I must. But my opinion of her taste does not exceed
that of Mrs. Gates's; for how should she know fashions, who goes so seldom to
public places?

[ Miss Freeman goes out.
Mrs. GATES. Shall I have the honor of fitting your dress now?


Miss CLARA. If you please, Mrs. Gates. I do not mean to detain you, but I am
afraid you are fatigued, had you not better rest yourself first? -- pray sit
down; -- nay, I insist upon it.


Mrs. GATES. Your goodness, worthy young lady, oppresses me. I really am not
fatigued, or I would avail myself of your kind attention to me.


Miss CLARA. We will, then, begin as soon as you please. [ She puts on her new
dress.] It appears to sit extremely well, and is neatly and elegantly made; yet
this sleeve is somewhat too large, do you not think so?


Mrs. GATES. I think it is, and will take care to alter it. Indeed, Miss Clara,
I have a pleasure in working for you; but your sister treats me with such
haughtiness, that I am sometimes tempted to give up attending her, and but for
your obliging behavior to me I certainly should do so.


Miss CLARA. If you knew my sister better, your opinion of her would alter; she
does not mean to wound you, it is only her manner. I will just go and take my
mamma's opinion.

[As she is going out, Enter Mrs. and Miss Freeman.]
Mrs. FREEMAN. Good morning to you, Mrs. Gates, I hope you are well? have you
rested a little? for I know you take long walks.


Mrs. GATES. It would ill become one, in my reduced circumstances; madam, and
with a young family, to indulge in a coach hire. I am thankful that I can
maintain myself and little ones, without being burdensome to any one.


Mrs. FREEMAN. Honest industry seldom wants encouragement. I am glad you have
employment enough to gratify your wishes.


Mrs. GATES. You are all goodness, madam; but your kind condescension is shown
to one, who is grateful for your favors. Do you approve of the young ladies
clothes?


Mrs. FREEMAN. Very much, Matilda's only wants the train to flow more behind;
and Clara's to be made narrower in the back.


Mrs. GATES. I will be attentive to your commands.

[She assists in taking off their things.]
Miss FREEMAN, [impatiently.] Do not pull off my arms, woman. How a^kward you
are; there, get away, or you will take part of me.


Miss CLARA. There is a pin in the way, I will be obliged to you to remove it,
-- thank you.


Mrs. GATES. [Takes up her parcel, and makes a respectful curtesy.] Ladies your
servant.


Mrs. FREEMAN. Good morning to you.

[ Miss Clara courtesies to her. She goes out.]


Miss FREEMAN, [Bursting into a loud laugh.] Are you practicing, Clara? for you
could not have made a finer obeisance to the QUEEN.


Miss CLARA. I was not conscious of any thing ridiculous, sister, but am glad
to see you so merry.


Miss FREEMAN. Merry! why who can help being diverted at seeing you so mighty
complaisant to that woman?


Mrs. FREEMAN. Is an act of common civility so very extraordinary then?


Miss FREEMAN. But to a mantua-maker, madam! why, she will thank the servants
by-and-by for doing their duty.


Mrs. FREEMAN. I hope so. She will at least treat them with kindness; even
servants may behave so as to deserve thanks. If Matilda acts properly, the
advantage will be her own; for, giving encouragement where it is due, secure
her respect. But in this instance, the heart must be ill formed that could lead
any one to forget the misfortunes which reduced poor Mrs. Gates to her present
situation: yet, while we pity her distress we must honor the fortitude that has
set her above it, and made her prefer gaining her bread by virtuous industry,
to becoming the flatterer of empty pride with a view of gaining a livelihood
among the great.


Miss FREEMAN. I do not comprehend your meaning, mamma; but think it very
strange, to prefer acquiring one's livelihood by work, to a situation that sets
one above being looked upon in so mean a light.


Mrs. FREEMAN. You do indeed strangely mistake the matter, my dear Matilda, to
think stooping to dependence less mean, than engaging in an honest employment.
All good people esteem Mrs. Gates highly, and honor the laudable pride that has
raised her above her misfortunes. There are two kinds of pride, the false and
the proper; nor can I describe them better than by assuring you, that she
possesses the right, and you the wrong.


Miss FREEMAN. Why am I to blame for not working, when there is no occasion for
me to do it?


Mrs. FREEMAN. At least you are to blame, for despising, and treating with
hautiness, a worthy amiable woman, only because she makes your gowns. A woman
who was better born and as well educated as yourself.


Miss FREEMAN. My aunt always judged as I do. She never liked any body that was
poor, because she thought them mean.


Mrs. FREEMAN. Meanness is not a necessary attendant on poverty. Your aunt is
dead, and her faults ought to be buried in oblivion. Truly am I concerned, that
through the narrowness of her mind, she has so greatly contracted yours: yet,
I hope, precept and observation, will overcome the prejudices of education. --
Would your father's becoming poor make me less a gentlewoman?


Miss FREEMAN. I do not know.


Mrs. FREEMAN. Then you doubt. Let me, therefore, endeavor to convince your
reason, by relating two examples of people personality known to you. To begin
with Mrs. Gates, her husband was a gentleman of fortune but unhappily fond of
show and parade; he lived to squander away his whole estate, among people who
only despised, though they assisted to ruin him; as his death she was left
destitute with three young children. All her acquaintance of high rank forsook
her; some few friends remained, but they were such as you would call mean,
because they were not rich. These solicited relief for her, from her husband's
former intimates. They all turned a deaf ear, except one great lady, who
offered to give her the run of her house, that is to feed her; in return for
which, she was to flatter her absurdities, and even her vices. Her children
were to be put out to service as they grew up. Mrs. Gates despised the offer
and the offerer; and with the advice and recommendation of her more humble
friends, she undertook her present employment, in which she has happily
succeeded, and is regarded, and respected by the good, whether of high or low
degree. Mrs. Combs, who you know lives with Lady Harris, was reduced also by
the extravagance of others; yet rather than undertake any thing like work, she
submitted to become her ladyship's humble friend. You have often remarked the
cruel treatment she receives even before us, who visit Lady Harris, merely on a
footing of formality. Now tell me, Matilda, which of these two persons is the
most respectable character and possesses the properest pride?


Miss FREEMAN. As you relate it, Mrs. Gates is undoubtedly the best, and the
happiest. But if my papa were to lose his fortune, I do not know what would
become of me, for I am certain I could not follow her example.


Mrs. FREEMAN. It cannot be pleasing to you young as you are, to dwell upon
such a thought. Yet [ ^^ghs] it is a misfortune very likely to happen. Your
papa carries on an extensive trade, and his success depends more frequently on
others, or even on the uncertain elements, than on himself. It is therefore the
duty of all connected with him to a^m their minds for a reverse; and I would
wish you to consider things in a proper light, that you may be strengthened to
support a misfortune, which it will probably be your portion to bear.


Miss FREEMAN. I shall always have my aunt's fortune; that, the servants
assured me she had left entirely to me.


Mrs. FREEMAN, [Taking her hand.] Dear girl, how you distress me! so young, and
yet so ^^ger after fortune* with pain to myself must I undeceive you. Your aunt
had nothing to leave; she lived on an annuity which ceased with her life; a few
ornaments were all she had to bequeath, and those are yours.


Miss FREEMAN. Well, I cannot believe that papa will ever make himself (...);
and I hope, mamma, I am to wear all my new things at the (...)?


Mrs. FREEMAN. I have not thought about it yet. But depend on it, if you go,
you shall be dressed properly. -- Clara, you work very hard; your assistance
relieves and obliges me, my dear girl. If your father and I were reduced to
poverty, what would you do to assist us, and your brothers and sisters?


Miss CLARA. I would work for you, and paint screens and fanmounts, and
embroider-muffs and waistcoats, and would give you all the the money I acquired.


Mrs. FREEMAN. I thought so. Well, my beloved girls, we must hope for the ^^st,
and may GOD direct us, if called to so severe a trial! your talents, if not
requisite to assist, will always be a sure refuge to yourselves, from the
weariness of solitude, and make you never less alone, than when alone. But I
must not spend any more time in talking with you at present. When you wish to
see me, you will find me in my dressing room.

[She goes out.
Miss CLARA [bursts into tears.] I am certain, mamma, is extremely unhappy;
what will become of me, if I see my parents in distress?


Miss FREEMAN. It is time enough to think of it when it happens. You will be a
pretty figure for the ball tomorrow night, with a crying countenance!


Miss CLARA. I shall not be much disposed for merriment, unless I see a visible
alteration in mamma. It is a great comfort though, that I can earn money, if
misfortunes should happen, how much you will, Matilda, lament the neglect of
your education!


Miss FREEMAN. Do not talk of it. I shall never dare to look the young ladies
in the face to whom I have behaved so haughtily, they will exult in my losing
what I valued myself upon.


Miss CLARA. Make it a lesson then in future, to study how to bear a fall, and
believe an affectionate sister, that you never appear so unpleasing as when you
behave proudly.


Miss FREEMAN. The example is set me, by almost all my acquaintance; and why am
I to be different from the rest of the world?


Miss CLARA. Did you ever think a haughty behavior appeared amiable in any one
person? I cannot think who you have associated with; I see but few such
char^cters among my acquaintances.


Miss FREEMAN. I never considered it. But I had no notion of giving up to
people no better than myself.


Miss CLARA. I am not equal to holding an argument on this subject; my mamma,
will, no doubt, tell you her sentiments, as she has me; and soon convince you,
that you will show more good sense by submitting to others, than by contending.
I have done my work now, and will carry it into the nursery. Shall we go
together?


Miss FREEMAN. With all my heart. I can play with the children, though I will
not work for them.

They go out. [The scene closes.
END of ACT I
ACT II.
SCENE, A Dressing Room.
Mrs. Freeman alone, in a very disconsolate posture. After a time, she speaks.
Mrs. FREEMAN. WHY cannot I raise my mind above the anxiety of the present
moment? If poor Mr. Freeman's late losses are as great as he apprehends, I know
the worst that can happen; with patience will I submit, even to the lowest
humiliation, for his, and my children's ^ake, and it is for them, more than for
myself, I grieve.


[Enter a Servant.] SERVANT. Mrs. Allworthy is below, madam.


Mrs. FREEMAN. Desire her to walk up. I do not stand on ceremony with her.

[Footman goes out. Good creature! report has conveyed the news of our
misfortunes to her ears, and she is come to console me.


[ Enter Mrs. Allworthy.] Mrs. ALLWORTHY. How are you, my deer madam? I hope my
company is not an intrusion?


Mrs. FREEMAN. Far from it, madam: such a friend as Mrs. Allworthy, is always
welcome. Nor would you have talked of intrusion, had not rumor been already
busy, and informed you -- something disquiets me.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. I have heard more than I hope is true. To assist you as far as
I have power brought me hither. Though your own excellent judgment will direct
you better than I can do.


Mrs. FREEMAN. I have nothing to resolve on but submission. We know not the
extent of our lo^ies. Mr. Freeman went immediately after dinner to make
personal enquiries about his property, which now hangs on so slender a twig, as
our ships, uninsured, escaping a hurricane which has happened in the
West Indies.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. Then you have still the support of hope; and even should the
worst happen, Mr. Freeman has so active a mind, that he will never rest until
he is in a situation to retrieve his losses, and regain his fortune.


Mrs. FREEMAN. You comfort me agreeably. And, indeed, I believe he will pursue
fortune, as long as life is spared. Men in business, with active minds, seldom
give up. I know too well the value of money to despise it. But believe me, my
concern is not for myself; I see too many instances of happiness, with a modern
competency, not to be perfectly content with it, if that remains.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. Are your daughters acquainted with your present distress?


Mrs. FREEMAN. Not thoroughly. Yet my dear Clara guesses a great deal from my
looks; her attention to which discovers more, than I wish her to know.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. And why not inform them? they are of an age to be your
comforters, and may, if necessary, contribute to your support.


Mrs. FREEMAN. I have no reason to doubt the goodness of their hearts. Matilda
indeed has imbibed opinions I wish to alter; and perhaps this early rub in
life, may assist to refine a mind that has been led wrong by one whom she was
taught to reverence.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. Under your management I doubt not its proving to her
advantage; and as she is not deficient in understanding, your endeavors will
reconcile her to that which is right.


Mrs. FREEMAN. Poor girl! she will be sadly chagrined at her not going to her
dancing master's ^all tomorrow night. I dread disappointing her; yet in our
present situation, it would be exceedingly improper to permit my daughters to
go to a place of public entertainment.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. Certainly. Command me as an assistant on this unpleasant
occasion.


Mrs. FREEMAN. They will come with the tea. I was unable to attend as usual to
my little ones, and desired your god-daughter to hear them their lessons.
Matilda, had no occasion for having an employment given her; the milliner and
mantua-maker, had just sent home her new dress and ornaments for the b^ll, and
I could not draw her from the admiration of them.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. I pity her disappointment, while I feel the necessity of it,
and think the present pain may prove in the event a source of real joy.


Mrs. FREEMAN. My prayers will be sincere for this blessed effect! had I placed
my dependence on what her infatuated aunt taught her to do, despondence and
horror would now have been my lot.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. How cruel are those parents who lead their children on in
unthinking security? Never taught to look beyond the present moment, or to
observe the changes which so frequently happen in this fluctuating world, the
bitter pangs of disappointment come suddenly upon them, and their unprepared
minds sink under misfortunes, that did they but know how to receive them
properly, might in the end turn to blessings, by giving them an opportunity of
submitting, as their duty requires, to the decrees of an all-wise Providence,
who never fails to comfort those who resign themselves to his will.


[ Enter Footman, and places the tea things.] Mrs. FREEMAN. Let Miss Freeman
and Miss Clara know that tea is ready.

[He goes out.
Mrs. FREEMAN. O! my overcharged heart! [ bursts into tears.] This is a relief
I greatly stood in need of, and will, I trust, enable me to perform my duty, in
setting an example to my children.

[ Mrs. Freeman wipes away her tears.]
[ Enter Miss Clara.] Miss CLARA. I have very good accounts to give you, mamma;
the little ones have all been good this afternoon, and obeyed me in every thing.


Mrs. FREEMAN. Your report delights me, Clara; but my dear, how comes it to
pass, that you do not take notice of one of your best friends?


Miss CLARA, [ seeing Mrs. Allworthy.] My dear god-mamma! only think of my
heedlessness! but it was owing to the desire I had of giving mamma pleasure.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. Such a laudable motive requires commendation, as well as
secures pardon, for what was only an oversight. God bless you, my beloved girl,
and may you ever deserve my affection by such dutiful attention to the wishes
of your worthy mother!


Mrs. FREEMAN. Where is your sister? I ordered John to inform her that we
waited tea.


Miss CLARA. He did. But she has locked herself into her room, and would not
admit me, but desired me to say, she was coming presently.


Mrs. FREEMAN. I must begin now to new model her; but must first endeavor to
convince her, that I ought to regulate all her actions. -- Make the tea, my
dear.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. I hear, Miss Clara, you are going to a ba^l, and that your
papa has been so good as to give you new clothes to appear in.


Miss CLARA. He has, madam, and they are all come home this afternoon, but I
have not yet had time to examine them.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. What would you do, if any circumstance should happen to
disappoint you of going to this ball?


Miss CLARA. Be much concerned to be sure; but it would be for the cause of the
disappointment; as nothing but a misfortune to some of the family could
occasion it: for papa and mamma are so indulgent to us, that they would not
suffer a tri^le to prevent our enjoyment of such a pleasure.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. You distinguish very justly, my sweet girl: yet in all cases
of sorrow^ you must submit with patience, because it is your duty to do so.
Misfortunes are often such as no human foresight could prevent: but the
goodness of God enables us to overcome what unavailing tears and complaining
only increase.


Miss CLARA. My life has hitherto been a very happy one; but I am not from
thence to infer, that it will always continue so. I can, thanks to dear mamma's
care, do a great many things toward gaining a livelihood, if papa should lose
his fortune.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. I am delighted to hear it. Pray inform me what your genius is
most inclined to?


Miss CLARA [blushes.] O, madam, I did not mean to appear conceited; but you
know mamma has taught me to draw and paint, and do all kinds of fancy work.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. And how will you make that useful, supposing the worst should
happen?


Miss CLARA. In every way I can. I will paint and work fanmounts and screens,
embroider gentlemen's waistcoats, and workbags and muffs for the ladies -- I
can also make work-baskets, and Pool-dishes; and when mamma requires it, I can
assist in mending my little brothers and sisters clothes.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. I am glad to hear, my dear, that you have profited so much by
your mamma's example; and do not doubt, every proper exertion of it, should
circumstances make it necessary, which I sincerely hope will not be the case.


Miss CLARA. I do not think I should make myself very miserable if we were
reduced; that is, if we had enough left to live altogether; it would only be
the difference of a large and, a small house; of a few, instead of a great many
servants. I would wait upon my mamma, and supply her maid's place, for I can
dress hair very tolerably.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. You can do very well for one so young; but could you submit to
being placed at a trade for life?


Miss CLARA [ startled.] I should not like to be separated from my mamma. Tho
if Mrs. Gates would take me, I think, nay, I am certain, I could submit to gain
my bread as a mantua-maker.


Mrs. FREEMAN. Go, my love, and tell Matilda I am offended at her not coming
when I send for her.

[Clara goes out. Her innocent conversation distresses, whilst it delights me.
Blessed with such a daughter, I ought not to repine at any misfortune, which is
not brought on by my own imprudence or impropriety of conduct.


[ Enter Miss FREEMAN dressed in all her new clothes, with a profusion of
feathers, flowers, etc. on her head, followed by her sister.] Miss FREEMAN.
There mamma, look how charmingly my dress is made; and see what an elegant cap
Madam Buffon has sent me. O what taste the French milliners have!


Mrs. FREEMAN. I am sorry, Matilda, to see you so fond of dress, and could I
have supposed you capable of trifling over new clothes a whole afternoon, I
would never have consented to your having them. I blush that you should be
capable of exposing yourself, not only to me, but before Mrs. Allworthy.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. I see Matilda's faults with great concern Miss; yet I think
she will be persuaded to overcome them.


Miss FREEMAN. I never heard, madam, that there was any fault in trying on new
clothes; and always supposed an elegant taste in dress was a very commendable
qualification.


Mrs. FREEMAN. But there is a wide difference, my dear girl, betwixt making it
the business of our lives, and attending to it sufficiently to make us (...)
and like gentlewomen. Besides, there is nothing requires more attention to
propriety of time and place than dress. View yourself, and consider whether you
make an appearance that would be to your advantage, supposing any acquaintance
should accidentally come into tea.


Miss FREEMAN. I could easily explain the cause of it; and I think every person
must admire my dress, for it is the most charming one I ever saw.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. Certain as you seem to be, Miss Matilda, of universal
admiration, I cannot help thinking, that with your present appearance you would
be disappointed. Your gown, though elegant, loses its effect, by the miserable
state of your hair, which gives me the idea of porcupine quills, intermixed
with feathers; and the ornaments though exqui^te in their kind, instead of
adorning, only give you a ridiculous look.


Mrs. FREEMAN. I think we have said enough to convince Matilda that she had
better retire, and lay by her clothes for a proper season.


Miss FREEMAN. I never intended to keep them on long, but thought you would
like to see me, as I had dressed myself.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. If that was really your motive, my dear, I will gratify your
wishes, by telling you that I think your dress very pretty, and do not doubt,
when it is put on with propriety, and for a- ball, it will appear very elegant;
and now let me advise you to take it off, lest you should meet with some
accident.


Miss FREEMAN. I will go directly, madam, I would not spoil it for the world. [
She walks off looking behind her, admiring her train -- with the corner of her
hoop she sweeps down a cup and saucer, and spills the tea all over her: Miss
Clara jumps up to assist her.


Miss CLARA. O sister, what a sad accident!


Miss FREEMAN [bursts into tears.] Sad indeed! what shall I do? Papa will never
give me another dress, and I shall not be able to go to the ball. What an
unfortunate creature I am!


Mrs. FREEMAN. You are like a great many other people, my dear, commit an
error, and then call yourself unfortunate; your accident was entirely
occasioned by your pre^ering your own opinion to the judgment of others. [
Rings the bell.] Let Williams go with you to take off your things; perhaps with
her care, they may escape better than you imagine.


[ Enter Williams.] Mrs. FREEMAN. Miss Freeman has had an accident with her
dress, you must endeavor, Williams, to recover it as well as possible.

[ Miss Freeman and Williams go out.
Miss CLARA. I am very sorry poor Matilda has met with such a misfortune. She
shall be welcome to my dress if it will fit her.


Mrs. FREEMAN. My mind is too much engrossed by more material thoughts, to
dwell on this circumstance; but I think, with care, her dress will not be much
the worse; and if it should, it may serve as a lesson in future, against false
pride and vanity.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. Poor Matilda; one brought up as she has been, could not meet a
greater distress.


Mrs. FREEMAN. Amidst all her errors, I do not believe she is really
illnatured; different as the life she leads with us is from that she led at her
aunt's, she appears to me to submit to it cheerfully; and though she does not
follow any of the advice that I give her, still she listens without murmuring.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. From whence you may indulge the pleasing hope of soon moulding
her to your wishes.


[Enter Miss Freeman.] Mrs. FREEMAN. Well, my love, how fares your dress?


Miss FREEMAN. Better than I could have expected, and Williams flatters me,
that by tomorrow it will be little the worse.


Miss CLARA. I am glad of that; for indeed, sister, I felt great concern for
you.


Mrs. FREEMAN. Tell me honestly, Matilda, do not you wish you had employed
yourself usefully this afternoon, instead of throwing your time away in so
trifling a manner?


Miss FREEMAN. To be sure I do, because then I should not have hurt my dress.


Mrs. FREEMAN. But does it not teach you the necessity of never being idle? had
you assisted Clara in attending to the young one's, you would not have had any
time to mis^mploy.


Miss FREEMAN. If I could acquire a relish for employment it would be a comfort
to me. What can I do mamma?


Mrs. FREEMAN. Take pleasure in reading, writing, working, and if you have
taste, apply to the several accomplishments, so admirable in most of your
acquaintance.


Miss FREEMAN. I should never have time to do so much, nor is there I think a
necessity for it, at least for working, because the servants can be employed
about that; and as for writing, what use is that of?


Mrs. FREEMAN. In my opinion, nothing marks a gentlewoman more than excelling
in both; writing, is indeed, particularly necessary, as even from a note you
may judge of the education of the person who executed it.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. True; and it is a qualification that excites a great deal of
prais^, which ought to be an inducement for acquiring it. Indeed, I would
rather a child of mine could work and write well, than excel in what are
peculiarly termed accomplishments; though even the ^atter are so essential to a
polite education, that I should be sorry to see the^^ wanting.


Miss CLARA. If I could only write and work, what could I do to assist mamma,
in case of her being reduced to poverty?


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. If you had not been better instructed, more could not be
expected from you, but we may hope to reap great benefit, where great pains
have been bestowed.


Miss FREEMAN. I have had more masters than my sister without knowing half so
much.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. You have been unfortunate my dear, and bred up by an aunt who
indulged you without considering the injury she did to your future prospects;
with your good sense, I think, all that may be easily overcome.


Miss FREEMAN. Every thing appears new to me, and I am quite bewildered. Mamma
seems perfectly good and kind to me, and still I feel under a restraint before
her which I never experienced with my aunt; what can be the meaning of it?


Mrs. FREEMAN. Believe me, dear girl, I am anxiosly solicitous for your
welfare, and for that reason, lament your being educated by your aunt. I need
not say, that her sentiments did not accord with mine. The difference of our
birth, made the difference of opinion. Life flowed smoothly with her, she had
no trials, and possessed an income that insured her respect and adulation. I
have experienced a very contrary fortune, and was early initiated in scenes of
sorrow. My father being an officer, felt distress himself, and pitied it in
many who belonged to our regiment. No tongue can describe the scenes of woe I
have witnessed; the more melancholy, because the objects were good and brave.
By these, my heart has been softened, and though by my marriage, I have been in
very affluant circumstances I could never forget the poverty of my former
companions.


Miss FREEMAN. I shall be ashamed to expose my ignorance, or I would begin
taking pains about something; but the worst is, I am equally unknowing in every
thing, and therefore have no hopes of ever regaining lost time.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. Fear not, Miss Matilda, a good resolution and endeavors will
assist you beyond imagination.


Mrs. FREEMAN. It grows late; I wonder we neither see or hear from Mr. Freeman!


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. Do not let that trouble you, my dear friend, suspend your
apprehensions.


Mrs. FREEMAN. My dependence and reliance are placed where consolation never
fails, and I doubt not a mitigation to my anxiety in proper time.


[ Enter a Footman with a letter which he gives to his mistress and goes out.]
Mrs. FREEMAN. From my husband!

[She reads it with agitation, her daughters watch her countenance
attentively.]
Mrs. FREEMAN. All is lost!


Miss FREEMAN and Miss CLARA. What is lost? Dear mamma, do not keep us in
suspense.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. Restrain your emotions a little while, my dears, this shall be
soon explained; at present, your mamma is too much agitated to be able to talk
to you.


Miss CLARA. I hope no accident has happened to papa, dear mamma, [ she throws
her arms around Mrs. Freeman's neck.] Lean upon my shoulder and tell me what
afflicts you?


Mrs. FREEMAN [ composes herself.] I am much recovered; though sadly hurt, that
my dear children must partake this affliction with me. Your father's losses in
trade are very great. In short, he has not more than enough left to satisfy his
creditors. [ She presses each daughter to her heart.] Let us determine to
submit to our fate with becoming fortitude, and mutually unite in endeavoring
to support poor Mr. Freeman, who requires every consolation.


Miss FREEMAN, [bursts into a passion of tears.] What will become of me? what
(...) I do? we are as badly off as Mrs. Gates; and if any body should slight
me, it will break my heart.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. You are very selfish in your grief Matilda, and think only for
yourself. Look there, [ pointing to her mamma.] direct your attention to that
object, forget your sorrows, and relieve here is.


Miss FREEMAN. I do not know what to say to her. I cannot help crying; it is
cruel to expect so much from me.


Miss CLARA. Compose yourself, dearest mamma, for all our sakes. I will do
every thing I can to be useful.


Mrs. FREEMAN. I do not doubt it, and am quite resigned to our fate. May you,
my dear Clara, practice, what in theory appeared so easy to you, for now it is
become necessary, and may your sister benefit by your example. I must go to my
young ones, soon will they be without another attendant.


Miss CLARA, [sobbing.] Do not say so, I will be their nurse, and save you all
the trouble in my power.


Mrs. FREEMAN. I neither fear your intentions or doubt your abilities, and will
put them to a trial. Stay with your sister, and endeavor to reason her into
resignation. Mrs. Allworthy, you will accompany me.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. Most willingly.

[ They go out. Miss CLARA runs and throws her arms round her sister's neck,
and they continue crying some time, (...) then recollects herself.
Miss CLARA. How ill am I performing my mamma's injunctions! she bid me console
you^ and I am, by my own grief, adding to yours.


Miss FREEMAN. What miserable wretches are we all become! now must I submit,
perhaps, to be a servant; or, what is worse, work for a daily subsistence.


Miss CLARA. If I am not obliged to be an apprentice, I shall think myself
happy. To be separated from mamma, will indeed be a sad stroke.


Miss FREEMAN. Only think how Miss Foley will rejoice in my down fall. I must
sit below her and every body else. [ cries again with violence.]


Miss CLARA. I should never suffer such thoughts as these to distress me. Now
we may discover our real friends.


Miss FREEMAN. You are quite a philosopher, Clara! I am not; but still I could
wish to be useful to mamma, and merit her kind approbation.


Miss CLARA. Dear Matilda, how I love you for that desire? we shall never be
greatly unhappy, if you will but unite your endeavors with mine to lessen
mamma's afflictions.


Miss FREEMAN. I wonder whether I could draw or paint fit to be seen I have a
great inclination to try.


Miss CLARA. Do, I have not one fear of your success; any instruction in my
power to give, you may command.


Miss FREEMAN. Thank you, Clara; I may perhaps trouble you, though I will not
if possible to avoid it. It is a shame for the elder to stand in need of being
taught by the younger.


Miss CLARA. Let us forget that distinction, dear girl! the difference of our
ages is small, and I have never been separated from mamma's instruction and
example.


Miss FREEMAN. I begin to honor and love my dear mother, as much as you do. Her
mildness has convinced my reason; had she exerted any violence, I am certain
she would have found me obstinate, though I must confess greatly against my own
interest.


Miss CLARA. Parents may sometimes be wrong, yet I never could bear to hear
them found fault with by their children, and always avoided the company of
those who fell into that error.


Miss FREEMAN. You are right, I am convinced; that thought never struck me
before, but I did not give myself time to consider much about any thing;
however, I shall become a new being. But do you think, Clara, mamma will ever
love me as well as she does you?


Miss CLARA. I have no room to believe she makes any difference among any of
us, in respect to her affection, though I must suppose your being guided by her
better judgment, will procure you a larger portion of her esteem than you at
present possess.


Miss FREEMAN. I have a great inclination to offer her my assistance in
undressing the young ones; perhaps it might please and console her, as she will
not like the servants should see her affliction.


Miss CLARA. Very probably. Let us then unite our efforts. I shall tell mamma
the offer was your own thought.


Miss FREEMAN. No, I beg you will not, there is no merit in it, for surely it
is my duty to save her trouble.


Miss CLARA. But it is certainly commendable to do our duty, besides, it will
be the subject of great joy to mamma, that you already profit by her advice.


Miss FREEMAN. Come then, let us begin the sweet labors of duty and love. I
think I feel more affection for the little dears than ever I did.


Miss CLARA. Attending them is an endearing employment, and I think a very
necessary one; for it teaches us to know our obligations to our mother, by
observing the trouble she once had with us.


Miss FREEMAN. I am inspired with spirit and resolution, and, perhaps, by
tomorrow morning, may surprise you with my capabilities.


Miss CLARA. I shall be prepared for something great, and rejoice at your
exertions; but we seem to prate and forget our good intentions.


Miss FREEMAN. Come then. No time should be lost when a good action is in view.

[They go out.
END of ACT II.
ACT III.
SCENE, A Parlour. The breakfast things.
[A Servant shows in Mrs. Allworthy, then goes out.] Mrs. ALLWORTHY. I HOPE to
find this distressed family more composed; and that a good night's rest has
calmed their spirits. Poor creatures, what a struggle appeared in their
exertions last night to support each other. Their virtuous resolution deserves,
and will, I doubt not, be rewarded. How much more does such a conduct excite
our pity and admiration, than weak unavailing complaints and despondency, which
render people unfit to assist themselves, or to be assisted by others.

[ Miss Clara peeps into the room, then enters.]
Miss CLARA. Dear Mrs. Allworthy, I wished to find you alone, and am happily
come in time to meet you so.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. What has my dear girl to say? I should suppose something of
great consequence by that anxious countenance.


Miss CLARA. I have indeed something of the first consequence to mention, which
has kept me from sleeping all night. It is about my new clothes; you know I can
never wear them now, and it will be a sad pity for papa to pay for them when he
is in such distress, and besides they will be useless. I wish my dear second
mother, you would endeavor to dispose of them among the numerous young ladies
with whom you are acquainted.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. It is time enough to think upon that subject, my dear, you had
better not be hasty.


Miss CLARA. My mind is so bent upon removing this load from them, that I can
think of nothing else; do, dearest mamma, promise to assist me on this occasion.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. Depend on it, my love, every thing in my power you may command.


Miss CLARA. I knew you would not disappoint my wishes. But I have now another
favor to obtain, which you must grant.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. You know me well enough, Clara, to be certain, that I can deny
you no reasonable request.


Miss CLARA. Listen to me then with patience. I think it my duty to assist my
papa and mamma as far as my power goes -- will not you agree with me in that?


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. Certainly. But to what does all this tend?


Miss CLARA. To a very good point, as you shall hear. My cap. there is no doubt
of the milliner's readily taking again, and so I dispose of my ornaments, which
are the last I shall ever have. But my harpsichord and music will surely afford
a small sum of money, which would in an emergency be very acceptable; the
motive of my selling them, without the knowledge of my parents, is for fear
their tenderness for me should oppose it. What use can music be of to me, who
must work for my bread? It would be ridiculous you know, Mrs. Allworthy, in
such a situation, to display any fashionable accomplishments.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. I am delighted with the dutiful attention you pay to the
present unhappiness of your worthy father and mother, whose distress would be
more supportable but for the consideration of their children. I esteem you for
thinking so deeply, and hope the same solicitude will influence every future
action of your life, which relates to them; but I cannot agree with you, that
it is right to take any steps, though for the relief of your parents, without
their knowledge and concurrence.


Miss CLARA. Believe me, madam, I would not, on any common occasion, presume to
act without their consent; but this is so peculiar a circumstance. It is
selling what can no longer be of use, and is, besides, my own, for my uncle
gave me the instrument when I was a very little girl.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. Still, my dear girl, I must support my own opinion. Indeed,
you are in an error to indulge such a wish, though to benefit your nearest and
dearest relations.


Miss CLARA. I never was disposed to rebel before; but now, if I was older,
should like to oppose my opinion to yours, and abide by my own.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. At any age, I fear such conduct would draw its own punishment
upon you. Why should I oppose your intentions, but from motives of kindness?


Miss CLARA. I know it, dearest madam, and yet to give up a plan I have been
all night bringing, as I thought, to perfection, and all to procure unexpected
relief to my beloved parents*


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. The thought, the design, is worthy of a feeling generous
heart, with such endearing sentiments as these you will bestow peace on many,
and ensure it for yourself. But let me entreat you never to indulge the wish of
doing any thing in secret. Think with what perspicuity your amiable mother
judges. As soon as your papa's affairs are arranged, she will instantly settle
the proper regulations for all her family, and dispose of what will not be for
your benefit to preserve. Let us however, my love, [ takes her hand,] drop this
subject for the present. You will coincide with my opinion by and by, and thank
me for being, what now appears peremptory -- tell me how your mamma does, and
whether she obtained any rest last night?


Miss CLARA. I have great pleasure in telling you she is wonderfully well and
composed, but desired to have her breakfast sent up, as she is busy in
regulating some bills and books which she cannot leave.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. It is time then to send her some refreshment; come, my dear,
make the tea, I am rather in want of some myself, as I have been up these four
hours.


Miss CLARA. I beg your pardon very sincerely, but my mind has been so entirely
engrossed with my schemes, I never thought of eating. [ She seats herself at
the table, but looks dispirited and disappointed.]


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. Is your sister with her mamma?


Miss CLARA. No, madam, she got up very early, and shut herself into our
dressing room; whatever her employment is, it must be of great consequence, for
she has been there, undisturbed, ever since six o'clock. We will send ^or her.
[ As she gets up to ring the bell.


[ Enter Miss Freeman, with a drawing for a fan-mount in her hand.] Mrs.
ALLWORTHY. Good morning to you, my dear, what study has kept you so long alone?


Miss FREEMAN. I hope one, that will in time prove of some consequence to me.
See the first fruits of my labor! [ laying the drawing on the table.] I would
not break my fast till I finished the task I set myself, of endeavoring to
copy the fan-mount Clara showed me yesterday. I must beg her to instruct me how
to paint it. I think, with pains, I may do better than I apprehended I should
be able to do.


Miss CLARA. How well you have imitated my outlines. O! sister, what an
acquisition has inclination and application already gained you.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. Dear girl! how this early instance of real attention, both to
yourself and friends, endears you to me; continue but your endeavors, and
success will attend you. At sight of this, your parents will lose the
recollection of their lass in your gain, of such moment to your future well
doing.


Miss FREEMAN. I am very solicitous to obtain my mamma's love, for it is
irksome to live unregarded by any one.


Miss CLARA. That was not your case surely Matilda; my dear mother might
sometimes appear serious, but I believe she really regarded you as
affectionately as she could.


Miss FREEMAN. My consciousness of not deserving it may make me suspicious.
However, I think, if I can but model myself to my papa's wishes and here is, I
shall be as much beloved as any one.


Miss CLARA. I will carry up mamma's tea, and wait on her myself, it may be
pleasanter than sending a servant.

[She goes out.
Mrs. ALLWORTHY. How much the change I already perceive is wrought in your
disposition delights me! may you, my beloved girl, continue to feel the real
advantage of employment, and make use of your time, which, once lost, can never
be regained.


Miss FREEMAN. I hope my mind will be as steady as my present intentions are
ardent; I shall endeavor to be good, and I cannot do more.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. True; but you have not yet proved the efficacy of endeavors,
they will estabish good habits in time; which once acquired, will, I hope,
remain permanent, for life.


Miss FREEMAN. I have been all night thinking what is to become of me, and
making resolutions. Yet surely, I am very much to be pitted, who have been bred
up with the expectation of a great fortune, and now when I could enjoy it am
disappointed.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. Every species of distress is the subject of commisseration to
the humane. Yet how many hundreds now sink under afflictions heavier than
yours, without one alleviating circumstance, but what arises from a dependence
on Providence?


Miss FREEMAN. I do not think any distress can exceed mine.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. And why yours in particular? -- you certainly share distress
with your family, but your misfortune is not greater than theirs.


Miss FREEMAN. Surely, madam, my aunt's bringing me up to the expectation of a
great fortune, without hinting at the possibility of a reverse, adds much to my
present disappointment.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. True, my dear, you have labored under many disadvantages.
False pride, which has been the bane of many, was early instilled into your
young mind, and will require reason and religion to overcome it. The cure is
already begun, by your opening your ears to the admonitions of your friends, by
which you discern how wrong it will be, to retain opinions calculated only to
misguide you.


Miss FREEMAN. I sincerely wish to be as amiable as my sister, did I but know
how to become so!


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. By copying all that is praiseworthy in her. Let us now go and
pay our respects to your mamma.


Miss FREEMAN. I will attend you with pleasure, madam.

[They go out.
SCENE, changes to another Parlour.
[Enter the two Miss Foley's.] Miss FOLEY. How I will mortify that proud
insolent girl, and make her feel that I am now her superior.


Miss HARRIOT. You could not surely come hither with so cruel a ^esign? I would
not have accompanied you had I suspected it.


Miss FOLEY. And therefore I kept my thoughts to myself. What, do you think I
will not re^ort on the proud minx when I have the opportunity?


Miss HARRIOT. I hear them on the stairs, and dread the meeting.


[Enter the Miss Freemans.] Miss FOLEY. [just rises from her chair, and sinks
into it immediately.] Your servant.


Miss HARRIOT. How do you do, ladies? I hope we see you well?


Miss CLARA. Very well, I thank you, pray sit down.

[They all seat themselves.
Miss FOLEY. Bless me! what is the matter with Miss Freeman? why, you are as
mute as a fish:


Miss CLARA. My sister is the same as usual, I believe, but we cannot command
our spirits at all times.


Miss FOLEY. And cannot she answer for herself? There was a time when Matilda
did not need the aid of her meek sister.


Miss FREEMAN. I am obliged to Clara for speaking, and think it hard you should
reprove her for it.


Miss FOLEY. O! by no mean. I reprove her, for what? she is very welcome to
speak. I can think of nothing but the ball tonight, and the dress I shall
appear in. We shall meet you of course.

[ Miss Freeman burst into tears.]
Miss FOLEY What can make you cry, Miss Freeman? you who are to eclipse all the
young ladies by your superior finery?


Miss CLARA. We shall not on this occasion outv^e any one, for we are not to be
there.


Miss HARRIOT. I am extremely concerned for that.


Miss FOLEY. Not there? you must mistake! child, for I know you have new
dresses for the purpose. Send them however, that something belonging to you may
be taker notice of.


Miss FREEMAN. I see, Miss Foley you are cruel enough to rejoice in our
distress, therefore I will complete your triumph, by informing you, that in all
probability, we shall never go to any balls as long as we live.

[Continues crying]
Miss FOLEY. Pray, then, what are you to go to?


Miss CLARA, [ greatly agitat^d.] To service, perhaps.


Miss FOLEY. To service^ then you must change your names. I should (...) upon
that, if you offered yourselves to me.


Miss HARRIOT. [ with great concern.] Dear girls, how my heart bleeds for you,
I had heard something of your papa's losses, but hoped to find it only report.


Miss CLARA. It is too true; but we are all resigned to our fate; indeed, with
such an example (...) mamma's before us, it would be shameful if we were not.


Miss HARRIOT. You have not yet my dear Clara, experienced the sad reverse, and
I hope never will, at least, not to the degree of servitude.


Miss FOLEY. What signifies the d^gree. They will easily get places. I will
speak to Lady Grogram. She told me ^etaved gentlewomen were the pleasantest of
all domestics; they were so patient, and bore reproof better than any others.


Miss HARRIOT. F^e! sister (...) is cruel to add to their distress?


Miss FOLEY. Add to it? why they should be innured to what they must meet with;
respect never follows the indigent.


Miss FREEMAN. [with some spirit.] We need not make ourselves quite so
despicable, as to live with a modern fine lady; that would be to give up all
pretensions to respect at once.


Miss FOLEY. You must give up your spirit, madam, or you will soon be turned
out of doors go where you will, and then to whom will you apply for relief?


Miss FREEMAN. Not to you Miss Foley. I shall trouble you on no occasion,
believe me.


Miss FOLEY. I am glad to hear it; for I hate dependent acquaintance.


Miss CLARA. We shall, I trust have no occasion to seek to any; for we do not
despair of being sought by the worthy and the good.


Miss FOLEY. O, are these your hopes? The (...) probably you do (...) despair
of being rich again and s^^^ing yourselves above us?


Miss FREEMAN. I blush to think I was ever capable of acting so meanly, and
sincerely ask Miss Harriot's pardon for my behavior the last time we met.
Clara convinced me yesterday of the impropriety of my conduct toward you; and
today my own feelings strengthen and confirm her argument. [ Looks steadfastly
at Miss Foley.]


Miss FOLEY. You are very impertinent in your manner, Matilda; but people who
mix with their inferiors, must expect to meet impertinence. Come Harriot, let
us go; or do you intend to stay crying over these girls all day?


Miss HARRIOT. If they will permit me to assist in comforting them, I shall be
obliged by it. Accept my company, dear girls, I beseech you.


Miss CLARA. Your offer is a very kind one, my dear Miss Harri^^ but we cannot
think of interfering with the ball: tomorrow, if you will favor us, we shall
be (...) of your company.


Miss FOLEY. It is a vain wish. Mamma will never suffer my sister to keep low
company.


Miss FREEMAN. I thank you, Miss Foley, for opening my (...) you argue now, did
I yesterday about (...) and treated her very insolently; how I heartily repent
having done so. Take warning, therefore, by my (...) and misfortune; the latter
may be yours; but it will (...) half its bitterness if unaccompanied by the
former.


Miss FOLEY. [disdainfully.] It is not for such people as you to give advice.
-- Do you part with your instrument? what a foolish question; that you do of
course.


Miss CLARA. Certainly; I shall never think of attending to music, (...) it
should be necessary to recommend me in whatever station papa fixes on for me.
Mrs. Allworthy thinks I am qualified as a teacher to a school.


Miss FOLEY. A blessed life you will pass; and Matilda's delicate hands to
trundle a mop.


Miss HARRIOT. For shame! sister.


Miss CLARA. If she is sunk below your pity, let her also be below your
contempt.


Miss FREEMAN. I am sunk in fortune, it is true, but I must be abject indeed to
wish to obtain any thing from Miss Foley, but her absence, or her silence.


Miss FOLEY. Am I ordered out of this house by you? impertinence! for this
behavior, I will never speak one word in your favor.


Miss FREEMAN. You have treated me, Miss Foley, as I deserve, and have done me
an essential piece of service; but tell me, could you, even by a look, indicate
an unkind thought to my patient amiable mother?


Miss FOLEY. I should look at her the same as I do at other people, perhaps
less embarrassed now she is beneath me; for some how I used rather to stand in
awe of her.


Miss CLARA. You make me angry, Miss Foley, by saying, my dearest mother is
beneath you. But I recollect myself; she would only smile at such a remark, and
I am proud to follow her example.


[ Enter Mrs. Allworthy.] Miss FREEMAN. You look remarkably cheerful; dear
madam, what occasions it?


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. The sight of your papa. He is returned home, and appears
uncommonly well.


Miss CLARA. I rejoice to hear it, may I go and see him?


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. Not immediately, he has people on business with him. Your
mamma is coming presently.


Miss FREEMAN. As my papa is in health and spirits, he will be more capable of
directing us in future, and comforting mamma.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. She does not appear at present to want comfort, for she
possesses every thing she can wish for in this world.


Miss FOLEY. But fortune; and I fancy every body finds that a very necessary
ingredient to happiness.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. How can Mrs. Freeman want fortune? it is well known that Mr.
Freeman is one of the richest merchants in the city.


Miss FREEMAN. O, madam! you need not conceal from Miss Foley our misfortunes,
she knows them, not only from us, but from report.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. Then I must have the pleasure of telling her, report is not
always to be depended upon. For Mr. Freeman's ships are safely arrived in the
river; and he has heard, that another, which he thought taken by the enemy, has
only been detained by contrary winds, in a neutral port these two months, and
is hourly expected.


Miss CLARA. No wonder you looked so pleased, madam, for your goodness leads
you to rejoice with every body that is fortunate.


Miss HARRIOT. I do sincerely congratulate you on this happy event, and am
rejoiced to hear it.


Miss FOLEY. [ looks very much confused.] I wish you joy. Who could have
thought it! Come, sister, we had better go.


Miss HARRIOT. I am ready to attend you, with a lighter heart than I brought
hither.


Miss FOLEY. [confused.] I suppose these ladies wi^^ go to the ball now. Shall
we have the honor of going with you? we can call on you in our coach if
agreeable.


Miss CLARA. You are very obliging: but we cannot think of the ball, till we
have seen papa and mamma, and known if it is agreeable to them for us to go.


Miss FREEMAN. As Miss Foley had made the offer of taking us, we can let her
know as soon as this matter is determined for us.


Miss HARRIOT. Do then; we shall be happy to join your party. Good morning to
you. [ They curtesy and go out.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. Let me now press my dear girls to my heart, and congratulate
them on returning prosperity.


Miss FREEMAN. You should also rejoice in my adversity; for it has done me more
good than riches possibly could have done. I was inclined to give up false
pride by my mamma's arguments and yours; but Miss Foley's conduct this morning
has I hope extinguished every latent spark of it; she showed me my own picture;
I pity her error, though I despise in her those faults which made my own
character contemptible.


Miss CLARA. Indeed, sister, you have shown more forbearance than I could have
practiced. Miss Foley has been more unfee^ingly insolent than I thought any
person capable of being.


Miss FREEMAN. You forget my conduct yesterday to poor Mrs. Gates; it (...) as
inexcusable.


Miss CLARA. But, Matilda, how could you promise to go to the ball with them,
in case we should be permitted to go? you cannot think of it.


Miss FREEMAN. Why not? it is my intentions to accept her invitation to night,
and at all proper times; not only to show to her that I am above resenting her
treatment, but also, that the sight of her may remind me of my own faults, and
with a secret hope, that the change in my conduct, may effect an alteration in
here is.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. You judge nobly my dear girl. Continue to think thus, and
false pride, the bane of peace, will not endanger the loss of your future
repose. Well, Clara, will you listen to my admonitions in future? was not my
advice better to follow than your own.


Miss CLARA. O dear, madam, I blush at the recollection of my earnestness, and
beg your pardon for it.


Miss FREEMAN. What did you do then, Clara? I long to know.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. We will talk of it another time; though it is nothing but what
must redound to her credit, and prove her duty and attention to her parents.


[Enter Maid.] MAID. My lady sent me to beg one of the young ladies would come
to the hair dresser, who has been waiting some time.


Miss FREEMAN. Then we are to go to the ball; will you go first, sister?


Miss CLARA. If it is most agreeable to you?

[She goes out.
MAID. My mistress had been enquiring about a box of fine things belonging to
you Miss, and is afraid somebody has stolen it.


Miss FREEMAN. [ blushes, in confusion.] I have it; run and tell mamma. [ in
confusion Maid goes out.] I am sorry now I took them; but it was to get you to
sell them; and carry the money to her. I had nothing else:e to give; could I
then refuse to part with what was of no use to me?


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. But it was wrong to take them clandestinely, and might have
been productive of great uneasiness to your mamma. I must read both your sister
and you a lecture on this subject; for her offense was of a similar nature.


[Enter MAID.] My master is gone into mistress is dressing room, and desires to
see you there, ladies.

[She goes out.
Miss FREEMAN. [cries.] What can be the matter with me; I was never happier in
my life, and yet I cannot restrain my tears.


Mrs. ALLWORTHY. Sensibility frequently produces this effect, that is now your
case. But go, my love, to your papa, and receive in his caresses the reward you
merit.

[She goes out.
Mrs. ALLWORTHY. The goodness of Providence has removed the affliction of this
worthy family, and conviction has (...) arrogant pride; her behavior to Miss
(...) I overheard by being in the next room)(...) about her reformation also,
and (...) REASON. I will now join th^s (...) in decorating the dear (...) for
the (...).

[She goes out.
THE END
THE CONTRAST, A DRAMA, IN THREE ACTS,

PERSONS of the DRAMA.
Mrs. VERNON. Mrs. G. VERNON. Mrs. SELWYN Miss. SELWYN. aged 14. Miss VERNON,
16. Master VERNON, 13. Miss WARD, 15. Miss FRANKLIN, 14. Miss THUROT, 13.
SALLY, and other attendants.
THE CONTRAST A DRAMA, IN THREE ACTS.
ACT I.
SCENE. I.
[Mrs. Vernon at breakfast, attended by her Maid.] [ Enter Miss Selwyn, who
advances to the table and takes her grandmamma's hand.] Miss SELWYN. GOOD
morning to you, my dear grandmamma, I hope you rested well last night, and feel
no remains of the rheumatic pains you complained of?


Mrs. VERNON. Thank you, my dear girl, I am as well as I can expect to he at my
late (...) of life, though I have still the same pains flying about me.


Miss SELWYN, [ who sits down.] I am extremely (...) for it. Is your breakfast
as you like it? your (...) does not look so nice as usual; you do not (...) to
(...) it. (...) you had better, if you please, make another.


Mrs. VERNON. Your (...) is very grateful to my feelings; but indeed my maid
has done every thing as usual. It is not wonderful that appetite of an old
woman near eighty should f^^l her, who is too infirm to take the benefit of
fresh air and exercise.


Miss SELWYN. What would I give that I could by any means remove some of your
infirmities? then my dear grandmamma might enjoy herself abroad as I do.


Mrs. VERNON. Undoubtedly. Health is certainly one of the greatest blessings we
can possess; but unfortunately, we seldom know how to price it, till lost by
our own mismanagement. The youthful too generally imagine they shall never be
old; and therefore throw away the most precious part of their lives in folly
and dissipation, which occasions constant regret for misspent time, and
embitters all their latter years. My comfort is, that I feel only the natural
infirmities of age; my conscience does not reproach me on this head.


Miss SELWYN. Young people who have a grandmamma and mamma like mine, can
surely never be subject to such errors.


Mrs. VERNON. We are to hope they have not such advantages as you have, my
dear. Sally, take away, and give me my knotting bag.


Miss SELWYN. You are never idle, madam. With your permission, I will fetch my
embroidery, and keep you company.


Mrs. VERNON. Do so, my love. [ Miss Selwyn goes out.] Rub this table a little
more, Sally.


SALLY. How very pretty Miss grows, Madam! -- she will be a perfect beauty in
time.


Mrs. VERNON. She has a good heart, and a sweet disposition: those are durable
perfections. Let me hear no flattery, Sally.

[Sally goes out.
[ Enter Miss Selwyn with her frame, which she places properly and begins to
work.] Miss SELWYN. I have often wondered, my dear grandmamma, to think how it
is possible for you to be so cheerful who are always in pain, and neither can
visit or be much visited.


Mrs. VERNON. Many circumstances conduce to my cheerfulness. My Creator, as one
of his bountiful gifts, has endowed me with an active mind, in consequence of
which, I have acquired a habit of constant employment. But above all, the
reliance which a long life has taught me to place on my Maker, naturally
produces serenity of mind; and I look back with satisfaction on the days that
are past, as I trust, guided by his unerring hand, I have not spent them
unprofitably. I am sure I have not unthankfully. The blessings I enjoy are
manifold. Misfortunes I have shared with the rest of mankind. Grateful and
resigned, I wait for the moment of my dissolution.


Miss SELWYN. I hope, however, that your life will be spared many years longer;
for I have a great deal to learn; and though my mamma is all goodness, yet she
has not so much time for conversation as you have; besides, it would break my
heart to be separated from you.


Mrs. VERNON, [ smiling.] The heart, my dear, is not so ea^^^y broken as you
imagine; great and heavy have been my afflictions. My mind was naturally weak,
and apt to repine at every disappointment, this my parents early observed,
their kind attention to me strengthened it; they soon convinced me, that a
dependence on this world is vain, and taught me to draw confolation from that
source which never fails. At what time may we expect the travelers? are you
not impatient to see your cousin?


Miss SELWYN. Indeed I am. Mamma told me at parting that she hoped to be at
home by dinner today, and I ordered it accordingly. I am afraid my appearance
will be very awkward in the company of (...). Seven years residence in France,
has no doubt, made her all accomplished.


Mrs. VERNON. I hope it has improved her, or it will be seven years thrown
away: but why should you be awkward, because she is accomplished? you have had
the advantage of a good education, and under the eye of an amiable mother,
whose acquirements and constant attention must have given you a benefit your
cousin wanted, separated as she has been for such a length of time from all her
relations.


Miss SELWYN. My aunt holds me so cheap for having been educated in England,
though the forbears to speak her sentiments, I think her looks seem to say,
when my mamma kindly commends my behavior, "my daughter will soon convince you
whose judgment is the best."


Mrs. VERNON. You should avoid all suspicions of this kind: for it is
ungenerous to judge of (...) passes in the minds of others merely for their
looks; had your mamma thought as you do, I dare say she would have been equally
hurt, but would have forborne to express her chagrin to any one.


Miss SELWYN. I saw yesterday morning tears start into her eyes, at a remark my
aunt made on home education, but it is true, that instead of taking it up, she
only turned and embraced me with the greatest affection, and seemed, whilst she
pressed me to her bosom, to say, "I am satisfied with you." My aunt was too
full of her approaching meeting with Cecilia, to say even adieu to me.


Mrs. VERNON. The neglect was pardonable. I must not have you think of it. Your
mamma's conduct through life will be an excellent guide for you. Be thankful to
GOD that you have before your eyes such an example. She has sacrificed her own
feelings on many occasions; and when I lost my son, consented, for my sake, to
take your aunt and cousins into this house. You are old enough to remark, that
they are in some respects different from (...) both in sentiment and character:
yet to this she has submitted, and without once deviating from the respect
which she thinks due to the relief of so near a relation.


Miss SELWYN. I am sure, my cousin George often treats my mamma shamefully, and
yet my aunt seldom reproves him for it.


Mrs. VERNON. It is with great concern I see his mother's blind indulgence
toward him; but as he has a good understanding, I hope he will in time learn
to behave with propriety.

[ Enter Master Vernon hastily, he runs to Miss Selwyn, then speaks.] I have
broke my kite, cousin; do give me some paper to mend it with?


Miss SELWYN. I will give you some paper, George, with as much pleasure, as
seeing you pay duty and respect to your grandmamma would give me.


Master VERNON. I do not mean to be rude to grandmamma, and will kiss her if
the pleases; for, indeed, she is never cross to me; but I heard Miss Ward
complain the other day, how ill-natured her grandmother was: and she said, she
did not know what use old women were of, if they must live, but to sit in the
chimney corner and knit stockings.


Mrs. VERNON. If you have adopted this sentiment, George, my affection can be
of little estimation in your opinion; yet I feel myself your parent, and am
truly anxious for your welfare.


Miss SELWYN. I think Miss Ward was quite inexcuseable to use such expressions;
for if she has no sense of duty, or propriety herself, she should not have
endeavored to pervert the minds of others.


Mrs. VERNON. Very true, my love; but young people who are in habits of
insolence, seldom consider to whom they address it, or think of the prevalence
of example.

[ Miss Selwyn furnishes the young gentleman with paper, then speaks.]
Miss SELWYN. There, cousin, you may now repair the damage your kite has
received; and I hope you will allow, that if old woman are useless, young one's
are not so?


Master VERNON. Why, I hope you do not call yourself a woman? however I thank
you for your kindness. As soon as I have mended my kite-and dried, it, I will
go and try if it will fly.

[He goes out.
Mrs. VERNON. I think I heard a carriage stop: if so, our hopes or fears, will
soon become certainty.


[ Enter Mrs. Selwyn.] Mrs. SELWYN. How is my dear mother? I have had ten
thousand alarms for your health during my absence.


Mrs. VERNON. Your daughter has paid such attention to me, that I have hardly
felt your loss: which will, I hope, induce you not to confine yourself so much
as formerly. Have you brought home your sister and the young Frenchwoman?


Mrs. SELWYN. I have, madam: they only wait your permission to be admitted. --
My beloved Teresa, you are dearer to me than ever, for showing such sweet
attention to your grandmother.


Miss SELWYN. I am happy to obtain your approbation so easily, mamma; for in so
doing, I have only followed the bent of my own inclinations.


Mrs. VERNON. Postpone at present these joyful effusions. -- It will be proper
for Teresa to welcome her aunt and Cousin; in the mean time. I will, with your
assistance, daughter, prepare myself for the approaching interview.


Mrs. SELWYN. Go then, my love, into the parlour, and tell my sister, her
mother will attend her immediately.

[ Exit Miss Selwyn.
Mrs. VERNON. I am all anxiety and apprehension, whilst I enquire whether my
son's daughter is worthy of him?


Mrs. SELWYN. Cecilia is certainly not such a character as will please you. Her
education may make a figure among the gay and thoughtless, but is no more
suited to the pleasures of a fire side, than such pleasures are suited to her.


Mrs. VERNON. My fears were then prophetic when I warned her infatuated mother
against sending her to a convent. But what is to be expected when a child is
removed so many years from the watchful eyes of anxious affection? will you
assist me to make the usual alteration in my dress, that I may avoid coming up
stairs any more today; and then, with a palpitating heart, will I embrace this
dear perverted child.

[They go out.
SCENE, changes to a Parlour.
[Mrs. G. Vernon and her daughter.]
Mrs. G. Vernon. It is strange no one comes to welcome us.


Miss Vernon. Not at all; I dare say my aunt is decorating and documenting
Teresa, that she may not appear awkward before me, [with (...) of her head,]
she may try, but I do not fancy she will succeed very well.


Mrs. G. VERNON. You are much mistaken, my dear. Your cousin is a very amiable
and accomplished girl, nor does she ever want decorating, for her dress is
always neat, and such as she may be seen in before any one.


Miss VERNON. Well, I allow she may be neat, but she cannot know how to put her
clothes on as fashionably as I do, for I have been dressed like a woman ever
since I went to France.

[ Enter Miss SELWYN who goes to embrace her cousin with great affection.]
Welcome to England, my dear Cecilia; I cannot express the joy I feel that I
once more see you in this house. Pardon me, aunt, for taking notice of my
cousin, before I have paid my duty to you; but my joy at seeing her occasioned
it.


Mrs. G. VERNON [ embraces her.] You are forgiven, my love, for a very natural
and pleasing omission; I am glad you retain the affection which, even in
infancy, you felt for my Cecilia. [To her daughter, who stands gazing at Miss
Selwyn in an affected manner] you neither speak or return your cousin's kind
reception -- recollect yourself, my dear.


Miss VERNON. My cousin is so grown and altered, that I should not have known
her any where; but I am very happy to fee her again.

[She Salutes her.]
Mrs. G. VERNON. Your separation, consider has been long enough to make an
equal change in both of you. How is my mother, Teresa? perhaps she may like to
see me alone first. I will, therefore, find George, and then attend her in her
own apartment. My absence will accelerate your intimacy, I hope, for at
present, young Ladies, you seem very distant to each other.

[She goes out.
Miss VERNON. Indeed I do not mean to appear cool; but I have been so lost in
admiration of you, cousin, that it tied my tongue.


Miss SELWYN. You are very kind, my dear Cecilia; but I cannot be vain enough
to believe what your politeness leads you to say.


Miss VERNON. Doubt my veracity, child? "true as the needle to the pole." But
come, tell me ten thousand things at once; I long to know how you amuse
yourself?


Miss SELWYN. I can sooner tell you how I employ myself; for as to amusements
except joining your brother George, in his plays sometimes, I have very few; I
am, however, seldom unemployed: but now you are returned I may promise myself
many pleasures suitable to my time of life, which the want of a companion has
for some time deprived me of.


Miss VERNON. La, coz! you talk as if we were to play like children still; I
like nothing in the old style; besides, I have too much vivacity to continue
the same employment long, la, la, la, [ sings, and dances before the
looking-glass.]


Miss SELWYN. You have charming spirits, and will find me ready to join you in
both singing and dancing, for I am very fond of them both.


Miss. VERNON. O, I adore them! am in ecstasies at an Opera, and expire at the
sight of Vestris.


Miss SELWYN. It Is a pity then you should run the risque of hearing and seeing
them. I think it would give me much pleasure to go to such an entertainment;
but as to expiring, I am sure I would not venture to go, could I expect the
pleasure would be so exquisite as to produce such an effect upon me.


Miss VERNON. You are all nonchalance. While I am endowed with Esprit. Esprit!
that makes me the life of company. -- but a^^ tonjours (...) when alime. Have
you no wish to go to that dear place I have just quitted?


Miss SELWYN. If you mean France, I confess, my desire is strong to go thither:
and I have my mamma's promise to take me, when my dear grandmamma no longer
requires our attendance on her.


Miss VERNON. Does the old lady give as much good advice as she used to do?
possitively, if she begins with me I shall advise her, knowing her great
fondness for experiments, to send for Mousieur Blunchard, and mount in one of
his air ballooms, and then I will bribe him, never to let her come back again.


Miss SELWYN. Fie! Cecilia, It is shocking to hear you talk so of any old
woman, but of such a grandmother, unpardonable.


Miss VERNON. You must expect this, and a great deal more; for I always speak
what comes uppermost. It is a la mode de France.


Miss SELWYN. La mode de France is not a very pleasant mode, if it inculcates a
want of feeling and respect to our nearest and dearest relations. You have not
enquired after your brother; yet he was a sweet little fellow when you parted
from him.


Miss VERNON. I have quite forgot what he was. But I know it would be better
for me if I had no brother; for then I should have a larger fortune.


Miss SELWYN. How can you talk so? what wish your brother dead!


Miss VERNON. It is no proof because I wish myself to have a better fortune
that I desire my brother's death. Suppose he was your brother, would not that
do as well?


Miss SELWYN. Well! I have no idea of indulging a wish for any thing to be
different from what Providence has ordered it. I have often, to be sure, wished
I had a sister; but then the thought has been forgotten as soon as I obtained a
companion.


Miss VERNON. But consider with what old fashioned notions you have been
educated; never to think or speak but by rule, whilst Frolic has been my
Mother, Whim my Sister, and their dear attendant Nonsense, constantly hovering
about me. Your masters are fusty old Englishmen, chosen by your grandmamma,
because they are mighty civil well behaved men. If you perform well, they are
too phlegmatic to praise you; if ill, the (...) never forget it. My instructors
were Petit Maitres, dressed (...) dernier gout, with a chapeau de bras. Whilst
I was playing, or dancing, they were all ecstasies; charmante! adorable! tres
bien! bon! encore! were repeated till I was even almost tired of hearing my own
praises. Vive la hagatelle, shall be my motto, whilst youth, (a Frenchman would
say) and beauty remain.


Miss SELWYN. I am sure, my dear parents have always encouraged my liveliness,
and at times I have very great spirits; it is true, they wished me to
distinguish between real cheerfulness and levily. The latter of which, I own,
is already so disagreeable in my eyes, that I am sorry to see any young lady
encourage it.


Miss VERNON. That is as much as to say, you do not like me. N'importe. The
opinion of a girl bred in obscurity, will never distress me. But your behavior
need not have been quite so English at our first meeting.


Miss SELWYN. I am sorry, cousin, you found any thing in my speech to apply to
yourself. You talked of the opera and Vestris as having seen them; how was that
possible in a Convent?


Miss VERNON. By the mean of a little art and good friends, my dear. I
accompanied the mother of one of our boarders to Paris, persuaded the Lady
Abbess, though almost as old and grumpy as my grandmamma, that she would o^^end
mamma, if she refused my accepting the invitation of so great a lady as Madame
la Com^^^^e de Resselle; under this idea, she consented, and for one fortnight
I enjoyed all the pleasures of the beau monde.


Miss SELWYN. How could you receive pleasure from any diversion obtained by the
meanness of deceit? I should have hoped, my Cecilia, had had more pride than to
descend to it, Seven years ago you would (...) blushed at only being supposed
capable of such an action.


Miss VERNON. You who have never gone beyond the pales of the village
churchyard, nor heard precepts but from the old fashioned months of your
relations, have no idea what young people will submit to when pleasure is in
view; for my part, I think there is no harm in an innocent deception; and often
laugh at the figure I made when I went into the Convent, a little formal demure
Miss grandmamma's best girl: said my prayers might and morning; preferred
reading good books to the old lady, to a game of romps: and would not have told
a mensonge for the world.


Miss SELWYN. I am sorry to say any thing harsh to you, dear cousin,
particularly in these first moments of our meeting; but indeed, if you continue
to use such expressions, I must only keep you company when you are restrained
by the presence of those relations whom you hold so cheap. What you have just
said, must, however, be all mere ^^^llery; when you are serious, I shall hear
very different sentiments, from you.


Miss VERNON. Though I do not thank you much for the former part of your
speech, yet I cannot help telling you, that my sentiments never differ, for I
disclaim every thing like seriousness; the age of sixteen was never made for
that: it is the prime of pleasure, gaiety and dress. Apropos, I long to show
you the sweet elegant becoming ornaments I have brought home, if the Barbares
at the Custom-house keep their odious hands from them.


Miss SELWYN. I shall be much delighted with a sight of them, as the French are
generally allowed to have great taste and elegance in dress.


Miss VERNON. And when placed with judgment I say no more. Vou^ me compren^^?


[ Enter Master Vernon who runs and kisses his sister.] Miss VERNON. How
impoli, George! you should only touch my cheek.


Master VERNON. I am not a Frenchman, sister; nor do I desire to be one, that
is more. Why, I never saw any body ^ut such a queer figure in my life as you
do, all frizzled and powdered. I like my cousin a great deal better.


Miss VERNON. With all my heart; your good opinion would only make me dislike
myself. I wish dinner was ready, [ takes out a dirty looking knife.] I long to
exercise you, [ addressing it] for I am very hungry.


Master VERNON. And do you think grandmamma will suffer such a nasty looking
knife as that to be used at the table she sits at? why, it would quick shock
her.


Miss VERNON. It is what I have used constantly these three years, and shall
continue to cut with it in spite of all she can say to the contrary; I am not
quite vulgar enough to eat with one, as I suppose you all do.


Master VERNON. There you are mistaken, Mrs. Frenchwoman; I often wish my
aunt's eyes behind her, because she watches me so narrowly, for fear I should
put any thing to my mouth with my knife; but then we are not absurd or dirty
enough to use such a nasty thing as that.


Miss VERNON. I wish you would hold your ridiculous tongue, and not talk of
things you cannot understand. Go to school, that is the properest place for you.


Master VERNON. Hold your tongue -- who sent for you to give an opinion? I
shall not submit to you, indeed.


Miss SELWYN. Pray restrain yourselves, my dear cousins, I am extremely shocked
to see such near relations quarrelling, and particularly, so soon after such a
long separation.


Miss VERNON. What right has he to laugh at me? I will use my knife if I like
it.


Master VERNON. And what right had you to call me impoli, or in plain English,
Brute?


Miss SELWYN. I beg you will compose yourselves. How much would your conduct
distress all our parents, if they knew it?


Miss VERNON. Tell them of it with all my heart; perhaps you will recommend
yourself by it.


Miss SELWYN. No one but you, cousin, would have supposed me capable of
designed ill nature. But you do not know what I am, and have forgot what I was.


Miss VERNON. You can praise yourself, however, that I can perceive. A fine
chance for happiness have I, to be documented by a conceited cousin, and a
boorish brother. But I will never let mamma rest till she removes me from this
hateful house.


Miss SELWYN. You distress me greatly, Cecilia, by thus misconstruing my
intentions, [ takes her hand with great affection.] I am sure proving myself
sincerely your friend will afford happiness to myself; and I hope, this house,
once so dear to you, and which you regretted leaving when your mamma sent you
abroad, will be (...) highly estimated as ever.


Miss VERNON. That is a vain hope: when I liked this dull situation, I did not
know better; but now I must detest every thing like retirement. That one
fortnight at Paris, has spoi^^ me for any thing but living in the world.


Miss SELWYN. So far from making me impatient to see the world, you render me
afraid of entering it. What dreadful effects, to make one hate home, and the
peace and quietness to be found there only! you cannot always be amused from
morning till night.


Miss VERNON. I am sure we were so at Paris, and wanted still more hours for
amusement; but then to be sure, I was fadly fatigued, and did not recover it
for many days after I returned to the Convent, but that was only for want of
use.


Master VERNON. Well, sister, I wish you would talk of something else besides
your outlandish manner of passing your time, it would do you more good to go
and play at trap-b^li with me.


Miss VERNON. Keep your sentiments to yourself, sir; they are by no mean
desirable in my opinion. What is the old lady dressing herself all this time?
she does not show much impatience to see me; but, perhaps, she is beautifying,
ha! ha! [ Laughs.]


Miss SELWYN. I will enquire what is the matter; for my dear grandmamma's great
age makes me constantly apprehensive about her. [ She rings the bell.]


Miss VERNON. You need not hurry her, Teresa, for I find no difficulty to
smother my impatience.


Miss SELWYN. I am sorry for it. [ Enter a footman.] Have you heard any thing
of my grandmamma, John?


JOHN. She is now upon the stairs, miss, I believe she has been kept above by
some complaint, because her maid went for drops.

He goes out.
Miss SELWYN. [agitated.] You alarm me greatly; but I will go and see her
myself. [ As she is quitting the room, enter Sally.]


SALLY. My lady is gone into the dining parlour with your mammas, ladies, and
desires your company there.


Miss SELWYN. How is my grandmamma, Sally? I hope not very ill?


SALLY. No, miss, only a little faint. But you are so soon frightened.


Miss VERNON. Frightened, indeed! I never heard such a fuss about an old woman
in my life; it is quite absurd.


SALLY. O, Miss Cecilia, I am glad you are come home, the house will seem alive
now.


Miss VERNON. That it will, if my endeavors can make it so.

[Sally is going to speak, but is interrupted by
Miss SELWYN. You need not stay here, Sally, we shall go to the dining parlour
immediately. [ Sally goes out.] How can you cousin encourage that impertinent
girl to prate? it is a liberty she never dared to take with me.


Miss VERNON. Keep your advice for those who will attend to it, I shall never
be a listner. Come, let us go, that I may be made a show of.

[They go out. [The Scene closes.]
END of ACT II.
ACT III.
SCENE, the Dining Parlour.
[Mrs. Vernon, Mrs. G. Vernon, Miss and Master Vernon, Mrs. and Miss Selwyn,
sitting round the table after dinner, eating fruit, etc.] Master VERNON. I KNEW
very well, sister, that you would not dare to pull out that nasty quee^ knife,
before grandmamma, notwithstanding what you said.


Miss VERNON. I think, sir, I had enough of your imper^^ence before dinner; I
must claim my mamma's protection from any more of it.


Mrs. G. VERNON. It is a shame, George, that you should quarrel with your
sister so soon after your meeting.


Master VERNON. O, you need not take her part; she wants no second, I assure
you, mamma, she was quite a match for my cousin and me together before dinner.


Mrs. VERNON. I am sorry, Teresa, to hear that you have been disputing, and
wonder from whose example you could learn it?


Miss SELWYN. Indeed, my dear grandmamma, I have not deserved your censure on
this occasion; George quite mistakes.


Miss VERNON. There is no occasion to tell tales. Though, to speak truth, we
had a fine battle of the tongues amongst us; but that is nothing new to me.


Mrs. SELWYN. But it is very new in this house, and what we never approve.
George, to be sure, sometimes thinking himself wiser than any of us, prefers
giving his opinion to hearing ours; however, we seldom spare him, for it is
unpardonable, even in a rude unpolished schoolboy, to behave in that manner,
but in young ladies, it proves a want of delicacy and sentiment. Fie, Teresa! I
thought you had too much gentleness to be guilty of such an error.

[ Miss Selwyn appears to be quite distressed, but continues silent,]
Miss VERNON. We never passed a day in the convent without half a dozen
quarrels amongst the boarders; by which mean I am so accustomed to them, that I
could not live in quietness for the world. You look quite ashamed of it,
cousin, why, I am not.


Mrs. VERNON. This is one of the blessed effects of the foreign education you
have had; and your speech convinces me, that you alone were to blame; poor
Teresa could not avoid being a spectator; but her distressed appearance plainly
speaks she took no other part in the contention.


Miss VERNON. I imagine, my cousin is to be supposed always in the right,
because she was bred at home under your tuition, grandmamma, and according to
your precepts. But consider the change of fashions in the last sixty years, and
how different young people are now to what they were formerly.


Mrs. VERNON. It is with great concern I observe the alteration you mention;
but sixty years cannot make absurdity appear like reason, or pertness, like
understanding.


Miss VERNON. I suppose, if I was demure, simple, and silent, you would call me
modest, and well bred; but what use would it be to have accomplishments if I
did not try to show them?


Mrs. VERNON. Do you then think, Cecilia, impertinent unmeaning remarks are
proofs of knowledge? you take the method to convince us of the contrary:
silence might hide your deficiency; there is no being mistaken when once you
open your mouth.


Miss VERNON. It is a little hard, that I may not speak of the customs which
prevail among people with whom I have passed almost half my life; but I suppose
I am prevented, for fear I should convince others that I know more than my
listeners.


Mrs. VERNON. Incorrigible girl! have you no affection? no feeling? no sense of
duty?


Miss VERNON. You do not give me any opportunity of showing my sentiments. It
is hard to be received with frowns after so long an absence, and all occasioned
by that young fripon my brother.


Mrs. SELWYN. My dear madam, let us wave all further argument. George, give
your sister a reconciling kiss, and we will call another subject.

[ Master Vernon just touches Miss Vernon' s cheek, then speaks.
Master VERNON. Was that done gently enough to please you, madame Franc^is?


Mrs. G. VERNON. H^sh! George, I must not allow you to take such liberties with
your sister, if you repeat it, I will instantly send you to (...). Did you,
Teresa, invite the young ladies to tea this afternoon?


Miss SELWYN. I wrote notes to them, madam, as you directed, requesting their
company to meet an old friend; they returned for answer that they should be
happy to wait on me, and would come early, according to my desire.


Mrs. G. VERNON. I hope, my dears, you will not dispute before your visitors.


Master VERNON. I shall not begin first. But I am determined to go into the
room to see how Cecilia behaves, and what frenchified airs she puts on.


Miss VERNON. I do not think it worth while to argue with such a rude boy as
you are. Pray, cousin, who are the young ladies we are to see this afternoon?


Miss SELWYN. Miss Ward, Miss Franklin, and Miss Thurot; the father of Miss
Thurot is a French refuge^; the other two ladies, you no doubt recollect?


Miss VERNON. Come then, let us go into the drawing room and prepare for them.

[ She runs out; Miss Selwyn curtefies to her friends, and follows her.


Mrs. VERNON. Come, my good Mrs. Selwyn, lead me to the couch in the little
parlour, that I may take my afternoon's sleep.

[They go out.
Mrs. G. VERNON, alone. With what difficulty have I smothered my grief and
disappointment. Alas! Cecilia's temper is quite spoiled. O that I had followed
her grandmother's advice, and educated her with her cousin; but headstrong and
opinionated people generally suffer as I do. What steps can I take to undo what
seven years seem to have fatally completed? had but her father's life been
spared, he would have saved her from perversion, and me from the fatal
instrument of being it. Why did I follow my own infatuated opinion? Too
prophetic mother, all your apprehensions are verified! I must go to my
daughter, and try to compose my mind, it is at present greatly disturbed.

She goes out.
SCENE changes to the Drawing Room.
[ Miss Selwyn, Miss and Master Vernon.]
Miss SELWYN. I long to hear you play on the harpsichord, Cecilia; I shall hope
to improve myself, by catching your graces.


Miss VERNON. I suppose you have an English master and English (...)?


Miss SELWYN. I play of all kinds; my master is still the same you began with,
and is reckoned a remarkably good one.


Miss VERNON. He may be thought so here, but I was obliged to unlearn all he
taught me; my French master told me, I had been most execrably instructed.


Miss SELWYN. That he might say to answer some purpose of his own. Perhaps an
English performer may not possess the spirit and brilliancy of a French one;
but I have been told the latter are apt to neglect laying a solid foundation,
which is the method our good masters always observe.


Miss VERNON. I really kn^w nothing about the matter; and I never give myself
the trouble to think: Monsieur de Brun was a very polite man, and always
praised me.

[ Master Vernon looking out of the window.]
Master VERNON. Here come our visitors. Now, Cecilia, for some of your French
airs and graces?


Miss VERNON. I wish I could transport you to the antipodes; you are the most
impertinent boy I ever knew.

[ Enter the three young ladies; Miss Selwyn advances to meet them with great
politeness, and introduces them to Miss Vernon.]
Miss SELWYN. Miss Ward, Miss Franklin, Miss Thurot, need I name the lady to
whom I am introducing you?


Miss VERNON. Oui, certainment; Am I not entierement grown out of their
knowledge?


Miss WARD. Miss Vernon, I rejoice to see you.


M^^^ FRANKLIN. It is certainly your old playfellow! How glad I am you are
returned home! [ They advance and embrace her.]


Miss THUROT. Though I have not had the pleasure of seeing you before, yet I am
a sharer with your other friends, Miss Vernon, in the happiness your return
gives them, for I have heard you so frequently spoken of, that I longed to see
you.


Miss VERNON. Je suis ravi a ce moment, which once more unites me a mes belles
amies, among whom I am rejoiced to reckon you [ addressing Miss Thurot.]


Miss WARD. How happy you must be to come home! La, my dear, was not a convent
a detestible place? from what I have read and heard of them, I would not go to
one for the world.


Miss VERNON. I cannot pretend to say it was bien charmant; but I shall now
reap the advantage by having been educated in a superior style.


Miss FRANKLIN. I doubt not your accomplishments, Miss Vernon. But you must be
very clever indeed to exceed our dear Teresa who is reckoned a perfect prodigy.


Miss SELWYN. [blushing.] Pray do not bestow such undeserved praises on me; I
do not wish to vie with any one.


Miss WARD. Well, you are very clever to be sure, at least we are told so; but
I think Miss Vernon will be more to my taste, she seems so lively.


Miss VERNON. Me? je suis toujours gaie. I have overturned the heads of the
whole family in the short time since my return.


Master VERNON. It is time then you settled your own, for if you do not take
care it will all drop off presently.


Miss VERNON. I wish, sir, you were gone to school.


Master VERNON. I dare say you do; and I shall be very ready to go, that I may
entertain my school-fellows with an imitation of some of your grimmaces.


Miss VERNON. I do not mind you, that is one comfort. What shall we do to
divert ourselves?


Miss THUROT. Any thing that is agreeable to these young ladies will be so to
me. But I am so fond of music, that I should prefer that entertainment to any
other.


Miss SELWYN. My cousin, I hope, will not refuse to begin.


Miss VERNON. I would rather hear somebody else first. That mad boy has
agitated me I cannot sing yet.


Miss SELWYN. Then I will set the example in hope of having it followed, and
that my playing may not appear to the disadvantage it must do after hearing a
better performer.

[ Miss Selwyn plays and sings, during which time Miss Thurot and Miss
Franklin, stand by her listening. Miss Vernon and Miss Ward whisper and laugh.
Master Vernon eyes them very archly; when it is over, Miss Selwyn rises.


Miss THUROT. You play enchantingly, Miss Selwyn, I wish I could perform as
well, my papa would be delighted to hear you; he is amazingly land of music,
and very anxious for me to excel in it.


Miss VERNON. Indeed, cousin, you are a great proficient, and sing a merveille!

[ Master Vernon bursts into a loud laugh.]
Master VERNON. Pray how much did you hear of it? for you have been louder than
the music.


Miss WARD. Come, Miss Vernon, you must absolutely play now. I am dying to hear
you.


Miss VERNON [ rises with great affectation.] I will with pleasure oblige you.
[ Takes a French sang out of her pocket; then seats herself, and begins
playing, during which she throws herself into attitudes like foreigners. Soon
after she begins, Master Vernon, who has observed her sometime, goes out, then
returns with a ^ooking glass, which he places suddenly before her.]


Miss VERNON. What is that for, sir?


Master VERNON. To show you what a monkey is like. Why, I never saw any thing
else like you.


Miss VERNON. This is too much to submit to, making me break off in the finest
part of the song, and disappointing the young ladies.


Master VERNON. Do not make yourself uneasy about that, I will entertain the
ladies quite in your style. [ He imitates her action and manner of singing.]


Miss VERNON, [bursts into tears.] I cannot submit to such cruel usage. Why, if
you must play ridiculous tricks, did you not choose Teresa instead of me to make
your subject?


Master VERNON. Because she did nothing ridiculous. Why, there was not one of
your cheres amies, that did not laugh at you.


Miss VERNON. Insufferable insolence! I will complain to my mamma if you
persist in abusing me.


Miss SELWYN. Pray George, forbear, indeed you are wrong to distress your
sister.


Miss VERNON. It is impossible I should play, or do any thing else well whilst
he is ridiculing me.


Master VERNON. It is only owing to my ignorance. Consider I never saw a
frenchified belle before. Miss Thurot was born in France, why does not she
behave like you if it is the fashion of that nation?


Miss THUROT. No, sir, I was born and educated in England, my parents were
French.


Master VERNON. Well then if it was right to squeeze about like my sister, to
be sure your papa and mamma would have taught you to do it.


Miss WARD. Pray, Master Vernon, do not say any more, you quite spoil our
amusement. Come, let one of us play while the rest dance.


Miss VERNON. De tout mon coeur. I am now again ready for any thing lively.


Master VERNON. I hope I shall have the honor of dancing with every lady but my
sister. If she dances as she plays, I can never hope to possess perfection
enough for her partner.


Miss SELWYN. Who will begin? -- Accept me as a fiddler. [ She fits down to the
harpsichord and plays a minuet.]

[ Master Vernon takes out Miss Ward and Miss Franklin, and dances alternately
with them.]


Master VERNON. I am quite tired. -- Come let the French ladies dance together.


Miss THUROT. If Miss Vernon will accept an indifferent partner, I am at her
service.

[ Whilst they are settling themselves, George slyly pins a cracker on the back
of his sister's gown; just as she is doing the pas grave, at giving her second
hand, he contrives, by means of a lighted paper, to set fire to it, and it goes
off with a great bounce; she falls down in a fright, and all the rest run about
screaming; he stands and laughs most violently.]


Miss SELWYN. Indeed, cousin George, you carry your jokes to a length
infinitely beyond prudence; what have you done? my dear Cecilia suffer me to
assist you in rising, I hope you are not hurt.

[A bell rings violently.
Miss VERNON. There is my grandmamma alarmed I dare say. What account, sir,
will you give of yourself to her?


Master VERNON. I shall not trouble myself to give her any. I never heard a
cracker go off so well in my life. [ Laughs and holds his sides.]


[Enter Sally.] SALLY. What is the matter in this room, ladies? my lady is
excessively alarmed, and thinks some accident has happened.


Miss SELWYN. No person is hurt, Sally. The noise was owing to one of George's
frolicks. Pray hasten to relieve my grandmamma's fears.

[She goes out.
Miss VERNON. I wonder. Teresa, you, who are so very attentive to your old
adviser, do not go and give her an account of every thing that is past.


Miss SELWYN. If any pleasant circumstance occurred, I should certainly put
myself forward to relate it; but in the present ease, silence is best. To speak
truth would pain her; and to utter falsehood, is meanness.


Miss WARD. Well, I see no harm in deceiving an old woman. I am sure my
grandmamma does not hear above one true word in ten from me; indeed, I do not
trouble myself to talk much to her; for I hate to satisfy her tiresome
questions.


Miss THUROT. I am surprised to hear you say so, for I think she and Mrs.
Vernon are the most pleasing old ladies I ever saw, they always have such a
benignant smile, and are so condesending to young people.


Miss VERNON. The smiles of old women are, in my eyes, only sneers. But it is
the fashion to look upon our old ladies as oracles, so we must submit to the
hearing them; but further than this, I cannot go.


Miss SELWYN. Well, I own, there is something so mild and good in my
grandmamma's appearance, that when I am with her, I cannot help thinking she is
a being superior to the generality of the world.


Miss FRANKLIN. And so she is. I am sure I hear her praised wherever I go; they
say she is both wise and good.


Miss THUROT. I declare, I am never so happy as when permitted to pass a few
hours with her, and always return home with some new sentiments, collected from
her conversation, that make me wiser and better.


Master VERNON. Well, ladies, I think you are rather on a dry subject. Have you
no new plays?


Miss VERNON. I bar every thing like play in your company. You have almost
killed me with your evil tricks.


Master VERNON. So much the better; then you will never dance and sing again.


Miss SELWYN. Pray, George, recollect yourself; indeed, you forget that you
ought to protect your sister from insolence, not make her the subject of it.


Master VERNON. Well then, peace for ever, I proclaim it. Come, sister* shake
hands. I should not have thought of doing what I have done, but to please and
entertain you, because you boasted of having such uncommon spirits.


Miss VERNON. And so I have, George, if I might be permitted to indulge them. I
have not been in the garden yet since my return. and long to see the
improvements.


Miss SELWYN. We had better then go immediately, or the evening will close and
prevent us; on our return tea will be ready*


Master VERNON. I shall go and fly my kite then during your walk, for (...)
would by no means interrupt your agreeable conversation.


Miss WARD. Do as you please, sir; we are not ambitious of you^ company.


Miss VERNON. Pray do not begin with him, he seems inclined to (...) quiet, and
let us keep him so.


Master VERNON. Your servant, ladies.

[He goes out
Miss FRANKLIN. Here are our calashes. I am ready.


Miss THUROT. So are we.


Miss VERNON. We can take ours as we go through the hall.

[As they are going out, enter Sally.]
SALLY. My lady desires to see Miss Selwyn, and one of the other young ladies.


Miss VERNON. Not me, I dare say.


SALLY. No Miss, one of the visitors.


Miss FRANKLIN. May I be indulged with the honor of accompanying you, Teresa?


Miss THUROT. A little French quickness would have stood my friend now, for you
are beforehand with me Amelia.


Miss WARD. Then you had better both go. Miss Vernon and I are ready to excuse
you.


Miss VERNON. Allons done! -- Come let us hasten, or it will be dark.

[They go out.
Miss THUROT. May I take the liberty of going with you to your grandmamma's
apartment, Teresa?


Miss SELWYN. Undoubtedly; and you will make her very happy in your company.


Miss THUROT. Thus kindly encouraged, I cannot resist the opportunity of
enjoying so great a pleasure.

[They go out.
END of ACT II.
ACT III.
SCENE, the Drawing Room. The tea things set.
[Mrs. G. Vernon and Mrs. Selwyn.]
Mrs. SELWYN. I HAVE sent the dear girls in quest of their companions, and when
they return will make the (...).


Mrs. VERNON. I am in no hurry. You are not well, daughter, I fear.


Mrs. G. VERNON. My mind, dear madam, is greatly disturbed. [ She bursts into
tears.] The consequence of my strange infatuation have, I fear, quite changed
the once gentle mind of my poor Cecilia.


Mrs. VERNON. If you are convinced it wants correcting my fears abate; she is
young, and may yet be taught to overcome the prejudices of education, difficult
as I fear the task may prove; but I own, I apprehended you would be as blind to
her errors as you were to her interest, when you determined on giving her a
foreign education.


Mrs. G. VERNON. You know not, my dear mother, the misery that I now
experience, for having obstinately persevered in an opinion so fatal to my
child. O! that I alone suffered! unhappy girl! my fatal impropriety has
perverted her heart, and deprived her of those finer feelings, which are the
greatest ornaments of the female mind.


Mrs. SELWYN. Comfort yourself dear Louisa, your daughter is not old in error;
the very acquisitions she so much plumes herself upon, will only turn to her
mortification. Introduce her among amiable people; their example will show her
the absurdity of her own conceit, and teach her how trifling outward
accomplishments are, when unaccompanied by diffidence and modesty.


Mrs. VERNON. Nor will it be amiss to let her sometimes mix with young people
as improperly educated as herself. The contrast will be striking, and more
convincing than precept; she must be led by gentleness, by attentively watching
every turn of her mind, we may imperceptibly implant that solid virtue we wish
to cultivate.


Mrs. G. VERNON. I ought not to despair (...) I have such kind and able
assistants; but I do not deserve, after my miserable mismanagement, the
happiness of seeing my daughter like her cousin.


Mrs. VERNON. Subject as we all are to errors, it is our duty to excuse them.
Parents who love their children, certainly wish to fix on the properest mode of
education, and such as they think will lead them to the good they wish them to
gain. But here the parent's mind betrays the child, and the worldly minded
cannot expect such blessed effects as generally reward those who have a view to
higher considerations.


Mrs. G. VERNON. But I, madam, had better advisers, and might have escaped the
rock so plainly pointed out to me.


Mrs. VERNON. You were young, and perhaps thought an old woman's advice the
effect of age and spleen; but tha^ (...) past. Let us now endeavor to overcome
what we could not prevent. You, Louisa, must be the great actor: your daughter
will not regard the ^^monitions of her (...) and me, unless they are supported
(...) you. The first thing, therefore, you have to determine on, is steadiness;
upon no account be led to smile, or encourage any of her lively sallies, (as
she terms them,) which at best are only pe^^ness and s^^ppancy.


Mrs. SELWYN. My sister, who is so different herself, will not, I think, allow
in Cecilia such wretched meanness, by some called, wit, which consists in
ridiculing the worthy; some, because they are old; others, because they are
grave; and others, because they are ugly; to such persons, an old face, a large
nose, a wide mouth, little eyes, etc. will furnish subjects for mirth during a
whole afternoon, to those who do not consider the wickedness of remarks which
reflect on the divine hand that formed persons with these imperfections, not on
the unfortunate possessors of them.


Mrs. G. VERNON. Indeed, Charlotte, I detest such kind of conversation as much
as you can do; for it is totally inconsistent with that commendable sensibility
which ought to make a part of the female character. Persons who have a turn to
this kind of ridicule, must either be insensibly thoughtless or else cruel and
malicious.


Mrs. VERNON. Per^^less, in my opinion, is detestable. How often have I seen
low ridicule put the worthy and the diffident out of countenance, while many
stood smiling round, enjoying the jest, and the confusion it produced.


Mrs. G. VERNON. Upon those occasions frequently have I prayed, that my
children might escape such unworthy sentiments; and now, by my mode of
education, they seem to be the characteristic of them both.


Mrs. SELWYN. I am not alarmed on George's account; he has a great deal of good
sense under the roughness of a schoolboy; and I think, the scene that passed
this afternoon, which Miss Franklin really described in a very diverting
manner, will be a mean of showing Cecilia, the absurdity of her conduct.


Mrs. VERNON. Certainly; while he ridiculed his sister's folly, he showed a
distinguishing mind, for he did not attempt ridiculing any of the other young
ladies.


Mrs. G. VERNON. But surely he ought not to be encouraged in treating Cecilia
with contempt, and making her the subject of mirth to himself and friends.


Mrs. SELWYN. Undoubtedly not; we must endeavor to convince him of this
impropriety and teach him to correct it; but yet, his behavior may be made a
useful lesson to his sister.


Mrs. G. VERNON. I wish she may be prevailed on to receive it as such. -- But
alas! she seems very little disposed to avail herself of any mode of
instruction.


Mrs. SELWYN. Let us hope the best my dear sister. The follies we have this day
observed in Cecilia, show a perverted understanding, it must be owned, but do
not prove that she has a ^ad heart. I wish much to know whether she has escaped
perversion in a very material point -- I mean Religion. -- The danger in this
respect, has all along appeared to me so great, that I could never think of it
without horror.


Mrs. VERNON. It is a subject we must at least for a time avoid talking upon to
her, though of infinitely the greatest consequence; our own attention will soon
enable us to make every requisue observation, and instruct us in the best
methods to pursue.


Mrs. G. VERNON. I shudder to reflect on what a precipice my beloved Cecilia
stands. O, that my prayers may avail to avert this most poignant misfortune! I
must enter upon the subject as soon as possible, for I am all anxiety to know
what my child is.


Mrs. SELWYN. Keep up your spirits, however my dear sister; you must have all
your thoughts about you, and endeavor to take the lead in every conversation
at which Cecilia is present.


Mrs. G. VERNON. I will certainly follow your advice, and study to retrieve my
past errors. Wonderful! that I should persist for seven years in one which
deprived me of my greatest joy and comfort; for never mother loved a child more
than I do my Cecilia; and, but for what I thought her advantage, she should
never have been out of my sight. Often have I envied you, sister, in having
Tere^a with you, and should certainly have sent for my daughter, but that a
false shame restrained me from it; though I always dreaded, as much as longed,
for her teturn.


Mrs. VERNON. I think, daughter, the expense of education abroad is nearly as
much as at home; and if so, what reason can there be for banishing a child so
many years?


Mrs. G. VERNON. Indeed, madam, Cecilia's education has cost me even more than
it would have done in England. The first year the demands for it were moderate,
and according to the agreement I made; but they have increased since more that
I wish to own; for this confession only adds to the inexcufeableness of my
conduct. The superior of the convent, solemnly engaged to leave her free in
respect to religion; but disappointed as I am in other respects, I can have
little hopes that her mind remains untainted in this particular.


Mrs. SELWYN [moves to the tea table.] I hear the voices of the young people,
and will therefore prepare for them.


Mrs. VERNON. Do, my dear, perhaps during tea we may draw from Cecilia opinions
that will instruct us for our future proceedings.


[ Enter Miss Selwyn, Miss Franklin, and Miss Thurot.] Mrs. SELWYN. Are you
come alone, ladies?


Miss SELWYN. We could not find my cousin and Miss Ward; but as we entered the
house heard their voices and George's very loud by the filbert hedge.


Mrs. VERNON. They are coming. I hear a strange noise.

[ Enter Master Vernon with a handful of false hair in one hand, dragging in
his sister with the other, her cap off, her curls unpinned, and hanging about
her ears, and she in tears, Miss Ward follows taking her part.] Master Vernon [
laughing, and holding up the false hair.


Master VERNON. Look here! I have found her out! I knew, all that immense head
could not belong to one person.


Miss VERNON. Am I not to find protection any where? rescue me, I beseech you,
dear mamma, from this cruel boy.


Mrs. G. VERNON [separates them.] For shame, George, is this the treatment due
from a brother to a sister? you who should protect her from the insolence of
others, instead of setting such an example. What would your wortly father say,
if he could look out of his grave, and see his representative acting so
differently from what he himself would do?


Master VERNON. I did not mean to hurt her, but she would not own her having
false hair, so I was determined to find it out, and I discovered her nicely.


Mrs. VERNON. It is in vain to reason with you, sir; but you shall go to school
tomorrow, and never come home till you have learnt to behave with more
propriety. Your sister's foibles, however great, ought not to be subjects for
ridicule, but pity, to her nearest relations.


Master VERNON. Well, I am sure, she spares none of her relations; for they all
have their turn to be laughed at.


Mrs. VERNON. I am sorry to hear she is capable of so much giddiness. If she
did set you the example, George, she has suffered sufficiently for it and I am
concerned; to find that as you had discernment enough to distinguish how
unamiable it was in her, you had not sufficient prudence to prevent your
falling into the (...) error. [ During this conversation, the young ladies
adjust Miss Vernon' s dress.]


Miss VERNON. I am sure my brother has tormented me ever since I entered this
house. I think it is very hard I cannot find peace at home.


Mrs. SELWYN. Indeed it is, my poor Cecilia; nor can I think you could deserve
such treatment by any expressions of your own.


Miss VERNON, [looks ashamed.] Whatever I have said, aunt, was only in jest.


Master VERNON. Well it was the same with me. I meant no harm, only a little
diversion.


Mrs. VERNON. You have both been extremely to blame; and your punishment,
Cecilia, though inflicted by a wrong person, is such as may show you the
impropriety of that low mean opinion, which leads you, when in the ridiculing
vein, to spare neither friend nor relation.


Miss VERNON. It is very hard, mamma, that I must not speak a word, but my
brother will repeat it to my disadvantage.


Mrs. G. VERNON. Say nothing improper, and you need not fear a repetition of
it. Do by others as you would have them do by you, and you will no longer be
guilty of a fault that must tender your company unpleasant to every one.


Miss VERNON. La! mamma, one cannot be expected to think at my age as you do. I
often speak without any meaning at all.


Mrs. VERNON. And by that mean wound where you should be kind. The tricks your
brother has played you he did unthinkingly; yet you do not accept that excuse
from him as a compensation.


Miss VERNON. No, certainly, because he hurt me, and made me appear absurd,
before company.


Mrs. VERNON. Yet you can with pleasure, by flippancy, put the modest out of
countenance, merely because they are without the same talents to retort.


Miss VERNON. I never thought about it before, nor was I ever corrected upon
the subject, but was always encouraged by my companions to make them laugh.


Mrs. VERNON. You have more excuse than any of these young ladies could have
for the same sault, because you have been deprived of good advisers; but I hope
to convince you, how very disagreeable such kind of low wit must render you.

[ Miss Ward appears confused.]


Miss VERNON. But you will allow grandmamma, that the natural fiveliness of
young people may sometimes lead them to say and do things they ought not.


Mrs. VERNON. I make every allowance for the inexperience and volatility of
youth; but when a fault proceeds from an unfeeling heart, it is, in my eyes,
unpardonable; and I have no idea that a person of a good disposition can, at
any age, take pleasure in putting another out of countenance, merely for
thinking they have said a good thing. As one of my favorite author's says,
Young's Universal Passion,


"Who for the poor renown of being smart,
"Would leave a sting within another's heart?"

Mrs. SELWYN. George, give the ladies their tea; you shall wait upon us this
afternoon.

[ Master Vernon hands the tea.]
Master VERNON. I am very happy to be employed; and what is more, I am sorry
for my behavior to my sister, and will never act so again to any one. I had no
design to be ill-natured, though it appeared that I had. [ He goes to her, and
takes her hand very affectionately.] Come Cecilia, you must forgive me.


Miss VERNON. Most cordially, George, and I thank you for your excuses. I am
quite ashamed of my own conduct, which drew upon me your censure.


Master VERNON. Indeed, Cecilia, without a jest, you do not appear half so well
as these other young ladles. I should not find fault with you if you were like
them.


Miss VERNON. Well, sir, you need not begin again.


Mrs. G. VERNON, [interrupting her.] Now I must take my son's part. He has
indeed given you most excellent advice. Your spirits appear assumed and not
natural. Some young people are livelier than others; and, when it is the bent
of their dispositions, their liveliness is very pleasing; but you Cecilia, when
a child were always grave; your present mode of conduct does not, therefore,
sit easy upon you.


Miss VERNON. [after a pause.] My dear mamma, I will confess my inward mind to
you. I was so unhappy in the convent, that had I not assumed this frivolous
manner of behavior I should have fretted myself to death. You were too distant
to hear my complaints. I was not permitted to write to you. Habit familiarised
nonsense; and I thought it right on my return to appear as I had done abroad,
that I might be unlike every one bred in England. I shall endeavor to resume
my natural temper, though your instruction will be necessary to remind me when
I forget myself.

Mrs. G. Vernon [ looks delighted, and takes her hand.]


Mrs. G. VERNON. With pleasure I accept the office you appoint, and will be
your monitor on all necessary occasions.


Mrs. VERNON. Come, and let me embrace my beloved child, the dear offspring of
an excellent son. Your last speech has given me a joy I little expected to feel
from your late appearance. [ They embrace and shed tears.]


Mrs. SELWYN. I too must share these caresses, and tell my dear Cecilia, I love
her with a mother's fondness.


Mrs. G. VERNON. Had you been her mother she would not have been thrown on such
rocks as I placed in her way; but she is rescued from them, for which I return
my unfeigned thanks where due.


Miss SELWYN. I hope my dear consin, you will now love me as well as ever, and
let us henceforth be friends and sisters.


Miss VRENON. That I will, my dear Teresa, and with joy accept your kind
invitation; though I own, with blushes, the hope of out-doing you, made me
purchase that false hair which produced my shame, and now my happiness.


Miss WARD. Do not blame yourself, or your education too (...) dear Miss
Vernon, since you are kindly pardoned. I have always practiced the same
flippancy; but from this moment will endeavor to divest myself of it, and will
never treat my grandmamma improperly again.


Mrs. SELWYN. An excellent resolution my dear, and I doubt not your keeping it.
We will have the tea equipage removed, and then proceed to something more like
amusen^^^ than the past conversation has been. [ The bell is rung, a footman
enters, and goes out with the tea things.


Miss FRANKLI^. I cannot wish for any entertainment that deprives us of the
instruction which the conversation of the present company, always conveys, in
which I learn sentiments I hope never to forget.


Miss THUROT. I always lament losing a moment which might be so well spent.


Mrs. VERNON. You are very polite young ladies, with such a disposition your
society will be desirable to people of all ages. But there is time for all
things. Youth is the season for gaiety; enjoy it properly, only act with
discretion; then you may look forward to a peaceable old age, unembittered by
regret for misspent time.


Miss THUROT. Pray, Miss Vernon, did you go to m^ss?


Miss VERNON. Not constantly; but I sometimes went, and was forced to attend
all hours of devotion in the convent, except in the night, those I was excused
from.


Mrs. G. VERNON, [in an agitation.] And how did you like it?


Mrs. G. VERNON, [ in an agitation.] (...) how did you like it?


Miss VERNON. I was pleased with the solemnity of their worship; and still I
must confess, my dear mamma, that I rather feel a bias toward a religion
which, notwithstanding the promises that were made to you to the contrary,
those who had the care of my education took so much pains to inculcate; and had
it not been for the urgent desire I felt ^o return to England, I certainly
should have professed myself a Roman Catholic; but I knew I should by this mean
cut myself off from my family and dearest connections, therefore, resolved to
resist all importunities; and the levity of conduct which I assumed, (though
highly blameable) was thus far serviceable to me, that it selt me little time
to attend to any serious subject; for, except during the time of divine
service, and whilst I was re^^iving grave lectures, I seldom thought on
religion at all.


Mrs. G. VERNON. What a fortunate escape have you had. Oh, how my heart
reproaches me for the danger I have exposed you to!


Mrs. VERNON. Do not, my dear daughter, afflict yourself too much for an error,
which, I trust, is not irreparable. I hope, from the comparison which Cecilia,
now she is of an age to distinguish, will be able to make between our rational
service and the unmeaning pageantry of the Romish Church, she will easily
incline to give preference to the former; and that we shall be able to
eradicate the false prejudices she has unhappily imbibed.


Miss VERNON. Indeed, my dear grandmamma, I will with pleasure attend to the
instructions of you and the rest of my good friends. -- I am very ignorant, but
I yield myself to your guidance.


Mrs. VERNON. Your friends will have pleasure in the task; and I am thankful
that you have but little more than ignorance to overcome. How much worse might
it not have been?


Mrs. G. VERNON. In the (...) of my bitter regret, a happy prospect persents
itself before me. Your advice, dear mother shall in future have its due
influence with me, and, I hope wi^h mine; and may Heaven great you length of
days for your comfort!


Mrs. VERNON. Whilst my life is spared, I wish to make is as useful as
possible. But, whenever I go, there is no fear but your good sense, which
enables you to perceive your late error, will keep you in the path you should
tread in, as much for your own sake, as for these dear children's whose guide
you must be.


Master VERNON. I do not know what ails me, but I am ready to ^ry; and am sorry
for having been at times so pert to all my relations.


Mrs. SELWYN. Well said, my dear boy, a fault handsomely acknowledged claims
forgiveness, and I doubt not, your proving as great a comfort to us all as our
beloved Cecilia.


Master VERNON. Thank you aunt, for your good opinion. Desire mamma to let me
have two or three holidays, and I will not for a long time intrude on her
goodness.


Mrs. G. VERNON. Upon that condition I grant your request; I like to indulge
you, George, but must keep you more strictly to your learning, for I fear
coming home so often has interfered with your Greek and Latin.


Master VERNON. Not very much, mamma. But, indeed, I will take more pains
in^^uture.


Mrs. SELWYN. By way of composing our spirits, what say you to a few minutes?
our footman plays a decent fiddle; he is in the hall.


Mrs. G. VERNON. I am obliged to you for the proposal, sister, and hope my dear
mother will give the young people an applauding smile.


Mrs. VERNON. With pleasure. Only to avoid catching cold I will sit in my
little parlour and look through the glass door at them.


Mrs. SELWYN. Go then, my dears, and see that every thing is in readiness, and
desire John to rosin his bow, for I think you will exercise it. [ The young
people all go out.


Mrs. G. VERNON. What an undeservedly happy woman am I! and how has this blessed
hour relieved my heart from agony too great to be long endured!


Mrs. VERNON. Your future attention to your children's welfare will, I hope,
enfure you a continuance of your present happy prospects, and bless us in their
rising virtues.


Mrs. SELWYN. We ought with heartfelt thankfulness to acknowledge, that all
our present comfort arises from the overruling hand of Providence; which alone
preserved our dear child from absolute perversion. But let not any parent be
encouraged from hence to expose theirs to the same temptation, as they cannot
know what the event may be.


Mrs. VERNON. Though this dear child had not been entirely neglected in her
infancy from an idea of her being too young to receive religious instructions,
yet what might have become of her when transported into a foreign land, before
any good principle ^iad taken root in her mind?


[ Enter a Footman.] FOOTMAN. Every thing is ready madam, and the ladies beg me
tell you they are impatient to begin.


Mrs. G. VERNON. We will attend them immediately. [Footman goes out.] Come,
dear mother and sister, let me lead you to a scene of innocent festivity.


Mrs. VERNON. With inexpressible delight do I accompany you, and am thankful
that I have lived to see this day, in which my family are again collected, and
my fears for one dear branch of it happily removed.

[ They lead Mrs. Vernon out
THE END.

