LETTERS, ADDRESSED TO THE YEOMANRY of the UNITED STATES: Showing the necessity
of confining the Public Revenue to a fixed proportion of the net produce of the
Land; and the bad Policy and Injustice of every species of indirect Taxation
and Commercial regulations.

BY A FARMER.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by ELEAZER OSWALD, in Market-street, No. 156, between
Fourth and Fifth-streets. M,DCC,XCI.

LETTERS, ADDRESSED TO THE YEOMANRY of the UNITED STATES.
LETTER I.
THE present situation of your domestic concerns, and the fituation of public
affairs in general, loudly call for your attention: It is time that you should
know what comforts you are to enjoy, what rights you have to defend.

The laws of nature are sufficiently promulgated by that necessity which has
occasioned them, by the benefit man receives in observing them, and the evils
he suffers by their infraction. Governments are instituted to support the laws
of nature, and not by the arbitrary decrees of men to violate them. These
truths, although so obvious and simple, that no person can be ignorant of them,
yet it is necessary that they should be premised in order to establish the
principles upon which men enter into civil society.

The least acquaintance with the order of sciences evidences that it is by the
most simple truths that men attain the knowledge of those which are less
evident. Thus in geometry, it is necessary to begin by learning that the whole
is greater than any of its parts, that things which are equal to the same are
equal to one another, and other truths which children know, but the use of
which is necessary for penetrating into other truths which are not so clear.

To discover the origin of government it is not necessary that we should have
recourse to the vague opinions of the scholiasts, or to the contradictory
accounts of civilians: A careful investigation into the nature of man,
manifests that it is the intention of the Creator of the world that he should
live in society. His sensations, his faculties, his wants in childhood and in
old age, render this state necessary. Man thus united in society, is not left
to the arbitrary and capricious decrees of men; but, with every other part of
the creation, has laws ordained by GOD for his government: these laws are
simple and evident; they have their foundation in the reciprocal duties men owe
to each other, and their rights arising from such duties.

On whatever side we turn our eyes, we see nothing in nature which is not
governed by laws proper to its existence, and which is not organized in a
manner to obey such laws, to acquire every succor which is agreeable to the
nature of its being, or necessary to its mode of existence, Man is not
neglected by his Creator; the gifts which to him are particular, and which give
him the empire of the world, manifest that happiness and prosperity are
designed for him, and an order proper to ensure him the enjoyment of them. --
Therefore, we must regard society as being the work of GOD himself, and the
laws constituting the social order as making part of the universal and
immutable laws of the creation. In support of this opinion, man is found in
every part of the world connected with his fellow creatures upon principles of
government more or less perfect, according to the situation of the country, and
the number of its inhabitants, where the natural produce of the earth affords a
sufficient support for its few inhabitants, and the gratification of their
wants does not depend on the assistance of men, but arises from the bountiful
gifts of GOD; the social tie is the weakest imaginable. Men depending on wild
animals taken in chase, or on sish for their support, having a right in the
game they take, as the just reward of their exertions and industry, and also in
their bows and arrows, and other personal property, they are stronger united in
society than the last; but even in this state, the society as a body does not
revenge the injuries which any individual may sustain, as every man is supposed
capable of defending his person and the small property immediately connected
with it.

In the pastoral life, the mark of government is still stronger; here you have
master and servant and some degree of subordination.

But whenever the population of a country becomes so great as to render the
cultivation of the soil necessary for the support of its inhabitants, then a
sirm, established government becomes equally necessary to support each
individual citizen in the right of soil, and the advantages and prosits arising
from his labor.

Considering Agriculture then, as forming the basis of regular government; it
is proper that every citizen engaged in this most honorable, and most useful
employ, should be acquainted with that chain of practical truths, which
constitutes the order of laws the most advantageous to men united in society:
These are comprised under regulations or ordinances, most favorable to the
cultivation of the land, in which the interest of all is concerned, and to
which the increase of every good is united.

Convinced of the dependence of civil society upon Agriculture, and that the
population, the prosperity and the happiness of a country is in a direct ratio
to the cultivation of the earth; it becomes the interest, it becomes the duty
of the farmers of the United States, to procure a system of laws favorable to
this divine science. Under this happy situation of public affairs the rights
and duties of men would be known: justice and the energy of government, would
be firmly united together for the protection of the liberty of every citizen;
and your property, after having once contributed to the support of government
by an equal direct tax, would become perfectly free, without being subject to
unjust commercial regulations.

The independent yeomanry of England are almost annihilated, owing to a
destructive lethargy having taken place amongst them respecting their rights --
The gentlemen in that country, living independent on their own estates, have
always been duped, by men much more active and connected than themselves, into
the belief that to grant the demands of the commercial and manufacturing
classes, was the best way of promoting their own interest -- The farmer, after
paying one tenth of the produce of his labor to the clergy, two or three more
tenths to the government, and a very heavy tax for the support of a numerous
poor, rendered so by large manufacturing towns: after this weight of taxes, the
free sale of the remainder of his produce is restricted to satisfy the avarice
of merchants and manufacturers.

A freeman should examine every act of government for himself; for, however
disinterested, however virtuous the men entrusted with the legislative
authority; yet if they are ignorant of the dependence of civil society upon the
physical order of cultivation, their administration will produce nothing but
arbitrary, mutable, and contradictory laws -- Statesmen and lawyers have
greatly contributed to involve the rights of men as connected in civil society
into a labyrinth of error, inverting the order of nature, and, in the place of
establishing government upon the simple principles of justice, using every
artifice to render the science of politics impenetrable to the people, wishing
to attract the admiration of an ignorant populace by mysterious, and obscure
oracles, rather than enlighten the minds of free citizens by substantial and
immutable truths.

Nor is it any matter of astonishment that Lawyers should be ignorant of the
fundamental principles of government: All the sciences have been rendered
obscure by the pretended teachers of them. The history of medicine, and of
philosophy in general, support this assertion. Even the Christian religion
itself is so greatly altered from its original purity and simplicity, that was
the holy founder of it now to appear on earth, he would scarcely be
acknowledged by the ostentatious professors of his own doctrines. Mankind in
general continue in error, because the guides on whom they depend, being
themselves unacquainted with truth, are incapable of instructing others, and
therefore only inculcate such false principles as they are infested with.
Knowledge must be acquired by experience and reflection, by which means alone
we are enabled to distinguish substantial, permanent good, from transitory
pleasure.

The science of political economy in no instance is subject to uncertainty, but
a pleasing uniformity is discoverable in every part of it. To engage the
learned in the belief of a new science may be difficult, and still more
difficult to render them so humble as to study its elements. Wisdom frequently
inspires us with a confidence in the knowledge acquired, and makes us
suspicious of novelties. Men, who have dedicated great part of their lives to
ancient and modern learning, will not easily be persuaded that the ancients
were ignorant of the essential truths of political economy; and that the
moderns, who have acquired so much useful knowledge in philosophy, should be
unacquainted with the best system of promoting the happiness of men united in
society. Yet this is really the case, and the world is alone indebted to a few
enlightened men in France for this important discovery.

This subject merits your most serious attention, having no less an object in
view than establishing a government founded in justice. The sublime
satisfaction which you will experience in being the authors of public good, and
of seeing thousands of your fellow citizens happy in living under your
administration, will be your ample reward.

It is to you alone that the people of the United States can look -- it is to
you alone that they ought to look, for protection and support. Men of weak
judgments and little reflection, regard the Farmers merely as laborers, who
raise wheat or other grain for the sustenance of men; but they appear ignorant
that it is the Farmers alone who furnish every other class of citizens with the
means of paving their expenses, and on whose success depends the prosperity of
the state.

The necessity of a perfect knowledge with political economy, and the high
station which you hold in civil society, should engage you to dedicate part of
your leisure to the study of this science -- a science evidently of the first
importance, because it brings us near to GOD himself, by engaging us to promote
the general prosperity and happiness of mankind. Removed from the noise and
bustle of a great city, and accustomed to reflection, you are well qualified to
become acquainted with truth, by means of strict examination.

Being yourselves convinced of the existence of a natural order, intended by
the Creator of the Universe for the purpose of promoting the happiness of men
united in society: For you to be silent or inactive on this important subject,
would be criminal. Although you may not at present have sufficient influence to
dissipate the thick clouds of political ignorance, with which our country is
surrounded, or to stop the unjust measures of government; yet you may expect to
see that day, when your fellow-citizens in general will be convinced of the
justice of these salutary principles; and admitting their insluence over every
department of government, we shall experience a happy revolution in our laws,
and in our manners, by which means our country will become the seat of justice
and of peace. Experience, reflection and truth, must open the eyes of men, and
will dictate those measures most proper for them to adopt. For whenever public
affairs are directed by mere opinion, they are always fluctuating, inadequate
and unjust. Tyrants, governed by opinion, believe that their happiness and
reputation consist in destructive wars, in parade, and in expense; and your
Legislators, governed by mere opinion, think it necessary that the commerce of
your country should be restricted by oppressive and embarrassing regulations,
equally unjust and impolitic. When a people are inattentive to the fundamental
principles of their original compact, or to the conduct of those men entrusted
with the supreme power of the state, they must expect that the prosperity and
happiness of the community will be continually sacrificed to the ambition and
avarice of a few.

There are no people more submissive to their government than the Chinese,
because they are well instructed in the reciprocal duties of the sovereign, and
of the people, and are watchful that these duties are not violated on either
side.

You have hitherto been equally submissive to your government, but you have not
been equally attentive to the conduct of your officers entrusted with the
administration of it; and yet there are men among you who are anxious for a
more efficient government, in order to render the people still more submissive.
-- Such characters should reflect, that a time may come when reason will find
the minds of our citizens disposed to hear, and will determine them to do
themselves justice. A wise Legislature will distinguish between the approbation
of their constituents, and the indignant silence or lethargy of a free people.

LETTER II.
THE particular terms made use of in the investigation of any science, should
have clear and determined ideas affixed to them. By political economy is to be
understood, that natural order appointed by the Creator of the Universe, for
the purpose of promoting the happiness of men in united society. This science
is supported by the physical order of cultivation, calculated to render the
soil the most productive possible; and by the sacred moral principle of doing
unto others as we would have others to do unto us -- The first is necessary to
the maintenance and existence of civil society -- the last, equally necessary
to ensure its prosperity.

In the propagation of this blessed doctrine, you must expect to be opposed by
the ignorant, proud, and all those indolent characters among you who are
anxious for lucrative offices in government, that they may be supported by the
labor of their fellow-citizens. You will be told by these wretched disciples of
Machiavel, Hobbs and Spinosa, that the natural state of man is that of a savage
animal, perpetually at war with his fellow creatures; that it is force alone
which renders him submissive to government; and that self-interest constantly
engages him to take the advantage of his neighbors by force or stratagem -- A
most horrid system, which authorizes every species of outrage and injustice,
and from the adoption of which it necessarily follows, that every man in civil
society must be either master or slave, oppressor or oppressed; and to preserve
himself from destruction, must be constantly employed in the ruin of others.
The error of these men arises from their want of reflection, and consequently
mistaking a momentary interest for a solid, permanent good, dictated by reason.

The same Great Being who created man for the purposes of his own glory, has
also appointed an order of conduct, calculated to conciliate the interests of
men united in society, not merely by assuring to each individual his own
safety, without usurping the rights of others, but by making the proportion of
every man's happiness to depend upon his benevolence and services to others.

Men, thus united in society, and forming a distinct government, must naturally
wish that such government should possess great riches, great authority, and
great power. The only possible means of acquiring this situation, depends upon
a strict observance of the physical order of cultivation -- When the supreme
power of the state, considering itself as a partner entitled to receive only a
just portion of the net proceeds of the land, secures and protects the Farmer
in the free disposal of the remainder.

The sovereign power which thinks it has the right of commanding, and wishes to
enjoy the power of making itself obeyed, should at the same time comply with
its duty in doing nothing but for the general good of the society, and securing
to every individual the full enjoyment of those natural rights, to secure which
men enter into civil society, and put themselves under the protection of
government,

The reciprocal rights and duties of the people, and of the sovereign,
constitutes substantial justice. In considering this subject one point should
be attended to, which is, that in every government the duty of the sovereign
power, in acting consistent with the safety of the people, always preceeds its
right of demanding obedience; whilst, on the contrary, between individuals,
every man's duty of serving his fellow-citizens, precedes his right of
expecting any benefit or attention from them. The justice and necessity of
these fundamental laws must appear evident to every person in the least
acquainted with the situation of men in society; they naturally arise from that
situation, and owe nothing to legislative authority, or express contract.

An ignorance or neglect of these salutary principles of political economy,
must occasion the whole administration of that extensive government which you
have adopted, to be wavering and unjust; and your representatives being too far
removed from the instructions of their constituents, will think that their own
hasty opinion or caprice should be the ruling principle of legislation. But the
yeomanry of the United States will certainly never suffer themselves to be
reduced to that abject state of servility as to believe that thousands of
freemen should be subject to the arbitrary opinion of the few; or that the
people owe every submission to government, whilst that government is only
devoted to support the luxury or ambition of its officers.

A Legislature unprovided with any fixed rule of conduct in the exercise of its
power, must constantly be subject to the caprice of the moment. You should
therefore impress the minds of your servants in Congress with the just
principles of political economy -- an attention to which will guard them
against the infatuation of power, the projects of ambition, or any false ideas
of glory, connected with the extravagance and parade of a court. This duty is
more particularly necessary at a time when your country is just at the
commencement of a new and important era, and when too many of your
fellow-citizens, infatuated with the false principles of the government of
Great Britain, are anxious to adopt her wretched system of policy. To divide
the interest of the people appears to be a fundamental maxim of that
government; and therefore it is constantly engaged in making laws to regulate
its agriculture, its commerce, and its manufactures; and thus, by sacrificing
the interests of one class of citizens to another. jealousies and animosities
are created among them. In the place of doing substantial justice to her
industrious farmers, manufacturers, and mechanics, by admitting a free disposal
of the produce of their labor and ingenuity, the country is overwhelmed with
commercial regulations, in order to secure a monopoly of the carrying-trade to
her own merchants, and to support a very expensive navy; although the real
advantage of either, have never been clearly ascertained. -- From hence also
the exclusion of strangers from her ports, prohibitory impositions, reprisals,
jealousies of commerce, quarrels, and, in fine, the most destructive wars, to
support measures, the contrary of which would be the true interest of that
country.

Every unprejudiced citizen must allow, that the total freedom of commerce,
without any restrictions whatever, will be one of the principle means of
promoting the prosperity of our country. In this great question you should take
a decided part; and as you wish to support the general interest of the
community, you should exert yourselves to expose and suppress the false
principles of those men who wish to make their fortunes by monopolies and
intrigue; and whose projects of opulence are ever founded upon the ruin of the
people.

LETTER III.
THE Legislators of a free people, influenced by the just principles of
political economy, will look only to the land for a source of revenue. Thus
science maniests the truth of the following axioms, beyond the possibility of a
doubt.

1st: The earth is naturally fruitful.

2d. The earth is not sufficiently productive for the support of civil society
without cultivation.

3d. The earth is the only source of those things necessary to the existence of
men.

4th. The earth being the only productive fund, the cultivation of the earth is
the only productive employ.

5th. Every other kind of work which has for its object the preparation,
alteration, or transport of such productions may be more or less necessary, but
they are not productive.

6th. No work can be executed without expense; this expense consists in the
support of its agents, and in the collection and preservation of the
instruments nenessary to such work.

There exists then two kinds of work, the one productive -- the other
unproductive. They equally require the expense of subsistence, but whilst the
one is creative, the other only replaces the actual consumption of subsistence.

The cultivation of the land being the only productive employ, it consequently
does not merely pay the expense of subsistence, but also furnishes a surplus,
more or less considerable, according to the ability or independent situation of
the Farmer.

It is the interest of the government, and of every class of citizens, that
this surplus should be the greatest possible.

Because it affords the only just revenue to the state:

Because, in proportion to the net produce of the land, will be the
encouragement and comfortable support of useful mechanics and manufacturers:

Because, the greater this produce, the greater will be the employ and profit
of the merchant.

In fine, the whole community, from the most dignified character, to the
poorest beggar, are all benefitted by the full cultivation of the earth.

As the prosperity and happiness of every individual in civil society depends
upon Agriculture; and as it is the interest of all, that Agriculture should be
the most productive possible, it is the duty of all to encourage and promote
it. This must be accomplished by devoting large sums of money to those previous
expenses necessary to making the land fertile.

The expenses which are necessary to obtain an annual production from the land,
by cultivation, are of two sorts: primitive expenses, which consist in the
purchase of instruments of husbandry, horses, oxen, and other animals necessary
on a well regulated farm; and annual expenses, which consists in the support of
the Farmer, his family, and stock, from one harvest to the other: besides
which, 10 per cent. upon the primitive expenses should be annually deducted
from the gross produce of the farm, to replace the stock, instruments of
husbandry, etc. which require renovation at least every ten years.

The quantity of the net produce of Agriculture depends upon the primitive
expense; when the fund is inadequate to the full cultivation of the soil; the
annual expenses of every kind being deducted leaves but a small surplus; and
therefore, the greater the fund, the better will be the cultivation, and the
greater will be the profit to the farmer, and to the state.

The gross produce of Agriculture naturally divides itself into two portions,
one of which should be held sacred to discharge every expense necessary to the
full cultivation of the soil; the remainder, forming the great mass of wealth
of the community, is distributed among the citizens according to their industry
and merit. And as this surplus arising from Agriculture is the only real wealth
of a government, it follows, that a nation cannot spend annually more than its
annual income, without destroying itself. The subsequent works to cultivation
do not multiply the riches of a state, nor extend its power of supporting
expense; they are certainly very necessary, and very useful, but they are
unproductive.

The quantity of the net produce arising from cultivation depends not only upon
the quantity of the annual produce, but also on its value; when this is low, a
greater proportion of the gross produce is required to pay the necessary
expenses of cultivation, and therefore the surplus remaining must be smaller.
As it is the interest of every class of citizens, and of the government itself,
that the produce of the land should be the greatest possible, so it is equally
the interest of all, that such produce should bear the greatest possible price,
by means of a perfect free commerce.

Ambitious Statesmen, and those contemptible wretches who are seeking to be
supported by the public revenue, will endeavor to persuade you, That by imposts
laid on the necessaries and conveniences of life, the burden of supporting
your government will be more equally divided amongst the citizens -- that such
taxes being optional they are most consistent with the independent spirit of
freemen -- and that the revenue arising from the consumption of the articles
taxed, the acquiring of it is attended with less delay and difficulty than by a
direct tax.

Instructed in the just principles of political economy, you certainly will not
suffer yourselves to be deceived by such sophistry.

As all the private and public wealth of a country arises from the land, the
revenue necessary for the support of government can only be derived from the
proprietors and farmers; therefore, every indirect tax, however circuitous,
must finally flow from the same source. You can gain no possible advantage from
indirect taxes upon articles of consumption, but on the contrary must suffer a
very considerable loss -- The mechanic -- the manufacturer -- the merchant, and
every other class of citizens to whom you may have occasion to pay wages, will
make their charges in proportion to the duties they pay to the government: All
such expenses being deducted from the gross produce of your farms, must
diminish that surplus which constitutes your wealth, and in proportion to which
you should pay a revenue to the state for protection. Such charges may become
so great as to eat up the whole produce of your industry, particularly where
the soil is not very rich and fertile. In this situation you may be regarded as
slaves to support the pageantry of government, but cannot be esteemed freemen,
acquiring property for yourselves.

With respect to the second position -- that indirect taxes being optional,
they are most consistent with the independent spirit of freemen -- it is a
principle that no just or wise government will adopt. The tax which each
individual is bound to pay, ought to be certain -- the time and manner of
payment, and the quantity to be paid, ought all to be clear and plain to the
contributor. Where it is otherwise, and it is left to the option of every
person to contribute what sum he pleases to the necessary expenses of the
state, disorder must pervade the most important department of government, and
the public revenue will be in a situation of uncertainty never to be depended
on. Besides, a free citizen of a republic will not wish to enjoy the protection
of a government without contributing his just proportion toward its support.

An unjust and oppressive tax may be acquired from a free people without much
difficulty, by laying a duty or excise upon articles of consumption, in which
case the purchaser thinks he is only paying the price of the commodity, whilst
in fact he is paying a heavy tax. Such a system of deception may be well
calculated for an aristocracy, where a few haughty and deluded men are in the
habit of violating the rights of their fello-citizens, and hold themselves
unaccountable for the expenditure of the public revenue -- But is it safe for a
republic of freemen to be indifferent with respect to their finances? An
enlightened people, wishing to preserve the liberty of their country, will
cheerfully submit to their duty in contributing to the necessary expenses of
government, but at the same time will contend for their rights, in having the
revenue strictly appropriated to the just demands of the state, and not wasted
in supporting the parade or extravagance of the servants of the people, or in
bribery and corruption.

In whatever manner a tax is taken, it is not a matter of indifference to the
prosperity of the country. A tax should take out of the pockets of the citizens
as little as possible over and above what it brings into the public treasury of
the state. Indirect taxes upon articles of consumption, in proportion to what
they bring into the public treasury, take from the people more than any other
tax, by the number of revenue officers necessary to carry the system into
execution, whose salaries and perquisites are a real tax upon the people.
However plausible these taxes may appear, they conceal a hidden poison, which
is continually preying upon the industrious part of the community. De Wit
observes, that the Dutch taxes upon consumption, raised the price of their
broad cloth 40 per cent. Britain has long labored under the same distemper,
which, by excluding her from foreign markets, will put an end to her
manufactures. Nothing supports them at present but the immense capitals
invested in them, and the great perfection to which they have brought machinery
to aid and facilitate the work. The agriculture and infant manufactures of your
country must suffer a similar fate, if the labor of the poor is to be enhanced
by duties on salt and other necessary articles.

LETTER IV.
AS the earth is the only source of private and public wealth, it is evident
that the revenue should be determined by the immutable principles of justice,
being strictly confined to a certain proportion of the produce of the earth,
after the deduction of every necessary expense of the proprietor or farmer. The
full cultivation of the soil, and the real interest of society, depends upon
this arrangement. It therefore cannot be violated by government with impunity.
The laborer, the mechanic, the manufacturer, and every other class of citizens,
occupied in the service of the Farmer, ought not to be subject to a capitation
tax, or to any indirect tax upon the necessaries or conveniences of life. These
occupations, however useful or agreeable, yet not being productive of any real
wealth, every charge and expense to which they are subject must be reimbursed
by the Farmer. If these principles are not well founded, then civil society can
exist independent of the produce of the land, or cultivation, which is
impossible.

The history of all nations bears testimony that it is for want of looking to
their true interest that so many governments pursue an unjust system of
sinance, founded upon indirect taxes; being influenced by the caprice of the
moment, without any regard to futurity. Such governments not only direct every
public measure, but also interfere in the most minute actions of their
citizens: But as such power is seldom exercised consistent with the strict
principles of justice, it becomes oppressive, constantly violating the rights,
the liberties and prosperity of the people. The ravages of such governments may
be discovered in every quarter of the world: Its direful effects may be traced
in the poverty, in the inactivity, and in the depopulated state of all
countries which have experienced its fury. Why at the present day do we find
people living in the most wretched misery, although inhabiting countries which
by industry would afford them every convenience to render them happy and
comfortable? Why are they deprived of useful manufactures, or necessary arts?
Is the climate or soil of Egypt, of Greece, of Italy, and many other countries,
now languishing in a state of misery, changed? or, must we not rather attribute
this astonishing alteration to the despotism of their governments, which has
frustrated the most bountiful gifts of nature. Such tyrants, influenced by a
puerile pride, attached to their own persons, and having no idea of real
grandeur, connected with the general prosperity of the people, are contented to
govern countries almost depopulated, and which present to the traveller the
remains of a former prosperity and population, contrasted with the distressing
appearance of present misery and wretchedness. The negligence and the
extravagance of unjust governments have in this manner changed the most
flourishing and populous countries into deserts. The land, abandoned by the
cultivator, frequently occasions famines, followed by contagion. All countries
become healthy in proportion to their cultivation; they are not cultivated but
in proportion to their population; they are not populous but in proportion to
the prosperity, the ease and liberty of their inhabitants.

No government ever derived advantage from keeping its citizens in a state of
misery; and yet there are some politicians who dare to support the false and
detestible opinion, that to render the people subservient to government it is
necessary to keep them poor and dependent. Men treated in this way will either
fall into a ruinous lethargy and inaction; or, becoming desperate by
accumulated wrongs, they will punish the authors of their misery. A government
that wishes to acquire the love and confidence of its citizens, should be
constantly engaged in promoting their prosperity and happiness -- This maxim,
so simple, and so self-evident, yet is too little attended to, by men
exercising the sovereign power of states -- On the contrary, unjust and
arbitrary rulers expect to be honored, whilst their oppressive conduct only
inspires horror. They desire that the agriculture of their country should
flourish, whilst by unjust commercial regulations they prevent the free sale of
the produce of labor -- They wish that a general spirit of industry should
prevail, whilst by indirect taxes they clog and impede every exertion of their
citizens. They wish to enjoy an extensive commerce, whilst by the most
impolitic mercantile regulations they discourage foreigners from visiting their
ports.

All these evils arise from inattention, or from an ignorance of the real
interest of civil society, as founded upon the full cultivation of the soil.

As you, my fellow-citizens, value the real prosperity of your country,
acquaint yourselves with the causes of the decline and fall of nations. The
same effects will ever follow the same causes; and therefore you should
strictly attend to the operations of that extensive and dangerous government
which you have just adopted. Congress is establishing a system of finance,
founded in deception, which never has been pursued by any government but to the
oppression of the great body of the people. Do not suffer yourselves to be
lulled into a dangerous lethargy by the opinions of those men who are looking
to Congress for lucrative offices, that they may be unjustly supported by the
labor of others. -- Come forward -- tell your servants in Congress, that it is
you who must feel the effects of their Machiavelian politics; tell them the
truth, and convince them that their own true interests depend upon the general
prosperity of the people. Convinced that a public revenue is necessary for the
support of government, tell them that you are willing to pay a just proportion
of the annual produce of your land into the public treasury, but that the
remainder shall be left free at your own disposal.

A system of sinance of this kind is not unprecedented In China the revenue of
the Sovereign is derived from the land which rises or falls with the plenty or
scarcity of the annual produce. The public revenue in that extensive empire
being immediately connected with the cultivation of the land; therefore
Agriculture becomes an object of public attention.
-- The Prince of Baden, in Germany, with full consent of his subjects, has
long since adopted it; in consequence of which he has abolished every species
of indirect tax, and all trafficking or commercial regulations, leaving the
actions of his subjects totally free, except where they violate the rights of
others. It is said the Duke of Tuscany, and some other Princes in Europe, are
about adopting similar principles of revenue.

But the apparent advantages of commercial regulations, and of indirect taxes
upon articles of consumption, seduces your government in such a manner, that
although at present it makes this system of finance, an excuse to prevent the
excessive use of foreign articles of luxury, there is great reason to apprehend
that it will, in time, become the only source from whence a public revenue will
be drawn -- The facility of adding to the old taxes, or inventing new ones --
the ease of collecting -- the pecuniary advantages which a great number of
citizens gain as agents, and the deception which takes place upon acquiring a
revenue by an indirect tax upon articles of consumption, will all tend to
establish this destructive system. The principle of fiscality will pervade
every department of government, and the interest of the Farmer, the mechanic,
the laborer, and the most necessary and useful citizens, will constantly be
sacrificed to rich monied men, who will be always ready to become the creditors
of the state, in order to enjoy, in a slothful indolence, a participation of
the public revenue.

This system of taxation is more ruinous by its destructive effects upon
cultivation, than by the enormous expense necessary to carry it into operation:
and yet, if you refuse to pay to government a just proportion of the net
produce of your farms, by a direct tax, and you will submit to be deceived and
ruined by the arts and projects of crafty financiers, you must expect that, by
circuitous impositions, the free sale of your produce will be circumscribed,
and the very sources of your riches will be destroyed. The immutable principles
of political economy cannot be diverted or frustrated by the false opinions of
speculative men. A constant revenue is necsseary for the support of civil
government; the source of such revenue should be equally certain, and therefore
must arise from the annual produce of the land.

The difference to the Farmer between a direct and an indirect tax, is very
great. A direct tax is consined to a just proportion of the not produce of the
land. -- Indirect taxes are obscure in their operation, devoid of all order and
proportion. The money raised by a direct tax passes immediately into the public
Treasury, whilst an indirect tax, upon articles of consumption, requires a
great expense to support a host of revenue officers. A direct tax, being
confined to a just proportion of the net produce of your farms, can never be
oppressive; whilst an indirect tax, preying upon the gross produce of your
farms, will destroy the means of future cultivation.

When the public revenue depends upon indirect taxes, little attention is given
to economy in the expenditure of it. Ministers look forward to future taxes to
supply deficiencies, but such resources do not produce relief to satisfy the
demand, because the revenue must be diminished in proportion to the destruction
of the productive fund. In this state of disorder the expense will always
exceed the public revenue: every year will create new demands, and will augment
the difficulty of providing for them. Under these circumstances public debts
must be contracted, by which you will unjustly burden posterity to discharge
debts contracted to support the folly and extravagance of the present day.

The dreadful example of Great Britain, and of some other nations, which have
given way to the destructive system of supporting their governments, by
procuring public credit, should be a warning to this infant republic: Should we
be so far infatuated as to adopt similar principles of sinance, we must expect
that the property of our best and most useful citizens, will be sacrificed to
satiate the unbounded avarice of stock-jobbers and usurers; and the wealth of
our country, wrested from necessary agricultural improvements, (in which the
interest of the whole community is concerned) will be devoted to support the
parade and dissipation of a few idle men, in great cities.

The essential object of civil society is, to procure to every individual
citizen the greatest possible happiness, by securing to him the full enjoyment
of his property. Under this general term is included, the property of person,
the property of moveable goods, and the property of the soil rendered
productive by labor.

In the natural order of political economy, the duties and rights of men are
equal. The right which corresponds with the absolute duty and necessity of
satisfying our wants, is the right of a full and entire liberty of our persons.
To violate this right, is to destroy the very intention of our existence. Every
man in your country, should be regarded as the absolute sovereign of his
person. The nature of our existence, by which we are rendered liable to
constant wants, reminds us of our duty, without the interference of government
to prescribe or delimit our conduct. A wise legislature will not, therefore,
interfere with the actions of citizens, except when they violate the rights of
others. Make use of every means in your power to establish this first law of
nature. The two other species of property depends upon the unequivocal rights
of our persons. The three together will insure the prosperity and stability of
your government.

Our rights over the other species of property arise from the labor we have
bestowed in acquiring them, or from the bounty of others: Such property can be
alienated, as its existence does not depend upon the life of the original
proprietor.

The necessity of subsistence excites us to work. -- The first employ is that
of hunting, or collecting the spontaneous fruits of the earth: By this means,
men are supported during the time they are engaged in clearing the land, and
rendering it productive by agriculture. The property of goods precedes the
property of land, in the same manner that personal property precedes both. They
are all so intimately blended together, that one cannot be violated without the
others suffering injury. Of what advantage is the free disposal of a man's
person, if the whole property acquired by his labor, is to be wrested from him
by an arbitrary power? The territorial right of a government, can give it no
legal authority over the property of its citizens; except as far as is
necessary to support the expense of protection consistent with the original
compact.

If you admit these principles to form the basis of your laws, you may expect,
that the agriculture of your country will immediately revive. Under your
government, men will regard their property as certain of the powerful
protection of inviolable justice, and, therefore, will invest large sums of
money in the cultivation of the earth, as the most prositable employ. You best
know how far an event of this importance is to be desired: Your experience has
long since taught you, that land is productive in proportion to the previous
expense bestowed.

Men do not esteem or value property but as they are the peaceable possessors
of it; and, therefore in a country where the moveable property is not exempt
from tax, and held sacred, the idea of wealth will only be attached to gold and
silver, the amount of which, in the hands of individuals, is seldom known to
the public. From hence accumulation of gold will be regarded as the only riches
of your country, and every art will be made use of to draw it from strangers,
not to be appropriated to the necessary and useful improvements of agriculture
and (...), but to be expended in the dainties of the table, costly equipages,
and personal ornaments -- The most certain symptoms of the ruin of a state.

The industry of a country will ever be influenced by its laws. Oppressed by
unjust laws, men will not invest their money in the cultivation of the land,
which, to render productive, requires great expense of money, or moveable
property.

The real wealth of a country, as arising from agriculture, should pay a tax to
that government by which it is protected. Whatever form it may afterward
assume, or however it may change its situation, it should be left to the free
disposal of the proprietor. This is the right of every citizen, and it is the
duty of the sovereign authority to support him in such right.

The possession of territory, without its being cultivated, is of little value
to civil society, whether consisting of forests or extensive plains,
depopulated by oppressive governments. Personal labor and moveable property are
necessary to render the land productive.

From the principles adduced respecting the public revenue due to a government,
it appears,

1st. That civil society has no claim upon the person of a citizen, because he
derives this right from GOD, independent of society.

2d. That moveable property owes nothing to government, as its just
appropriation is to render the land productive; on which account it should be
left to the free disposal of the proprietor.

The full liberty and security of these rights, supported by the concurrence
and union of men in civil society, produces an increase of property, which is
obtained from the earth by means of agriculture. The net produce of such
property, together with a very small part naturally arising from fertile soils,
constitute the real wealth of a people, and therefore is the only so^^^e from
which a just revenue can be drawn. As this advantage to individuals totally
depends on the protection of government, it becomes the first duty of every
citizen to support its authority and power. This preference is consistent with
strict justice, because men acquire the whole of such property under the
protection of civil society. These reciprocal rights and duties of the people
and of the sovereign power, being well understood, and mutually supported, must
render a government happy and permanent. Under its benign influence, the net
produce of the land would become the greatest possible to the emolument of the
Farmer, and through him to the advantage of every individual in the state.

Under whatever form the sovereign authority of a country may be administered,
it has a just claim only to a certain proportion of the net produce of the
earth, to defray the necessary expense of protection, and therefore it should
be regarded as a co-partner with the proprietor or Farmer. In this situation it
could never injure the rights of its citizens, without experiencing an equal
injury to its own power. As the prosperity and happiness of the people, and the
full enjoyment of their rights, is of consequence to the sovereign authority,
so the prosperity and power of the government is equally interesting to the
people under its protection. The only means of establishing a useful and
permanent agreement between these reciprocal rights and duties, so necessary to
be supported, is to establish the just proportion due to government for
protection, and strictly consining the appropriation of the public revenue to
the necessary services of the state, and not sacrificing it to the support of a
few men in lucrative or unnecessary offices. The power and authority of
government, united with the private exertions of our citizens to render the
land productive, would make our country popolous and happy.

Such is the immutable law of political economy, ordained by GOD to promote the
happiness of men united in society, and is the only just foundation of revenue.

LETTER V.
HOW long will you suffer yourselves to be duped by the low cunning and
artifice of half-informed Lawyers, and mercenary Merchants? Are these
characters to be the dictators of a free people? Are you to have no laws, no
regulations, but through their influence, or by their authority? -- Certainly
you have not wrested the power from Great Britain, to place it in the hands of
these men. As you value your own prosperity and that of your children, look
well to the present moment: a dangerous aristocracy is forming, which if not
crushed in the bud, will destroy your liberties for ever: Continuing in a state
of lethargy respecting public affairs, you will too late repent of your folly
and negligence.

From whence does your government derive its authority for interfering in, or
directing the occupation of its citizens -- from whence its power of
restricting the free sale of the produce of your farms by commercial
regulations? Are these measures founded in wisdom and justice; or are they not
rather a contemptible imitation of the oppressive governments in Europe, where
it is a political maxim, that it is necessary to keep the people poor and
dependent, in order to render them submissive. This could not be effected by an
equal direct tax, and therefore recourse is had to indirect taxes upon articles
of consumption; by which means the wealthy citizens and great landed
proprietors, do not contribute to the public revenue in proportion to their
income, whilst the Farmer, the mechanic, and the laborer, are unjustly
oppressed. The prosperity of your country does not require that a few members
of society should enjoy a supersluity of wealth, but that the great body of the
people should live at their ease and be happy. It is the misfortune of the
present day to connect the dignity of government, with the parade and
extravagance of its officers. A more ruinous system of policy cannot be
pursued, than lavishing the property of industrious citizens upon useless
offices, or in pensions to idle men in no manner engaged in promoting the good
of the Commonwealth. The wealth of private citizens at their own free command,
and employed by themselves, will ever be of the greatest advantage to their
country. It is therefore the interest of every nation that such useful
characters should enjoy the most comfortable support, that thereby they may be
encouraged to defend and support their country in times of public danger. To
make war a profession, in order to acquire territory or riches, is to ruin the
great body of citizens, to enable a few to enrich themselves -- besides, money
thus acquired constantly brings in its train luxury, venality, baseness, and
every vice which tends to the destruction of civil society.

Almost all the wars which have been entered into by the kingdoms of Europe for
many years past, have been to procure to themselves an extensive commerce,
which has appeared to them the only source of wealth. Their politicians do not
perceive that the abundance of silver, produced by commerce, terminates by
destroying commerce itself. The greater the quantity of money, bank notes, or
any circulating paper, in a country, the greater will become the price of
sustenance, and consequently of work; then the poorer nations will naturally
supplant their rich neighbors in their commerce. Merchants will always apply
where they can be supplied at the lowest rate.

Your Legislators appear to forget that their country is inhabited by an
independent yeomanry, who ought to be regarded as the most valuable class of
citizens, and not sacrificed to the avidity of merchants, who are citizens of
the world, and who know no country but their coffers of gold. The Farmer,
finally, pays all the imposts, and by his industry procures from the earth the
necessary subsistence for society. Merchants are in general engaged in
furnishing nations with useless or unnecessary articles. -- Their commerce
would be confined within narrow limits, if they were only to supply those
things necessary to render life comfortable or happy. It is true, that in a
country accustomed to frivolity and dissipation, a vitiated taste makes many
things indispensable; but are governments instituted to support the extravagant
fancies of a few idle men, who know nothing more interesting to their country,
than what will contribute to their own vanity, or gratification?

An enlightened government will ever give the greatest attention to the
happiness and to the prosperity of its real citizens; to those who possess and
cultivate the land: it will give every encouragement to agriculture, as the
most useful occupation in which its citizens can be employed.

What advantage has the yeomanry of any country derived from wars undertaken on
account of commerce? Nothing but new taxes, or having their estates and the
industry of their children mortgaged, to pay an annual and heavy interest to a
few monied men.

To appease the clamors of merchants, who think themselves of importance to the
state, because they occasion an influx of silver, wars are commenced and
pursued to the ruin of the Farmer. The ordinary revenues of the state are found
insufficient to satisfy the additional expense occasioned by the war, and
government has recourse to public credit. The wealthy Merchant lends the money
to government, and the Farmer pays the interest without receiving any benefit
from the measure. In this manner a commercial war, carried on at the expense of
the lives of many valuable citizens, and much treasure, terminates in bringing
an additional burden on the nation. Whilst it enriches merchants, financiers
and usurers, who may possess no real property in the state, and who may remove
from it, as soon as they have accumulated the property of its laborious
citizens.

The establishment of public funds, from whence your wealthy citizens may draw
an annual income, will not only become very burdensome to the industrious part
of the community, but will also favor the indolence of men, who, neglecting
agriculture, or any other employment of real use to their country, will abandon
themselves to indolence, and seek for amusement in the dissipation of your
cities, which they will infest by their disorderly lives. Wishing to preserve
the manners of the people, you should not suffer your government to furnish any
citizens with the means of living in a useless state of inaction, but rather
provide for the happiness of the great body of the people, by encouraging them
in moderate work, by which they may procure the real comforts of life. It is
impossible to render men happy whilst plunged in essiminacy, indolence and
vice, and whose disordered imaginations are perpetually occupied in creating
chimerical wants.

The unjust policy of nations in violating the rights of the people in favor of
a few, is the fruitful source of every moral and political evil.

Public credit, which our politicians esteem of the greatest importance to
government, should be regarded as the most unjust and ruinous invention of
modern times. It is only useful and convenient to serve the ambitious projects
of governments, and to add to the wealth of monied men. The facility of
acquiring credit precipitates nations into wars and other expenses beyond the
revenues of the state; funding systems are adopted, and peace itself does not
relieve the people from oppressive taxes; but the misery of the present
generation is unjustly transmitted to posterity. Thus kingdoms, which pass for
the most opulent, experience real distress, and those who govern them are
continually reduced to seek for new expedients to satisfy the demands of
usurers. They resemble those young men who borrow money at any rate, and
mortgage their patrimony to supply the extravagancies and follies of youth.

In Turkey, and such despotic governments, where the lives and fortunes of the
people are at the arbitrary disposal of the supreme power of the state, the
property of the subject is taken by force -- and therefore there is no occasion
to support the phantom of public credit. Free governments, unjustly or weakly
administered, have recourse to this destructive expedient. By douceurs and
great apparent advantages, men are tempted to become creditors to the state --
Government finds itself embarrassed, and every artifice and deception is made
use of to draw money from the people to satisfy the demands of men, who living
upon the blood of their fellow-citizens, insult them with an ostentatious
parade of their ill-gotten wealth.

An extensive public credit can be of little service to you: it may tend to
ruin your country. The certainty of borrowing will precipitate your Legislators
into unnecessary expenses and wars, which may be a means of adding to the
wealth of a few artful men, but will add nothing to the happiness of the useful
and laborious citizen.

The enormous debts, which at present oppress and will ruin all the great
nations of Europe, has been progressive; and the practice of funding such debts
has gradually enfeebled every state which has adopted that destructive system.
The republics of Venice and Genoa, have long languished under the oppressive
load, and the citizens of Holland can no longer boast of enjoying their ancient
liberty, whilst they are under the absolute control of an aristocracy of monied
men.

To proportion your expenses to your income, is a maxim as necessary to be
attended to by government, as by individuals. This salutary principle is
despised and neglected when public credit is too easily acquired; and,
therefore, in the place of esteeming an enormous public debt as a blessing,
every wise and good man will regard it with anxiety and horror.

Let your government conduct with that degree of wisdom and justice, as to
secure the considence and affection of the people, and it will have no occasion
of rich creditors, to support its authority and dignity.

Whilst engaged in the laborious, but honorable, employ of cultivating your
sields, it would afford you some consolation to reflect, that, after paying
into the public treasury an equitable proportion of the net produce of your
farms, to defray the expenses of a just government; you were permitted to enjoy
the free disposal of the remainder. But to see your property wasted to support
the dissipation, extravagance and folly of officers of government, or unjustly
taken from you to support idle peasioners and placemen, is hard indeed. But
even here the evil does not end; the pittance of property left, is made subject
to commercial regulations, and thus your rights are sacrificed to add to the
wealth of a few merchants in your sea ports. How far such regulations are
politic or just, requires your serious consideration. Will not an enlightened
posterity be as much astonished at the unjust principles of fiscality, and the
oppressive commercial regulations, of modern governments, as we are in the
present day, at the horrid tyranny of the last age in directing the consciences
and the religious opinions of men? The complete establishment ofthe religious
rights of men, is the brightest ornament of the American revolution. Why was
not this just principle extended to our civil rights? Why suffer a violation of
them? Can you be regarded as freemen, if all your actions are to be directed or
impeded by excise and mercantile regulations.

Your Legislators, not daring openly to violate your rights, effect their
purpose under the pretext of necessary commercial regulations; this point being
once firmly established, they will follow the example of Great Britain, and
intersere in every action of your lives, till, at length, like the people of
that devoted country, you will not deserve the name of freemen. Such
impositions can only be brought about by deception, and adopted by error.

In a former letter we have offered some reflections on direct and ndirect
taxes; the latter may lead a people into slavery, the former never can.

Commerce is a subject on which the general government of the United States has
spent much time, but appear totally ignorant of its principles. Every act of
Congress manifests that the interest of the local merchant is substituted for
the general interest of the country, as depending on a free, unlimitted
commerce.

The disposal of the produce of your labor is not an adventitious right,
arising from your connection in civil society, but is one of those natural,
original rights, to preserve which, you have entered into society.

To acquire an unrestricted commerce, was one of the objects for which you
contended with Britain, and now you submit to its being violated by your
immediate representatives.

All restrictions of trade, under the name of commercial regulations, are
impolitic, oppressive, and unjust; and whatever form they may assume, they have
ever been found burdensome to the people and injurious to the revenues of the
state. No authority on earth has alegal right to subject you to such
regulations. The first right derived from nature, is the full liberty of our
faculties, and the enjoyment of property arising from the use of them. Our
sensations engage us to pursue such advantages, to seek pleasure, to avoid
pain, to support our existence, and to satisfy our wants by the means of a
multitude of productions, which we cannot make use of without acquiring them,
and which we cannot acquire but by the full enjoyment of our faculties and of
our labor.

All associations among men have commenced from an express or tacit convention
to respect each others rights. When such primitive associations created a
sovereign authority, it was because the great increase of population, and the
necessary inequality of riches, rendered the rights of all unsafe; and
therefore to promote order, and the better to secure to every one the use of
his property, government was armed with a power superior to that of any
individual. No other interest, no other motive, no other object could have
engaged men to submit to such authority.

The original and fundamental title, which the Congress of the United States
has to sovereignty, is to maintain, to protect, and to preserve the rights of
all. -- These rights, as has been observed, consist in every citizen enjoying
the greatest possible advantage from the use of his faculties and property,
which includes an unlimited pursuit in every kind of work, and a free exchange
of his property. These principles cannot be contradicted, but in an age of
ignorance and barbarity, in which the rights of the sovereign and of the people
are not known. Nor can your government violate them without diminishing the
riches, the prosperity and number of our citizens, and consequently the wealth
and power of our country.

It is easy to pursue the beaten track of British politics; but it requires an
enlightened understanding, and some attention to discern, the natural and
inevitable consequence of adopting such measures. Local and temporary evils
disappear before the eye of a wise Legislator, who takes a general view of
things, and regulates his conduct in conformity to the natural and essential
laws of justice.

There is a law anterior to civil laws, the support of which ought to be the
only object of government. It is the sacred law of PROPERTY: By this, every man
has a right to the free disposal of his person, and of goods acquired by his
industry as far as he does not injure the rights of others. This principle so
simple in itself constitutes the foundation and basis of civil law.

The first property of man is that of his person, which consists in the free
use of his faculties. A second property, not less sacred, arises from the
first, and consists in the goods acquired by his industry. -- The fruits of the
tree which he cultivates, and the produce of grain which he sows, although he
receives them at the hands of nature, yet this bounty is not purely gratuitous,
but is the just reward of his attention and labor. It is then evident that
man's right to such property is absolute, that he may use it, or destroy it at
his pleasure, without being accountable to any set of men on earth. It is
impossible to conceive that, consistent with the strict principles of justice,
such right can be susceptible of any limitation. Should you desire to cut down
a tree which you had planted, should you wish to consume, or even to destroy,
the produce of your farms, what right has government to intersere, to prevent
you from having the free disposal of property arising from your exertions, and
constituting the reward of your industry?

Unpon this right, which every man has over his property, is founded his right
to a free, unlimited commerce, or exchange of such property. This liberty is
necessary to accomplish the mutual exchange of property amongst men, to satisfy
their reciprocal wants. This exchange is a contract purely natural, where the
command of property should be free in its most extensive sense. Civil law may
intervene to compel the execution of a contract; but it ought not to regulate
the conditions or limit the price.

The necessary effect of the division, the distribution and the free
circulation of property, is to produce the just value of every commodity. A
fair competition takes place between the purchasers, and the price of the
merchandise is regulated by its plenty or scarcity. No person will have just
reason to complain where the price of things are in this manner regulated by
causes purely natural.

A perfect free trade will always ensure to the Farmer the highest price for
his produce, by bringing purchasers of every denomination to his very doors:
and by creating a competition between the purchasers, that price will always
afford the most just criterion of the real value of property. Under the laws of
order and justice, every man enjoys the greatest possible liberty in the
exercife of his right of property; and therefore he is encouraged to render his
farm in the highest degree productive, not only to his own emolument, but to
that of his country: Such might be your happy situation, if the natural order
of things was not inverted by arbitrary commercial regulations.

Wherever the right of property is violated by prohibitive laws, or a just
competition destroyed by exclusive regulation, all must be confusion and
disorder. -- The price of things not being influenced by natural causes, every
man seeks to give them a complexion favorable to himself; and commerce, instead
of being an amicable exchange of property, becomes the theater of little, low
cunning and deception. The Farmers and Merchants, no longer obliged to submit
to the common law of competition, treat each other as enemies, and reciprocally
seek to turn in their own favor a balance which is always false, when not
regulated by LIBERTY. The merchant, enjoying a monopoly under the sanction of
law, obtains the property of the Farmer without giving the full value of it,
and by this means unjustly deprives him of the reward of his labor.

It is greatly to be lamented that the commercial regulations and laws of all
the nations in Europe, are founded in error and injustice; and it is equally to
be lamented that your servants in Congress are adopting similar measures. It is
time that a free people should know, that however high the authority from which
they take their examples, yet that error never will sanction injustice and
oppression.

It is confidently asserted that Great Britain owes all her power and grandeur
to her navigation act. -- to her excise laws -- and to her commercial
regulations -- To those causes she is indebted for the misery of her most
useful citizens. The grandeur and power of a nation must be estimated, not from
the exuberant wealth of the few, but from the ease and prosperity of the many.
It is true that London, and some other parts of Britain, exhibit an appearance
of wealth, little known in former days. But what is the situation of the great
body of the people? Marchall and Young, two of the latest and most accurate
observers of the agriculture of England, declare that the yeomanry of that
country are almost annihilated; and their manufacturers and laborers are daily
becoming objects of charity. Instead of being alarmed at these appearances, and
seeking to remedy so great an evil we are told with the most astonishing,
thoughtless exultation, that their King was chanted into church by seven
thousand charity children, and that three hundred thousand children belonging
to parents not capable of bearing, the expense of their education, were objects
of Sunday schools. Whilst such instances manifest the humanity and benevolence
of that nation, they at the same time afford the most unequivocal proof of the
wretched, depending situation of the people.

The navigation act of Britain, which appears to be the fond object of
imitation with Congress, has for more than a century, subjected the industrious
part of the people to a legal monopoly; it has violated the rights of the
husbandman, and of the most industrious citizens, to augment the riches of the
merchants: it has impoverished the masters of the house, the real citizens
occupying the land, to enrich the servants; it has contributed to raise
pecuniary fortunes, by which the delirium of public sunds has been supported.
The merchants of London, Bristol and other sea ports, have rapidly increased
their fortunes at the expense of their fellow-citizens, and becoming of
importance by the influence of their riches, they have precipitated the nation
into commercial wars beyond its ability.

Had Britain never experienced the curse of a navigation act -- had the
industrious part of the nation been permitted to enjoy the full and just value
of the produce of their labor, by a free commerce; had she not entered into
wars to support the unbounded avarice of her merchants -- had she not borrowed
money, and funded her debts, to enable her to carry on such wars -- and had she
avoided excise laws, and every species of indirect taxation; contenting herself
with a just portion of the net produce of the land, the great body of the
people would enjoy a degree of ease and happiness to which they are now
strangers, and the nation itself would experience real prosperity and power.

The raw, bulky materials, which constitute the principal part of your exports,
does not afford a freight to satisfy your merchants; and therefore, these men,
ever attentive to their private emolument, have taken the advantage of your
lethargy, and have influenced Congress to enact the most arbitrary and unjust
laws, sacrificing your rights and your property, to add to their wealth.

Engage your Legislators to take a survey of the exhausted, and almost
dismantled state of your farms; inform them of your poverty and inability to
render your farms productive, and then let them turn their attention to the
ease and affluence of the merchants, enjoying every comfort and luxury in your
great cities. The contrast is so great that no man can think it consistent with
justice, that Congress should establish a monopoly in their favor. A just
competition for the produce of your farms, being destroyed by restricting
foreign vessels from coming amongst us; the whole agricultural interest of your
country must depend upon the mercy of a combination of merchants.

LETTER VI.
KNOWING what constitutes your rights, you should comply with that duty you owe
to yourselves and to your posterity, and support such rights.

Do not suffer ambitious and designing men to mislead you into an opinion, that
whilst you enjoy the freedom of electing your Legislators there is no danger of
your rights being violated. This is a dangerous and false doctrine; for laws
made by the immediate representatives of the people, are not always just.
Britain, which is regarded by many of our politicians, as an example worthy of
imitation, is continually enacting laws, not only unjust, but oppressive to her
most valuable citizens. You can only be regarded as a free people whilst your
Legislature adheres strictly to the laws of nature, and calculates every one of
its regulations for the protection of PROPERTY, and for promoting the general
happiness of the community. This principle is too frequently stifled by the
voice of avarice and ambition; the wealthy citizens, by intrigue, sumptuous
entertainments, and bribery, influence the conduct of Legislators; and when by
such means a law is obtained in favor of the few, however the general rights of
the community may be violated, yet it must never be altered or repealed, from a
mock apprehension of a breach of public faith.

Under such circumstances of finesse and imposition, it is necessary that you
should support a regular militia; otherwise an army of mercenaries may be
thought necessary to procure obedience to laws. This has taken place in England
to support the most unjust and oppressive excise laws; and the Ministry of that
country depends more on a willing, obedient soldiery, than on the justice of
laws, to procure a submission to them.

Under every government the dernier resort of the people, is an appeal to the
sword; whether to defend themselves against the open attacks of a foreign
enemy, or to check the insidious encroachments of domestic foes. Whenever a
people are so enervated by luxury, as to entrust the defense of their country
to a regular, standing army, composed of mercenaries, the power of that country
will remain under the direction and influence of the most wealthy citizens. The
history of Holland and other modern republics will manifest, how far a mere
monied interest is to be entrusted with the liberties of the people. This
subject requires your most serious consideration. Whatever form your government
may assume, your liberties will be safe as long as you support a well regulated
militia. Those who experience the labor of acquiring property, will ever be the
best defenders of it.

FINIS.

