REV. DR. LINN's SERMON.

THE Blessings of America.

A SERMON, PREACHED IN THE MIDDLE DUTCH CHURCH, ON THE FOURTH JULY, 1791,

BEING THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE INDEPENDENCE OF AMERICA: AT THE REQUEST OF THE
TAMMANY SOCIETY, OR COLUMBIAN ORDER.

BY WILLIAM LINN, D. D.

-- NEW YORK -- PRINTED BY THOMAS GREENLEAF. -- M, DCC, XC, I.

At a Meeting of the Tammany Society, or Columbian Order, held at the Great
Wigwam on Monday the 4th July, 1791,
RESOLVED unanimously, That the thanks of this Society be presented by the
Grand Sachem to the Rev. Dr. WILLIAM LINN, for the Sermon preached by him this
day before the Society.

RESOLVED, That Sachems Ebenezer Stevens, Melancton Smith, and James Tylee, be
a committee to wait and request of the Rev. Dr. WILLIAM LINN, in behalf of this
Society, a manuscript of the abo^^ Sermon, and to superintend the printing of
six hundred copies of said Sermon, at the expense of the Society.

Extract from the minutes, JOHN SWARTWOUT, Secretary.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following Sermon is published as it was delivered. Though additions and
alterations might have been profitably made, yet it was supposed, that it would
be most acceptable, in this form, to all, of that numerous and respectable
assembly, who honored it with their hearing.

THAT it may tend to incul^^^^ those principles which led to our glorious
revolution, awaken our gratitude to Almighty God for his many blessings, and
contribute to the general cause of liberty, is the ardent wish and sincere aim
of

THE AUTHOR.

THE BLESSINGS OF AMERICA.
PSALM xvi. 6. THE LINES ARE FALLEN UNTO ME IN PLEASANT PLACES; YEA, I HAVE A
GOODLY HERITAGE.
IN these words the Psalmist celebrates the agreeable and advantageous
situation in which he was placed by Divine Providence. It was such as
administered to his earthly comfort, and tended to promote his eternal welfare.

THE like manner of expression may, with propriety, be used by every American;
and it affords, on this auspicious day, a suitable and profitable subject for
our meditation. By the choice of it, I shall, at least, avoid the beaten path
of a minute recital of events during our revolution; and if the performance
disappoint the hopes, or if some things be introduced which would, at any other
time, be improper in the pulpit, a judicious and candid audience will readily
excuse me.

WITHOUT incurring the charge of local prejudices, illiberal aspersions of
others, or unreasonable partiality to ourselves, we may say, that our country
is highly favored of God; that the lines, which measure our inheritance, are
fallen in pleasant places; yea, that we have a goodly heritage. This will
appear when we consider the natural advantages which we enjoy; the constitution
of our civil government; and our religious privileges. Let us take a cursory
view of each of these; and then attend to some reflections which the subject,
together with the occasion, may inspire.

FIRST, The natural advantages of our country are many and great. The territory
is extensive, the soil luxuriant, the climates and productions various. We
possess in abundance every thing necessary for our support, comfort and
strength. The lofty mountains and the fruitful valleys, the waving forests and
the spreading lawns, the magnificent rivers and the commodious harbors
contribute to the delight and accommodation of the inhabitants. The means of
exportation abroad, and of intercourse with one another, are convenient and
easy.

IN the diversity of the advantages which the States enjoy there is a
resemblance to the division of the land of Canaan among the tribes of Israel.
To Judah was given a country abounding with vines and pasture; to Asher, one
plenteous in oil, iron and brass; to Zebulon and Issachar, such as was famous
for seaports; and thus, were distributed among them their respective gifts,
which, while they needed not to depend on other nations, taught them the
necessity of union among themselves, as conspiring to promote their common
welfare. Is not the general description, which is given of their country,
equally, if not more applicable to our own? A land of brooks of water, of
fountains, and depths that spring out of valleys and hills; a land of wheat,
and barley, and vines, and fig trees, and pomegranates; a land of oil-olive,
and honey; a land wherein thou shall eat bread without scarceness, thou shall
not lack any thing in it; a land whose stones are iron, and out of whose hills
thou may dig brass. Deuteronomy. viii. 7. 8, 9.
He, whose the sea is, and whose hands formed the dry land, has here lavished
his bounty, and, as if on purpose, reserved the best for the latest discovery;
he has united, in this one, all the excellencies of the other parts of the
earth.

THOUGH much still remains to be done, yet the improvement of these advantages
has been, for the time, uncommonly rapid. Less than two centuries ago, what was
this now pleasant country? A dismal wilderness; the habitation of wild beasts,
and of savage men. Where now the populous city lifts its spires, the solitary
wigwam stood; where commerce spreads its sails, was seen the bark canoe; and
where the found of industry is heard, and all the arts of civilized life
flourish, indolence, rudeness, and ignorance, held a gloomy reign. If our
country has, so suddenly, risen into eminence, what may be expected when time
has given it maturity, rendered its population complete, and called forth all
its exertions? Then will it be rich, powerful, and happy. Then will her
wilderness become like Eden, and her desert like the garden of the Lord; joy
and gladness shall be found therein, thanks giving, and the voice of melody.
Isaiah V. 3.


As we are not left to depend upon other countries for our necessaries and
comforts, so our being removed at so great a distance from them, is no small
advantage. We have thus, less temptation to invade, and are less liable to be
invaded: we are in less danger of being infected with foreign vices, and
involved in intrigues and wars. Happily, indeed, that desire of conquest, and
love of domination, which have so long actuated the kingdoms of the world, and
made man a scourge to man do not actuate our nation. Separated, by Providence,
from the continual jealousies, and bloody dissensions of the old world, our
endeavor is, to cultivate every useful art, to enjoy in peace, the blessings
which Heaven has bestowed, and to extend them to all within our reach. This is
a more noble ambition than Romans everknew; a more just glory than to enlarge
our dominion, or seek to build our advancement on the degradation of others.

IT is cause of regret at this day, that the sword which had been sheathed, is
now drawn against some of the Indian tribes. Who does not ardently wish, that
peace may be speedily restored; that the natives of this land, instead of being
extirpated, may exchange the hatchet for the book of divine knowledge; and that
we may be brought to rejoice together as children of the same Almighty Parent,
and partakers of the same common nature! Though it be ordered, in the course of
events, that we possess their land, yet we owe them justice and charity; we owe
them our attempts to recover them from abasement, that so they may enjoy with
us the desirable inheritance.

IN short, when we consider the manner in which this new world has been opened
to us, its first settlement, the growing number of its inhabitants, the great
advantages afforded, the prospects still in view, with every circumstance, may
we not address the supreme Ruler of the universe in these beautiful words of
the Psalmist? Thou have brought a vine out of Egypt; thou have cast out the
heathen, and planted it. Thou preparedst room before it, and did cause it to
take deep root, and it filled the land. The hills were covered with the shadow
of it, and the boughs thereof were like (...) goodly cedars. She sent out her
boughs unto the sea, and her branches unto the river. Psalm, lxxx. 8 -- 11.


BUT all these natural advantages would be in vain, were we deprived of
liberty. We could then neither improve, nor enjoy them. Oppression breaks the
spirits of men, and sinks them into gross and stupid ignorance. Time was, when
Demosthenes shook all Greece with the tempest of his eloquence; and when
Cicero, in his flowing strains, gained on the Roman Senate. Greece and Rome
were then free. Liberty is now gone, and their glory is no more. Time was, when
there were seven churches in Asia, and pure religion beamed, where now
ignorance and superstition brood, and where the Turk, dreaming of a Mohammedan
paradise, sleeps his life away. The inhabitants of these places seem, at
present, to be a different race of men. Even the milk and honey of Canaan are
long since converted into gall and wormwood. The finest country, when enslaved,
is a region, of darkness, poverty, and barbarity, in which human beings drag
out a miserable existence.

"What is life?
"'It Is not to stalk about and draw fresh air
"From time to time, or gaze upon the sun:
"'It Is -- to be free. When liberty is gone,
"Life grows insipid, and has lost its relish.
This leads me to remark,

IN the second place, That we inherit pleasant places, on account of the
constitution of our civil government. This has not been imposed upon us by the
will of a conqueror, nor received through necessity, but formally and
deliberately chosen by ourselves. When obliged to separate from that empire to
which we belonged, particular constitutions were framed by the several States,
and articles of confederation for the government of the whole, on such
principles as were then judged to be conformable to the equality in human
nature, and consistent with public peace and tranquillity.

IT becomes us here, to acknowledge with gratitude, the peaceable and unanimous
manner in which a change, in our national government, has been effected.
Experience having shown the defects of the first, another, after long
consultation, has been proposed and adopted; yea, amendments again to this have
been offered, and time, we trust, will bring it to as much perfection as human
things will admit. We have beheld a people, distant, and various in their
habits, united beyond the most sanguine expectation; a constitution formed in
the bosom of peace; received by all the States, after full and able discussion
in each; enforced by no other weapons than reason and argument; no other
thunder heard than the thunder of debate. Has God, then, at any time,
interposed more remarkably for us? Do we not, every thing considered, stand
single among all the nations of the earth? Other revolutions may have been more
diversified and splendid, but, surely, none is more honorable to human nature,
and none so likely to produce such happy effects.

As far as this constitution has been tried, its influence is found to be safe
and beneficial. It is a representation of the people from whom all legitimate
government is (...). It is a government of laws, not o^ men. It promises to
unite mildness and ^^ergy; to secure and defend; to steer the happy medium
between oppression and licentiousness. It is calculated to encourage genius,
and bring merit to view from the obscure walks of life. Titles and birth give
no claim to rank or precedence; but a capacity for business, with learning,
eloquence, and virtue, are the surest ways to rise to honor and preferment.

IT is foreign, however, to my desig^ (...) pronounce an eulogium on the
constitution. There are those who can better paint its excellencies, and those
who are more eagle-eyed to scan its defects, and watch its tendency. It rather
belongs to my place to celebrate the goodness of God, in conferring upon us the
blessing of liberty. How eligible does our situation appear, when we look
around us in the world! Only a small part enjoys even the shadow of liberty.
The great bulk of mankind are under the most galling and ignominious servitude.
A few are exalted to more than men, and the rest made less, to the debasement
and reproach of human nature. Surely the distinction in favor of ourselves
deserves an honorable mention, and the highest praise is to be ascribed to the
Father of lights, from whom every good gift, and every perfect gift comes down.

CIVIL liberty is a blessing the more precious, because with it are connected
the rights of conscience. Where slavery prevails these are always infringed. In
this country, as they are well understood, so they are preserved inviolate.
This is

THE last respect in which it appears that we have a goodly heritage. Here, no
particular modes of faith, or worship are established. No undue preference is
given to one denomination of religion above another. Every one stands upon
equal footing, and can prove successful, only by the piety, virtue, learning,
and liberality of its professors. Human establishments have always been made
engines of state policy; they have promoted hypocrisy and infidelity: they have
perpetuated error, and restrained that free spirit of enquiry which conduces to
improvement.

THE government which Jesus Christ has instituted in his Church is distinct
from the power which appertains to the kingdoms of this world, and it consists
in inflicting spiritual pains; in admonitions, reproofs, censures, and
exclusion from membership. The members of the Church, indeed, are also members
of civil society, and subject to all its laws, so far as is consistent with a
good conscience; but the great evil has been in the civil magistrate usurping
the throne of Christ and exercising spiritual dominion. The Church and the
State, no doubt, mutually assist and support one another, but they have, too
often, been unlawfully blended. The Church asks and needs no assistance except
the protection of its rights; and it willingly yields to civil government the
surest support, by diffusing knowledge, and promoting righteousness and peace
among men.

RELIGIOUS freedom banished from every other corner of the earth has erected
her standard in these States, and kindly invites the oppressed from all
quarters to repair hither. Here are no fire and faggots, no pains and
emoluments of any kind, to force these sentiments, or the other upon them.
Religion pure and undefiled solicits their regard. The heaven-born maid is not
dressed or daubed with human inventions. She trusts to her native charms and
asks a willing love. -- Here is an asylum for you, our brethren of the old
world, whose lives are embittered by the cruel impositions of men; the fruit of
whose labors go to support lazy priests and luxurious princes; who, though you
rise early and late take rest, obtain only a scanty subsistence for yourselves
and families. Forsake your hard taskmasters. Refuse to dig an ungrateful soil
which will not yield you bread. Haste you to the fertile plains of America.
Fill her new, and as yet, uninhabited territory. She opens wide her arms to
embrace millions, and waits to crown all the industrious and virtuous with
plenty and happiness. (...) WESTERN TERRITORY (...)


NOT only do we enjoy the right of private judgment in matters of conscience,
but the gospel is preached and its ordinances administered throughout a great
part of our land. Without this we would be less civilized, and less free. This
truly renders our land a pleasant place and a goodly heritage. What is this
world but the beginning of an eternal scene? What is an extensive and beautiful
country, what liberty with all its concomitant blessings, destitute of the
worship of our Creator, and the hope of dwelling in his presence when the
fashion of this world shall have passed away? Though the rights of man be
invaluable, yet we may successfully plead for these and be forever unhappy
hereafter. This is life eternal, that they might know thee, the only true God,
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. John xvii. 3.
The abundant means of this knowledge are within our power.

CONSIDERING the situation of our country in this respect, we see these words
of the prophet fulfilled; The wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad
for them; and the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose. It shall
blossom abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and singing; the glory of Lebanon
shall be given unto it, the excellency of Carmel and Sharon: they shall see the
glory of the Lord, and the excellency of our God -- In the wilderness shall
waters break out and streams in the desert. Isaiah, xxxv. 1. 2. 6.


HAVING now shown, that the words of the Psalmist equally express our own
privileges, and are an acknowledgment highly proper from each of us, let us
reflect more particularly,

FIRST, On the distinguishing goodness of God in giving us this fair
inheritance, and in defending it against those who sought unjustly to deprive
us. The earth is the Lord's, and the fullness thereof; the world, and they that
dwell therein. Psalm xxiv. 1.
Of whom is it, that we inhabit this land rather than another? Of whom, that we
are surrounded with so many blessings? Of whom, that we enjoy civil and
religious liberty? Surely it is of the Lord, and he is entitled to all the
praise. He gave to the renowned Columbus that spirit of curiosity, that
boldness of enterprise, that contempt of danger, and that firmness of
perseverance, which led him through unexplored seas and distressing hardships,
to the discovery of this vast continent; where he found the native "girt with
feathered cincture, naked else and wild among the trees on isles and woody
shores." It was the Lord who conducted to this place the original settlers,
supported them under all their difficulties, cast out the heathen before them,
and divided them an inheritance by line, and made them to dwell in their
tents." Psalm lxxviii. 55.


NOT to carry our attention so far back, who, of later years, has sustained us
in a mighty contest for every thing which we held dear? Who united us in a
common cause? Who inspired and enabled us, unacquainted with war, and
unprepared, to withstand an experienced and formidable enemy? Who disconcerted
their stratagems, gave us powerful allies, encouraged our suffering army,
crowned them with signal victories, and who, in so short a time, gladdened our
hearts with peace? Of whom is it, that to day we commemorate our existence as a
nation, and rejoice in the prospect of growing prosperity? Surely these are the
doings of the Lord, whose interpositions in our favor were so numerous and
remarkable, that they can never be forgotten. When this page of history is
revolved, it will show to the generation to come, the praises of the Lord, and
his strength, and his wonderful works that he has done. That the generation to
come might know them, even the children which should be born; who should arise
and declare them to their children. Psalm Ixxviii. 4 -- 6.


WHAT must have been our condition, had our enemies succeeded? What could we
have expected from a nation which dared, in the face of Heaven, to assert a
right to bind us "in all cases whatsoever," and which strove to enforce it with
cruelty and blood? What could we have expected from them, when opposed and
irritated, but every thing the disappointed hopes, the mortified pride, and the
incensed wrath of tyrants could inflict? What but desolation, slavery, and
death? What, at the best, but a life less tolerable than the furnace of
Nebuchadnezzar, which was heated seven times for those who disobeyed his
unrighteous decree? Absolute power has made tyrants in every age, and the
temper of all tyrants is unrelenting. To these who have a (...) of Liberty,
death, in any form, is less (...) than abject submission. Better to suffer
death at exit, than to (...) on a rock. Indeed, when the rights of (...) are
violated, it becomes a duty to prefer death to a (...) compliance; and many
thousand, in former days, have suffered worse than the (...) of Nebuchadnezzar,
rather than live in disobedience to their God.
The fruitful field would soon have returned to a wilderness, the nerves of
industry and improvement been withered, and a languid spiritless temper
pervaded the inhabitants. We would have been laborers in a vineyard not our
own, and though we had borne the heat and burden of the day, a foreign and
unjust lord, if he rewarded us with a penny, would have given us with it,
frowns and ill-usage. -- There is no pleasure, even in hinting these things,
farther than may be necessary to show the greatness of our deliverance. Spirit
and ability are given us, not only to repair our wastes, but to add new
improvements and ornaments; and as the external traces of the war must soon be
effaced, so ought every unchristian resentment to be forever effaced from our
breasts. -- Blessed be the ETERNAL SOVEREIGN who decreed us victorious; who
re-animated expiring liberty, snatched her from the feet of kings, and
exhibited her in her winning form, to enlighten, to guide, and to charm the
world. O sing unto the Lord a new song. O clap your hands, all ye people, shout
unto God with the voice of triumph. For the Lord most High is terrible; he is a
great King over all the earth. God is gone up with a shout, the Lord with the
sound of a trumpet. Sing praises to God, sing praises; sing praises unto our
King, sing praises. Both young men and maidens, old men and children: Let them
praise the name of the Lord; for his name alone is excellent; his glory is
above the earth and heaven. Psalms xlvii, cxlviii.


IT has not been unusual, nor will it damp the joy of this day, to remember
with tender regard those, who fired in their country's cause, stepped foremost
to the field, and bravely offered up their lives in its defense. They did not
live to enjoy the privileges for which they contended, but their memory shall
be dear to us, and posterity shall do justice to their worthy character. We
will teach our sons sons how early and how nobly WARREN fell. MONTGOMERY, that
high-sounding name, with M'PHERSON, HENDRICKS, CHEESEMAN, shall swell the tale.
To show the price of liberty, we will uncover MERCER'S bleeding wounds, and
traverse all the fields of death. But why do I mention names? It seems almost
injustice to others who equally merit our praise. Let the historian faithfully
tell them all, from WARREN down to LAURENS, whose blood last streamed in the
cause. They have nobly fallen. As often as we celebrate this day, while we trim
the laurels on their graves, let the recollection of their virtues animate us
with the love of our country, that for it, when called, like them we may die.

WHAT tribute shall be here paid to those who cheerfully underwent every danger
and toil? Who marched, and fought and bled? What tribute to the remains of a
most meritorious army? What tribute to their patriotic Leader whom it has
pleased God to endow with so many rare talents, and to make no less
distinguished in the arts of peace than of war? Behold the rich inheritance
with which Providence has rewarded your virtuous struggle! Your swords were
drawn not only in defense of all which we held dear, but in defense of the
rights of mankind. Under God you have been successful. His right hand and his
holy arm has gotten him the victory. May you live long to enjoy the blessings
which you have been instrumental in procuring, and may generations yet to come
arise and call you blessed.

ANOTHER important reflection on this subject, and the last which shall be
mentioned is, that the privileges conferred upon us call for our faithful and
diligent improvement. Is our country pleasant and fertile? It is our duty to
contribute to the advancement of agriculture, manufactures and commerce. Are we
a free people? It is our duty to support and encourage government; to be
obedient subjects; to diffuse knowledge among all classes of men, as being the
most effectual safeguard of liberty. Enlighten mankind and you cannot enslave
them. Despotic government makes them ignorant and barbarous, and when thus
reduced, they are neither able nor willing to break the yoke.

To call to mind the natural equality of men, to keep alive the spirit of
liberty, and to diffuse knowledge and happiness, have given rise to subordinate
societies in free States; and these are held out as the great objects of that
Society at whose desire I address you to day. They are plainly and concisely
expressed in these word; of their public constitution: "It shall connect in the
indissoluble bonds of PATRIOTIC FRIENDSHIP, AMERICAN BRETHREN, of known
attachment to the political rights of human nature, and the liberties of this
country." Somewhat similar are the revolution and constitutional Societies in
GreatBritain, and which are at this day the watch-towers of liberty. May we not
hope that these Societies will emulate one another, in preventing all
sacrilegious approaches to the altar of freedom, and that they will themselves
be bright examples of order, decency, and virtue! It is to the honor of that
Society, at whose motion we are convened, that under its direction and
patronage a Museum has been established, to consist, not only of natural
curiosities, but of all those writings, either at home, or abroad, which serve
to furnish a complete history of this country in its various stages. Many of
those curious and valuable tracts must have, otherwise, been lost. The laudable
design of preserving them, is perfectly agreeable to the generous principles of
the Society, and indeed, to that public spirit which is so conspicuous in this
great and flourishing city.

ALLOW me only to add, that the name, which this Society has appropriated,
affords to the mind a striking contrast of what this country once was, to what
it now is; of its once barbarous, to its now civilized state; and if such an
association of men have a tendency to introduce a national spirit and
character, it will be so far useful; for certainly it is the glory, and ought
to be the ambition of every one, who makes his residence in this country, to be
esteemed an AMERICAN. Making due allowance for our age and numbers, we have
produced as many eminent men as fall to our share; See this matter fairly and
ingeniously stated by Mr. Jefferson in his notes on Virginia. It is, perhaps,
not strange that foreigners should inconsiderately adopt prejudices against us;
but if there be any who reside in this country, enjoy all the blessings of it,
and who, notwithstanding, undervalue what gives them bread and importance, one
would hardly know, whether to pity their folly, or to contemn their (...).
and it is hoped, are free from that European pride which can see no
excellencies in a neighbor. Let it be the sincere endeavor of us all, by
every just and proper method, to advance the interest and reputation of our
country; to make it virtuous, enlightened, and free.

" Remember, O my friends, the laws, the rights,
" The generous plan of power delivered down
" (So dearly bought, the price of so much blood)
" O let it never perish in your hands!
" But piously transmit it to your children."
MAY we not indulge the pleasing thought, that the time is not far distant,
when tyranny every where shall be destroyed; when mankind shall be the slaves
of monsters and idiots no more, but recover the true dignity of their nature!
The cause of Liberty is continually gathering strength. The advocates of
despotic rule must fail. The British orator, Edmund Burke; who has published
reflections on the revolution in France; a performance containing abuse,
misrepresentation, a specious rather than true eloquence, and sentiments
unfavorable to (...). This (...) has done after (...) with the (...) and (...)
to be, form (...) a (...) in the (...) of (...) -- His book ha^ had a (...)
what was (...) it has (...) and (...) PAIN, a (...).
though he sublimely rave, he raves in vain. No force of genius, no brilliancy
of fancy, and no ornament of language can support his wretched cause. He and
his abettors only hasten its downfall. The revolution in France is great -- is
astonishing -- is glorious. It is, perhaps, not just to say, that the flame was
kindled by us, but certainly we contributed to blow and increase it, as France
will in other nations; until blaze joining blaze, shall illumine the darkest
and remotest corners of the earth.

IN return for the great and inestimable privileges which we enjoy, let us
devote ourselves to the service of God, and be found in the practice of all
righteousness. Virtue is highly necessary for the support of order and good
government; and the Christian religion powerfully inculcates, and leads to the
exercise of this virtue. Let us comply with its precepts, and pray for its
universal spread and influence. Nothing would so conduce to our national
prosperity and happiness. It would make us better citizens, and more
disinterested patriots; more happy in ourselves, and more useful to all around
us. Before I conclude this discourse, allow me then, as a Minister of the Lord
Jesus Christ, to offer you salvation in his name; to remind you, that you must
soon leave all terrestial scenes, and enter upon an eternal and unchangeable
state. Be entreated to accept the liberty wherewith Christ makes free; that so
when the kingdoms of this world and the glory of them are no more; yea, when
the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt
with servent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt
up, you may inherit a better country, and live immortal beneath a brighter sun
and more ample (...).

AND now, while we act on this first stage of our existence, may the Lord
ordain peace for us! May we never hear the drum, the trumpet, and the clang of
arms any more in battle; but may peace, leading in her train religion,
knowledge, and liberty, forever dwell with us!

" Haste thee, fair peace, thy softening power renew,
" Bless every clime, the old world and the new,
" In friendly league unite each distant shore,
" And bid mankind with anger burn no more.
" Then pure religion's precepts shall prevail;
" Impartial justice poise her balanced scale;
" Bright liberty shall wanton in the breeze;
" Innoxious pleasure, philosophic ease;
" Commerce shall then expand without control,
" Where coasts extend, or farthest occans roll.
May wars cease unto the end of the earth; and God, who commanded the light to
shine out of darkness, give to all nations, the light of the knowledge of his
glory, in the face of Jesus Christ.

AN ODE, Composed for the Occasion, at the Request of the Society. By DR.
WILLIAM PITY SMITH.
NOW elevate your hymns of joy,
With sacred music let these arches ring,
Patriots your breath employ,
Your purest incense bring;
For HE receives the grateful lay,
Whose matchless all-controling sway,
Kings, armies, empires, oceans, worlds obey:
Hence kingdoms fall, while here republics rise
Reason resumes her rights, dumb superstition dies.
Since then from Heaven fair Liberty descends
Her bright'ning advent hail;
It Is GOD alone emits the high command --
(His great behests fulfill!)
See how the patriot-light'ning bends
Oppression's haughty will;
Wide rends her deep obscuring vail,
While waking glory dawns on every land.
GREAT SPIRIT hear -- our humble vows we pay,
Thine arm unseen, thy goodness we adore,
The aid divine confess!
Sweet Independence crowns the joyous day,
Celestial Freedom owns the genial hour,
To shed her choicest bliss.
When usurpation raised her head,
Th'appeal, impartial JUDGE, was madeto THEE,
When darkness over the affrighted land was spread,
THOU bad'st the gloom disperse,the United States be free!
PARENT of Union, manifest thy power,
Let discord cease,
Fell tyrants kindle mad'ning rage no more;
Diffuse to earth's remotest bound,
The blaze of science, and the smile of peace,
'Till praise resound,
Through every clime where human voice be sound:
Advancing on the wings of light,
Let Freedom still extend her golden chain,
And while the nations hail the auspicious fight,
Commence the blessed Immanuel's gentle reign.
Then elevate your hymns of joy,
With heav'n-taught music let the temple ring,
Patriots your breath employ,
Your sweetest incense bring:
To GOD, Columbia's King, we homage pay,
His arm protective, though unseen adore,
His sacred boon confess:
Sweet independence crowns the signal day;
Freedom selects the gratulating hour
To shed her choicest bliss!
Hallelujah, Hallelujah, etc.
Set to music by Mr. VAN HAGEN.

