THE ROYAL PENITENT. IN THREE PARTS.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, DAVID's LAMENTATION OVER SAUL AND JONATHAN.

BY MRS. SARAH PORTER, OF PLYMOUTH IN NEWHAMPSHIRE.

Of old, those met rewards who could excel;
And those were praised who but endeavored well:
The triumphs were to Generals only due,
Crowns were reserved to grace the Soldiers too.
POPE. CONCORD: Printed by GEORGE HOUGH, and sold at his Office, Wholesale and
Retail.

M. DCC. XCI.

THE ROYAL PENITENT.
PART FIRST.
CELESTIAL Muse! assist me while I sing,
In paths forbid, what woes unnumber'd spring.
To shun a noisy court, and noontide heat,
And all the cares that 'tend upon the great,
The King walked forth, to breathe the balmy air,
And view the beauties of the gay parterre.
The palace-garden, made for careless ease,
Was stored with all that could the fancy please; --
The stately trees, in lofty arches, rise,
Wave their green heads, and gently fan the skies;
A humbler sort, with blossoms sprinkled over,
In order ranged, stand round the royal bower:
Here joyful birds, in sweet harmonious notes,
To hail their monarch, tune their little throats:
Near the delicious spot, smooth rolled a flood,
In which the various trees reflected stood;
The golden Orange, 'midst the smiling green,
Inverted in the shining mirrour's seen.
Here, while the trees their ripened fruit display,
Or sweetly smile with purple blossoms gay,
The mantling vine holds forth her luscious grape,
That not a beauty may the eye escape.
Ten thousand lovely flowers, of various dye,
In regular confusion meet the eye.
HERE Israel's King enjoyed the balmy breeze,
By Zephyr wafted through the charming trees.
Fair Bathsheba, with all her blooming charms,
Had just withdrawn her from the Monarch's arms;
When Nathan found, beneath the cooling shade,
Stretched at his ease, the Royal Shepherd laid.
"Forever live, O King!" -- thus spoke the Seer --
The Monarch rose, with reverence, to hear
High Heaven's Ambassador -- who thus began:
"Justice, my Lord the King, 'twixt man and man;
Within the city-walls two men were known --
One, poor indeed -- the other, overgrown
In wealth and power; his flocks, unnumber'd, rove
Over all the plain, and whiten every grove:
The poor man nursed, each day, with care and cost,
One little lamb -- 'twas all that he could boast;
With him it fed, and with his children grew,
And in his bosom lay the darling ewe.
The rich have many friends -- a friend arrives
To visit him who in gay affluence lives:
Pride now would furnish out a sumptuous feast;
But Avarice fears to entertain the guest; --
A sudden thought the miser filled with glee. --
'Twas often his hap his neighbor's lamb to see;
When walking forth, he marked its snowy hue,
And with its beauty quite enamored grew:
He seized the destined prey, nor heeds its cries,
Nor felt the woe that from the deed might rise."
THE Prophet ceased: -- enraged, the Monarch stands:
"Who? Where is he?" he sternly then demands;
Anger, like lightning, flashes from his eye:
"As God does live, the man shall surely die!"
Thou art the man, scarce had the Prophet said,
When all the outward marks of inward dread
Appeared in view -- a chilly frost bedews
The Monarch's face, and speaks his recent woes:
Thou art the man, like an envenomed dart,
Rankles within, and tears the bleeding heart:
Thou art the man, still vibrates on the ear,
And half forbids it other words to hear.
THE man of God continues to unfold
High Heaven's behest, and thus the message told: --
"Thus says the Lord -- I raised thee to the throne,
And on thy head have placed thy master's crown;
His numerous wives, his houses, and his land,
To thee I gave -- what more could thou demand?
Or if thou had a wish that asked for more,
My hand was able to increase the store.
Why have thou then, with Ammon's sword, hewn down Uriah, chief supporter of
thy crown?
Why, tyrant-like, have you thus sought his life,
And from his bosom torn his beauteous wife?
Thou, Israel's Shepherd, (this was once my boast)
Ill fares the flock that have their leader lost.
How, from the fold, was thou the first to stray,
'Till even Innocence became thy prey?
Hell heard, with pleasure, the detested deed;
And Belial's wanton sons, supinely laid
Within his groves, with harlots now blaspheme,
Mock Israel's King, and curse Jehovah's name."
FORLORN, appalled, the Royal mourner stood:
Ive sinned against the Lord -- nor more he could:
A sigh escaped the heart -- on Angels' wings
Alost was borne, and reached the KING of Kings;
With incense touched, it lay before the throne,
Spoke his remorse, and made his sorrows known.
"Thy sin is blotted out -- thou shall not die;
Heaven sees thy grief -- has heard thy inward cry:
Yet, lest GOD's foes his justice should arraign,
Thy firstborn son shall be untimely slain; --
Scarce shall his infant eyes behold the light,
Ere they shall close in everlasting night:
While greater troubles in thy house shall rise,
To break thy peace, and damp thy future joys."
PART SECOND.
DEATH's Angel now, commissioned by the Lord,
Over the fond infant holds the fatal sword;
From the dread sight the frantic father turns,
And, clad in sackcloth, in his chamber mourns;
The Monitor, within the Royal breast,
That long had slept, now roused at length from rest,
Holds forth a mirror to the aching sight,
Seizes the mind that fain would take its flight --
Bids it look in: -- and first, Uriah stood,
Armed for the sight, as yet unstained with blood;
Courage and care were on his brow combined,
To show the hero and the patriot joined: --:
Next, pale and lifeless, on his warlike shield,
The soldiers bore him from the bloody field.
"And is it thus? (the Royal mourner said)
And has my hand performed the dreadful deed?
Was I the wretch that gave thee to the so,
And bade thee sink beneath the impending blow?
Bade every friend and hero leave thy side? --
Open, O earth! and in thy bosom hide
A guilty wretch who wishes not to live;
Who cannot, dares not, ask for a reprieve;
So black a crime just Heaven will not forgive!
Justice arrests thy coming mercy, Lord --
Strike then, O strike, unsheath thy dreadful sword:
Accursed forever be the hated day,
That led my soul from innocence astray; --
O may the stars, on that detested hour,
Shed all their influence with malignant pow'^*
Darkness and sorrows jointly hold their reign,
When time, revolving, brings it round again.
Ye injured ghosts, break from the silent tomb,
In all the fearful pomp of horror come,
Breathe out your woes, and hail the dreadful gloom.
Why does not injured Israel now arise,
Proclaim my madness to the avenging skies,
Hurl quick the scepter from my bloody hand,
While marks of infamy my forehead brand?
No time shall ever the dreadful act conceal --
No tongue shall fail its horrors to reveal --
Eternity, upon its strongest wing,
Shall bear the deed whence all my sorrows spring.
Unhappy man! -- ah! whither shall I turn?
Like Cain, accursed, must I forever mourn?
On beds of silk in vain I seek repose --
Uriah's shade forbids my eyes to close;
No bars exclude him -- to no place confined,
Eager he still pursues my flying mind:
Not all the crowd that bow at my approach,
Nor guards that thicken round the gilded coach.
Can with their arms, or martial air, affright.
Or drive the phantom from my wearied sight.
Whenever I view the diamond's varied rays,
That grace my robes, or on my scepter blaze,
Uriah still, reflected from the stone,
(...) at his wounds, and shows me what I Have done.
Could all the gold that lies on India's coast,
Could all the gems its numerous quarries boast,
Bribe peace a moment to this aching heart,
How freely with the glittering store I Would part.
Black, heavy thoughts, ah! what a numerous train!
I feel your stings unpitied, yet complain.
Thou gallant hero, say, where art thou now?
Gone, gone forever! sunk beneath my blow! --
Of my uplifted arm, my dire command,
Fell Ammon's sword was wielded by my hand!
Where the fierce battle glowed with hottest rage,
Where all the mighty, arm to arm engage,
Where frightful death his various forms put on,
You met the terror of his dreadful frown. --
As some huge tree, whose towering threats the sky,
While deep in earth its roots embosom'd lie,
Mocks at the warring winds, and proudly dares
The tempest's force, nor once destruction fears:
So, unappall'd, the glorious Leader stood,
Tho torn with wounds, and covered over with blood;
Over hills of slaughtered foes he makes his way --
His sword, from Ammon, gained the doubtful day:
Yet, while alost the Hebrew standard flies,
And victory shouts to echoing earth and skies,
The lifeless hero, stretched upon the shield,
With countless wounds, is borne from off the field.
Once, how he shone amidst the gazing throng,
Who praised his courage as he passed along!
On thy firm brow, what beaming splendor shone!
By thy bold arm, how strengthened was my throne!
And shall thy murderer crown thy head with bays,
And dare thy God-like virtues thus to praise?
From cruel fate, ah! whither shall I run? --
Capricious lust! -- thou have my soul undone!
Drawn on by impious passion, I pursued.
The flying fair, and often my suit renewed;
The humble suppliant, and the haughty lord,
By turns put on, no ray of hope afford; --
She heard at length, but with an obdurate ear --
And still Uriah draws the pitying tear.
O happy day! when, blessed with Eglah's charms,
I wooed no other beauty to my arms;
No court's licentious joys did then molest
My peaceful mind, nor haunt my tranquil breast.
A glittering crown! thou poor, fantastic thing!
What solid satisfaction can thou bring? --
Once, far removed from all the toils of state,
In groves I slept -- no guards around me wait:
Oh! how delicious was the calm retreat! --
Sweet groves! with birds and various flowers stored,
Where nature furnished out my frugal board;
The pure, unstained spring, my thirst allayed;
No poisoned draughts, in golden cups conveyed,
Was there to dread. -- Return, ye happy hours,
Ye verdant shades, kind nature's pleasing bowers --
Inglorious solitude, again return,
And heal the breast with pain and anguish torn.
Oh! sweet content! unknown to pomp and kings,
The humble rest beneath thy downy wings;
The lowly cottage is thy loved retreat --
In vain, you're courted by the rich and great --
In vain, the miser seeks thee in his gold --
In vain, each day the glittering store is told;
Thou art not there: in vain the ambitious sigh,
And seek the joys that still before them fly:
The merchant's ship all treasures brings but thee --
You from his anxious bosom ever flee:
For thee, the sailor tempts the boisterous main,
And hopes to find thee in his dear-bought gain:
For thee, the hero mounts his iron car,
And hopes to find thee when returned from war.
Their hopes are vain. -- Who wish with thee to dwell,
Must seek the rural shade, or lonely cell:
The Gods themselves delight in verdant groves,
And shield from harm the innocence they love. --
Witness, the day, my youthful arm withstood
The foaming bear: -- the monarch of the wood,
With open jaws appeared, and crested mien,
But in a moment by my hand was slain:
Safe from their teeth I snatched the destined prey,
And bore it harmless in my arms away. --
Witness, the day, Gath's lordly champion came,
With haughty strides, and cursed Jehovah's name;
Tho in my hand nor sword nor spear were found,
This vast unwieldy bulk lay stretched upon the ground.
Beloved by Heaven, naught had I then to fear --
Twice I escaped from Readiness emitted spear,
By malice thrown; and, free from danger, stand,
Hid in the hollow of the Almighty's hand; --
His darling then I was; who, mighty GOD!
Sink now beneath the terrors of thy rod.
Dispel those thick, dark clouds, this boisterous wind,
That tears the soul, and harrows up the mind;
Oh! let thy mercy, like the solar ray,
Break forth and drive these dismal clouds away;
Oh! send its kind enlivening warmth on one,
Who sinks, who dies, beneath thy dreadful frown:
Thus fares the wretch at sea, by tempests tossed --
Sands, hurricanes, and rocks, proclaim him lost;
With eager eyes he views the peaceful shore,
And longs to rest where billows cease to roar: --
Of wanton winds and waves I Have been the sport --
Oh! when shall I attain the wished for port?
Or might I bear the punishment alone,
Nor hear the lovely infant's piteous moan; --
My sins upon the dying child impressed,
The dreadful thought forbids my soul to rest.
In mercy, LORD, thy humble suppliant hear --
Oh! give the darling to my ardent prayer! --
Cleanse me from sin -- oh! graciously forgive --
Blessed with thy love, oh! let thy servant live:
Thy smiles withdrawn, what is the world to me?
My hopes, my joys, are placed alone on thee:
Oh! let thy love, to this desponding heart,
One ray, at least, of heavenly love impart."
PART THIRD.
SWIFT to the skies the winged petition flew,
And, from above, a radiant Seraph drew:
A sudden light dispels the sable gloom,
And solemn music fills the mourner's room;
While balmy fragrance fills the midnight air,
The King beholds the shining guest draw near;
To meet the heavenly form he lowly bends,
And to his words a fixed attention lends.
"COMMISSIONED from the throne of GOD, I come --
Now bear, with fortitude, the approaching doom:
Thy son must die! -- such is the will of GOD;
Nor thou repine -- but humbly kiss the rod:
Yet Heaven has heard thy cries, has seen thy tears,
And sends me down to calm thy anxious fears:
Thy prayer is heard -- thy sin is done away,
That in thy sorrowing heart so heavy lay:
Thou shall not die -- till, fixed upon the throne,
Beloved of Heaven, you see another son;
A son, whose fame shall reach the farthest east --
In his mild reign shall Israel's sons be blessed;
Then strife shall cease -- calm Peace, with downy wing,
From all annoy shall shield her favorite King;
At War's approach no more the trees shall fade,
And safe the swain shall deep beneath the shade;
While peace and plenty bless the happy land,
Science shall thrive beneath his fostering hand;
Eager of knowledge, shall his searching eye,
Into the farthest depths of nature pry;
From famed Libanus' cedars, fair and tall,
To humble hyfsop springing on the wall,
He shall discourse -- while men, astonished, own,
No Prince on earth ever equaled David's son: --
But let this thought prevail above the rest,
That in his seed all nations shall be blessed;
From this beloved child, this son, shall spring,
Of whom the Prophets sung the mystic King --
lsrael's Redeeper styled -- sent down from Heaven --
To him, to him the glorious branch is giv'm --
To rule the world -- his kingdom shall extend
From East to West -- even earth's remotest end
Shall own his sway; and, at his birth, shall cease,
All strife and toil; and justice, truth, and peace,
Each hand in hand shall walk through all the earth,
Proclaiming, as they go, the Savior's birth.
As Eden was, ere Adam's fatal sin,
In his blessed reign such shall the earth be seen:
The barren waste shall fragrant blossoms yield,
While smiling plenty crowns the open field:
For joy, the crystal streams shall break their way,
And, unconfined, through deserts, winding, stray;
Where, late, rough thorns were seen, the fir shall rise,
With tufted top, and wave among the skies;
Where noisome thistles did the ground overspread,
The fragrant myrtle now shall rear its head;
Rich grapes, in clusters, from the bending vine,
Unpress'd, shall yield their luscious streams of wine.
Even savage beasts their natural dens shall change,
And, harmless, through the fields and forests range;
The ox and lion sleep beneath one shade,
Or, side by side, shall cross the flowery mead;
Upon the verdant grass, the fearless lamb,
Shall, with the wolf, lie down as with its dam;
Pleased with its speckle'd coat, in colors gay,
Unhurt, the child shall with the serpent play --
Floods, floods, of joy, shall overflow the land,
While fixed Messiah's throne shall ever stand; --
To him, at last, each stubborn knee shall bend,
Whose kingdom knows no bounds, whose reign no end:
It Is his, all care and anguish to destroy --
It Is his, to fill the wounded heart with joy --
From his mild reign shall every comfort flow --
Nor more, let man or angel seek to know."
THE heavenly guest, the King with transport heard --
His grief removed: the Angel disappeared.
FINIS.
DAVID's LAMENTATION OVER SAUL AND JONATHAN.
HOW are the mighty fallen! Gilboa, boast
Saul, and his son, upon thy summit lost! --
Thy face is sprinkle'd with the blood of war --
Thy bosom surrow'd with the iron car --
Accursed remain, from this dark, gloomy hour,
Nor know henceforth one cool, refreshing shower:
Ye humid clouds, by Ocean's bounty fed,
Your kindly moisture here forbear to shed:
No ripened fruit nor herbage may thou know,
Nor flocks or herds ever grace thy desert brow;
Nor fragrant incense from thy top arise,
In curling waves, to greet the offended skies.
DISTAINED with blood, here lay the royal shield --
Here lay the sword Readiness mighty arm did wield.
Oh Jonathan! for thee I am distressed --
My friend, my brother! -- speak, my tears, the rest.
Ye Hebrew dames, will ye forbear to join
My song of woe, nor mingle tears with mine?
The generous Prince, whose recent fate we mourn,
With costly vestments did the Fair adorn:
Rich gems, and gold, that charmed the admiring eye,
Were sprinkle'd over your robes of Tyrian dye:
Did Foreigners, to see the King, resort,
He proudly showed the Damsels of his court: --
Your rich attire, with perfect beauty joined,
Won every heart, and filled the enraptured mind.
OH! Saul! -- oh! Jonathan! -- our lsrael's host!
Ofc have the Heathen proved you to their cost:
Your names, with terror sill'd the nations round --
Appalled, they heard your warlike trumpet sound.
Swifter, you rushed to meet the coming war,
Than towering eagles cut the yielding air --
Fiercer than lions tear their destined prey,
You met the foe, and swept whole hosts away --
Swift from your bows, unerring, show the dart;
Nor failed your jav'lins to arrest the heart.
Ye sons of Israel! thee, the dreadful deed,
Sinks deep within, and makes each bosom bleed.
Your heavy sorrows yet with caution tell,
Lest when in doleful accounts you reveal
The mighty v.oe, Fhilistia's sons rejoice,
Loudly blaspheme, and rend the echoing skies --
Invoke their gods, obscene -- fresh altars raise --
While nightly revels shout their idol's praise.
Thus they their impious madness shall proclaim,
Mock all our woe, and curse Jehovah's name.
OH Saul! illustrious hero! may thy name,
With Jonathan's, borne on the wings of fame,
Reach, with your glorious deeds, from pole to pole,
'Till winds lie still, and waters cease to roll.
How are the mighty fallen! -- the sword, the spear,
And all the rich habiliments of war,
Lie scattered over the bloody sield, and tell,
How Israel's Nobles by the Heathen fell.

