SOME ARGUMENTS AGAINST WORLDLY-MINDEDNESS, And needless Care and Trouble. WITH
Some other useful INSTRUCTIONS.

REPRESENTED By way of a DIALOGUE or DISCOURSE between two, called by the Names
of MARY and MARTHA.



BOSTON: Printed by E. RUSSELL, next (...) the (...) of Liberty-Tree, for ZADOK
KING, of (...) 1791. [Price SIX PENCE.]

A DIALOGUE BETWEEN MARTHA AND MARY.
MARY. I AM glad to see you my Sister, hoping our Discourse may be for
edification; and I desire to know whether you are well in body, but more
especially whether your soul is in health and prosperity.


MARTHA. I perceive, Sister, your enquiry after my health requires a more deep
and solemn answer than is common at the meeting of friends, who usually enquire
only after the welfare of the mortal body, as though that was a matter of the
greatest importance.


MARY. Truly it is so: But why are we not more concerned for the immortal soul
than the mortal body of our friend? Is it not because we are apt to look more
at things that are seen, which are temporal, than at the things that are not
seen, which are eternal? Could the clouds be removed, and the veil drawn aside
that hides eternity from our sight, I believe we should often be apt to forget
to enquire whether this mortal body was healthy, and our first and last
discourse when we met together would be concerning our soul's health, and that
eternal life that shall never end. But you have not yet told me whether you are
well.


MAR. I can answer concerning my body; through the mercy of GOD I am well. But
when I think of my soul I hardly know what to say concerning that; but I cannot
say it is in health, for it is almost surfeited with the cares of this present
life, which makes me feel unfit for the service of GOD or man. I long to have
it otherways, but I cannot obtain my desire: If you can tell me of any way to
be ^^ee (...) this care and trouble, I should be gl^^ to hear it.


MARY. I can joyfully tell you ^^ere is a way of peace: Come sit at the feet of
the lovely JESUS; and first wash his feet with the tears of true repentance,
and then sit and hear his sweet voice, saying, Daughter be of good comfort,
though thou art a great sinner, I am a more great Savior: Thy sins are forgiven
thee; go in peace. I say come sit and hear such comforting words as these, and
see what will become of all your care and trouble.


MARTHA. O how happy I should be if I had nothing to do but to sit at JESUS'
feet and hear his words; but there is so much necessary service for me to do in
the affairs of this world, that it not only takes up my time, but takes up my
mind also too much, and causes many troubles: So that I am sometimes ready to
wish that I had wings (...) a dove, that I might fly away and be at rest.


MARY. You seem to think you should be happy if you had nothing to do but to
sit at JESUS' feet and hear his words, but I can tell you we should always be
at the feet of JESUS, let our work be what it will. Our trouble does not
consist in what we have to do or suffer; but sin is the cause of all our
trouble. We may be as truly at the feet of CHRIST, and take as much pleasure
when we are doing his will, as when we have nothing to do but to sit and hear
his words. It is pleasant to know what our LORD commands us to do, but much of
our happiness (...) in doing his will. Therefore you are unwise to wish for
wings to fly away to find rest; for true rest is only to be found in the place
where our wise LORD sees fit to put us: There is the best place in all the
world for us to take delight, if we can but cast our troublesome sins away.


MARTHA. But what shall I do with all the cares that perplex my mind.


MARY. Cast all your care upon the LORD, for he cares for you; and let your
care be to do your duty every day: Let your m^nd be stayed on him, and he will
keep you in perfect peace. We bring needless trouble upon ourselves, by trying
to do the work that the LORD has told us he will do himself. It is the LORD's
work to take care of his children. Our kind Father knows his poor children are
not fit to ca^ve for themselves and therefore he has revealed it to be his
will that they should trust themselves and all their concerns wholly in his
faithful hands. He knows what we have need of* and our GOD will supply all our
need. He will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withhold from
them that walk uprightly: Then our care should be to see that we walk uprightly.


MARTHA. But what shall I do when my heavenly Father seems to frown upon me,
and Providence works so that it looks as if all was against me?


MARY. Then trust in the LORD and stay upon your GOD; though he slay you, yet say
you will trust in him. If you are in trouble, call on the LORD for help* but
never let a murmuring though it have any stay in your soul. How unreasonable it is
for poor, dark, short-sighted mortals to think they could order any matter more
wisely than it is ordered by Him who is infinitely wise of heart and mighty in
power. Though Providence may look ever so dark to you, yet as certain as you
can be that you love GOD, so certain you may be that all things are working
together for your good. I think this word in Romans viii. 28. is worthy of a
moments meditation. "And we know" Here is something it seems the Saints have a
sure knowledge of, ^et things look ever so dark; though they may be destitute,
afflicted and tormented ever so much, yet they may say, We know "that all
things;" (this is a very comprehensive word, it takes in all the mercies and
afflictions the Saints can meet with in time) "work together for good to them
that love GOD." -- As a skilful Physician would apply many medicines to a man
afflicted with many sore diseases, some of the medicines might be sweet and
some bitter, telling him, all shall work together for good: So our dear
Redeemer deals with us in wisdom and love. He caused us to hear his sweet
voice, which brought us to life when we were dead in trespasses and sins; yet
we are still afflicted with many sore diseases, all which he has undertook to
cure. And there never was or will be a Physician on earth worthy to be compared
with him: He is infinite in knowledge, and of never-failing skill. Then let us
rest ourselves safely in his hands, and be exceeding joyful in all our
tribulations, nothing doubting but that the bitterest pill will do the most
good. I find I cannot express clearly what I see of these things; but I hope
you understand my mind by my weak expressions.


MARTHA. I believe I understand your meaning, though your expressions are
short; I know by experience that the ideas of the soul can run beyond what can
be communicated by words. But can it be as you say? Does the high and lofty One
that inhabits eternit^, who makes Heaven his throne, and the earth his
footstool, condescend (...) take a special care of any of his poor, sinful
creatures here on earth? Will he overrule all the affairs they trust in his
hands, so that all shall prosper, and not suffer any thing to hurt them by any
means: I think if the case be so, and if I am one that he takes such care of, I
have brought much needless trouble upon myself.


MARY. If you think this is too good news to be true, go to the Scriptures and
search for yourself: I desire to assert nothing for truth in matters of
religion, but what can be proved by the Scriptures; and what I find there I
depend upon for certain truth. We read of the godly man, that whatsoever he
does shall prosper. And there is no want to them that fear the LORD. As the
mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the LORD is round about them that fear
him* Blessed are all they that put their trust in him. The blessed JESUS speaks
plainly of this matter ^n Matt. vi. 24, to the end of the chap. CHRIST says,
See that ye be not troubled. Fear not is often repeated. But the Scriptures
that prove the care the LORD takes of his children, and their safety and duty
to trust themselves and all they have in his hands, are too numerous to repeat.


MARTHA. Truly the Scriptures are full of such consolations; I see they fully
prove more than you have said. Our glorious Redeemer takes such constant care
and particular notice of his children, that there shall not an hair of their
head perish without his leave. And he has surely promised over and over, by
many words, that he will do them good. I see that I am a foolish child. I have
troubled myself about things that did not belong to me. I mourn to think of
what I have done. I have been as it were trying to take the LORD's work out of
his hands, and the work he has appointed for me to do I have too much
neglected. O that I could always live as happy as you do when you sit weeping
at the feet of our lovely JESUS! I know by experience that is a joyful place to
sit at So joyful that I believe none ever sit there long before they weep for
joy. Though I am too careful and troubled about many things, yet at some happy
moments I have known the joy of weeping at my Master's feet. At first I began
to weep for sorrow, but as soon as I heard his soul-reviving voice I began to
weep for joy. And while you have been telling how happy we might live, my own
experience appears and gives in a witness of the truth of what you say.


MARY. I can join with you in mourning my folly. I also wish that I could
always live as happy as you do when you sit weeping at the Master's feet: But I
am ashamed of myself; I see that the proper place for me to be is, not only at
the feet of CHRIST but also at the feet of all his children. I think I should
be thankful if I may be permitted like a dog to pick up the crumbs that fall
from the blessed Master's table, where he feeds his children. When I take a
view of myself, I can find no good there, all looks dark and melancholy. Self
is an unpleasant field for meditation. If I stay there long* I shall be in
danger of starving.


MARTHA. Self is an unpleasant field indeed; but I am so foolish that I stay
there sometimes until my soul is almost starved to death.


MARY. We should stay looking of ourselves no longer than just to see that
there is no good there, and then hasten away from this barren wilderness, and
enter the pleasant field where our beloved Savior shows his most beautiful
face. Let us be speaking of the glory of his kingdom, and telling of his
wondrous works. Let us be meditating of his power, and telling of his salvation
from day to day. Let us behold and admire the infiniti perfections of our GOD,
until we can say thou art altogether lovely; thou have made me glad through thy
work, and I will triumph in the works of thy hands. O how sweet and now
pleasant! Here Is matter enough to afford a joyful song! We may glory in the
LORD and rejoice in the LORD; our souls may make their boast in the LORD. Let
us walk out into this field to meditate. This field is so large and contains
such a variety of beauties and pleasures, we may be always finding something
new. Here is to be found all manner of precious fruits for the soul to feed
upon. Here we may glean a little such food as we expect to live upon in the
heavenly world Therefore let none ever meet us in any other field.


Mar. Truly this is a sweet field for meditation: I have spent many sweet hours
there in times past, and I could wish it might be the place of my abode: But
alas I live a mourner's life! I conclude I am more easily led astray than any
other mortal that ever tasted of the love of JESUS. For when at any time my
dear LORD leads me away from all my troubles into the field of pleasure, and
there my soul begins to feast and take delight, then some trifling care, or
some vain temptation comes and takes me by the hand, and I am so foolish that
away I go, and forsake the paths of uprightness to walk in the ways of
darkness: Then I am in trouble, and many sorrows compass me about. Thus I
destroy myself; but I cannot help myself. What shall I do in such a case? How
shall I get back when I have run away from CHRIST?


MARY. I will try to answer your question according to the testimony of
Scripture, and the witness of experience. It is a mournful and a shameful thing
to run away from the blessed JESUS, who is the spring of all our life, joy and
pleasure. But since we are such foolish children that we are very apt to leave
our Father's rich table to feed among the swine, how shall we get back again?
We can run away from CHRIST, but we can never return to him again without his
special assistance; but yet there is a duty for us to do, though fallen never so
low. We are active creatures, and therefore we must be active in returning
again to our Father's house. Though we are sunk as low, and bound as fast as
Jonah was, yet from thence we must look toward his holy temple, and cry to him
that is able to help us.


MARTHA. But sometimes I am in a worse case than Jonah, when he was in the
whales belly: for though he had no way to help himself, yet he had praying
breath, so that he could cry to the LORD for help and was heard and soon
relieved. But as for me I am often swallowed up by worldly cares or carnal
security, or something as bad, and carried down the stream against my will, and
yet I have no heart to pray, and it seems like mockery to ask for help in words
when the LORD knows my heart is not engaged therein.


MARY. This is a sad case indeed; but even in such a case we ought to pray and
not to faint. If we stay here and yield to sin, and give over trying to ask for
help we shall be in danger of growing harder and harder, until our last state
is worse than the first. (Not that I think any will utterly fall from saving
grace; but grace will surely teach all that possess it to pray.) Therefore we
must exert all our power in begging and pleading to the LORD for help, and
never give over though he gives us no answer, or though the enemy tells us to hold
our peace, yet let us cry so much the more. Though the blessed JESUS should long
hide his face; and at length frown upon us and tell us it is not meet to give
children's bread to such dogs as we he; yet we must not give out for that, but
acknowledge the truth thereof; yet plead with the dogs to be permitted to eat
of the children's crumbs. We must, like the poor prodigal, resolve to return,
though we feel ourselves a great way off in a foreign land and our compassionate
Father will run to meet his returning children. He pities them when he sees
them toiling all night for nothing; and he is pleased with their earnest
endeavors, though he knows that without him they can do nothing. The love of our
Redeemer is such, that when he sees we can live no longer without him, he will
appear and turn our night into day, and our sorrow shall be sweetened with joy.
O how our hearts rejoice to see our LORD again, after we have been enclosed in
clouds and thick darkness! Glory to his name that he blots out as a cloud our
transgressions, and as a thick cloud our sins, and comes for our relief: When
all other refuge fails us, the Beauty of Heaven comes leaping on the mountains,
and skipping on the hills. Then we mourn and rejoice at the same time; our own
works make us mourn, and cause us shame. We see that to us belongs nothing but
shame and confusion of face because we have sinned against such a holy GOD; but
we rejoice in the LORD who is the rock of our salvation. Then we resolve never
to run away from our lovely JESUS again. We long to get more near to him still.
His love is so attracting, that the more we see of his glory, the more we long
to see.


MARTHA. When this is the happy case, how shall we keep ourselves in the love
of GOD?


MARY. None but the LORD can keep us, yet he has appointed a work for us to
do, so that we ought to be as active as though we could do all ourselves. We must
work out our own salvation with fear and trembling; yet every soul that obeys
this command knows it is GOD that works within them both to will and to do of
his good pleasure. This is a mystery that cannot be unfolded by words as it may
be understood by feeling the truth thereof by experience. I think by Scripture
and experience that the only way to live in the sensible possession of the love
of GOD, is to keep his commands: As JESUS says, He that loves me will keep my
commands, and my Father will love him, and we will come and make our abode with
him. We must watch and pray continually* though at some happy moments we may feel
as though the danger is all past, and the enemies are all dead; but there is
never more need of watching than at such a time; for our enemies are still
alive and lie hid waiting to see us led down our watch. Therefore let us hold
fast what we have received, and see that we do not lose the ground that through
grace we have gained. We must pray without ceasing, for all our strength and
help comes from CHRIST. We must watch and search, and study and pray to know
what our LORD would have us to do. Our happiness greatly consists in doing his
will. It was the meat of our great Redeemer to do his Father's will and to
finish his work: And O how sweetly do his children grow when they feed upon the
same heavenly meat! If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. If we
long to glorify GOD let us bear much fruit. We must also watch against every
motion of sin: Resist the first vain thought that comes: Keep our hearts with
all diligence: Take heed lest our evil hearts depart from the LORD. And though
our enemies are lively and strong, too strong for us, yet the weapons of
earnest prayer will prevail when nothing else will do, if we are but constant
to fight against our spiritual enemies, through the strength of CHRIST, we
shall surely prevail against them. Resist the devil and CHRIST will make him
flee. I speak by experience (and I think it agrees with the Scriptures.)
Whenever I have been engaged in war against my sins, though I had no strength of
my own, yet the LORD suffered not my enemies to triumph over me; but as soon as
I grew careless and laid down my weapons, my enemies prevailed and brought me
into bondage; and there my wise LORD let me be, until I saw my folly and tasted
the bitter fruit of unwatchfulness.


MARTHA. My experience bears witness to the truth of these things, and I
resolve to try to be more watchful than I have been; but I know I can do
nothing in my own strength. I think I see the narrow way, and it looks
exceeding bright and beautiful, and I long to walk therein. But there is
nothing more base than I am. I see I am much defiled with sin. O for
deliverance from sin! It is sin is the cause of all my trouble. I would do
good, but evil is present with me. I know that in me, that is in my flesh
dwells no good thing. But why should I stand still looking o^ myself? Behold
the Lamb of GOD has died for the chief of sinners! I will run and fall down at
his blessed feet, for I have no where else to go. Behold I see, through a glass
darkly a little glimpse of his glory, and my heart is ravished at the sight!
Though my own comeliness is turned to corruption before him, yet the joy far
exceeds the sorrow. Let me be abased, I care not how much if JESUS is but
exalted. As for my iniquities. I believe he will purge them away. He is able to
cleanse my defiled soul by that (...) ^ighty power, whereby he is able to
subdue all things to himself. Now, my Sister, rejoice with me and bless the
LORD. Come magnify the LORD with me, and let us exalt his name together. Glory
to GOD for the peace I now enjoy! Now I can trust myself, soul and body and all
my concerns for time and eternity, in the hands of this lovely One. He will
perform all things for me exactly right. I see that he has done all things
well. Why have I been so careful and troubled about many things, when there is
but one thing needful? May I but have CHRIST to dwell in my heart by faith, I
have enough, all is well. O the love of JESUS how sweet it is!

O this is my REDEEMER's love,
Descending fr^^ly from above
To my poor soul; then back it goes
To my dear LORD, from whom it flows.
Why does he any notice take
Of me who did his way forsake.
Except it be to bid me go
From Him to everlasting woe.
Free grace I free grace I my soul does sing!
Glory to GOD! my heavenly King!
I long to sing a song of praise
That shall not cease to endless days.
But my soul seems to be in a cage, so I cannot fly away and sing as I desire,
as I believe the birds of paradise do above. Come Lord Jesus come quickly.


MARY. Dear Sister I rejoice with you. Glory to GOD alone. You speak my heart,
and I trust I have spoke yours. Come let us sing as well as we can while we
remain in the cage. Quickly our Wellbeloved will send the messenger Death, or
come himself and set our longing souls at liberty. Then we shall obtain all our
desires: We shall leave all our sins behind us; and they can never follow us
into that holy City above, for there shall in no case enter any thing that
defiles. Then shall we be as holy as we can desire. Then we shall be satisfied
with the love of him who is altogether lovely. Then we shall be able to praise
him as we desire, and all the excellent ones in Heaven and earth will join and
help us praise our GOD forever! Now we receive but now and then a drop of sweet
love and heavenly joy; but then we shall drink of the river of pleasure
forevermore. O blessed hope! full of consolation! Sweet and pleasant is the
way, and sweet will be the end of our journey.

MAR. Amen! Amen! my soul does say.
O how I long to fly away.
And see my lovely JESUS dear.
Who now my weary soul does cheer.
Glory to GOD and to the LAMB,
Forever blessed be his Name!
Glory to Him that once did die
For rebel sinners such as I!
He is altogether lovely! His justice and mercy are lovely. All his dealings
with his children are altogether lovely. We may trust in him and not be afraid
of earth or Hell. I can say hitherto the LORD has helped me. Here I desire to
set up a pillar of remembrance, and never forget what I now see of the safety
of trusting in the LORD. If all the Angels in Heaven and all the men on earth
should promise to stand by me and be my friends in all dangers, it could not
make me feel so safe as I now feel in the hands of my GOD. The LORD is my
strength and song. Glory to GOD alone!


MARY. Glory to GOD for what he has done for your soul. I have had a simpathy
with your sorrow, and I rejoice for your joy and consolation. O the sweet
uniting love of JESUS! If the fellowship of the spirit is so sweet here, while
all our grace is mixed with sin, and all our joy is mixed with sorrow, how
unspeakably sweet will our fellowship be when we shall meet together in the
world of glory, freed from all sin, with our soul (...) bodies refined and made
immortal, decked with the beauty of our glorious Head! O how unworthy am I to
hope for such unspeakable blessings; I know I deserve Hell, yet I believe my
GOD will bring me safely to Heaven: Not for any worthiness in me, but for his
own name's sake. Glory to GOD!

I hope to spend eternal days
With Him whom I admire and praise.
Where all the bright redeemed throng
Shall sing the everlasting song.
There shall we see in glory bright
The GOD in whom our souls delight.
The Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
With all the bright angelic Host.
There shall the whole redeemed Race
Behold their great Redeemer's face,
And all unite with one accord
To praise and bless their glorious LORD.
O glorious happy day indeed.
When we shall all from sin be freed,
When we our glorious King shall see,
And like to Him forever be.
Come let us run and take the prize
That shines so bright before our eyes;
With patience run through troubles here,
Until we see our JESUS dear.
MAR. O I long to run faster toward the glorious prize! All the troubles of
time are nothing in my way, when the eye of faith is fixed on JESUS.

Engage my soul with all thy might*
Under thy glorious Captain fight;
None never need to quit the field:
I hope through CHRIST to never yield.
Call on the LORD for grace and strength*
Eternal peace will come at length.
Sweet songs of praise I hope to sing,
Melodious, music to my KING.
I know He Is worthy of my praise;
To Him I dedicate my days:
Hosanna to the GOD of grace.

ASHFIELD, March 17, 1791.

