THE Young Mason's Monitor; CONTAINING SOME NECESSARY HINTS TO YOUNG BRETHREN
-- YET NOT BENEATH THE ATTENTION OF ANY.

TO WHICH IS ANNEXED, A COLLECTION OF MASONIC SONGS, ODES, etc. MANY OF THEM
NEW AND EXCELLENT.

COMPILED BY B. WHEELER, SECRETARY OF ST. JOHN's LODGE, No. 1, PROVIDENCE.

PRINTED AT PROVIDENCE, FOR THE EDITOR, IN THE YEAR OF LIGHT 5791.

TO THE MOST WORSHIPFUL CHRISTOPHER CHAMPLIN, ESQUIRE, GRAND MASTER, AND THE
RIGHT WORSHIPFUL THE HON. JABEZ BOWEN, ESQUIRE. DEPUTY GRAND MASTER, OF FREE AND
ACCEPTED MASONS, IN THE STATE OF Rhode Island and Providence-Plantations, THIS
PUBLICATION, BEING THE FIRST OF THE KIND SINCE THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A GRAND
LODGE IN THIS STATE,

IS MOST RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED, BY YOUR FRIEND AND BROTHER, THE EDITOR.
Providence, June 2, 5791.
LINES WRITTEN BY Brother Stewart, N. Y.

THE Flower that decks the verdant field,
As writers all agree,
A poison to the Spider yields,
And honey to the Be.
So envirous readers, -- Spider like,
May read with partial eye,
Extracting poison of dislike,
To please them -- what care I.
The worthy still some sweet may find,
Disguised from envious eyes,
In mystie darkness here confined,
Seen plain by Mason's, wife,
Let censure -- when a fault he meet.
Devour with venomed tusk;
Let freeborn souls enjoy the sweets.
To envy -- leave the (...).
THE YOUNG MASON 'S MONITOR.
ADDRESS.
THE external name of Free Mason does not entitle man to usurp any authority,
or claim any respect from his fellow, without he strictly conforms to the
salutary laws and restrictions, on which our mystery is founded. Therefore, I
would advise the young and unexperienced brother, that he be very circumspect;
for "by the fruit the tree is known." -- The errors you may accidentally fall
into by an involuntary mistake, rectisy them with that prudence becoming a
Mason. Would you wish to be esteemed by the good and worthy, be prudent in your
words and actions, let it ever be your ultimate view, to add respect to the
venerable and noble order, of which you have the honor of being a Member;
which will not only disarm malevolence of its sting, but gain you that love and
respect which is due to merit.

PRUDENTIALS.
1. In all your actions whether public or private, be prudent as becomes a
Mason; consider in your public character, that the eye of the world is upon
you, and the partial tongue of the envious is liable to censure the most
virtuous endeavors; much more so, should you, as a Mason, forget your duty,
and give any plausable reason, by being guilty of the least irregular step in
your conduct.

2d. In your more private connections, remember your thoughts are exposed to
the allseeing eye of the great Architect of the Universe; therefore, prudently
consider, that great and comprehensive Masonic command, laid down in our
spiritual Tressel-Board, "As ye would that men should do unto you,
"Do ye even so to them."


3d. It is indispensably your duty to check every appearance of vice; for where
its baneful influence takes impression on human nature, its effects are
terrible. It draws a gloom over every shining virtue, prevents its growth, and
steals into the deepest recesses of the heart, and infects every thing within
its reach; and produces pride, malice, revenge, discord, etc. etc. Such
epidemic disorders are diametically opposite to our noble institution, and must
be guarded against in particular; they must have no place of residence -- no,
not even a name in the breast, especially when made the repository of our grand
Mystery.

4th. Prudence observes, that a man given to intemperance is no way fitting for
a member of any laudable society; for he values neither health, wealth,
friends, family, reputation or character: But temperance is one of the
principal ornaments of our venerable institution. -- Therefore, as you prize
your character as a Mason, be temperate in all things.

5th. Prudence informs us, that Charity, or universal love, is a peculiar
virtue, and grows only in the breast of the benevolent, and is the grand corner
stone of our order. It unites us in one universal band of affection --
conciliates true friendship, and effectuates the great and noble purpose of
making each other happy, and rejoicing in each others felicity.

6th. Would you wish to gain esteem and respect be temperate, be frugal,
generous, benevolent, humane, sincere and kind to all men; this is
indispensably your duty, would you wish to support the character of a Free
Mason. Prudence says, the prevalency of good example is great; and no language
so expressive as a consistent life and conversation; these once forfeited in a
masonic character, will diminish the man in the eye of the worthy, and give a
full scope to the envious part of mankind to censure our noble and honorable
institution.

7th. True brotherly love is essentially necessary to attain to any degree of
perfection in the Masonic Art (as it is the life and essence of all other
virtues) your cultivating it, and showing its influence in your life and
actions, will testify to the world, the goodness of your respectable order, and
the tongue of the envious and malevolent will be struck dumb, and slander
disarmed of its venomous sting. Cultivating brotherly love with laudable
emulation, endeavoring to excel each other in whatever in good and
praiseworthy, is what is required of all Free Masons. Be not contented,
therefore, with the bare name of a Mason, but walk worthy of that glorious
Profession, in constant conformity to its dictates; for he who styles himself a
Mason, and acts contrary to the mild and salutary precepts of our venerable
order, is not worthy of being a Member of the same.

8th. Prudence says, Evil-speaking is a mirror, which shows a bad man's
principle in fair colors. As a Mason in particular, shun this pernicious
practice of backbiting and speaking evil of any man. How easy is it to speak
well of any man, if you know it to be so; if you do not, say no ill of him. Be
prudent, remember the royal Psalmist (he says) "Set a watch, O Lord, before my
mouth, keep thou the door of my lips;" this detestable vice is the offspring of
a diabolical, depraved disposition. A slanderous tongue bites like a serpent,
and cuts like a sword. Consider seriously, brethren, should any of us be guilty
of censure, or slander (which I hope not) how inconsistent such base
proceedings are with the mystical precepts of our institution. Dare any of us
as Masons, presume, by one pernicious blast of our tongue, at once to ruin our
brother or friend's character and reputation, perhaps to all posterity. Lay
your hand on your heart, appeal to that, consider how incompatible with the
precepts that were delivered to you as a Mason, to be guilty of such an injury,
then shudder at the thought of such baseness, that is so despisable in the eye
of man, and so contrary to the commands of the great Architect of the Universe.

9th. Prudence advises you, as a man in all your actions and dealing with the
world, whether of a public or a private nature, to "act on the square" with all
mankind, rendering every man his due. As a Mason, this duty is doubly
increased; prudently consider, how great the violation, should you stoop so low
as to forget every sacred tie of Masonry, and wrong your friend and brother,
what would be the consequence? You would expose yourself to the tongue of the
slanderer, and be despised by all men, and what is worse, forever forfeit the
love and respect of every worthy Mason and friend; -- therefore let me conjure
you, by that sincere masonic love, that I bear to your person and character as
a friend and brother, that you forget not the sacred band of union, that
cements and binds us in love and amity together -- that you keep in view that
grand period of your life, when by the authority of our Order, you became the
fellow, friend and brother of the greatest and best of men, throughout the
globe. And as long as you act consistent with the salutary rules of Masonry,
you will be esteemed and beloved, reverenced and respected,, by every virtuous
and worthy man.

Permit me here to add a charge, which, or something similar, you no doubt
remember to have been given to you on a solemn occasion -- and let me recommend
a serious attention to the useful Monitions contained in it.

THE CHARGE.
BROTHER,
YOU are now admitted, by the unanimous consent of our Lodge, a fellow of our
most ancient and honorable society; ancient, as having subsisted from time
immemorial, and honorable, as tending in every particular to make the man so,
that will be but conformable to its glorious precepts. The greatest monarchs in
all ages, as well of Asia and Africa as of Europe, have been encouragers of the
royal Art, and many of them have presided as Grand Masters over the Masons in
their respective dominions; not thinking it any diminution of their imperial
dignities to level themselves with their Brethren in Masonry, and to act as
they did. The world's Great Architect is our Supreme Master, and the unerring
rule he has given us is that by which we work. Religious disputes are never
suffered in the Lodge, for, as Free-Masons, we only pursue the universal
religion of nature. This is the cement which joins men of the most different
principles in one sacred band, and brings together those who were the most
distant from one another.

THERE are three general heads of duty, which Masons ought always to inculcate,
viz. to God, our neighbors, and ourselves. To God, in never mentioning his
name but with that reverential awe which becomes a creature to bear to his
Creator; and to look upon him always as the summum bonum which we came into the
world to enjoy: And according to that view to regulate our pursuits. To our
neighbors, in "acting upon the square," or doing as we would be done by. To
ourselves, in avoiding all intemperance and excesses, whereby we may be led
into a behavior unbecoming our laudable profession.

IN the state, a Mason is to act as a peaceable and dutiful subject, conforming
cheerfully to the government under which he lives; he is to pay a due deference
to his superiors, and from his inferiors he is rather to receive honor with
some reluctance than to extort it; he is to be a man of benevolence and
charity, not sitting down contented while his fellow creatures (but much more
his Brethren) are in want, and it is in his power, without prejudicing himself
or family, to relieve them. In the Lodge he is to behave with due decorum, lest
the beauty and harmony thereof should be disturbed and broke. He is to be
obedient to the Master and presiding officers, and to apply himself closely to
the business of Masonry, that he may sooner become a proficient therein, both
for his own credit, and for that of the Lodge. He is not to neglect his
necessary avocations for the sake of Masonry, nor to involve himself in
quarrels with those who, through ignorance, may speak evil of, or ridicule it.
He is to be a lover of the arts and sciences, and to take all opportunities of
improving himself therein. If he recommends a friend to be made a Mason, he
must vouch him to be such as he really believes will conform to the aforesaid
duties; lest by his misconduct at any time the Lodge should pass under some
evil imputations. Nothing can prove more shocking to all faithful Masons, than
to see any of their Brethren profane, or break through the sacred rules of
their Order, and such as can do it, they wish had never been admitted.

WHEN assembled within the peaceful walls of our Lodge, where universal love
and harmony inspires each bosom. When our business is over, then prudence
introduces gaiety and good humor, to cheer the mind, and diffuse its pleasing
joys over the understanding; then sweet hilarity smiles serene on every
countenance, and calls for the cheerful Song.

IN the following Pages the worthy Brother will find a small Collection; which
I have selected from different Authors, and which I hope will be well received,
and tend to promote harmony and unanimity.

A COLLECTION OF MASONIC SONGS, ODES, etc.
SONG I.
HERE social love serenely smiles,
Soft harmony inspires the breast,
Music the weight of care beguiles,
And lulls each gloomy thought to rest.
Come dove-ey'd Peace, thou heavenly guest,
And Concord; attribute divine!
Reside within each Mason's breast,
Their hearts with sacred Union join.
Thus long shall stand our noble art,
Hid deep within each faithful breast,
We feel its influence on the heart,
Therefore we say -- probatum est.
SONG II.
CONVENED we are met my jovial souls,
With sparkling wine come fill our bowls,
Let concord be the toast;
With glass in hand let each agree
To sing in praise of Masonry,
What mortal more can boast.
Here dove-ey'd Peace, celestial maid,
Stands ready waiting for to aid,
And guard the sacred door;
Here Is Charity from Heaven sent,
To bring her free born sons content,
And comfort to the poor.
See in the East, effulgent shine,
Bright Wisdom with his rays divine,
Hark! Hark! the solemn sound:
"While thus we live in mutual love,
"We taste what angels do above,
"Here happiness is found.
"The fruit of Eden's tree we taste,
"Its balmy joys are our repast,
"Here freedom cheers the heart;
"The indigent oppressed with grief,
"Gains from his brother's hand relief,
"Each to his wants impart.
"The Great and Good, with us combine
"To trace our mysteries divine,
"And find the pleasing light;
"With pleasure we pursue the plan,
"While friendship rivets man to man,
"How pleasing is the sight."
United thus our structure stands,
Untouched by sacriligious hands,
A monument of fame;
Nor envious foes shall ever deface
The virtues that our order grace,
Or blast a Mason's name.
'Till Heaven sends her summons sorth,
From East to West, from South to North,
Her chosen sons to call;
While time runs its continual round,
Shall fame with golden trumpet sound,
Masons shall never fall.
TOAST. TO all true and faithful Masons.

SONG III.
MASTER. RECITATIVE.
ARISE, my brethren, let us arise,
For work let us prepare,
Let Us build a fabric to the skies,
True architects we are.
AIR.
With plum-line and square,
Come let us prepare,
True friendship shall be our foundation;
Da Capo.
A temple we'll raise,
Deserving of praise,
For our first Master Grand was a Mason.
SEN. WAR. RECITATIVE.
See in the east yon star refulgent shine,
Whose accents sweet fill me with love divine;
Attentive, brethren -- mark his precepts true,
Come heart in hand -- and eager let us pursue.
AIR.
Come follow, follow, let us pursue
Yon eastern star, we have in view;
From whence true knowledge springs,
Behold! with what effulgent rays,
Upon his breast, his jewels blaze;
An ornament to kings.
Da Capo.
From west to east, let us pursue,
And keep yon orient star in view.
JUN. WAR. RECITATIVE.
It Is high meridian, laborers all retire,
(Rest after labor, our bodies do require)
Till called again, your task for to fulfill,
I go a while to learn our Master's will.
AIR.
Whenever commanded we are always obedient,
When Wisdom he orders, for work we prepare,
We work, sing and caper, yet think it expedient,
To govern our actions by compass and square.
Chorus.
With love that is delighting,
And friendship inviting,
Our moments in innocent mirth we employ;
Come see Mason's felicity,
Working and singing with hearts full of joy.
TREASURER. RECITATIVE.
When harmony and love unite,
To me how pleasing is the sight,
My soul's elate -- my heart's on fire;
Who can behold, and not admire?
AIR.
Come Charity thou goddess fair,
Come immortal heavenly guest,
Teach to us thy virtues rare,
Reside within each Mason's breast.
Da Capo.
Cement, unite us all in love,
And fit us for the realms above.
SECRETARY. RECITATIVE.
Jehosephat, the great Recorder,
Chosen by great Solomon,
Trace his pages there in order,
See the deeds by Masons done.
AIR.
When our Masters command,
With my pen in my hand,
With pleasure I always obey,
Da Capo.
Recording each name,
On the annals of fame,
That will stand till the world does decay.
GRAND CHORUS.
With lofty praise rehearse,
In soft poetic verse,
Hail Masonry.
With heart and hand unite,
Let us support with might
And guard our ancient Rite,
That makes us free.
TOAST. May Wisdom continue our Happiness, Strength support our virtuous
Resolutions, and Beauty adorn our Beds.

SONG IV.
CURIOSITY labors and longs for to know,
Why Masons are children of fame,
What makes them respected wherever they go,
Give me leave and the cause I Will explain.
A Mason's unawed by the sound of a name,
He harbors no hate in his breast;
What superiors may do he pretends not to blame
As he hopes they intend for the best.
He Is upright and just, to his country he is true,
Likewise to his friend and his lass,
Sincerity bids him give merit its due,
Thus happy his moments does pass.
No office he flatters, compounds with no cheat,
But always takes honesty's part,
Beloved and esteemed by the good and the great,
And Charity dwells in his heart.
From his store with a generous hand he bestows,
His mite to the indigent pool;
Compassion invites him wherever he goes.
When misery groans at the door.
The widow and orphan oppressed with grief,
When hunger and want on them wait,
His heart sympathizing, he sends them relief;
Humanity stands at his gate.
Yes, this is the man who the good does revere,
Though envy may aim to disgrace.
Undaunted he smiles, having nothing to fear,
While Innocence beams on his face.
What makes him beloved is his merit you see,
But this to the base is unknown;
In the eye of a Mason, the mote they can see,
But discern not the beam in their own.
TOAST. May each Mason be a good Man, and every good Man a Mason.

SONG V.
ARISE and sound thy trumpet, Fame,
Free Masonry aloud proclaim,
To realms and worlds unknown,
Tell them it is this, great David's son,
The wise, the matchless Solomon,
Prized far above his throne.
Those losty temples, cloud-cap'd towers,
Those stately domes are works of ours,
By us those piles were raised;
Then let mankind with songs advance,
And through the etherial vast expanse,
Let Masonry be praised.
We help the poor in time of need,
The naked clothe, the hungry feed,
It Is our foundation stone,
We build upon the noblest plan,
While friendship rivets man to man,
Uniting all in one.
Sweet harmony our order grace,
Here friendship smiles in every face,
Cementing all in love,
Obedient to our Master Grand,
Obedience was the first command,
That came from heaven above.
Thy trumpet, Fame, yet louder blow,
And let the distant regions know,
Free Masonry is this:
Almighty wisdom gave it birth,
While heaven fixed it here on earth,
A type of future bliss.
TOAST. To all Free Masons, however distressed or dispersed throughout the
Globe.

SONG VI.
YE Masons look around, and hark to the sound,
To none but the worthy it is known;
It Is not every he, who says I am free,
Deserves to be reckoned as one.
When I entered the road, dressed alamode,
My gold it most brilliantly shone,
More clothes I put on by the help of friend John,
Who freely disposed of his own.
When deeper I sought, arose a fresh thought,
Of the glorious thing I did see,
A jewel most bright appeared to my sight,
A rock and foundation to me.
I Am sure it is true, call me Christian or Jew,
Its rays I beheld in the East;
From whence the wise came to honor and fame.
Declaring the Author of Peace.
Be every Lodge-Night conducted upright,
Abide by the things that are pure;
No evil take in, choose virtue, quit sin,
Then shall the Lodge ever endure.
What a glorious sound encircles us round,
When once formed, the method to peace;
No afflictions near, no griefs interfere,
To lessen those measures of bliss.
O ye Angels above, unite us in love,
Proclaim through the world Masonry;
Our actions shine bright as we come to the light,
When entered and once are made free.
TOAST. All Kings, Princes and States, who are Encouragers of the Royal Art.

ODE for the FESTIVAL of ST. JOHN, THE BAPTIST, 5791.
RECITATIVE.
BEHOLD the social Band appears!
Imparting joy, dispelling fears!
And waked by duty and by choice,
Command the sons of Freedom to rejoice.
SONG.
Boast not mortals human skill;
If the sculptured dome you raise,
Works of art by sancy's will,
Lead us often through folly's maze.
What if Phidia's chissel guide?
What if Titian's pencil grace?
Marble flatters but our pride,
Bane of all the human race.
RECITATIVE.
It Is from the watchful culture of the mind,
A well-directed soul, a sense refined,
That heavenly virtues spring to grace the man.
This be our noble conflict and our plan.
AIR.
Let the diamond's azure blaze,
Call its water bright and clear,
But confess the greater praise,
Rests on pity's tender tear.
May the social virtues bind,
Tune each sympathetic heart,
Raise the feeble, lead the blind,
Wipe the tear that swells to part.
RECITATIVE.
Ye blessed Ministers above,
Who guard the good with purest love,
Propitious hear the notes of praise,
Columbia's Sons their voices raise.
AIR.
Blessings await this Western Land,
Blessings overflow with liberal hand,
Commerce uprears our infant State,
And golden currents make us great:
Fair Science lifts her head and cries,
"I come to make you good and wise."
These be the glories of each day,
Marking OUR BROTHER'S gentle sway.
RECITATIVE.
Our social band, by love and honor joined,
Unite their zeal, as friends to human kind:
The Mystic sense is out, the sign does move,
Behold the SIGN -- Peace, harmony and love.
DUETTO.
Let the day be ever praised,
When the Royal Craft was raised,
Let the social virtues shine,
Doing good is sure divine.
CHORUS.
Give the Heroes all their due,
Twine their brows with laurels too,
But shall we no laurels find,
For our love to human kind?
Let the Social Virtues shine,
DOING GOOD is sure DIVINE.
TOAST. May the Sons of St. JOHN never deviate from the genuine principles of
their Ancestors.

THE DEPUTY-GRAND-MASTER'S SONG.
N. B. Every two last Lines of each Verse is the Chorus.

ON, on, my dear Brethren, pursue your great lecture,
And refine on the rules of old architecture:
High honor to Masons the Craft daily brings,
To those brothers of Princes, and fellows of Kings.
We drove the rude Vandals and Goths off the stage,
Reviving the arts of Augustus' sam'd age;
And Vespasian destroyed the vast temple in vain,
Since so many now rise in great George's mild reign.
The noble five orders composed with such art,
Will amaze the fixed eye, and engage the whole heart;
Proportion's sweet harmony gracing the whole,
Gives our work, like the glorious creation, a soul.
Then Master and Brethren preserve your great name.
This Lodge so majestic will purchase you fame,
Revered it shall stand till all nature expire,
And its glories never fade till the world is on fire.
See, see, behold here what rewards all our toil,
Inspires our genius and bids labor smile:
To our noble Grand Master let a bumper be crowned
To all Masons a bumper, so let it go round.
Again, my loved brethren, again let it pass,
Our ancient firm union cements with the glass;
And all the contention amongst Masons shall be,
Who better can work, or who better agree.
TOAST. May universal Masonry be the only universal Monarchy, and reign
triumphant in the hearts of the worthy.

THE FELLOW-CRAFT's SONG.
HAIL Masonry! thou Crast divine!
Glory of earth! from heaven revealed!
Which does with jewels precious shine,
From all but Masons eyes concealed.
CHORUS.
Thy praises due, who can rehearse,
In nervous prose or flowing verse?
From scorching heat, and piercing cold,
From beasts whose roar the forests rend;
From the assault of warriors bold,
The Mason's Art mankind defends.
CHORUS.
Be to this Art due honor paid,
From which mankind receives such aid.
Ensigns of state, that seed our pride,
Distinctions troublesome and vain.
By Masons true are laid aside.
Art's freeborn sons such toys disdain.
CHORUS.
Enobled by the name we bear,
Distinguished by the badge we wear.
Sweet fellowship from envy free,
Social converse of wise and good;
The Lodge's lasting cement be,
Which has for ages firmly stood.
CHORUS.
A Lodge thus bright, for ages past,
Has lasted, and shall ever last.
Then in our songs be justice done,
To those who have enriched the art;
From ADAM to great WASHINGTON,
And let each brother bear a part.
CHORUS.
Let noble Masons' healths go round.
Their praise in lofty Lodge resound.
TOAST. The Square in Conduct, the Level in Condition, the Plum-Line in
Rectitude, and the Compass in Prudence, to all Masons.

THE ENTERED APPRENTICE's SONG.
COME let us prepare,
We brothers that are,
Assembled on merry occasion;
Let Us drink, laugh and sing,
Our wine has a spring,
Here Is a health to an accepted Mason.
All charged. The world is in pain,
Our secrets to gain,
And still let them wonderand gaze on;
Till they are brought to light,
They Will never know the right,
Word or sign of an accepted Mason.
It Is this, and it is that,
They cannot tell what,
Why so many great men in the nation,
Should aprons put on,
To make themselves one,
With a free and an accepted Mason.
Antiquity's pride
We have on our side,
Which makes men just in their station:
There Is naught but what is good
To be understood,
By a free and an accepted Mason.
Great Kings, Dukes and Lords,
Have laid by their swords,
Our mystery to put a good grace on;
And never been ashamed,
To hear themselves named,
With a free and an accepted Mason.
Still firm to our trust,
In friendship we are just,
Our actions are guided by reason:
By observing this rule,
The passions move cool,
Of a free and an accepted Mason.
We Are true and sincere,
And just to the Fair,
They Will trust us on any occasion:
No mortals can more,
The Ladies adore,
Than a free and an accepted Mason
Then join hand in hand,
By each Brother firm stand,
Lets be merry and put a bright face on,
CHORUS
What mortal can boast,
So noble a toast,
As a free and an accepted Mason.
TOAST. May every Mason's Heart have the Ardenoy of Charcoal, and the Freedom
of Chalk -- but not the Coldness or Hardness of Marble, when the Distresses of
a Brother claim Assistance.

SONG XI.
A Mason's daughter fair and young,
The pride of all the virgin throng,
Thus to her lover said: --
Though Damon I your flame approve,
Your actions praise, your person love,
Yet still I live a Maid.
None shall untie my virgin zone,
But one to whom the secret's known,
Of famed Free Masonry;
In which the great and good combine,
To raise with generous design,
Man to felicity.
The Lodge excludes the fop and fool,
The plodding knave and party tool,
That liberty would fell;
The noble, faithful, and the brave,
No golden charmy can ever deceive,
In slavery to dwell.
This said, he bowed and went his way,
Applied, was made without delay,
Returned to her again:
The fair one granted his request,
Connubial joys their days have blessed,
And may they ever remain.
TOAST. Masons' Wives, and Masons' Bairns, and all that lie in Masons' Arms.

SONG XII.
ONCE I was blind, and could not see,
And all was dark around,
But Providence provided me,
And soon a friend I found;
Through hidden paths my friend me led,
Such ones as bab'lers never shall tread.
With a fa, la, la, etc.

He took all stumbling blocks away,
That I might walk secure,
And brought me long ever break of day,
To Sol's bright temple door,
Where we both admittance found,
By help of magic spell and sound.
With a fa la, etc.

The curber of my rash attempt
Did then my breast alarm,
And hinted I was not exempt,
Nor free from double harm;
Which put a stop to rising pride,
And made me trust more to my guide.
With a fa, la, etc.

With sober pace I then was led,
And brought to Sol's bright throne;
Where I was obliged to stop,
Till I myself made known;
With hideous noise I round was brought,
For to obtain that which I sought.
With a fa, la, etc.

In humble posture and due form,
I listened with good will;
Instead of mighty noise and storm,
All then was calm and still.
Such charming sounds I then did hear.
As quite dispeli'd all doubts and fear.
With a fa, la, etc.

The guardian of this mystic charm,
In shining jewels dressed,
Said that I need to fear no harm,
If faithful was my breast;
For though to rogues he was severe,
No harm an honest man need fear.
With a fa, la, etc.

Bright wisdom from his awful throne,
Bid darkness to with draw;
No sooner said than it was done,
And then -- great things I saw;
But what they were -- I now wont tell,
They safely in my breast shall dwell.
With a fa, la, etc.

Then round and round me he did tie,
And ancient, noble charm,
Which future darkness will desy,
And ward off cowan's harm;
With instruments in number three,
To learn the art GEOMETRY.
With a fa, la, etc.

TOAST. May the Rays of celestial Light pierce through the Veil of Ignorance, and
Perseverance remove the Key-Stone that covers Truth.

SONG XIII.
ASSEMBLED and tyl'd, let us social agree
With the Mason that sits on a throne;
For he charges a glass, and round let it pass,
To celebrate ancient St. John.
Though bablers may prattle in showing their spleen,
Their spite we compare to the drone;
For in sweet harmony in love we'll agree,
To celebrate ancient St. John.
The world is in pain, our secrets to gain,
In ignorance let them think on;
For in sweet harmony in love we'll agree,
To celebrate ancient St. John.
With toast after toast, let us drink, laugh and sing,
Remember the great WASHINGTON;
For his actions are rare, by the compass and square,
Thus celebrate ancient St. John.
Then join hand in hand, in a body firm stand,
Our cares and our troubles are gone;
Let us love, laugh and sing, and WASHINGTON bring,
To celebrate ancient St. John.
TOAST. To the Memory of him who first planted the Vine.

SONG XIV.
HAIL Masonry divine,
Glory of ages shine,
Long may thou hold;
Wherever thy Lodges stand,
May they have great command,
And always grace the land,
Thou Art divine.
Great fabrics still arise,
And touch the azure skies,
Great are thy schemes;
Thy noble orders are
Matchless beyond compare,
No art with thee can mare
Thou Art divine.
Hiram, the Architect,
Did all the Craft direct,
How they should build;
SOLOMON, great Israel's King,
Did mighty blessings bring,
And lest us room to sing,
Hail! ROYAL ART.
TOAST. The Splendour of the East, the Repose of the South, and the Solidity of
the West, to every regular Lodge of free and accepted Masons.

SONG XV.
YE thrice happy few,
Whose hearts have been true,
In concord and unity sound;
Let us sing and rejoice,
And unite every voice,
To send the gay chorus around.
CHORUS.
Like pillars we stand,
An immortal band,
Cemented by power from above;
Then freely let pass
The generous glass,
To Masonry, Friendship and Love.
The grand Architect
Whose word did erect
Eternity, measure and space,
First laid the fair plan
Whereon we began,
The cement of friendship and peace.
CHORUS. Like pillars we stand, etc.

Whose firmness of hearts
Fair treasure of arts,
To the eye of the vulgar unknown;
Whose luster can beam
New dignity and fame,
To the pulpit, the bar, and the throne.
CHORUS. Like pillars we stand, etc.

The great David's son,
Unmatched Solomon,
As recorded in sacred page,
Through Masonry became,
The favorite of fame,
The wonder and pride of his age.
CHORUS. Like pillars we stand, etc.

Indissoluble bands,
Our hearts and our hands
In social benevolence bind;
For true to his cause,
By immortal laws,
A Mason's a friend to mankind.
CHORUS. Like pillars we stand, etc.

Let joy fly around,
And peace, olive-bound
Preside at our mystical rites;
Whose conduct maintains,
Our auspicious domains,
And freedom with order unites.
CHORUS. Like pillars we stand, etc.

Nor let the fair maid
Our mysteries dread,
Or think them repugnant to love;
To beauty we bend,
And her empire defend,
Her empire derived from above.
CHORUS, Like pillars we stand, etc.

Then let us unite
Sincere and upright,
On the level of virtue to stand:
No mortal can be
So happy as we,
With a brother and friend in each hand.
CHORUS. Like pillars we stand, etc.

SONG XVI.
WE have no idle prating,
Of either Whig or Tory
But each agrees
To live at ease,
And sing or tell a story.
CHORUS.
Fill to him,
To the brim,
Let it round the table roll,
The divine
Tells us wine
Cheers the body and the soul.
We Are always men of pleasure
Despising pride and party;
While knaves and souls
Prescribe us rules,
We are sincere and hearer
CHORUS. Fill to him, etc.

If an accepted Mason
Should talk of this or that church
We'll set his down
A shallow crown,
And understand him no church
CHORUS. Fill to him, etc.

The world is all in darkness;
About us they conjecture,
But little think
A song and drink
Succeeds a Mason's lecture.
CHORUS. Fill to him, etc.

Then landlord bring a hogshead,
And in the corner place it;
Till it rebound,
With hollow sound,
Each Mason here will face it.
CHORUS. Fill to him, etc.

SONG XVII.
IT IS Masonry unites mankind,
To generous actions forms the soul;
In friendly converse all conjoined,
One spirit animates the whole.
Wherever aspiring domes arise,
Wherever sacred alters stand;
Those altars blaze unto the skies,
Those domes proclaim the Masons' hand.
As passions rough the soul disguise,
Till science cultivates the mind;
So the rude stone unshapen lies,
Till by the Masons' art resin'd.
Tho still our chief concern and care
Be to deserve a brother's name;
Yet ever mindful of the Fair,
Their kindest influence we claim.
Let wretches at our manhood rail;
But they who once our order prove,
Will own that we who build so well,
With equal energy can love.
Sing brethren then, the Craft divine,
(Best band of social joy and mirth)
With choral sound, and cheerful wine,
Proclaim its virtues over the earth.
SONG XVIII.
BACCHUS open all thy treasure,
Let sweet music charm the ear;
Love cements us all together,
Sons of Hiram welcome here.
Vulgar, base and sordid wretches,
May deride us, what care we;
Slander write malignant sketches,
By the fruit we know the tree.
Come my brothers, Love unites us,
Come let beauty be our toast;
Here Is to her that can delight us,
The charming fair we prize the most.
Let us join our hands together,
May peace and love the cement be;
Charge your glasses, prime together,
Here Is a health to Masons free.
TOAST. May we be Entered-Apprentices to Beauty, and Fellow-Crafts in Love; --
but still Masters of our passions.

SONG XIX.
ITS' down in yonder shady grove,
Philander musing chanced to rove,
To pass dull hours away;
There he espied a lovely maid,
All on a verdant bank she laid,
And thus he heard her say:
"Oh love, thou tyrant of my breast,
Forbear, and let me have some rest,
Or bring Philander here;
His graceful mein has stole my heart,
I Am wounded by love's crud dart,
I Am lost, undone, I fear!
"When first I saw this lovely youth,
Whose bosom is the seat of truth,
My heart was all on fire;
In shining jewels he was dressed,
The azure blae beamed on his breast,
Love kindled new desire.
"'It Was on the last procession day,
Philander stole my heart away,
And lest me here to grieve;
Oh! did he know that I was here,
I know his tender heart sincere,
He soon would me reheve."
Philander listened with amaze,
While on her charms the youth did gaze,
Young Cupid st uck his dart,
"I Am come," he cried, "my charming maid,
To heal the wound that love has made,
Here take my loyal heart:
And in return pray give me thine,
For I am yours, and you are mine," --
Fair Sylvia gave consent;
Come let us join in wedlock's bands,
They kissed and joined their willing hands,
Straightway to church they went.
TOAST. May every Maid that loves a Mason, be a Wife, and every Wife a Mother

THE TREASURER'S SONG.
N. B. The two last Lines of each Verse is the Chorus.

GRANT me kind heaven, what I request.
In Masonry let me be blessed;
Direct me to that happy place,
Where friendship smiles in every face,
Where freedom and sweet innocence
Enlarge the mind, and cheer the sense.
Where sceptered reason from her throne,
Surveys the Lodge, and makes us one;
And harmonv's delightful sway
Forever theds ambrosial day,
Where we blessed Eden's pleasures taste,
While balmy joys are our repast
No prying eye can view us here,
No fool or knave disturb our cheer;
Our well-form'd laws set mankind free,
And give relief to misery;
The poor, oppressed with woe and gries.
Gain from our bounteous hands relief
Our Lodge the social virtues grace,
And wisdom's rules we sondly trace:
While nature open to our view,
Points out the paths we should pursue.
Let us subsist in lasting peace,
And may our happiness increase.
THE SWORD-BEARER's SONG.
N. B. The two last Lines of cach Verseis' the Chorus.

TO all who Masonry despise,
This council I bestow:
Don't ridicule, if you are wife,
A secrer you don't know.
Yourselves you banter, but not it,
You show your spleen, but not your wit.
With a fa, la, la, la.

Inspiring virtue by our rules,
And in ourselves secure,
We have compassion for those fools,
Who think our acts impure:
We know from ignorance proceeds,
Such mean opinion of our deeds.
With a fa, la, etc.

If union and sincerity
Have a pretense to please,
We brothers of Free Masonry
Lav a just claim to these.
To State-disputes we never give birth,
Our motto friendship is, and mirth.
With a fa, la, etc.

Then let us laugh since we have imposed
On those who make a pother,
And cry the secret is disclosed
By some salse-hearted brother:
The mighty secret's gained they boast,
From post-boy and from flying post.
With a fa, la, etc

SONG XXII.
ASSIST my muse, thy influence bring,
In praise of Masonry I sing;
In lowing notes my voice shall raise
To sing the worthy Vason's praise.
CHORUS.
Whose heart is tree from envu's stain,
And while he lives wili so remain.
Hail oriental splendid light,
And dove-ey'd peace, with beauty bright;
Thy all enlivening strengthening rays,
Does crown our bliss with happy days.
Statesmen and Kings with hand and heart
Support, adorn our royal Art.
With music sweet, (...) Tubal Cain,
On the deep organ (...) the strain;
Sweet melody inspired hie tongue,
With (...) note he sweetly sung:
Hail Masonry, from heaven sent,
In thee alone we find content.
Benevolence and mutual love,
Sent by our Master from above,
Are pillars of our royal Art,
Engraved on each Mason's heart.
These lofty pillars stand secure,
And snall the date of time endure.
Hail royal Art, from heaven revealed,
In Mason's heart thou art concealed,
Cowans may seek and knock in vain,
Ouriv'ry keys their arts disdain.
Each Mason smiles and sees their art,
While prudence guards his faithful heart.
THE MASON's WISH.
BLESSED Urania, grant me my desire,
Thy humble votary with true love inspite,
Thy sweet influence, to my mind impart,
Bestow on me a kind, and generous heart.
Instruct me in the way I ought to go,
Teach me to sympathize with others' woe;
Grant me a store, to yield distress relief,
To stop the orphan's cry, the widow's grief,
To clothe the naked, low, distressed and poor,
And feed the hungry traveller at my door.
Wisdom to use the talent of mind,
All for the general good of all mankind;
To check in embryo, each loose desire,
Nor let one thought to wickedness aspire;
With strength support me in each generous deed,
Lend thy assistance in the time of need;
When proud ambition crush the needy poor,
Show an asylum -- send him to my door.
In sweet content may I my days thus spend,
Blessed with a brother -- and a real friend;
Nor would I dread what envious man could do,
While I thy virtuous precepts did pursue;
Whoever pursues this real masonic plan,
Will live beloved, and die a happy man.
ODE TO MASONRY.
GENIUS of Masomy, oh hither come,
Nor hover round demolished Eastern piles;
Come Goddess, come, and with us make thy home,
Grace with thy presence great Columbia's isles.
Fame spread the pinions, tell yon distant clime,
Great WASHINGTON beams forth our Master Grand;
Whose name immortal shall outlive old Time,
The pride, the glory of Columbia's land.
See on his brow calm reason reigns secure,
His sapient temples see with olive crowned;
An heart that is free from every thought impure,
While every virtue does the same surround.
His reverend head now silvered over by time,
With flving ensigns of proud pomp and state
Is crowned -- But Masonry sublime,
Within his breast proclaims him truly great.
His martial sword now rests within its sheath,
Nor more in bloody war it shall engage:
Immortal same has crowned him with her wreath,
And marked the hero on her sacred page.
Hail Royal Art, once more, how blooming fair,
Nursed in the bosom of our Masier Grand;
Henceforth shall Masons, every blessing share,
While dove-ey'd peace unites the social band.
Thrice honored, great, mysterious Art,
The pride of Kings, and garter'd sons of same,
Companion to the generous noble heart,
Which boasts no honor, but a Mason's name.
AN ODE.
HAIL roval Art, in thee alone we find,
The noblest dictates of the human mind;
Thy golden precepts can alone impart,
Seraphic raptures to the Mason's heart;
Bright wisdom's rules, our gross desires refine,
And raise our thoughts to pleasures more divine,
Within our wells, come virtue six thy feat,
And dwell in Masons' hearts -- a fare retreat;
From the base world, where worth and merit's lost,
By shise and envy, in oblivion tossed;
Where feigned friendships, will their trust betray,
While interest wipes each conscious stain away;
Not so with Masons -- such our order grand,
It links creation in one social band.
It Is solid basis, sounded on a rock,
That neither spite nor envy ever can shock,
Supported by Corinthian pillars grand,
Has stood for ages, and shall ever stand;
Let cowans still, the mystic path explore;
In vain they try, while Masons guard the door;
Still shall our art, in their defiance rise,
And bear our same, triumphant to the skies.
MASONIC HYMN, Sung by charity scholars in St. George's Chapel, New York, Dec.
27, 1787, after a charity Sermon, preached by the Rev. Abraham Beach, D. D.
THOU great first cause, whose wisdom plan'd,
Whose power achieved the boundless scheme,
The match'ess fabric of thy hand
Proclaim the architect supreme.
Ye angels, that surround his throne,
Who formed at first his joyful train,
When laying the foundation stone;
As then ye shouted, shout again.
Ye glorious orbs, that roll on high,
Exulting run your bright career,
And through the regions of the sky
Resound his praise from sphere to sphere.
O praise him, thou terraqueous globe,
Who, though no native light be thine,
Has clothed thee with a lucid robe,
And caused thy grosser mould to shine.
Breathe praise, thou circumambient air,
Responsive sound, thou spacious main;
Aloft, ye hills, your tribute bear,
Whilst lowly vales resound the strain.
Ye lowest in the vital scale,
That wing the air or tread the ground,
His praises wast on every gale,
Join all that cleave the vast profound.
Thou sovereign of this earthly ball,
With reason's voice the concert join:
But most let us thy name extol,
Our Lord, our architect divine.
With us let every heart be love,
Let every tongue be grateful praise,
Let every thought be realms above,
Let every voice be choral lays.
Ye mournful widows, form our train,
Ye helpless orphans lend your voice,
Our sympathy shall footh your pain:
So, so shall all with us rejoice!
SOCIETY.
HAIL social converse! source of purest pleasures,
Sweet and reviving as the rosy morning,
When first the day star gilds the face of nature
With his blessed radiance.
Hail sacred friendship! fraught with choicest blessings,
Where souls congenial taste thy sacred union,
Bound by the cement of resin'd affection,
Founded on virtue.
Truth, heavenly goddess, baffles our researches,
While painful languor springs from ceaseless study,
Welcome sweet converse, kind refreshing cordial,
Ever delightful.
Thy cheering influence fooths the ruffled passion,
While pale misfortune sinks the weary spirits;
So the clouds vanish, where the radiant sunbeams
Shine in full splendour.
If thus exalted thy enlivening pleasure
In these dull regions, how sublimely glorious,
Mid the bright mansions, where immortal friendship
Blooms in perfection.
MASONIC TOASTS.
Man the Royal Arch cover every honest Mason's Heart -- and the Glory of the
first Temple overshadow all, who act up to the true Principles of Masonry.

Man the Tongue of every Mason be the Key of the Heart: May it ever hang in
just Equilibrium, and never be suffered to speak to injure a Brother.

May the Fragrance of good Report, like a Sprig of Cassia, bloom over the Head
of every departal Brother.

Our Sisters -- man they have as much Reason to admire our Wisdom, as the Queen
of Sheba had that of our Grand Master Solomon.

TABLE OF THE SONGS.
Page ARISE, my brethren let us rise, Page 15 Arise and sound thy trumpet,
Fame, Page 18 A Mason's Daughter fair and young, Page 27 Assembled and tyl'd,
let us social agree, Page 30 Assist my muse, thy influence bring, Page 40 Behold
the social Band appears! Page 21 Bacchus open all thy treasure, Page 36
Convened were met my jovial souls, Page 13 Curiosity labors and longs for to
know, Page 17 Come let us prepare, Page 25 Grant me kind heaven what I request,
Page 38 Hail Masonry divine! Page 31 Here social love serenely smiles, Page 13
Hail Masonry! thou Craft divine, Page 24 Its down in yonder shady grove, Page
36 On, on, my dear Brethren, pursue etc. Page 23 Once I was blind and could not
see, Page 28 It Is Masonry unites mankind, Page 35 To all who Masonry despise,
Page 39 We have no idle prating, Page 34 Ye Masons look around, and hark etc.
Page 19 Ye thrice happy few, Page 31

