AN INAUGURAL DISSERTATION ON THE MALIGNANT FEVER.

AN INAUGURAL DISSERTATION ON THE MALIGNANT FEVER, WHICH PREVAILED IN THE CITY
OF NEW YORK DURING THE MONTHS OF AUGUST, SEPTEMBER, AND OCTOBER, IN THE YEAR
1791.

SUBMITTED TO THE EXAMINATION OF THE Rev. WILLIAM LINN, D.D. P.T. President;
AND TO THE TRUSTEES AND FACULTY OF QUEEN'S COLLEGE, NEW JERSEY; FOR THE DEGREE
OF DOCTOR of MEDICINE, WITH THE RIGHTS AND IMMUNITIES THEREUNTO APPERTAINING.

By JONAS SMITH ADDOMS, OF NEW YORK.

NON DOMUS ET FUNDUS, NON AERIS ACERVUS ET AURI,
AEGROTO DOMINI DEDUXIT CORPORE FEBRES.
HOR. EP. I. NEW YORK: PRINTED BY T. AND J. SWORDS, No. 27, WILLIAM-STREET.

1792.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY GEORGE CLINTON, Governor of the State of NEW YORK, General
and Commander in Chief of the Militia, and Admiral of the Navy of the same;
WHO, From a Series of Services, merits to be considered The FATHER of the STATE;

By being highly instrumental in establishing its INDEPENDENCE; By the equal
Administration of its LAWS; By the Regulating its FINANCES TO OPULENCE; AND, By
evidencing himself The Patron of the Arts and Sciences:

THIS DISSERTATION, As a grateful Testimony of Respect, Is inscribed, By his
obliged Servant,

The AUTHOR.

AN INAUGURAL DISSERTATION ON THE MALIGNANT FEVER.
DISEASES, which have proved violent in their progress, or fatal in their
termination, prevailing through cities, states or empires, have not only
claimed the attention of the physician, but have been scrupulously noted by the
philosopher, historian Diadorus Siculus gives an account of a fever which broke
out and proved very destructive among the Carthagenians in Sicily, at the siege
of Syracuse. See BIBLIOTH. HIST. lib. xiv. cap. 70 and 71.
and poet. Lucretius gives a description of a disease which almost depopulated
Athens.

Principio caput incensum fervore gerebant,
Et dupliceis oculos suffusa luce rubenteis,
Sudabant etiam fauces intrinsecus atro
Sanguine, and ulceribus vocis, via septa coibat,
Atque animi interpres manabat lingua cruore,
Debilitata malis, motu gravis aspera tactu.
LUCRET. lib. vi. The inimitable Thomson also has introduced in his Summer, an
account of a fever which destroyed a great number of Admiral Vernon's troops
when before Carthagena.

Sick nature blasting, and to heartless woe,
And feeble desolation, casting down
The towering hopes and all the pride of man.
-- You, -- You, pitying, saw
To infant-weakness sunk the warrior's arm;
Saw the deep-racking pang, the ghastly form,
The lip pale-quivering, and the beamless eye
No more with ardour bright. --
THOMSON'S SEASONS, Summer, I. 1036. Wherever medical records have been
faithfully kept by physicians, fevers have been scrupulously noticed and
investigated. The necessity of this we will not wonder at, when we come to
consider the great proportion of diseases, which are either originally fevers,
or become so from some symptomatic affection: -- But fevers of the putrid kind
have particularly drawn their attention, both on account of their fatality, and
universal prevalence when they have taken place, as well as the difficulty in
the method of cure: The uniformity of the pathognomonic symptoms in putrid
fevers, from the days of Hippocrates to the present time, is so great, that it
renders almost all the histories of this disease like mere copies from one
author to another. However, when it rages epidemically, it may yet have some
accidental symptoms, which have frequently led physicians to suppose it a
different disease, and consequently to give it a different name. It was this
that led the great Sydenham, and the illustrious Boerhaave, those luminaries of
the profession of medicine, to believe that fevers were unlimited in their
number; which, according to the observations of Sir John Pringle, Doctor
Huxham, the late Professor Doctor Cullen, Cullen's First Lines, par. lxvii.
and others, is now proved to be exceedingly limited. Thus we shall find, in
the history of the disease under consideration, some accidental symptoms
observed, which made physicians differ very much in the method of cure, as well
as in their opinion of the nature of the fever.

It is not, however, my design to enter into a general description of fevers,
and their differences; but merely to take notice of the epidemic which lately
raged so universally in this city and its suburbs.

About the middle of August, 1791, a contagious fever appeared in the city of
New York, which first discovered itself near Peck's-slip, a part of the city
thickly inhabited, its houses generally small, and badly ventulated* many of
the inhabitants were in indigent circumstances, which is a frequent cause of
the want of cleanliness. Here it raged a considerable time; it then began to
spread, as some attendants on the sick became affected, who lived in other
neighbourhoods. By this mean it was carried to different families, and most
generally could be traced from this source. It likewise proved more
particularly fatal near the place where it first appeared, than in any other
part. Thus at length it spread through the city, until about the middle of
October, when the weather growing a little cooler, the disease greatly abated,
and in a short time nearly disappeared. I have been informed by several
physicians of reputation, who reside and practice in the country, that many of
the boatmen, who frequented the city from Long Island and the upper part of
Hudson's river, carried the disease home, where it proved fatal to several.
Doctor William Moore, an eminent physician of New York, informed me, that a
gentleman from Lime, in the state of Connecticut, was on a visit to this city,
when he became a patient of his, in whom the disease was very evidently marked,
attended with large vibices; he however recruited considerably before he left
the city: on his passage to Lime he relapsed, and died shortly after he reached
home. The greater part of his family caught the contagion, and soon became
affected with a similar disease; which proved fatal to his mother, and some
other persons in the family.


At the same time, in the south-western part of the city, an intermittent and
remittent fever prevailed, together with a few cases of dysentery. This caused
much dispute among physicians, as they generally named the disease from the
cases which they had an opportunity of seeing most prevalent. Some called (...)
a remittent, others, bilious; some typhus, putrid, or malignant; and others,
following Sydenham, febris biliosa remittens.

In consequence of a few cases terminating suddenly fatal, together with the
very unjust, as well as ungenerous judgment of some physicians, in determining
every disease to be the putrid fever, fear spread from mind to mind like a
devouring famine, and terror, frequently more hideous than the disease itself,
wrought on the minds of the credulous and weak. This, in some cases, greatly
increased the malignity of the fever: in others again, even a slight headache
caused them to despond, and threw them into a state of langour more easily
conceived than described, but without the real symptoms of the fever. Whether
this diagnostic was given through ignorance, or as a professional trick, in
order to gain applause by making many and speedy cures, is uncertain; however,
it was nevertheless so considered. Thus some physicians obtained a credit in
curing the complaint, without possessing any real merit.

CHAPTER I.
HISTORY OF THE DISEASE.
THIS disease generally, in the first place, affected the person with a sense
of chilliness, alternating with gentle flushings -- and a sense of soreness of
all the muscles; the face appeared pale, the features shrunk, the body weary,
as if it had undergone some great fatigue, attended with yawnings and
stretchings of the extremities; a disinclination for any bodily exercise; and
when any exertion was made, it was attended with sluggishness and uneasy
sensations. The pulse at this time was weak and frequent; the mental faculties
were likewise impaired, and frequently a small pain in the head, attended with
sighings and anorexy: respiration being anxious and rather small at this stage
of the disease.

In some cases, the following symptoms took place without the patient's
knowledge of the former having past: they however, in general, preceded violent
pains in the head, back, and loins: -- A pulse more tense, full, and something
increased in fullness. (In one case, the patient compared the pulsation of the
temporal arteries, to the striking of a hammer against his temples.) In some, a
delirium came on immediately after the cold stage, so that the persons affected
got out of their beds, and wandered about their rooms or houses. Sometimes
nausea and vomiting appeared early in the disease, which proved very
troublesome, and greatly debilitated the patient. Respiration was now rather
laborious than anxious; the skin dry and hot, belly most commonly costive,
though some had a gentle diarrhoea from the beginning of the disease; no
appetite, but a great desire for drink, particularly any united with vegetable
acids, as the acid of lemons, etc. the adnatae of the ^^^s, in some, were much
inflamed, so that light became scarcely tolerable; the countenance, on the
first and second days, in many, appeared much flushed, attended continually
with a violent headache, so as frequently to produce delirium, with
restlessness and watchings, which greatly exhausted the patient's strength; the
tongue was generally dry, and in the beginning of the disease covered with a
whitish scurf, and the patient complained much of anxiety, or a great sense of
weight at the praecordia: the excrementitious discharges, whether natural or
produced by art, were very fetid and disagreeable.

About the third day, the inflammatory symptoms greatly changed, to those of a
putrid kind, or a remission of the fever took place: if the latter did not
succeed, the tongue became dry, and began to be covered with a brown or black
sordes: not long after the teeth and lips put on the same appearance;
respiration became more anxious, with an increased prostration of strength: the
vital functions at this time were much more disturbed; watching, or a comatose
state, now took place, if it had not before appeared; and even those who did
sleep, enjoyed it but for a few moments, when they waked as if in a fright: the
pulse became smaller, weaker, and more frequent; thirst was greatly increased;
nausea much more intolerable, together with the sense of oppression at the
stomach: those who had not vomited before, had that direful symptom added now
to the others: the contents of the stomach, which were thrown up in the act of
vomiting, were generally of a fetid nature; the voice began to be changed;
small petechiae appeared about the neck and breast; when the body, and even the
room, unless well ventulated, had a cadaverous smell -- The patient kept
continually rolling or turning in the bed, and frequently picking the
bed-clothes. In some, the bowels at this stage of the disease were very
costive, so that recourse was obliged to be had to artificial means, whenever
it became necessary to evacuate their contents: in others, a profuse diarrhoea
considerably increased the weakness of their debilitated bodies. Most
generally, on the fourth or fifth day of the disease, with those to whom it
proved fatal, all the last mentioned symptoms were greatly increased, together
with a cadaverous smelling sweat, which would appear on the body when the trunk
was hot and the extremities cold: the pulse became more frequent, irregular,
and sometimes intermittent: the person would lay on his back, with his knees
drawn up, and his body appearing as if falling down in the bed; his voice low,
and scarcely perceptible: he was now senseless of persons standing around, or
any of their proceedings: the pulse in this stage of the disease was so weak as
scarcely to be felt: the extremities put on a livid appearance. From the
comatose state which had already taken place, the patient could hardly be
roused by the strongest stimuli of sound and light, though in the beginning of
the disease he was scarcely able to bear the most gentle; and if he should be
roused from this situation, in a few moments the same would again succeed. The
urine and stools were frequently involuntarily discharged; a hiccup followed,
if it had not before taken place; and the person, in consequence of universal
debility producing inability to discharge the natural secretion in the
bronchial vessels, appeared as if choking with phlegm, or something pent up in
the trachea: convulsions, or subsultus tendinum, now affected the frame; the
eyes put on a glassy appearance; and death, in a short time, closed the scene.

This was the general course of the symptoms in those to whom the disease
proved mortal; but in some they came on a little sooner, in others later: in
some, petechiae, and even maculae and vibices, extended over the body before
death, though all showed evident signs of putrescency directly after.

In one person, on the afternoon of the second day, an entire intermission of
his symptoms took place: on the morning of the third, they returned with
increased violence, when a vomiting came on, with apthae appearing in the mouth
and fauces. Upon taking a few drops of any thing in the stomach, vomiting would
immediately be produced, which terminated in hiccup: this continued a few
minutes; it would then subside until any thing was again swallowed, when the
same circumstances returned. Petechiae appeared on his neck and breast the
fifth day; and as nothing could be retained on his stomach, he was supported
with glysters of broth for several days, to which, as there was no other way of
administering it, the red bark was added. The pulse in this person remained
good until within a few hours of his death, when it began to diminish, weaken,
and became intermittent. From this time, it was remarked any thing would remain
on his stomach; the hiccup ceased, and death in a few hours closed the scene.
This was on the morning of the seventh day.

In some, the disease made its appearance in a more gradual manner, without any
inflammatory symptoms attending it, and most commonly those were protracted
beyond the eleventh or fourteenth days, when a remission or intermission took
place, or the person sunk under the disease. There were some who recovered, as
well as those who perished, on whom petechial eruptions appeared; and the
stomach in many of those who survived, was very much disordered.

Some had other accidental symptoms accompanying the disease, such as a dry
tickling cough, pains in different parts of the thorax, with other catarrhal
and pneumonic symptoms; so that some physicians were induced to declare it a
simple inflammatory fever, and treat it accordingly. In other patients, a
billious yellowness appeared over the surface of the body, the vessels in the
adnatae of the eyes were filled with bile, and attended with the other symptoms
of Doctor Cullen's species of typhus, the icteroides.

Many of those who survived the disease were a long time troubled with
rheumatic pains of a chronic nature, or a small eruption over the surface of
their bodies, which seemed to be caused by the debilitated state in which the
disease had left them; and the eruption appeared to depend particularly on a
weakened action of the extreme vessels.

CHAPTER II.
IN classing diseases, it should be our endeavor to reduce the genera and
species to as limited a number as the nature of things will admit, observing
due perspicuity in the definition of the complaint. By this means, an author is
enabled to communicate his ideas with much greater facility and clearness; and
indeed, one circumstance which gives the moderns an ascendency over the
ancients, is the simplicity to which our profession is at present reduced, by
means of accurate nosological arrangement; therefore, in classing the disease
which I make the subject of this dissertation, from the symptoms related in the
former chapter, I shall simply call it a typhus fever, although the greater
number of cases would evidently come under the genus of synochus, as described
in Doctor Cullen's Synopsis Nosologiae Methodicae. When, however, I differ from
so eminent, experienced and learned a physician as Doctor Cullen, it is with
the greatest diffidence, and after a very attentive examination of the subject.
It appears to me very clear, that synochus should not have a place as a genus
in nosology, but should only be a variety of typhus, because both are produced
by the same cause, Edin. Med Com. vol. xi. page 220.
and only differ according to the predisposition of the person affected, or
some concurring causes. Doctor Cullen himself is doubtful of the justness of
his classifycation. Synopsis Nosologiae Methodicae Culleni, tom. ii. p. 78, 79.
Cullen's First Lines Pract. Physic, parag. 79. Romayne's MS. Lectures of 1791
and 1792. Pract. Medicine.
It may also be observed, that, if the same contagion produces the species
typhus icteroides that does the petechialis, of which there is little doubt, as
it appears to be the opinion of Doctor Cullen, it should be a variety of
typhus, and not a different species, as its difference depends only on the
accidental symptom of bile being mixed with the mass of circulating fluids.
Edin. Med. Com. vol. ix. p. 238. Romayne's MS. Lectures, Pract. Medicine, of
1791 and 1792.
We then should have three varieties under the genus of typhus: 1st Typhus cum
symptomatibus phlegmasiae. 2d. Typhus (petechialis) plerumque cum petechiis.
3d. Typhus (icteroides) cum flavidine cutis. I am not tenacious in what manner
they stand with respect to each other.

CHAPTER III.
CAUSES.
IN considering the causes of the fever I am treating of, I shall divide them
into three kinds, as they take place in operating upon the human body, when
they concur to produce disease, viz. predisponent, occasional or exciting, and
proximate causes. The two former have been frequently considered together,
under the title of remote cause, and with some degree of propriety, because one
only renders the body more liable to the operation of the other.

SECT. I.
PREDISPONENT CAUSE.
PREDISPOSITION is that state of the body not sufficiently disordered to
constitute disease, Brown's Elements of Medicine.
but verging toward it, and rendering a person susceptible to the operation of
an occasional or exciting cause, which are considered only as possible causes.

In many contagious complaints the body appears always predisposed to receive
the contagion of the disease, by a proper application being made; and all that
is requisite to produce it, is to be exposed to the effluvia as it flies from
the body of the person affected, or fomes from clothes which have been imbued
with the contagion; as smallpox, measles, etc. There are others which can only
be communicated by contact, or an application of matter made to an absorbing
surface, as syphilis, etc. What makes it still more remarkable is, that with
respect to the production of the former of these, the body is only predisposed
to be operated on by the contagious miasma but once in a person's life: on the
contrary, a person being affected with syphilis once, will not render him
unsusceptible of receiving the contagion as often as the application of matter
be properly made. Likewise, a person is not freed from the operation of the
contagion of typhus fever by previously having had the disease.

For the production of typhus fever, particularly as it rages in this country,
it is requisite the body should be in a certain state to render the person
susceptible to the operation of the occasional cause, when properly applied;
and this appears to be a state verging toward debility, or debility actually
produced. Dessert. inaug. Edin. 1779. John Bell, de sebre maligna.
It is upon this principle only that we can account for the contagion not
affecting every person within the limits of its action, and carrying
devastation over our globe; and in this manner only we can explain why
physicians and others attending on the sick in this complaint, obviate its
effects, by frequently taking small quantities of some stimulating cordial, by
which means the excitment of the system is kept up, and the effects of the
noxious powers are avoided. On the contrary, in blockaded places, prisons, or
crowded ships, whenever the inhabitants, prisoners, or crews, are debilitated
either by a scanty allowance, or bad provisions, or want of fresh air; if a
typhus fever should happen to take place, either by foreign contagion being
received, or by being produced by the already debilitated bodies, we see it
affect almost all within the atmosphere of its operation, and find the
contagion increase to such a degree of virulency, as to affect others in whom
predisposition is scarcely perceptible. See the account of the Old Bailey, and
Black Assizes of Oxford. Stow's Chron.
The debilitating power of the depressing passions greatly favors the action
of the exciting cause, particularly fear, which not only operates forcibly in
producing predisposition, but also increases the malignity of the disease. This
must have frequently been observed by every physician who has had any
considerable practice in contagious diseases. Thus, some persons who attended
the sick in the plague of Mersailles made use of a preparation of vinegar as a
preventative; but then I would rather suppose they escaped the disease more for
having full confidence that the vinegar would effectually prevent their taking
the infection, than from any real virtue in the preparation which they used,
although an antiseptic.

I will now take notice of a cause producing predisposition, which perhaps is
more common than any before mentioned; which is, the different degrees of heat
in opposition to each other, termed heat and cold.

Heat appears to be the most universal and natural stimulus to the animal and
vegetable world; a certain degree of it is essentially necessary to be applied
to our bodies, in order to produce a moderate degree of excitement, which
constitutes health: Brown's Elements of Medicine, Sect. 221, and onward.
but then, when this stimulus has increased to any considerable degree, perhaps
there is no greater or more certain cause of producing predisposition, and even
disease of the greatest debility, and death itself. This we have an example of
in all the diseases of hot climates, particularly cholera and typhus fever. The
degree of external heat which appears to be necessary in this climate to
produce healthy excitement, is about 65 Romayne's MS. Lectures, Pract. Medic.
No. 21 of 1791 and 1792.
degrees of Fahrenheit's thermometer; at the same time, the body is capable of
bearing a degree of heat considerably above this, without producing any morbid
effects. Cullen's Practice of Physic, chap. 4. Philosophical Transactions
concerning the experiments of heated rooms, made by Doctor Blagden, and others.


Whenever the heat applied to the human body is below 65 degrees, we then call
it cold, or a privation of heat, because there is not a sufficient stimulus of
heat to produce an agreeable sensation; and if the degree below 65 be applied
for any considerable time, or the degree diminished, it will actually lessen
the heat of the body; by that mean, taken off a necessary stimulus to all
living bodies, excitement will be diminished, the nervous system become
languid, and injured; the strength and vigor of the body will be impaired;
sleepiness will at length be produced; See the account of Doctor Solander, who
sailed with Capt. Cook to the North-west parts of America.
and those symptoms will take place in exact proportion to the diminution of
heat below 65 degrees, and its length of continuance, even until it produces
death: therefore, we may justly consider cold as one of the causes of
predisposition to typhus fever. Cullen's Practice of Physic, chap. iv.
Romayne's MS. Lectures, Pract. Medic. No. 22 of 1790 and 1791. London Medical
Transactions, vol. iii. p. 343, by John Hunter. Rush's Observations and
Inquiries, p. 181, No. 10


It has been much disputed among physicians, whether cold itself would produce
typhus fever, without the concurrence of contagion. It must certainly be
allowed, that if cold be applied, it will diminish the excitement of the body,
but in no other manner than any other debilitating power: and as intermittent
fevers appear to have only one source of occasional cause, viz. marsh miasma,
so it appears probable that typhus fevers have only one also, viz. human
effluvia. If we allow cold to produce this disease in one instance, we must
allow similarity of cause, coeteris paribus, to produce similarity of effect,
and we should always have typhus fevers produced in persons exposed to
considerable degrees of cold, which is contrary to fact. It is therefore
likely, that cold operates only as a predisponent cause, which favors the
action of contagion, Rush's Observations and Inquiries, p. 181, No. 9. "This
fever (typhus fever) always prevailed most, and with the worst symptoms, in
winter," No. 10. "In all the cases where contagion was received, cold seldom
failed to render it active."
or produces that state of the body which will generate a poison to itself.
London Medical Transactions, vol. iii. paper No. 22. Romayne's MS. Lectures,
Pract. Medic. of 1791 and 1792.
It is here worthy of remark, that the disease described in the former chapter
did not, to my knowledge, affect any children under three years of age, and but
few females Dissert. Inaug. John Bell, de febre maligna. Edin. 1779, in which
there is a similar remark.
in proportion to males; and those of the latter, to whom it proved fatal, were
mostly in the prime of life. This at first sight would appear to militate
against predisposition being necessary to favor the action of contagion; but
in all the cases which I had an opportunity of inquiring into, I found that
debility was produced either by immoderate drinking, former disease, or excess
of venery, etc. Therefore, I shall annex a table which contains the most
obvious causes that generally produce predisposition to typhus fevers, viz.

1. Bad diet. a Vegetable diet. b Too scanty allowance of any diet. c Fish
diet. d Damaged provisions. e Excessive diet, by which indirect debility may be
produced. 2. Fear. 3. Cold below 65 degrees. a Cold per se. b -- combined with
moisture. 4. Heat long continued, so as to produce indirect debility. 5.
Intemperance in drinking. Rush's Observations and Inquiries, p. 181 -- "Drunken
soldiers and convalescents were most subject to this fever," viz. the camp
fever.
6. Excess in venery. "Immoderata seminis profusio non tantum utilissimi
humoris jactura, sed ipso etiam motu convulsivo, que emittitur, frequentius
repetito, imprimis laedit." Gaubii Patholog. sect. 562.

Riverius, in the plague at Leipsic, says scarcely any young married people
escaped.


7. Fatigue. 8. Uncleanliness. 9. Sudden vicissitudes of heat and cold. 10.
Grief and anxiety. 11. Previous disease. 12. Long study, without proper
exercise. 13. Idleness, or want of exercise. 14. Violent passions of the mind.
15. Long watching. 16. Confined air.
SECT. II.
OCCASIONAL, or EXCITING CAUSE.
TYPHUS fever being sometimes epidemic, as we have an instance in the disease
related in the former chapter, has led many physicians to attempt the
explanation of its occasional, or exciting cause, by supposing certain changes
to take place in the atmosphere, or that the air is impregnated with particles
arising from putrefying animal or vegetable substances: Sir John Pringle on
jail and hospital fevers.
others again supposed it merely depended upon increased predisposition, or any
thing which would produce a sufficient degree of debility. Brown's Elements of
Medicine.
However respectable the authorities which support these opinions may be, yet,
if we pay a little attention to the method of cure in those fevers, and the
places where they mostly rage, I am confident we will be convinced that the
putrefaction of animal and vegetable substances is not essentially necessary to
produce typhus fever; on the contrary, it cannot operate as an occasional
cause, but only increases predisposition by contaminating the air, and thereby
rendering it less proper for respiration; and that something more is generally
wanted than predisposition already mentioned.

The effluvia exhaling from substances verging to putrefaction, or which have
already passed into that state, has been supposed to produce a disease of a
putrid nature, by being absorbed into the mass of fluids, and there producing a
fermentation similar to what takes place in dead matter. In this manner of
reasoning, however, I suspect we are apt to annex vague and ill-defined ideas
to terms; and inferences may be drawn from chemical laws upon inanimate matter,
which, when applied to bodies endowed with a living principle, will by no means
be just, but subject to lead us into error.

If we presume that fermentation takes place, as has been supposed, the fluids
will be assimilated; in that case we should only have to correct the putrid
fermentation, and relieve the patient from the most deplorable situation
compatible with life; but daily experience convinces us this is not the case.
In large cities, where there is a great proportion of animal matter continually
putrefying, this fever is not more common than in other places, unless
contagion be produced by another cause. And if debility only were necessary to
produce typhus fever, we should always have it to take place whenever the body
was reduced to a certain state of weakness, which we find is not the case; for
in the dropsy, and in many other diseases, we see debility carried so far as
even to produce death, and no such fever appears. In smallpox, measles,
syphilis, etc. each appears to depend on a specific contagion applied to the
body: -- Now, if we allow typhus fever to be a contagious disease, which is not
doubted by any one acquainted with the present state of medicine, I think it
will appear equally probable, that typhus fever depends on a specific contagion
as well as many other diseases: therefore I am of opinion, that the occasional
cause of typhus fever is a contagion, or effluvia Edin. Med. Com. vol. viii. p.
196. Romayne's MS. Lectures, Pract. Medic.
arising from living or dead bodies affected with the same disease, or the
exhalation from living bodies being retained a considerable time in some porous
substances, Lettsom's Observations and Cases on putrid fevers.
so as to undergo a fermentation or concentration, by which means it will be
enabled to operate on bodies predisposed to receive it.

Although much has been said respecting contagion, by men high in medical
reputation, we must still acknowledge we know little of its properties. We can
only note its effects, as they take place in bodies exposed to its action; and
these effects being so different in persons differently predisposed, that the
judgment formed concerning the nature of the contagion must be very uncertain.
But, because we cannot investigate its peculiar nature, shall we reject the
idea? By no means. If we do, we may with the same propriety reject the
foundation of some of the most beautiful theories in nature.

The operation of contagion appears to be much more virulent near the source
from whence it arises, and when it becomes diffused in the air, it is rendered
weaker, or entirely inert; therefore, by freely ventulating places impregnated
with contagious matter, the effluvia will be so divided in the atmosphere, as
to render it little, or not at all, hurtful.

Persons frequently exposed to this contagion, or living within its atmosphere,
become less susceptible of its operation than others who have not been
accustomed to its effects. This shows the wonderful power our bodies have in
accommodating themselves to the action of any thing which may prove injurious
to them. At the same time, convalescents in this disease, if exposed to a new
application of contagion, not unfrequently are affected more severely than at
the first attack. Cullen's Practice of Physic, vol. i. p. 27.
The exhalation going off from the human body in a state of health, or when
affected with a disease not contagious, is generally considered as unhurtful,
and therefore has had little or no attention paid to it; but if it be long
confined for want of free ventulation, or retained in the apparel or
bed-clothes of the person, it will be concentrated or acted on in such a manner
as to produce a contagion little inferior in degree of virulency to that which
comes from the body of a person laboring under typhus fever. But most
frequently this does not affect the person producing it so much as it does
others; because the body becomes accustomed to its action, Medical
Transactions, vol. iii. p. 345. And the effects produced in jails, hospitals,
prison-ships, etc. Medical Commentaries, decad ii. vol. ii. p. 38, 39.
unless the person by whom it is produced be diseased, in which case the
predisposition will be increased. This evidences the great necessity of
cleanliness and change of apparel.

Contagion may be communicated by fomites, Rush's Observations and Inquiries,
p. 182, No. 5.

Lettsom on putrid fevers, p. 51. "Woollen, and all porous substances, seem
adapted to absorb and retain infection or putrid effluvia, which by retention
and accumulation acquires more virulency and activity."


as clothes imbued with the contagious miasma, and beds which have been used by
patients affected with this disease, both which will retain the miasma a
considerable time; and if confined in any manner so as to prevent the air being
freely applied thereto, its virulency will be greatly increased, which would
lead us to suppose that this contagion underwent some state of fermentation. A
melancholy proof of this we have recorded in Stow's Chronicle, in what is
called the Black Assizes of Oxford: -- On the 4th, 5th and 6th days of July,
1577, were the assizes held at Oxon, where was arraigned and condemned, Rowland
Jenkins, for a seditious tongue; at which time there arose amidst the people
such a damp, that almost all were smothered. "Very few escaped that were not
taken. -- Here died in Oxon three hundred persons; and sickened there, but died
in other places, two hundred and odd. -- Another instance we have in the
unhappy session at the Old Bailey, in the year 1750, when four of the bench, a
considerable number of the jury, and other persons present, received the
infection, and died from the fomites brought with the prisoners into court.

Some physicians have supposed this fever was immediately produced, in the
instance mentioned, by an exhalation from a large quantity of mud which had
been thrown out of the slips on the adjoining docks, near Peck's-slip, where
the disease first appeared; however, this was nothing more than a miasma
similar to that which arises from marshes, when acted on by the heat of the
sun, and consequently could not produce putrid fever any otherwise than by
increasing predisposition. I am also induced to doubt this being the immediate
cause of this fever, from the persons who were first affected residing at some
distance from the dock on which the mud was deposited. The slips were cleared
out in the same manner, and the mud deposited in like situations, in other
parts of the city, near which no such fever appeared, until it extended
gradually from the place where it first showed itself.

SECT. III.
PROXIMATE CAUSE.
A KNOWLEDGE of the proximate causes of diseases is necessary to be understood
by every physician; as the chief part of the cure depends immediately upon it:
Cullen's Practice of Physic, parag. 4.
But the proximate cause of fevers has eluded the research of every one who has
endeavored to investigate it, at least the inquiries into this part of
medicine have not met with such success as that of many others; and at present
our knowledge of the proximate cause of typhus fever is incomplete, and in some
manner doubtful. If, however, I may be allowed to give an opinion on this
subject, from the many causes which tend to produce predisposition, as before
related, and from the effect of the occasional cause appearing in the system,
all which show the greatest signs of debility; a like inference may also be
drawn from the only remedies which are found to have been effectual in the cure
of this disease, which are either tonics or stimulants. I therefore think we
should consider debility as the proximate cause of typhus fever; and upon this
we can establish the most natural and effectual method of cure.

The doctrine of spasm being the proximate cause of typhus fever, although very
ingenious, and supported by the celebrated Doctor Cullen, appears incompatible
with the method of cure and the phenomenon of this disease. If spasm be the
proximate cause, why do we not find warm bathing, bloodletting, and other
antispasmodics, cure the disease? But these only aggravate and increase the
most dangerous symptoms. True, we may say that tonics and stimulants are
antispasmodics, and thus some may suppose they effectuate a cure by relieving
the spasm, and by giving tone to the system prevent its recurring again,
similar to what takes place in the cure of tetanus and spasmodic affections in
cholera; but in this fever we have no real evidence of spasm, which in those
two diseases we have: I therefore attribute the good effects of these remedies
wholly to their obviating debility.

As to the phenomenon of the disease, we find perspiration and even sweating
not unfrequently continue a considerable length of time, sometimes several
days, and even through the whole course of the disease, Sudor Anglicus
Sennertus de febre, lib. iv. chap. 15.
when the spasm on the surface must be relaxed; and still the fever remains.

What can evidence debility more clearly than what is manifested by the
symptoms of langour and lassitude in the beginning of the disease, together
with anorexy, nausea, and vomiting? And as the disease continues, are not want
of appetite, coldness of the extremities, tremblings, inability in walking or
other exercise, weakness and quickness of the pulse, frequent sighings and
faintings, cold clammy sweats, impaired state of the vital functions, continual
slipping down in the bed, want of sleep, petechia, with all the other symptoms
which take place near the close of the disease, and even death itself,
undeniable proofs of great debility being present in the system? -- I therefore
shall form my general indication of cure from the supposition of debility being
the proximate cause.

CHAPTER IV.
PROGNOSIS.
IF in the beginning of the disease which I have made the subject of this
dissertation, the inflammatory symptoms ran high, attended with delirium, want
of sleep, great anxiety, and about the third day no remission took place, but
the pulse became smaller and quicker, respiration frequent and anxious,
attended with vomiting, and in the progress of the disease these symptoms
became more severe, accompanied with cold clammy sweats, succeeded by petechia,
-- generally indicated an unhappy prognosis, particularly if the irritability
of the stomach was such as not to allow the retention of any medicine.

On the contrary, if on the third day a remission appeared, the pulse became
slower, more soft and full, delirium began to abate, nausea and vomiting, if
any had appeared, now ceased, so that any thing would remain on the stomach, we
might prognosticate a favorable termination; though sometimes this abatement
of the symptoms was later in taking place. However, by the fifth or seventh day
a pretty just prognosis could be formed.

CHAPTER V.
METHOD of CURE.
AS I have endeavored to establish the proximate cause of this disease as it
appeared, to be debility, which, from what has been said in the former
sections, I think will appear pretty evident, I will found the method of cure
in obviating debility, taking into consideration the predisposing and
occasional causes.

1st. To avoid, as far as may be, any further effects being produced by the
occasional cause.

2d. To relieve or remove any thing which may tend to obviate the more
completely fulfilling the third indication; which is,

3d. To restore and support the tone of the system.

The first indication may be fulfilled by having the patient removed from all
contagious matter as speedily and effectually as possible, and placed in a
large chamber, which will admit of free ventulation: by this mean his own
effluvia will not be allowed to stagnate, but be continually carried off in the
air. The temperature of the room should be governed in some measure by the
predisposition of the person affected, and the stage of the disease. In the
beginning of this fever, persons who were naturally predisposed to inflammatory
diathesis, and by some irregularities had indirect debility produced, so as to
favor the operation of the occasional cause, in whom inflammatory symptoms
were generally very violent, for two or three days the temperature of the room
should be below 65 degrees, so that it might diminish the increased action of
the system, which would tend to produce healthy excitement.

By having the bed-clothes and body linen changed at least once in every
twenty-four hours; and the shirts should be wetted in good strong vinegar, and
dried without being wrung, Romayne's MS. Lectures, Pract. Med.
so that as much of the acid might remain on the linen as possible, which acts
as an antiseptic to the body, and tends to correct that disagreeable smell of
the perspiration which always an attendant on this disease; and indeed to have
the body washed all over with vinegar Edin. Medical Commentaries, decad (...)
vi. p. 383.
not only tends to prevent putrescency, but keeps the surface of the body
clean, which is of very great moment in the cure of typhus fever. -- By not
allowing any excrementitious matter to remain in the room, but to have it
removed immediately; dirty clothes should also be removed from the apartment,
so that the air in the room may be kept as pure as possible. -- By evacuating
the contents of the bowels once in twenty-four hours. And by paying attention
to the circumstances above related, every accumulation of effluvia will be
prevented, and of course its virulency must be diminished.

To fulfill the second indication. If called early in the disease, when the
strength of the patient was but little impaired, or if there were signs of
crudities in the stomach, which most generally was the case, the administration
of an emetic Cullen's Practice of Physic, parag. 131 and 172. See Lind on
fevers and infection.
proved of the greatest benefit, not only in unloading immediately the stomach,
but frequently with great relief to the pain in the head, by inducing a more
equal circulation throughout the system. The choice of the emetic should depend
on the symptoms of the patient. If there were, as frequently happened,
considerable inflammatory symptoms, as a pretty full hard pulse, skin dry,
countenance flushed, with a pain in the head, an antimonial emetic should be
preferred, which, whilst it evacuated the contents of the stomach, would relax
the system more than any other: this would sometimes produce a remission, and
prove a crisis to the disease. On the other hand, if the person appeared
debilitated, and we wished only to clear the stomach, an emetic of ipecacuanha
Cullen's Practice of Physic, parag. 181.
would be preferable: this would unload the stomach without increasing debility
as much as any preparation of antimony. After the operation of the emetic, in
order to prevent the debility increasing, and to take off the irritability
produced by the action of vomiting, an anodyne was administered with advantage.

In some cases, the first day or two of the disease put on such inflammatory
symptoms, by the increased action of the arterial system, attended with violent
pains of the head, and delirium, as made it necessary to moderate the
inflammatory diathesis. This appears more immediately necessary, when we come
to consider the effects of violent action in the system, which frequently takes
place in those fevers; when the collapse, or state of debility, in a short time
will be in proportion to the inflammatory symptoms which have preceded:
consequently it is much better to prevent the system being worn down by too
great excitement, and to endeavor to moderate its action in such cases by
relaxing remedies; but this should be done with the greatest caution, as the
danger of the disease depends on the debility which ensues.

Blood-letting being the most effectual way of reducing the inflammatory
diathesis, was made use of by many physicians, not considering the natural
tendency of this disease toward debility, consequently putrescency; but this,
like almost all other contagious diseases, particularly of this kind, bore the
loss of blood very badly; and in a few hours after blood was drawn, the pulse
would sink, when a prostration of strength, and other signs of debility,
appeared: the disease would increase with such rapidity, that the power of
medicine would be scarcely able to rescue the patient from the jaws of death.

Whenever it be necessary to moderate the action of the system, after the
contents of the bowels are evacuated, some preparation of antimony, Cullen's
Practice of Physic, parag. 182.
as James's powder, calx nitrata antimonii, or even tartar emetic, either,
frequently given in small doses, not however so as to produce vomiting, will
safely and effectually moderate the excitement, and bring on a gentle
perspiration, so as in a short time to prepare the body for the administration
of the bark: though in many cases the fever from the beginning showed such
signs of debility, or the physician not being called at an early period of the
disease, rendered the second indication unnecessary, when recourse should
immediately be had to the third; which is,

To restore and support the tone of the system.

The first thing which should claim our attention, after considering
ventulation, as before mentioned, is the temperature of the patient's chamber.
In this, I think we often commit an egregious error, either from taking our
ideas from authors who have written on the disease, as it appears in hot
climates, where the debilitating power of cold could not be obtained, or from
our not having paid sufficient attention to the difference between inflammatory
diseases, and the one of which I am treating: for, if we consider that we are
administering tonics and stimulants to increase the excitement, and at the same
time applying the debilitating power of cold, which must diminish it, we will
be fully convinced, that the degree of temperature in the room should be that
which will afford a gentle stimulus, not to increase debility; at least this
practice will be more consistent one part with the other. Another wrong
conclusion which has led physicians into an error, concerning the supposed good
effects of cold, is attributing the effects of pure or fresh air, obtained by
free ventulation, to the cold to which the patient was exposed in obtaining
this air. Lettsom's Observations and Cases on putrid fevers.
However, since a sufficient number of experiments evince the capability of
this disease raging with great violence in cold climates, or cold seasons of
the year, London Medical Transactions, vol. iii. p. 345.
it appears sufficiently evident, that no good effects can, but many bad ones
may, arise from the debilitating power of cold; but by heat being applied so as
to be gently stimulant, much benefit will ensue* Brown's Elements of Medicine,
vol. ii. p. 7, 8, etc.
and at the same time we may have free ventulation: -- Therefore the
temperature of the patient's chamber should be about 65 degrees of Fahrenheit's
scale.

If the bowels be costive, they should be evacuated by glysters, which are not
followed by the degree of debility that cathartics are; and they are better
combined with vegetable acid, which acts in some measure as an antiseptic.

Peruvian bark, although thrown out of the materia medica by the ingenious
Doctor Brown and his strict followers, still stands high on the list as one of
the most effectual remedies in the cure of fevers. We should begin the
administration of this valuable remedy as soon as typhus symptoms appear, and
not wait till an evident intermission or remission takes place, which
frequently is not effected until the patient resigns his life. Lettsom's
Observations and Cases on putrid fevers. Cleghorn on the diseases of Minorca.
It should be given in as large quantities as the stomach of the patient will
bear, at least an ounce or more in twenty-four hours: this is best given in
powder; but the irritability of the stomach in the fever which prevailed in
New York was such that in most cases the bark could not be retained, and in
others the stomach could bear neither medicine nor diet, in which cases the
bark was freely administered in glysters, previously emptying the bowels with
an acetous injection. Romayne's MS. Lectures, Practice (...) Medicine.
It is remarkable that the bowels generally retained these bark injections for
several hours, or until they were brought away by having the acetous ones
repeated; though in many cases, when the powder could not be retained on the
stomach, a cold infusion in water, or joined with an alkali, or a mixture of
the tincture of bark, would be retained with the most happy effects.

Spirituous fomentations of the inferior extremities most generally took off
the irritability of the stomach, so as to enable it to retain the necessary
remedies, and frequently relieved it when the direful symptom of vomiting had
already taken place.

Wine, the most natural stimulus belonging to the materia medica, should be
given freely, and bark at the same time administered. The best kind is old
Madeira, or genuine Port; the former is to be preferred; and when the debility
is very great, its stimulus may be increased by heat and being spiced: this
should be administered in as large quantities as the patient can bear, without
producing intoxication or indirect debility; though, when the disease is
severe, one or two bottles, or even more, may be taken in twenty-four hours
with advantage. However, in the use of this remedy we should pay particular
attention to the former habits of the patient, as whether he has been
accustomed to the use of wine, or distilled or fermented liquors. If the
patient has been in the use of spirituous liquors before he became sick, this
would be the most natural stimulus; and indeed in such cases we should not be
able to produce a sufficient excitement by wine or beer; therefore spirits or
brandy, in water, becomes immediately necessary, and in other cases may be
advantageously used. Punch is generally very agreeable to the stomach, and
proves a useful stimulant: I have seen warm punch stop a vomiting in a very
debilitated state, when nearly all the other stimulants had failed.

Beer, such as porter, Lettsom's Observations and Cases on putrid fevers.
to those who are accustomed to its use, is a very valuable remedy, and for
others it frequently becomes necessary to change the stimulus, as the person
gets tired of the use of one: here porter may be used with the greatest
advantage: the carbonic acid which it contains has been much extolled in the
cure of putrid fevers; indeed, if there be much virtue in this acid, or air, it
may be administered in this very beautiful manner, far exceeding the nauseous
yeast remedy, Some physicians, in the time of this disease, extolled their own
peculiar remedy; and many people were led to believe, that in consequence of
this remedy, they cured all their patients; by which trick probably some
patients might be obtained: and this was nothing less than a quantity of yeast
put in a decoction of bark, which being placed in a degree of heat so as to
ferment, was then to be taken; and in this manner they produced a quantity of
carbonic acid. In the days of Macbride, and other sticklers for the doctrine of
fixed air, or carbonic acid, being the bond of union in all animal bodies, this
theory might appear plausible; but at this time it is truly laughable that they
should put their dependence on such a remedy. However, they were very cautious
to combine it with bark.
which, by some physicians, was extolled almost as a catholicon.

Opium comes next to be noticed -- a medicine which, by physicians, has long
been considered as a palliative only in this disease; but, from the most
authentic testimonials of its operation, at present its stimulant effect is
generally allowed; consequently it is well suited to obviate and remove the
causes of this disease; Brown's Elements of Medicine. Edin. Medical
Commentaries, decad ii. vol. i. p. 195. Fordv^^ on fevers, p. 165.
indeed, it supersedes the use of many other stimulant remedies. The celebrated
Doctor Mead might well call it the "magnum donum Dei." The best method to give
it is in the form of laudanum, in some cordial mixture, in small quantities at
a time, and frequently repeated, until the stomach be able to retain wine, with
some preparation of animal food; at which time the quantity of laudanum must be
diminished, as the other is increased. When delirium comes on, with all its
attendants, and every symptom grows more alarming, uneasy days are succeeded by
restless nights, and the patient is exhausted by pain and watching, a full dose
of opium relieves, in a measure, all those disagreeable symptoms, and produces
sleep, which is the sick man's elysium; it revives his hope, it is his most
desirable state, and by which the strength and vigor of the system will be
recruited: indeed, there are few things which wear out the system more than
continual watching, which is thus happily prevented. In convulsions also, and
subsultus tendinum, which appear in the latter stages of this disease, there is
nothing has so powerful an effect as opium; and when vomiting prevents its
being retained on the stomach, it may be administered in glysters with
advantage. Any medicine administered in glysters should be double the quantity
that would be necessary to be taken in the stomach.


Volatile alkali, camphire, musk, etc. have been used by their admires; but
they are all less powerful stimulants than opium, and therefore not equal to
those already mentioned. I saw volatile alkali and camphire used in this
disease with little or no effect.

Vitriolic ether is another powerful stimulant, and has been extolled by some,
when singultus takes place; but I think it is superseded by the use of opium.

Blisters, which have long been disputed among physicians, whether their good
effects were owing to their stimulating or debilitating power, were used by
some in every stage of the disease, which generally proved hurtful, unless in
the beginning, when a violent pain frequently took place in the head; a blister
then applied between the shoulders mitigated, if not entirely relieved it; but
when used in the latter stages of the complaint, their good effects did not
appear manifest. Lettsom says, Lettsom's Observations and Cases on putrid
fevers, p. 45. Tissot de febre biliosa. Fordyce on fevers. Baglivi. Van
Swieten's Commentaries on Boerhaave's Aphorisms.
In these fevers I do not find any evident advantage from the use of
vesecatories.

Diet. As soon as the patient has an inclination for food, or his stomach will
retain it, he should be indulged therein: this ought to be of the most
nutritious kind, so that in small quantities it may contain much nourishment,
and so prepared as to be easy of digestion; the best form of which, we have in
good beef broth, when the oily part, which is apt to nauseate the stomach, is
taken off: this may be well seasoned, a spoonful given at a time, and often
repeated; and as the stomach grows more invigorated, the quantity should be
increased.

Besides the remedies above related, there are others of no little moment,
which should be attended to; as external stimulants, and the passions of the
mind.

That degree of light should be admitted in the chamber, which will be most
agreeable to the patient's own sensation. Sounds may sometimes be allowed with
advantage: these should be of the soft harmonious kind, as soft music, or
pleasing conversation of friends, which will attract the patient's attention,
prove an agreeable stimulus, and thus prevent delirium coming on at the
accustomed period.

In the latter stage of this dise^se* the body and extremities of the patient
should (...) washed with warm spirits or bran^^*

T^^ ^^ssions of the (...) very great effect on the body* (...) of death, or
grief for the loss of any friend or relative, has a powerful operation in
diminishing the excitement; therefore it becomes the duty of the physician to
encourage and sooth his patient, and endeavor as far as possible to gain his
confidence. It is the duty of the sick man's friend to prevent any disagreeable
news being brought him; and all, while in his chamber, should appear cheerful
and serene: this, in a great measure, will prevent any depression of his mind,
whereas the contrary will ^end greatly to increase the malignity of the disease.

As the patient gains strength, the quantity of wine, and other diffusible
stimuli, should be diminished in proportion as the stomach is enabled to digest
an increased quantity of permanent food, until it attains its accustomed state;
when the usual occupation and exercise will soon make joyous his mind, for a
restoration of that health, to which, previous to disease, little attention had
been paid; and his friends will rejoice to see him returned to their former
association.

Many persons, after the fever, as it prevailed in the city of New York, had
entirely left them, were troubled with pains in different parts of their body,
which gave way most readily to the volatile tincture of gum. guaiac. and other
medicines proper for relieving chronic rheumatism.

The accidental spmptoms of catarrh and pneumonia, which took place in some
cases, were most effectually relieved by local applications proper for such
complaints.

THE END.

