THE HISTORY OF NEW HAMPSHIRE.

VOLUME I.

COMPREHENDING THE EVENTS OF ONE COMPLETE CENTURY FROM THE DISCOVERY OF THE
RIVER PASCATAQUA.

BY JEREMY BELKNAP, A. M. Member of the American Philosophical S^^^^ty held at
Philadelphia for promoting useful Knowledge.

Tempus edax rerum, tuque invidiosa vetustas
Omnia destruitis: vitiataque dentibus aevi
Paulatim lenta consumitis omnia morte.
Haec perstant.
OVID. BOSTON: REPRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, M.DCC.X^^^.

[Published according (...)t of Congress.]

District of Massachusetts, to wit:
L. S. BE it remembered, that on the thirty-first day of August, in the
sixteenth year of the Independence of the United States of America, JEREMY
BELKNAP of the said district has deposited in this Office the titles of three
Books and a Map, the right whereof he claims as author, in the words following,
to wit: The History of New Hampshire, Vol. I. Comprehending the events of one
complete century from the discovery of the river Pascataqua. By Jeremy Belknap,
A. M. Member of the American Philosophical Society held at Philadelphia for
promoting useful knowledge.

The History of New Hampshire, Vol. II. Comprehending the events of
seventy-five years, from MDCCXV to MDCCXC, illustrated by a Map. And

The History of New Hampshire, Vol. III. Conta^^^^^ a geographical description
of the STATE, with sketches of (...) natural history, productions,
improvements, and present state (...) society and manners, laws and government.
By Jeremy Belknap, A. M. Member of the Philosophical Society in Philadelphia
and of the Academy of Arts and Sciences in Massachusetts. And the title of the
Map in the words following: A new Map of New Hampshire, by Jeremy Belknap.

In conformity to the act of the Congress of the United States, entitled An Act
for the encouragement of learning, by securing the copies of maps, charts and
books to the authors and proprietors, of such copies, during the times therein
mentioned.

N. GOODALE, Clerk of the District of Massachusetts
A true copy of Record,

attest, N. GOODALE,



PREFACE.
WHEN a new publication appears, some prefatory account of the reasons which
lead to it, and the manner in which it has been conducted, is generally
expected.

The compiler of this history was early impelled by his natural curiosity to
inquire into the original settlement, progress, and improvement of the country
which gave him birth. When he took up his residence in New Hampshire his
inquiries were more particularly directed to that part of it. Having met with
some valuable manuscripts which were but little known, he began to extract and
methodize the principal things in them; and this employment was (to speak in
the style of a celebrated modern author) his "hobby "horse."

The work, crude as it was, being communicated to some gentlemen, to whose
judgment he paid much deference, he was persuaded and encouraged to go on with
his collection, until the thing became generally known, and a publication could
not decently be refused.

He owns himself particularly obliged to the public officers both in this and
the neighboring state of Massachusetts, under the former as well as the
present constitutions, for their obliging attention in favoring him with the
use of the public records or extracts from them. He is under equal obligation
to a number of private gentlemen, who have either admitted him to their own
collections of original papers or procured such for him. In the course of his
inquiry he has frequently had reason to lament the loss of many valuable
materials by fire and other accidents: But what has pained him more severely is
the inattention of some persons in whose hands original papers have been
deposited, and who have suffered them to be wasted and destroyed as things of
no value. The very great utility of a public repository for such papers under
proper regulations, has appeared to him in the strongest light, and he is
persuaded that it is an object worthy the attention of an enlightened
legislature.

The late accurate and indefatigable Mr. PRINCE of Boston, (under whose
ministry the author was educated and whose memory he shall always revere) began
such a collection in his youth and continued it for above fifty years. By his
will he left it to the care of the Old South Church, of which he was pastor,
and it was deposited with a library of ancient books in an apartment of their
meeting house. To this collection the public are obliged for some material
hints in the present work, the author having had frequent access to that
library before the commencement of the late war. But the use which the British
troops in 1775 made of that elegant building having proved fatal to this noble
collection of manuscripts; the friends of science and of America must deplore
the irretrievable loss. Had we suffered it by the hands of SARACENS, the grief
had been less poignant!

Historians have mentioned the affairs of New Hampshire only in a loose and
general manner. Neale and Douglas, though frequently erroneous, have given some
hints, which by the help of original records and other manuscripts, have in
this work been carefully and largely pursued. Hutchinson has said many things
which the others have omitted; his knowledge of the antiquities of the country
was extensive and accurate, and the public are much obliged by the publication
of his history; but he knew more than he thought proper to relate. The few
publications concerning New Hampshire are fugiitve pieces dictated by party or
interest. No regular historical deduction has ever appeared. The late Mr. FITCH
of Portsmouth made a beginning of this sort about the year 1728. From his
papers some things have been collected which have not been met with elsewhere.
The authorities from which information is derived are carefully noted in the
margin. Where no written testimonies could be obtained, recourse has been had
to the most authentic tradition, selected and compared with a scrupulous
attention, and with proper allowance for the imperfection of human memory.
After all, the critical reader will doubtless find some chasms which in such a
work it would be improper to fill by the help of imagination and conjecture.

The author makes no merit of his regard to truth. To have disguised or
misrepresented facts would have been abusing the reader. No person can take
more pleasure in detecting mistakes than the author in correcting them if he
should have opportunity. In tracing the progress of controversy it is
impossible not to take a side, though we are ever so remote from any personal
interest in it: Censure or applause will naturally follow the opinion we adopt.
If the reader should happen to entertain different feelings from the writer, he
has an equal right to indulge them; but not at the expense of candor.

The Masonian controversy lay so directly in the way that it could not be
avoided. The rancour shown on both sides in the early stages of it has now
subsided. The present settlement is so materially connected with the general
peace and welfare of the people, that no wise man or friend to the country can
at this day wish to overthrow it.

Mr. HUBBARD, Dr. MATHER and Mr. PENHALLOW have published narratives of the
several Indian wars: These have been compared with the public records, with
ancient manuscripts, with CHARLEVOIX'S history of New-France, and with the
verbal traditions of the immediate suff^^^rs or their descendants. The
particular incidents of these wars may be tedious to strangers, but will be
read with avidity by the posterity of those whose misfortunes and bravery were
so conspicuous. As the character of a people must be collected from such a
minute series, it would have been improper to have been less particular.

The writer has had it in view not barely to relate facts, but to delineate the
characters, the passions, the interests and tempers of the persons who are the
subjects of his narration, and to describe the most striking features of the
times in which they lived. How far he has succeeded, or wherein he is
defective, must be left to the judgment of every candid reader, to which this
work is most respectfully submitted.

Dover, June 1, 1784.
CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. DISCOVERY of the country. Establishment of the council of Plymouth.
Their grants to Mason and others. Beginning of the settlements at Portsmouth
and Dover. Whelewright's Indian purchase. Neale's adventures. Discouragements.
Dissolution of the council. Mason's death. Causes of the failure of his
enterprise. Page 1 CHAP. II. Troubles at Dover. Settlements of Exeter and
Hampton. Story of Underhill. Desertion of Mason's tenants. Combinations at
Portsmouth and Dover. Union of New Hampshire with Massachusetts. 32 CHAP. III.
Observations on the principles and conduct of the first planters of
New England. Cause of their removal. Their religious sentiments. Fortitude.
Care of their posterity. Justice. Laws. Principles of government. Theocratic
prejudices. Intolerance and persecutions. 60 CHAP. IV. Mode of government under
Massachusetts. Mason's efforts to recover the property of his ancestor.
Transactions of the King's commissioners. Opposition to them. Internal
transactions. Mason discouraged. 100 CHAP. V. Remarks on the temper and manners
of the Indians. The first general war with them called Philip's war. 120 CHAP.
VI. Mason's renewed efforts. Randolph's mission and transaction's. Attempts for
the trial of Mason's title. New Hampshire separated from Massachusetts and made
a royal province. Abstract of the commission. Remarks on it. 164 CHAP. VII. The
administration of the first council. Mason's arrival. Opposition to him. His
departure. State of trade and navigation. 175 CHAP. VIII. The administration of
Cranfield. Violent measures. Insurrections. Mason's suits. Prosecution of Moody
and Vaughan. Arbitrary measures. Complaints. Tumults. Weare's agency in
England. Cranfield's removal. Barefoote's administration. 188 CHAP. IX.
Administration of Dudley as president, and Androsse as governor of New England.
Mason's further attempts. His disappointment and death. Revolution. Sale to
Allen. His commission for the government. 228 CHAP. X. The war with the French
and Indians, commonly called King William's war. 242 CHAP. XI. The civil
affairs of the province during the administrations of Usber, Partridge, Allen,
the Earl of Bellomont and Dudley, comprehending the whole controversy with
Allen and his heirs. 288 CHAP. XII. The war with the French and Indians called
Queen Anne's war. Conclusion of Dudley's and Usher's administration. 329
Appendix.
CHAP. I. Discovery of the country. Establishment of the Council of Plymouth.
Their Grants to Mason and others. Beginning of the settlements at Portsmouth
and Dover. Whelewright's Indian purchase. Neal's adventures. Discouragements.
Dissolution of the Council. Mason's death. Causes of the failure of his
enterprise.
IT is happy for America that its discovery and settlement by the Europeans
happened at a time, when they were emerging from a long period of ignorance and
darkness. The discovery of the magnetic needle, the invention of printing, the
revival of literature and the reformation of religion, had caused a vast
alteration in their views, and taught them the true use of their rational and
active powers. To this concurrence of favorable causes we are indebted for the
precision with which we are able to fix the beginning of this great American
empire: An advantage of which the historians of other countries almost
universally are destitu^e; their first aeras being either disguised by fiction
and romance, or involved in impenetrable obscurity.

Mankind do not easily relinquish ancient and established prejudices, or adopt
new systems of conduct, without some powerful attractive. The prospect of
immense wealth, from the mines of Mexico and Peru, fired the Spaniards to a
rapid conquest of those regions and the destruction of their numerous
inhabitants; but the northern continent, presenting no such glittering charms,
was neglected by the European princes for more than a century after its
discovery. 1496.
No effectual care was taken to secure to themselves the possession of so
extensive a territory, Prince's Annals.
or the advantage of a friendly traffic with its natives, or of the fishery on
its coasts; till private adventurers at a vast expense, with infinite hazard
and persevering zeal, established settlements for themselves, and thereby
enlarged the dominions of their sovereigns.

Of the voyagers who visited the northern coast of America, for the sake of its
furs and fish, one of the most remarkable was Captain John Smith; who ranged
the shore from Penobscot to Cape Cod, 1614.
and in this route discovered the river Pascataqua; which he found to be a safe
harbor with a rocky shore. He returned to England in one of his ships, and
there published a description of the country, with a map of the seacoast,
which he presented to Prince Charles, Smith's Voyage.
who gave it the name of NEW ENGLAND. The other ship he left behind under the
care of Thomas Hunt, who decoyed about twenty of the natives on board, and sold
them for slaves at Malaga. This perfidious action excited a violent jealousy in
the natives and bitterly enraged them against succeeding adventurers. Two of
those savages having found their way back as far as Newfoundland, then under
the government of Captain John Mason, were restored to their native country by
his friendly interposition, and reported the strong disapprobation, which the
English in general entertained of the mischievous plot by which they had been
carried off. By this means, together with the prudent endeavors of Captain
Thomas Dermer, and afterward of the Plymouth settlers, tranquillity was
re-established between the Indians and the adventurers, Hubbard's printed
Narrative of the (...) with the Indians* p. 3.
which was tolerably preserved for many years. However fond we may have been of
accusing the Indians of treachery and infidelity, it must be confessed that the
example was first set them by the Europeans. Had we always treated them with
that justice and humanity which our religion inculcates, and our true interest
at all times required, we might have lived in as much harmony with them, as
with any other people on the globe.

1620.
The importance of the country now began to appear greater than before, and some
measures were taken to promote its settlement. A patent had been granted by
King James in 1606, limiting the dominion of Virginia, from the thirty-fourth,
to the forty-fourth degree of northern latitude; which extent of territory had
been divided into two parts, called North and South Virginia. The latter was
assigned to certain noblemen, knights, and gentlemen of London, the former to
others in Bristol, Gorges's Narrative.
Exeter and Plymouth. Those who were interested in the northern colony, finding
that the patent did not secure them from the intrusions of others, petitioned
for an enlargement and confirmation of their privileges. After some time, the
king, by his sole authority, constituted a council, Nov. 3.
consisting of forty noblemen, knights and gentlemen The Duke of Lenox, Marquis
of Buckingham, -- Hamilton, Earl of Pembroke, Earl of Arundel, -- Bath, --
Southampton, -- Salisbury, Earl of Warwick, Viscount Haddington, Lord Zouche,
-- Sheffield, -- Gorges, Sir Edward Seymour, -- Robert Mansel, -- Edward
Zouche, -- Dudley Digges -- Thomas Roe -- Ferd^nando Gorges. -- Francis Popham,
-- John Brooks -- Thomas Gates, -- Richard Hawkins, -- Richard Edgecombe, --
Sir Allen Apsiey, -- Warwick Heal, -- Richard Cotchmay, -- John Bourgchiere, --
Nathaniel Rich, -- Edward Giles, -- Giles Mompesson, -- Thomas Wroth, Knights.
Matthew Sutcliffe, Robert Hea^h, Henry Bourg^hiere, John Drake, Rawley Gilbert,
George Chudley, Thomas Hammond, John Argall, Esquire^

, by the name of The council established at Plymouth, in the county of Devon,
for the planting, ruling and governing of New England, MS Copy in Super. Court
files.
in America. They were a corporation with perpetual succession, by election of
the majority; and their territories extended from the fortieth to the
forty-eighth degree of northern latitude. This patent, or charter, is the
foundation of all the grants that were made of the country of New England. But
either from the jarring interests of the members, or their indistinct knowledge
of the country, or their inattention to business, or some other cause which
does not fully appear, their affairs were transacted in a confused manner from
the beginning; and the grants which they made were so inaccurately described,
and interfer^d so much with each other, as to occasion difficulties and
controversies, some of which are not yet ended.

Two of the most active members of this council were Sir Ferdinando Gorges and
Captain John Mason. Gorges had been an officer in the navy of Queen Elizabeth,
Hume.
intimately connected with Sir Walter Raleigh, of whose adventurous spirit he
had a large share. After the peace which King James made in 1604, he was
appointed governor of the fort and island of Plymouth in Devonshire. Whilst he
resided there, Captain Weymouth, who had been employed by Lord Arundel in
search of a nor^hwest passage, but had fallen short of his course and put in at
Pemaquid, brought from thence into the harbor of Plymouth, five natives of
America, three of whom were eagerly seized by Georges, and retained in his
service for three years. Finding them of a tractable and communicative
disposition, and having won their affections by gentle treatment, he learned
from them many particulars concerning their country, its rivers, harbors,
islands, fisheries and other productions; and the numbers, force, disposition
and government of the natives; and from this information he conceived sanguine
hopes of indulging his genius, and making his fortune, by a thorough discovery
of the country. For this purpose he, in conjunction with others, ventured
several ships, Gorges's Narrative.
whereof some met with peculiar misfortunes; and others brought home accounts,
which, though discouraging to some of his associates, made him determine upon
farther attempts, wherein his resolution and perseverance were more conspicuous
than any solid gain. These transactions were previous to the establishment of
the council; in soliciting which, Gorges was so extremely active, that he was
appointed their president, and had a principal share in all their transactions.
Mason was a merchant of London, but became a sea-officer, and, after the peace,
governor of Newfoundland, where he acquired a knowledge of America, which led
him, on his return to England, into a close attachment to those who were
engaged in its discovery; and upon some vacancy in the council, he was elected
a member and became their secretary; being also governor of Portsmouth in
Hampshire. 1621. March 9.
He procured a grant from the council, of all the land from the river Naumkeag
[now Salem] round Cape Anne, to the river Merrimack; and up each of those
rivers to the farthest head thereof; then to cross over from the head of the
one to the head of the other; with all the islands lying within three miles of
the coast. This district was called MARIANA. The next year another grant was
made, to Gorges and Mason jointly, 1622. Aug. 10.
of all the lands between the rivers Merrimack and Sagadehock, extending back
to the great lakes and river of Canada, and this was called LACONIA.

Under the authority of this grant, Gorges and Mason, in conjunction with
several merchants of London, Bristol, Exeter, Plymouth, Shrewsbury and
Dorchester, who styled themselves "The Company of Laconia," attempted the
establishment of a colony and fishery at the river Pascataqua; and in the
spring of the following year sent over David Thompson, 1623.
a Scotsman, Edward and William Hilton, fishmongers of London, with a number of
other people, in two divisions, furnished with all necessaries to carry on
their design. One of these companies landed on the southern shore of the river,
at its mouth, and called the place Little-Harbour: Here they erected
salt-works, and built an house which was afterward called Mason-H^ll; but the
Hiltons set up their stages eight miles further up the river toward the
northwest, on a neck of land which the Indians called Winnichahanna^, but they
named Northam, and afterward Dover. Thompson, Hubbard's MS.
not being pleased with his situation, removed the next spring to an island in
the Bay of Massachusetts; 1624.
this the General Court afterward confirmed to him, Prince's Annal^.
and it still bears his name.

These settlements went on slowly for several years, but the natives being
peaceable and several other small beginnings being made along the coast as far
as Plymouth, a neighbourly intercourse was kept up among them, each following
their respective employments of fishing, trading and planting, till the
disorderly behavior of one Morton, at Mount Wollaston in the Bay of
Massachusetts, caused an alarm among the scattered settlements as far as
Pascataqua. 1628.
This man had, in defiance of the king's proclamation, made a practice of
selling arms and ammunition to the Indians, whom he employed in hunting and
fowling for him; so that the English, seeing the Indians armed in the woods,
began ^o be in terror. They also apprehended danger of another kind; for
Morton's plantation was a receptacle for discontented servants, whose desertion
weakened the settlements, and who, being there without law, were more
formidable than the savages themselves. The principal persons of Pascataqua
therefore readily united with their neighbors, Prince's Annals.
in making application to the colony of Plymouth, which was of more force than
all the rest, to put a stop to this growing mischief; which they happily
effected by seizing Morton and sending him prisoner to England.

1629
Some of the scattered planters in the Bay of Massachusetts, being desirous of
making a settlement in the neighborhood of Pascataqua, and following the
example of those at Plymouth, who had purchased their lands of the Indians,
which they conscientiously thought necessary to give them a just title,
procured a general meeting of Indians, May 17.
at Squamscot falls, where they obtained a deed from Passaconaway Sagamore of
Penacook, Runnaawitt of Pantucket, Wahangnonawitt of Squamscot, and Rowls of
Newichwannock: Wherein they express their desire to have the English come and
settle among them as among their countrymen in Massachusetts, whereby they hope
to be strengthened against their enemies the Tarrateens; and accordingly with
the universal consent of their subjects, for what they deemed a valuable
consideration in coats, shirts and kettles, sell to John Whelewright of the
Massachusetts Bay, late of England, minister of the gospel, Augustine Story (or
Storer) Thomas Wight, William Wentworth, and Thomas Leavit, all that part of
the main Land bounded by the river Pascataqua and the river Merrimack, to begin
at Newichwannock falls, in Pascataqua river aforesaid, and down said river to
the sea; and along the seashore to Merrimack river; and up said river to the
falls at Pantucket; and from thence upon a northwest line, twenty English miles
into the woods; and from thence upon a strait line northeast, till it meet with
the main rivers that run down to Pantucket falls, and Newichwannock falls
aforesaid The NW line here described will end within the township of Amherst;
and the NE line from thence will cross the river Merrimack about Amuskeeg
falls; and passing through C^^ster, Nottingham, Barrington and Rochester will
strike Ne^ichwannock rive^ about ten miles above the Salmon falls.
; the said rivers to be the bounds from the thwart or head line to the
aforesaid falls, and from thence the main channel of each river to the sea to
be the side bounds; together with all the islands within the said bounds; as
also the isles of shoals so called. The conditions of this grant were, that
Whelewright should within ten years, begin a plantation at Squamscot falls;
that other inhabitants should have the same privileges with him; that no
plantation should exceed ten miles square; that no lands should be granted but
in townships; and that these should be subject to the government of the
Massachusetts colony, until they should have a settled government among
themselves; that for each township there should be paid an annual
acknowledgement of one coat of trucking cloth, to Passaconaway the chief
Sagamore or his successors, and two bushels of Indian corn to Whelewright and
his heirs. The Indians reserved to themselves free liberty of fishing, fowling*
hunting and planting within these limits. The principal persons of Pascataqua
and the province of Maine were witnesses to the subscribing of this instrument,
MS Copy in Super. Court files.
and giving possession of the lands.

By this deed the English inhabitants within these limits obtained a right to
the soil from the original proprietors, more valuable in a moral view, than the
grants of any European prince could convey. If we smile at the arrogance of a
Roman Pontiff in assuming to divide the whole new world between the Spaniards
and Portuguese, with what consistency can we admit the right of a king of
England, to parcel out America to his subjects, when he had neither purchased
nor conquered it, nor could pretend any other title, than that some of his
subjects were the first Europeans who discovered it, whilst it was in
possession of its native lords? The only validity which such grants could have
in the eye of reason was, that the grantees had from their prince a permission
to negotiate with the possessors for the purchase of the soil, and thereupon a
power of jurisdiction subordinate to his crown.

The same year Captain Mason procured a new patent, Nov. 7.
under the common seal of the council of Plymouth, for the land from the middle
of Pascataqua river and up the same to the farthest head thereof, and from
thence northwestward until sixty miles from the mouth of the harbor were
finished; also through Merrimack river to the farthest head thereof, and so
forward up into the land westward, until sixty miles were finished; and from
thence to cross over land to the end of the sixty miles accounted from
Pascataqua river; MS in file^ of Superior Court.
together with all islands within five leagues of the coast. This tract of land
was called NEW HAMPSHIRE: It comprehended the whole of Whelewright's purchase;
and unless Mason's intention was to frustrate his title, it is difficult to
assign a reason for the procurement of this patent, as the same land, with much
more, had been granted to Gorges and Mason jointly, seven years before. If
there was an agreement between them to divide the province of Laconia, and take
out new patents from the council, in preference to the making a deed of
partition; it is not easy to conceive why the western boundary should be
contracted to sixty miles from the sea, when the lakes and river of Canada were
supposed to be but ninety or an hundred miles from Pascataqua. Gorges's Hist of
America, p. 48.
If this grant was intended as an equivalent for the patent of Mariana, which
the council had the preceding year included in their deed to the Massachusetts
company; it is impossible to account for the extension of New Hampshire to the
river Merrimack, when the grant of Massachusetts reached to three miles north
of that river and of every part of it Mr. Hubbard in his MS history says it
has been affirmed by Mr. Josselyn, who first came over into New England on
Captain Mason's account, that there was an agreement made between Mr. Matthew
Cradock (the first Governor of the Massachusetts company) and Captain John
Mason, that the bounds of the Massachusetts should reach to three miles
northward of Merrimack and the remainder of the land betwixt that line and
Pascataqua river, should be left for Captain Mason's patent.

The Commissioners sent by Charles II in 1664, report that Mr. Mason had a
patent for some land about Cape Anne before the Massachusetts had their first
patent; whereupon Captain Mason and Mr. Cradock agreed that the Massachusetts
should have that land, which was granted to Captain Mason about Cape Anne, and
Captain Mason should have that land, which was beyond Merrimack and granted to
the Massachusetts. This agreement was sent to Mr. Henry Jocelyn to get recorded
at Boston, but before he could have leisure to go there he heard that Captain
Mason was dead and therefore went not. Of this he made affidavit, before the
commissioners. Hutch. Collection Papers, p. 423.


.

The west country adventurers were not less attentive to their interest; 1630,
March 12.
for in the following spring they obtained a patent from the council whereby
all that part of the river Pascataqua called or known by the name of Hilton's
Point, with the south side of the said river up to the falls of Squamscot, and
three miles into the main land for breadth, was granted to Edward Hilton. This
patent, sealed with the common seal of the council, and subscribed by the Earl
of Warwick, sets forth, that Hilton and his associates had at their own proper
cost and charges transported servants, built houses and planted corn at
Hilton's Point, now Dover, and intended the further increase and advancement of
the plantation. MS Copy in Proprietary Office.
William Blackstone, William Jefferies and Thomas Lewis or either of them,
1631. July 7.
were empowered to give possession of the premses; which was done by Lewis, and
the livery and seizen endorsed. Within these limits are contained the towns of
Dover, Durham, and Stretham, with part of Newington and Greenland. It was
commonly called Squamscot patent, but sometimes Bloody-point patent, from a
quarrel between the agents of the two companies about a point of land in the
river which was convenient for both; Hubbard's MS.
and, there being no government then established, the controversy would have
ended in blood, if the contending parties had not been persuaded to refer the
decision of it to their employers.

The London adventurers also thought it prudent to have some security for the
interest which they had advanced, and accordingly obtained a grant from the
council, Novem. 3^
of that part of the patent of Laconia, on which the buildings and salt-works
were erected, Hutch. vol. I. p. ^16.
situate on both sides the harbor and river of Pascataqua to the extent of
five miles westward by the seacoast, then to cross over toward the other
plantation in the hands of Edward Hilton. The grantees named in this patent Mr.
Hubbard says, that this patent was in the hands of some gentlemen at Portsmouth
when he wrote. I have seen no copy of it but what is preserved in his MS
history. There is among the ancient files in the Recorder's office, an invoice
of goods sent over in 1631, subscribed by all the above (...) the last, in
whose stead i^ subscribed William Oy^^
were, Sir Ferdinando Gorges, Captain John Mason, John Gorton, Henry Gardner,
George Griffith, Edwin Gay, Thomas Warnerton, Thomas Air and Eliezer Air,
who, it is said, had already expended three thousand pounds in the undertaking.
They were to pay forty-eight pounds per annum by way of acknowledgment to the
president and council, if demanded. Captain Camocke, a relation of the Earl of
Warwick, with Henry Jocelyn, Hubbard's MS.
who were then intending a voyage here were appointed to put the grantees in
possession. Within this patent are comprehended the towns of Portsmouth,
Newcastle, and Rye, with part of Newington and Greenland.

The whole interest being thus divided into two parts, Captain Thomas Wiggen
was appointed agent for the upper, and Captain Walter Neal for the lower
plantation; with him were associated Ambrose Gibbons, George Vaughan, MS
Letters.
Thomas Warnerton, Humphry Chadbourne and one Godfrie as superintendants of the
several businesses of trade, fishery, salt-making, building and husbandry. Neal
resided at Little-Harbour with Godfrie who had the care of the fishery.
Chadbourne built an house at Strawberry-bank, which was called the great house,
in which Warnerton resided. Gibbons had the care of a sawmill, and lived in a
palisaded house at Newichwannock, where he carried on trade with the Indians.
He afterward removed to Sander's-point, where the adventurers gave him a
settlement for his faithful services. He was succeeded at Newichwannock by
Chadbourne, whose posterity are persons of principal figure and interest there
at this day. The proprietors were also careful to provide for the defense of
their plantations, and sent over several cannon which they directed their
agents to mount in the most convenient place for a fort. They accordingly
placed them on the northeast point of the Great-Island at the mouth of the
harbor, and laid out the ground about a bow-shot back from the waterside to
an high rock, MS in the Recorder's Files.
on which it was intended in time to build the principal fort.

A great part of Captain Neal's errand was to penetrate the interior part of
the province of Laconia, concerning which the adventurers had formed very
sanguine expectations. It was described as containing diverse lakes, Gorges's
Hist. of America, p. 47.
and extending back to a great lake and river in the country of the Iroquois.
This river was said to be fair and large, containing many fruitful islands; the
air pure and salubrious; the country pleasant, having some high hills; full of
goodly forests, fair valleys and fertile plains; abounding in corn, vines,
chestnuts, walnuts, and many other sorts of fruit; the rivers well stored with
fish, and environed with goodly meadows full of timber trees. In the great lake
were said to be four islands, full of pleasant woods and meadows, having great
store of stags, fallow-deer, elks, roe-bucks, beavers and other game, and these
islands were supposed to be commodiously situated for habitation and traffic,
in the midst of a fine lake, abounding with the most delicate fish. No one who
is acquainted with the interior part of the country in its wilderness state,
can forbear smiling at this romantic description, penned in the true style of
adventurers: yet such an impression had the charms of Laconia made on the minds
of our first settlers, that Neal set out on foot, in company with Jocelyn and
Darby Field, 1632.
to discover these beautiful lakes, and settle a trade with the Indians by
pinnaces, imagining the distance to be short of an hundred miles. In the course
of their travels, they visited the white mountains, which they described in the
same romantic style, to be a ridge, extending an hundred leagues, on which snow
lies all the year, and inaccessible but by the gullies which the dissolved
snow has made: Jocelyn's rarities of New England.
on one of these mountains they reported to have found a plain of a day's
journey over, whereon nothing grows but moss; and at the further end of this
plain, a rude heap of massy stones, piled up on one another a mile high; on
which one might ascend from stone to stone, like a pair of winding stairs, to
the top, where was another level of about an acre, with a pond of clear water.
This summit was said to be far above the clouds, and from hence they beheld a
vapor like a vast pillar, drawn up by the sunbeams, out of a great lake into
the air, where it was formed into a cloud. The country beyond these mountains
northward, was said to be "daunting terrible," full of rocky hills, as thick as
mole-hills in a meadow, and clothed with infinite thick woods. They had great
expectation of finding precious stones on these mountains; and something
resembling crystal being picked up, Hubbard's MS Hist.
was sufficient to give them the name of the CHRYSTAL-HILLS. From hence they
continued their route in search of the lake; till finding their provision
almost spent, and the forests of Laconia yielding no supply, they were obliged
to return when they supposed themselves so far advanced, that the discovery
wanted but one day's journey of being finished Mr. Hubbard and after him
Governor Hutchinson, place this discovery of the White Hills in 1642. But as
Neal had positive orders to discover the lakes* and tarried but three years in
the country, employing great part of his time in searching the woods, it is
probable that Mr. Hubbard mistook one figure in his date.
. Gorges's Hist. of America, p. 48.


This expedition, being ended, was succeeded by one of another kind. The coast
was alarmed by the report of a pirate, one Dixy Bull; who with fifteen others,
November.
being employed in the Indian trade at the eastward, had taken several boats
and rifled the fort at Pemaquid. Neal, in conjunction with the others, equipped
four pinnaces and shallops, manned with forty men, being all the force that
both plantations could spare, who, being joined by twenty more in a bark from
Boston, proceeded to Pemaquid; but contrary winds and bad weather obliged them
to return without meeting the pirates, who made their way farther to the
eastward, and at length got to England; where Bull met with his deserts. The
company on their return hanged, at Richmond's island, Prince's Annals, vol. 2.
p. 73.83.
an Indian who had been concerned in the murder of an Englishman.

1633.
The next year Neal and Wiggen joined in surveying their respective patents, and
laying out the towns of Portsmouth and Northam, and another which was called
Hampton, though no settlement had been made there. They also agreed with
Whelewright that the plantation which he had undertaken to make at Squamscot
falls, should be called Exeter; and determined the bounds between his land and
theirs. This survey was made by order of the company of Laconia, who gave names
to the four towns, and the transaction was duly reported to them: MS in
Recorder's Office.
soon after which Neal returned to England.

From a number of letters that passed between the adventurers and Gibbons their
factor, and which are yet preserved, it appears that their vie^s were chiefly
turned toward the discovery of the lakes and of mines; the cultivation of
grapes, and the advantages of trade and fishery; and that little regard was had
to agriculture, the surest foundation of all other improvements in such a
country as this. They often complain of their expenses, as indeed they might
with reason; for they had not only to pay wages to their colonists, but to
supply them with provisions, clothing, utensils, medicines, articles of trade,
implements for building, husbandry and fishing, and to stock their plantations
with cattle, swine, and goats. Bread was either brought from England in meal,
Prince's Annals. vol. 2. p. 30.70.
or from Virginia in grain, and then sent to the windmill at Boston, there
being none erected here. Very little improvement was made on the lands; the
lakes were not explored; the vines were planted but came to nothing; no mines
were found but those of iron, and these were not wrought; three or four houses
only were built within the first seven years; the peltry trade with the Indians
was of some value, and the fishery served for the support of the inhabitants;
but yielded no great profit to the adventurers, who received but inadequate
returns in lumber and furs. They saw their interest sinking apace, and grew
dispirited; and the major part of them either relinquished the design, or sold
their shares to Mason and Gorges, who were more sanguine than the rest, and
became (either by purchase or tacit consent of the others) the principal, if
not sole proprietors. These gentlemen renewed their exertions with greater
vigor, sent over a fresh supply of servants, 1634.
and materials for carrying on the settlement, and appointed Francis Williams
their governor. He was a gentleman of good sense and discretion; and so very
acceptable to the people, that when they combined in a body politic they
continued him at their head. Hub^a^d's MS Hist.


The charter by which the council of Plymouth was established, 1635.
had been from the beginning disrelished by the Virginia company; who spared no
pains to get it revoked. Their applications to the king proved fruitless; but
when the parliament began to enquire into the grievances of the nation, this
patent was complained of as a monopoly. Gorges's Narrative, p. 22 and 44.
Sir Ferdinando Gorges, being summoned, appeared before them, and both in
person and by his council defended it in a masterly manner, but in vain; for
when the national grievances were presented to the throne, the patent of
New England was the first. The council also had got into disrepute with the
high-church party, for having encouraged the settlement of the Plymouth and
Massachusetts colonists, who fled from their persecutions. These prejudices
against them, operating as discouragements to their undertaking, induced the
council to resign their charter to the king; having previously taken care to
secure some portion of the expiring interest to such of themselves as were
disposed to accept it. The scheme they had in view was to divide their
territory into twelve provinces, under as many proprietary governors, subject
to one general governor; and they went so far as to nominate Gorges, then
threescore years of age, for the person, and build a ship of war, which was to
bring him over and remain in the service of the country. But the ship fell and
broke in the launching; Hubbard's MS Hist.
and their project not being sufficiently attended to by those in power, they
were obliged to be content with such grants as they could make, of those
districts, into which they had divided the country. That which was now made to
Mason comprehended both his former patents, extending from Naumkeag to
Pascataqua, and sixty miles northwestward within the land, together with the
south half of the Isles of Shoals, and ten thousand acres at Sagadahock; saving
to those already settled within these limits, Files of the Sup. Cour.
the property of their lawful grants on paying "some "small acknowledgment" to
the proprietor. Hubbard's MS Hist.
This grant was dated the twenty-second of April Whether Capt. Mason had his
title confirmed by the king after the surrender of the charter is a point that
has been questioned. I shall here collect what evidence I have met with on both
sides.

In a pamphlet published in 1728, containing a detail of the grants and
transactions of Capt. Mason, it is said K. Charles I. by charter dated Aug. 19,
1635, gives, grants and confirms unto Capt. John Mason, then called treasurer
and paymaster of his army, his heirs and assigns, all the aforesaid tract of
land granted to him by the council of Plymouth, by the name of the province of
New Hampshire; with power of government, and as ample jurisdiction and
prerogatives as used by the bishop of Durham; creating him and his aforesaids
absolute lords and proprietors of the province of New Hampshire, with power of
conferring honors, Doug. Summary, l. 418. Hist. Mass. l. 317.
etc. On this authority (I suppose) Douglas has asserted the same thing. On
which Hutchinson remarks This is not probable. His heirs were certainly
unacquainted with it, or they would have made mention of it before the king in
council in 1691. The report of the Lords Chief Justices in 1677, wherein the
several grants are recited, makes no mention of this: But on the contrary it is
said* As to Mr. Mason's right of government within the soil he claimed their
lordships, and indeed his own council, agreed he had none* the great council of
Plymouth, under whom he claimed, having no power to transfer government to any.
The Lords of Trade in a report to the king in 1753, say, It is alleged that
this last grant to Mason was ratified and confirmed by the crown, by charter
dated Aug. 19, 1635, with full power of civil jurisdiction and government, but
no such charter as this appears upon record.

None of Mason's heirs ever attempted to assume government by virtue of such a
charter, as the heirs of Gorges did in the province of Maine. Robert Mason was
appointed councellor by mandamus* and Samuel Allen, who purchased the title,
was governor by commission from the crown.

There is an original letter in the Recorder's files, written by George Vaughan
to Ambrose Gibbons, both factors for the company of Laconia, April 10, 1636,
long before any controversy arose on this point, which may give more light to
it than any thing that has yet been published. I shall give it a place in the
Appendix.


. In June following the council surrendered their charter to the king; and in
September Gorges sold to Mason a tract of land on the northeast side of the
river Pascataqua, extending three miles in breadth, and following the course of
the river from its mouth to its farthest head, Printed State of Allen's Title.
including the saw-mill which had been built at the falls of Newichwannock.

But death, which puts an end to the fairest prospects, cut off all the hopes
which Mason had entertained of aggrandizing his fortune, by the settlement of
New Hampshire. By his last will, which he signed a few days before his death,
Nov. 26.
he disposed of his American estate in the following manner, viz. To the
corporation of Lynn Regis in Norfolk the place of his nativity, he gave two
thousand acres of land in New Hampshire, subject to the yearly rent of one
penny per acre to his heirs, and two fifths of all mines royal; on condition
that five families should within five years be settled thereupon. To his
brother in law John Wallaston, three thousand acres, subject to the yearly rent
of one shilling. To his grandchild Anne Tufton, ten thousand acres at
Sagadahock. To Robert Tufton, his grandson, he gave his manor of Mason-hall, on
condition that he should take the surname of Mason. He also gave to his brother
Wallaston in trust, one thousand acres for the maintenance of an honest, godly
and religious preacher of God's word; and one thousand more for the support of
a grammar school; each of these estates to be conveyed to feoffees in trust,
and their successors, paying annually one penny per acre to his heirs. The
residue of his estate in New Hampshire he gave to his grandson John Tufton, he
taking the surname of Mason, and to his lawful issue; or in want thereof to
Robert Tufton and his lawful issue; or in want thereof to Doctor Robert Mason,
chancellor of the diocese of Winchester, and his lawful issue; or, in want of
such issue, to his own other right heirs forever; provided that it should not
go out of the name of Mason. The residuary legatee was required to pay five
hundred pounds out of this estate to his sister Mary, and all the grandchildren
were to relinquish their right to one thousand pounds due from this estate to
their father Joseph Tufton. The estate in America was valued in the inventory
at ten thousand pounds sterling. MS in Sup. Court files.


The Massachusetts planters viewed Mason as their enemy, because he with Gorges
had privately encouraged some persons whom they had censured and sent home, to
petition against them as disaffected to the government; and had endeavored to
get their charter set aside, to make way for the scheme of a general governor
Mr. Hubbard relates the following anecdote, without mentioning the name of the
person. One of the gentlemen who was known to be one of the greatest
adversaries to the affairs of the Massachusetts, fell sick and died. In his
sickness he sent for the minister, and bewailed his enmity against them: and
promised if he recovered, he would be as good a friend to New England, as he
had been an enemy; but his fatal hour being come, his purposes of that nature
were cut off. The passage aforegoing was certified by letters from lord Say and
others to the governor of New England about the year 1635

Governor Winthrop has the following remark in his Journal. 1636. The last
winter Captain Mason died. He was the chief mover, in all attempts against us;
and was to have sent the general governor; and for this end was providing
ships. But the Lord in mercy taking him away, all the business fell on sleep.


.

But though Mason and Gorges had not the same religious views with the
Massachusetts planters, yet their memory deserves respect. They were both
heartily engaged in the settlement of the country; they sunk their estates in
the undertaking, and reaped no profit to themselves; yet their enterprizing
spirit excited emulation in others, who had the advantage of improving their
plans and avoiding their mistakes. Gorges accounted for the ill success of his
adventures in the following manner. Gorges's Narrative, p. 49.
1. He began when there was no hope of any thing for the present but loss; as
he had first to seek a place; which, being found, was a wilderness; and so
gloomy was the prospect, that he could scarce procure any to go, much less to
reside in it; and those whom he at length sent, could not subsist but on the
provisions with which he supplied them. 2. He sought not barely his own profit,
but the thorough discovery of the country; wherein he went so far (with the
help of his associates) as to open the way for others to (...) their gain. 3.
He never went in person to oversee the people whom he employed. 4. There was no
settled government to punish offenders, or mispenders of their masters goods.
Two other things contributed to the disappointment in as great, if not a
greater degree than what he has assigned. The one was that instead of applying
themselves chiefly to husbandry, the original source of wealth and independence
in such a country as this; he and his associates, being merchants, were rather
intent on trade and fishery as their primary object* These can not be
profitable in a (...) country, until the foundation is laid (...) the
cultivation of the lands. If the lumber trade and fishery can not now be
carried on to advantage, without the constant aid of husbandry in their
neighborhood, how could a colony of traders and fishermen make profitable
returns to their employers, when the husbandry necessary for their support was
at the distance of Virginia or England? The other mistake which these
adventurers fell into was the idea of lordship, and the granting of lands not
as freeholds, but by leases subject to quit-rents. To settle a colony of
tenants in a climate so far northward, where the charges of subsistence and
improvement were much greater than the value of the lands, after the
improvements were made; especially in the neighborhood of so respectable and
growing a colony as that of Massachusetts, was indeed a chimerical project; and
had not the wiser people among them sought an union with the Massachusetts, in
all probability the settlements must have been deserted.

CHAP. II. Troubles at Dover. Settlements of Exeter and Hampton. Ruin of
Mason's interest. Story of Underhill. Combinations at Portsmouth and Dover.
Union of New Hampshire with Massachusetts.
WHILE the lower plantation on the river Pascataqua lay under discouragement by
the death of its principal patron, the upper settlement, though carried on with
more success, had peculiar difficulties to struggle with. Two thirds of this
patent belonged to some merchants of Bristol, the other third to some of
Shrewsbury; and there was an agreement that the division should be made by
indifferent men. Captain Wiggen who was sent over to superintend their affairs,
after about one year's residence in the country made a voyage to England, to
procure more ample m^ans for carrying on the plantation. In the mean time those
of Bristol had sold their interest to the lords Say and Broke, George Willys
and William Whiting, who continued Wiggen in the agency, and procured a
considerable number of families in the West of England, some of whom were of
good estates, 1633.
and of some account for religion, to come over and increase the colony.
Hubbard's MS Hist. Dover Records.
It appears from ancient records that Wiggen had a power of granting lands to
the settlers; but, as trade was their principal object, they took up small
lots, intending to build a compact town on Dover Neck, which lies between two
branches of the river, and is a fine, dry, and healthy situation; so high as to
command all the neighboring shores, and afford a very extensive and delightful
prospect. On the most inviting part of this eminence they built a
meeting house, which was afterward surrounded with an entrenchment and
flankarts, the remains of which are still visible. Wiggen also brought over
William Leverich, a worthy and able puritan minister; but his allowance from
the adventurers proving too small for his support in a new country, where all
the necessaries of life were scarce and dear, he was obliged to remove to the
southward; and settled at Sandwich in the colony of Plymouth. This proved an
unhappy event to the people, who, being left destitute of regular instruction,
were exposed to the intrusions of artful impostors.

The first of these was one Burdet. 1634.
He had been a minister at Yarmouth in England; Hubbard's MS Hist.
but either really or pretendedly taking offense at the extravagancies of the
bishops and spiritual courts, came over to New England, and joined with the
church in Salem, who employed him for a year or two as a preacher, being a good
scholar and plausible in his behavior. But, disgusted with the strictness of
their discipline, 1636.
he removed to Dover; and continued for some time in good esteem with the
people as a preacher; until by artful insinuations he raised such a jealousy in
their minds against Wiggen their governor, that they deprived him of his
office, and elected Burdet in his place.

During his residence here, he carried on a correspondence with Archbishop Laud
to the disadvantage of the Massachusetts colony, 1637.
representing them as hypocritical and disaffected, and that under pretense of
greater purity and discipline in matters of religion, they were aiming at
independent sovereignty; it being accounted perjury and treason by their
general court, to speak of appeals to the king. The prelate thanked him for his
zeal in the king's service, 1638.
and assured him that care should be taken to redress those disorders when
leisure from their other concerns would permit. This letter of the archbishop
was intercepted, and shown to the governor of Massachusetts. Burdet's villainy
was considered as the more atrocious, because he had been admitted a freeman of
their corporation, and had taken the oath of fidelity. A copy of his own letter
was afterward found in his closet.

About this time, the Antinomian controversy at Boston having occasioned the
banishment of the principal persons of that sect, several of them retired to
this settlement, being without the jurisdiction of Massachusetts. When this was
known, Governor Winthrop wrote to Wiggen, Burdet and others of this plantation,
that as there had hitherto been a good correspondence between them it would be
much resented if they should receive the exiles; and intimating the intention
of the general court to survey the utmost limits of their patent, and make use
of them. To this Burdet returned a scornful answer, refusing to give the
governor his title. The governor thought of citing him to court to answer for
his contempt; but was dissuaded from it by Dudley, the deputy governor, who
judged it imprudent to exasperate him, lest he should avenge himself by farther
accusing them to their enemies in England. The governor contented himself with
sending to Hilton an account of Burdet's behavior, enclosing a copy of his
letter, and cautioning the people not to put themselves too far under his
power. His true character did not long remain secret; for being detected in
some lewd actions he made a precipitate removal to Agamenticus [now York] in
the province of Maine, where he also assumed to rule, and continued a course of
injustice and adultery till the arrival of Thomas Gorges, their governor, [in
1640] who laid a fine on him, and seized his cattle for the payment of it The
records of the court mention him as a man of ill name and same, infamous for
incontinency. Lib. A. Sept. 8th, 1640.
. He appealed to the king, but his appeal not being admitted, he departed for
England full of enmity against these plantations. When he arrived, he found all
in confusion; and falling in with the royalists was taken and imprisoned by the
parliamentary party, which is the last account we have of him.

One of the exiles on account of the Antinomian controversy, was John
Whelewright, brother to the famous Anne Hutchinson. He had been a preacher at
Braintree, which was then part of Boston, and was a gentleman of learning,
piety and zeal. Having engaged to make a settlement within ten years, on the
lands he had purchased of the Indians at Squamscot falls, he with a number of
his adherents began a plantation there, which according to the agreement made
with Mason's agents they called Exeter. Having ob^^ined a dismission from the
church in Boston The names of those who were thus dismissed were, John
Whelewright, Richard Merrys, Richard Bulgar, Philemon Purmot, Isaac Gross,
Christopher Marshall, George Baytes, Thomas Wardell, William Wardell.
(Boston Chb. Records).


, they formed themselves into a church; and judging themselves without the
jurisdiction of Massachusetts, they combined into a separate body politic, and
chose rulers and assistants, who were sworn to the due discharge of their
office, Exeter Records.
and the people were as solemnly sworn to obey them. Their rulers were Isaac
Gross, Nicholas Needham, and Thomas Wilson; each of whom continued in office
the space of a year, having two assistants. The laws were made in a popular
assembly and formally consented to by the rulers. Treason, and rebellion
against the king, (who is styled "the Lord's anointed") or the country, were
made capital crimes; and sedition was punishable by a fine of ten pounds, or
otherwise, at the discretion of the court. This combination subsisted three
years.

About the same time a plantation was formed at Winnicumet, which was called
Hampton. The principal inducement to the making this settlement was the very
extensive salt-marsh, which was extremely valuable, as the uplands were not
cultivated so as to produce a sufficiency of hay for the support of cattle.
With a view to secure these meadows, the general court of Massachusetts had [in
1636] empowered Mr. Dummer of Newbury, with John Spencer, to build an house
there at the expense of the colony, Massa. Records.
which was to be refunded by those who should settle there. Accordingly an
house was built, and commonly called the Bound-house; though it was intended as
a mark of possession rather than of limits. The architect was Nicholas Easton,
who soon after removed to Rhode Island, Callender's Century Sermon, p. 93.
and built the first English house in Newport.

This entrance being made, a petition was presented to the court by a number of
persons, MS of Mr. Gookin.
chiefly from Norfolk in England, Massa. Records, Sep. 8, 1638.
praying for liberty to settle there, which was granted them. They began the
settlement by laying out a township in one hundred and forty-seven shares; and
having formed a church, chose Stephen Bachelor for their minister, with whom
Timothy Dalton was soon after associated. The number of the first inhabitants
was fifty-six Some of their names are mentioned in the Court Records, viz.
Stephen Bachelor, Christopher Hussy, Mary Hussy, widow, Thomas Cromwell,
Samuel Skullard, John Osgood, Samuel Greenfield, John Molton, Thomas Molton,
William Estow, William P^l^er, William Sergeant, Richard Swayne, William
Sanders, Robert Tucke, John Cross.

.

The authority of Massachusetts having established this settlement, they, from
the beginning, considered it as belonging to their colony. Though the agent of
Mason's estate made some objection to their proceeding, MS Deposition in Sup.
Court files.
yet no legal method being taken to controvert this extension of their claim,
the way was prepared for one still greater, which many circumstances concurred
to establish.

After the death of Captain Mason, his widow and executrix sent over Francis
Norton as her "general attorney; Anne Mason's Letters, and
" to whom she committed the whole management of the estate. MS Depositions in
Sup. Court files.
But the expense so far exceeded the income, and the servants grew so impatient
for their arrears, that she was obliged to relinquish the care of the
plantation, and tell the servants that they must shift for themselves. Upon
which they shared the goods and cattle. Norton drove above an hundred oxen to
Boston, and there sold them for twenty-five pounds sterling per head, which it
is said was the current price of the best cattle in New England at that time.
These were of a large breed, imported from Denmark, from whence Mason had also
procured a number of men skilled in sawing planks and making potashes. Having
shared the stock and other materials, some of the people quitted the
plantation; others of them tarried, keeping possession of the buildings and
improvements, which they claimed as their own; the houses at Newichwannock were
burned; and thus Mason's estate was ruined. These events happened between 1638
and 1644.

Among the Antinomians who were banished from Boston, Hubbard's MS History.
and took refuge in these plantations, was Captain John Underhill, in whose
story will appear some very strong characteristics of the spirit of these
times. He had been a soldier in the Netherlands, and was brought over to
New England by Governor Winthrop, to train the people in military discipline.
He served the country in the Pequod war, and was in such reputation in the town
of Boston, Prince's Annals, MS.
that they had chosen him one of their deputies. Deeply tinctured with
Antinomian principles, and possessed of an high degree of enthusiasm, he made a
capital figure in the controversy; being one of the subscribers to a petition
in which the court was censured, with an indecent severity, for their
proceedings against Whelewright. For this offense he was disfranchised. He then
made a voyage to England; Nov. 15th, 1637.
and upon his return petitioned the court for three hundred acres of land which
had been promised him for his former services, intending to remove after
Whelewright. In his petition he acknowledged his offense in condemning the
court, and declared that the Lord had brought him to a sense of his sin in that
respect, so that he had been in great trouble on account thereof. On this
occasion the court thought proper to question him concerning an offensive
expression, which he had uttered on board the ship in which he came from
England, that the government at Boston were as zealous as the scribes and
Pharisees, and as Paul before his conversion. He denied the charge, and it was
proved to his face by a woman who was passenger with him, and whom he had
endeavored to seduce to his opinions. He was also questioned for what he had
said to her concerning the manner of his receiving assurance, which was, that
having long lain under a spirit of bondage, he could get no assurance; till at
length as he was taking a pipe of tobacco, the spirit set home upon him an
absolute promise of free grace, with such assurance and joy that he had never
since doubted of his good estate, neither should he, whatever sins he might
fall into. This he would neither own nor deny; but objected to the sufficiency
of a single testimony. The court committed him for abusing them with a
pretended retraction, and the next day passed the sentence of banishment upon
him. Being allowed the liberty of attending public worship, his enthusiastic
zeal brake out in a speech in which he endeavored to prove that as the Lord
was pleased to convert Saul while he was persecuting, so he might manifest
himself to him while making a moderate use of the good creature tobacco;
professing withal that he knew not wherein he had deserved the censure of the
court. The elders reproved him for this inconsiderate speech; and Mr. Cotton
told him, that though God often laid a man under a spirit of bondage while
walking in sin, as was the case with Paul, yet he never sent a spirit of
comfort but in an ordinance, as he did to Paul by the ministry of Ananias; and
therefore exhorted him to examine carefully the revelation and joy to which he
pretended. The same week he was privately dealt with on suspicion of adultery,
which he disregarded; and therefore on the next sabbath was questioned for it
before the church; but the evidence not being sufficient to convict him, the
church could only admonish him.

These proceedings, civil and ecclesiastical, being finished, he removed out of
their jurisdiction; and after a while came to Dover, where he procured the
place of governor in the room of Burdet. Governor Winthrop hearing of this,
wrote to Hilton and others of this plantation, informing them of his character.
Underhill intercepted the letter, and returned a bitter answer to Mr. Cotton;
and wrote another letter full of reproaches against the governor to a gentleman
of his family, while he addressed the governor himself in a fawning obsequious
strain, begging an obliteration of former miscarriages, and a bearing with
human infirmities. These letters were all sent back to Hilton; but too late to
prevent his advancement.

1639.
Being settled in his government, he procured a church to be gathered at Dover
who chose Hanserd Knollys for their minister. He had come over from England the
year before; but being an Anabaptist of the Antinomian cast, was not well
received in Massachusetts, and came here while Burdet was in office, who forbad
his preaching; but Underhill, agreeing better with him, prevailed to have him
chosen their minister. To ingratiate himself with his new patron, Knollys wrote
in his favor to the church in Boston; styling him The right worshipful their
honored governor. Notwithstanding which they cited him again to appear before
them; the court granting him safe conduct. At the same time complaint was made
to the chief inhabitants on the river, of the breach of friendship in advancing
Underhill after his rejection; and a copy of Knollys's letter was returned,
wherein he had written that Underhill was an instrument of God for their ruin,
and it was enquired whether that letter was written by the desire or consent of
the people. The principal persons of Portsmouth and Dover disclaimed his
miscarriages, and expressed their readiness to call him to account when a
proper information should be presented; but begged that no force might be sent
against him. By his instigation Knollys had also written to his friends in
England, a calumnious letter against the Massachusetts planters, representing
them as more arbitrary than the high commission court, and that there was no
real religion in the country. A copy of this letter being sent from England to
Governor Winthrop, Knollys was so ashamed at the discovery, that obtaining a
license, he went to Boston; and at the public lecture before the governor,
magistrates, ministers and the congregation, made confession of his fault, and
wrote a retraction to his friends in England, which he left with the governor
to be sent to them.

Underhill was so affected with his friend's humiliation, and the disaffection
of the people of Piscataqua to him, that he resolved to retrieve his character
in the same way. Having obtained safe conduct, he went to Boston, and in the
same public manner acknowledged his adultery, his disrespect to the government
and the justice of their proceedings against him: But his confession was mixed
with so many excuses and extenuations that it gave no satisfaction; and the
evidence of his scandalous deportment being now undeniable, the church passed
the sentence of excommunication, to which he seemed to submit, and appeared
much dejected while he remained there.

Upon his return, to please some disaffected persons at the mouth of the river,
he sent thirteen armed men to Exeter to rescue out of the officer's hand one
Fish, who had been taken into custody for speaking against the king. The people
of Dover forbad his coming into their court till they had considered his crimes
and he promised to resign his place if they should disapprove his conduct; but
hearing that they were determined to remove him, he rushed into court in a
passion, took his seat, ordered one of the magistrates to prison for saying
that he would not sit with an adulterer, and refused to receive his dismission,
when they voted it. But they proceeded to choose another governor, Roberts, and
sent back the prisoner to Exeter.

A new scene of difficulty now arose. Thomas Larkham, 1640.
a native of Lyme in Dorsetshire and formerly a minister at Northam near
Barnstable, who had come over to New England, and not favoring the doctrine,
nor willing to submit to the discipline of the churches in Massachusetts, came
to Dover; and being a preacher of good talents, eclipsed Knollys, and raised a
party who determined to remove him. He therefore gave way to the popular
prejudice, and suffered Larkham to take his place; who soon discovered his
licentious principles by receiving into the church persons of immoral
characters, and assuming, like Burdet, the civil as well as ecclesiastical
authority. The better sort of the people were displeased and restored Knollys
to his office who excommunicated Larkham. This bred a riot in which Larkham
laid hands on Knollys, taking away his hat on pretense that he had not paid for
it; but he was civil enough afterward to return it. Some of the magistrates
joined with Larkham, and forming a court, summoned Underhill, who was of
Knollys's party to appear before them, and answer to a new crime which they had
to allege against him. Underhill collected his adherents; Knollys was armed
with a pistol, and another had a bible mounted on an halbert for an ensign. In
this ridiculous parade they marched against Larkham and his party, who
prudently declined a combat, and sent down the river to Williams the governor,
at Portsmouth, for assistance. He came up in a boat with an armed party, beset
Knollys's house where Underhill was, guarded it night and day till a court was
summoned, and then, Williams sitting as judge, Underhill and his company were
found guilty of a riot, and after being fined, were banished the plantation.
The new crime which Larkham's party alleged against Underhill was that he had
been secretly endeavoring to persuade the inhabitants to offer themselves to
the government of Massachusetts, whose favor he was desirous to purchase, by
these means, as he knew that their view was to extend their jurisdiction as far
as they imagined their limits reached, whenever they should find a favorable
opportunity. The same policy led him with his party to send a petition to
Boston, praying for the interposition of the government in their case: In
consequence of which the governor and assistants commissioned Simon Bradstreet,
Esquire. with the famous Hugh Peter's, then minister of Salem, and Timothy Dalton of
Hampton, to enquire into the matter, and effect a reconciliation, or certify
the state of things to them. These gentlemen traveled on foot to Dover, and
finding both sides in fault, brought the matter to this issue, that the one
party revoked the excommunication, and the other the fines and banishment.

In the heat of these disputes, a discovery was made of Knollys's failure in
point of chastity. He acknowledged his crime before the church; but they
dismissed him and he returned to England, where he suffered by the severity of
the long parliament in 1644; Neal's Hist. Puritans, 4to vol. II. p. 113.
and being forbidden to preach in the churches, opened a separate meeting in
Great St. Helen's, from which he was soon dislodged, and his followers
dispersed. Neal's Hist. N. Engld. vol. I. p. 216.
He also suffered in the cause of nonconformity in the reign of King Charles
the second, and at length (as it is said) died a good man in a good old age.
(September 19, 1691, Aet. 93. Mather's Magnal. lib. 3. p. 7.
)

Underhill having finished his career in these parts obtained leave to return
to Boston, and finding honesty to be the best policy, did in a large assembly,
at the public lecture, and during the sitting of the court, make a full
confession of his adultery and hypocrisy, his pride and contempt of authority,
justifying the church and court in all that they had done against him,
declaring that his pretended assurance had failed him, and that the terror of
his mind had at some times been so great, that he had drawn his sword to put an
end to his life. The church being now satisfied, restored him to their
communion. The court, after waiting six months for evidence of his good
behavior, Prince's Annals.
took off his sentence of banishment, and released him from the punishment of
his adultery: The law which made it capital having been enacted after the crime
was committed, could not touch his life. Some offers being made him by the
Dutch at Hudson's river, Hubbard's MS Hist.
whose language was familiar to him, the church of Boston hired a vessel to
transport him and his family thither, furnishing them with all necessaries for
the voyage. The Dutch governor gave him the command of a company of an hundred
and twenty men, and he was very serviceable in the wars which that colony had
with the Indians, having, it is said, killed one hundred and fifty on
Long Island, and three hundred on the Main. He continued in their service till
his death.

We find in this relation a striking instance of that species of false
religion, which, having its seat in the imagination, instead of making the
heart better and reforming the life, inflames the passions, stupifies reason,
and produces the wildest effects in the behavior. The excesses of enthusiasm
have often been observed to lead to sensual gratifications; the same natural
fervor being sufficient to produce both. It cannot be strange that they who
decry morality, should indulge such gross and scandalous enormities as are
sufficient to invalidate all those evidences of their religious character on
which they lay so much stress. But it is not so surprising that men should be
thus misled, as that such frantic zealots should ever be reduced to an
acknowledgment of their offenses; which in this instance may be ascribed to the
strict discipline then practiced in the churches of New England.

The people of Dover and Portsmouth during all this time had no power of
government delegated from the crown; but finding the necessity of some more
determinate form than they had yet enjoyed, combined themselves each into a
body politic after the example of their neighbors at Exeter. The inhabitants
of Dover, by a written instrument, Octo. 22.
signed by forty one persons, agreed to submit to the laws of England, and such
others as should be enacted by a majority of their number, Hubbard's MS Hist.
until the royal pleasure should be known. The date of the combination at
Portsmouth is uncertain, their first book of records having been destroyed [in
1652,] after copying out what they then thought proper to preserve. Ports. Rec.
Williams, who had been sent over by the adventurers, was by annual suffrage
continued governor of the place, and with him were associated Ambrose Gibbons
and Thomas Warnerton Warnerton had been a soldier. Upon the division of Mason's
stock and goods he carried his share to Penobscot, or some part of Nova Scotia,
where he was killed in a fray with the French inhabitants. 1644. (Hubbard)
in quality of assistants. During this combination, a grant of fifty acres of
land for a glebe was made by the governor and inhabitants This grant is
subscribed by Francis Williams, Governor, Ambrose Gibbons, Assistant, William
Jones, Reynald Fernald, John Crowther, Anthony Bracket, Michael Chatterton,
John Wall, Robert Pudington, Henry Sherburne, John Land^n, Henry Taler, John
Jones, William Berry, John Pickerin, John Billing, John Wotten, Nicholas Row,
Matthew Coe, William Palmer.
(Ports: Rec:)


to Thomas Walford and Henry Sherburne, May 25.
churchwardens, and their successors forever, as feoffees in trust; by virtue
of which grant the same land is still held, Ports. Rec.
and being let on long leases, a considerable part of the town of Portsmouth is
built upon it. At this time they had a parsonage house and chapel, and had
chosen Richard Gibson for their parson, the patronage being vested in the
parishioners. Gibson was sent from England as minister to a fishing plantation
belonging to one Trelawney. He was wholly addicted to the hierarchy and
discipline of England, Gov. Winthrop's Journal, MS.
and exercised his ministerial function according to the ritual. He was
summoned before the court at Boston for scandalizing the government there, and
denying their title; but upon his submission, they discharged him without fine
or punishment, being a stranger and about to depart the country. After his
departure the people of Portsmouth had James Parker Governor Winthrop gives
this account of him and his ministry, ("1642. 10 mo:) Those of the lower part
of Pascataqua invited Mr. James Parker of Weymouth, a godly man, to be their
minister. MS Journ.
He by advising with diverse of the magistrates and elders accepted the call and
went and taught among them, this winter, and it pleased God to give great
success to his labors so as above forty of them, whereof the most had been
very profane and some of them professed enemies to the way of our churches,
wrote to the magistrates and elders, acknowledging the sinful course they had
lived in, and bewailing the same, and blessing God for calling them out of it
and earnestly desiring that Mr. Parker might be settled amongst them. Most of
them fell back again in time, embracing this present world. He afterward
removed to Barbados and there settled. (vid Hutchinson's collection of papers,
p. 155 and 222.) Hutchinson supposes him to have been minister of Newbury,
mistaking him for Thomas Parker.
for their minister, Ports. Rec.
who was a scholar and had been a deputy in the Massachusetts court. After him
they had one Brown; and Dudley settled at Exeter in 1650, and died there in
1683, Aet. 77. He was a person of good capacity and learning. (Fitch's MS.)
Samuel Dudley a son of Deputy Governor Dudley; but these were only temporary
preachers, and they did not obtain the regular settlement of a minister for
many years.

Four distinct governments (including one at Kittery on the north side of the
river) were now formed on the several branches of Pascataqua. These
combinations being only voluntary agreements, liable to be broken or subdivided
on the first popular discontent, there could be no safety in the continuance of
them. The distractions in England at this time had cut off all hope of the
royal attention, and the people of the several settlements were too much
divided in their opinions to form any general plan of government which could
afford a prospect of permanent utility. The more considerate persons among
them, therefore thought it best to treat with Massachusetts about taking them
under their protection. That government was glad of an opportunity to realize
the construction which they had put upon the clause of their charter wherein
their northern limits are defined. For a line drawn from east to west at the
distance of three miles to the northward of Merrimack river and of any and
every part thereof, will take in the whole province of New Hampshire, and the
greater part of the province of Maine, so that both Mason's and Gorges's
patents must have been vacated. Massa. Rec.
They had already intimated their intention to run this east and west line, and
presuming on the justice of their claim, they readily entered into a
negotiation with the principal settlers of Pascataqua respecting their
incorporation with them. The affair was more than a year in agitation, 1641.
April 14.
and was at length concluded by an instrument subscribed in the presence of the
general court by George Willys, Robert Saltonstall, William Whiting, Edward
Holiock, and Thomas Makepeace, in behalf of themselves and the other partners
of the two patents; by which instrument they resigned the jurisdiction of the
whole to Massachusetts, on condition that the inhabitants should enjoy the same
liberties with their own people, and have a court of justice erected among
them. The property of the whole patent of Portsmouth, and of one-third part of
that of Dover, and of all the improved lands therein, was reserved to the lords
and gentlemen proprietors, and their heirs forever.

The court on their part consented that October 8.
the inhabitants of these towns should enjoy the same privileges with the rest
of the colony, and have the same administration of justice as in the courts of
Salem and Ipswich; that they should be exempted from all public charges, except
what should arise among themselves, or for their own peculiar benefit; that
they should enjoy their former liberties of fishing, planting and felling
timber; that they should send two deputies to the general court: and that the
same persons who were authorized by their combinations to govern them, should
continue in office till the commissioners named in this order should arrive at
Pascataqua. These commissioners were invested with the power of the quarter
courts of Salem and Ipswich, and at their arrival they constituted Francis
Williams, Thomas Warnerton and Ambrose Gibbons of Portsmouth, Edward Hilton,
Thomas Wiggen and William Waldron of Dover, magistrates, who were confirmed by
the general court.

By a subsequent order a very extraordinary concession was made to these towns,
1642. Sept. 8.
which shows the fondness that government had of retaining them under their
jurisdiction. A test had been established by law, but it was dispensed with in
their favor; their freemen were allowed to vote in town affairs, and their
deputies to sit in the general court though they were not church members.

The people of Dover being left destitute of a minister by the sudden departure
of Larkham, Hubbard's MS.
who took this method to avoid the shame which would have attended the
discovery of a crime similar to that for which Knollys had been dismissed,
wrote to Massachusetts for help. The court took care to send them Daniel Maud
who had been a minister in England. He was an honest man, Math. Mag.
and of a quiet and peaceable disposition, qualities much wanting in all his
predecessors. Larkham returned to England, where he continued to exercise his
ministry till ejected by the act of uniformity in 1662, from Tavistock in
Devon. Galamy's account of ejected ministers, p. 246.
He is said to have been well known there for a man of great piety and
sincerity, and died in 1669. AE. 68.

The inhabitants of Exeter had hitherto continued their combination; but
finding themselves comprehended within the claim of Massachusetts, and being
weary of their inefficacious mode of government they petitioned the court, Sep.
8.
and were readily admitted under their jurisdiction. William Wenborne, Robert
Smith, and Thomas Wardhall were appointed their magistrates; Massa. Rec.
and they were annexed to the county of Essex. Upon this, Whelewright who was
still under sentence of banishment, with those of his church who were resolved
to adhere to him, removed into the province of Maine, and settled at Wells,
where his posterity yet remain. Hubbard's MS.
He was soon after restored, upon a slight acknowledgment, to the freedom of
the colony, and removed to Hampton; of which church he was minister for many
years; until he went to England where he was in favor with Cromwell: But,
after the restoration, he returned and settled at Salisbury, where he died in
1680.

After his departure from Exeter, an attempt was made by the remaining
inhabitants to form themselves into a church, 1644.
and call the aged Stephen Bachelor to the ministry, who had been dismissed
from Hampton for his irregular conduct. But the general court here interposed
and sent them a solemn prohibition, Massa Rec.
importing that their divisions were such that they could not comfortably, May
29.
and with approbation, proceed in so weighty and sacred affairs, and therefore
directing them to defer gathering a church, or any other such proceeding, till
they or the court at Ipswich, upon further satisfaction of their reconciliation
and fitness, should give allowance therefore.

Such a stretch of power, which would now be looked upon as an infringement of
christian liberty, was agreeable to the principles of the first fathers of
New England, who thought that civil government was established for the defense
and security of the church against error both doctrinal and moral. In this
sentiment they were not singular, it being universally adopted by the
reformers, in that and the preceding age, as one of the fundamental principles
of their separation from the Romish church, and necessary to curtail the claims
of her Pontiff, who assumed a supremacy over the kings of the earth.

CHAP. III. Observations on the principles and conduct of the first planters of
New England. Causes of their removal. Their fortitude. Religious sentiments.
Care of their posterity. Justice. Laws. Theocratic prejudices. Intolerance and
persecutions.
AN union having been formed between the settlements on Pascataqua and the
colony of Massachusetts, their history for the succeeding forty years is in a
great measure the same. It is not my intention to write the transactions of the
whole colony during that period; but, as many of the people in New Hampshire
had the same principles, views and interests with the other people of
New England, I shall make some observations thereon, and intersperse such
historical facts as may illustrate the subject.

In the preceding century the holy scriptures, which had long lain hid in the
rubbish of monastic libraries, were brought to public view by the happy
invention of printing; and as darkness vanishes before the rising sun, so the
light of divine truth began to dissipate those errors and superstitions in
which Europe had long been involved. At the same time a remarkable concurrence
of circumstances gave peculiar advantage to the bold attempt of Luther, to
rouse Germany from her inglorious subjection to the Roman Pontiff, and
effectuate a reformation, which soon spread into the neighboring countries.
But so intimately were the political interests of kingdoms and states blended
with religious prejudices, that the work, though happily begun, was greatly
blemished and impeded.

Henry the VIIIth of England took advantage of this amazing revolution in the
minds of men, to throw off the papal yoke, and assert his native claim to
independence. But so dazzling was the idea of power, and the example of the
first christian princes, who had exercised a superintendency in spirituals, as
well as temporals, that he transferred to himself that spiritual power which
had been usurped and exercised by the bishops of Rome, and set up himself as
supreme head on earth of the church of England; commanding both clergy and
laity in his dominions to swear allegiance to him in this newly assumed
character.

This claim was kept up by his son and successor Edward the Sixth, in whose
reign the reformation gained much ground; and a service book was published by
royal authority as the standard of worship and discipline for his subjects.
This excellent prince was taken out of the world in his youth; and his sister
Mary, who then came to the throne, restored the supremacy to the pope, and
raised such fiery persecution against the reformers, that many of them fled
into Germany and the Netherlands; where they departed from that uniformity
which had been established in England, and became divided in their sentiments
and practice respecting ecclesiastical affairs: the native effect of that just
liberty of conscience which they enjoyed abroad, pursuing their own inquiries
according to their respective measures of light; uninfluenced by secular power,
or the hope of acquiring dignities in a national establishment.

The accession of Elizabeth inspired them with new hopes; and they returned
home, resolving to attempt the reformation of the church of England, agreeably
to the respective opinions which they had embraced in their exile. But they
soon found that the queen, who had been educated in the same manner with her
brother Edward, was fond of the establishment made in his reign, and was
strongly prejudiced in favor of pomp and ceremony in religious worship. She
asserted her supremacy in the most absolute terms, and erected an
high commission court with jurisdiction in ecclesiastical affairs. Uniformity
being rigorously enjoined and no abatement or allowance made for tender
consciences (though it was conceded that the ceremonies were indifferent) a
separtion from the establishment took place. Those who were desirous of a
farther reformation from the Romish superstitions, and of a more pure and
perfect form of Religion were denominated Puritans; whose principles, as
distinguished from those of the other reformers who were in favor with the
queen, are thus represented.

The queen and court-reformers held, 1. That every prince had the sole
authority to correct all abuses of doctrine and worship within his own
territories. 2. That the church of Rome was a true church though corrupt in
some points of doctrine and government; Neal's Hist. Puritans, vol. 1. p.
95.98. 4to.
that all her ministrations were valid, and that the pope was a true bishop of
Rome though not of the universal church. 3. That the scriptures were a perfect
rule of faith, but not a standard of discipline; and that it was left to the
discretion of the christian magistrate, to accommodate the government of the
church to the policy of the state. 4. That the practice of the primitive church
for the first four or five centuries was a proper standard of church government
and discipline; and in some respects better than that of the apostles, which
was only accommodated to the infant state of the church, while it was under
persecution; whereas the other was suited to the grandeur of a national
establishment. 5. That things indifferent in their own nature as rites,
ceremonies, and habits, might be settled, determined and made necessary by the
command of the civil magistrate, and that in such cases it was the duty of the
subject to observe them.

On the other hand, the puritans, 1. Disowned all foreign jurisdiction over the
church, but could not admit of that extensive power which the crown claimed by
the supremacy. However, they took the oath, with the queen's explication, as
only restoring her majesty to the ancient and natural rights of soverign
princes over their subjects. 2. They held the pope to be antichrist, the church
of Rome a false church, and all her ministrations superstitious and idolatrous.
3. That the scriptures were a standard of discipline as well as doctrine, and
if there was need of a discretionary power, it was vested not in the magistrate
but in the officers of the church. 4. That the form of government ordained by
the apostles was aristocratical, and designed as a pattern to the church in
after ages, not to be departed from in its main principles. 5. That those
things which Christ has left indifferent ought not to be made necessary; and
that such rites and ceremonies as had been abused to idolatry and superstition,
and had a manifest tendency to lead men back thereto, were no longer
indifferent but unlawful.

Both parties agreed too well in asserting the necessity of uniformity in
public worship, and of using the sword of the magistrate for the support and
defense of their respective principles; which they made an ill use of in their
turns, whenever they could grasp it in their hands. The standard of uniformity
according to the bishops, was the queen's supremacy and the laws of the land;
according to the puritans, the decrees of national and provincial synods,
allowed and enforced by the civil magistrate. Neither party were for admitting
that liberty of conscience and freedom of profession which is every man's
right, so far as is consistent with the peace of civil government. Upon this
fatal rock of uniformity, was the peace of the church of England split.

It is melancholy to observe what mischiefs were caused by the want of a just
distinction between civil and ecclesiastical power, and by that absurd zeal for
uniformity, which kept the nation in a long ferment, and at length burst out
into a blaze, the fury of which was never thoroughly quelled till the happy
genius of the revolution gave birth to a free and equitable toleration, whereby
every man was restored to the natural right of judging and acting for himself
in matters of religion. All the celebrated wisdom of Elizabeth's government
could not devise an expedient so successful. Though her reign was long and
prosperous, yet it was much stained with oppression and cruelty toward many of
her best subjects; who, wearied with ineffectual applications, waited the
accession of James, from whom they expected more favor, because he had been
educated in the presbyterian church of Scotland, and professed an high
veneration for that establishment. But they soon found that he had changed his
religious principles with his climate, and that nothing was to be expected from
a prince of so base a character, but insult and contempt.

In the beginning of his reign a great number of the puritans removed into
Holland, where they formed churches upon their own principles. But not
relishing the manners of the Dutch, after twelve years they projected a removal
to America, and laid the foundation of the colony of Plymouth. The spirit of
uniformity still prevailing in England, and being carried to the greatest
extent in the reign of Charles the First by that furious bigot Archbishop Laud;
many of the less scrupulous, but conscientious members of the church of
England, who had hitherto remained in her communion, seeing no prospect of rest
or liberty in their native country, followed their brethren to America, and
established the colony of Massachusetts, from which proceeded that of
Connecticut.

By such men, influenced by such motives, were the principal settlements in
New England effected. The fortitude and perseverance which they exhibited
therein will always render their memory dear to their posterity. To prepare for
their enterprise, they had to sell their estates, some of which were large and
valuable, and turn them into materials for a new plantation, with the nature of
which they had no acquaintance, and of which they could derive no knowledge
from the experience of others. After traversing a wide ocean they found
themselves in a country full of woods, to subdue which required immense labor
and patience; at a vast distance from any civilized people; in the
neighborhood of none but ignorant and barbarous savages; and in a climate,
where a winter much more severe than they had been accustomed to, reigns for a
third part of the year. Their stock of provisions falling short, they had the
dreadful apprehension of perishing by famine, one half of their number dying
before the first year was completed; the ocean on one side separated them from
their friends, and the wilderness on the other, presented nothing but scenes of
horror, which it was impossible for them to conceive of before they endured
them.

But under all these difficulties, they maintained a steady and pious
resolution; depending on the providence of the supreme ruler, and never
repenting the business on which they had come into this wilderness. As purity
in divine administrations was the professed object of their undertaking, so
they immediately set themselves to form churches, on what they judged the
gospel plan. To be out of the reach of prelatic tyranny, and at full liberty to
pursue their own enquiries, and worship God according to their consciences,
(which had been denied them in their own country) was esteemed the greatest of
blessings, and sweetened every bitter cup which they were obliged to drink.
They always professed that their principal design was to erect churches on the
primitive model, and that the consideration of temporal interest and
convenience had but the second place in their views. It concerns New England
always to remember, that they are originally a plantation religious, not a
plantation of trade. The profession of the purity of doctrine, worship and
discipline is written upon her forehead. Let merchants, and such as are
increasing cent per cent remember this, that worldly gain was not the end and
design of the people of New England but religion. And if any man among us make
religion as twelve, and the world as thirteen, such an one has not the spirit
of a true New-Englandman. Higginson's Election Sermon, 1663.


In the doctrinal points of religion they were of the same mind with their
brethren of the church of England, as expressed in their articles. The
Massachusetts planters left behind them, when they sailed, Hutchin. Hist. vol.
I. p. 487.
a respectful declaration importing that they did not consider the church of
England as antichristian, but only withdrew from the imposition of unscriptural
terms of communion. Some of the Plymouth planters had embraced the narrow
principles of the Brownists, the first who separated from the church of
England; but by the improvements which they made in religious knowledge under
the instruction of the renowned John Robinson, their pastor in Holland, they
were in a great measure cured of that sour leaven. The congregational system of
church government was the result of the studies of that truly pious, learned,
humble and benevolent divine, who seems to have had more of the genuine spirit
of the reformation, and of freedom from bigotry, than any others in his day.
His farewell charge to those of his flock who were embarking in Holland for
America deserves to be had in perpetual remembrance. Neal's Hist. N. Eng. vol.
I. p. 84.
Brethren (said he) we are now quickly to part from one another, and whether I
may ever live to see your face on earth any more, the God of heaven only knows;
but whether the Lord has appointed that or no, I charge you before God and his
blessed angels that you follow me no further than you have seen me follow the
Lord Jesus Christ. If God reveal any thing to you by any other instrument of
his, be as ready to receive it, as ever you were to receive any truth by my
ministry; for I am verily persuaded, I am very confident, the Lord has more
truth yet to break forth out of his holy word. For my part, I cannot
sufficiently bewail the condition of the reformed churches, who are come to a
period in religion, and will go at present no farther than the instr^ments of
their reformation. The Lutherans cannot be drawn to go beyond what Luther saw;
whatever part of his will our good God has revealed to Calvin, they will rather
die than embrace it. And the Calvinists you see stick fast where they were left
by that great man of God, who yet saw not all things. This is a misery much to
be lamented; for though they were burning and shining lights in their times,
yet they penetrated not into the whole counsel of God; but were they now
living, would be as willing to embrace farther light, as that which they at
first received. I beseech you to remember it is an article of your church
covenant, That you be ready to receive whatever truth shall be made known to
you from the written word of God. Remember that, and every other article of
your sacred covenant. But I must herewithal exhort you to take heed what you
receive as truth. Examine, consider and compare it with other scriptures of
truth, before you receive it; for it is not possible the christian world should
come so lately out of such thick antichristian darkness, and that perfection of
knowledge should break forth at once. It is much to be regretted that this
excellent man did not live to reach New England and to diffuse more generally
such truly catholic and apostolic principles.

Many of the first planters of New England were persons of good education, and
some of them eminent for their abilities and learning. Such men could not but
see the necessity of securing to their posterity the advantages which they had
so dearly purchased. One of their first concerns was to have their children
considered, from their earliest years, as subjects of ecclesiastical
discipline. This became a matter of controversy, and was largely discussed in
sermons and pamphlets, and at length determined by the authority of a synod. A
regular course of academical learning was a point of equal importance, and
admitted of no dispute. They saw that the reputation and happiness of the whole
country depended greatly upon it. They therefore took early care for the
establishment of schools, and within ten years from their first settlement,
founded a college at Cambridge When New England was poor, and we were but few
in number, there was a spirit to encourage learning, and the college was full
of students. Result of a Synod in 1679.
, which from small beginnings, by the munificence of its patrons, has made a
distinguished figure in the republic of letters. Many eminent men have there
been formed for the service of the church and state; and without this advantage
the country could not have arrived, in so short a time, at its present
respectable state; nor have been furnished with men capable of filling the
various stations of usefulness, and of defending our civil and religious
liberties.

Though the first planters derived from the royal grants and charters a
political right as subjects of the crown of England, to this territory; yet
they did not think themselves justly entitled to the property of it till they
had fairly purchased it of its native lords, and made them full satisfaction
The Abbe Raynal in his elegant history of the East and West Indies speaks of
the purchase made of the Indians by William Penn in 1681, as an example of
moderation and justice in America, which was never thought of before, by the
Europeans. It can be no derogation from the honor due to the wise founder of
Pennsylvania that the example of this moderation and justice was first set by
the plant^rs of New England, whose dee^s of conveyance from the Indians were
earlier than his by half a cen^ury.

In some parts of the country the lands purchased of the Indians are subject to
a quit-rent, which is annually paid to their posterity. They have lands
reserved to their use, which are not allowed to be purchased of them without
the consent of the legislature.


. Nor did they content themselves with merely living peaceably among them, but
exerted themselves vigorously in endeavoring their conversion to christianity,
which was one of the obligations of their patent, and one of the professed
designs of their settlement in this country. This painful work was remarkably
succeeded, and the names of ELIOT and MAYHEW will always be remembered as
unwearied instruments in promoting it. Great care was taken by the government
to prevent fraud and injustice toward the Indians in trade, or violence to
their persons. The nearest of the natives were so sensible of the justice of
their English neighbors, that they lived in a state of peace with them, with
but little interruption, for above fifty years.

Slavery was thought so inconsistent with the natural rights of mankind, and
detrimental to society, that an express law was made, prohibiting the buying or
selling of slaves, except those taken in lawful war, or reduced to servitude
for their crimes by a judicial sentence; and these were to have the same
privileges as were allowed by the laws of Moses. There was a remarkable
instance of justice in the execution of this law in 1645, when a Negro who had
been fraudulently brought from the coast of Africa, and sold in the country,
was by the special interposition of the general court taken from his master in
order to be sent home to his native land 14. 3^ mo. 1645. The court thought
proper to wri^e ^o Mr. Williams of Pascataqua (understanding that the Negroes
while ^h Captain Smyth brought were fraudulently and inju^iously taken and
brought from Guinea* by Captain Smy^^'s conf^ssion and the rest of the company)
that he forthwith send the Negro which he had of Captain Sm^th hi^her, that he
may b^ (...) home, which this court does resolve to send back without d^lay.
And if you have any thing to allege, why you should not return him to be
disposed of by the court, it will be expected you should forthwith make it
appear either by yours^^^ or your agent. Massachusetts Records.
. How long after this the importation of blacks continued to be disallowed is
uncertain; but if the same resolute justice had always been observed, it would
have been much for the credit and interest of the country; and our own
struggles for liberty would not have carried so flagrant an appearance of
inconsistency.

Severe laws conformable to the principles of the laws of Moses were enacted
against all kinds of immorality. Blasphemy, idolatry, adultery, unnatural
lusts, rape, murder, man-stealing, false witness, rebellion against parents,
and conspiracy against the commonwealth were made capital crimes; and because
some doubted whether the magistrate could punish breaches of the four first
commands of the decalogue, this right was asserted in the highest tone, and the
denial of it ranked among the most pestilent heresies, and punished with
banishment. By the severity and impartiality with which those laws were
executed, intemperance and profaneness were so effectually discountenanced that
Hugh Peter's, who had resided in the country twenty years, declared before the
parliament that he had not seen a drunken man, nor heard a profane oath during
that period. The report of this extraordinary strictness, while it invited many
of the best men in England to come over, kept them clear of those wretches who
fly from one country to another to escape the punishment of their crimes.

The professed design of the plantation being the advancement of religion, and
men of the strictest morals being appointed to the chief places of government,
their zeal for purity of every kind carried them into some refinements in their
laws which are not generally supposed to come within the sphere of magistracy,
and in larger communities could scarcely be attended to in a judicial way. The
drinking of healths, and the use of tobacco were forbidden, the former being
considered as an heathenish and idolatrous practice, grounded on the ancient
libations; the other as a species of intoxication and waste of time. Laws were
instituted to regulate the intercourse between the sexes, and the advances
toward matrimony: They had a ceremony of betrothing, which preceded that of
marriage. Pride and levity of behavior came under the cognizance of the
magistrate. Not only the richness but the mode of dress, and cut of the hair
were subject to state-regulations. Women were forbidden to expose their arms or
bosoms to view; it was ordered that their sleeves should reach down to their
wrist, and their gowns be closed round the neck. Men were obliged to cut short
their hair, that they might not resemble women. No person not worth two hundred
pounds was allowed to wear gold or silver lace, or silk hoods and scarfs.
Offenses against these laws were presentable by the grand jury; and those who
dressed above their rank were to be assessed accordingly. Sumptuary laws might
be of use in the beginning of a new plantation; but these pious rulers had more
in view than the political good. They were not only concerned for the external
appearance of sobriety and good order, but thought themselves obliged, so far
as they were able, to promote real religion and enforce the observance of the
divine precepts.

As they were fond of imagining a near resemblance between the circumstances of
their settlement in this country and the redemption of Israel from Egypt or
Babylon; it is not strange that they should also look upon their commonwealth
as an institution of God for the preservation of their churches, Increase
Mather's life, p. 57.
and the civil rulers as both members and fathers of them. The famous John
Cotton, the first minister in Boston was the chief promoter of this settlement.
When he arrived in 1633, he found the people divided in their opinions. Some
had been admitted to the privileges of freemen at the first general court,
Mather's Magnalia, l^b. 3. p. 20.
who were not in communion with the churches; after this an order was passed,
that none but members of the churches should be admitted freemen; whereby all
other persons were excluded from every office or privilege civil or military.
This great man by his eloquence confirmed those who had embraced this opinion,
and earnestly pleaded that the government might be considered as a theocracy
wherein the Lord was judge, lawgiver and king; that the laws which he gave
Israel might be adopted, so far as they were of moral and perpetual equity;
that the people might be considered as God's people in covenant with him; that
none but persons of approved piety and eminent gifts should be chosen rulers;
that the ministers should be consulted in all matters of religion; and that the
magistrate should have a superintending and coercive power over the churches.
At the desire of the court, he compiled a system of laws founded chiefly on the
laws of Moses, Hutch^ Collect. papers, p. 161.
which was considered by the legislative body as the general standard; though
they never formally adopted it and in some instances varied from it.

These principles were fundamentally the same with those on which were grounded
all the persecutions which they had endured in England, and naturally led to
the same extremes of conduct which they had so bitterly complained of in those
civil and ecclesiastical rulers, from whose tyranny they had fled into this
wilderness. They had already proceeded a step farther than the hierarchy had
ever attempted. No test-law had as yet taken place in England; but they had at
one blow cut off all but those of their own communion, from the privileges of
civil offices, however otherwise qualified. They thought that as they had
suffered so much in laying the foundation of a new state, which was supposed to
be a model of the glorious kingdom of Christ on earth I look upon this as a
little model of the glorious kingdom of Christ on earth. Christ reigns among us
in the commonwealth as well as in the church, and has his glorious interest
involved in the good of both societies respectively. He that shall be
tr^acherous and false to the civil government, is guilty of high treason
against the Lord Jesus Christ, and will be proceeded against as a rebel and
traitor to the King of kings, when he shall hold his great assizes at the end
of the world. President Oakes's Election Sermon, 1673.
, they had an exclusive right to all the honors and privileges of it; and
having the power in their hands, they effectually established their
pretensions, and made all dissenters and disturbers feel the weight of their
indignation.

In consequence of the union thus formed between the church and state on the
plan of the Jewish theocracy, the ministers were called to sit in council, and
give their advice in matters of religion and cases of conscience which came
before the court, and without them they never proceeded to any act of an
ecclesiastical nature. As none were allowed to vote in the election of rulers
but freemen, and freemen must be church members; and as none could be admitted
into the church but by the elders, who first examined, and then propounded them
to the brethren for their vote, the clergy acquired hereby a vast ascendency
over both rulers and people, and had in effect the keys of the state as well as
the church in their hands. The magistrates, on the other hand, regulated the
gathering of churches, interposed in the settlement and dismission of
ministers, arbitrated in ecclesiastical controversies and controled synodical
assemblies. This coercive power in the magistrate was deemed absolutely
necessary to preserve the order of the gospel.

The principle on which this power is grounded is expressed in the Cambridge
Platform in terms as soft as possible. Chap. 17. Sect. 3.
The power and authority of magistrates is not for the restraining of churches,
or any other good works, but for the helping in and furthering thereof, and
therefore the consent and countenance of magistrates when it may be had, is not
to be slighted or lightly esteemed; but, on the contrary, it is a part of the
honor due to christian magistrates to desire and crave their consent and
approbation therein: which being obtained, the churches may then proceed in
their way with much more encouragement and comfort. This article (like diverse
others in that work) is curiously and artfully drawn up, so that there is an
appearance of liberty and tenderness but none in reality: For although the
magistrate was not to restrain any good works, yet he was to be the judge of
the good or evil of the works to be restrained; and what security could
churches have that they should not be restrained in the performance of what
they judged to be good works? They might indeed think themselves safe, while
their rulers were so zealous for the purity of the churches of which themselves
were members, and while their ministers were consulted in all ecclesiastical
affairs; but if the civil powers had acted without such consultation, or if the
ministers had been induced to yield to the opinion of the magistrates, when
contrary to the interest of the churches, what then would have become of
religious liberty?

The idea of liberty in matters of religion was in that day strangely
understood, and mysteriously expressed. The venerable Higginson of Salem in his
sermon on the day of the election 1663, speaks thus; The gospel of Christ has
a right paramount all rights in the world; it has a divine and supreme right
to be received in every nation, and the knee of magistracy is to bow at the
name of Jesus. This right carries liberty along with it, for all such as
profess the gospel, to walk according to the faith and order of the gospel.
That which is contrary to the gospel has no right, and therefore should have
no liberty. Here the question arises, Who is to be the judge of what is
agreeable or cont^ary to the gospel? If the magistrate, then there is only a
liberty to believe and practice what the magistrate thinks right. A similar
sentiment occurs in the sermon of the learned President Oaks on the same
occasion in 1673; The outcry of some is for liberty of conscience. This is the
great Diana of the libertines of this age. But remember that as long as you
have liberty to walk in the faith and order of the gospel, and may lead quiet
and peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty, you have as much liberty of
conscience as Paul desired under any government. Here the question recurs,
Would Paul have submitted to walk according to the opinion which the magistrate
might entertain of the faith and order of the gospel? But this was all the
freedom allowed by the spirit of these times. Liberty of conscience and
toleration were offensive terms, and they who used them were supposed to be the
enemies of religion and government. I look upon toleration (says the same
author) as the firstborn of all abominations; if it should be born and brought
forth among us, you may call it Gad, and give the same reason that Leah did for
the name of her son, Behold a troop comes, a troop of all manner of
abominations. In another of these election sermons, ^hephard's Election Sermon,
1672.
(which may generally be accounted the echo of the public voice, or the
political pulse by which the popular opinion may be felt) it is shrewdly
intimated that toleration had its origin from the devil, and the speech of the
demoniac who cried out, what have we to do with thee, let us alone, thou Jesus
of Nazareth, is styled "Satan's plea for toleration." The following admonition
to posterity, written by the Deputy Governor Dudley, is another specimen.

Morton's Memorial, p. 179.
"Let men of God in courts and churches watch"
"Over such as do a toleration hatch;
"Lest that ill egg bring forth a cockatrice,
"To poison all with heresy and vice.
"If men be left and otherwise combine
"My epitaph's I die no libertine."
The champion of these sentiments was Cotton, who though eminently meek, placid
and charitable, yet was strongly tinctured with the prevailing opinion, That
the magistrate had a coercive power against heretics. The banishment of Roger
Williams, minister of Salem, occasioned a vehement controversy on this point.
Williams having written in favor of liberty of conscience, and styled the
opposite principle "the bloody tenet;" was answered by Cotton, who published a
treatise in 1647 with this strange title, The bloody tenet washed, and made
white in the blood of the Lamb. In this work he labors to prove the lawfulness
of the magistrate's using the civil sword to extirpate heretics, from the
commands given to the Jews to put to death blasphemers and idolaters. To the
objection, that persecution serves to make men hypocrites, he says, better
tolerate hypocrites and tares than briars and thorns. In such cases the civil
sword does not so much attend the conversion of seducers, as the preventing the
seduction of honest minds by their means. He allows indeed that the magistrate
ought not to draw the sword against seducers till he have used all good means
for their conviction: But if after their continuance in obstinate rebellion
against the light, he shall still walk toward them in soft and gentle
commiseration, his softness and gentleness is excessive large to foxes and
wolves; but his bowels are miserably straightened and hardened against the poor
sheep and lambs of Christ. Nor is it frustrating the end of Christ's coming,
which was to save souls, but a direct advancing it, to destroy, if need be, the
bodies of those wolves, who seek to destroy the souls of those for whom Christ
died. In pursuing his argument he refines so far as to deny that any man is to
be persecuted on account of conscience till being convinced in his conscience
of his wickedness, he do stand out therein, not only against the truth, but
against the light of his own conscience, that so it may appear he is not
persecuted for cause of conscience, but punished for sinning against his own
conscience. To which he adds, sometimes it may be an aggravation of sin both in
judgment and practice that a man commits it in conscience. After having said
that it was toleration which made the world antichristian, he concludes his
book with this singular ejaculation, the Lord keep us from being bewitched with
the whore's cup, lest while we seem to reject her with open face of profession,
we bring her in by a back door of toleration; and so come to drink deeply of
the cup of the Lord's wrath, and be filled with her plagues.

But the strangest language that ever was used on this or perhaps on any other
subject, is to be found in a book printed in 1645 by the humourous Ward of
Ipswich entitled the Simple Cobbler of Agawam. My heart (says he) has naturally
detested four things; the standing of the Apocrypha in the bible: foreigners
dwelling in my country, to crowd out native subjects into the corners of the
east: alchymized coins: toleration of diverse religions or of one religion in
segregant shapes. He that willingly assents to the last, if he examines his
heart by daylight, his conscience will tell him, he is either an atheist, or
an heretic, or an hypocrite, or at best a captive to some lust. Polypiety is
the greatest impiety in the world. To authorize an untruth by toleration of the
state, is to build a sconce against the walls of heaven, to batter God out of
his chair. Persecution of true religion and toleration of false are the Jannes
and Jambres to the kingdom of Christ, whereof the last is by far the worst. He
that is willing to tolerate any unsound opinion, that his own may be tolerated
though never so sound, will for a need, hang God's bible at the devil's girdle.
It is said that men ought to have liberty of conscience and that it is
persecution to debar them of it: I can rather stand amazed than reply to this;
it is an astonishment that the brains of men should be parboiled in such
impious ignorance.

From these specimens, (of which the reader will think he has had enough) it is
easy to see how deeply the principle of intolerancy was rooted in the minds of
our forefathers. Had it stood only in their books as a subject of speculation,
it might have been excused, considering the prejudices of the times; but it was
drawn out into fatal practice, and caused severe persecutions which cannot be
justified consistently with christianity or true policy. Whatever may be said
in favor of their proceedings against the Antinomians, whose principles had
such an effect on the minds of the people as materially affected the
foundations of government, in the infancy of the plantation; yet the
Anabaptists and Quakers were so inconsiderable for numbers, and the colony was
then so well established that no danger could have been rationally apprehended
to the commonwealth from them. Rhode Island was settled by some of the
Antinomian exiles on a plan of entire religious liberty: Callender's Century
Sermon, 1738.
men of every denomination being equally protected and countenanced, and
enjoying the honors and offices of government. The Anabaptists, fined and
banished, flocked to that new settlement, and many of the Quakers also took
refuge there; so that Rhode Island was in those days looked upon as the drain
or sink of New England; and it has been said that if any man had lost his
religion, he might find it there, among such a general muster of opinionists.
Notwithstanding this invective, it is much to the honor of that government
that there never was an instance of persecution for conscience sake
countenanced by them. Rhode Island and Pennsylvania afford a strong proof that
toleration conduces greatly to the settlement and increase of an infant
plantation.

The Quakers at first were banished; but this proving insufficient, a
succession of sanguinary laws were enacted against them, of which imprisonment,
whipping, cutting off the ears, boring the tongue with an hot iron, and
banishment on pain of death, were the terrible sanctions. In consequence of
these laws four persons were put to death at Boston, bearing their punishment
with patience and fortitude; solemnly protesting that their return from
banishment was by divine direction, to warn the magistrates of their errors,
and entreat them to repeal their cruel laws; Sewel's History of the Quakers.
denouncing the judgments of God upon them; and foretelling that if they should
put them to death others would rise up in their room to fill their hands with
work The following passages extracted from William Leddra's letter to his
friends, written the day before his execution, March 15. 1660, show an elegance
of sentiment and expression, not common in their writings. Most dear and
inwardly beloved,
The sweet influence of the morning star, like a flood, distilling into my
innocent habitation has so filled me with the joy of the Lord in the beauty of
holiness, that my spirit is as if it did not inhabit a tabernacle of clay, but
is wholly swallowed up in the bosom of eternity from whence it had its being.

Alas, alas! what can the wrath and spirit of man that lusts to envy,
aggravated by the heat and strength of the king of the locusts which came o^t
of the pit, do unto one that is hid in the secret places of the Almighty? or to
them that are gathered under the healing wings of the Prince of Peace? O my
beloved, I have waited as the dove at the windows of the ark, and have stood
still in that watch, which the master did at his coming reward with the fullness
of his love; wherein my heart did rejoice that I might speak a few words to
you, sealed with the spirit of promise. As the flowing of the ocean does fill
every creek and branch thereof, and then retires again toward its own being and
fullness and leaves a favor behind it; so does the life and virtue of God flow
into every one of your hearts, whom he has made partakers of his divine
nature; and when it withdraws but a little, it leaves a sweet savor behind it,
that many can say they are made clean through the word that he has spoken to
them. Therefore, my dear hearts, let the enjoyment of the life alone be your
hope, your joy and your consolation. Stand in the watch within, in the fear of
the Lord which is the entrance of wisdom. Confess him before men, yea before
his greatest enemies. Fear not what they can do to you: Greater is he that is
in you than he that is in the world, for he will clothe you with humility and
in the power of his meekness you shall reign over all the rage of your enemies.
Sewel's Hist. Quakers, p. 274.



. After the execution of the fourth person, an order from King Charles the
second, procured by their friends in England, put a stop to capital executions.

Impartiality will not suffer a veil to be drawn over these disgraceful
transactions. The utmost that has been pleaded in favor of them, cannot excuse
them in the eye of reason and justice. The Quakers, it is said, were heretics;
Hutch. Collect. papers, p. 327.
their principles appeared to be subversive of the gospel, and derogatory from
the honor of the Redeemer. Argument and scripture were in this case the proper
weapons to combat them with; and if these had failed of success, they must have
been left to the judgment of an omniscient and merciful God. They were
complained of as disturbers of the peace, revilers of magistracy, malignant and
assiduous promoters of doctrines directly tending to subvert both church and
state; and our fathers thought it hard, when they had fled from opposition and
persecution in one shape to be again troubled with it in another. But it would
have been more to their honor to have suffered their magistracy and church
order to be insulted, than to have stained their hands with the blood of men
who deserved pity rather than punishment. The Quakers indeed had no right to
disturb them; and some of their conduct was to an high degree indecent and
provoking; but they were under the influence of a spirit which is not easily
quelled by opposition. Had not the government appeared to be jealous of their
principles, and prohibited the reading of their books before any of them
appeared in person, there could not have been so plausible a pretext for their
reviling government. It was said that the laws by which they were condemned
were grounded on the laws in England against Jesuits. But the case was by no
means parallel, Sewel's History Quakers.
(as the Quakers pleaded) their principles and practices not being equally
detrimental to society. It was moreover urged in excuse of the severities
exercised against the Quakers that the magistrates thought themselves bound in
conscience to keep the passage with the point of the sword: Mass. Rec.
this (it was said) could do no harm to him that would be warned by it: their
rushing on it was their own act, and they brought the blood on their own heads.
Had they promised to depart the jurisdiction and not return without leave, the
country would have been glad to have rid themselves of the trouble of executing
the laws upon them; it was their presumptuous returning after banishment that
caused them to be put to death. This was the plea which the court used in their
address to the king; Sewel, b. 6. p. 272.
and in another vindication published by their order, the unhappy sufferers are
styled "felones de se," or self-murderers. But this will not justify the
putting them to death, unless the original crimes for which they were banished
had deserved it. p. 199.
The preamble to the act by which they were condemned charges them with
altering the received laudable custom of giving respect to equals and reverence
to superiors; that their actions tend to undermine the civil government and
destroy the order of the churches, by denying all established forms of worship,
by withdrawing from orderly church fellowship allowed and approved by all
orthodox professors of the truth, and instead thereof, and in opposition
thereto, frequently meeting themselves, insinuating themselves into the minds
of the simple, whereby diverse of our inhabitants have been infected. Did these
offenses deserve death? had any government a right to terrify with capital laws
persons guilty of no other crimes than these, especially when they professed
that they were obliged to go the greatest lengths in maintaining those tenets
which they judged sacred, and following the dictates of that spirit which they
thought divine? Was not the mere holding the point of the sword to them, really
inviting them to "rush on it" and seal their testimony with their blood? and
was not this the most likely way to strengthen and increase their party? Such
punishment for offenses which proceeded from a misguided zeal, increased and
inflamed by opposition, will never reflect any honor on the policy or
moderation of the government; and can be accounted for only by the strong
predilection for coercive power in religion, retained by most or all of the
reformed churches; a prejudice which time and experience were necessary to
remove From the following authorities, it will appear that the government of
New England, however severe and unjustifiable in their proceedings against the
Quakers, went no farther than the most eminent reformers; particularly the
Bohemians, the Lutherans, the celebrated Calvin and the martyr Cranmer.

In the war which the Emperor Sigismond excited against the BOHEMIAN reformers,
who had the famous Zisca for their general; The acts of barbarity which were
committed on both sides were shocking and terrible beyond expression. For
notwithstanding the irreconcilable opposition between the religious sentiments
of the contending parties, they both agreed in this one horrible point, that it
was innocent and lawful to persecute and extirpate with fire and sword, the
enemies of the true religion, and such they reciprocally appeared to be in each
others eyes. Mosheim's Eccl. Hist. vol. 3. p. 261.

It were indeed ardently to be wished, that the LUTHERANS had treated with more
mildness and charity those who differed from them in religious opinions. But
they had unhappily imbibed a spirit of persecution in their early education.
This was too much the spirit of the times, and it was even a leading maxim with
our ancestors [this author was a Lutheran] that it was both lawful and
expedient to use severity and force against those whom they looked upon as
here^ics. This maxim was derived from ROME; and even those who separated from
that church did not find it easy to throw off all of a s^dden that despotic and
uncharitable spirit, that had so long been the main spring of its government
and the general charact^ristic of it members. Nay in their narrow view of
things, their very piet^ seemed to suppress the generous movements of fraternal
love and ^^^bearance, and the more they felt themselves animated with a zeal
for the divine glory, the more difficult did they find it to renounce that
ancient and favorite maxim, that whoever is found to be an enemy to God, ought
also to be declared an enemy to his country. Mosheim, vol. 4. p. 437.

Michael Servetus, a Spanish physician, published seven books in which he
attacked the sentiments adopted by far the greatest part of the christian
church, in relation to the divine nature and a trinity of persons in the
Godhead. Few innovators have set out with a better prospect of success: But all
his views were totally disappointed by the vigilance and severity of Calvin,
who when Servetus was passing through Switzerland, caused him to be apprehended
at Geneva in the year 1553, and had an accusation of blasphemy brought against
him before the council. Servetus adhering resolutely to the opinions he had
embraced, was declared an obstinate heretic and condemned to the flames.
Mosheim, vol. 4. p 171.

Dr. Macclaine in his note on this passage, says, It was a remaining portion of
the spirit of p^pery in the breast of Calvin that kindled his unchristian zeal
against the wretched Servetus, whose death will be an indelible reproach upon
the character of that great and eminent reformer.

In the reign of Edward the sixth of England, anno 1549, A woman called Joan
Bocher, or Joan of Kent, was accused of heretical pravity. Her doctrine was,
that Christ was not truly incarnate of the virgin, whose flesh being the
outward man was sinfully begotten and born in sin; and consequently he could
take none of it; but the word, by the consent of the inward man of the virgin
was made flesh. A scholastic nicety, not capable of doing much mischief! but
there was a necessity for delivering the woman to the flames for maintaining
it. The young king though in such tender years, had more sense than all his
counselors and preceptors; and he long refused to sign the warrant for her
execution. CRANMER, with his superior learning, was employed to persuade him to
compliance, and he said, that the prince, being God's deputy, ought to repress
impieties against God. in like manner as the king's deputies were bound to
punish offenders against the king's person. He also argued from the practice of
the Jewish church in stoning blasphemers. Edward overcome by importunity more
than reason at last submitted, and told Cranmer with tears in his eyes, that if
any wrong was done, the guilt should lie entirely on his head. The primate was
struck with surprise; but after making a new effort to reclaim the woman and
finding her obstinate, he at last committed her to the flames. Nor did he ever
renounce his burning principles so long as he continued in power. Hume's Hist.
Eng. 4to vol. 3. p. 320. Neal's Hist. Purit. 4to. vol. 1. p. 41.

It ought also to be remembered, that at the same time that the Quakers
suffered in New England, penal laws against them were made and rigorously
executed in England; and though none of them suffered capital executions, yet
they were thrown into prison and treated with other marks of cruelty, which in
some instances proved the means of their death. And though the lenity of King
Charles the IId in putting a stop to capital executions here has been much
celebrated, yet in his letter to the Massachusetts government the next year,
wherein he requires liberty for the church of England among them, he adds, We
cannot be understood hereby to direct, or wish that any indulgence should be
granted to Quakers, whose principles, being inconsistent with any kind of
government, We have found it necessary with the advice of our parliament here
to make a sharp law against them, and are well content you do the like there.
Records of Deeds, Prove. Maine, lib. 1. fol. 129.


.

The mistakes on which their conduct was grounded cannot be detected in a more
masterly manner, than by transcribing the sentiments of Doctor Increase Mather,
who lived in those times, and was a strong advocate for the coercive power of
the magistrate in matters of religion; but afterward changed his opinion on
this point. He became sensible that the example of the Israelitish reformers
inflicting penalties on false worshippers would not legitimate the like
proceedings among christian gentiles: For the holy land of old was, by a deed
of gift from the glorious God, miraculously and indisputably granted to the
Israelitish nation, and the condition on which they had it was their observance
of the Mosaic institutions. To violate them was high treason against the king
of the theocracy, an iniquity to be punished by the judge. At the same time
sojourners in the land were not compelled to the keeping those rites and laws
which Moses had given to the people. Nay the Israelites themselves fell, many
of them, into the worst of heresies, yet while they kept the laws and rites of
Moses, the magistrate would not meddle with them. The heresy of the Sadducees
in particular struck at the foundation of all religion; yet we do not find that
our Savior ever blamed the Pharisees for not persecuting them. The christian
religion brings us not into a temporal Canaan, it knows no weapons but what are
purely spiritual. He saw that until persecution be utterly banished out of the
world, and Cain's club taken out of Abel's hand, it is impossible to rescue the
world from endless confusions. He that has the power of the sword will always
be in the right and always assume the power of persecuting. In his latter times
therefore he looked upon it as one of the most hopeful among the signs of the
times, that people began to be ashamed of a practice which had been a mother of
abominations, and he came entirely into that golden maxim, Errantis poena
doceri.

Diverse others of the principal actors and abettors of this tragedy lived to
see the folly and incompetency of such sanguinary laws, to which the sufferings
of their brethren, the nonconformists in England, did not a little contribute.
Under the arbitrary government of King James the second, when he, for a show of
liberty and as a leading step to the introduction of popery, issued a
proclamation of indulgence to tender consciences, the principal men of the
country sent him an address of thanks, for granting them what they had formerly
denied to others. It is but justice to add, that all those disgraceful laws
were renounced and repealed, and the people of New England are now as heartily
disposed toward the Quakers as any other denominations of christians. To keep
alive a spirit of resentment and reproach to the country, on account of those
ancient transactions which are now universally condemned, would discover a
temper not very consistent with that meekness and forgiveness which ought to be
cultivated by all who profess to be influenced by the gospel.

But though our ancestors are justly censurable for those instances of
misconduct, yet they are not to be condemned as unworthy the christian name,
since some of the first disciples of our Lord, in a zealous imitation of the
prophet Elias, would have called for fire from heaven to consume a village of
the Samaritans who refused to receive him. Their zeal was of the same kind; and
the answer which the benevolent author of our religion gave to his disciples on
that occasion, might with equal propriety be addressed to them, and to all
persecuting christians, Ye know not what spirit ye are of, for the Son of man
is not come to destroy men's lives but to save them.

CHAP. IV. Mode of government under Massachusetts. Mason's efforts to recover
the property of his ancestor. Transactions of the king's commissioners.
Opposition to them. Political principles. Internal transactions. Mason
discouraged.
DURING the union of these plantations with Massachusetts, they were governed
by the general laws of the colony, and the terms of the union were strictly
observed. Exeter and Hampton were at first annexed to the jurisdiction of the
courts at Ipswich, till the establishment of a new county which was called
Norfolk, 1643.
and comprehended Salisbury, Haverhill, Hampton, Exeter, Portsmouth and Dover.
These towns were then of such extent as to contain all the lands between the
rivers Merrimack and Pascataqua. The shire town was Salisbury; but Dover and
Portsmouth had always a distinct jurisdiction, though they were considered as
part of this new county; a court being held in one or the other, sometimes once
and sometimes twice in the year, consisting of one or more of the magistrates
or assistants, and one or more commissioners chosen by the general court out of
the principal gentlemen of each town. This was called the court of associates;
and their power extended to causes of twenty pounds value. Mass. Genesis Court Rec.
From them there was an appeal to the board of assistants, which being found
inconvenient, it was in 1670 ordered to be made to the county court of Norfolk.
Causes under twenty shillings in value were settled in each town by an inferior
court consisting of three persons. After some time they had liberty to choose
their associates, 1647.
which was done by the votes of both towns, opened at a joint meeting of their
selectmen, Dover and Portsmou. Rec.
though sometimes they requested the court to appoint them as before. That
mutual confidence between rulers and people, which springs from the genius of a
republican government is observable in all their transactions In 1652, the
number of people in Dover was increased so that they were allowed by law to
send two deputies to the general court. Hampton continued sending but one till
1669, and Portsmouth till 1672. The names of the representatives which I have
been able to recover, are as follows: For Dover.
John Baker, Valentine Hill, Richard Waldron, who was chosen without
interruption for 25 years, and was sometime speaker of the house. Richard Cook,
Peter Coffin.
For Portsmouth.
Bryan Pendleton, Henry Sherburne, Richard Cutts, Nathaniel Friar, Elias
Stileman, John Cutts, Richard Martyn, Richard Cook, of Boston.
For Hampton.
Jeoffry Mingay, Henry Dow, William Fuller, Robert Page, Roger Shaw, Roger
Page, Samuel Dalton, Joshua Gilman, Anthony Stanyon, Christopher Hussy,
William Gerrish, Joseph Hussy.


I do not find that Exeter sent any deputies to court during this union. Genesis
Court Rec.


.

This extension of the colony's jurisdiction over New Hampshire, could not fail
of being noticed by the heirs of Mason* But the distractions caused by the
civil wars in England were invincible bars to any legal enquiry. The first heir
named in Mason's will dying in infancy, the estate descended after the death of
the executrix to Robert Tufton, who was not of age till 1650. 1652.
In two years after this, Joseph Mason came over as agent to the executrix, to
look after the interest of her deceased husband. He found the lands at
Newichwannock occupied by Richard Leader, against whom he brought actions in
the county court of Norfolk; but a dispute arising whether the lands in
question were within the jurisdiction of Massachusetts, and the court of
Norfolk judging the action not to be within their cognizance, recourse was had
to the general court; who on this occasion ordered an accurate survey of the
northern bounds of their patent to be made; a thing which they had long
meditated. A committee of the general court attended by Jonathan Ince and John
Shearman surveyors, Massa. Rec.
and several Indian guides, went up the river Merrimack to find the most
northerly part thereof, which the Indians told them was at Aquedochtan, the
outlet of the lake Winnipiseogee. The latitude of this place was observed to be
43 degrees 40 minutes and 12 seconds, to which three miles being added, made
the line of the patent, according to their construction, fall within the lake,
in the latitude of 43 degrees 43 minutes and 12 seconds. 1653.
Two experienced ship-masters, Jonas Clarke and Samuel Andrews, were then
dispatched to the eastern coast, who found the same degrees, minutes, and
seconds, on the northern point of an island in Casco Bay, called the Upper
Clapboard Island. An east and west line, drawn through these points from the
Atlantic to the South sea, was therefore supposed to be the northern boundary
of the Massachusetts patent, within which the whole claim of Mason, and the
greater part of that of Gorges were comprehended. When this grand point was
determined, the court were of opinion, that some lands at Newichwannock, with
the river, were by agreement of Sir Ferdinando Gorges and others, apportioned
to Captain Mason, and that he also had right by purchase of the Indians, as
also by possession and improvement; and they ordered a quantity of land
proportionable to his disbursements, with the privilege of the river, to be
laid out to his heirs. The agent made no attempt to recover any other part of
the estate; but having tarried long enough in the country to observe the temper
of the government, and the management used in the determination of his suit, he
returned; and the estate was given up for lost unless the government of England
should interpose.

During the commonwealth, and the protectorate of Cromwell, there could be no
hope of relief, as the family had always been attached to the royal cause, and
the colony stood high in the favor of the parliament and of Cromwell. But the
restoration of King Charles the second encouraged Tufton, 1660.
who now took the surname of Mason, to look up to the throne for favor and
assistance. For though the plan of colonization adopted by his grandfather was
in itself chimerical, and proved fruitless, yet he had expended a large estate
in the prosecution of it, which must have been wholly lost to his heirs, unless
they could recover the possession of his American territories. Full of this
idea, Mason petitioned the king; setting forth the encroachment of the
Massachusetts colony upon his lands, their making grants and giving titles to
the inhabitants, and thereby dispossessing him and keeping him out of his
right. The king referred the petition to his attorney general Sir Geoffry
Palmer, who reported that Robert Mason, Nov. 8. MS in Su. Cour. files.
grandson and heir to Capt. John Mason, had a good and legal title to the
province of New Hampshire. Nothing farther was done at this time, nor was the
matter mentioned in the letter which the king soon after sent to the colony,
though some offensive things in their conduct were therein reprehended, 1662.
Hutch. Collect. of papers, p. 377.
and diverse alterations enjoined. But the directions contained in this letter
not being strictly attended to, and complaints being made to the king of
disputes which had arisen in diverse parts of New England concerning the limits
of jurisdiction, Hutch. Hist. Mas. vol. 1. p. 535.
and addresses having been presented by several persons, praying for the royal
interposition; a commission was issued under the great seal to Colonel Richard
Nichols, Sir Robert Carre, knight, 1664. April 25.
George Carteret and Samuel Maverick, esquires, impowering them to visit the
several colonies of New England; to examine and determine all complaints and
appeals in matters civil, military and criminal; to provide for the peace and
security of the country, according to their good and sound discretion, and to
such instructions as they should receive from the king, and to certify him of
their proceedings.

This commission was highly disrelished by the colony, as inconsistent with the
rights and privileges which they enjoyed by their charter, and which the king
had sacredly promised to confirm. It is therefore no wonder that the
commissioners were treated with much coolness at their arrival; Hutch. Colle.
pap. 417.
but they severely repaid it in their report to the king.

In their progress through the country they came to Pascataqua, 1665. June.
and enquired into the bounds of Mason's patent. They heard the allegation of
Whelewright, who when banished by the colony, was permitted to reside
immediately beyond what was called the bound-house, which was three large miles
to the northward of the river Merrimack. They took the affidavit of Henry
Jocelyn concerning the agreement between Governor Cradock and Captain Mason,
that the river should be the boundary of their respective patents. They made no
determination of this controversy in their report to the king; but having
called together the inhabitants of Portsmouth, Sir Robert Carre, Mass. Rec.
Octo. 10.
in the name of the rest, told them that they would release them from the
government of Massachusetts whose jurisdiction should come no farther than the
bound-house. They then proceeded to appoint justices of the peace and other
officers, with power to act according to the laws of England, and such laws of
their own as were not repugnant thereto, Hutchin. Collection pap. 488.
until the king's pleasure should be farther known.

There had always been a party here who were dissaffected to the government of
Massachusetts. One of the most active among them was Abraham Corbett of
Portsmouth, who, since the arrival of the commissioners at Boston, and probably
by authority derived from them, had taken upon him to issue warrants in the
king's name on several occasions, which was construed a high misdemeanor, as he
had never been commissioned by the authority of the colony. Being called to
account by the general court, he was admonished, Massa. Rec.
fined five pounds, and committed till the sentence was performed. Irritated by
this severity, he was the fitter instrument for the purpose of the
commissioners, who employed him to frame a petition to the king in the name of
the four towns, complaining of the usurpation of Massachusetts over them, and
praying to be released from their tyranny. Corbett, in a secret manner,
procured several persons both in Portsmouth and Dover to subscribe this
petition, but the most of those to whom he offered it refused.

The sensible part of the inhabitants now saw with much concern that they were
in danger of being reduced to the same unhappy state which they had been in
before their union with the colony. Awed by the supercilious behavior of the
commissioners, they knew not at first how to act; for to oppose the king's
authority was construed treason, and it was said that Sir Robert Carre had
threatened a poor old man with death for no other crime than forbidding his
grandchild to open a door to them. But when the rumor was spread that a
petition was drawn, and that Corbett was procuring subscribers, the people, no
longer able to bear the abuse, earnestly applied to the general court, praying
that in some orderly way they might have an opportunity to clear themselves of
so great and unjust aspersions, as were by this petition, drawn in their name,
cast upon the government under which they were settled; and also to manifest
their sense of such perfidious actions, lest by their silence it should be
concluded they were of the same mind with those who framed the petition. In
consequence of this petition, the court commissioned Thomas Danforth, Eleazar
Lusher, and Major General Leverett to enquire into the matter, and settle the
peace in these places according to their best discretion.

These gentlemen came to Portsmouth, October 9.
and having assembled the inhabitants, and published their commission, they
told them that they were informed of a petition subscribed in behalf of that
and the neighboring towns, complaining of the government; and desired them if
they had any just grievances to let them be known, and report should be
immediately made to the general court. The next day they assembled the people
of Dover and made the same challenge. Both towns respectively protested against
the petition, and professed full satisfaction with the government, which they
signified in addresses to the court. Dudley, the minister of Exeter, certified
under his hand to the committee, that the people of that town had no concern
directly nor indirectly with the obnoxious petition. They received also full
satisfaction with regard to Hampton; a certificate of which might have been
obtained, if they had thought it necessary.

They then proceeded to summon Corbett before them for seditious behavior; but
he eluded the search that was made for him, and they were obliged to leave a
warrant with an officer to cite him to the court at Boston. The commissioners
had now gone over into the province of Maine, from whence Sir Robert Carre in
their name sent a severe reprimand to this committee, forbidding them to
proceed against such persons as had subscribed the petition, and enclosing a
copy of a letter which the said commissioners had written to the governor and
council on the same subject.

The committee returned and reported their proceedings to the court, and about
the same time the commissioners came from their eastern tour to Boston; where
the court desired a conference with them, but received such an answer from Sir
Robert Carre as determined them not to repeat their request. A warrant was then
issued by the secretary, in the name of the whole court, to apprehend Corbett
and bring him before the governor and magistrates, to answer for his tumultuous
and seditious practices against the government. The next spring he was seized
and brought before them; 1666. May 23.
and after a full hearing was adjudged guilty of sedition, and exciting others
to discontent with the government and laws, and of keeping a disorderly house
of entertainment, for which crimes he was sentenced to give a bond of one
hundred pounds with security for his peaceable behavior and obedience to the
laws; he was prohibited retailing liquors; disabled from bearing any office in
the town or commonwealth, during the pleasure of the court; and obliged to pay
a fine of twenty pounds and five pounds for the costs of his prosecution.

This severity in vindication of their charter-rights they thought fit to
temper with something that had the appearance of submission to the royal
commands. The king's pleasure had been signified to the commissioners, Hutchin.
Collect. pap. 419.
that the harbors should be fortified. This instruction came to hand while
they were at Pascataqua, and they immediately issued warrants to the four
towns, requiring them to meet at a time and place appointed to receive his
majesty's orders. One of these warrants was sent by express to Boston, from
whence two officers were dispatched by the governor and council to forbid the
towns on their peril to meet, or obey the commands of the commissioners. But by
their own authority they ordered a committee to look out the most convenient
place for a fortification, upon whose report the neck of land on the eastward
of the Great Island, Massa. Rec.
where a small fort had been already built, was sequestered for the purpose,
taking in the Great Rock, and from thence all the easterly part of the said
island. The court of associates being empowered to hear and determine the
claims of those who pretended any title to this land; a claim was entered by
George Walton, but rejected; and the appropriation confirmed. The customs and
imposts on goods imported into the harbor were applied to the maintenance of
the fort, and the trained bands of Great-Island and Kittery-Point were
discharged from all other duty to attend the service of it, under Richard
Cutts, esquire. who was appointed captain.

The people of Massachusetts have, both in former and latter times, been
charged with disloyalty to the king in their conduct toward these
commissioners, and their disregard of authority derived from the same source
with their charter. To account for their conduct on this occasion, we must
consider the ideas they had of their political connection with the parent state.
They had been forced from thence by persecution: they came at their own charges
into a wilderness, claimed indeed by the crown of England; but really in
possession of its native lords; from whom they had purchased the soil and
sovereignty, which gave them a title, considered in a moral view, superior to
the grant of any European prince. For convenience only, they had solicited and
accepted a patent from the crown, which in their opinion constituted the only
bond of union between them and their prince, by which the nature and extent of
their allegiance to him was to be determined. This patent they regarded as a
solemn compact, wherein the king had granted them undisturbed possession of the
soil, and power of government within certain limits; on condition that they
should settle the country, christianize the natives, yield a fifth of all gold
and silver mines to the crown, and make no laws repugnant to those of England.
They had, on their part, sacredly performed these conditions; and therefore
concluded that the grant of title, property and dominion which the crown had
made to them was irrevocable. And although they acknowledged themselves
subjects of the reigning prince, and owned a dependence on the royal authority;
yet they understood it to be only through the medium of their charter.

The appointment of commissioners who were to act within the same limits,
independently of this authority, and to receive appeals from it; whose rule of
conduct was no established law, but their own "good and sound discretion," was
regarded as a dangerous stretch of royal power, militating with and superseding
their charter. If the royal authority was destined to flow through the patent,
it could not regularly be turned into another channel: if they were to be
governed by laws made and executed by officers of their own choosing, they
could not at the same time be governed by the "discretion" of men in whose
appointment they had no voice, and over whom they had no control. Two ruling
powers in the same state was a solecism which they could not digest. The patent
was neither forfeited nor revoked; but the king had solemnly promised to
confirm it, and it subsisted in full force. The commission therefore was deemed
an usurpation and infringement of those chartered rights, which had been
solemnly pledged on the one part, dearly purchased and justly paid for on the
other. They regarded "a royal donation under the great seal (to use their own
words) as the greatest security that could be had in human affairs; Hutch.
Hist. Mass. Vol. I. p. 54^.
and they had confidence in the justice of the supreme ruler, that if they held
what they in their consciences thought to be their rights, and performed the
engagements by which they had acquired them, they should enjoy the protection
of his providence, Keep to your patent. Your patent was a royal grant indeed;
and it is instrumentally your defense and security. Recede from that, one way
or the other, and you will expose yourselves to the wrath of God and the rage
of man. Fix upon the patent, and stand for the liberties and immunities
conferred upon you therein; and you have GOD and the king with you, both a good
cause and a good interest: and may with good conscience set your foot against
any foot of pride and violence that shall come against you. President Oakes's
Election Sermon 1673.
though they should be obliged to abandon the country, which they had planted
with so much labor and expense, and seek a new settlement in some other part
of the globe.

These were the principles which they had imbibed, which they openly avowed and
on which they acted. Policy might have dictated to them the same flexibility of
conduct, and softness of expression, by which the other colonies on this
occasion gained the royal favor. But they had so long held the sole and
uninterrupted sovereignty, in which they had been indulged by the late popular
government in England; and were so fully convinced it was their right; that
they chose rather to risque the loss of all, than to make any concessions;
thereby exposing themselves farther to the malice of their enemies and the
vengeance of power.

The commissioners, having finished their business, were recalled by the order
of the king, who was much displeased with the ill treatment they had received
from the Massachusetts government, which was the more heinous, as the colonies
of Plymouth, Rhode Island and Connecticut had treated the commission with
acknowledged respect. By a letter to the colony he commanded them to send over
four or five agents, April 10. Hutch. p. 547.
promising to hear in person, all the allegations, suggestions, and pretenses
to right or favor, that could be made on behalf of the colony, intimating that
he was far from desiring to invade their charter; and commanding that all
things should remain as the commissioners had settled them until his farther
order; and that those persons who had been imprisoned for petitioning or
applying to them should be released. The court, however, continued to exercise
jurisdiction, appoint officers, and execute the laws in these towns as they had
done for twenty-five years, to the general satisfaction of the people who were
united with them in principles and affection.

This affection was demonstrated by their ready concurrence with the proposal
for a general collection, 1669.
for the purpose of erecting a new brick building This building was erected in
1672, and consumed by fire in 1764.
at Harvard college, the old wooden one being small and decayed. The town of
Portsmouth, which was now become the richest, made a subscription of sixty
pounds per annum for seven years; and after five years passed a town vote to
carry this engagement into effect. Dover gave thirty-two, Harvard Col. Rec.
and Exeter ten pounds for the same laudable purpose.

The people of Portsmouth, having for some time employed Joshua Moody as a
preacher among them, 1671.
and erected a new meeting house, 1666.
proceeded to settle him in regular order. A church consisting of nine brethren
Joshua Moody, John Cutts, Richard Cutts, Richard Martyn, Elias Stileman, Samuel
Haynes, James Pendleton, John Fletcher, John Tucker.

was first gathered; then, the general court having been duly informed of it,
Ports. Chh. Records.
and having signified their approbation, according to the established practice,
Moody was ordained in the presence of Governor Leverett and several of the
magistrates.

The whole attention of the government in England being at this time taken up
with things that more immediately concerned themselves, 1674.
nothing of moment relating to Mason's interest was transacted. He became
discouraged, and joined with the heirs of Gorges in proposing an alienation of
their respective rights in the provinces of New Hampshire and Maine to the
crown, to make a government for the Duke of Monmouth. The duke himself was
greatly pleased with the scheme, as he had been told that an annual revenue of
five thousand pounds or more might be collected from these provinces. Hutch.
Collection of Papers, 451, 472.
But by the more faithful representations of some persons who were well
acquainted with the country, he was induced to lay aside the project. Many
complaints were made against the government of Massachusetts; and it was
thought to be highly expedient that more severe measures should be used with
them; but the Dutch wars, and other foreign transactions, prevented any
determination concerning them, till the country was involved in all the horrors
of a general war with the natives.

CHAP. V. Remarks on the temper and manners of the Indians. The first general
war with them called Philip's war.
AT the time of the first discovery of the river Pascataqua by Captain Smith,
it was found that the native inhabitants of these parts differed not in
language, manners, nor government, from their eastern or western neighbors.
Though they were divided into several tribes, each of which had a distinct
sachem, yet they all owned subjection to a sovereign prince, called Bashaba,
Smith's Voyage.
whose residence was somewhere about Pemaquid. It was soon after found that the
Tarratenes, who lived farther eastward, had invaded his country, surprised and
slain him, and all the people in his neighborhood, and carried off his women,
leaving no traces of his authority. Upon which the subordinate sachems, having
no head to unite them, and each one striving for the pre-eminence, made war
among themselves; whereby many of their people, and much of their provision
were destroyed. When Sir Richard Hawkins visited the coast in 1615, Gorges's
Narrat. p. 17.54.
this war was at its height; and to this succeeded a pestilence, which carried
them off in such numbers that the living were not able to bury the dead;
Prince's Annals. 1617.
but their bones remained at the places of their habitations for several years.
During this pestilence, Richard Vines and several others, whom Sir Ferdinando
Gorges had hired, at a great expense, to tarry in the country through the
winter, lived among them and lodged in their cabbins, without receiving the
least injury in their health, not so much as feeling their heads to ach the
whole time. Gorges, p. 12.
By such singular means did divine providence prepare the way for the peaceable
entrance of the Europeans into this land.

When the first settlements were made, the remains of two tribes had their
habitations on the several branches of the river Pascataqua; one of their
sachems lived at the falls of Squamscot, and the other at those of
Newichwannock; their head quarters being generally seated in places convenient
for fishing. Both these, together with several inland tribes, who resided at
Pantucket and Winnipiseogee, acknowledged subjection to Passaconaway the great
sagamore of Pannukog, or (as it is commonly pronounced) Penacook. He excelled
the other sachems in sagacity, duplicity and moderation; but his principal
qualification was his skill in some of the secret operations of nature, which
gave him the reputation of a sorcerer, and extended his fame and influence
among all the neighboring tribes. They believed that it was in his power to
make water burn, and trees dance, and to metamorphose himself into flame;
Hutch. Hist. Mass. Vol 1. p^ 174.
that in winter he could raise a green leaf from the ashes of a dry one, and a
living serpent from the skin of one that was dead.

An English gentleman who had been much conversant among the Indians was
invited, in 1660, to a great dance and feast; on which occasion the elderly
men, in songs or speeches recite their histories, and deliver their sentiments,
and advice, to the younger. At this solemnity Passaconaway, being grown old,
made his farewell speech to his children and people; in which, as a dying man,
he warned them to take heed how they quarrelled with their English neighbors;
for though they might do them some damage, yet it would prove the means of
their own destruction. He told them that he had been a bitter enemy to the
English, and by the arts of sorcery had tried his utmost to hinder their
settlement and increase; but could by no means succeed. This caution perhaps
often repeated, had such an effect, that upon the breaking out of the Indian
war fifteen years afterward, Wonolanset, Hubbard's printed Narrative. p. 9.31.
his son and successor, withdrew himself and his people into some remote place,
that they might not be drawn into the quarrel.

While the British nations had been distracted with internal convulsions, and
had endured the horrors of a civil war, produced by the same causes which
forced the planters of New England to quit the land of their nativity; this
wilderness had been to them a quiet habitation. They had struggled with many
hardships; but providence had smiled upon their undertaking, their settlements
were extended and their churches multiplied. There had been no remarkable
quarrel with the savages, except the short war with the Pequods, who dwelt in
the south-east part of Connecticut: They being totally subdued in 1637, the
dread and terror of the English kept the other nations quiet for near forty
years. During which time the New England colonies being confederated for their
mutual defense, and for maintaining the public peace, took great pains to
propagate the gospel among the natives, and bring them to a civilized way of
living, which, with respect to some, proved effectual; others refused to
receive the missionaries, and remained obstinately prejudiced against the
English. Yet the object of their hatred was at the same time the object of
their fear; which led them to forbear acts of hostility, and to preserve an
outward show of friendship, to their mutual interest.

Our historians have generally represented the Indians in a most odious light,
especially when recounting the effects of their ferocity. Dogs, caitiffs,
miscreants and hell hounds, are the politest names which have been given them
by some writers, who seem to be in a passion at the mentioning their cruelties,
Hubbard's Narrative and Mather's Magnalia.
and at other times speak of them with contempt. Whatever indulgence may be
allowed to those who wrote in times when the mind was vexed with their recent
depredations and inhumanities, it ill becomes us to cherish an inveterate
hatred of the unhappy natives. Religion teaches us a better temper, and
providence has now put an end to the controversy, by their almost total
extirpation. We should therefore proceed with calmness in recollecting their
past injuries, and forming our judgment of their character.

It must be acknowledged that human depravity appeared in these unhappy
creatures in a most shocking view. The principles of education and the
refinements of civilized life, either lay a check upon our vicious
propensities, or disguise our crimes; but among them human wickedness was seen
in its naked deformity. Yet, bad as they were, it will be difficult to find
them guilty of any crime which cannot be paralleled among civilized nations.

They are always described as remarkably cruel; and it cannot be denied that
this disposition indulged to the greatest excess, strongly marks their
character. We are struck with horror, when we hear of their binding the victim
to the stake, biting off his nails, tearing out his hair by the roots, pulling
out his tongue, boring out his eyes, sticking his skin full of lighted
pitch-wood, half roasting him at the fire, and then making him run for their
diversion, till he faints and dies under the blows which they give him on every
part of his body. But is it not as dreadful to read of an unhappy wretch, sewed
up in a sack full of serpents and thrown into the sea, or broiled in a red hot
iron chair; or mangled by lions and tigers after having spent his strength to
combat them for the diversion of the spectators in an amphitheatre? and yet
these were punishments among the Romans in the politest ages of the empire.
What greater cruelty is there in the American tortures, than in confining a man
in a trough, and daubing him with honey that he may be stung to death by wasps
and other venomous insects; or fleaing him alive and stretching out his skin
before his eyes, which modes of punishment were not inconsistent with the
softness and elegance of the ancient court of Persia? or, to come down to
modern times; what greater misery can there be in the Indian executions, than
in racking a prisoner on a wheel, and breaking his bones one by one with an
iron bar; or placing his legs in a boot and driving in wedges one after
another; which tortures are still, or have till lately been used in some
European kingdoms? I forbear to name the torments of the inquisition, because
they seem to be beyond the stretch of human invention. If civilized nations,
and those who profess the most merciful religion that ever blessed the world,
have practiced these cruelties, what could be expected of men who were
strangers to every degree of refinement either civil or mental?

The Indians have been represented as revengeful. When any person was killed,
the nearest relative thought himself bound to be the avenger of blood, and
never left seeking, till he found an opportunity to execute his purpose.
Whether in a state, where government is confessedly so feeble as among them,
Numbers chapter 35. v. 19. Deuteronomy chapter 19. v. 12.
such a conduct is not justifiable, and even countenanced by the Jewish law may
deserve our consideration*

The treachery with which these people are justly charged, is exactly the same
disposition which operates in the breach of solemn treaties made between
nations which call themselves christian. Can it be more criminal in an Indian,
than in an European, not to think himself bound by promises and oaths extorted
from him when under duress?

Their jealousy and hatred of their English neighbors may easily be accounted
for, if we allow them to have the same feelings with ourselves. How natural is
it for us to form a disagreeable idea of a whole nation, from the bad conduct
of some individuals with whom we are acquainted? and though others of them may
be of a different character, yet will not that prudence which is esteemed a
virtue, lead us to suspect the fairest appearances, as used to cover the most
fraudulent designs, especially if pains are taken by the most politic among us,
to foment such jealousies to subserve their own ambitious purposes?

Though the greater part of the English settlers came hither with religious
views, and fairly purchased their lands of the Indians, yet it cannot be denied
that some, especially in the eastern parts of New England, had lucrative views
only; and from the beginning used fraudulent methods in trade with them. Such
things were indeed disallowed by the government, and would always have been
punished if the Indians had made complaint: but they knew only the law of
retaliation, and when an injury was received, it was never forgotten till
revenged. Encroachments made on their lands, and fraud committed in trade,
afforded sufficient grounds for a quarrel, though at ever so great a length of
time; and kept alive a perpetual jealousy of the like treatment again Mons. du
Pratz gives nearly the same account of the Indians on the Mississippi. There
needs nothing but prudence and good sense to persuade these people to what is
reasonable, and to preserve their friendship without interruption. We may
safely affirm, that the differences we have had with them have been more owing
to the French than to them. When they are treated insolently, or oppressively,
they have no less sensibility of injuries than others. History of Louisiana,
lib. 4. cap. 3.
.

Such was the temper of the Indians of New England when the first general war
began. 1675.
It was thought by the English in that day, that Philip, sachem of the
Wompanoags, a crafty and aspiring man, partly by intrigue, and partly by
example, excited them to such a general combination. He was the son of
Massassoiet, the nearest sachem to the colony of Plymouth, with whom he had
concluded a peace, which he maintained (...) through fear than good will, as
long as he lived. His son and immediate successor Alexander, preserved the same
external show of friendship; but died with choler on being detected in a plot
against them. Philip, it is said, dissembled his hostile puposes; he was ready,
on every suspicion of his infidelity, to renew his submission, and testify it
even by the delivery of his arms, till he had secretly infused a cruel jealousy
into many of the neighboring Indians; which excited them to attempt the
recovering their country by extirpating the new possessors. The plot, it is
said, was discovered before it was ripe for execution; and as he could no
longer promise himself security under the mask of friendship, he was
constrained to show himself in his true character, and accordingly began
hostilities upon the plantation of Swanzy, in the colony of Plymouth, in the
month of June 1675.

Notwithstanding this general opinion, it may admit of some doubt, whether a
single sachem, whose authority was limited, could have such an extensive
influence over tribes so remote and unconnected with him as the eastern
Indians; much more improbable is it, that those in Virginia should have joined
in the confederacy, as it has been intimated. Hubbard's Narrative, p. 1^.
The Indians never traveled to any greater distance than their hunting
required; and so ignorant were they of the geography of their country, Neal's
Hist. N.E. Vol. 1. p. 21.
that they imagined New England to be an island, and could tell the name of an
inlet or straight by which they supposed it was separated from the main land.
But what renders it more improbable that Philip was so active an instrument in
exciting this war, is the constant tradition among the posterity of those
people who lived near him, and were familiarly conversant with him, and with
those of his Indians who survived the war: which is, that he was forced on by
the fury of his young men, sorely against his own judgment and that of his
chief counselors; and that as he foresaw that the English would, in time,
establish themselves and extirpate the Indians, so he thought that the making
war upon them would only hasten the destruction of his own people. It was
always a very common, and sometimes a just excuse with the Indians, when
charged with breach of faith, that the old men were not able to restrain the
younger from signalizing their valor, and gratifying their revenge, though
they disapproved their rashness. This want of restraint was owing to the
weakness of their government; their sachems having but the shadow of
magistratical authority.

The inhabitants of Bristol show a particular spot where Philip received the
news of the first Englishmen that were killed, Callender's Century Sermon, p.
73.
with so much sorrow as to cause him to weep; a few days before which he had
rescued one who had been taken by his Indians, and privately sent him home.
Whatever credit may be given to this account, so different from the current
opinion, it must be owned, that in such a season of general confusion as the
first war occasioned, fear and jealousy might create many suspicions, which
would soon be formed into reports of a general confederacy, through Philip's
contrivance; and it is to be noted that the principal histories of this war,
[Increase Mather's and Hubbard's] were printed in 1676 and 1677, when the
strangest reports were easily credited, and the people were ready to believe
every thing that was bad of so formidable a neighbor as Philip. But as the
fact cannot now be precisely ascertained, I shall detain the reader no longer
from the real causes of the war in these eastern parts.

There dwelled near the river Saco a sachem named Squando, a noted enthusiast,
a leader in the devotions of their religion, Hubbard, p. 29.61.
and one that pretended to a familiar intercourse with the invisible world.
These qualifications rendered him a person of the highest dignity, importance
and influence among all the eastern Indians. His squaw passing along the river
in a canoe, with her infant child, was met by some rude sailors, who having
heard that the Indian children could swim as naturally as the young of the
brutal kind, in a thoughtless and unguarded humor overset the canoe. The child
sunk, and the mother instantly diving fetched it up alive, but the child dying
soon after, its death was imputed to the treatment it had received from the
seamen; and Squando was so provoked that he conceived a bitter antipathy to the
English, and employed his great art and influence to excite the Indians against
them. Some other injuries were alleged as the ground of the quarrel; Magnalia,
Lib. 7. p. 55.
and, considering the interested views and irregular lives of many of the
eastern settlers, their distance from the seat of government, and the want of
due subordination among them, it is not improbable that a great part of the
blame of the eastern war belonged to them.

The first alarm of the war in Plymouth colony spread great consternation among
the distant Indians, and held them a while in suspense what part to act; for
there had been a long external friendship subsisting between them and the
English, and they were afraid of provoking so powerful neighbors. But the
seeds of jealousy and hatred had been so effectually sown, that the crafty and
revengeful, and those who were ambitious of doing some exploits, soon found
means to urge them on to an open rupture; so that within twenty days after
Philip had begun the war at the southward, the flame broke out in the most
northeasterly part of the country, Hubbard, p. 13.
at the distance of two hundred miles.

The English inhabitants about the river Kennebeck, hearing of the insurrection
in Plymouth colony, determined to make trial of the fidelity of their Indian
neighbors, by requesting them to deliver their arms. They made a show of
compliance; but, in doing it, committed an act of violence on a Frenchman, who
lived in an English family; which being judged an offense, both by the English
and the elder Indians, the offender was seized; but upon a promise, with
security, for his future good behavior, his life was spared, and some of them
consented to remain as hostages; who soon made their escape, and joined with
their fellows in robbing the house of Purchase, an ancient planter at Pechypscot.

The quarrel being thus begun, and their natural hatred of the English, and
jealousy of their designs, having risen to a great height under the malignant
influence of Squando and other leading men; and being encouraged by the example
of the western Indians, who were daily making depredations on the colonies of
Plymouth, and Massachusetts; they took every opportunity to rob and murder the
people in the scattered settlements of the province of Maine; and having
dispersed themselves into many small parties, that they might be the more
extensively mischievous, in the month of September they approached the
plantations at Pascataqua, and made their first onset at Oyster river then a
part of the town of Dover, but now Durham. Here they burned two houses
belonging to two persons named Chesly, killed two men in a canoe, and carried
away two captives; Hubbard, p. 19.
both of whom soon after made their escape. About the same time a party of four
laid in ambush near the road between Exeter and Hampton, where they killed one,
and took another, who made his escape. Within a few days an assault was made on
the house of one Tozer at Newichwannock, wherein were fifteen women and
children, all of whom, except two, were saved by the intrepidity of a girl of
eighteen. She first seeing the Indians as they advanced to the house, shut the
door and stood against it, till the others escaped to the next house, which was
better secured. The Indians chopped the door to pieces with their hatchets, and
then entering, they knocked her down, and leaving her for dead, went in pursuit
of the others, of whom two children, who could not get over the fence, fell
into their hands. The adventurous heroine recovered, and was perfectly healed
of her wound.

The two following days they made several appearances on both sides of the
river, using much insolence, and burning two houses and three barns, with a
large quantity of grain. Some shot were exchanged without effect, and a pursuit
was made after them into the woods by eight men, but night obliged them to
return without success. Five or six houses were burned at Oyster river, and two
more men killed. These daily insults could not be borne without indignation and
reprisal. About twenty young men, chiefly of Dover, obtained leave of Major
Waldron, then commander of the militia, to try their skill and courage with the
Indians in their own way. Hubbard, p. 22.
Having scattered themselves in the woods, a small party of them discovered
five Indians in a field near a deserted house, some of whom were gathering
corn, and others kindling a fire to roast it. The men were at such a distance
from their fellows that they could make no signal to them without danger of a
discovery; two of them, therefore, crept along silently, near to the house,
from whence they suddenly rushed upon those two Indians, who were busy at the
fire, and knocked them down with the butts of their guns; the other three took
the alarm and escaped.

All the plantations at Pascataqua, with the whole eastern country, were now
filled with fear and confusion: Business was suspended, and every man was
obliged to provide for his own and his family's safety. The only way was to
desert their habitations, and retire together within the larger and more
convenient houses, which they fortified with a timber wall and flank-arts,
placing a centry-box on the roof. Thus the labor of the field was exchanged
for the duty of the garrison, and they who had long lived in peace and security
were upon their guard night and day, subject to continual alarms, and the most
fearful apprehensions.

The seventh of October was observed as a day of fasting and prayer; and on the
sixteenth the enemy made an assault upon the inhabitants at Salmon falls, in
Berwick. Lieutenant Roger Plaisted, being a man of true courage and of a public
spirit, immediately sent out a party of seven from his garrison to make
discovery. They fell into an ambush; three were killed, and the rest retreated.
The Lieutenant then dispatched an express to Major Waldron and Lieutenant
Coffin at Cochecho, begging most importunately for help, which they were in no
capacity to afford, consistently with their own safety. The next day Plaisted
ventured out with twenty men, and a cart to fetch the dead bodies of their
friends, and unhappily fell into another ambush. The cattle affrighted ran
back, and Plaisted being deserted by his men, and disdaining either to yield or
fly, was killed on the spot, with his eldest son and one more; his other son
died of his wound in a few weeks. Had the heroism of this worthy family been
imitated by the rest of the party, and a reinforcement arrived in season, the
enemy might have received such a severe check as would have prevented them from
appearing in small parties. The gallant behavior of Plaisted, though fatal to
himself and his sons, had this good effect, that the enemy retreated to the
woods; and the next day Captain Frost came up with a party from Sturgeon creek,
and peaceably buried the dead: Hubbard, ^. 24.
But before the month had expired a mill was burned there, and an assault made
on Frost's garrison, who though he had only three boys with him, kept up a
constant fire, and called aloud as if he were commanding a body of men, to
march here and fire there: the stratagem succeeded, and the house was saved.
The enemy then proceeded down the river, killing and plundering as they found
people off their guard, till they came opposite to Portsmouth; from whence some
cannon being fired they dispersed, and were pursued by the help of a light snow
which fell in the night, and were overtaken by the side of a swamp, into which
they threw themselves, leaving their packs and plunder to the pursuers. They
soon after did more mischief at Dover, Lamprey river and Exeter; and with these
small, but irritating assaults and skirmishes, the autumn was spent until the
end of November; when the number of people killed and taken from Kennebeck to
Pascataqua amounted to upwards of fifty.

The Massachusetts government being fully employed in defending the southern
and western parts, could not seasonably send succors to the eastward. Major
General Denison, who commanded the militia of the colony, had ordered the
majors who commanded the regiments on this side of the country, to draw out a
sufficient number of men to reduce the enemy, by attacking them at their
retreat to their headquarters at Ossapy and Pigwacket. But the winter setting
in early and fiercely, and the men being unprovided with rackets to travel on
the snow, which by the tenth of December was four feet deep in the woods, it
was impossible to execute the design. This peculiar severity of the season
however proved favorable. The Indians were pinched with famine, and having
lost by their own confession about ninety of their number, partly by the war,
and partly for want of food, they were reduced to the necessity of suing for
peace. With this view they came to Major Waldron, expressing great sorrow for
what had been done, and promising to be quiet and submissive. By his mediation
a peace was concluded with the whole body of eastern Indians, which continued
till the next August; and might have continued longer, if the inhabitants of
the eastern parts had not been too intent on private gain, and of a disposition
too ungovernable to be a barrier against an enemy so irritable and vindictive.
The restoration of the captives made the peace more pleasant: A return from the
dead could not be more welcome than a deliverance from Indian captivity.

The war at the southward, though renewed in the spring, 1676.
drew toward a close. Philip's affairs were desperate; many of his allies and
dependents forsook him; and in the month of August he was slain by a party
under Captain Church. Church's Memoirs, p. 44.
Those western Indians who had been engaged in the war, now fearing a total
extirpation, endeavored to conceal themselves among their brethren of Penacook
who had not joined in the war, and with those of Ossapy and Pigwacket who had
made peace. But they could not so disguise themselves or their behavior as to
escape the discernment of those who had been conversant with Indians. Several
of them were taken at different times and delivered up to public execution.
Three of them, Simon, Andrew and Peter, who had been concerned in killing
Thomas Kimbal of Bradford, and captivating his family, did, within six weeks
voluntarily restore the woman and five children. It being doubted whether this
act of submission was a sufficient atonement for the murder, they were
committed to Dover prison till their case could be considered. Fearing that
this confinement was a prelude to farther punishment, they broke out of prison,
and going to the eastward, joined with the Indians of Kennebeck and Amoriscogin
in those depredations which they renewed on the inhabitants of those parts, in
August, and were afterward active in distressing the people at Pascataqua.

This renewal of hostilities occasioned the sending of two companies to the
eastward under Captain Joseph Syll, and Captain William Hawthorne. In the
course of their march they came to Cochecho, on the sixth of September, where
four hundred mixed Indians were met at the house of Major Waldron, with whom
they had made the peace, and whom they considered as their friend and father.
The two captains would have fallen upon them at once, having it in their orders
to seize all Indians, who had been concerned in the war. The major dissuaded
them from that purpose, and contrived the following stratagem. He proposed to
the Indians, to have a training the next day, and a sham fight after the
English mode; and summoning his own men, with those under Captain Frost of
Kittery, they, in conjunction with the two companies, formed one party, and the
Indians another. Having diverted them a while in this manner, and caused the
Indians to fire the first volley; by a peculiar dexterity, the whole body of
them (except two or three) were surrounded, before they could form a suspicion
of what was intended. They were immediately seized and disarmed, without the
loss of a man on either side. A separation was then made: Wonolanset, with the
Penacook Indians, and others who had joined in making peace the winter before,
were peaceably dismissed; but the strange Indians, (as they were called) who
had fled from the southward and taken refuge among them, were made prisoners,
to the number of two hundred; and being sent to Boston, seven or eight of them,
who were known to have killed any Englishmen, were condemned and hanged; the
rest were sold into slavery in foreign parts.

This action was highly applauded by the general voice of the colony; as it
gave them opportunity to deal with their enemies in a judicial way, as rebels,
and, as they imagined, to extirpate those troublesome neighbors. The remaining
Indians, however, looked upon the conduct of Major Waldron as a breach of
faith; inasmuch as they had taken those fugitive Indians under their
protection, and had made peace with him, which had been strictly observed with
regard to him and his neighbors, though it had been broken elsewhere. The
Indians had no idea of the same government being extended very far, and thought
they might make peace in one place, and war in another, without any imputation
of infidelity; but a breach of hospitality and friendship, as they deemed this
to be, merited, according to their principles, a severe revenge, and was never
to be forgotten or forgiven. The major's situation on this occasion was indeed
extremely critical; and he could not have acted either way without blame. It is
said that his own judgment was against any forcible measure, as he knew that
many of those Indians were true friends to the colony; and that in case of
failure he should expose the country to their resentment; but had he not
assisted the forces in the execution of their commission, (which was to seize
all Indians who had been concerned with Philip in the war) he must have fallen
under censure, and been deemed accessory, by his neglect, to the mischiefs
which might afterward have been perpetrated by them. In this dilemma he finally
determined to comply with the orders and expectations of government; imagining
that he should be able to satisfy those of the Indians whom he intended to
dismiss, and that the others would be removed out of the way of doing any
further mischief; but he had no suspicion that he was laying a snare for his
own life. It was unhappy for him, that he was obliged in deference to the laws
of his country, and the orders of government, to give offense to a people who,
having no public judicatories and penal laws among themselves, were unable to
distinguish between a legal punishment and private malice The above account of
the seizure of the Indians is given from the most authentic and credible
tradition that could be obtained within the last sixteen years, from the
posterity of those persons who were concerned in the affair. It is but just
mentioned by Hubbard and Mather, and not in connection with its consequences.
Neal, for want of better information, has given a wrong turn to the relation,
and so has Win who copies from him. Hutchinson has not mentioned it at all.
.

Two days after this surprisal the forces proceeded on their route to the
eastward, being joined with some of Waldron's and Frost's men; and taking with
them Blind Will, a sagamore of the Indians who lived about Cochecho, and eight
of his people for pilots. The eastern settlements were all either destroyed or
deserted, and no enemy was to be seen; so that the expedition proved fruitless,
and the companies returned to Pascataqua.

It was then thought advisable, that they should march up toward the Ossapy
ponds; where the Indians had a strong fort of timber fourteen feet high, with
flankarts; which they had a few years before hired some English carpenters to
build for them, as a defense against the Mohawks, of whom they were always
afraid. It was thought that if the Indians could be surprised on their first
return to their headquarters, at the beginning of winter, some considerable
advantage might be gained against them; or if they had not arrived there, that
the provisions, which they had laid in for their winter subsistence, might be
destr^^ed. Accordingly, the companies being well provided for a march at that
season, set off on the first of November; and after traveling four days
through a rugged, mountainous wilderness, and crossing several rivers, they
arrived at the spot; but found the fort and adjacent places entirely deserted,
and saw not an Indian in all the way. Thinking it needless for the whole body
to go further, the weather being severe, and the snow deep, a select party was
detached eighteen or twenty miles above; who discovered nothing but frozen
ponds, and snowy mountains; and supposing the Indians had taken up their winter
quarters nearer the sea, they returned to Newichwannock, within nine days from
their first departure.

They had been prompted to undertake this expedition by the false accounts
brought by Mogg, an Indian of Penobscot, who had come in to Pascataqua, with a
proposal of peace; and had reported that an hundred Indians were assembled at
Ossapy. This Indian brought with him two men of Portsmouth, Friar and Kendal,
who had been taken on board a vessel at the eastward; he was deputed by the
Penobscot tribe to consent to articles of pacification; and being sent to
Boston, a treaty was drawn and subscribed by the governor and magistrates on
the one part, and by Mogg on the other; in which it was stipulated, that if the
Indians of the other tribes did not agree to this transaction, and cease
hostilities, they should be deemed and treated as enemies by both parties. This
treaty was signed on the sixth of November; Mogg pledging his life for the
fulfillment of it. Accordingly, vessels being sent to Penobscot, the peace was
ratified by Madokawando the sachem, and two captives were restored. But Mogg,
being incautiously permitted to go to a neighboring tribe, on pretense of
persuading them to deliver their captives, though he promised to return in
three days, was seen no more. It was at first thought that he had been
sacrificed by his countrymen, as he pretended to fear when he left the vessels;
but a captive who escaped in January gave a different account of him; 1677.
that he boasted of having deceived the English, and laughed at their kind
entertainment of him. There was also a design talked of among them to break the
peace in the spring, and join with the other Indians at the eastward in ruining
the fishery. About the same time it was discovered that some of the
Narrhaganset Indians were scattered in the eastern parts; three of them having
been decoyed by some of the Cochecho Indians into their wigwams, and scalped,
were known by the cut of their hair. This raised a fear in the minds of the
people, that more of them might have found their way to the eastward, and would
prosecute their revenge against them.

From these circumstances it was suspected, that the truce would be but of
short continuance. The treachery of Mogg, who was surety for the performance of
the treaty, was deemed a full justification of the renewal of hostilities; and
the state of things was, by some gentlemen of Pascataqua, represented to be so
dangerous, that the government determined upon a winter expedition. Two hundred
men, including sixty Natick Indians, were enlisted and equipped, and sailed
from Boston the first week in February, under the command of Major Waldron; a
day of prayer having been previously appointed for the success of the
enterprise.

At Casco the major had a fruitless conference, and a slight skirmish with a
few Indians, of whom some were killed and wounded. At Kennebeck he built a
fort, and left a garrison of forty men, under the command of Captain Sylvanus
Davis. At Pemaquid he had a conference with a company of Indians, who promised
to deliver their captives on the payment of a ransom: Part of it being paid,
three captives were delivered, and it was agreed that the conference should be
renewed in the afternoon, and all arms be laid aside. Some suspicion of their
infidelity had arisen, and when the major went ashore in the afternoon with
five men, and the remainder of the ransom, he discovered the point of a lance
hid under a board, which he drew out and advanced with it toward them; charging
them with treachery in concealing their arms so near. They attempted to take it
from him by force; but he threatened them with instant death, and waved his cap
for a signal to the vessels. While the rest were coming on shore, the major
with his five men secured the goods: Some of the Indians snatching up a bundle
of guns which they had hid, ran away: Captain Frost, who was one of the five,
seized an Indian, who was well known to be a rogue, and with Lieutenant Nutter,
carried him on board. The major searching about found three guns, with which he
armed his remaining three men; and the rest being come on shore by this time,
they pursued the Indians, killed several of them before they could recover
their canoes, and after they had pushed off, sunk one with five men, who were
drowned; and took four prisoners, with about a thousand pounds of dried beef,
and some other plunder. The whole number of the Indians was twenty-five.

Whether the casual discovery of their arms, which they had agreed to lay
aside, was sufficient to justify this severity, may be doubted; since, if their
intentions had really been hostile, they had a fine opportunity of ambushing or
seizing the major and his five attendants, who came ashore unarmed; and it is
not likely that they would have waited for the rest to come ashore before they
opened the plot. Possibly, this sudden suspicion might be groundless, and might
inflame the prejudice against the major, which had been already excited by the
seizure of their friends at Cochecho some time before.

On the return of the forces, they found some wheat, guns, anchors and boards
at Kennebeck, which they took with them. They killed two Indians on Arrowsick
Island, who, with one of the prisoners taken at Pemaquid, and shot on board,
made the number of Indians killed in this expedition thirteen. They returned to
Boston on the eleventh of March, without the loss of a man, bringing with them
the bones of Captain Lake, which they found entire in the place where he was
killed Here ends Hubbard's printed narrative. The account of the remainder of
this war is taken from his MS history, from sundry original letters, and copies
of letters, and from a MS journal found in Prince's collection, and supposed to
have been written by Captain Lawrence Hammond of Charlestown.
.

There being no prospect of peace at the eastward, it became necessary to
maintain great circumspection and resolution, and to make use of every possible
advantage against the enemy. A long and inveterate animosity had subsisted
between the Mohawks and the eastern Indians, the original of which is not
mentioned, and perhaps was not known by any of our historians; nor can the
oldest men among the Mohawks at this day give any account of it. These Indians
were in a state of friendship with their English neighbors; and being a fierce
and formidable race of men, their name carried terror wherever it was known. It
was now thought, that if they could be induced to prosecute their ancient
quarrel with the eastern Indians, the latter might be awed into peace, or
incapacitated for any farther mischief. The propriety of this measure became a
subject of debate; some questioning the lawfulness of making use of their help,
"as they were heathen;" but it was urged in reply, that Abraham had entered
into a confederacy with the Amorites, Genesis, chapter 14.
among whom he dwelled, and made use of their assistance in recovering his
kinsman Lot from the hands of their common enemy. With this argument the
objectors were satisfied; and the two messengers, Major Pynchon of Springfield,
and Richards of Hartford were dispatched to the country of the Mohawks; who
treated them with great civility, expressed the most bitter hatred against the
eastern enemy, Hubbard's MS History.
and promised to pursue the quarrel to the utmost of their power.

Accordingly some parties of them came down the country about the middle of
March, and the first alarm was given at Amuskeeg falls; where the son of
Wonolanset being hunting, discovered fifteen Indians on the other side, who
called to him in a language which he did not understand; upon which he fled,
while they fired near thirty guns at him without effect. Presently after this
they were discovered in the woods about Cochecho. Major Waldron sent out eight
of his Indians whereof Blind Will was one, for farther information. They were
all surprised together by a company of the Mohawks; MS Journal, March 30.
two or three escaped, the others were either killed or taken: Will was dragged
away by his hair; and being wounded, perished in the woods, on a neck of land,
formed by the confluence of Cochecho and Isingglass rivers, which still bears
the name of Blind Will's Neck. This fellow was judged to be a secret enemy to
the English, though he pretended much friendship and respect; so that it was
impossible to have punished him, without provoking the other neighboring
Indians, with whom he lived in amity, and of whose fidelity there was no
suspicion. Hubbard's MS Hist.
It was at first thought a fortunate circumstance that he was killed in this
manner; but the consequence proved it to be otherwise; for two of those who
were taken with him escaping, reported that the Mohawks threatened destruction
to all the Indians in these parts without distinction: MS Journal.
So that those who lived in subjection to the English grew jealous of their
sincerity, and imagined, not without very plausible ground, that the Mohawks
had been persuaded or hired to engage in the war, on purpose to destroy them;
since they never actually exercised their fury upon those Indians who were in
hostility with the English, but only upon those who were in friendship with
them; and this only in such a degree as to irritate, rather than to weaken or
distress them. It cannot therefore be thought strange that the friendly Indians
were alienated from their English neighbors, and disposed to listen to the
seducing stratagems of the French; who in a few years after made use of them,
in conjunction with others, sorely to scourge these unhappy people. The
English, in reality, had no such design; but the event proved, that the scheme
of engaging the Mohawks in our quarrel, however lawful in itself, and
countenanced by the example of Abraham, was a pernicious source of innumerable
calamities.

The terror which it was thought this incursion of the Mohawks would strike
into the eastern Indians was too small to prevent their renewing hostilities
very early in the spring. Some of the garrison who had been left at Kennebeck
were surprised by an ambush, as they were attempting to bury the dead bodies of
their friends, who had been killed the summer before, and had lain under the
snow all winter. Hubbard's MS.
The remainder of that garrison were then taken off and conveyed to Pascataqua;
whither a company of fifty men and ten Natick Indians marched, under Captain
Swain, to succor the inhabitants, who were alarmed by scattered parties of
the enemy, killing and taking people, and burning houses in Wells, Kittery, and
within the bounds of Portsmouth The following extract from the before mentioned
journal, shows something of the spirit of the times.

April 16. The house of John Keniston was burnt and he killed at Greenland. The
Indians are Simon, Andrew, and Peter, those three we had in prison, and should
have killed. The good Lord pardon us.


. A young woman who was taken from Rawling's house, made her escape and came
into Cochecho, informing where the enemy lay: Three parties were dispatched to
ambush three places, April 2^.
by one of which they must pass: The enemy appearing at one of these places,
were seasonably discovered; but by the too great eagerness of the party to fire
on them, they avoided the ambush and escaped.

Soon after this the garrisons at Wells and Black Point were beset, May 16.
and at the latter place the enemy lost their leader Mogg, who had proved so
treacherous a negociator. Upon his death they fled in their canoes, some to the
eastward and others toward York, where they also did some mischief. May 27.
On a sabbath morning, a party of twenty, under the guidance of Simon,
surprised six of our Indians, who lay drunk in the woods, at a small distance
from Portsmouth; they kept all day hovering about the town, and if they had
taken advantage of the people's absence from home, in attending the public
worship, they might easily have plundered and burned the outmost houses; MS
Letter of Mr. Moody.
but they were providentially restrained. At night they crossed the river at
the Long Reach, killed some sheep at Kittery, and then went toward Wells; but,
being afraid of the Mohawks, let their prisoners go. Four men were soon after
killed at North Hill, June 13.
one of whom was Edward Colcott, whose death was much regretted.

More mischief being expected, and the eastern settlements needing assistance,
the government ordered two hundred Indians of Natick, with forty English
soldiers, under Captain Benjamin Swett of Hampton, and Lieutenant Richardson,
to march to the falls of Taconick on Kennebeck river; where it was said the
Indians had six forts, well furnished with ammunition. The vessels came to an
anchor off Black Point; July.
where the captain being informed that some Indians had been seen, went on
shore with a party; and being joined by some of the inhabitants, so as to make
about ninety in all, marched to seek the enemy; who showed themselves on a
plain in three parties. Swett divided his men accordingly, and went to meet
them. The enemy retreated till they had drawn our people two miles from the
fort, and then turning suddenly and violently upon them, threw them into
confusion, they being mostly young and unexperienced soldiers. Swett, with a
few of the more resolute, fought bravely on the retreat, till he came near the
fort, when he was killed; MS Letter of Mr. Gookin of Hampton.
sixty more were left dead or wounded, and the rest got into the fort. The
victorious savages then surprised about twenty fishing vessels, which put into
the eastern harbors by night; the crews, not being apprehensive of danger on
the water, fell an easy prey to them. Thus the summer was spent with terror and
perplexity on our part; Hubbard MS Hist.
while the enemy rioted without control, till they had satiated their
vengeance, and greatly reduced the eastern settlements.

At length, in the month of August, Major Androsse, governor of New York, sent
a sloop with some forces to take possession of the land which had been granted
to the Duke of York, and build a fort at Pemaquid, to defend the country
against the encroachment of foreigners. Upon their arrival the Indians appeared
friendly; and in evidence of their pacific disposition, restored fifteen
prisoners with the fishing vessels. They continued quiet all the succeeding
autumn and winter, and lived in harmony with the new garrison.

In the spring, Major Shapleigh of Kittery, 1678.
Captain Champernoon and Mr. Friar of Portsmouth, were appointed commissioners
to settle a formal treaty of peace with Squando and the other chiefs, MS
Journal, April 1^.
which was done at Casco, whither they brought the remainder of the captives.
It was stipulated in the treaty, that the inhabitants should return to their
deserted settlements, on condition of paying one pe^k of corn annually for each
family, by way of acknowledgment to the Indians for the possession of their
lands, and one bushel for Major Pendleton, who was a great proprietor. Thus an
end was put to a tedious and distressing war, which had subsisted three years.
The terms of peace were disgraceful, but not unjust, considering the former
irregular conduct of many of the eastern settlers, and the native propriety of
the Indians in the soil: Certainly they were now masters of it; and it was
entirely at their option, whether the English should return to their
habitations or not. It was therefore thought better to live peaceably, though
in a sort of subjection, than to leave such commodious settlements and forego
the advantages of trade and fishery, which were very considerable, and by which
the inhabitants of that part of the country had chiefly subsisted.

It was a matter of great enquiry and speculation how the Indians were supplied
with arms and ammunition to carry on this war. Hubbard's printed Narrative, p.
82.
The Dutch at New York were too near the Mohawks for the eastern Indians to
adventure thither. The French in Canada were too feeble, and too much in fear
of the English, to do any thing which might disturb the tranquillity; and there
was peace between the two nations. It was therefore supposed that the Indians
had long premeditated the war, and laid in a stock beforehand. There had
formerly been severe penalties exacted by the government, on the selling of
arms and ammunition to the Indians; but ever since 1657, licenses had been
granted to particular persons to supply them occasionally for the purpose of
hunting, on paying an acknowledgment to the public treasury. This indulgence,
having been much abused by some of the eastern traders, who, far from the seat
of government, Randolph's Narrative in Hutch. col. papers, p. 492.
were impatient of the restraint of law, was supposed to be the source of the
mischief. But it was afterward discovered that the Baron de St. Castine, a
reduced French officer, who had married a daughter of Madokawando, and kept a
trading house at Penobscot, where he considered himself as independent, being
out of the limits of any established government, was the person from whom they
had their supplies; which needed not to be very great as they always husbanded
their ammunition with much care, and never expended it but when they were
certain of doing execution. Ibid, p. 562.


The whole burden and expense of this war, on the part of the colonies, were
borne by themselves. It was indeed thought strange by their friends in England,
and resented by those in power, that they made no application to the king for
assistance. It was intimated to them by Lord Anglesey that his majesty was
ready to assist them with ships, Hutchin. Hist. vol. 1. p. 309.
troops, ammunition or money, if they would but ask it; and their silence was
construed to their disadvantage, as if they were proud, and obstinate, and
desired to be considered as an independent state. They had indeed no
inclination to ask favors from thence; being well aware of the consequence of
laying themselves under obligations to those who had been seeking to undermine
their establishment; and remembering how they had been neglected in the late
Dutch wars, when they stood in much greater need of assistance: The king had
then sent ammunition to New York, but had sent word to New England, Hutch. col.
pap. p. 506.
that they must shift for themselves and make the best defense they could. It
was therefore highly injurious to blame them for not making application for
help. But if ^^ey had not been so ill treated, they could ^ot be charged with
disrespect, since they really did not need foreign assistance. Ships of war and
regular troops must have been altogether useless; and no one that knew the
nature of an Indian war could be serious in proposing to send them. Ammunition
and money were necessary, but as they had long enjoyed a free trade, and had
coined the bullion which they imported, there was no scarcity of money, nor of
any stores which money could purchase. The method of fighting with Indians
could be learned only from themselves: After a little experience, few men in
scattered parties were of more service than the largest and best equipped
armies which Europe could have afforded. It ought ever to be remembered for the
honor of New England, that as their first settlement, so their preservation,
increase, and defense, even in their weakest infancy were not owing to any
foreign assistance, but under God, to their own magnanimity and perseverance.

Our gravest historians have recorded many omens, predictions, and other
alarming circumstances, during this and the Pequod war, which in a more
philosophical and less credulous age would not be worthy of notice. When men's
minds were rendered gloomy by the horrors of a surrounding wilderness, and the
continual apprehension of danger from its savage inhabitants; when they were
ignorant of the causes of many of the common appearances in nature, and were
disposed to resolve every unusual appearance into prodigy and miracle, it is
not to be wondered that they should imagine they heard the noise of drums and
guns in the air, and saw flaming swords and spears in the heavens, and should
even interpret eclipses as ominous. Some old Indians had intimated their
apprehensions concerning the increase of the English, and the diminution of
their own people, which any rational observer in a course of forty or fifty
years might easily have foretold, without the least pretense to a spirit of
prophecy; yet these sayings were recollected, and recorded, as so many
predictions by force of a supernatural impulse on their minds, and many persons
of the greatest distinction were disposed to credit them as such. These things
would not have been mentioned, but to give a just idea of the age: If mankind
are now better enlightened, superstition is the less excuseable in its
remaining votaries.

CHAP. VI. Mason's renewed efforts. Randolph's mission and transactions.
Attempts for the trial of Mason's title. New Hampshire separated from
Massachusetts, and made a royal province. Abstract of the commission. Remarks
on it.
WHILE the country was laboring under the perplexity and distress arising from
the war, 1675.
measures were taking in England to increase their difficulties and divide
their attention. The scheme of selling the provinces of New Hampshire and Maine
to the crown being laid aside, Mason again petitioned the king for the
restoration of his property; and the king referred the matter to his attorney
general Sir William Jones, and his solicitor general Sir Francis Winnington,
who reported that John Mason, esquire. grandfather to the petitioner, May 17.
by virtue of several grants from the council of New England under their common
seal was instated in fee in sundry great tracts of land in New England, by the
name of New Hampshire; MS Copy in Superior Court files.
and that the peti^ioner being heir at law to the said John had a good and
legal title to said lands. 1676. March 10.
Whereupon a letter was dispatched to the Massachusetts colony, requiring them
to send over agents within six months, fully empowered to answer the
complaints, which Mason and the heirs of Gorges had made, of their usurping
jurisdiction over the territories claimed by them; and to receive the royal
determination in that matter. Copies of the complaints were enclosed; and
Edward Randolph, a kinsman of Mason, a man of great address and penetration,
resolute and indefatigable in business, was charged with the letters, and
directed by the Lords of Trade to make enquiry into the state of the country.
When he arrived, June 10.
he waited on Governor Leverett, who read the king's letter with the petitions
of Mason and Gorges in council, Randolph being present, Hutchin col. pap. (...)
504.
who could obtain no other answer than that "they would consider it."

He then came into New Hampshire, and as he passed along, July.
freely declared the business on which he was come, and publicly read a letter
which Mason had sent to the inhabitants. Some of them he found ready to
complain of the government, and desirous of a change; but the body of the
people were highly enraged against him; and the inhabitants of Dover in public
town-meeting protested against the claim of Mason; declared that they had bona
fide purchased their lands of the Indians; recognized their subjection to the
government of Massachusetts, under whom they had lived long and happily, and by
whom they were now assisted in defending their estates and families against the
savage enemy. They appointed Major Waldron to petition the king in their
behalf, that he would interpose his royal authority and afford them his wonted
favor; that they might not be disturbed by Mason, or any other person, but
continue peaceably in possession of their rights under the government of
Massachusetts. ^over Re^ords.
A similar petition was sent by the inhabitants of Portsmouth, who appointed
John Cutts and Richard Martyn, Portsmou. Records, ^ept. 1.
esqrs. Captains Daniel and Stileman to draught and forward it.

When Randolph returned to Boston, he had a severe reproof from the governor,
for publishing his errand, and endeavoring to raise discontent among the
people. To which he made no other answer than that if he had done amiss,
Hutchin. ^ol. pap. ^. 510.
they might complain to the king.

After about six weeks stay, he went back to England and reported to the king,
that he had found the whole country complaining of the usurpation of the
magistrates of Boston; earnestly hoping and expecting that his majesty would
not permit them any longer to be oppressed; but would give them relief
according to the promises of the commissioners in 1665. With the same
bitterness of temper, and in the same strain of misrepresentation, he inveighed
against the government in a long report to the Lords of Trade; which farther
inflamed the prejudice that had long been conceived against the colony, and
prepared the way for the separation which was meditated.

After his departure, a special council being summoned, at which the elders of
the churches were present, the question was proposed to them whether the best
way of making answer to the complaints of Gorges and Mason about the extent of
their patent, be by sending agents, or by writing only? To which they answered,
That it was most expedient to send agents, to answer by way of information,
provided they were instructed with much care and caution to negociate the
affair with safety to the country, and loyalty to his majesty, in the
preservation of their patent liberties. Accordingly William Stoughton,
afterward lieutenant governor, and Peter Bulkley then speaker of the house of
deputies, Hutchin. Hist. vol. 1. p. 311.
were appointed agents and sailed for England.

At their arrival an hearing was ordered before the lords chief justices of the
king's bench and common pleas; 1677.
when the agents in the name of the colony disclaimed all title to the lands
claimed by the petitioner, Narrative of Allen's Title, p. 5.
and to the jurisdiction beyond three miles northward of the river Merrimack,
to follow the course of the river, so far as it extended. The judges reported
to the king that they could give no opinion as to the right of soil, in the
provinces of New Hampshire and Maine, not having the proper parties before
them; it appearing that not the Massachusetts colony, but the ter-tenants had
the right of soil, and whole benefit thereof, and yet were not summoned to
defend their titles. As to Mason's right of government within the soil he
claimed, their lordships, and indeed his own counsel, agreed he had none; the
great council of Plymouth, under whom he claimed, having no power to transfer
government to any. It was determined that the four towns of Portsmouth,
Hutchin. col. 1. p. ^17.
Dover, Exeter and Hampton were out of the bounds of Massachusetts. This report
was accepted and confirmed by the king in council.

After this, at the request of the agents, Sir William Jones the attorney
general drew up a complete state of the case to be transmitted to the colony;
1679. Sept. 18.
by which it seems that he had altered his opinion since the report which he
gave to the king in 1675, Hutch. vol. 1. p. 317.
concerning the validity of Mason's title. It was also admitted that the title
could be tried only on the place, there being no court in England that had
cognizance of it.

It became necessary then to the establishment of Mason's title, that a new
jurisdiction should be erected, in which the king might direct the mode of
trial and appeal at his pleasure: This being resolved upon, the colony of
Massachusetts was informed, by a letter from the secretary of state, July 24.
of the king's intention to separate New Hampshire from their government,
Hutchin. col. pap. 522.
and required to revoke all commissions which they had granted there, and which
were hereby declared to be null and void. To prevent any extravagant demand,
the king obliged the claimant to declare, under his hand and seal, that he
would require no rents of the inhabitants for the time passed, before the
twenty fourth of June 1679, nor molest any in their possessions for the time to
come; but would make out titles to them and their heirs forever, provided they
would pay him sixpence in the pound, according to the yearly value of all
houses which they had built and lands which they had improved.

Things being thus prepared, a commission passed the great seal on the
eighteenth of September for the government of New Hampshire; Commission.
which inhibits and restrains the jurisdiction exercised by the colony of
Massachusetts over the towns of Portsmouth, Dover, Exeter and Hampton, and all
other lands extending from three miles to the northward of the river Merrimack
and of any and every part thereof, to the province of Maine; constitutes a
president and council to govern the province; appoints John Cutts, esquire.
president, to continue one year and till another be appointed by the same
authority; Richard Martyn, William Vaughan, and Thomas Daniel of Portsmouth,
John Gilman of Exeter, Christopher Hussy of Hampton and Richard Waldron of
Dover, esquires, to be of the council, who were authorized to choose three
other qualified persons out of the several parts of the province to be added to
them. The said president and every succeeding one to appoint a deputy to
preside in his absence; the president or his deputy with any five to be a
quorum. They were to meet at Portsmouth in twenty days after the arrival of the
commission and publish it. They were constituted a court of record for the
administration of justice, according to the laws of England, so far as
circumstances would permit; reserving a right of appeal to the king in council
for actions of fifty pounds value. They were empowered to appoint military
officers, and take all needful measures for defense against enemies. Liberty of
conscience was allowed to all protestants, those of the church of England to be
particularly encouraged. For the support of government they were to continue
the present taxes, till an assembly could be called; to which end they were
within three months to issue writs under the province seal, for calling an
assembly, to whom the president should recommend the passing such laws as
should establish their allegiance, good order and defense, and the raising
taxes in such manner and proportion as they should see fit. All laws to be
approved by the president and council, and then to remain in force till the
king's pleasure should be known, for which purpose they should be sent to
England by the first ships. In case of the president's death, his deputy to
succeed, and on the death of a counselor, the remainder to elect another, and
send over his name, with the names of two other meet persons, that the king
might appoint one of the three. The king engaged for himself and successors to
continue the privilege of an assembly, in the same manner and form, unless by
inconvenience arising therefrom he or his heirs should see cause to alter the
same. If any of the inhabitants should refuse to agree with Mason or his
agents, on the terms before mentioned, the president and council were directed
to reconcile the difference, or send the case stated in writing with their own
opinions, to the king, that he with his privy council might determine it
according to equity.

The form of government described in this commission considered abstractedly
from the immediate intentions, characters, and connexions of the persons
concerned, appears to be of as simple a kind as the nature of a subordinate
government and the liberty of the subject can admit. The people, who are the
natural and original source of power, had a representation in a body chosen by
themselves; and the king was represented by a president and council of his own
appointment, each had the right of instructing their representative, and the
king had the superior prerogative of disannulling the acts of the whole at his
pleasure. The principal blemish in the commission was the right claimed by the
king of discontinuing the representation of the people, whenever he should find
it inconvenient, after he had solemnly engaged to continue this privilege. The
clause, indeed, is artfully worded, and might be construed to imply more or
less at pleasure. Herein Charles was consistent with himself, parliaments being
his aversion. However, there was in this plan as much of the spirit of the
British constitution as there could be any foundation for in such a colony; for
here was no third branch to form a balance between the king or his
representative, and the people. The institution of an house of peers in Britain
was the result of the feudal system: the barons being lords of the soil and
enjoying a sovereignty within their own territories and over their own vassals;
the constitution was formed by the union of these distinct estates under one
common sovereign. But there was nothing similar to this in New England. The
settlements began here by an equal division of property among independent
freemen. Lordship and vassalage were held in abhorrence. The yeomanry were the
proprietors of the soil and the natural defenders of their own rights and
property; and they knew no superior but the king. A council, whether appointed
by him or chosen by the people could not form a distinct body, because they
could not be independent. Had such a simple form of colony government been more
generally adopted, and perseveringly adhered to, and administered only by the
most delicate hands, it might have served better than any other, to perpetuate
the dependence of the colonies on the British crown.

CHAP. VII. The administration of the first council. Opposition to the acts of
trade. Mason's arrival. Opposition to him. His departure. State of trade and
navigation.
THE commission was brought to Portsmouth on the first of January by Edward
Randolph, 1680.
Council Rec.
than whom there could not be a more unwelcome messenger. It was received with
great reluctance by the gentlemen therein named; who, Fitch's MS.
though they were of the first character, interest and influence, and had
sustained the principal offices civil and military under the colony government
The president JOHN CUTTS was a principal merchant, of great probity and esteem
in Portsmouth; but now aged and infirm.

Richard Martyn, was of good character, and great influence. He had been very
active in procuring the settlement of a minister in the town of Portsmouth.

William Vaughan, was a wealthy merchant, generous and public spirited, and of
undaunted resolution. He was of Welsh extraction, but was bred in London under
Sir Jos^ah Child, who had a great regard for him, and whose interest he made
use of for the good of the province.

Thomas Daniel was a person of such note and importance, that when he died in a
time of general sickness and mortality, Mr. Moody preached his funeral sermon
from 2 Samuel ii.30. There lacked of David's servants, nineteen men and Afabel.
(Fitch's MS.)

John Gilman was a principal man in Exeter, as was Christopher Hussy, in
Hampton.

Richard Waldron, was a native of Som^rsetshire, and one of the first settlers
in Dover. He was much respected and eminently useful, having sustained diverse
important offices civil and military, and approved his courage and fidelity in
the most hazardous enterprises.


; yet easily saw that their appointment was not from any respect to them or
favor to the people; but merely to obtain a more easy introduction to a new
form of government, for a particular purpose, which they knew would be a source
of perplexity and distress. They would gladly have declined acting in their new
capacity; but considering the temper of the government in England, the
unavoidable necessity of submitting to the change, and the danger (upon their
refusal) of others being appointed who would be inimical to the country, they
agreed to qualify themselves, determining to do what good, and keep off what
harm they were able. Council Rec.
They therefore published the commission, and took the oaths on the twenty
second day of January, which was beyond the utmost time limited in the
commission. Agreeably to the royal direction they chose three other gentlemen
into the council; Elias Stileman of Great Island, who had been a clerk in the
county courts, whom they now appointed secretary, Samuel Dalton of Hampton and
Job Clements of Dover. The president nominated Waldron to be his deputy or vice
president, Martyn was appointed treasurer, and John Roberts, marshal.

This change of government gratified the discontented few, but was greatly
disrelished by the people in general; as they saw themselves deprived of the
privilege of choosing their own rulers, which was still enjoyed by the other
colonies of New England, and as they expected an invasion of their property
soon to follow.

When writs were issued for calling a general assembly the persons in each town
who were judged qualified to vote were named in the writs The number of
qualified voters in each town was, In Portsmouth 71 Dover 61 Hampton 57 Exeter
20 209

; and the oath of allegiance was administered to each voter. A public fast was
observed, Febru. 26.
to ask the divine blessing on the approaching assembly and the continuance of
their precious and pleasant things. The assembly The deputies in this first
assembly were, For Portsmouth.
Robert Eliot, Philip Lewis, John Pickering.
Dover.
Peter Coffin, Anthony Nutter, Richard Waldron, jun.
Hampton.
Anthony Stanyon, Thomas Marston, Edward Gove.
Exeter.
Bartholomew Tippin, Ralph Hall.

met at Portsmouth on the sixteenth of March, and was opened with prayer and a
sermon by Mr. Moody.

To express their genuine sentiments of the present change, and invalidate the
false reports which had been raised against them, as well as to show their
gratitude and respect to their former protectors, they wrote to the general
court at Boston acknowledging the kindness of that colony in taking them under
their protection and ruling them well; assuring them, that it was not any
dissatisfaction with their government, but merely their submission to divine
providence and his majesty's commands, without any seeking of their own, which
induced them to comply with the present separation, which they should have been
glad had never taken place; signifying their desire that a mutual
correspondence might be continued for defense against the common enemy, and
offering their service when it should be necessary This letter fully shows the
absurdity of the reason assigned by Douglas in his Summary, vol. II. page 28,
for the erecting this new government. The proprietors and inhabitants of
New Hampshire not capable of protecting themselves against the Canada French
and their Indians, desired of the crown to take them under its immediate
protection. A random assertion, unsupported by any proof, and contrary to plain
fact! The crown could afford them no pro^^ction against Indians. With the
French the crown was in alliance, and the nation was at peace.
. Council Records.


Their next care was to frame a code of laws, of which the first, conceived in
a style becoming freemen, was that no act, imposition, law or ordinance should
be made or imposed upon them, but such as should be made by the assembly and
approved by the president and council. Idolatry, blasphemy, treason, rebellion,
wilful murder, manslaughter, poisoning, witchcraft, sodomy, bestiality,
perjury, man-stealing, cursing and rebelling against parents, rape and arson
were made capital crimes. The other penal laws were in their main principles
the same which are now in force. To prevent contentions that might arise by
reason of the late change of government, all townships and grants of land were
confirmed, and ordered to remain as before; and controversies about the titles
of land were to be determined by juries chosen by the several towns, according
to former custom. The president and council with the assembly were a supreme
court of judicature, with a jury when desired by the parties; and three
inferior courts were constituted at Dover, Hampton and Portsmouth. The military
arrangement was, MS Law.
one foot company in each town, one company of artillery at the fort, and one
troop of horse, all under the command of Major Waldron. During this
administration, things went on as nearly as possible in the old channel, and
with the same spirit, as before the separation. A jealous watch was kept over
their rights and privileges, and every encroachment upon them was withstood to
the utmost. The duties and restrictions established by the acts of trade and
navigation were universally disgustful, and the more so as Randolph was
appointed collector, surveyor and searcher of the customs throughout
New England. In the execution of his commission he seized a ketch belonging to
Portsmouth, but bound from Maryland to Ireland, which had put into this port
for a few days. The master Mark Hunking, March 23.
brought an action against him at a special court before the president and
council, and recovered damages and costs to the amount of thirteen pounds.
Randolph behaved on this occasion with such insolence, that the council obliged
him publicly to acknowledge his offense and ask their pardon. Council Records
and Files.
He appealed from their judgment to the king; but what the issue was does not
appear. Having constituted Captain Walter Barefoote his deputy at this port, an
advertisement was published requiring that all vessels should be entered and
cleared with him. Upon which Barefoote was brought to examination, and
afterward indicted before the president and council, for, having in an high and
presumptuous manner set up his majesty's office of customs without leave from
the president and council; March 25.
in contempt of his majesty's authority in this place; for disturbing and
obstructing his majesty's subjects in passing from harbor to harbor, and town
to town; and for his insolence in making no other answer to any question
propounded to him but "my name is Walter." He was sentenced to pay a fine of
ten pounds, and stand committed till it was paid. But though Randolph's
authority was denied, yet they made an order of their own for the observation
of the acts of trade, and appointed officers of their own to see them executed.
They had been long under the Massachusetts government, and learned their
political principles from them; and as they had been used to think that all
royal authority flowed in the channel of the charter, so they now thought that
no authority derived from the crown could be regularly exercised in the
province but through their commission. In this they reasoned agreeably not only
to their former principles, but to their fundamental law, to which they
steadily adhered, though they had no reason to think it would be allowed by the
crown; and though they knew that a rigid adherence to rights, however clear and
sacred, was not the way to recommend themselves to royal favor. But they were
not singular in these sentiments, nor in their opposition to the laws of trade.
Randolph was equally hated, and his commission neglected at Boston; where the
notary refused to enter his protest against the proceedings of the court; MSS
in files.
and he was obliged to post it on the exchange.

In the latter end of the year Mason arrived from England with a mandamus,
requiring the council to admit him to a seat at the board, Dec. 30.
1681.
which was accordingly done. He soon entered on the business he came about;
endeavoring to persuade some of the people to take leases of him, threatening
others if they did not, forbidding them to cut firewood and timber, asserting
his right to the province and assuming the title of lord-proprietor. His
agents, or stewards as they were called, had rendered themselves obnoxious by
demanding rents of several persons and threatening to sell their houses for
payment. These proceedings raised a general uneasiness; and petitions were sent
from each town, as well as from diverse individuals, to the council for
protection; who, taking up the matter judicially, published an order,
prohibiting Mason or his agents at their peril to repeat such irregular
proceedings, and declaring their intention to transmit the grievances and
complaints of the people to the king. Upon this, Mason would no longer sit in
council, though desired, nor appear when sent for; when they threatened to deal
with him as an offender, he threatened to appeal to the king, and published a
summons to the president and several members of the council, and others to
appear before his majesty in three months. This was deemed an usurpation over
his majesty's authority here established, and a warrant was issued for
apprehending him; but he got out of their reach and went to England.

During these transactions President Cutts died, March 27. April 5.
and Major Waldron succeeded him, appointing Captain Stileman for his deputy,
who had quitted his place of secretary upon the appointment of Richard
Chamberlayne to that office by royal commission. Dec. 30. 1680.
The vacancy made in the council by the president's death was filled by Richard
Waldron, junior. On the death of Dalton, Anthony Nutter was chosen. Henry Dow
was appointed marshal in the room of Roberts who resigned.

During the remainder of the council's administration, 1682.
the common business went on in the usual manner, and nothing remarkable is
mentioned, excepting another prosecution of Barefoote, with his assistants,
William Haskins and Thomas Thurton for seizing a vessel under pretense of his
majesty's name, March 10.
without the knowledge of the authority of the province, and without showing
any breach of statute though demanded. Barefoote pleaded his deputation from
Randolph; but he was amerced twenty pounds to be respited during his good
behavior, and his two assistants five pounds each; the complainant being left
to the law for his damages. This affair was carried by appeal to the king: but
the issue is not mentioned.

It will be proper to close the account of this administration with a view of
the state of the province as to its trade, improvements and defense, from a
representation thereof made by the council to the lords of trade, pursuant to
their order.

"The trade of the province (say they) is in masts, planks, boards and staves
and all other lumber, which at present is of little value in other plantations,
to which they are transported; so that we see no other way for the advantage of
the trade, unless his majesty please to make our river a free port.

"Importation by strangers is of little value; ships commonly selling their
cargoes in other governments, and if they come here, usually come empty to fill
with lumber: but if happily they are at any time loaded with fish, it is brought
from other ports, there being none made in our province, nor likely to be,
until his majesty please to make the south part of the Isles of Shoals part of
this government, they not being at present under any When these islands were
first settled is uncertain, but it must have been very early, as they are most
commodiously situated for the fishery, which was a principal object with the
first settlers. Whilst New Hampshire was united to Massachusetts, they were
under* the same jurisdiction, and the town there erected was called Appledore.
[Mass. Rec.] They are not named in Cutts's nor Cranfield's commission; but
under Dudley's presidency, causes were brought from thence to Portsmouth, which
is said to be in the same county. In Allen's and all succeeding commissions,
they are particularly mentioned; the south half of them being in New Hampshire.
.

"In reference to the improvement of lands by tillage, our soil is generally so
barren, and the winters so extreme cold and long that there is not provision
enough raised to supply the inhabitants, many of whom were in the late Indian
war so impoverished, their houses and estates being destroyed, and they and
others remaining still so incapacitated for the improvement of the land,
(several of the youth being killed also) that they even groan under the tax or
rate, assessed for that service, which is, great part of it, unpaid to this day
Taxes were commonly paid in lumber or provisions at stated prices; and whoever
paid them in money was abated one third part. The prices in 1680, were as
follows.

Merchantable white pine boards per m 30 s. White Oak pipe staves per ditto 3
L. Red Oak ditto per ditto 30 s. Red Oak Hhd. ditto per ditto 25 s. Indian Corn
per bushel 3 s. Wheat per ditto 5 s. Malt per ditto 4 s.
N. B. Silver was 6 s. and 3 d. per oz.


.

"There is at the Great Island in Portsmouth, at the harbour's mouth, a fort
well enough situated, but for the present too weak and insufficient for the
defense of the place; the guns being eleven in number are small, none exceeding
a sacre [six pounder] nor above twenty one hundred weight, and the people too
poor to make defense suitable to the occasion that may happen for the fort.

"These guns were brought, and the fortification erected, at the proper charge
of the towns of Dover and Portsmouth, at the beginning of the first Dutch war,
about the year 1665, in obedience to his majesty's command in his letter to the
government under which this province then was.

There are five guns more lying at the upper part of Portsmouth, purchased by
private persons, for their security and defense against the Indians in the late
war with them, and whereof the owners may dispose at their pleasure. To supply
the foresaid defect and weakness of the guns and fort, we humbly supplicate his
majesty to send us such guns as shall be more serviceable, with powder and
shot.

By an account of the entries in the port annexed to the above, it appears,
that from the fifteenth of June 1680, to the twelfth of April 1681, were
entered, twenty two ships, eighteen ketches, two barks, Council Records.
three pinks, one shallop and one fly-boat; in all forty seven.

CHAP. VIII. The administration of Cranfield. Violent measures. Insurrection,
trial and imprisonment of Gove, Mason's suits. Vaughan's imprisonment.
Prosecution of Moody and his imprisonment. Arbitrary proceedings. Complaints.
Tumults. Weare's agency in England. Cranfield's removal. Barefoot's
administration.
EXPERIENCE having now convinced Mason, 1682.
that the government which he had procured to be erected, was not likely to be
administered in a manner favorable to his views, he made it his business, on
his return to England, to solicit a change; in consequence of which it was
determined to commission Edward Cranfield, esquire. lieutenant governor and
commander in chief of New Hampshire. By a deed enrolled in the court of
chancery, Mason surrendered to the king one fifth part of the quit-rents, Jan.
25.
which had or should become due: These with the fines and forfeitures which had
accrued to the crown since the establishment of the province, and which should
afterward arise, were appropriated to the support of the governor. But this
being deemed too precarious a foundation, Mason by another deed mortgaged the
whole province to Cranfield, for twenty-one years, MS in the ^^les.
as security for the payment of one hundred and fifty pounds per annum, for the
space of seven years. On this encouragement Cranfield relinquished a profitable
office at home, Fitch's MS.
with the view of bettering his fortune here.

By the commission, which bears date the ninth of May, the governor was
empowered to call, adjourn, prorogue and dissolve general courts; to have a
negative voice in all acts of government; to suspend any of the council when he
should see just cause (and every counselor so suspended was declared incapable
of being elected into the general assembly;) to appoint a deputy governor,
judges, justices, and other officers, by his sole authority; and to execute the
powers of vice admiral. The case of Mason was recited nearly in the same words
as in the former commission, and the same directions were given to the governor
to reconcile differences, or send cases fairly stated to the king in council,
for his decision. The counselors named in this commission were Mason, who is
styled proprietor, Waldron, Daniel, Vaughan, Martyn, Gilman, Stileman and
Clements: These were of the former council, and to them were added Walter
Barefoote and Richard Chamberlayne.

Cranfield arrived and published his commission on the fourth of October,
Council Records.
and within six days Waldron and Martyn were suspended from the council, on
certain articles exhibited against them by Mason. This early specimen of the
exercise of power must have been intended as a public affront to them, in
revenge for their former spirited conduct; otherwise their names might have
been left out of the commission when it was drawn.

The people now plainly saw the dangerous designs formed against them. The
negative voice of a governor, his right of suspending counselors, and
appointing officers by his own authority, were wholly unprecedented in
New England; and they had the singular mortification to see the crown not only
appointing two branches of their legislature, but claiming a negative on the
election of their representatives, in a particular case, which might sometimes
be essentially necessary to their own security. They well knew that the sole
design of these novel and extraordinary powers was to facilitate the entry of
the claimant on the lands which some of them held by virtue of grants from the
same authority, and which had all been fairly purchased of the Indians; a right
which they believed to be of more validity than any other. Having by their own
labor and expense subdued a rough wilderness, defended their families and
estates against the savage enemy, without the least assistance from the
claimant, and held possession for above fifty years; they now thought it hard
and cruel, that when they had just recovered from the horrors of a bloody war,
they should have their liberty abridged, and their property demanded, to
satisfy a claim which was at best disputable and in their opinion groundless.
On the other hand it was deemed unjust, that grants made under the royal
authority should be disregarded; and that so great a sum as had been expended
by the ancestor of the claimant, to promote the settlement of the country,
should be entirely lost to him; Mason's Will.
especially as he had foregone some just claims on the estate as a condition of
inheritance. Had the inhabitants by any fraudulent means impeded the designs of
the original grantee, or embezzled his interest, there might have been a just
demand for damages; but the unsuccessfulness of that adventure was to be sought
for in its own impracticability; or the negligence, inability or inexperience
of those into whose hands the management of it fell after Captain Mason's
death, and during the minority of his successor.

An assembly, being summoned, met on the fourteenth of November; with whose
concurrence a new body of laws was enacted, in some respects different from the
former; the fundamental law being omitted and an alteration made in the
appointment of jurors, which was now ordered to be done by the sheriff, MS Laws.
after the custom in England.

Vaughan's Journal.
Cranfield, who made no secret of his intention to enrich himself by accepting
the government, on the first day of the assembly restored Waldron and Martyn to
their places in the council; having, as he said, examined the allegations
against them and found them insufficient. Council Rec.
In return for this show of complaisance, and taking advantage of his needy
situation, the assembly having ordered an assessment of five hundred pounds,
appropriated one half of it as a present to the governor; hoping hereby to
detach him from Mason, who they knew could never comply with his engagements to
him. Prefering a certainty to an uncertainty, he passed the bill, though it was
not presented to him till after he had given order for adjourning the court,
December. 1.
and after Mason, MSS in the Files.
Barefoote and Chamberlayne were withdrawn from the council.

This appearance of good humor was but short-lived; 1683. Jan. 20.
for at the next session of the assembly, the governor and council having
tendered them a bill for the support of government, which they did not approve,
and they having offered him several bills which he said were contrary to law,
he dissolved them; having previously suspended Stileman from the council and
dismissed him from the command of the fort; for suffering a vessel under
seizure to go out of the harbor. Council Rec.
Barefoote was made captain of the fort in his room.

The dissolution of the Assembly, a thing before unknown, aggravated the
popular discontent, and kindled the resentment of some rash persons in Hampton
and Exeter; who, headed by Edward Gove, a member of the dissolved assembly,
declared by sound of trumpet for "liberty and "reformation." There had been a
town meeting at Hampton, when a new clerk was chosen and their records secured.
Gove went from town to town proclaiming what had been done at Hampton, carrying
his arms, declaring that the governor was a traitor and had exceeded his
commission, and that he would not lay down his arms till matters were set
right, and endeavoring to excite the principal men in the province to join in
a confederacy to overturn the government. His project appeared to them so wild
and dangerous, that they not only disapproved it, but informed against him and
assisted in apprehending him. Hearing of their design he collected his company,
and appeared in arms; but on the persuasion of some of his friends he
surrendered. A special court was immediately commissioned for his trial, of
which Major Waldron sat as judge, with William Vaughan and Thomas Daniel
assistants. The grand jury presented a bill in which Edward Gove, John Gove,
his son, and William Hely, of Hampton; Joseph, John and Robert Wadleigh, three
brothers, Thomas Rawlins, Mark Baker and John Sleeper, of Exeter, were charged
with high treason. Gove, who behaved with great insolence before the court, and
pretended to justify what he had done, was convicted and received sentence of
death in the usual hideous form; Feb. 2.
and his estate was seized, as forfeited to the crown. Records of ^pecial
Courts.
The others were convicted of being accomplices, and respited. The king's
pleasure being signified to the governor that he should pardon such as he
judged objects of mercy; they were all set at liberty but Gove, who was sent to
England, and imprisoned in the tower of London about three years. On his
repeated petitions to the king, and by the interest of Randolph with the Earl
of Clarendon, then lord chamberlain, he obtained his pardon and returned home
in 1686, with an order to the then president and council of New England to
restore his estate.

Gove in his petitions to the king pleaded "a distemper of mind" as the cause
of those actions for which he was prosecuted. Gove's Papers.
He also speaks in some of his private letters of a drinking match at his
house, and that he had not slept for twelve days and nights, about that time.
When these things are considered, it is not hard to account for his conduct.
From a letter which he wrote to the court whilst in prison, MS in files.
one would suppose him to have been disordered in his mind. His punishment was
by much too severe, and his trial was hurried on too fast, it being only six
days after the commission of his crime. Had he been indicted only for a riot
there would have been no difficulty in the proof, nor hardship in inflicting
the legal penalty. Waldron, it is said, shed tears when pronouncing the
sentence of death upon him.

On the fourteenth of February the governor, by advertisement, called upon the
inhabitants to take out leases from Mason within one month, otherwise he must,
pursuant to his instructions, certify the refusal to the king, that Mason might
be discharged of his obligation to grant them. Upon this summons and within the
time set, Major Waldron, John Wingett and Thomas Roberts, three of the
principal landholders in Dover, waited on the governor to know his pleasure,
who directed them to agree with Mason. They then retired into another room
where Mason was, and proposed to refer the matter to the governor, that he
might according to his commission, state the matter to the king for his
decision. This proposal Mason rejected, saying that unless they would own his
title, he would have nothing to do with them. Whilst they were in discourse the
governor came in and desired them to depart. Weare's MS.


This piece of conduct is difficult to be accounted for, it being directly in
the face of the commission. Had the method therein prescribed, and by these men
proposed, been adopted, it was natural to expect that the king, who had all
along favored Mason's pretensions, would have determined the case as much to
his wish as upon an appeal from a judicial court; besides, he had now the
fairest opportunity to have it decided in the shortest way, to which his
antagonists must have submitted, it being their own proposal. His refusal to
accede to it was a capital mistake, as it left both him and Cranfield exposed
to the charge of disobedience. But it afforded a powerful plea in behalf of the
people; whose confidence in the royal justice would have induced them to comply
with the directions in the commission. It being now impossible to have the
controversy thus decided they determined to hearken to none of his proposals.
As he generally met with opposition and contradiction he was induced to utter
many rash sayings in all companies. He threatened to seize the principal
estates, beggar their owners, and provoke them to rebellion by bringing a
frigate into the harbor and procuring soldiers to be quartered on the
inhabitants. Weare's MS.
These threats were so far from intimidating the people that they served the
more firmly to unite them in their determination not to submit; and each party
was now warm in their opposition and resentment.

The governor on some fresh pretense suspended Waldron, Martyn and Gilman from
the council. The deaths of Daniels and Clements made two other vacancies.
Vaughan held his seat the longest, but was at length thrust out for his
noncompliance with some arbitrary measures. So that the governor had it in his
power to model the council to his mind, which he did by appointing at various
times Nathanael Friar, Robert Eliot, John Hinckes, James Sherlock, Francis
Champernoon and Edward Randolph, esquires. The judicial courts were also filled
with officers proper for the intended business. Barefoote, the deputy governor,
was judge; Mason was chancellor; Chamberlayne was clerk and prothonotary;
Randolph was attorney general, Council Records.
and Sherlock provost marshal and sheriff. Some who had always been disaffected
to the country, and others who had been awed by threats or flattered by
promises took leases from Mason; and these served for under sheriffs, jurors,
evidences and other necessary persons.

Things being thus prepared, Mason began his lawsuits by a writ against Major
Waldron, (who had always distinguished himself in opposition to his claim) for
holding lands and felling timber to the amount of four thousand pounds. The
major appeared in court, and challenged every one of the jury as interested
persons, some of them having taken leases of Mason, and all of them living upon
the lands which he claimed. The judge then caused the oath of voire dire to be
administered to each juror, purporting that he was not concerned in the lands
in question, and that he should neither gain nor lose by the cause. Upon which
the major said aloud to the people present. That his was a leading case, and
that if he were cast they must all become tenants to Mason; and that all
persons in the province being interested, none of them could legally be of the
jury. MS in the files.
The cause however went on; but he made no defense, asserted no title, and gave
no evidence on his part. Judgment was given against him and at the next court
of sessions he was fined five pounds for "mutinous and seditious words."

Suits were then instituted against all the principal landholders in the
province, who, following Waldron's example, never made any defense. Some,
chiefly of Hampton, gave in writing their reasons for not joining issue; which
were, the refusal of Mason to comply with the directions in the commission; the
impropriety of a jury's determining what the king had expressly reserved to
himself; and the incompetency of the jury, they being all interested persons,
one of whom had said that he would spend his estate to make Mason's right good.
These reasons were irritating rather than convincing to the court. The jury
never hesitated in their verdicts. From seven to twelve causes were dispatched
in a day, and the costs were multiplied from five to twenty pounds. Executions
were issued, of which two or three only were levied; but Mason could neither
keep possession of the premises nor dispose of them by sale, MSS in files, and
Weare's MSS.
so that the owners still enjoyed them. Several threatened to appeal to the
king but Major Vaughan alone made the experiment.

A suit was also commenced against Martyn who had been treasurer, for the fines
and forfeitures received by him, during the former administration; and judgment
was recovered for seventy one pounds with costs. Martyn petitioned Mason as
chancellor, setting forth, that he had received and disposed of the money
according to the orders of the late president and council, and praying that the
whole burden might not lie upon him. A decree was then issued for the other
surviving members of the late council, and the heirs of those who were dead, to
bear their proportion. MSS in files.
This decree was afterward reversed by the king in council.

Cranfield with his council had now assumed the whole legislative power. They
prohibited vessels from Massachusetts to enter the port, because the acts of
trade were not observed in that colony: They fixed the dimensions of
merchantable lumber; altered the value of silver money, which had always passed
by weight at six shillings and eight-pence per ounce: and ordered that dollars
should be received at six shillings each, which was then a great hardship; as
many of them were greatly deficient in weight: They also changed the bounds of
townships; established fees of office* made regulations for the package of
fish, and ordered the constables to forbear collecting any town or parish taxes
till the province tax was paid, and the accounts settled with the treasurer.
Council Rec.


The public grievances having become insupportable, the people were driven to
the necessity of making a vigorous stand for their liberties. The only regular
way was by complaint to the king. Having privately communicated their
sentiments to each other, and raised money by subscription, they appointed
Nathaniel Wear, esquire. of Hampton their agent; and the four towns having drawn
and subscribed distinct petitions of the same tenor, Wear privately withdrew
to Boston from whence he sailed for England. Major Vaughan who accompanied him
to Boston, and was appointed to procure depositions to send after him, was upon
his return to Portsmouth, brought to an examination, treated with great
insolence and required to find sureties for his good behavior; MSS in Files.
which, having broken no law, he refused In this refusal he is countenanced by
the example of the great Seldom, and other members of parliament who were
imprisoned by order of Charles I. in 1629. Macaulay's Hist. Eng. 8vo. Vol. 2.
p. 72.
; and was by the governor's own warrant immediately committed to prison; where
he was kept nine months to the great damage of his health, and of his own as
well as the people's interest.

Amidst these multiplied oppressions, Cranfield was still disappointed of the
gains he had expected to reap from his office; 1684.
and found to his great mortification, that there was no way of supplying his
wants, but by application to the people, through an assembly. He had already
abused them so much that he could hope nothing from their favor; and was
therefore obliged to have recourse to artifice. On a vague rumor of a foreign
war, he pretended much concern for the preservation of the province from
invasion; and presuming that they would show the same concern for themselves,
he called an assembly at Great-Island where he resided, to whom he tendered a
bill, January 14.
which in a manner totally unparliamentary, had been drawn and passed by the
council, for raising money to defray the expense of repairing the fort, and
supplying it with ammunition, and for other necessary charges of government.
The house The members of the assembly were, For Portsmouth.
Richard Waldron, jun. speaker, Philip Lewis, John Pickering.
Dover.
John Gerrish, John Woodman, Anthony Nutter*
Hampton.
Anthony Stanyon, Joseph Smith, John Smith,
Exeter.
Robert Smart, Thomas Wiggen. (Court Records.)

debated a while, and adjourned for the night, and the tide serving, the
members went up to the town. In the morning they returned the bill with their
negative; at which the governor was highly enraged, and telling them that they
had been to consult with Moody, and other declared enemies of the king and
church of England, he dissolved them; and afterward by his influence with the
court of sessions, diverse of the members were made constables for the following
year. Court Rec. Vaughan's Journal.
Some of them took the oath, and others paid the fine which was ten pounds.
Thus by a mean and execrable revenge, he taxed those whom he could not persuade
to tax their constituents for his purposes.

But Moody was marked as an object of peculiar vengeance. He had for some time
rendered himself obnoxious by the freedom and plainness of his pulpit
discourses, and his strictness in administering the discipline of the church;
one instance of which merits particular notice. Randolph having seized a
vessel, she was in the night carried out of the harbor. The owner, who was a
member of the church, swore that he knew nothing of it; but upon trial there
appeared strong suspicions that he had perjured himself. He found means to make
up the matter with the governor and collector; but Moody, being concerned for
the purity of his church, requested of the governor copies of the evidence,
that the offender might be called to account in the way of ecclesiastical
discipline. Cranfield sternly refused, saying that he had forgiven him, and
that neither the church nor minister should meddle with him; and even
threatened Moody in case he should. Not intimidated, Moody consulted the church
and preached a sermon against false swearing; then the offender, Ports. Chh
Records.
being called to account was censured, and at length brought to a public
confession. This procedure extremely disgusted the governor who had no way then
in his power to show his resentment. But malice, ever fruitful in expedients to
attain its ends, suggested a method, which to the scandal of the English
nation, has been too often practiced. The penal laws against nonconformists
were at this time executing with great rigor in England; and Cranfield,
ambitious to ape his royal master, determined to play off the ecclesiastical
artillery here, the direction of which he supposed to be deputed to him with
his other powers. He had attempted to impose upon the people the observation of
the thirtieth of January as a fast, and to restrain them from manual labor at
Christmas; but his capital stroke was to issue an order in council that after
the first of January, the ministers should admit all persons of suitable years
and not vicious, to the Lord's supper, and their children to baptism; and that
if any person should desire baptism or the other sacrament to be administered
according to the liturgy of the church of England, it should be done, in
pursuance of the king's command to the colony of Massachusetts This command was
conceived in the following terms:

And since the principle and foundation of that charter was and is freedom and
liberty of conscience; We do hereby charge and require you that freedom and
liberty be duly admitted and allowed, so that they that desire to use the
book of common prayer and perform their devotion in that manner that is
established here be not denied the exercise thereof, or undergo any prejudice
or disadvantage thereby, King Charles's Letter in Hutchin. col. pap. p. 378.
they using their liberty peaceably without any disturbance to others; and that
all persons of good and honest lives and conversations be admitted to the
sacrament of the Lord's supper according to said book of common prayer, and
their children to baptism.

This command cannot consistently with the acknowledged principle and strict
limitation, be construed any other way, than that the use of the liturgy should
be permitted to such ministers and people as desired it. To compel ministers to
use it, and leave all others at liberty, was a construction that malice alone
could suggest.


; and any minister refusing so to do should suffer the penalty of the statutes
of uniformity.

The same week in which he dissolved the assembly, he signified to Moody in
writing, by the hands of the sheriff, that himself, with Mason and Hinckes,
intended to partake of the Lord's supper the next Sunday; requiring him to
administer it to them according to the liturgy; and, as they justly expected,
he at once denied them. The way was now opened for a prosecution; and the
attorney general Joseph Rayn, by the governor's order exhibited an information
at the next court of sessions, before Walter Barefoote judge, Feb. 5.
Nathanael Friar and Henry Green assistants, Peter Coffin, Thomas Edgerly and
Henry Robie justices, setting forth, that Joshua Moody clerk, being minister of
the town of Portsmouth within the dominions of King Charles, was by the duty of
his place and the laws of the realm, viz. the statutes of the fifth and sixth
of Edward VI, the first of Elizabeth, and the thirteenth and fourteenth of
Charles II, required to administer the Lord's supper in such form as was set
forth in the book of common prayer, and no other. But that the said Moody in
contempt of the laws had wilfully and obstinately refused to administer the
same to the Honorable Edward Cranfield, Robert Mason, and John Hinckes, MSS in
files.
and did obstinately use some other form. Moody in his defense pleaded that he
was not episcopally ordained as the statutes required; nor did he receive his
maintenance according to them; and therefore was not obliged to the performance
of what had been commanded; that the alleged statutes were not intended for
these plantations, the known and avowed end of their settlement being the
enjoyment of freedom from the imposition of those laws which freedom was
allowed and confirmed by the king, Ports. Chh. Records.
in the liberty of conscience granted to all protestants, in the governor's
commission. Vaughan's Journal.
Four of the justices, viz. Green, Robie, Edgerly and Friar were at first for
acquitting him; but the matter being adjourned till the next day, Cranfield
found means before morning to gain Robie and Green, who then joined with
Barefoote and Coffin, in sentencing him to six months imprisonment, without
bail or mainprize. The other two persisted in their former opinion, and were
soon after removed from all their offices. Moody was immediately ordered into
custody, without being permitted first to see his family; and he remained under
confinement, in company with Major Vaughan, at the house of Captain Stileman,
with liberty of the yard, for thirteen weeks; "his benefice" being declared
forfeited to the crown. The next week after Moody's trial, the governor in a
profane bravado sent word to Seaborn Cotton minister of Hampton, that when he
had prepared his soul, he would come and demand the sacrament of him as he had
done at Portsmouth. Vaughan's Journal.
Upon which Cotton withdrew to Boston. The minister of Dover, John Pike, was
(as far as I can find) unmolested. Exeter had then no settled minister.

During Moody's imprisonment, Cranfield would neither suffer him to go up to
the town to preach, nor the people to assemble at the island to hear, nor the
neighboring ministers to supply his place; only the family where he was
confined were permitted to be present with him at sabbath exercises. But whilst
the governor was absent on a tour to New York, Mason gave leave for opening the
meeting house twice, Vaughan's Journal.
when they obtained a minister t^ officiate; he also allowed both Moody and
Vaughan to make a short visit to their families. At length, by the
interposition of friends, Moody obtained a release, though under a strict
charge to preach no more within the province, on penalty of farther
imprisonment. He then accepted an invitation from the first church in Boston;
where being out of the reach of his persecutors, he was employed as a preacher,
and was so highly esteemed that upon the death of President Rogers he was
invited to take the oversight of the college, which he modestly declined,
Harvard College Records.
and continued his ministrations at Boston, frequently visiting his destitute
church at Portsmouth, at their private meetings, till 1692; when, the
government being in other hands, and the eastern country under trouble by the
Indians, at the earnest request of his people, Original MSS.
and by the advice of an ecclesiastical council, he returned to his charge at
Portsmouth, and spent the rest of his days there in usefulness, love, and peace
He died at Boston, being there on a visit, July 4, 169^, Aet. 65. Dr. Cotton
Mather preached his funeral sermon from Acts vi. 15. They saw his face as it
had been the face of an angel. Magnal^^, lib. 4. cap. 7.
.

Upon a calm review of this prosecution, one can hardly tell which is most
detestable, the vindictive temper which gave it birth; or the profaneness and
hypocrisy with which it was conducted. The pretended zeal of the prosecutors
was totally inconsistent with a due regard to those laws, and the principles of
that church, for which they made themselves such contemptible champions. For it
had been long before this time, a received opinion in the church of England,
that the validity of all the sacramental administrations depends on authority
derived from the apostles, by episcopal ordination, in an uninterrupted
succession; and one of the statutes on which the prosecution was grounded
enacts, that no person shall presume to consecrate and administer the Lord's
supper, Stat 13 and 14 Car. II.
before he be ordained a priest by episcopal ordination, on pain of forfeiting
for every offense one hundred pounds. The ministers then in the province, being
destitute of the grand pre-requisite, were in^apable by the act, of doing what
was so peremptorily required of them; and had they complied with the governor's
order, must have exposed themselves to the penalty, if he had pleased to exact
it from them. But the extending these penalties to the king's American
subjects, who had fled hither from the rod of prelatic tyranny, was a most
unwarrantable stretch of power; since the last of these acts, and the only one
which had been made since the settlement of the colonies, was expressly
restricted in its operation, to the realm of England, dominion of Wales, and
town of Berwick upon Tweed.

Disappointed in all his schemes for raising money by an assembly, Cranfield
next ventured on the project of taxing the people without their consent. The
pretext for this was a clause in the commission, impowering him, with the
council, to continue such taxes as had been formerly levied, until a general
assembly could be called. This had been done, without offense, at the beginning
both of this and the former administration, when the change of government
rendered it necessary. But the council, though too much devoted to him, were
not easily persuaded into the measure at this time; till fear at length
accomplished what reason could not approve; for, letters being received from
the eastward, informing of the discovery of a plot among the Indians, who were
instigated by Castine the Frenchman to renew the war early in the spring, ^eb.
14.
the council were summoned in haste, and presently agreed to the governor's
proposal, for continuing such taxes as had been formerly laid, which he told
them was necessary for the immediate defense and security of the province. This
affair however, was kept secret for the present; and the people were first to
be convinced of the governor's paternal care and kindness in taking the
necessary precautions for their safety. March 13.
It was ordered that the meeting houses in each town should be fortified, and
bye garrisons were established in convenient places: Supplies of ammunitton
were ordered to be provided: Circular letters were dispatched to the governors
of the neighboring colonies, informing them of the danger: and, to crown the
whole Cranfield himself, at the request of the council, undertook a tour to
New York to solicit the governor, Dongan, for a number of the Mohawks to come
down and destroy the eastern Indians; Council Records.
promising to pay them for their services out of the money which was thus to be
raised. Vaughan's Journal.


At his return from this excursion, he found himself under some embarrassment
in his favorite views, from a letter of the lords of trade, which directed him
to make use of an assembly, in raising money on the people. He could not,
therefore, avoid calling one, May 27.
though he immediately dissolved it, because several of the members were those
whom he had formerly ordered to be made constables. At the same time, in his
letters to the secretary of state, he represented the assembly as persons of
such a mutinous and rebellious disposition, that it was not safe to let them
convene; that they had never given any thing toward the support of government;
that he was obliged to raise money without them; and that it was impossible for
him to serve his majesty's interest without a ship of war to enforce his
orders; and finally he desired leave to go to the West Indies for the recovery
of his health. When this business was dispatched, warrants were issued for
collecting the taxes; which caused fresh murmurings and discontent among the
people.

But however disaffected to the governor and his creatures, they were always
ready to testify their obedience to the royal orders; an instance of which
occured at this time. The seas of America and the West Indies being much
infested with pirates, the king sent orders to all the governors and colony
assemblies, directing acts to be made for the suppressing of piracy and robbery
on the high seas. Cranfield, having received this order, summoned an assembly;
July 22.
and though it consisted almost entirely of the same persons who were in the
last; he suffered them to pass the act, and then quietly dissolved them: This
was the last assembly that ever he called. Council Records, and Files.


The tax-bills were first put into the hands of the newly made constables; who
soon returned them, informing the governor that the people were so averse to
the method, that it was impossible to collect the money. The provost, Thomas
Thurton, was then commanded to do it, with the assistance of his deputies and
the constables. The people still refusing compliance, their cattle and goods
were taken by distraint and sold by auction: Those who would neither pay nor
discover their goods to the officers, were apprehended and imprisoned; and some
of the constables, who refused to assist, suffered the same fate. The more
considerate of the people were disposed to bear these grievances, though highly
irritating, till they could know the result of their applications to the king.
But in a country where the love of liberty had ever been the ruling passion, it
could not be expected but that some forward spirits would break the restraints
of prudence, and take a summary method to put a stop to their oppressions.
Several persons had declared that they would sooner part with their lives, than
suffer distraints; and associations were formed for mutual support. At Exeter
the sheriff was resisted and driven off with clubs; the women having prepared
hot spits and scalding water to assist in the opposition, Dec. 29.
as Thurton testified in his deposition on the occasion. At Hampton he was
beaten, and his sword was taken from him; then he was seated on an horse,
January 22.
and conveyed out of the province to Salisbury with a rope about his neck and
his feet tied under the horse's belly. Justice Robie attempted to commit some
of the rioters; but they were rescued by the way, and both the justice and the
sheriff were struck in the execution of their office. The troop of horse,
January 9.
under Mason's command, was then ordered to turn out completely mounted and
armed, to assist in suppressing the disorder; but when the day came not one
trooper appeared. Cranfield thus finding his efforts ineffectual, and his
authority contemptible, MSS in files.
was obliged to desist.

The agent had been a long time in England, waiting for the depositions, which
were to have been transmitted to hin in support of the complaint which he was
to exhibit. Cranfield and his creatures here did all that they could, to retard
the business; first by imprisoning Vaughan, and then by refusing to summon and
swear witnesses when applied to by others; who were obliged to go into the
neighboring governments to get their depositions authenticated; and after all,
the proof was defective, as they had no access to the public records. The
agent, however, exhibited his complaint against Cranfield in general terms,
July 11.
consisting of eight articles. That he had engrossed the power of erecting
courts, and establishing fees, exclusive of the assembly: That he had not
followed the directions in his commission respecting Mason's controversy; but
had caused it to be decided on the spot by courts of his own constitution,
consisting wholly of persons devoted to his interest: That exorbitant charges
had been exacted and some who were unable to satisfy them had been imprisoned:
That others had been obliged to submit, for want of money to carry on the
suits: That he had altered the value of silver money: That he had imprisoned
sundry persons without just cause: That he with his council had assumed
legislative authority, without an assembly; and, that he had done his utmost to
prevent the people from laying their complaints before the king, Weare^^ MSS.
and procuring the necessary evidence.

'This complaint was, in course, July 23.
referred to the board of trade; who transmitted copies of it, and of the
several proofs, to Cranfield, and summoned him to make his defense; directing
him to deliver to the adverse party copies of all the affidavits which should
be taken in his favor; to let all persons have free access to the records; and
to give all needful assistance to them in collecting their evidence against
him. Ibid*


When he had received this letter he suspended Mason's suits, till the question
concerning the legality of the courts should be decided. He also ordered the
secretary to give copies to those who should apply for them. At the same time
it was complained that the people, on their part, had been equally reserved, in
secreting the records of the several towns, so that Mason upon inquiry could
not find where they were deposited: and the town clerks, when summoned, had
solemnly sworn that they knew neither where the books were concealed, MSS in
the fi^e^.
nor who had taken them out of their possession.

1685.
The necessary evidence on both sides being procured, a new complaint was drawn
up, consisting of twelve articles, which were, That at the first session of the
assembly, Cranfield had challenged the power of legislation and settlement of
affairs to himself, against the words of the commission: That he had by
purchase or mortgage from Mason, made himself owner of the province, and so was
not likely to act impartially between Mason and the inhabitants: That he had
made courts, whereof both judges and jurors had agreed with Mason for their own
lands, and some had taken deeds of him for other men's lands, so that they were
engaged by their interest to set up Mason's title: That Mason had sued forty
persons, and cast all; and that the governor's interposal to state the cases,
as by his commission he was directed, had been refused though desired: and that
the defendants pleas grounded on the laws of England were rejected: That they
could not reconcile the verdict with the attachment, nor the execution with the
verdict, nor their practice under color of the execution with either; that the
verdict found the lands sued for according to the royal commission and
instructions, and that commission only gave power to state the case if Mason
and the people could not agree; but the execution took land and all: That the
charge of every action was about six pounds, though nothing was done in court
but reading the commission and some blank grants without hand or seal; and
these were not read for one case in ten: That court charges were exacted in
money, which many had not; who though they tendered cattle, were committed to
prison for non-payment: That ministers, contrary to his majesty's commission,
which granted liberty of conscience to all protestants, had their dues withheld
from them, even those that were due before Cranfield came, and were threatened
with six months imprisonment for not administering the sacrament according to
the liturgy: That though the general assembly agreed that Spanish money should
pass by weight, the governor and council ordered pieces of eight to pass for
six shillings, though under weight: That men were commonly compelled to enter
into bonds of great penalty, to appear and answer to what should be objected
against them, when no crime was alleged: That they had few laws but those made
by the governor and council, when his commission directed the general assembly
to make laws: That the courts were kept in a remote corner of the province; and
the sheriff was a stranger and had no visible estate, Weare's MSS.
and so was not responsible for failures.

Upon this complaint, an hearing was had before the Lords of Trade on Tuesday
the tenth of March; and their lordships reported to the king, on three articles
only of the complaint, viz. That Cranfield had not pursued his instructions
with regard to Mason's controversy; but instead thereof had caused courts to be
held and titles to be decided, with exorbitant costs; and that he had exceeded
his power in regulating the value of coins. This report was accepted, and the
king's pleasure therein signified to him. At the same time, his request for
absence being granted, he, on receipt of the letters, Neal's Hist. and Flitch's
MS.
privately embarked on board a vessel for Jamacia; and from thence went to
England, where he obtained the collectorship of Barbados. At his departure,
Barefoote the deputy governor took the chair; which he held till he was
superseded by Dudley's commission, as president of New England.

Cranfield's ill conduct must be ascribed in a great measure to his
disappointment of the gains which he expected to acquire, by the establishment
of Mason's title; which could be his only inducement to accept of the
government. This disappointment inflaming his temper, naturally vindictive and
imperious, urged him to actions not only illegal, but cruel and unmanly. A
ruler never degrades his character more than when he perverts public justice to
gratify personal resentment; he should punish none but the enemies of the laws,
and disturbers of the peace of the community over which he presides. Had there
been the least color, either of zeal or policy, for the severity exercised in
the prosecution of Moody, candor would oblige us to make some allowance for
human frailty. His ordering the members of the assembly to be made constables,
was a mode of revenge disgraceful to the character of the supreme magistrate.
From the same base disposition, he is said to have employed spies and pimps,
Neal. vol. 2. p. 39.
to find matter of accusation against people in their clubs, and private
discourse. And his deceit was equal to his malice; for, being at Boston when
the charter of that colony was called in question, and the people were
solicitous to ward off the danger; he advised them to make a private offer of
two thousand guineas to the king, promising to represent them in a favorable
light; but when they, not suspecting his intention, followed his advice, and
showed him the letter which they had written to their agents for that purpose,
he treacherously represented them as "disloyal rogues;" and made them appear so
ridiculous that their agents were ashamed to be seen at court. Hutchin. vol. 1.
page 337.
However, when he had quitted the country, and had time for reflection he grew
ashamed of his misconduct, and whilst he was collector at Barbados, made a
point of treating the masters of vessels, Fitch's MS*
and other persons who went thither from Pascataqua, with particular respect.

Although the decision of titles in Cranfield's courts had been represented, in
the report of the lords, as extrajudicial, and a royal order had been thereupon
issued to suspend any farther proceedings in the case of Mason till the matter
should be brought before the king in council, pursuant to the directions in the
commission; yet Barefoote suffered executions which had before been issued to
be extended, and persons to be imprisoned at Mason's suit. This occasioned a
fresh complaint and petition to the king, which was sent by Wear, who about
this time made a second voyage to England, as agent for the province and
attorney to Vaughan, to manage an appeal from several verdicts, judgments,
Weare's MSS.
decrees and fines which had been given against him in the courts here, one of
which was on the title to his estate. An attempt being made to levy one of the
executions in Dover, a number of persons forcibly resisted the officer, and
obliged him to relinquish his design. MSS in files*
Warrants were then issued against the rioters, and the sheriff with his
attendants attempted to seize them, whilst the people were assembled for divine
service. This caused an uproar in the congregation, in which a young heroine
distinguished herself by knocking down one of the officers with her bible. They
were all so roughly handled that they were glad to escape with their lives.

That nothing might be wanting to show the enmity of the people to these
measures, and their hatred and contempt for the authors of them; MSS in files.
there are still preserved the original depositions on oath, of Barefoote and
Mason, relating to an assault made on their persons by Thomas Wiggen and
Anthony Nutter, who had been members of the assembly. These two men came to
Barefoote's house where Mason lodged, Dec. 30.
and entered into discourse with him about his proceedings; denying his claim
and using such language as provoked him to take hold of Wiggen with an
intention to thrust him out of the door. But Wiggen being a stronger man seized
him by his cravat, and threw him into the fire; where his clothes and one of
his legs were burned. Barefoote, attempting to help him, met with the same
fate, and had two of his ribs broken and one of his teeth beaten out in the
struggle. The noise alarmed the servants, who at Mason's command brought his
sword, which Nutter took away, making sport of their misery A farther specimen
of the contempt in which these men were held, even by the lower class of
people, expressed in their own genuine language, may be seen in the following
affidavit:

Mary Rann, aged thirty years or thereabout, witnesses, that the 21 day of
March 84, being in company with Seabank Hog, I heard her say; it was very hard
for the governor of this province to strike Sam. Seavy before he spoke; the
said Hog said also that it was well the said Seavy's moth^^ was not there for
the governor, for if she had, there had been bloody work for him. I heard the
said Hog say also that the governor and the rest of the gentlemen were a crew
of pitiful curs, and did they want earthly honor? if they did, she would pull
off her head clothes and come in her hair to them like a parcel of pitiful
beggarly curs as they were; come to undo us both body and soul; they could not
be contented to take our estates from us, but they have taken away the gospel
also* which the devil would ^ave them for it.

Sworn in the court of pleas held at Great Island the 7 of Nov. 1684. R*
Chamberlain, (...).


.

Nothing else occured during Barefoote's short administration, except a treaty
of friendship, between the Indians of Penacook and Saco, on the one part; and
the people of New Hampshire and Maine on the other. The foundation of this
treaty seems to have been laid in Cranfield's project of bringing down the
Mohawks on the eastern Indians; which had once before proved a pernicious
measure; as they made no distinction between those tribes which were at peace
with the English, and those which were at war. Some of the Penacook Indians who
had been at Albany after Cranfield's journey to New York, reported on their
return, that the Mohawks threatened destruction to all the eastern Indians,
from Narrhaganset to Pechypscot* Hagkins, a chief of the tribe, had informed
Cranfield in the spring of the danger he apprehended, and had implored
assistance and protection, but had been treated with neglect. In August the
Penacook and Saco Indians gathered their corn, and removed their families;
which gave an alarm to their English neighbors, as if they were preparing for
war. Messengers being sent to demand the reason of their movement, were
informed that it was the fear of the Mohawks, whom they daily expected to
destroy them; and being asked why they did not come in among the English for
protection, they answered, lest the Mohawks should hurt the English on their
account. Upon this they were persuaded to enter into an agreement; and
accordingly their chiefs being assembled with the council of New Hampshire, and
a deputation from the province of Maine, September. 8.
a treaty was concluded, wherein it was stipulated, that all future personal
injuries on either side should, upon complaint, be immediately redressed; that
information should be given of approaching danger from enemies; that the
Indians should not remove their families from the neighborhood of the English
without giving timely notice, and if they did, that it should be taken for a
declaration of war; and, that whilst these articles were observed the English
would assist and protect them against the Mohawks and all other enemies. The
danger was but imaginary, Original MSS in files.
and the peace continued about four years.

Though Mason was hitherto disappointed in his views of recovering the
inhabited part of the province he endeavored to lay a foundation for realizing
his claim to the waste lands. 1686.
A purchase having been made from the Indians, by Jonathan Tyng and nineteen
others, of a tract of land on both sides the river Merrimack, six miles in
breadth, from Souhegan river to Winnipiseogee lake; Mason by deed confirmed the
same, reserving to himself and his heirs the yearly rent of ten shillings.
April 15.
This was called the million acre purchase. About the same time he farmed out
to Hezekiah Usher and his heirs, the mines, minerals, Douglas, vol. 1. p. 419.
and ores within the limits of New Hampshire, for the term of one thousand
years; May 15.
reserving to himself one quarter part of the royal ores, and one seventeenth
of the baser sorts; Records of Deeds.
and having put his affairs here in the best order that the times would admit,
he sailed for England, to attend the hearing of Vaughan's appeal to the king.

CHAP. IX. The administration of Dudley as president, and Androsse as governor
of New England. Mason's farther attempt. His disappointment and death.
Revolution. Sale to Allen. His commission for the government.
WHEN an arbitrary government is determined to infringe the liberty of the
people, it is easy to find pretenses to support the most unrighteous claims.
King Charles the second in the latter part of his reign was making large
strides toward despotism. Charters, which obstructed his pernicious views,
were by a perversion of the law decreed forfeited. The city of London, and most
of the corporations in England, either suffered the execution of these
sentences, or tamely surrendered their franchises to the all-grasping hand of
power. It could not be expected that in this general wreck of privileges the
colonies of New England could escape. The people of Massachusetts had long been
viewed with a jealous eye. Hutch. col. pap. p. 377.
Though the king had repeatedly assured them of his protection and solemnly
confirmed their charter privileges; yet their spirit and principles were so
totally dissonant to the corrupt views of the court, that intriguing men found
easy access to the royal ear, with complaints against them. Of these the most
inveterate and indefatigable was Randolph, Hutch. vol. 1. p. 329.
who made no less than eight voyages in nine years across the Atlantic, on this
mischievous business. They were accused of extending their jurisdiction beyond
the bounds of their patent; of invading the prerogative by coining money; of
not allowing appeals to the king from their courts; and, of obstructing the
execution of the navigation and trade laws. By the king's command agents were
sent over to answer these complaints. They found the prejudice against the
colony so strong, that it was in vain to withstand it; and solicited
instructions whether to submit to the king's pleasure, or to let the
proceedings against them be issued in form of law. A solemn consultation being
held, at which the clergy assisted, it was determined to die by the hands of
others rather than by their own. Upon notice of this, the agents quitted
England; and Randolph, 1683 October.
as the angel of death soon followed them, bringing a writ of quo warranto from
the king's bench; but the scire facias which issued from the chancery did not
arrive till the time fixed for their appearance was elapsed: This however was
deemed too trivial an error to stop the proceedings; judgment was entered
against them, and the charter declared forfeited.

The king died before a new form of government was settled; 1685. ^eb. 6.
but there could be no hope of favor from his successor, who inherited the
arbitrary principles of his brother, and was publicly known to be a bigoted
papist.

The intended alteration in the government was introduced in the same gradual
manner as it had been in New Hampshire. A commission was issued, in which
Joseph Dudley, esquire, was appointed president of his majesty's territory and
dominion of New England; William Stoughton, deputy president; Simon Bradstreet,
Robert Mason, John Fitz Winthrop, John Pynchon, Peter Bulkeley, Edward
Randolph, Wait Winthrop, Richard Warton, John Usher, Nathaniel Saltonstall,
Bartholomew Gedney, Jonathan Tyng, Dudley Bradstreet, John Hinckes, and Edward
Tyng, counselors. Their jurisdiction extended over Massachusetts,
New Hampshire, Maine and the Narrhaganset or King's province. These gentlemen
were mostly natives of the country, 1686.
some of them had been magistrates, and one of them governor under the charter.
No house of deputies was mentioned in the commission.

The new form of government took place on the twenty-fifth day of May; and on
the tenth of June an order of council was issued for settling the county
courts, which consisted of such members of the council as resided in each
county, and any others of them who might be present; with such justices as were
commissioned for the purpose. These courts had the power of trying and issuing
all civil causes, and all criminal matters under life or limb; from them an
appeal was allowed to a superior court held three times in the year at Boston,
for the whole territory; and from thence appeals, in certain cases, might be
had to the king in council. Juries were pricked by the marshal and one justice
of each county, in a list given them by the selectmen of the towns. A probate
court was held at Boston, by the president, and in the other provinces and
remote counties by a judge and clerk appointed by the president. The territory
was divided into four counties, viz. Suffolk, Middlesex, Essex and Hampshire;
and three provinces, viz. New Hampshire, Maine, and King's province. By another
order of the same date, town-taxes could not be assessed but by allowance of
two justices; Printed orders in the files.
and the members of the council were exempted from paying any part thereof.

Things were conducted with tolerable decency, and the innovations were
rendered as little grievous as possible; that the people might be induced more
readily to submit to the long meditated introduction of a governor-general.

In December following, Sir Edmund Androsse who had been governor of New York,
Dec. 30.
arrived at Boston with a commission appointing him captain general and
governor in chief of the territory and dominion of New England, in which the
colony of Plymouth was now included. By this commission, the governor with his
council, five of whom were a quorum, were empowered to make such laws* impose
such taxes, and apply them to such purposes as they should think proper. They
were also empowered to grant lands on such terms and subject to such quitrents,
MS Copy o^ the Commission.
as should be appointed by the king. Invested with such powers, these men were
capable of the most extravagant actions. Though Androsse, like his master,
began his administration with the fairest professions, yet like him, he soon
violated them, and proved himself a fit instrument for accomplishing the most
execrable designs. Those of his council who were backward in aiding his
rapacious intentions were neglected. Seven being sufficient for a full board,
he selected such only as were devoted to him, and with their concurrence did
what he pleased. Randolph and Mason were at first among his confidents; but
afterward when New York was annexed to his government, Hutchin. vol. 1. p. 344.
Collect. pap. p. 564.
the members from that quarter were most in his favor.

To particularize the many instances of tyranny and oppression which the
country suffered from these men, 1687.
is not within the design of this work. Let it suffice to observe, that the
press was restrained; liberty of conscience infringed; exorbitant fees and
taxes demanded, without the voice or consent of the people, who had no
privilege of representation. The charter being vacated, it was pretended that
all titles to land were annulled; and as to Indian deeds, Androsse declared
them no better than the scratch of a bear's paw. Revolution in N. Eng.
justified, p. 21.
Landholders were obliged to take out patents for their estates which they had
possessed forty or fifty years; for these patents extravagant fees were
exacted, and those who would not submit to this imposition had writs of
intrusion brought against them, and their land was patented to others. To
hinder the people from consulting about the redress of their grievances,
town-meetings were prohibited, except one in the month of May for the choice of
town officers; and to prevent complaints being carried to England, no person
was permitted to go out of the country without express leave from the governor.
But notwithstanding all the vigilance of the governor, his emissaries and his
guards, the resolute and indefatigable Increase Mather, I* Mather's ^^^e p. 107.
minister of the second church in Boston, and president of the college, got on
board a ship and sailed for England, with complaints in the name of the people
against the governor, which he delivered with his own hand to the king; but
finding no hope of redress, he waited the event of the revolution which was
then expected.

When the people groaned under so many real grievances, 1688.
it is no wonder that their fears and jealousies suggested some that were
imaginary. They believed Androsse to be a papist; that he had hired the
Indians, and supplied them with ammunition to destroy their frontier
settlements; Revolution justified, p. 29, 40.
and that he was preparing to betray the country into their hands of the
French. At the same time, the large strides that King James the second was
making toward the establishment of popery and despotism, raised the most
terrible apprehensions; so that the report of the landing of the Prince of
Orange in England was received here with the greatest joy. Androsse was so
alarmed at the news, that he imprisoned the man who brought a copy of the
prince's declaration, and published a proclamation commanding all persons to be
in readiness to oppose "any invasion from Holland," which met with as much
disregard as one he had issued before, appointing a day of thanksgiving for the
birth of a Prince of Wales.

The people had now borne these innovations and impositions for about three
years: Their patience was worn out, 1689.
and their native love of freedom kindled at the prospect of deliverance. The
news of a complete revolution in England had not reached them; yet so sanguine
were their expectations, so eager were they to prove that they were animated by
the same spirit with their brethren at home, that upon the rumor of an
intended massacre in the town of Boston by the governor's guards, they were
wrought up to a degree of fury. On the morning of the eighteenth of April the
town was in arms, and the country flocking in to their assistance. The
governor, and those who had fled with him to the fort, were seized and
committed to prison. The gentlemen who had been magistrates under the charter,
with Bradstreet, the late governor, at their head, assumed the name of a
council of safety, and kept up a form of government, in the exigency of
affairs, till orders arrived from England; when Androsse and his accomplices
were sent home as prisoners of state, to be disposed of according to the king's
pleasure.

The people of New Hampshire had their share of sufferings under this rapacious
administration: and Mason himself did not escape. Having attended the hearing
of Vaughan's appeal to the king which was decided in Mason's favor: the
judgment obtained here, Nov. 6, 1686.
being affirmed; and having now the fairest prospect of realizing his claim, he
returned hither in the spring of 1687, but found his views obstructed in a
manner which he little expected. The government was in the hands of a set of
hungry harpies* who looked with envy on the large sha^^ of territory which
Mason claimed, Hutchin. collect. pa. p. 564.
and were for parceling it out among themselves. The new judges delayed issuing
executions on the judgments which he had formerly recovered, and the
attorney general, Graham, would not allow that he had power to grant lands by
leases. This confirmed the people in their opinion of the invalidity of his
claim, and rendered them (if possible) more averse to him than ever they had
been. At length, however, he obtained from Dudley the chief justice, MS in Sup.
Court files.
a writ of certiorari, directed to the late judges of New Hampshire, by which
his causes were to be removed to the supreme court of the whole territory, then
held at Boston; July 13, 1688*
but before this could be done, death put an end to his hopes and relieved the
people for a time of their fears. Being one of Sir Edmund's council, Aug. or
Sept. 1688. Hutchin. vol. 1. p. 365. Collect. papers, p. 5^6.
and attending him on a journey from New York to Albany; he died at Esopus, in
the fifty ninth year of his age; leaving two sons, John and Robert, the heirs
of his claim and controversy.

The revolution at Boston, though extremely pleasing to the people of
New Hampshire, left them in an unsettled state. They waited the arrival of
orders from England; but none arriving, and the people's minds being uneasy, it
was proposed by some of the principal gentlemen, that a convention of deputies
from each of the towns should consider what was best to be done. The
convention-parliament in England was a sufficient precedent to authorize this
proceeding. Deputies were accordingly chosen The members of this convention
were, For Portsmouth.
Major William Vaughan, Richard Waldron, Nathaniel Friar, Robert Eliot, Thomas
Cobbett, Capt. John Pickering,
For Dover.
Capt. John Woodman, Capt. John Ger^^s^, John Tuttle, John Roberts, Thomas
Edgerly, Nicholas Follet.
For Exeter.
Robert Wadley, William Moore, Samuel Leavitt. (Portsm. Dover and Exeter Rec.
Records.)


It does not appe^r from Hampton records whether they joined in th^^
convention, or returned immediately to the government of M^ss^^^^setts.


and instructed to resolve upon some method of government. At their first
meeting they came to no conclusion; 1690. January.
but afterward they thought it best to return to their ancient union with
Massachusetts. Massa. Rec. Portsmou. Dover and Exeter Records.
A petition for this purpose being presented, they were readily admitted; till
the king's pleasure should be known and members were sent to the general court
which met there in that and the two following years. March 12.
The gentlemen who had formerly been in commission for the peace, the militia
and the civil offices, were by town votes, approved by the general court,
restored to their places, and ancient laws and customs continued to be observed.

Had the inclination of the people been consulted, 1691.
they would gladly have been annexed to that government. This was well known to
Mather and the other agents, I. Mather's Life page 136.
who when soliciting for a new charter, earnestly requested that New Hampshire
might be included in it. Hutchin. vol. 1. p. 412.
But it was answered that the people had expressed an aversion to it and
desired to be under a distinct government. This could be founded only on the
reports which had been made by the commissioners in 1665, and by Randolph in
his narrative. The true reason for denying the request was; that Mason's two
heirs had sold their title to the lands in New Hampshire to Samuel Allen of
London, merchant; April 27.
for seven hundred and fifty pounds, the entail having been previously docked
by a fine and recovery in the court of king's bench; MS in Sup. Court files.
and Allen was then soliciting a recognition of his title from the crown, and a
commission for the government of the province. When the inhabitants were
informed of what was doing, they again assembled by deputies in convention, and
sent over a petition to the king, praying that they might be annexed to
Massachusetts. The petition was presented by Sir Henry Ashurst, and they were
amused with some equivocal promises of success by the earl of Nottingham;
Hutchin. vol. 2. p. 6.
but Allen's importunity co-inciding with the king's inclination, effectually
frustrated their attempt. The claim which Allen had to the lands from Naumkeag
to three miles northward of Merrimack, was noticed in the Massachusetts
charter; 1692. March 1.
and he obtained a commission for the government of New Hampshire in which his
son in law John Usher, then in London, was appointed lieutenant governor, with
power to execute the commission in Allen's absence. The counselors named in
the governor's instructions were John Usher lieutenant governor, John Hinckes,
Nathaniel Friar, Thomas Graffort, Peter Coffin, Henry Green, Robert Eliot, John
Gerrish, John Walford and John Love. The governor was instructed to send to the
secretary of state the names of six other persons suitable for counselors.
Three were a quorum, but the instructions were that nothing should be done
unless five were present except in extraordinary emergencies. Major Vaughan,
Nathaniel Wear and Richard Waldron, MS copy of Com. etc. Council minutes.
were afterward added to the number.

The council was composed of men who, in general, had the confidence of the
people; but Usher was very disagreeable, not only as he had an interest in
Allen's claim to the lands, but as he had been one of Sir Edmund Androsse's
adherents, and an active instrument in the late oppressive government. Council
minutes.
He arrived with the commission and took upon him the command, on the
thirteenth day of August. The people again submitted, with extreme reluctance,
to the unavoidable necessity of being under a government distinct from
Massachusetts.

The year 1692 was remarkable for a great mortality in Portsmouth and Greenland
by the small pox. The infection was brought in bags of cotton from the West
Indies, MS Le^
and there being but few people who were acquainted with it, the patients
suffered greatly, and but few recovered.

CHAP. X. The war with the French and Indians, commonly called King William's
war.
IT was the misfortune of this country to have enemies of different kinds to
contend with at the same time. Whilst the changes above related were taking
place in their government, a fresh war broke out on their frontiers, which,
though ascribed to diverse causes, was really kindled by the rashness of the
same persons who were making havoc of their liberties.

The lands from Penobscot to Nova Scotia* had been ceded to the French, by the
treaty of Breda, Hutchin. coll. pap. p. 548.
in exchange for the island of St. Christopher. On these lands the Baron de St.
Castine had for many years resided, and carried on a large trade with the
Indians; with whom he was intimately connected; having several of their women,
beside a daughter of the sachem Madokawando, for his wives. The lands which had
been granted by the crown of England to the duke of York (now King James the
second) interfered with Castine's plantation, as the duke claimed to the river
St. Croix. A fort had been built by his order at Pemaquid, and a garrison
stationed there to prevent any intrusion on his property. In 1686 a ship
belonging to Pascataqua landed some wines at Penobscot, supposing it to be
within the French territory. Palmer and West, the duke's agents at Pemaquid,
went and seized the wines; but by the influence of the French ambassador in
England an order was obtained for the restoration of them. Hereupon a new line
was run which took Castine's plantation into the duke's territory. In the
spring of 1688, 1688.
Androsse went in the Rose frigate, and plundered Castine's house and fort;
leaving only the ornaments of his chapel to console him for the loss of his
arms and goods. This base action provoked Castine to excite the Indians to a
new war, Hutchin. coll. pap. p. 562.
pretenses for which were not wanting on their part. They complained that the
tribute of corn which had been promised by the treaty of 1678, had been
withholden; that the fishery of the river Saco had been obstructed by seines;
that their standing corn had been devoured by cattle belonging to the English;
that their lands at Pemaquid had been patented without their consent; and that
they had been fraudulently dealt with in trade. Some of these complaints were
doubtless well grounded; but none of them were ever inquired into or redressed.

They began to make reprisals at North Yarmouth by killing cattle. Justice
Blackman ordered sixteen of them to be seized and kept under guard at Falmouth;
but others continued to rob and captivate the inhabitants. Androsse, who
pretended to treat the Indians with mildness, commanded those whom Blackman had
seized to be set at liberty. But this mildness had not the desired effect; the
Indians kept their prisoners, and murdered some of them in their barbarous
frolicks. Androsse then changed his measures, and thought to frighten them,
with an army of seven hundred men, which he led into their country in the month
of November. The rigor of the season proved fatal to some of his men; but he
never saw an Indian in his whole march. The enemy were quiet during the winter.

1689.
After the revolution, the gentlemen who assumed the government took some
precautions to prevent the renewal of hostilities. They sent messengers and
presents to several tribes of Indians, Hutchinson, Neal, and Mather.
who answered them with fair promises; but their prejudice against the English
was too inveterate to be allayed by such means as these.

Thirteen years had almost elapsed since the seizure of the four hundred
Indians, at Cochecho, by Major Waldron; during all which time, an
inextinguishable thirst of revenge had been cherished among them, which never
till now found opportunity for gratification The inveteracy of their hatred to
Major Waldron on account of that transaction, appears from what is related by
Mr. Williams in the narrative of his captivity, which happened in 1704. When he
was in Canada, a jesuit discoursing with him on the causes of their wars with
New England, justified the Indians in what they did against us; rehea^^ing some
things done by Major Waldron above 30 years ago, and how ju^^ly God ^etaliated
them. page 18.
. Wonolanset, one of the sachems of Penacook, who was dismissed with his people
at the time of the seizure, always observed his father's dying charge not to
quarrel with the English; but Hagkins, another sachem, who had been treated
with neglect by Cranfield, was more ready to listen to the seducing invitations
of Castine's emissaries. Some of those Indians, who were then seized and sold
into slavery abroad, had found their way home, and could not rest till they had
revenge. Accordingly a confederacy being formed between the tribes of Penacook
and Pigwacket, and the strange Indians (as they were called) who were
incorporated with them, it was determined to surprise the major and his
neighbors among whom they had all this time been peacably conversant.

In that part of the town of Dover which lies about the first falls in the
rive^ Cochecho, were five garrisoned houses; ^^ree on the North side, viz.
Waldron's, Otis's and Heard's; and two on the south side, viz. Peter Coffin's
and his son's. These houses were surrounded with timber-walls, the gates of
which, as well the house doors, were secured with bolts and bars. The
neighboring families retired to these houses by night; but by an unaccountable
negligence no watch was kept. The Indians who were daily passing through the
town visiting and trading with the inhabitants, as usual in times of peace,
viewed their situation with an attentive eye. Some hints of a mischievous
design had been given out by their squaws; but in such dark and ambiguous terms
that no one could comprehend their meaning. Some of the people were uneasy; but
Waldron who, from a long course of experience, was intimately acquainted with
the Indians, and on other occasions had been ready enough to suspect them, was
now so thoroughly secure, that when some of the people hinted their fears to
him, he merrily bade them to go and plant their pumpkins, saying that he would
tell them when the Indians would break out. The very evening before the
mischief was done, being told by a young man that the town was full of Indians
and the people were much concerned; he answered that he knew the Indians very
well and there was no danger.

The plan which the Indians had pre-concerted was, that two squaws should go to
each of the garrisoned houses in the evening, and ask leave to lodge by the
fire; that in the night when the people were asleep they should open the doors
and gates, and give the signal by a whistle; upon which the strange Indians,
who were to be within hearing, should rush in, and take their long meditated
revenge. This plan being ripe for execution, on the evening of Thursday the
twenty-seventh of June, two squaws applied to each of the garrisons for
lodging, as they frequently did in time of peace. They were admitted into all
but the younger Coffin's, and the people, at their request, showed them how to
open the doors, in case they should have occasion to go out in the night.
Mesandowit, one of their chiefs, went to Waldron's garrison, and was kindly
entertained, as he had often been before. The squaws told the major, that a
number of Indians were coming to trade with him the next day, and Mesandowit
whilst at supper, with his usual familiarity, said, Brother Waldron, what would
you do if the strange Indians should come? The major carelessly answered, that
he could assemble an hundred men by lifting up his finger. In this unsuspecting
confidence the family retired to rest.

When all was quiet the gates were opened and the signal was given. The Indians
entered, set a guard at the door, and rushed into the major's apartment, which
was an inner room, Awakened by the noise, he jumped out of bed, and though now
advanced in life to the age of eighty years, he retained so much vigor as to
drive them with his sword, through two or three doors; but as he was returning
for his other arms, they came behind him, stunned him with an hatchet, drew him
into his hall, and seating him in an elbow chair on a long table, insultingly
asked him, Who shall judge Indians now? They then obliged the people in the
house to get them some victuals; and when they had done eating, they cut the
major across the breast and belly with knives, each one with a stroke, saying,
I cross out my account. They then cut off his nose and ears, forcing them into
his mouth; and when spent with the loss of blood he was falling down from the
table, one of them held his own sword under him, which put an end to his
misery. They also killed his son in law Abraham Lee; but took his daughter Lee
with several others, and having pillaged the house, left it on fire. Otis's
garrison, which was next to the major's, met with the same fate; he was killed,
with several others, and his wife and child were captivated. Heard's was saved
by the barking of a dog just as the Indians were entering: Elder Wentworth, who
was awakened by the noise pushed them out, and falling on his back, set his
feet against the gate and held it till he had alarmed the people; two balls
were fired through it, but both missed him. Coffin's house was surprised, but
as the Indians had no particular enmity to him, they spared his life, and the
lives of his family, and contented themselves with pillaging the house. Finding
a bag of money, they made him throw it by handfuls on the floor, whilst they
amused themselves in scrambling for it. They then went to the house of his son
who would not admit the squaws in the evening, and summoned him to surrender,
promising him quarter: He declined their offer and determined to defend his
house, till they brought out his father and threatened to kill him before his
eyes: Filial affection then overcame his resolution, and he surrendered. They
put both families together into a deserted house, intending to reserve them for
prisoners; but whilst the Indians were busy in plundering, they all escaped.

Twenty three people were killed in this surprisal, and twenty nine were
captivated; five or six houses, with the mills, were burned; and so expeditious
were the Indians in the execution of their plot, that before the people could
be collected from the other parts of the town to oppose them, they fled with
their prisoners and booty. As they passed by Heard's garrison in their retreat,
they fired upon it; but the people being prepared and resolved to defend it,
and the enemy being in haste, it was preserved. The preservation of its owner
was more remarkable.

Elizabeth Heard, with her three sons and a daughter, and some others, were
returning in the night from Portsmouth. They passed up the river in their boat
unperceived by the Indians, who were then in possession of the houses; 1689.
but suspecting danger by the noise which they heard, after they had landed
they betook themselves to Waldron's garrison, where they saw lights, which they
imagined were set up for direction to those who might be seeking a refuge. They
knocked and begged earnestly for admission; but no answer being given, a young
man of the company climbed up the wall, and saw, to his inexpressible surprise,
an Indian standing in the door of the house, with his gun. The woman was so
overcome with the fright that she was unable to fly; but begged her children to
shift for themselves; and they with heavy hearts, left her. When she had a
little recovered she crawled into some bushes, and lay there till daylight.
She then perceived an Indian coming toward her with a pistol in his hand; he
looked at her and went away; returning, he looked at her again; and she asked
him what he would have; he made no answer; but ran yelling to the house, and
she saw him no more. She kept her place till the house was burned, and the
Indians were gone; and then returning home, found her own house safe. Her
preservation in these dangerous circumstances was the more remarkable, if (as
it is supposed) it was an instance of justice and gratitude in the Indians. For
at the time when the four hundred were seized in 1676, a young Indian escaped
and took refuge in her house, where she concealed him; in return for which
kindness he promised her that he would never kill her, nor any of her family in
any future war, and that he would use his influence with the other Indians to
the same purpose. This Indian was one of the party who surprised the place, and
she was well known to the most of them.

The same day, after the mischief was done, a letter from Secretary Addington,
written by order of the government, directed to Major Waldron, giving him
notice of the intention of the Indians to surprise him under pretense of trade,
fell into the hands of his son. This design was communicated to Governor
Bradstreet by Major Henchman of Chelmsford, Mass. Rec.
who had learned it of the Indians: The letter was dispatched from Boston,
Appendix No. 47.
the day before, by Mr. Wear; but some delay which he met with at Newbury
ferry prevented its arrival in season.

The prisoners taken at this time were mostly carried to Canada, and sold to
the French; and these, as far as I can learn, were the first that ever were
carried thither One of these prisoners was Sarah G^rrish, a remarkably fine
child of seven years old, and granddaughter of Major Waldron, in whose house
she lodged that fatal night. Some circumstances attending her captivity are
tr^ly affecting. When she was awakened by the noise of the Indians in the
house, she crept into another bed and hid herself under the clothes to escape
their search. She remained in their hands till the next winter, and was fold
from one to another several times. An Indian girl once pushed her into a river;
but, catching by the bushes, she escaped drowning, yet durst not tell how she
came to be wet. Once she was so weary with traveling that she she did not
awake in the morning till the Indians were gone, and then found herself alone
in the woods, covered with s^ow and without any food; having found their tracks
she went crying after them till they heard her and took her with them. At
another time they kindled a great fire, and the young Indians told her she was
to be roasted. She burst into tears, threw her arms round her master's neck,
and begged him to save her, which he promised to do if she would behave well.
Being arrived in Canada, she was bought by the Intendant's lady, who treated
her courteously, and sent her to a nunnery for education. But when Sir William
Phips was at Quebeck she was exchanged, and returned to her friends, with whom
she lived till she was sixteen years old.

The wife of Richard Otis was taken at the same time, with an infant daughter
of three months old. The French priests took this child under their care,
baptized her by the name of Christina, and educated her in the Romish religion.
She passed some time in a nunery, but declined taking the veil, and was married
to a Frenchman, by whom she had two children. But her desire to see New England
was so strong, that upon an exchange of prisoners in 1714, being then a widow,
she left both her children, who were not permitted to come with her, and
returned home, where she abjured the Romish faith. M. Siguenot, her former
confessor, wrote her a flattering letter, warning her of her danger, inviting
her to return to the bosom of the catholic church, and repeating many gross
calumnies which had formerly been vented against L^ther and the other
reformers. This letter being shown to Governor Burnet, he wrote her a sensible
^and m^sterly answer, refuting the arguments, and detecting the falsehoods it
contained: Both these letters were printed. She was married afterward to Capt.
Thomas Baker, who had been taken at Deerfield in 1704, and lived in Dover,
where she was born, till the year 1773.

Mr. John Emerson, by declining to lodge at Major Waldron's on the fatal night,
though strongly urged, met with an happy escape. He was afterward a minister at
New Castle and Portsmouth.

Some of the circumstances relating to the destruction of Cochecho are taken
from Mather's Magnalia. The others from the tradition of the sufferers and
the^r descendants.


. The Indians had been seduced to the French interest by popish emissaries, who
had began to fascinate them with their religious and national prejudices. They
had now learned to call the English heretics, and that to extirpate them as
such was meritorious in the sight of heaven. When their minds were filled with
religious phrenzy, they became more bitter and implacable enemies than before;
and finding the sale of scalps and prisoners turn to good account in Canada,
they had still farther incitement to continue their depredations, and prosecute
their vengeance.

The necessity of vigorous measures was now so pressing, that parties were
immediately dispatched, one under Captain Noyes to Penacook, where they
destroyed the corn, but the Indians escaped; another from Pascataqua, under
Captain Wincal, to Winnipiseogee, whither the Indians had retired, as John
Church, who had been taken at Cochecho and escaped from them, reported: One or
two Indians were killed there, and their corn cut down. But these excursions
proved of small service, as the Indians had little to lose, and could find an
home wherever they could find game and fish.

In the month of August Major Swain, with seven or eight companies raised by
the Massachusetts government, marched to the eastward; and Major Church, with
another party, consisting of English and Indians from the colony of Plymouth,
soon followed them. Whilst these forces were on their march, the Indians, who
lay in the woods about Oyster river, observed how many men belonged to
Hucking's garrison; and seeing them all go out one morning to work, nimbly ran
between them and the house, and killed them all (being in number eighteen)
except one who had passed the brook. They then attacked the house, in which
were only two boys (one of whom was lame) with some women and children. The
boys kept them off for some time and wounded several of them. At length the
Indians set the house on fire, and even then the boys would not surrender till
they had promised them to spare their lives. They perfidiously murdered three
or four of the children; one of them was set on a sharp stake, in the view of
its distressed mother, who with the other w^men and the boys were carried
captive. One of the boys escaped the next day. Captain Garner with his company
pursued the enemy, but did not come up with them.

The Massachusetts and Plymouth companies proceeded to the eastward, settled
garrisons in convenient places, and had some skirmishes with the enemy at Casco
and Blue Point. On their return, Major Swain sent a party of the Indian
auxiliaries under Lieutenant Flagg toward Winnipiseogee to make discoveries.
These Indians held a consultation in their own language; and having persuaded
their lieutenant with two men to return, nineteen of them tarried out eleven
days longer; in which time they found the enemy, staid with them two nights,
and informed them of every thing which they desired to know; upon which the
enemy retired to their inaccessible deserts; Magnalia, lib. 7. p. 67.
the forces returned without finding them, and in November were disbanded.

Nothing was more welcome to the distressed inhabitants of the frontiers than
the approach of winter, as they then expected a respite from their sufferings.
The deep snows and cold weather were commonly a good security against an attack
from the Indians but when resolutely set on mischief, and instigated by popish
enthusiasm, no obstacles could prevent the execution of their purposes.

The Count de Frontenac, then governor of Canada, 1690.
was fond of distinguishing himself by some enterprises against the American
subjects of King William, with whom his master was at war in Europe. For this
purpose he detached three parties of French and Indians from Canada in the
winter, who were to take three different routes into the English territories.
One of these parties marched from Montreal and destroyed Schenectada, a Dutch
village on the Mohawk river, in the province of New York. This action which
happened at an unusual time of the year, in the month of February, alarmed the
whole country; and the eastern settlements were ordered to be on their guard.
On the eighteenth day of March, another party which came from Trois Rivieres,
under the command of the Sieur Hertel, an officer of great repute in Canada,
found their way to Salmon falls, a settlement on the river which divides
New Hampshire from the province of Maine. This party consisted of fifty two
men, of whom twenty five were Indians under Hoophood a noted warrior. They
began the attack at daybreak, in three different places. The people were
surprised; but flew to arms and defended themselves in the garrisoned houses,
with a bravery which the enemy themselves applauded. But as in all such onsets
the assailants have the greatest advantage, so they here proved too strong for
the defendants; about thirty of the bravest were killed, and the rest
surrendered at discretion, to the number of fifty four, of whom the greater
part were women and children. After plundering, the enemy burned the houses,
mills and barns, with the cattle Charlevoix says they burned twenty seven
houses and two thousand head of cattle in the barns. The number of buildings,
including mills, barns and outhouses, might amount to near twenty* but the
number of cattle as he gives it, is incredible.
which were within doors, and then retreated into the woods, whither they were
pursued by about one hundred and forty men, suddenly collected from the
neighboring towns, who came up with them in the afternoon at a narrow bridge
on Wooster's river. [Berwick.] Hertel expecting a pursuit, had posted his men
advantageously on the opposite bank. The pursuers advanced with great
intrepidity, and a warm engagement ensued, which lasted till night, when they
retired with the loss of four or five killed; the enemy by their own account
lost two, ^arlevoix (...). 7. p. 74.
one of whom was Hertel's nephew; his son was wounded in the knee; another
Frenchm^n was taken prisoner, who was so tenderly treated that he embraced the
protestant faith, Magnalia. lib. 7. p. 68.
and remained in the country. Hertel on his way homeward met with a third party
who had marched from Quebec, and joining his company to them attacked and
destroyed the fort and settlement at Casco, the next May. Thus the three
expeditions planned by Count Frontenac proved successful; but the glory of them
was much tarnished by acts of cruelty, which christians should be ashamed to
countenance, though perpetrated by savages The following instances of cruelty
exercised toward the prisoners taken at Salmon falls are mentioned by Dr.
Mather.

Robert Rogers, a corpulent man, being unable to carry the burden which the
Indians imposed upon him, threw it down in the path and went aside in the woods
to conceal himself. They found him by his track, stripped, beat and pricked him
with their swords; then tied him to a tree and danced round him till they had
kindled a fire. They gave him time to pray, and take leave of his
fellow prisoners who were placed round the fire to see his death. They pushed
the fire toward him, and when he was almost stifled, took it away to give him
time to breathe, and thus prolonged his misery; they drowned his dying groans
with their hideous singing and yelling; all the while dancing round the fire,
cutting off pieces of his flesh and throwing them in his face. When he was dead
they left his body broiling on the coals, in which state it was found by his
friends, and buried.

Mehetab^l Goodwin was taken with her child of five months old. When it cried
they threatened to kill it, which made the mother go aside and sit for hours
together in the snow to lull it to sleep; her master seeing that this hindered*
her from traveling, took the child, struck its head against a tree, and hung
it on one of the branches, she would have buried it but he would not let her,
telling her that if she came again that way she might have the pleasure of
seeing it. She was carried to Canada, and after five years returned home.

Mary Plaisted was taken out of her bed, having lain in but three weeks." They
made her travel with them through the snow, and to ease her of her burden, as
they said, struck the child's head against a tree, and threw it into a river.

An anecdote of another kind may relieve the reader after these tragical
accounts. Thomas Toogood was pursued by three Indians and overtaken by one of
them, who having inquired his name was preparing strings to bind him, holding
his gun under his arm, which Toogood seized and went backward, keeping the gun
presented at him, and protesting that he would shoot him if he alarmed the
others who had stopped on the opposite side of the hill. By this dexterity he
escaped and got safe into Cochecho; whilst his adversary had no recompense in
his power but to call after him by the name of No good. When he returned to his
companions without gun or prisoner, their derision made his misadventure the
more grievous.


.

After the destruction of Casco the eastern settlements were all deserted, and
the people retired to the fort at Wells. The Indians then came up westward, and
a party of them under Hoophood sometime in May made an assault on Fox Point,
[in Newington] where they burned several houses, killed about fourteen people,
and carried away six. They were pursued by the Captains Floyd and Greenleaf,
Mag. lib. 7. p. 73.
who came up with them and recovered some of the captives and spoil, after a
skirmish in which Hoophood was wounded and lost his gun. This fellow was soon
after killed by a party of Canada Indians who mistook him for one of the
Iroquois, with whom they were at war. On the fourth day of July eight persons
were killed as they were mowing in a field near Lamprey river, and a lad was
carried captive. The next day they attacked Captain Hilton's garrison at
Exeter, which was relieved by Lieutenant Bancroft with the loss of a few of his
men; one of them, Simon Stone, received nine wounds with shot, and two strokes
of a hatchet; when his friends came to bury him they perceived life in him,
Mag. lib. 7. p. 74.
and by the application of cordials he revived to the amazement of all.

Two companies under the Captains Floyd and Wiswal were now scouting, and on
the sixth day of July discovered an Indian track, which they pursued till they
came up with the enemy at Whelewright's Pond, [in Lee] where a bloody
engagement ensued for some hours; in which Wiswal, his lieutenant Flagg, and
sergeant Walker, with twelve more, were killed, and several wounded. It was not
known how many of the enemy fell, as they always carried off their dead. Floyd
maintained the fight after Wiswal's death, till his men, fatigued and wounded,
drew off; which obliged him to follow* The enemy retreated at the same time;
for when Captain Convers went to look after the wounded, he found seven alive,
whom he brought in by sunrise the next morning; and then returned to bury the
dead. The enemy then went westward, and in the course of one week killed,
between Lamprey river and Almsbury, not less than forty people.

The cruelties exercised upon the captives in this war exceeded, both in number
and degree, any in former times. The most healthy and vigorous of them were
sold in Canada, the weaker were sacrificed and scalped; and for every scalp
they had a premium. Two instances only are remembered of their releasing any
without a ransom; one was a woman taken from Fox Point, Mag. 73.
who obtained her liberty by procuring them some of the necessaries of life;
the other was at York; where, after they had taken many of the people, they
restored two aged women and five children, in return for a generous action of
Major Church, who had spared the lives of as many women and children when they
fell into his hands at Amariscogin. MS Letter.


The people of New England now looked on Canada as the source of their
troubles, and formed a design to reduce it to subjection to the crown of
England. The enterprise was bold and hazardous; and had their ability been
equal to the ardour of their patriotism it might probably have been
accomplished. By straining every nerve, they equipped an armament in some
degree equal to the service. What was wanting in military and naval discipline
was made up in resolution; and the command was given to Sir William Phips, an
honest man, and a friend to his country; but by no means qualified for such an
attempt. Unavoidable accidents retarded the expedition, so that the fleet did
not arrive before Quebec till October; when it was more than time to return. It
being impossible to continue there to any purpose; and the troops growing
sickly and discouraged, after some ineffectual parade, they abandoned the
enterprise.

This disappointment was severely felt. The equipment of the fleet and army
required a supply of money which could not readily be collected, and occasioned
a paper currency; which has often been drawn into precedent on like occasions,
and has proved a fatal source of the most complicated and extensive mischief.
The people were almost dispirited with the prospect of poverty and ruin. In
this melancholy state of the country, it was an happy circumstance that the
Indians voluntarily came in with a flag of truce, Nov. 29.
and desired a cessation of hostilities. A conference being held at Sagadahock,
they brought in ten captives, and settled a truce till the first day of May,
which they observed till the ninth of June; 1691.
when they attacked Storer's garrison at Wells, but were bravely repulsed.
About the same time they killed two men at Exeter, and on the twenty-ninth of
September, Mag. 78.
a party of them came from the eastward in canoes to Sandy Beach [Rye] where
they killed and captivated twenty-one persons. MS Letter of Morril to Prince.
Captain Sherburne of Portsmouth, a worthy officer, was this year killed at
Macquoit. Fitch's MS.


The next winter the country being alarmed with the destruction of York, 1692.
Januar. 25.
some new regulations were made for the general defense. Major Elisha
Hutchinson was appointed commander in chief of the militia; by whose prudent
conduct the frontiers were well guarded, and so constant a communication was
kept up, by ranging parties, from one post to another, that it became
impossible for the enemy to attack in their usual way by surprise. The good
effect of this regulation was presently seen. A young man being in the woods
near Cochecho, was fired at by some Indians. Lieutenant Wilson immediately went
out with eighteen men; and finding the Indians, killed or wounded the whole
party excepting one. This struck a terror and kept them quiet the remainder of
the winter and spring. But on the tenth day of June, an army of French and
Indians made a furious attack on Storer's garrison at Wells, where Captain
Convers commanded; who after a brave and resolute defense, was so happy as to
drive them off with great loss.

Sir William Phips, being now governor of Massachusetts, continued the same
method of defense; keeping out continual scouts under brave and experienced
officers. This kept the Indians so quiet that, except one poor family which
they took at Oyster river, and some small mischief at Quaboag, there is no
mention of any destruction made by them during the year 1693. 1693.
Their animosity against New England was not quelled; but they needed a space
to recruit; some of their principal men were in captivity, and they could not
hope to redeem them without a peace. To obtain it, they came into the fort at
Pemaquid; Aug. 11.
and there entered into a solemn covenant; wherein they acknowledged subjection
to the crown of England; engaged to abandon the French interest; promised
perpetual peace; to forbear private revenge; to restore all captives; and even
went so far as to deliver hostages for the due performance of their
engagements. This peace, Mag. p. 85.
or rather truce, gave both sides a respite, which both earnestly desired.

The people of New Hampshire were much reduced; their lumber trade and
husbandry being greatly impeded by the war. Frequent complaints were made of
the burden of the war, the scarcity of provisions, and the dispiritedness of
the people. Once, it is said in the council minutes that they were even ready
to quit the province. The governor was obliged to impress men to guard the
outposts; they were sometimes dismissed for want of provisions, and then the
garrisoned officers were called to account and severely punished: Yet all this
time the public debt did not exceed four hundred pounds. In this situation,
they were obliged to apply to their neighbors for assistance; but this was
granted with a sparing hand. The people of Massachusetts were much divided and
at variance among themselves, both on account of the new charter which they had
received from King William, and the pretended witchcrafts which have made so
loud a noise in the world. Party and passion had usurped the place of
patriotism; and the defense, not only of their neighbors, but of themselves
was neglected to gratify their malignant humors. Their governor too had been
affronted in this province, on the following occasion.

Sir William Phips, having had a quarrel with Captain Short of the Nonsuch
frigate about the extent of his power as vice admiral, arrested Short at
Boston, and put him on board a merchant ship bound for England, commanded by
one Tay, with a warrant to deliver him to the secretary of state. The ship put
into Pascataqua, and the Nonsuch came in after her. The lieutenant, Carry, sent
a letter to Hinckes, president of the council threatening to impress seamen if
Short was not released. Carry was arrested and brought before the council, where
he received a reprimand for his insolence. At the same time Sir William came
hither by land, went on board Tay's ship, and sent the cabbin-boy with a
message to the president to come to him there; which Hinckes highly resented
and refused. Phips then demanded of Tay his former warrant, and issued another
commanding the re-delivery of Short to him, broke open Short's chest, and
seized his papers. This action was looked upon by some as an exertion of power
to which he had no right, and it was proposed to cite him before the council to
answer for assuming authority out of his jurisdiction. The president was warm;
March 30.
but a majority of the council, considering Sir William's opinion that his vice
admiral's commission extended to this province, (though Usher had one, but was
not present) and that no person belonging to the province had been injured, MS
in ^iles.
advised the president to take no farther notice of the matter. Soon after this
Sir William drew off the men whom he had stationed in this province as
soldiers; and the council advised the lieutenant governor to apply to the
colony of Connecticut for men and provisions; but whether this request was
granted does not appear.

The towns of Dover and Exeter being more exposed than Portsmouth or Hampton
suffered the greatest share in the common calamity. Nothing but the hope of
better times kept alive their fortitude. When many of the eastern settlements
were wholly broken up, they stood their ground, and thus gained to themselves a
reputation which their posterity boast of to this day.

The engagements made by the Indians in the treaty of Pemaquid, 1694.
might have been performed if they had been left to their own choice. But the
French missionaries had been for some years very assiduous in propagating their
tenets among them, one of which was that to break faith with heretics was no
sin. The Sieur de Villieu, who had distinguished himself in defense of Quebec
when Phips was before it, and had contracted a strong antipathy to the
New-Englanders, being then in command at Penobscot, he with M. Thury, the
missionary, diverted Madokawando and the other sachems from complying with
their engagements; so that pretenses were found for detaining the English
captives, who were more in number, and of more consequence than the hostages
whom the Indians had given. Influenced by the same pernicious councils, they
kept a watchful eye on the frontier towns, to see what place was most secure
and might be attacked to the greatest advantage. The settlement at Oyster
river, within the town of Dover, was pitched upon as the most likely place; and
it is said that the design of surprising it was publicly talked of at Quebec
two months before it was put in execution* Rumors of Indians lurking in the
woods thereabout made some of the people apprehend danger; but no mischief
being attempted, they imagined them to be hunting parties, Magnalia* lib* ^. p.
8^*
and returned to their security. At length, the necessary preparations being
made, Villieu, with a body of two hundred and fifty Indians, collected from the
tribes of St. John, Penobscot and Norridgwog, Charlevoix li^. 15. p 210.
attended by a French priest, marched for the devoted place.

Oyster river is a stream which runs into the western branch of Pascataqua; the
settlements were on both sides of it, and the houses chiefly near the water.
Here were twelve garrisoned houses sufficient for the defense of the
inhabitants, but apprehending no danger, some families remained at their own
unfortified houses, and those who were in the garrisons were but indifferently
provided for defense, some being even destitute of powder. The enemy approached
the place undiscovered, and halted near the falls on Tuesday evening, the
seventeenth of July. Here they formed two divisions, one of which was to go on
each side of the river and plant themselves in ambush, in small parties, near
every house, so as to be ready for the attack at the rising of the sun; and the
first gun was to be the signal. John Dean, whose house stood by the saw-mill at
the falls, intending to go from home very early, arose before the dawn of day,
and was shot as he came out of his door. This firing, in part, disconcerted
their plan; several parties who had some distance to go, had not then arrived
at their stations; the people in general were immediately alarmed, some of them
had time to make their escape, and others to prepare for their defense. The
signal being given, the attack began in all parts where the enemy was ready.

Of the twelve garrisoned houses five were destroyed, viz. Adams's, Drew's,
Edgerly's, Medar's and Beard's. They entered Adams's without resistance, where
they killed fourteen persons; one of them, being a woman with child, they
ripped open. The grave is still to be seen in which they were all buried. Drew
surrendered his garrison on the promise of security, but was murdered when he
fell into their hands; one of his children, a boy of nine years old, was made
to run through a lane of Indians, as a mark for them to throw their hatchets
at, till they had dispatched him. Edgerly's was evacuated; the people took
their boat, and one of them was mortally wounded before they got out of reach
of the enemy's shot. Beard's and Medar's were also evacuated and the people
escaped.

The defenseless houses were nearly all set on fire, the inhabitants being
either killed or taken in them, or else in endeavoring to fly to the
garrisons. Some escaped by hiding in the bushes and other secret places, Thomas
Edgerly, by concealing himself in his cellar, preserved his house, though twice
set on fire. The house of John Buss, the minister, was destroyed, with a
valuable library. He was absent, his wife and family fled to the woods and
escaped. The wife of John Dean, at whom the first gun was fired, was taken with
her daughter, and carried about two miles up the river, where they were left
under the care of an old Indian whilst the others returned to their bloody
work. The Indian complained of a pain in his head, and asked the woman what
would be a proper remedy: she answered, Occapee, which is the Indian word for
rum, of which she knew he had taken a bottle from her house. The remedy being
agreeable, he took a large dose and fell asleep; and she took that opportunity
to make her escape, with her child, into the woods, and kept herself concealed
till they were gone.

The other seven garrisons, viz. Burnham's, Bickford's, Smith's, Bunker's,
Davis's, Jones's, and Woodman's were resolutely and successfully defended. At
Burnham's the gate was left open: The Indians, ten in number, who were
appointed to surprise it, were asleep under the bank of the river, at the time
that the alarm was given. A man within, who had been kept awake by the
toothache, hearing the first gun, roused the people and secured the gate, just
as the Indians who were awakened by the same noise were entering. Finding
themselves disappointed, they ran to Pitman's, a defenseless house, and forced
the door at the moment that he had burst away through that end of the house
which was next to the garrison, to which he with his family, taking advantage
of the shade of some trees, it being moonlight, happily escaped. Still
defeated, they attacked the house of John Davis, which, after some resistance,
he surrendered on terms; but the terms were violated, and the whole family was
either killed or made captives. Thomas Bickford preserved his house in a
singular manner. It was situate near the river, and surrounded with a palisade.
Being alarmed before the enemy had reached the house, he sent off his family in
a boat, and then shutting his gate, betook himself alone to the defense of his
fortress. Despising alike the promises and threats by which the Indians would
have persuaded him to surrender, he kept up a constant fire at them, changing
his dress as often as he could, showing himself with a different cap, hat or
coat, and sometimes without either, and giving directions aloud as if he had
had a number of men with him. Finding their attempt vain, the enemy withdrew,
and left him sole master of the house which he had defended with such admirable
address* Smith's, Bunker's, and Davis's garrisons, being seasonably apprized of
the danger, were resolutely defended; one Indian was supposed to be killed and
another wounded by a shot from Davis's. Jones's garrison was beset before day;
Capt. Jones hearing his dogs bark, and imagining wolves might be near, went out
to secure some swine and returned unmolested. He then went up into the flankart
and sat on the wall. Discerning the flash of a gun, he dropped backward; the
ball entered the place from whence he had withdrawn his legs. The enemy from
behind a rock kept firing on the house for some time and then quitted it.
During these transactions the French priest took possession of the
meeting house, and employed himself in writing on the pulpit with chalk; but
the house received no damage.

Those parties of the enemy who were on the south side of the river having
completed their destructive work, collected in a field adjoining to Burnham's
garrison, where they insultingly showed their prisoners, and derided the
people, thinking themselves out of reach of their shot. A young man from the
centry-box fired at one who was making some indecent signs of defiance, and
wounded him in the heel: Him they placed on a horse and carried away. Both
divisions then met at the falls, where they had parted the evening before, and
proceeded together to Capt. Woodman's garrison. The ground being uneven, they
approached without danger, and from behind a hill kept up a long and severe
fire at the hats and caps which the people within held up on sticks above the
walls, without any other damage than galling the roof of the house. At length,
apprehending it was time for the people in the neighboring settlements to be
collected in pursuit of them, they finally withdrew; having killed and
captivated between ninety and an hundred persons, and burned about twenty
houses, of which five were garrisons Charlevoix with his usual parade boasts of
their having killed two hundred and thirty people, and burned fifty or sixty
houses* He speaks of only two sorts, both of which were stormed.
. The main body of them retreated over Winnipiseogee lake, where they divided
their prisoners, separating those in particular who were most intimately
connected, in which they often took a pleasure suited to their savage nature
Among these prisoners were Thomas Drew and his wife who were newly married. He
was carried to Canada, where he continued two years and was redeemed. She to
Norridgwog, and was gone four years, in which she endured every thing but
death. She was delivered of a child in the winter, in the open air, and in a
violent snow storm. Being unable to suckle her child, or provide it any food,
the Indians killed it. She lived fourteen days on a decoction of the bark of
trees. Once they set her to draw a sled up a river against a piercing
north-west wind, and left her. She was so overcome with the cold that she grew
sleepy, laid down and was nearly dead, when they returned; they carried her
senseless to a wi^^am, and poured warm water down her throat, which recovered
her. After her return to her husband, ^he had fourteen children; they lived
together till he was ninety three and she eighty nine years of age; they died
within two days of each other and were buried in one grave.

These particular circumstances of the destruction at Oyster river were at my
desire collected from the information of aged people by John Smith, Esquire. a
d^^cendant of one of the suffering families.


.

About forty of the enemy under Toxus, a Norridgwog chief, resolving on farther
mischief, went westward and did execution as far as Groton. A small party
having crossed the river Pascataqua, came to a farm where Ursula Cutts, widow
of the deceased president, resided, who imagining the enemy had done what
mischief they intended for that time, could not be persuaded to remove into
town till her haymaking should be finished. As she was in the field with her
laborers, Magnalia, lib. 7. p. 86.
the enemy fired from an ambush and killed her, with three others. Colonel
Richard Waldron and his wife with their infant son (afterward secretary) had
almost shared the same fate; they were taking boat to go and dine with this
lady, when they were stopped by the arrival of some friends at their house;
whilst at dinner they were informed of her death. She lived about two miles
above the town of Portsmouth, and had laid out her farm with much elegance. The
scalps taken in this whole expedition were carried to Canada by Madokawando,
and presented to Count Frontenac, from whom he received the reward of his
treacherous adventure.

There is no mention of any more mischief by the Indians within this province
till the next year, when, 1695.
in the month of July, two men, were killed at Exeter. The following year, 1696.
on the seventh day of May, John Church, who had been taken and escaped from
them seven years before, was killed and scalped at Cochecho, near his own
house. On the twenty-sixth of June an attack was made at Portsmouth plain,
about two miles from the town. The enemy came from York-nubble to Sandy-beach
in canoes, which they hid there among the bushes near the shore. Some suspicion
was formed the day before by reason of the cattle running out of the woods at
Little-harbour; but false alarms were frequent and this was not much regarded.
Early in the morning the attack was made on five houses at once; fourteen
persons were killed on the spot, one was scalped and left for dead, but
recovered, and four were taken. The enemy having plundered the houses of what
they could carry, set them on fire, and made a precipitate retreat through the
great swamp. A company of militia under Captain Shackford and Lieutenant Libbey
pursued, and discovered them cooking their breakfast, at a place ever since
called Breakfast hill. [Rye] The Indians were on the farther side, having
pl^ced their captives between themselves and the top of the hill, that in case
of an attack they might first receive the fire. The lieutenant pleaded to go
round the hill, and come upon them below to cut off their retreat; but the
captain fearing that in that case they would, according to their custom, kill
the prisoners, rushed upon them from the top of the hill, by which means they
retook the captives and plunder, but the Indians, rolling down the hill,
escaped into the swamp and got to their canoes. Another party, under another
commander, Gerrish, was then sent out in shallops to intercept them as they
should cross over to the eastward by night. The captain ranged his boats in a
line, and ordered his men to reserve their fire till he gave the watchword. It
being a calm night the Indians were heard as they advanced; but the captain,
unhappily giving the word before they had come within gunshot, they tacked
about to the southward, and going round the Isles of Shoals, by the favor of
their light canoes escaped. The watchword was Crambo, which the captain ever
after bore as an appendage to his title The account of this transaction I had
from the late Judge Parker, who had taken pains to preserve it. It is
mentioned, but not circumstantially, by Dr. Mathe^, Magnalia, lib. 7 p. 89.
. On the twenty-sixth day of July, the people of Dover were waylaid as they
were returning from the public worship, when three were killed, Magnalia, lib.
7. p. 89.
three wounded, and three carried to Penobscot, from whence they soon found
their way home.

The next year on the tenth of June, 1697.
the town of Exeter was remarkably preserved from destruction. A body of the
enemy had placed themselves near the town, intending to make an assault in the
morning of the next day. A number of women and children contrary to the advice
of their friends went into the fields, without a guard, to gather strawberries.
When they were gone, some persons, to frighten them, fired an alarm; which
quickly spread through the town, and brought the people together in arms. The
Indians supposing that they were discovered, and quickened by fear, after
killing one, wounding another, and taking a child, made a hasty retreat and
were seen no more there. But on the fourth day of July they waylaid and killed
the worthy Major Frost at Kittery, Mag. lib. 7. ^. 91. MS Journal.
to whom they had owed revenge ever since the seizure of the four hundred at
Cochecho, in which he was concerned.

The same year an invasion of the country was projected by the French. A fleet
was to sail from France to Newfoundland and thence to Penobscot, where being
joined by an army from Canada, an attempt was to be made on Boston, and the
seacoast ravaged from thence to Pascataqua. The plan was too extensive and
complicated to be executed in one summer. The fleet came no further than
Newfoundland; when the advanced season, and scantiness of provisions obliged
them to give over the design. The people of New England were apprized of the
danger, and made the best preparations in their power. They strengthened their
fortifications on the coast, and raised a body of men to defend the frontiers
against the Indians who were expected to cooperate with the French. Some
mischief was done by lurking parties at the eastward* but New Hampshire was
unmolested by them during the remainder of this, and the whole of the following
year.

After the peace of Ryswick, School.
Count Frontenac informed the Indians that he could not any longer support them
in a war with the English, with whom his nation was then at peace. He therefore
advised them to bury the hatchet and restore their captives. Having suffered
much by famine, and being divided in their opinions about prosecuting the war,
after a long time they were brought to a treaty at Casco; 1699. Januar. 7.
where they ratified their former engagements; acknowledged subjection to the
crown of England; lamented their former perfidy, and promised future peace and
good behavior in such terms as the commissioners dictated, Mag. lib. 7 p. 94.
and with as much sincerity as could be expected. At the ^ame time they
restored those captives who were able to travel from the places of their
detention to Casco in that unfavourable season of the year; giving assurance
for the return of the others in the spring; but many of the younger sort, both
males and females, were detained; who, mingling with the Indians, contributed
to a succession of enemies in future wars against their own country. Hutchin.
vol. 2. p. 110.


A general view of an Indian war will give a just idea of these distressing
times, and be a proper close to this narration.

The Indians were seldom or never seen before they did execution. They appeared
not in the open field, nor gave proofs of a truly masculine courage; but did
their exploits by surprise, chiefly in the morning, keeping themselves hid
behind logs and bushes, near the paths in the woods, or the fences contiguous
to the doors of houses; and their lurking holes could be known only by the
report of their guns, which was indeed but feeble, as they were sparing of
ammunition, and as near as possible to their object before they fired. They
rarely assaulted an house unless they knew there would be but little
resistance, and it has been afterward known that they have lain in ambush for
days together, watching the motions of the people at their work, without daring
to discover themselves. One of their chiefs who had got a woman's riding-hood
among his plunder would put it on, in an evening, and walk into the streets of
Portsmouth, looking into the windows of houses and listening to the
conversation of the people.

Their cruelty was chiefly exercised upon children, and such aged, infirm, or
corpulent persons as could not bear the hardships of a journey through the
wilderness. If they took a woman far advanced in pregnancy their knives were
plunged into her bowels. An infant when it became troublesome had its brains
dashed out against the next tree or stone. Sometimes to torment the wretched
mother, they would whip and beat the child till almost dead, or hold it under
water till its breath was just gone, and then throw it to her to comfort and
quiet it. If the mother could not readily still its weeping, the hatchet was
buried in its skull. A captive wearied with a burden laid on his shoulders was
often sent to rest the same way. If any one proved refractory, or was known to
have been instrumental of the death of an Indian, or related to one who had
been so, he was tortured with a lingering punishment, generally at the stake,
whilst the other captives were insulted with the sight of his miseries.
Sometimes a fire would be kindled and a threatening given out against one or
more, though there was no intention of sacrificing them, only to make sport of
their terrors. The young Indians often signalized their cruelty in treating
captives inhumanly out of sight of the elder, and when inquiry was made into
the matter, the insulted captive must either be silent or put the best face on
it, to prevent worse treatment for the future. If a captive appeared sad and
dejected he was sure to meet with insult; but if he could sing and dance and
laugh with his masters, he was caressed as a brother. They had a strong
aversion to negroes, and* generally killed them when they fell into their hands.

Famine was a common attendant on these doleful captivities; the Indians when
they caught any game devoured it all at one sitting, and then girding
themselves round the waist, traveled without sustenance till chance threw more
in their way. The captives, unused to such canine repasts and abstinances,
could not support the surfeit of the one nor the craving of the other. A ^hange
of masters, though it sometimes proved a relief from misery, yet rendered the
prospect of a return to their home more distant. If an Indian had lost a
relative, a prisoner bought for a gun, a hatchet, or a few skins, must supply
the place of the deceased, and be the father, brother, or son of the purchaser;
and those who could accommodate themselves to such barbarous adoption, were
treated with the same kindness as the persons in whose place they were
substituted. A sale among the French of Canada was the most happy event to a
captive, especially if he became a servant in a family; though sometimes even
there a prison was their lot, till opportunity presented for their redemption;
whilst the priests employed every seducing art to pervert them to the popish
religion, and induce them to abandon their country. These circumstances, joined
with the more obvious hardships of traveling half naked and barefoot through
pathless deserts, over craggy mountains and deep swamps, through frost, rain
and snow, exposed by day and night to the inclemency of the weather, and in
summer to the venomous stings of those numberless insects with which the woods
abound; the restless anxiety of mind, the retrospect of past scenes of
pleasure, the remembrance of distant friends, the bereavements experienced at
the beginning or during the progress of the captivity, and the daily
apprehension of death either by famine or the savage enemy; these were the
horrors of an Indian captivity.

On the other hand, it must be acknowledged that there have been instances of
justice, generosity and tenderness during these wars, which would have done
honor to a civilized people. A kindness shown to an Indian was remembered as
long as an injury; and persons have had their lives spared for acts of humanity
done to the ancestors of those Indians into whose hands they have fallen
Several instances to this purpose have been occasionally mentioned in the
course of this narrative. The following additional one i^ taken from Capt.
Hammond's MS Journal. April 13, 1677. The Indians Simon, Andrew and Peter burnt
the house of Edward Weymouth at Sturgeon creek. They plundered the house of one
Crawley but did not kill him, because of some kindnesses done to Simon's
grandmother.
. They would sometimes carry children on their arms and shoulders, feed their
prisoners with the best of their provision, and pinch themselves rather than
their captives should want food. When sick or wounded they would afford them
proper means for their recovery, which they were very well able to do by their
knowledge of simples. In thus preserving the lives and health of their
prisoners, they doubtless had a view of gain. But the most remarkably
favorable circumstance in an Indian captivity, was their decent behavior to
women. I have never read, nor heard, nor could find by inquiry, that any woman
who fell into their hands was ever treated with the least immodesty; but
testimonies to the contrary are very frequent Mary Rowlandson who was captured
at Lancaster, in 1675, has this passage in her narrative, (p. 55.) I have been
in the midst of these roaring lions and savage bears, that feared neither God
nor man nor the devil, by day and night, alone and in company; sleeping all
sorts together, and yet not one of them ever offered me the least abuse of
unchastity in word or action.

Elizabeth Hanson who was taken from Dover in 1724, testifies in her narrative,
(p. 28.) that the Indians are very civil toward their captive women, not
offering any incivility by any indecent carriage.

William Fleming, who was taken in Pennsylvania, in 1755, says the Indians told
him "he need not be afraid of their abusing his wife, for they would not do it,
for fear of offending their God (pointing their hands toward heaven) for the
man that affron^s his God will surely be killed when he goes to war. He farther
says, that one of them gave his wife a shift and petticoat which he had among
his plunder, and though he was alone with her, yet he turned his back, and went
to some distance whilst she put them on. (p. 10.)

Charlevoix in his account of the Indians of Canada, says, (letter 7.) There is
no example that any have ever taken the least liberty with the French women,
even when they were their prisoners.


. Whether this negative virtue is to be ascribed to a natural frigidity of
constitution, let philosophers inquire: The fact is certain; and it was a most
happy circumstance for our female captives, that in the midst of all their
distresses, they had no reason to fear from a savage foe, the perpetration of a
crime, which has too frequently disgraced, not only the personal, but the
national character of those, who make large pretenses to civilization and
humanity.

CHAP. XI. The civil affairs of the province during the administrations of
Usher, Partridge, Allen, the Earl of Bellamount and Dudley, comprehending the
whole controversy with Allen and his heirs.
JOHN Usher, Esquire, was a native of Boston, and by profession a stationer. He
was possessed of an handsome fortune, and sustained a fair character in trade.
He had been employed by the Massachusetts government, when in England, to
negociate the purchase of the province of Maine, from the heirs of Sir
Ferdinando Gorges, and had thereby got a taste for speculating in landed
interest. He was one of the partners in the million purchase, and had sanguine
expectations of gain from that quarter. He had rendered himself unpopular among
his countrymen, by accepting the office of treasurer, under Sir Edmund
Androsse, and joining with apparent zeal in the measures of that
administration, and he continued a friendly connection with that party, after
they were displaced.

Though not illnatured, but rather of an open and generous disposition, yet he
wanted those accomplishments which he might have acquired by a learned and
polite education. He had but little of the statesman, and less of the courtier.
Instead of an engaging affability he affected a severity in his deportment, was
loud in conversation, and stern in command. Fond of presiding in government, he
frequently journied into the province, (though his residence was at Boston,
where he carried on his business as usual,) and often summoned the council when
he had little or nothing to lay before them. He gave orders, and found fault
like one who felt himself independent, and was determined to be obeyed. He had
an high idea of his authority and the dignity of his commission, and when
opposed and insulted, as he sometimes was, he treated the offenders with a
severity which he would not relax till he had brought them to submission. His
public speeches were always incorrect, Provi^c^ files.
and sometimes coarse and reproachful.

He seems, however, to have taken as much care for the interest and
preservation of the province as one in his circumstances could have done. He
began his administration in the height of a war which greatly distressed and
impoverished the country, yet his views from the beginning were lucrative In a
letter to George Dorrington and John Tailor in London, he writes thus; Jan. 29,
1692-3. In case yourselves are concerned in the province of New Hampshire, with
prudent management it may be worth money, the people only paying 4d and 2d per
acre. The reason why the commonalty of the people do not agree is because 3 or
4 of the great landed men dissuade them from it. The people have petitioned the
king to be annexed to Boston government, but it will not be for the
proprietor's interest to admit of that unless the king sends a general governor
over all.
. The people perceived these views, and were aware of the danger. The transfer
of the title from Mason to Allen was only a change of names: They expected a
repetition of the same difficulties under a new claimant. After the opposition
they had hitherto made, it could not be thought strange that men whose pulse
beat high for freedom, should refuse to submit to vassalage; nor, whilst they
were on one side defending their possessions against a savage enemy, could it
be expected, that on the other, they should tamely suffer the intrusion of a
landlord. Usher's interest was united with theirs in providing for the defense
of the country, and contending with the enemy; but when the propriety of the
soil was in question, they stood on opposite sides; and as both these
controversies were carried on at the same time, the conduct of the people
toward him varied according to the exigency of the case; they sometimes voted
him thanks for his services, and at other times complained of his abusing and
oppressing them.

Some of them would have been content to have held their estates under Allen's
title I have 40 hands in Exeter who desire to take patents for lands from you,
and many in other towns. Usher to All^n* October 1695.
, but the greater part, including the principal men were resolved to oppose it
to the last extremity. They had an aversion not only to the proprietary claim
on their lands, but their separation from the Massachusetts government, under
which they had formerly enjoyed so much freedom and peace. They had petitioned
to be re-annexed to them, at the time of the revolution; and they were always
very fond of applying to them for help in their difficulties, that it might
appear how unable they were to subsist alone. They knew also that the
Massachusetts people were as averse as themselves to Allen's claim, which
extended to a great part of their lands, and was particularly noticed in their
new charter.

Soon after Usher's arrival, he made enquiry for the papers which contained the
transactions relative to Mason's suits. During the suspension of government in
1689, Captain John Pickering, a man of a rough and adventurous spirit, and a
lawyer, had gone with a company of armed men to the house of Chamberlayne, the
late secretary and clerk, and demanded the records and files which were in his
possession. Chamberlayne refused to deliver them without some legal warrant or
security; but Pickering took them by force, and conveyed them over the river to
Kittery. Pickering was summoned before the governor, threatened and imprisoned,
but for sometime would neither deliver the books, nor discover the place of
their concealment, unless by order of the assembly and to some person by them
appointed to receive them. At length, however, he was constrained to deliver
them, and they were put into the hands of the secretary, by the
lieutenant-governor's order.

1693.
Another favorite point with Usher was to have the boundary between
New Hampshire and Massachusetts ascertained: There were reasons which induced
some of the people to fall in with this desire. The general idea was, that
New Hampshire began at the end of three miles north of the river Merrimack;
which imaginary line was also the boundary of the adjoining townships on each
side. The people who lived, and owned lands near these limits, pretended to
belong to either province, as best suited their convenience; which caused a
difficulty in the collecting of taxes, and cutting of timber. The town of
Hampton was sensibly affected with these difficulties, 1695. October 12*
and petitioned the council that the line might be run. The council appointed a
committee of Hampton men to do it, and gave notice to Massachusetts of their
intention; Prove. files.
desiring them to join in the affair. They disliked it and declined to act.
Upon which the lieutenant governor and council of New Hampshire caused the
boundary line to be run from the seashore three miles northward of Merrimack,
and parallel to the river, Brief of the case of N. Hamp. and Massachu. stated
by Strange and Hollings, 1738, p. 3.
as far as any settlements had been made, or lands occupied.

The only attempt made to extend the settlement of the lands during these
times, was, that in the spring of the year 1694, whilst there was a truce with
the Indians, Usher granted a charter for the township of Kingston, to about
twenty petitioners from Hampton. They were soon discouraged by the dangers and
difficulties of the succeeding hostilities, and many of them returned home
within two years. After the war they resumed their enterprise; but it was not
till the year 1725, that they were able to obtain the settlement of a minister.
No alterations took place in the old towns, except the separation of Great
Island, 1693.
Little Harbor, and Sandy Beach, from Portsmouth, and their erection into a
town by the name of New Castle; together with the annexation of that part of
Squamscot patent which now bears the name of Stretham, to Exeter, it having
before been connected with Hampton. Prove. files.


The lieutenant governor was very forward in these transactions, thinking them
circumstances favorable to his views, and being willing to recommend himself
to the people, by seconding their wishes, as far as was consistent with the
interest he meaned to serve. The people, however, regarded the settling and
dividing of townships, and the running of lines, only as matters of general
convenience, and continued to be disgusted with his administration. His
repeated calls upon them for money were answered by repeated pleas of poverty,
and requests for assistance from the neighboring province. Usher used all his
influence with that government to obtain a supply of men to garrison the
frontiers; and when they wanted provisions for the garrisons, and could not
readily raise the money, he would advance it out of his own purse and wait till
the treasury could reimburse it.

During the two or three first years of his administration the public charges
were provided for as they had been before, by an excise on wines and other
spirituous liquors, and an impost on merchandise. These duties being laid only
from year to year, Usher vehemently urged upon the assembly a renewal of the
act, 1695. Nov. 7 and 9.
and an extension of the duty to articles of export; and that a part of the
money so raised might be applied to the support of government. The answer he
obtained was, that considering the exposed state of the province, they were
obliged to apply all the money they could raise to their defense; and therefore
they were not capable of doing any thing for the support of government, though
they were sensible his honor had been at considerable expense: They begged
that he would join with the council in representing to the king the poverty and
danger of the province, that such methods might be taken for their support and
preservation as to the royal wisdom should seem meet. Being further pressed
upon the subject, they passed a vote to lay the proposed duties for one year,
provided he and the council would join with them in petitioning the king to
annex them to Massachusetts.

He had the mortification of being disappointed in his expectations of gain,
not only from the people, but from his employer. Allen had promised him two
hundred and fifty pounds per annum for executing his commission; and when at
the end of the third year, Usher drew on him for the payment of this sum, his
bill came back protested It is probable that Allen was not able to comply with
this demand. The purchase of the province from the Masons had been made "with
other men's money." Letter of Usher to Sir Matthew Dudley, Sept. 1718.
. This was the more mortifying, as he had assiduously and faithfully attended
to Allen's interest, and acquainted him from time to time with the means he had
used, the difficulties he had encountered, the pleas he had urged, the time he
had spent, and the expense he had incurred in defense and support of his claim.
He now desired him to come over and assume the government himself, Usher's
letter to Allen, July and Octo. 1695.
or get a successor to him appointed in the office of lieutenant governor. He
did not know that the people were before hand of him in this latter request.

On a pretense of disloyalty he had removed Hinckes, Waldron, and Vaughan from
their seats in the council. The former of these was a man who could change with
the times; the two ^^tter were steady opposers of the proprietary claim. Their
suspension irritated the people, who, by their influence, privately agreed to
recommend William Partridge, Esquire. as a proper person for their lieutenant
governor in Usher's stead. Partridge was a native of Portsmouth, a shipwright,
of an extraordinary mechanical genius, of a politic turn of mind, and a popular
man. He was treasurer of the province, and had been ill used by Usher. Being
largely concerned in trade he was well known in England, having supplied the
navy with masts and timber. His sudden departure for England was very
surprising to Usher, who could not imagine he had any other business than to
settle his accounts. But the surprise was greatly increased when he returned
with a commission appointing him lieutenant governor and commander in chief in
Allen's absence. 1697. January.
It was obtained of the lords justices in the king's absence, by the interest
of Sir Henry Ashurst, Ashurst's letters in files.
and was dated June 6, 1696.

Immediately on his arrival, his appointment was publicly notified to the
people; though, either from the delay of making out his instructions, or for
want of the form of an oath necessary to be taken, the commission was not
published in the usual manner: But the party in opposition to Usher triumphed.
The suspended counselors resumed their seats, Pickering was made king's
attorney, and Hinckes as president of the council, opened the assembly with a
speech. June 8.
This assembly ordered the records which had been taken from Pickering to be
deposited in the hands of Major Vaughan, MS. Laws.
who was appointed recorder: In consequence of which they have been kept in
that office ever since.

Usher being at Boston when this alteration took place, wrote to them,
declaring that no commission could supersede his till duly published; and
intimated his intention of coming hither if he could be safe with his life. He
also dispatched his secretary, Febru. 20.
Charles Story, to England, with an account of this transaction, which in one
of his private letters he styles "the Pascataqua rebellion;" adding, that the
militia were raised, and forty horse sent to seize him; and intimating that the
confusion was so great, that if but three French ships were to appear, he
believed they would surrender on the first summons. Usher's Letters.
The extreme imprudence of sending such a letter across the Atlantic in time of
war, was still heightened by an apprehension which then prevailed, that the
French were preparing an armament to invade the country, Lt Gov. Stoughton's
letter of Feb. 24, in files.
and that they particularly designed for Pascataqua river.

In answer to his complaint, the lords of trade directed him to continue in the
place of lieutenant governor, August 3.
till Partridge should qualify himself, or till Richard, Earl of Bellomont,
should arrive; who was commissioned to the government of New York,
Massachusetts Bay and New Hampshire; but had not yet departed from England.
Usher received the letter from the lords together with the articles of peace
which had been concluded at Ryswick, December. 10.
and immediately set off for New Hampshire, (where he had not been for a year)
proclaimed the peace, December. 13
and published the orders he had received, and having proceeded thus far,
thought all well and quiet. But his opposers having held a consultation at
night, Partridge's commission was the next day published in form; December. 14.
he took the oaths, and entered on the administration of government, to he
complete vexation and disappointment of Usher who had been so elated with the
confirmation of his commission, Usher's pa.
that as he passed through Hampton, he had forbidden the minister of that place
to observe a thanksgiving day, Council ^^les.
which had been appointed by President Hinckes.

An assembly being called, one of their first acts was to write to the lords of
trade, School. January 3.
acknowledging the favor of the king in appointing one of their own
inhabitants to the command of the province, complaining of Usher, and alleging
that there had been no disturbances but what he himself had made; declaring
that those counselors whom he had suspended were loyal subjects, and capable
of serving the king; and informing their lordships that Partridge had now
qualified himself, and that they were waiting the arrival of the Earl of
Bellomont.

They also deputed I^habod Plaisted to wait on the earl at New York, and
compliment him on his arrival. If he should find his lordship high, and
reserved, and not easy of access, he was instructed to employ some gentleman
who was in his confidence to manage the business; but if easy and free, he was
to wait on him in person; to tell him how joyfully they received the news of
his appointment, and that they daily expected Governor Allen, whose commission
would be accounted good till his lordship's should be published, Plaisted's
Instructions in files.
and to ask his advice how they should behave in such a case. The principal
design of this message was to make their court to the earl, and get the start
of Usher or any of his friends who might prepossess him with an opinion to
their disadvantage. But if this should have happened, Plaisted was directed to
observe what reception they met with. If his lordship was ready to come this
way, he was to beg leave to attend him as far as Boston, and then ask his
permission to return home; and he was furnished with a letter of credit to
defray his expenses. This message, which shows the contrivers to be no mean
politicians, had the desired effect.

The earl continued at New York for the first year after his arrival in
America; during which time Governor Allen came over, as it was expected, Aug.
23.
and his commission being still in force, he took the oaths and assumed the
command. Sept. 15.
Upon (...) appearance Nov. 23.
in council, where he produced the letter from the lords of trade, claimed his
place as lieutenant governor, and declared that the suspended counselors had
no right to sit till restored by the king's order. This brought on an
altercation, wherein Elliot affirmed that Partridge was duly qualified and in
office, that Waldron and Vaughan had been suspended without cause, and that if
they were not allowed to sit, the rest were determined to resign. The governor
declared Usher to be of the council; upon which Elliot withdrew.

At the succeeding assembly two new counselors appeared; 1699. January 5.
Joseph Smith, and Kingsley Hall. The first day passed quietly. The governor
approved Pickering as speaker of the house; told them he had assumed the
government because the Earl of Bellomont had not arrived; recommended a
continuance of the excise and powder money, and advised them to send a
congratulatory message to the earl at New York. January 6.
The next day the house answered, that they had continued the customs and
excise till November, that they had already congratulated the earl, and
received a kind answer, and were waiting his arrival; when they should enter
further on business. They complained that Allen's conduct had being grievous in
forbidding the collecting of the last tax, whereby the public debts were not
paid; in displacing sundry fit persons, and appointing others less fit, and
admitting Usher to be of the council, though superseded by Partridge's
commission. These things they told him had obliged some members of the council
and assembly to apply to his lordship for relief, and unless he should manage
with a more moderate hand they threatened him with a second application.

The same day Coffin and Wear moved a question in council, whether Usher was
one of that body. He asserted his privilege, and obtained a major vote. They
then entered their dissent, and desired a dismission. The governer forbad their
departure. Wear answered that he would not, by sitting there, put contempt on
the king's commission, meaning Partridge's, and withdrew. The next day the
assembly ordered the money arising from the impost and excise to be kept in the
treasury, till the Earl of Bellomont's arrival; and the governor dissolved them.

These violences on his part were supposed to originate from Usher's
resentment, and his overbearing influence upon Allen, who is said to have been
rather of a pacific and condescending disposition. The same ill temper
continued during the remainder of this short administration. The old
counselors, excepting Friar, refused to sit. Sampson Sheaffe and Peter Wear
made up the quorum. Sheaffe was also secretary, Smith treasurer, and William
Ardel, sheriff. The constables refused to collect the taxes of the preceding
year, and the governor was obliged to revoke his orders, MS in files.
and commission the former constables to do the duty which he had forbidden.

In the spring the earl of Bellomont set out for his eastern governments. The
council voted an address, and sent a committee, of which Usher was one, to
present it to him at Boston; and preparations were made for his reception in
New Hampshire; where he at length came and published his commission to the
great joy of the people, July 31.
who now saw at the head of the government a nobleman of distinguished figure
and polite manners, a firm friend to the revolution, a favorite of King
William, and one who had no interest in oppressing them.

During the controversy with Allen, Partridge had withdrawn; but upon this
change he took his seat as lieutenant-govvernor, and the displaced counselors
were again called to the board. A petition was presented against the judges of
the superior court, and a proclamation was issued, for justices of the peace
and constables only, to continue in office, whereby the judges commissions
determined. Richard Jose was made sheriff in the room of Ardell, and Charles
Story secretary in the room of Sheaffe.

The government was now modelled in favor of the people, and they rejoiced in
the change, as they apprehended the way was opened for an effectual settlement
of their long continued difficulties and disputes. Both parties laid their
complaints before the governor, who wisely avoided censuring either, and
advised to a revival of the courts of justice, in which the main controversy
might be legally decided. This was agreed to, and the necessary acts being
passed by an assembly, (who also presented the earl with five hundred pounds
which he obtained the king's leave to accept) after about eighteen days stay he
quitted the province, leaving Partridge, now quietly seated in the chair, to
appoint the judges of the respective courts. Hinckes was made chief justice of
the superior court, Council Records.
with Peter Coffin, John Gerrish and John Plaisted for assistants; Waldron
chief jusstice of the inferior court, with Henry Dow, Theodore Atkinson and
John Woodman for assistants.

One principal object of the earl's attention was to fortify the harbor and
provide for the defense of the country in case of another war. He had
recommended to the assembly in his speech the building of a strong fort on
Great Island, and afterward, in his letters, assured them that if they would
provide materials, he would endeavor to prevail on the king to be at the
expense of erecting it. 1700. June 6.
Col. Romer, a Dutch engineer, having viewed the spot, produced to the assembly
an estimate of the cost and transportation of materials, amounting to above six
thousand pounds. They were amazed at the proposal; and returned for answer to
the governor, that in their greatest difficulties, when their lives and estates
were in the most imminent hazard, they were never able to raise one thousand
pounds in a year I have here placed in one view such assessments as I have been
able to find during the preceding wa^, with the proportion of each town, which
varied according to their respective circumstances at different times. (MS Laws)

1692. 1693 1694 1695 Uncertain. 1697. Portsmouth, 70 210 167 129 6 140 1 ^
Hampton, 66 134 230 230 172 14 6 187 2 4^ Dover, 30 110 9^ 117 16 6 127 9 7
Exeter, 33 68 80 127 106 16 115 14 New Castle, 86 73 7 ^0 12 6 L. 200 600 700
400 600 ^^0


; that they had been exceedingly impoverished by a long war, and were now
struggling under an heavy debt, besides being engaged in a controversy with "a
pretended "proprietor;" that they had expended more "blood and money" to secure
his majesty's interest and dominion in New England than the intrinsic value of
their estates, and that the fortifying of the harbor did as much concern
Massachusetts as themselves; but they concluded with assuring his lordship,
that if he were thoroughly acquainted with their miserable, poor and mean
circumstances, they would readily submit to whatever he should think them
capable of doing. They were also required to furnish their quota of men to join
with the other colonies in defending the frontiers of New York in case of an
attack The quota^ of men to be furnished by each government for the defense of
New York, if attacked, were as follows, viz. Massachusetts 350 New Hampshire 40
Rhode Island 48 Connecticut 1^^ New York, 200 East New Jersey 60 West
New Jersey 60 Pennsylvania 80 Maryland 160 Virginia 240
MS in files


. MS in files.
This they thought extremely hard, not only because they had never received the
least assistance from New York in the late wars, but because an opinion
prevailed among them that their enemies had received supplies from the Dutch at
Albany, and that the plunder taken from their desolated towns had been sold in
that place. There was however no opportunity for affording this assistance,
Smith's Hist. New York; page 108, 175, 214.
as the New-Yorkers took care to maintain a good understanding with the French
and Indians, for the benefit of trade.

But to return to Allen: He had as little prospect of success in the newly
established courts, as the people had when Mason's suits were carried on under
Cranfield's government. Printed state of Allen's title, p 9.
On examining the records of the superior court it was found that twenty-four
leaves were missing, in which it was supposed the judgments recovered by Mason
were recorded. No evidence appeared of his having obtained possession. The work
was to begin anew; and Waldron, being one of the principal landholders and most
strenuous opposers of the claim, was singled out to stand foremost in the
controversy with Allen, as his father had with Mason. The cause went through
the courts, and was invariably given in favor of the defendant with costs.
Allen's only refuge was in an appeal to the king, Aug. 13.
which the court, following the example of their brethren in the Massachusetts,
refused to admit. He then petitioned the king, who by an order in council
granted him an appeal, allowing him eight months to prepare for its
prosecution. 1701. April 24.


The refusal of an appeal could not fail of being highly resented in England.
It was severely animadverted on by the lords of trade, who in a letter to the
Earl of Bellomont upon this occasion, say, April 29.
This declining to admit appeals to his majesty in council, is a matter that
you ought very carefully to watch against in all your governments. It is an
humor that prevails so much in proprieties and charter colonies, and the
INDEPENDENCY they thirst after is now so notorious, that it has been thought
fit those considerations, together with other objections against those
colonies, should be laid before the parliament; and a bill has thereupon been
brought into the house of lords for re-uniting the right of government in their
(...) to the crown. MS in file^


Before this letter was written the earl died at New York, March 5.
to the great regret of the people in his several governments, among whom he
had made himself very popular. A copy of the letter was sent to New Hampshire
by the council of New York; but the bill mentioned in it was not passed into an
act of parliament. For some reasons of state it was rejected by the house of
lords.

The assembly of New Hampshire, having now a fair opportunity, Hutch. vol. 2.
p. 131.
endeavored as much as possible to provide for their own security; and passed
two acts, the one for confirming the grants of lands which had been made within
their several townships; Sept. 13.
the other for ascertaining the bounds of them. Partridge gave his consent to
these acts; but Allen had the address to get them disallowed and repealed
because there was no reserve made in them of the proprietor's right. MS Laws.


The controversy being carried before the king, both sides prepared to attend
the suit. Allen's age, and probably want of cash, prevented his going in
person; he therefore appointed Usher to act for him, having previously
mortgaged one half of the province to him, October. 14.
for fifteen hundred pounds; Vaughan was appointed agent for the province,
1702. May 29.
and attorney to Waldron. It being a general interest, the assembly bore the
expense, and notwithstanding their pleas of poverty on other occasions provided
a fund, on which the agent might draw in case of emergency.

In the mean time King William died and Queen Anne appointed Joseph Dudley Esquire.
formerly president of New England, to be governor of Massachusetts and
New Hampshire; whose commission being published at Portsmouth, July 13.18.
the assembly by a well timed present interested him in their favor, and
afterward settled a salary on him during his administration, Council and
Assembly Records.
agreeably to the queen's instructions, who about this time forbad her
governors to receive any but settled salaries.

When Allen's appeal came before the queen in council, it was found that his
attorney had not brought proof that Mason had ever been legally in possession;
Printed state of Allen's title, p. 9.
for want of this, the judgment recovered by Waldron was affirmed; but the
order of council directed that the appellant should be at liberty to begin de
novo by a writ of ejectment in the courts of New Hampshire, MS Copy of Lords
Trade Report in 1753.
to try his title to the lands, or to quit-rents payable for the same; and that
if any doubt in law should arise, the jury should declare what titles each
party did severally make out to the lands in question, and that the points in
law should be referred to the court; Files of (...) Sup. (...)
or if any doubt should arise concerning the evidence, it should be specially
stated in writing, that if either party should appeal to her majesty she might
be more fully informed, in order to a final determination.

Whilst this appeal was depending a petition was presented to the queen,
praying that Allen might be put in possession of the waste lands. This petition
was referred to Sir Edward Northey attorney general, who was ordered to report
on three questions. viz. 1. Whether Allen had a right to the wastes? 2. What
lands ought to be accounted waste? 3. By what method her majesty might put him
into possession? At the same time Usher was making interest to be re-appointed
lieutenant governor of the province. Upon this, Vaughan entered a complaint to
the queen, setting forth that Allen claimed as waste ground not only a large
tract of unoccupied land, but much of that which had been long enjoyed by the
inhabitants, as common pasture, within the ^ounds of their several townships.
That Usher, by his former managements and misdemeanors when in office, had
forced some of the principal inhabitants to quit the province, and had greatly
harrassed and disgusted all the rest, rendering himself quite unacceptable to
them. That he was interested in the suits now depending, as on Allen's death he
would in right of his wife be entitled to part of the estate. Wherefore it was
humbly submitted whether it would be proper to appoint, as lieutenant governor,
one whose interest and endeavor it would be to disseize the people of their
ancient estates, and render them uneasy; and it was prayed that no letters
might be written to put Allen in possession of the wastes till the petitioner
should be heard by council. Usher's papers.


Usher's interest however prevailed. 1703. January 28.
The attorney general reported, that Allen's claim to the wastes was valid;
that all lands uninclosed and unoccupied were to be reputed waste; that he
might enter into and take possession of them, and if disturbed might assert his
right and prosecute trespassers in the courts there; but that it would not be
proper for her majesty to interpose, unless the question should come before her
by appeal from those courts; save, that it might be reasonable to direct (if
Allen should insist on it at the trials) that matters of fact be found
specially by the juries, Superior Court files.
and that these special matters should be made to appear on an appeal.

Soon after this Usher obtained a second commission as lieutenant governor; but
was expressly restricted from intermedling with the appointment of judges or
juries, July 26.
or otherwise, in matters relating to the disputes between Allen and the
inhabitants. The people did not relish this re-appointment, nor did his
subsequent conduct reconcile them to it. Upon his first appearance in council
Partridge took his seat as counselor; October 27.
but the next day desired a dismission on account of a ship in the river which
demanded his constant attention. This request was granted, and he soon after
removed to Newbury, where he spent the rest of his days in a mercantile
department, and in the business of his profession. His son Richard Partridge
was an agent for the province in England. One of his daughter, was married to
Governor Belcher, and was mother to the late lieutenant governor of Nova Scotia.


It had always been a favorite point with Usher to get the books and files,
which had been taken from Chamberlayne, lodged in the secretary's office. Among
these files were the original minutes of the suits which Mason had carried on,
and the verdicts, judgments and bills of cost he had recovered. As they were
committed to the care of the recorder who was appointed by the general court
and removeable only by them, no use could be made of these papers but by
consent of the assembly. Nov. 4.
When Usher produced to the council an order from Whitehall that these records
should be deposited with the secretary, 1704.
Penhallow, the recorder, who was a member of the council, refused to deliver
them without an act of the general assembly authorizing him to do so.

Usher succeeded but little better in his applications for money. He alleged
that he had received nothing for his former services, though they had given
hundreds to Partridge; and he complained that no house was provided for him to
reside in, which obliged him to spend most of his time at Boston. The plea of
poverty always at hand, was not forgotten in answer to these demands. But at
length, upon his repeated importunity and Dudley's earnest recommendation,
after the assembly had refused making any provision for him, and the governor
had expressly directed him to reside at New Castle, and exercise a regular
command, July 7.
it being a time of war; the council were prevailed upon to allow him two rooms
in any house he could procure till the next meeting of the assembly, and to
order thirty eight shillings to be given him for the expense of his journey to
and from Boston.

When Dudley acquainted the assembly with the royal determination in Allen's
suits, Feb. 10.
they appeared tolerably satisfied with the equitable intention discovered
therein; but begged him to represent to her majesty that the province was at
least sixty miles long and twenty wide, containing twelve hundred square miles,
that the inhabitants claimed only the property of the lands contained within
the bounds of their townships, which was less than one third of the province,
and had been possessed by them and their ancestors more than sixty years; that
they had nothing to offer as a grievance if the other two thirds were adjudged
to Allen; but should be glad to see the same planted and settled for the better
security and defense of the whole; withal desiring it might be considered how
much time, blood and treasure had been spent in settling and defending this
part of her majesty's dominion, and that the cost and labor bestowed thereon
far exceeded the true value of the land; so that they hoped it was not her
majesty's intention to deprive them of all the herbage, timber and fuel,
without which they could not subsist; and that the lands comprehended within
the bounds of their townships was little enough to afford these necessary
articles; Records of ^he council and assem^ly.
it not being usual in these plantations to fence in more of their lands than
would serve for tillage, leaving the rest unfenced for the feeding their cattle
in common.

Notwithstanding this plea, which was often alleged, Allen, by virtue of the
queen's permission, Dec. 22, 1703.
had entered upon and taken possession, by turf and twig, of the common land in
each township, as well as of that which was without their bounds. Usher's pa.
He brought his writ of ejectment de novo against Waldron, and when the trial
was coming on, informed Governor Dudley of it, that he might come into court
and demand a special verdict agreeably to the queen's instructions. Dudley from
Boston informed the court of the day when he intended to be at Portsmouth, and
directed the judges to adjourn the court to that day. Before it came, 1704.
Aug. 10.
he heard of a body of Indians above Lancaster, which had put the country in
alarm, and ordered the court to be again adjourned. At length he began his
journey; but was taken ill at Newbury, with a seasonable fit of the gravel, and
proceeded no farther. The jury in the mean time refused to bring in a special
verdict; Printed state of Allen's ^itle p. 9.
but found for the defendant with costs. Allen again appealed from the judgment.

Perplexed, however, with these repeated disappointments, and at the same time
being low in purse, as well as weakened with age, he sought an accommodation
with the people, with whom he was desirous to spend the remainder of his days
in peace. It has been said that he made very advantageous offers to Vaughan and
Waldron, if they would purchase his title; but that they utterly refused it.
The people were sensible that a door was still open for litigation; and that
after Allen's death they might, perhaps, meet with as much or more difficulty
from his heirs, among whom Usher would probably have a great influence. They
well knew his indefatigable industry in the pursuit of gain, that he was able
to harrass them in law, and had great interest in England. They therefore
thought it best to fall in with Allen's views, and enter into an accommodation
with him. A general meeting of deputies being held at Portsmouth, 170^. May 3.
the following resolutions and proposals were drawn up, viz. That they had no
claim or challenge to any part of the province without the bounds of the four
towns of Portsmouth, Dover, Hampton and Exeter, with the hamlets of New Castle
and Kingston, which were all comprehended within lines already known and laid
out, and which should forthwith be revised; but that Allen and his heirs might
peaceably hold and enjoy the said great waste, containing forty miles in length
and twenty in breadth, or thereabouts, at the heads of the four towns
aforesaid, if it should so please her majesty; and that the inhabitants of the
four towns would be so far from interrupting the settlement thereof, that they
desired the said waste to be planted and filled with inhabitants, to whom they
would give all the encouragement and assistance in their power. That in case
Allen would, for himself and heirs, forever quit claim, to the present
inhabitants and their heirs, all that tract of land comprehended within the
bounds of the several towns, and warrant and defend the same against all
persons, free of mortgage, entailment and every other encumbrance, and that
this agreement should be accepted and confirmed by the queen* then they would
lot and lay out to him and his heirs five hundred acres within the town of
Portsmouth and New Castle, fifteen hundred in Dover, fifteen hundred in Hampton
and Kingston, and fifteen hundred in Exeter, out of the commonages of the said
towns, in such places, not exceeding three divisions in each town, as should
best accommodate him and be least detrimental to them; and that they would pay
him or his heirs two thousand pounds current money of New England at two
payments, one within a year after receiving the royal confirmation of this
agreement, and the other within a year after the first payment. That all
contracts made either by Mason or Allen with any of the inhabitants, or others,
for lands or other privileges in the possession of their tenants in their own
just right, beside the claim of Mason and Allen, and no other, should be
accounted valid; but that if any of the purchasers, lessees or tenants should
refuse to pay their just part of the sums agreed on, according to the lands
they held, their share should be abated by Allen out of the two thousand pounds
payable by this agreement. That upon Allen's acceptance, and underwriting of
these articles, they would give personal security for the aforesaid payment;
and that all actions and suits depending in law concerning the premises should
cease till the queen's pleasure should be known.

These articles were ordered to be presented to Allen for his acceptance: But
so desirable an issue of the controvesy was prevented by his sudden death, MS
Copy of Report of Lord's of Trade. 1753.
which happened on the next day. He left a son and four daughters, and died
intestate.

Colonel Allen is represented as a gentleman of no remarkable abilities, and of
a solitary, rather than a social disposition; Atkinson's Letter MS.
but ^ild obliging and charitable. His character, Emerson's funeral sermon and
letter to Mr. Prince, MS.
whilst he was a merchant in London, was fair and upright, and his domestic
deportment amiable and exemplary. He was a member of the church of England by
profession, but constantly attended divine worship in the congregation at
New Castle, and was a strict observer of the christian sabbath. He died on the
fifth of May 1705, in the seventieth year of his age, and was buried in the
fort.

After his death his only son, Thomas Allen, Esquire. of London, renewed the suit,
1706.
by petitioning the queen, who allowed him to bring a new writ of ejectment,
and ordered a revival of the directions given to the governor in 1703, May. 16.
with respect to the jury's finding a special verdict. Accordingly Allen,
August 20.
having previously conveyed one half of the lands in New Hampshire by deed of
sale to Sir Charles Hobby and appointed his mother Elizabeth Allen his
attorney, 1707. April 15.
brought his writ of ejectment against Waldron in the inferior court of common
pleas, where he was cast. He then removed it by appeal to the superior court,
where it had been tried three years before. As this was the last trial, and as
all the strength of both parties was fully displayed on the occasion, it will
be proper to give as just a view of the case as can now be collected from the
papers on file in the office of the superior court.

On Allen's part were produced copies of the charter by which King James I.
constituted the council of Plymouth; their grants to Mason in 1629 and 1635;
his last will and testament; an inventory of artillery, arms, ammunition,
provisions, merchandise and cattle left in the care of his agents here at his
death; depositions of several ancient persons taken in 1685, who remembered the
houses, fields, forts, and other possessions of Capt. Mason at Portsmouth and
Newichwannock, and were acquainted with his agents, stewards, factors and other
servants, who divided the cattle and merchandise among them after his death;
the opinions of Sir Geoffry Palmer, Sir Francis Winnington and Sir William
Jones in favor of the validity of Mason's title; King Charles's letter to the
president and council of New Hampshire in 1680; the paragraph of Cranfield's
commission which respects Mason's claim in 1682; the writ, verdict, judgment
and execution against Major Waldron in 1683; the decision of the king in
council against Vaughan in 1686; Dudley's writ of certiorari in 1688; the fine
and recovery in Westminster Hall whereby the entail was cut off, and the
consequent deed of sale to Allen in 1691; Sir Edward Northey's report in 1703;
and evidence of Allen's taking possession of the wastes, and of his enclosing
and occupying some land at Great Island. On this evidence, it was pleaded that
the title derived from Mason, and his possession of the province, of which the
lands in question were part, was legal; that the appellee's possession had been
interrupted by the appellant and those from whom he derived his title, more
especially by the judgment recovered by Robert Mason against Major Waldron; and
a special verdict was moved for, agreeably to the royal directions. The council
on this side were James Meinzies and John Valentine.

On Waldron's part were produced the deed from four Indian sachems to
Whelewright and others in 1629; and depositions taken from several ancient
persons who testified that they had lived with Major Waldron when he began his
plantation at Cochecho, about the year 1640, and assisted him in building his
houses and mills, and that no person had disturbed him in the possession
thereof for above forty years. To invalidate the evidence of the title produced
on the opposite side, it was pleaded, That the grant from the council of
Plymouth to Mason in 1629, was not signed; that livery and feizin were not
endorsed on it as on other of their grants, and as was then the legal form; nor
was it ever enrolled according to statute: That the sale of part of the same
lands in 1628 to the Massachusetts company, by an instrument signed and
executed according to law, renders this subsequent grant suspicious; and that
his pretending to procure another grant of part of the same lands in 1635, was
an argument that he himself could not rely on the preceding one, nor was it
credible that the same council should grant the same lands twice, and to the
same person: That the grant in 1635 was equally defective; and that he must
reliquish one or the other, it being contrary to the reason and usage of law to
rely on two several titles at once. It was urged, That Waldron's possession was
grounded on a deed from the native lords of the soil, 1703.
with whom his father had endeavored to cultivate a friendly connection; that
he had taken up his land with their consent, when the country was a wilderness;
had cultivated it, had defended it in war at a great expense, and at the hazard
of his life, which he finally lost in the attempt; that the Indian deed was
legally executed in the presence of the factors and agents of the company of
Laconia, of which Mason was one; that this was done with the toleration of the
council of Plymouth, and in pursuance of the great ends of their incorporation,
which were to cultivate the lands, to people the country and christianize the
natives, for the honor and interest of the crown and the trade of England, all
which ends had been pursued and attained by the appellee and his ancestor. It
was also alleged, that the writ against Major Waldron in 1683 was for "lands
and tenements," of which the quantity, situation and bounds were not described,
for want of which no legal judgment could be given; that no execution had ever
been levied, nor was the possessor ever disturbed or amoved by reason thereof;
and that the copies produced were not attested, 1707.
no book of records being to be found. To invalidate the evidence of Mason's
possession, it was observed, that he himself was never here in person; that all
the settlement made by his agents or successors was only a factory for trade
with the Indians, and principally for the discovery of a country called
Laconia; and that this was done in company with several other
merchant-adventurers in London, who, for the security of their goods erected a
fort; but that this could not amount to a legal possession nor prove a title to
the country, especially as upon the failure of trade, the object of their
enterprise, they quitted their factory after a few years stay in these parts.

As to the motion for a special verdict, it was said that a jury could not find
one, if they had no doubt of the law or fact, for the reason of a special
verdict is a doubt either in point of law or evidence; nor was it consistent
with the privileges of Englishmen that a jury should be compelled to find
specially. In addition to these pleas, it was further alleged, that by the
statute law no action of ejectment can be maintained except the plaintiff, or
those under whom he claims, have been in possession within twenty years; and if
they have been out of possession sixty years, then not only an ejectment, but a
writ of right, and all other real actions are barred in respect of a subject,
and that in such cases the right of the crown is also barred: and that by the
statute of 32 Hen. 8. chapter 9. it is enacted, that no person shall purchase any
lands or tenements, unless the seller, or they by whom he claims, have been in
possession of the same or the reversion or remainder thereof, or have taken the
rents or profits thereof by the space of one whole year next before such
bargain is made; and that the appellee and his ancestor, and no other person
whatever had been in possession of the premises, nor was it ever pretended by
the appellant that the Masons, of whom the purchase was made, were in
possession within one year, or at any time before the alleged purchase; that
all the mischiefs provided against by the above statute have been experienced
by the people of New Hampshire from the purchase made by the appellant's
father, of the bare title of the propriety of the province. The council on this
side were John Pickering and Charles Story.

A certificate from the lieutenant governor respecting the queen's directions
was delivered to the jury who returned the following Aug 1^
verdict: In the cause depending between Thomas Allen, Esquire. appellant and
Richard Waldron, Esquire. defendant, the jury finds for the defendant a
confirmation of the former judgment and cost of courts. Mark Hunking foreman.

The court then sent out the jury again, with this charge, Gentlemen, you are
further to consider this case and observe her majesty's directions to find
specially, and your oaths. They returned the second time with the same verdict;
upon which the court ordered judgment to be entered, and that the defendant
recover costs of the appellant. The council for the appellant then moved for an
appeal to her majesty in council; which was allowed on their giving bond in two
hundred pounds to prosecute it.

But ^he loyalty of the people, and the distresses under which they labored by
reason of the war, Council and Assembly's Records.
prevailed on the queen's ministry to suspend a final decision; and before the
appeal could be heard, Printed state of Allen's title. p. 10.
Allen's death, which happened in 1715, put an end to the suit, which, his
heirs being minors, did not renew.

CHAP. XII. The war with the French and Indians, called Queen Anne's war.
Conclusion of Dudley's and Usher's administration.
THE peace which followed the treaty of Ryswick was but of short duration, for
the seeds of war were already sown both in Europe and America. Louis had
proclaimed the pretender king of England, and his Governor Villebon had orders
to extend his province of Acadia to the river Kennebeck, though the English
court understood St. Croix to be the boundary between their territories and
those of the French. The fishery was interrupted by French men of war, and by
the orders of Villebon, who suffered no English vessels to fish on the banks of
Nova Scotia. A French mission was established, and a chapel erected at
Norridgwog, on the upper part of Kennebeck, which served to extend the
influence of the French among the Indians. The governor of Canada, assuming the
character of their father and protector, instigated them to prevent the
settlement of the English to the east of Kennebeck, and found some among them
ready to listen to his advice. The people in those parts were apprehensive of
danger and meditated a removal, and those who had entertained thoughts of
settling there were restrained.

Things were in this posture when Dudley entered on his government. He had
particular orders from England to rebuild the fort at Pemaquid; but could not
prevail on the Massachusetts assembly to bear the expense of it. However he
determined on a visit to the eastern country, and having notified his intention
to the Indians, took with him a number of gentlemen of both his provinces (...)
this transaction by a year.
, and held a conference at Casco with delegates from the tribes of Norridgwog,
1703. June 20.
Penobscot, Pigwacket, Penacook and Amariscoggin; who assured him that as high
as the sun was above the earth, so far distant was their design of making the
least breach of the peace. They presented him a belt of wampum in token of
their sincerity, and both parties went to two heaps of stones which had
formerly been pitched and called the Two Brothers, where the friendship was
further ratified by the addition of other stones. They also declared, that
although the French emissaries among them had been endeavoring to break the
union, yet it was firm as a mountain, and should continue as long as the sun
and moon. Notwithstanding these fair appearances, it was observed that when the
Indians fired a salute their guns were charged with shot; and it was suspected
that they had then formed a design to seize the governor and his attendants, if
a party which they expected from Canada, and which arrived two or three days
after, had come in proper season to their assistance. However this might be, it
is certain that in the space of six weeks, a body of French and Indians, August
10
five hundred in number, having divided themselves into several parties,
attacked all the settlements from Casco to Wells, and killed and took one
hundred and thirty people, burning and destroying all before them. Mr.
Hutchinson takes no notice of this remarkable devastation, which is
particularly related by Mr Penhallow in his "wars of New England." p. 5.


The next week (August 17) a party of thirty Indians under Capt. Tom killed
five people at Hampton village; among whom was a widow Mussy, a noted speaker
among the friends, and much lamented by them; they, also plundered two houses;
but the people being alarmed, and pursuing them, they fled.

703.
The country was now in terror and confusion. The women and children retired to
the garrisons. The men went armed to their work, and posted sentinels in the
fields. Troops of horse were quartered at Portsmouth and in the province of
Maine. A scout of three hundred and sixty men marched toward Pigwacket, and
another to Ossapy Ponds; but made no discoveries. Alarms were frequent, and the
whole frontier country from Deerfield on the west, to Casco on the east was
kept in continual terror by small parties of the enemy.

In the fall Col. March of Casco made a visit to Pigwacket, where he killed six
of the enemy and took six more; this encouraged the government to offer a
bounty of forty pounds for scalps.

As the winter came on, the frontier towns were ordered to provide a large
number of snow-shoes; and an expedition was planned in New Hampshire, against
the head quarters of the Indians. Major Winthrop Hilton, and Captain John
Gilman of Exeter, Captain Chesley and Captain Davis of Oyster river, marched
with their companies on snow-shoes into the woods; but returned without
success. This is called in the council books "an honorable service: 1703.
" Hi^ton received a gratuity of twelve, and each of the captains five pounds.

With the return of spring there was a return of hostilities; 1704.
for notwithstanding the posting a few southern Indians in the garrisons at
Berwick, the enemy appeared at Oyster river, April 25.
and shot Nathaniel Medar near his own field, and the next day killed Edward
Tailor near Lamprey river, and captivated his wife and son. These instances of
mischief gave color to a false alarm at Cochecho, where it was said they lay
in wait for Col. Waldron a whole day, but missing him by reason of his absence
from home, took his servant maid as she went to a spring for water; and having
examined her as to the state of the garrison, stunned her with an hatchet but
did not scalp her. The girl invented this story to palliate her too long
absence.

In May Col. Church, by Governor Dudley's order, having planned an expedition
to the eastern shore, sailed from Boston with a number of transports, furnished
with whale-boats for going up rivers. In his way he stopped at Pascataqua, where
he was joined by a body of men under Major Hilton, who was of eminent service
to him in this expedition This is called in the council books "an expedition to
Port Royal," and this was the ostensible object. But Church in his memoirs says
that Dudley would not permit him to go there. Church, p. 104. Hutch. II. 146.
, which lasted the whole summer, and in which they destroyed the towns of Minas
and Chiegnecto, and did considerable damage to the French and Indians at
Penobscot and Passaquoddy, and even insulted Port Royal. Whilst they were at
Mount Desert, Church learned from nine of his prisoners that a body of I
suppose this is the party whom Penhallow mentions, p 23. who quarrelled on
their march about dividing the plunder which they might take, and of whom two
hundred returned while the rest pursued their (...) did damage at Lancaster and
(...)
six hundred Indians were preparing for an attack on Casco, and the head of
Pascataqua river; and sent an express to Portsmouth which obliged the people to
be vigilant. No such great force as this appeared; but small parties kept
hovering on the out skirts. At Oyster river they wounded William Tasker; and at
Dover they laid in Ambush for the people on their return from public worship,
but happily missed their aim. They afterward mortally wounded Mark Gyles at
that place, August 11.
and soon after killed several people in a field at Oyster river, whose names
are not mentioned.

In the former wars New Hampshire had received much assistance from their
brethern of Massachusetts; but these now remonstrated to the governor that his
other province did not bear their proportion of the charge for the common
defense. The representatives of New Hampshire urged, in reply, the different
circumstances of the two provinces; most of the towns in Massachusetts being
out of the reach of the enemy, and no otherwise affected by the war than in the
payment of their part of the expense, whilst this province was wholly a
frontier by sea and land, and in equal danger with the county of York, in which
four companies were stationed, and the inhabitants were abated their proportion
of the public charges. They begged that twenty of the friendly Indians might be
sent to scout on their borders, Council Rec.
which request the governor complied with.

In the winter, Col. Hilton with two hundred and seventy men, 1705.
including the twenty Indians, were sent to Norridgwog on snow-shoes. They had
a favorable season for their march, the snow being four feet deep. When they
arrived there, finding no enemy to contend with, they burnt the deserted
wigwams, and the chapel. The officers who went on this expedition complained
that they had only the pay of private soldiers.

The late repairs of fort William and Mary at New Castle were always complained
of, as burdensome to the people; and a representation thereof had been made to
the queen, who instructed Dudley, to press the assembly of Massachusetts, to
contribute to the expense; as the river bolonged equally to both provinces.
They urged in excuse, that the fort was built at first, at the sole charge of
New Hampshire, to whom it properly belonged; that the whole expense of the
repairs did not amount, to what several of their towns singly paid, toward the
support of the war for one year; that all the trade and navigation of the
river, on both sides, paid a duty toward maintaining that fortress; and that
they had been at great expense in protecting the frontiers of New Hampshire,
and the parties who were employed in getting timber and masts for her majesty's
service; whilst New Hampshire had never contributed any thing to the support of
the garrisons, forces and guards by sea, which were of equal benefit to them as
to Massachusetts. One thing which made New Hampshire more in favor with the
queen was, that they had settled a salary on her governor, which the others
never could be persuaded to do. The repairs of the fort, however, went on
without their assistance, under the direction of Col. Romer; and when they were
completed, a petition was sent home for a supply of cannon, ammunition and
stores.

The next summer was chiefly spent in negotiating an exchange of prisoners; and
Dudley had the address to protract the negotiation, under pretense of
consulting with the other governments about a neutrality proposed by the
governor of Canada; by which means, the frontiers in general were kept
tolerably quiet, although the enemy appeared once or twice in the town of
Kittery. The line of pickets This line extended from the mill-pond on the
south, to the creek on the north side of the town. It crossed the main street ^
few rods westward of the spot where the State House now stands.
which enclosed the town of Portsmouth was repaired, and a nightly patrole
established on the sea shore, from Rendezvous Point to the bounds of Hampton,
to prevent any surprise by sea; the coasts being at this time infested by the
enemy's privateers.

During this truce, the inhabitants of Kingston who had left the place, were
encouraged to petition for leave to return to their lands which the court
granted on condition that they should build a fort in the center of the town,
lay out a parsonage and settle a minister within three years* This last
condition was rendered impracticable by the renewal of hostilities.

The governor of Canada had encouraged the Indians who inhabited the borders of
New England to remove to Canada, where being incorporated with the tribe of St.
Francis, they have ever since remained. By this policy they became more firmly
attached to the interest of the French, and were more easily dispatched on
their bloody business to the frontiers of New England, with which they were
well acquainted. Dudley, who was generally apprized of their movements, and
kept a vigilant eye upon them, apprehended a rupture in the winter; and gave
orders for a circular scouting march, once a month, round the heads of the
towns from Kingston to Salmon falls; but the enemy did not appear till April;
1706.
when a small party of them attacked the house of John Drew at Oyster river,
where they killed eight and wounded two. The garrison was near, but not a man
in it: The women, however, seeing nothing but death before them, fired an
alarm, and then putting on hats, and loosening their hair that they might
appear like men, they fired so briskly that the enemy, apprehending the people
were alarmed, fled without burning or even plundering the house which they had
attacked. John Wheeler, meeting this party and mistaking them for friendly
Indians, unhappily fell into their hands and was killed with his wife and two
children. Four of his sons took refuge in (...) by the bank of the Little Bay,
and though pursued by the Indians escaped unhurt.

In July Colonel Schuyler from Albany gave notice to Dudley that two hundred
and seventy of the enemy were on their march toward Pascataqua, of which he
immediately informed the people, and ordered them to close garrison, and one
half of the militia to be ready at a minute's warning. The first appearance of
this body of the enemy was at Dunstable; whence they p^oceeded to Amesbury and
Kingston, where they killed some cattle. Hilton with sixty four men marched
from Exeter; but was obliged to return without meeting the enemy. The reason he
gave to the council for returning so soon was the want of provision, there
being none in readiness at the garrisons, notwithstanding a law lately enacted,
enjoining it on every town to have stores ready and deposited in the hands of
their captains. For the same reason he had been obliged to discontinue a small
scout which he had for some time kept up. Hilton was so brave and active an
officer that the enemy had marked him for destruction; and for this purpose a
party of them kept lurking about his house, where they observed ten men to go
out one morning with their scythes, and lay aside their arms to mow; they then
crept between the men and their guns and suddenly rushing on them killed four,
wounded one, and took three; two only of the whole number escaped. They missed
the major for this time, and two of their prisoners escaped; but suffered much
in their return, having nothing to subsist on for three weeks but lilly roots
and the rinds of trees. After this they killed William Pearl and took Nathaniel
Tibbets at Dover. August 10.
It was observed during this war that the enemy did more damage in small bodies
than in larger, and by scattering along the frontiers kept the people in
continual apprehension and alarm; and so very few of them fell into our hands,
that in computing the expense of the war it was judged that every Indian killed
or taken cost the country a thousand pounds. Penhallow p. 40.


In the following winter Hilton made another excursion to the eastward, 1707.
and a shallop was sent to Casco with stores and provisions for his party
consisting of two hundred and twenty men. The winter being mild, and the
weather unsettled, prevented their marching so far as they intended: Cold dry
weather and deep snow being most favorable to winter expeditions. However they
came on an Indian track near Black Point, and pursuing it, killed four, and
took a squaw who conducted them to a party of eighteen, Jan. 21.
whom they surprised as they lay asleep on a neck of land at break of day, and
of whom they killed seventeen and took the other. This was matter of triumph
considering the difficulty of finding their haunts. It was remarked that on the
very morning that this affair happened it was reported with but little
variation from the truth, at Portsmouth though at the distance of sixty miles.

When Church went to Nova Scotia he very earnestly solicited leave to make an
attempt on Port Royal; but Dudley would not consent, and the reason he gave
was, that he had written to the ministry in England and expected orders and
naval help to reduce the place. His enemies however assigned another reason for
his refusal; which was that a clandestine trade was carried on by his
connivance, and to his emolument, with the French there. This report gained
credit and occasioned a loud call for justice. Those who were directly
concerned in the illegal traffic were prosecuted and fined; Hutch. Hist.
Massa. Vol. 2. p. 154.
and the governor suffered much in his reputation. To wipe off these aspersions
he now determined to make an attack in earnest, on Port Royal, even though no
assistance should come from England. It was intended that an armament should be
sent to America, and the commander was appointed; but the state of affairs in
Europe prevented their coming.

Early in the spring the governor applied to the assemblies of both his
provinces, and to the colonies of Rhode Island and Connecticut, requesting them
to raise one thousand men for the expedition. Connecticut declined but the
other three raised the whole number, who were disposed into two regiments, of
which Colonel Wainwright commanded the one, and Colonel Hilton the other. They
embarked at Nantasket in twenty-three transports furnished with whaleboats, May
13.
under convoy of the Deptford man of war, Capt. Stuckley, and the province
galley, Capt. Southack. The chief command was given to Colonel March, who had
behaved well in several scouts and rencounters with the Indians, but had never
been tried in such service as this. May 26.
They arrived before Port ^oyal in a few days, and after burning some houses,
killing some cattle round the fort, and making some ineffectual attempts to
^ombard it, a jealousy and disagreement among the officers, Penhallow p. 42.
and a misapprehension of the state of the fort and garrison, June 6 and 7.
caused the army to break up and reimbark in a disorderly manner. Some of the
officers went to Boston for orders, some of the transports put in at Casco; a
sloop with Captain Chesley's company of sixty men arrived at Portsmouth: June
13.
Chesley suffered his men to disperse, Council Rec.
but ordered them to return at the beat of the drum: Being called to account
for this conduct he pleaded that general orders were given at Port Royal for
every man to make the best of his way home. The governor, highly chagrined and
very angry, sent orders from Boston that if any more vessels should arrive, the
men should not be permitted to come on shore "on pain of death." After a while
he ordered Chesley's company to be collected and reimbarked, offering a pardon
to those who might voluntarily return, the rest to be severely punished. By the
latter end of July they went on board, and with the rest of the army, returned
to the place of action. At the landing, an ambuscade of Indians from among the
sedge on the top of a sea-wall, greatly annoyed the troops. Major Walton and
Captain Chesley, being then on shore with the New Hampshire companies, pushed
their men up the beach, flanked the enemy, and after an obstinate struggle put
them to flight. The command was now given to Wainwright, and the army put under
the direction of three supervisors; but no means could inspire that union,
firmness and skill which were necessary. By the last of August the whole affair
was at an end, and the army returned sickly, fatigued, disheartened, and
ashamed; but with no greater loss than sixteen killed and as many wounded.

Whilst this unfortunate expedition was in hand, the frontiers were kept in
continual alarm. May 22.
Two men were taken from Oyster river, July 8.
and two more killed as they were driving a team between that place and Dover.
Captain Sumersby pursued with his troop and recovered the contents of the cart.
Stephen and Jacob Gilman, brothers, were ambushed between Exeter and Kingston;
Penhallow p. 45.
their horses were killed, but both of them escaped to the garrison. Kingston,
being a new plantation, was much exposed, and was this summer weakened by the
desertion of eight men. The remaining inhabitants complained to the government,
who ordered the captains of Exeter and Hampton to take them up as deserters,
and oblige them to return to the defense of their settlements, or do duty at
the fort during the governor's pleasure. They were afterward bound over to the
sessions for contempt of orders. Council Rec.
The state of the country at this time was truly distressed; a large quota of
their best men were abroad, the rest harrassed by the enemy at home, obliged to
continual duty in garrisons and in scouts, and subject to severe discipline for
neglects. They earned their bread at the continual hazard of their lives, never
daring to stir abroad unarmed; they could till no lands but what were within
call of the garrisoned houses, into which their families were crowded; their
husbandry, lumber-trade and fishery were declining, their taxes increasing,
their apprehensions both from the force of the enemy and the failure of the
Port Royal expedition were exceedingly dismal, and there was no prospect of an
end to the war, in which they were now advanced to the fifth summ^^. Yet under
all these distresses and discouragements, they resolutely kept their ground and
maintained their garrisons, not one of which was cut off during the whole of
this war, within the limits of New Hampshire.

In September one man was killed at Exeter, Septem. 15.
and two days after Henry Elkins at Kingston. 17.
But the severest blow on the frontiers happened at Oyster river, a place which
suffered more than all the rest. A party of French Mohawks painted red,
attacked with an hideous yell a company who were in the woods, some hewing
timber and others driving a team, under the direction of Captain Chesley who
was just returned the second time from Port Royal. At the first fire they
killed seven and mortally wounded another. Chesley, with the few who were left,
fired on the enemy with great vigor, and for sometime checked their ardour;
but being overpowered, he at length fell. He was much lamented, being a brave
officer. Three of the scalps taken at this time were soon after recovered at
Berwick.

The next year a large army from Canada was destined against the frontiers of
New England. 1708.
Dudley received information of it in the usual route from Albany, and
immediately ordered guards in the most exposed places of both these provinces.
A troop under Captain Rober^ Coffin patroled from Kingston to Cochecho, and
scouts were kept out continually. Spy-boats were also kept out at sea between
Pascataqua and Winter harbors. Four hundred Massachusetts soldiers were posted
in this province. The towns were ordered to provide ammunition, and all things
were in as good a state of preparation as could be expected. At length the
storm fell on Haverhill; August 29.
but the enemy's force having been diminished by various accidents, they
proceeded no farther, and every part of New Hampshire was quiet. Hilton made
another winter march to Pigwacket with one hundred and seventy men, Penhallow
45, 48.
but made no discovery.

The next spring William Moody, 1709. May 5
Samuel Stephens, and two sons of Jeremy Gilman were taken at Pickpocket-mill
in Exeter, June 30*
and soon after Bartholomew Stevenson was killed at Oyster river. Colonel
Hilton and Captain Davis performed their usual tour of duty in scouting, and
the people this summer kept close in garrison, on a report that two hundred
Indians had marched against them from Montreal. But the principal object now in
view was a desire of wiping off the disgrace of a former year, by an attempt,
not on Port Royal, but on Canada itself. For this purpose solicitations had
been made in England by Francis Nicholson, Esquire. who had been
lieutenant governor of Virginia, and Capt. Samuel Vetch a trader to
Nova Scotia, who was well acquainted with the French settlements there, and
made a full representation of the state of things in America to the British
ministry. An expedition being determined upon, they came over, early in the
spring, with the queen's command to the governors of the several provinces, to
raise men for the service. Vetch was appointed a colonel, and Nicholson by
nomination of the governor of New York, and consent of the other governments,
was made commander in chief. The people of New Hampshire were so much
exhausted, and their men had been so ill paid before, that it was with great
difficulty, and not without the dissolution of one assembly and the calling of
another, that they could raise money to levy one hundred men and procure two
transports for conveying them. After the utmost exertions had been made by the
several governments, and Nicholson with part of the troops had marched to Wood
creek, and the rest with the transports had lain at Nantasket three months
waiting for a fleet, news arrived that the armament promised from England was
diverted to another qua^^er. Upon which the commander of ^he ^^igates on the
Boston station refused to convoy the troops, the whole army was disbanded, and
the expense the colonies had been at was fruitless. A congress of governors and
delegates from the assemblies met in the fall at Rhode Island, who recommended
the sending of agents to assist Colonel Nicholson in representing the state of
the country, and soliciting an expedition against Canada the next spring. The
ministry at first seemed to listen to this proposal, but afterward changed
their minds, and resolved only on the reduction of Port Royal. 1710.
For this purpose Nicholson came over in July with five frigates and a bomb
ketch; the colonies then had to raise their quotas; the New Hampshire assembly
ordered one hundred men, August 1.
who were got ready as soon as possible, and put under the command of Colonel
Shadrach Walton. The whole armament sailed from Boston the eighteenth of
September, and on the twenty-fourth arrived at the place. The force now being
equal to its ^eduction* Subercase, the governor, waited only the compliment of
a few shot and shells as a decent pretense for a surrender; which was completed
on the fifth of October, and Vetch was appointed governor of the place which in
honor of the queen was called Annapolis. Hutchinson and Penhallow


Whilst this expedition was in hand, and before the appointment of the
commanders, New Hampshire sustained an heavy loss in the death of Col. Winthrop
Hilton. This worthy officer being concerned in the masting business, July 22.
and having several large trees felled, about fourteen miles from home, went
out with a party to peel the bark that the wood might not be injured by worms.
Whilst engaged in this business they were ambu^hed by a party of Indians, who
at the first fire killed Hilton with two more, and took two; the rest being
terrified, and their guns being wet, made no opposition, but escaped. The next
day one hundred men marched in pursuit, but discovered only the mangled bodies
of the dead. The enemy in their barbarous triumph had struck their hatchets
into the colonel's brains, and left a lance in his heart. He was a gentleman of
good temper, courage and conduct, respected and lamented by all that knew him,
Penhallow p. 58.
and was buried with the honors due to his rank and character.

Flushed with this success, they insolently appeared in the open road at
Exeter, and took four children who were at their play. They also took John
Wedgwood, and killed John Magoon near his brother's barn, a place which for
three days he had visited, with a melancholy apprehension, arising from a
dream, that he should there be murdered.

The same day that Hilton was killed, a company of Indians who had pretended
friendship, who the year before had been peaceably conversant with the
inhabitants of Kingston, and seemed to be thirsting after the blood of the
enemy, came into the town, and ambushing the road, killed Samuel Winslow, and
Samuel Huntoon; they also took Philip Huntoon and Jacob Gilman, and carried
them to Canada; MS Letter of Ward Clark to Prince.
where, after some time, they purchased their own redemption by building a
saw-mill for the governor after the English mode.

The last that fell this summer was Jacob Garland, who was killed at Cochecho
on his return from the public worship. As the winter approached, Colonel Walton
with one hundred and seventy men traversed the eastern shores which the Indians
usually visited at this season for the purpose of gathering clams. On an Island
where the party was encamped, several Indians decoyed by their smoke, and
mistaking them for some of their own tribe, came among them and were made
prisoners. One of them was a sachem of Norridgwog, active, bold and sullen;
when he found himself in the hands of enemies he would answer none of their
questions, and laughed with scorn at their threatening him with death. His
wife, being an eye witness of the execution of the threatening, was so
intimidated as to make the discoveries which the captors had in vain desired of
the sachem; in consequence of which, three were taken at the place of which she
informed, and two more at Saco river, where also five were killed. This
success, inconsiderable as it may appear, kept up the spirits of the people,
and added to the loss of the enemy who were daily diminishing by sickness and
famine.

In the spring they renewed their ravages on the frontiers in small parties.
1711.
Thomas Downs, John Church, and three more were killed at Cochecho; and on a
sabbath day several of the people there fell into an ambush as they were
returning from public worship. John Horn was wounded, and Humphry Fosse was
taken; but, by the determined bravery of Lieutenant Heard, he was recovered out
of the hands of the enemy. Walton with two companies marched to the ponds about
the fishing season; but the Indians had withdrawn, and nothing was to be seen
but their deserted wigwams. Penhallow p. 60.


After the reduction of Port Royal Nicholson went to England to solicit an
expedition against Canada. The tory ministry of Queen Anne, to the surprise of
all the whigs in England and America, fell in with the proposal; and on the
eighth of June Nicholson came to Boston with orders for the northern colonies
to get ready their quotas of men and provision at the arrival of the fleet and
army from Europe; which happened within sixteen days; and whilst the several
governors were holding a consultation on the subject of their orders. A
compliance with them in so short a time was impossible; yet every thing that
could be done was done; the nature of the service conspiring with the wishes of
the people, made the governments exert themselves to the utmost. New Hampshire
raised one hundred men, which was more than they could well spare; one half of
the militia being continually employed in guarding the frontiers. They also
voted them subsistence for one hundred and twenty-six days, besides providing
for them on shore before their embarkation. Two transports were taken up at
eight shillings per month per ton; and artillery stores were issued from the
fort. The colony forces formed two regiments under the command of Vetch and
Walton. The army which came from England were seven veteran regiments of the
Duke of Marlborough's army, and a battalion of marines, under the command of
Brigadier-General Hill, which, joined with the New England troops made a body
of about six thousand five hundred men, provided with a fine train of
artillery. The fleet consisted of fifteen ships of war from eighty to
thirty-six guns, with forty transports and six storeships under the command of
Admiral Walker. Penhallow p. 64. Hutch. vol. 2. p. 190.
A force fully equal to the reduction of Quebec.

The fleet sailed from Boston on the thirtieth of July; and a fast was ordered
by Dudley to be kept on the last Thursday of that, and each succeeding month,
till the enterprise should be finished. Coun. Rec.
This was an imitation of the conduct of the long parliament during the civil
wars in the last century. But the sanguine hopes of success which had been
entertained by the nation and the colonies were all blasted in one fatal night.
For, the fleet having advanced ten leagues into the river St. Lawrence, in the
night of the twenty third of August, the weather being thick and dark, eight
transports were wrecked on Egg-Island near the north shore, and one thousand
people perished; among whom there was but one man who belonged to New England.
The next day the fleet put back, and were eight days beating down the river
against an easterly wind which would in two days have carried them to Quebec.
After rendezvousing at Spanish river in the island of Cape Breton, and holding
a fruitless consultation about annoying the French at Placentia, the expedition
was broken up: the fleet returned to England, and the New England troops to
their homes. Loud complaints and heavy charges were made on this occasion; the
ignorance of the pilots; the obstinacy of the admiral; the detention of the
fleet at Boston; its late arrival there; the want of seasonable orders;
Dummer's defense and letter to a noble lord.
and the secret intentions of the ministry, were all subjects of bitter
altercation: but the miscarriage was never regularly inquired into, October. ^.
and the voyage was finally settled by the blowing up of the admiral's ship,
with most of his papers, and four hundred seamen, at Spithead.

1712.
The failure of this expedition encouraged (...) Indians to harrass the
frontiers (...) as the season would permit. In April one Cunningham was killed
at Exeter; Ensign Tuttle at Dover, and Jeremy Crommet at Oyster river; on one
of the upper branches of this stream the enemy burned a saw-mill with a large
quantity of boards. A scouting party who went up the river Merrimack had the
good fortune to surprise and kill eight Indians and recover a considerable
quantity of plunder, without the loss of a man. The frontiers were well
guarded; one half of the militia did duty at the garrisons and were ready to
march at a minute's warning; a scout of forty men kept ranging on the heads of
the towns, and the like care was taken by sea, spy-boats being employed in
coasting from Cape Neddock to the Great Boar's-head. Notwithstanding this
vigilance, small parties of the enemy were frequently seen. Stephen Gilman and
Ebenezer Stevens were wounded at Kingston, the former was taken and put to
death. June 3.
In July an ambush was discovered at Dover, but the enemy escaped; and whilst a
party was gone in pursuit of them, two children of John Waldron were taken, and
for want of time to scalp them, their heads were cut off. There being no man at
that time in Heard's garrison, a woman named Esther Jon^s mounted guard and
with a commanding voice called so loudly and resolutely as made the enemy think
there was help at hand, and prevented farther mischief.

In autumn the news of the peace of Utrecht arrived in America; and on the 29th
of October the suspension of arms was proclaimed at Portsmouth. The Indians
being informed of this event came in with a flag of truce to Captain Moody at
Casco, and desired a treaty; which the governor, with the council of each
province, held at Porsmouth, 1713. July 11.
where the chiefs and deputies of the several belligerent tribes, by a formal
writing under hand and seal, acknowledged their perfidy, promised fidelity,
renewed their allegiance, submitted to the laws, Penhallow p. 72, 80.
and begged the queen's pardon for their former miscarriages. The frequent
repetition of such engagements and as frequent violations of them, had by this
time much abated the sense of obligation on the one part, and of confidence on
the other. But it being for the interest of both parties to be at peace, the
event was peculiarly welcome.

To preserve the dependence of the Indians, and to prevent all occasions of
complaint, private traffic with them was forbidden and it was in contemplation
to establish truck-houses at the public expense; the next summ^^ a ship was
fitted out by both provinces, 1714.
and sent to Quebec, where an exchange of prisoners was effected.

During the whole of this long war, Usher behaved as a faithful servant of the
crown; frequently coming into the province by Dudley's direction, and sometimes
residing in it several months, inquiring into the state of the frontiers and
garrisons, visiting them in person, consulting with the officers of militia
about the proper methods of defense and protection, and offering his service on
all occasions: Yet his austere and ungracious manners, and the interest he had
in Allen's claim, effectually prevented him from acquiring that popularity
which he seems to have deserved. He was solicitous to support the dignity of
his commission; but could never prevail with the assembly to settle a salary
upon him. The council generally paid his traveling expenses by a draught on
the treasury, which never amounted to more than five pounds for each journey,
until he came from Boston to proclaim the accession of King George; when in a
fit of loyalty and good humor they gave him ten pounds, which served as a
precedent for two or three other grants. He often complained, and sometimes in
harsh and reproachful terms of their neglect; and once told them that his Negro
servants were much better accommodated in his house than the queen's governor
was in the queens fort. Coun. Rec.


Dudley had the good fortune to be more popular. Beside his attention to the
general interest of the province and his care for its defense, he had the
particular merit of favoring the views of those who were most strongly opposed
to Allen's claim; and they made him amends by promoting in the assembly
addresses to the queen, defending his character, when it was attacked and
praying for his continuance in office when petitions were presented for his
removal. One of these addresses was in one thousand seven hundred and six, and
another in one thousand seven hundred and seven, in both of which they
represent him as a prudent, careful and faithful governor, and say they are
perfectly satisfied with his disposal of the people, and their arms and the
public money. Addresses to the crown were very frequent during this female
reign. Scarcely a year passed without one or two; they either congratulated her
majesty on her victories in Europe, or petitioned for arms and military stores
for their defense, or for ships and troops to go against Canada, or represented
their own poverty or Dudley's merits, or thanked her majesty for her care and
protection, and for interposing in the affair of Allen's suit and not suffering
it to be decided against them. Council Rec.
A good harmony subsisted between the governor and people, and between the two
branches of the legislature, during the whole of this administration.

On the accession of King George a change was expected in the government, 1715.
and the assembly did what they could to prevent it, by petitioning the king
for Dudley's continuance. But it being now a time of peace, and a number of
valuable officers who had served with reputation in the late wars being out of
employment; interest was made for their obtaining places of profit under the
crown. Colonel Eliseus Burges who had served under General Stanhope was, by his
recommendation, commissioned governor of Massachusetts and New Hampshire; and
by the same interest George Vaughan, Esquire. then in London, was made lieutenant
governor of the latter province; he arrived and published his commission on the
thirteenth of October. Usher had some scruples about the validity of it, as he
had formerly had of Partridge's, and wrote on the subject to the assembly, who
assured him that on inspection they had found Vaughan's commission "strong and
authentic;" and that his own was "null and void. Council and Assembly's Rec.
" Upon his dismission from office he retired to his elegant seat at Medford,
where he spent the rest of his days, and died on the fifth of September 1726,
in the seventy-eighth year of his age.

Burges wrote a letter to the assembly in July, in which he informed them of
his appointment, and of his intention to sail for America in the following
month. But Sir William Ashurst, with Jeremy Dummer, the Massachusetts agent,
and Jonathan Belcher, then in London, apprehending that he would not be an
acceptable person to the people of New England, prevailed with him, for the
consideration of one thousand pounds sterling, which Dummer and Belcher
generously advanced, to resign his commission; and Colonel Samuel Shute was
appointed in his stead to the command of both provinces. Hutch. Vol. II. p. 215^
He arrived in New Hampshire, and his commission was published the seventeenth
of October 1716. Dudley being thus superseded, retired to his family-seat at
Roxbury, where he died in 1720, in the seventy-third year of his age.

APPENDIX.
No. I. Copy of a deed from four Indian sagamores to John Whelewright and
others. 1629.
WHEREAS We the sagamores of Penacook, Pentucket, Squomsquot and Nuchawanack
are inclined to have the English inhabit amongst us as they are amongst our
countrymen in the Massachusetts Bay; by which means we hope in time to be
strengthened against our enemy the Tareteens who yearly does us damage.
Likewise being persuaded that it will be for the good of us and our posterity,
etc. To that end have at a general meeting at Squomsquot on Piscattaqua river,
We the aforesaid sagamores with a universal consent of our subjects, do
covenant and agree with the English as follows:

NOW know all men by these presents that we Passaconawaye sagamore of Penecook,
Runnaawitt sagamore of Pentuckit, Wahangnonawittt sagamore of Squomsquot, and
Rowls sagamore of Nuchawanack, for a competent valuation in goods already
received in coats, shirts and kettles, and also for the considerations
aforesaid do according to the limits and bounds hereafter granted, give, grant,
bargain, sell, release, ratify and confirm unto John Wheelwright of the
Massachusetts Bay late of England, a minister of the gospel, Augustine Story,
Thomas Wite William Wentworth William Wentworth was one of the first settlers
at Exeter, and after the breaking up of their combination for government he
removed to Dover and became a ruling elder in the church there. In 1689 he was
remarkably instrumental of saving Heard's garrison, as is related in the proper
place. After this he officiated for several years as a preacher at Exeter and
other places, and died in a very advanced age at Dover in 1697, leaving a
numerous posterity. From him the several GOVERNORS of that name are descended.
He was a very useful and good man.
and Thomas Levet, all of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, to them, their
heirs and assigns for ever, all that part of the main land bounded by the river
of Piscattaqua and the river of Meremak, that is to say, to begin at
Nuchawanack falls in Piscattaqua river aforesaid, and so down said river to the
sea, and so along the sea shore to Merramack river, and so up along said
river to the falls at Pantuckit aforesaid, and from said Pantucket falls upon a
north-west line twenty English miles into the woods and from thence to run upon
a straight line north-east and south-west till meet with the main rivers that
runs down to Pantuckett falls and Nuchawanack falls, and the said rivers to be
the bounds of the said lands from the thwart line or head line to the aforesaid
falls and the main channel of each river from Pentuckitt and Nuchwanack falls
to the maine sea to be the side bounds and the main sea between Piscattaqua
river and Meramack river to be the lower bounds, and the thwart or head line
that runs from river to river to be the upper bounds; together with all islands
within said bounds, as also the Isles of Shoals so called by the English
together with all profits, advantages and appurtenances whatsoever to the said
tract of land belonging or in any wise appertaining, reserving to our selves
liberty of making use of our old planting land, as also free liberty of
hunting, fishing and fowling; and it is likewise with these provisoes
following, viz. First, the said John Wheelwright shall within ten years after
the date hereof set down with a company of English and begin a plantation at
Squomsquott falls in Piscataque river aforesaid. Secondly, That what other
inhabitants shall come and live on said tract of land amongst them from time to
time and at all times shall have and enjoy the same benefits as the said
Wheelwright aforesaid. Thirdly, That if at any time there be a number of people
amongst them that have a mind to begin a new plantation, that they be
encouraged so to do, and that no plantation exceed in lands above ten English
miles square or such a proportion as amounts to ten miles square. Fourthly,
That the aforesaid granted lands are to be divided into townships as people
increase and appear to inhabit them, and that no lands shall be granted to any
particular persons but what shall be for a township, and what lands within a
township is granted to any particular persons to be by vote of the major part
of the inhabitants legally and orderly settled in said township. Fifthly, For
managing and regulating and to avoid contentions amongst them, they are to be
under the government of the colony of the Massachusetts their neighbors and to
observe their laws and orders until they have a settled government amongst
themselves. Sixthly, We the aforesaid sagamores and our subjects are to have
free liberty within the aforesaid granted tract of land of fishing, fowling,
hunting and planting, etc. Seventhly and lastly, Every township within the
aforesaid limits or tract of land that hereafter shall be settled shall pay to
Passaconaway our chief sagamore that now is and to his successors forever, if
lawfully demanded, one coat of trucking cloth a year, and every year, for an
acknowledgement, and also shall pay to Mr. John Wheelwright aforesaid his heirs
and successors forever, if lawfully demanded, two bushels of Indian corn a year
for and in consideration of said Wheelwrights great pains and care, as also for
the charges he has been at to obtain this our grant for himself and those
aforementioned and the inhabitants that shall hereafter settle in townships on
the aforesaid granted premises. And we the aforesaid sagamores, Passaconaway
sagamore of Penecook, Runaawitt sagamore of Pentuckitt, Wahangnonawitt sagamore
of Squomsquot, and Rowles sagamore of Nuchawanack do by these presents ratify
and confirm all the before granted and bargained premises and tract of land
aforesaid, excepting and reserving as before excepted and reserved and the
provisoes aforesaid fulfilled, with all the meadow and marsh ground therein,
together with all the mines, minerals of what kind or nature soever, with all
the woods, timber and timber trees, ponds, rivers, lakes, runs of water or
water courses thereunto belonging, with all the freedom of fishing, fowling and
hunting as ourselves, with all other benefits, profits, privileges and
appurtenances whatsoever thereunto of all and every part of the said tract of
land belonging or in any ways appertaining unto him the said John Wheelwright,
Augustine Storer, Thomas Wight, William Wentworth and Thomas Levet, and their
heirs forever as aforesaid, TO HAVE AND TO HOLD the same as their own proper
right and interest without the least disturbance, molestation, or trouble of
us, our heirs, execrs and adminrs to and with the said John Wheelwright,
Augustine Storer, Thomas Wight, William Wentworth and Thomas Levet their heirs,
execrs. adminrs. and assigns, and other the English that shall inhabit there
and their heirs and assigns forever shall warrant, maintain and defend.

IN WITNESS whereof we have hereunto set our hands and seals the seventeenth
day of May 1629, and in the fifth year of King Charles his reign over England,
etc. PASSACONAWAY ^ mark, (Seal.) RUNAAWITT, ^ mark, (Seal.) WAHANGNONAWITT, ^
mark, (Seal.) ROWLS, ^ mark, (Seal.)

Signed, Sealed, and Delivered in presence of us

WADERGASCOM, ^ mark. MISTONABITE, ^ mark. JOHN OLDHAM. SAM. SHARP.

Memorandum. On the 17th day of May, one thousand six hundred twenty and nine,
in fifth year of the reign of our sovereign Lord Charles, king of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, defender of the faith, etc. Wahangnonaway
sagamore of Squamsquott in Piscattaqua river, did in behalf of himself and the
other sagamores before mentioned then present, deliver quiet and peaceable
possession of all the lands mentioned in the within written deed unto the
within named John Wheelwright for the ends within mentioned, in presence of us
Walter Neal governor, George Vaughan factor, and Ambrose Gibbons trader, for
the company of Laconia, Richard Vines, governor, and Richard Bonighton
assistant, of the plantation at Saco; Thomas Wiggin agent, and Edward Hilton
steward, of the plantation of Hilton's Point, and was signed, sealed, and
delivered in our presence. In witness whereof we have hereunto set our hands
the day and year above written.

Richd. Vines, Rich. Bonighton, Tho. Wiggin, Edward Hilton, Wa. Neale, George
Vaughan, Ambrose Gibbons,

Recorded according to the original found on the ancient files for the county
of York, this 28th day of Jan. 1713.

per JOS. HAMMOND, Reg.








A true copy from York county records of deeds, etc. lib. 3. fol. 16. etc. At.
DAN. MOULTON, Reg. Corrected by a copy on file in the superior court of
New Hampshire, in the case of Allen us Waldron; which copy is attested by the
above named Jos. Hammond,

No. II. An original letter from Thomas Air one of the adventurers or company
of Laconia to Mr. Gibbons their factor.
Mr. Gibbons, London the last of May, 1631.
YOURS of the 8th April 1630, from Plymouth I received and thereby took notice
of your entertaining Roger Knight; and here I present his wife 20 s. pr.
quarter at your desire and 3 l. per quarter to yours. I hope by this they are
both with you according to your desire. I wish all your wives with you, and
that so many of you as desire wives had such as they desire; for the
adventurers desire not to be troubled with quarterly payments.

Your next to me is dated the 21st of July last at Pascataquacke, I take notice
of your complaints for want of the trade goods, and so much as lies in me it
shall be otherwise, especially if you send us returns, doubt you not but that
you shall be supplied from time to time unto your own contents.

Your 3d lre to me is dated the 14th of August, by which I perceive diverse of
the commodities and provisions which you carried with you in the bark
Warwick, were not to your liking for which I am sorry. You know the trouble we
had. I could not look to Mr. Olden's and all besides. I hope by the Pide-Cowe
you find it otherwise. I pray write me how you like the hatchetts sent you by
that ship and how all goes.

I like it well that your governor will have a stock of bords at all times
ready. I hope you will find something to relade both the Pide-Cowe and the
Warwick. I will now put on the sending of you the moddell of a saw mill that
you may have one going.

Your wife and children, Roger Knight's wife and one wife more we have already
sent you, and more you shall have as you write for them.

Another lre I have from you of the 14th August, in which you write for another
Mason. We have had enough to do, to go so far forwards as we have, as Capt.
Keys can tell you, now we begine to take heart again, but the sight of
returns will be that which will indeed put life into us.

Among my New England records I find your ^re unto Capt. Mason of the 14th
August last, wherein you give a good account of your times spent from the first
of June until then, as also of the manner of your trade which was to Capt.
Mason's liking. We hope you will find out some good mines, which will be
welcome news unto us.

By Mr. Glover we recd. lres from Capt. Neale, written as we think about the
end of March last, write me I pray, what winter you had, and how you had your
healthes and why Capt. Neale went not in Septem. last to discover the lakes, as
he wrote he would, and why you did not write by that conveyance.

By the bark Warwick we send you a factor to take charge of the trade goods;
also a soldier for discovrie etc.

Thus I comend you, and your wife, who by this I hope is with you to the
protection of the almighty.

Your loving friend, THO. AIR.
Kept until the 7th of June.
No. III. An original letter from the company to Gibbins.
Mr. Ambrose Gibbons, London 5th December 1632.
YOUR sundry letters we have received. We do take notice of your care and
pains in our plantation and do wish that others had bine that way the same
that you are and will we hope so continue. The adventurers here have bine so
discouraged by reason of John Gibbes ill dealing in his fishing voyage, as
also by the small returns sent hither by Capt. Neal Mr. Herbert or any of
their factors as that they have noe desire to proceed any farther, until Capt.
Neale come hither to confer with them, that by conferrence with him they may
settle things in a better order. We have written unto Capt. Neale to dismise
the household, only such as will or can live of themselves may stay upon our
plantation in such convenient places as Capt. Neale Mr. Godfrie and you shall
think fit; and after conference had with Capt. Neale they shall have a
reasonable quantity of land granted unto them by deed.

We pray you to take care of our house at Newichwannick and to look well to
our vines, also you may take some of our swine and goats, which we pray you
to preserve. We have committed the chief care of our house at Pascatta^^y to
Mr. Godfrie and written unto Mr. Warnerton to (...) care of our house at
Strawberrybancke. Our desire is that Mr. Godfrie, Mr. Warnerton and you shall
join loveinglie together in all things for our good, and to advise us what our
best course will be to do another year.

You desire to settle yourself upon Sanders point. The adventurers are willing
to pleasure you not only in this, in regard of the good report they have heard
of you from time to time, but also after they have conferred with Captain
Neale they determyne some further good toward you for your further
incouridgment.

We desire to have our fishermen increased, whereof we have written unto Mr.
Godfrie. We thank you for assisting John Raymond, we pray you still to be
helpful to him that so he may dispatch and come to us with such return as he
has, and if he has any of his trade goods remaining unsold we have willed
him to leave them with you, and we do hereby pray you to receive them into
your custody and to put them off with what convenience you can, and to send
us the retournes by the first shipp that comes. Thus we commend you and your
wife to the protection of the Almightye.

Your loving friends, John Mason, Henry Gardener, Geo. Griffith, Tho.
Wannerton, Tho. Erye, for my children.


No. IV. Copy of a letter from Gibbins to the company.
AFTER my umble duty remembered unto your worships, I pray for your good health
and prosperity. These are certifying your worship for the goods I have received
from you. I have delivered unto Mr. John Raymon 76lb and 4 ounses of bever, 10
otters, 6 ^usquashes and on martain more, that Captain Ne^^e had 358lb and ii
ounzes of bever and otter, 17 martins, on black fox skin, on other fox skin, 3
racoon skins, 14 musquashes two of them with stones. Mr. Raymon's present
departing and the intermixing of all the trade goods in my care until Mr.
Vaughan com I cannot give you any satisfaction for the account of trade. I did
advise Mr. Raymon to return with all speed unto you. Your letters I received
the 7th of June. At larg I will write if God will by the next. Thus taking my
leave I commit your worship to Almighty God.

Your worship's at command, AMBROSE GIBBINS.
From Newichwanicke this 24th of June 1633.
No. V. Copy of another from Gibbins to the company.
Newichwanicke, July 13, 1633.
RIGHT honorable, right worshippful and the rest* my humble servis rembred.
Your letter dated the 5th of December and Mr. Ares letter the third of April I
received the seventh of June. The detaining of the former letter has put you
to a great charge in the plantation. For my care and pains I have not thought
it much although I have had very little encouradgement from you and here. I do
not doubt of your good will unto me. For your fishing, you complain of Mr.
Gibbes: A Londoner is not for fishing, neither is there any amity betwixt the
West cuntrimen and them. Bristo or Barnstable is very convenient for your
fishing shipes. It is not enough to fit out shipes to fish but they must be
sure (God will) to be at their fishing place the beginning of February and not
to come to the land when other men have half their viage.

Mr. Wanerton has the charge of the house at Pascatawa and has with him
William Cooper, Rafe Gee, Roger Knight, and his wife, William Dermit and on
boy. For your house at Newichwanicke, I seeing the necessity will do the best I
can there and elsewhere for you until I hear from again. Advise I have sent
but not knowing your intentes I cannot well enlarge but I refer you to Mr.
Herbert and Mr. Vaughan. For my settlement at Sanders-Point and the further
good you intend me I humbly thank you I shall do the best I can to be grateful.
I have taken into my hands all the trade goods that remains of John Raymon's
and Mr. Vaughan's and will with what convenience I may put them of. You
complain of your returns; you take the coorse to have little; a plantation
must be furnished with cattle and good hired hands and necessaries for them and
not think the great looks of men and many words will be a means to raise a
plantation. Those that have been here this three year some of them have neither
me^t money nor clothes, a great disparagement. I shall not need to speak of
this, you shall hear of it by others. For myself, my wife and child and four
men we have but half a barrel of corn, beef and porke I have not had but on
peese this three months, nor bear this four months; for I have for two and
twenty months had but two barrels of bear and two barrels and four booshel of
malt, our number commonly has bin ten. I nor the servantes have neither money
nor clothes, I have bin as sparing as I could, but it will not do. These four
men with me is Charles Knell, Thomas Clarke, Steven Kidder, and Thomas
Crockitt, three of them is to have for their wages until the first of March
four pounds per peese and the other for the year six pounds which in your
behalf I have promised to satisfy in money or bever at ten shillings per pound.
If there were necessarys for them for clothing there would not be much for
them to receave. You may perhaps think that fewer men would serve me but I have
sometimes on C [ one hundred] or more Indians and far from neybors: These that
I have I can set to pale in ground for corn and garden. I have dug a well
within the palizado, where is good water, I have that to close with timber.
More men I could have and more employ, but I rest thus until I hear from you.
The vines that were planted will com to little, they prosper not in the ground
they were set, them that groo natural are very good of diverse sorts. I have
sent you a note of the beaver taken by me at Newichwanicke, and how it has gone
from me. George Vaughan has a note of all the trade goods in my custody of
the old store John Ramon's and George Vaughan's accomtes, but the beaver being
disposed of before I could make the devident I cannot see but it must be all on
packt and be divided by you. The governor departed from the plantation the
fifteenth of July in the morning. So for this time I end, committing you to the
protection of the Almighty and ever rest your loving servant,

AMBROSE GIBBINS.

No. VI. Copy of a letter from Neal and Wigg^n, relating to a division of the
lands at Pascataqua, 1633.
Much honored,
^N obedience to your commands have survaied the river from the mouth of the
harbor to Squamscutt falls, liquise from the harbor's mouth by the sea side to
the Massachusetts bounds, and find that the bounds of your pattents will not
aford more than for two towns in the river of Pascataway and the remainder will
make another good town having much salt marsh in it. And because you would
have four towns named as you desired we have treated with a gentleman who
has purchased a trackt of land of the Indyans at Squamscutt falls, and your
land running up ^o the said falls on one side of the river from the falls about
a mile downward, said gentlemen having a mind to said land on your side to a
certain crike and one mile bacward from the river which we agreed on and the
crike is called Weelewright's, the gentleman's name being Weelewright and he
was to name said plantation (when settled) Exeter. And the other two towns in
the river, the one North-ham and Portsmouth the other. Bounded as follows,
viz. Portsmouth runes from the harbor's mouth by the sea side to the entrance
of a little river between two head lands which we have given the names of the
Little Bore's-hed, and the Great Bore's-hed, and from the mouth of that little
river to go on a strait line (...) the aforesaid creek which we have named
Weelewrights creek^ and from thens down the river to the harbor's mouth where
it began. And North-ham is the bounds of all the land of Hilton's Point side.
And the other land from the little river between the two Boores-Heds to run by
the sea till it meets with the line between the Massachusetts and you, and so
to run from the sea by said Massachusetts line into the woods eight miles and
from thence atwart the woods to meet with Portsmouth line near Wheleright's
creek and that tracte of land to be called Hampton. So that their is four
towns named as you desired but Exeter is not within the bounds of your
pattents. But the great dificulty is the agreement about the dividing line
between the patent of the twenty thousand acres belonging to the company of
Laconyah and the pattent of Bluddy point the river running so intrycate, and
Bluddy point pattent bounds from thence to Squamscutt falls to run three miles
into the woods from the water side. But for your better understanding thereof
we have sent you a draft of it according to our best skill of what we know of
it at present, and have drawn a dividing line between the two pattents, so that
Portsmouth is part of both pattents and Hampton we apprehend will be holly in
the twenty thousand acres pattent, and North-ham is the bounds of Hilton's
point pattent. If what we have don be to your likinge we shall think our time
well spent and what further commands you will please to lay on us we shall
readily obey to the utmost of our power. We humbly take leve and subscribe
ourselves, Your devoted and most humble servants,

WALTER NELE, THOMAS WIGGIN.

North-ham on Pascataway river, in New England, 13 August, 1633. Superscribed
to John Mason, Esquire. governor of Portsmouth to be communicated to the pattentees
of Laconiah and Hilton's point humbly present in London.

We under written being of the government of the province of Maine do affirm
that the above letter written and sent by Walter Nele and Thomas Wiggen and
directed to John Mason Esquire. governor of Portsmouth to be communicated to the
patentees of Laconiah and Hilton's point, is a true copia compared with the
original. And further we do affirm that there was four great gunes brought
to Pascataqua which ware given by a merchant of London for the defense of the
river, and at the same time the Earl of Warwick, Sr Ferdenando Gorges, Capt.
John Mason and the rest of the pattentees sent an order to Cap. Walter Nele and
Captn. Thomas Wiggin there agents and governor at Pascataway to make choice of
the most convenient place in the said river to make a fortefecatyon for the
defense thereof, and to mount those four gunes giveen to the place, which
accordingly was done by Capt. Walter Nele and Capt. Thomas Wiggen and the
pattentees servants, and a draft was sent of the place that they had made
choice of to the said earl and company, and the draft did contain all the
neck of land in the north este side of the great island that makes the great
harbor, and they gave it the name of Fort-poynt, and allotted it so far back
into the island about a bow-shoat to a great high rock whereon was intended in
time to set the principal forte.

That the above is all truth we affirm, and by the desire of Capt. Walter
Nele and Capt. Those. Wiggen we have ordered this wrighting to ly in our files
of records of their doings therein.

In witness whereof we have hereunto set our hands and seles at Gorgeana, in
the province of Maine, in New England, 20th August 1633. RICH. VINES, (Seal.)
HENRY JOCELYN, (Seal.)




No. VII. An original letter from Sir F. Gorges and Capt. Mason to Messrs
Wannerton and Gibbins.
Mr. Wannerton and Mr. Gibbons,
THESE are to let you know that we with the consent of the rest of our
partners have made a division of all our land lying on the north east side of
the harbor and river of Pascattaway; of the quantities of which lands and
bounds agreed upon for every man's part we send you a coppie of the draft,
desiring your furtherance with the advice of Capt. Norton and Mr. Godfrey to
set out the lines of division betwixt our lands and the lands of our partners
next adjoining, because we have not only each of us shipped people present to
plant upon our own lands at our own charge, but have given direction to
invite and authority to receive such others as may be had to be tenants, to
plant and live there for the more speedy peopling of the country. And whereas
there is belonging unto me Sr Ferdinando Gorges, and unto Capt. Mason for
himself and for Mr. John Cotton and his deceased brother Mr. William Cotton
both whose interests Capt. Mason has bought, the one half of all matters
mentioned in the inventorie of household stuff and implements left in trust
with you by Capt. Neale, where unto you have subscribed your names and whereof
a coppie is herewith sent, we desire you to cause an equal division as near as
possibly may to be made of all the said matters menconed in the inventorie in
kind, or if some of them cannot be so divided then the one half to be made
equal to the other in value of all the said matters, except the cattle and
suites of apparel and such other things as belong perticularly to Capt. Mason,
and to deliver the said one half of all the said matters so to be divided,
unto Mr. Henry Jocelyn for the use of our plantations, taking an inventory
thereof under his hand of all you shall so deliver hime, and making
certificate to us thereof. And for your so doing this shall be your
sufficient warrant and discharge. And so we rest,

Your very lovinge friends, FERDIN. GORGE, JOHN MASON.

Portsmouth, May 5, 1634.
No. VIII. An original letter from Capt. Mason to Gibbins.
Mr. Gibbins,
THESE people and provisions which I have now sent with Mr. Jocelyne are to
set upp two mills upon my own division of lands lately agreed upon betwixt
our adventurers; but I think not any of them will adventure this year to the
plantation besides Sr Ferdinando Gorges and myself, for which I am sorrye in
that so good a business (albeit hitherto it has been unprofitable) should be
subject to fall to the ground. Therefore I have strayned myself to do this at
this present, and could have wished that the rest would have joined to have
sent you some provisions for trade and support of the place, but that faileing
I have directed to you as a token from myself one hogshead of malt to make
you some bear. The servants with you and such others as remain upon the
companies chardge are to be discharged and paid their wages out of the stock
of beaver in your hands at the rate of 12 s. the pound, whereof I think the
company will write you more at large. And we have agreed to devide all our
movables mentioned in the inventory that Capt. Neale brought home, which were
left in trust with you and Mr. Wannerton. I bought Mr. Cotton's and his
brother's part of all their adventures; so that the half of all belongs to Sr
Ferdinando Gorges and myself, and of that half three quarters will be dew to
me and one quarter to Sr Ferdinando. These things being equally divided they
are to be delivered to Mr. Joceline, my three parts of the half, and the other
fourth to whom Sr Ferdinando shall appointe. And you must afford my people some
house room in Newichewannocke house, and the cowes and goats which are all
mine, and 14 swine with their increase, some ground to be upon till we have
some place provided upon my new divided land, or that you receive my further
order. A copy of the division of the lands is herewith sent unto you.

The stockinges and the malt and the suites of clothes and suggar and
raysinges and wine that was delivered by Mr. Bright and Mr. Jews I have not
received any satisfaction for, wherein I must crave your help and such
satisfaction as may be sent by this shipp.

The crystal stoanes you sent are of little or no value unless they were so
great to make drinking cups or some other works, as pillars for fair
lookeinge glasses or for garnishinge of rich cabinets. Good iron or lead oar I
should like better of if it could be found.

I have disbursed a great deal of money in your plantation and never received
one penny, but hope if there were once a discovery of the lakes that I should
in some reasonable time be reimbursed again. I pray you help the mr what you
can to some of the best iron stoane for ballast, and in case he want other
ladeinge to fill the shipp upp with stocks of cypress wood and cedar. Let me
hear from you of all matters necessary, and wherein I may do you any pleasure
I shall be reddie, and so with my hearty commendations, I rest your very
loving friend,

Portsmouth, May 5th, 1634. (Received 10th July, 1634.) JOHN MASON.

No. IX. Answer to the foregoing.
SIR,
YOUR worship have done well in setting forward your plantacon, and for your
milles they will prove beneficial unto you, by God's assistance. I would you
had taken this coorse sooner, for the merchants I shall be very cautyouse how I
deal with any of them while I live. But God's will be done. I and the world
does judge that I could not in these my days have spent my time for noethinge.
For their sending trade and support I desire it not. I have supported but now
sonke under my burden, the more I think on this, the more is my grief.

I have received the hogsd. of malt that you sent me, giveing you humble
thanks for the same. The servants that were with me are discharged and paid
their wages for the year past and I have delivered unto Mr. Wannerton 43lb. of
beaver to pay those that were with him for the year past. For the paying of the
servants there old wages or the dividing of the goods I expect a general
letter, if not, then to hear^ further from your worship. Your carpenters are
with me and I will further them the best I can. Capt. Neale appointed me two of
your goats to keep, at his departinge, I praise God they are 4. Of the goods
that Mr. Bright left I only reed. of Capt. Neale 4 bushels of malt and at
several times 8 gallons of sack, and from Mr. Wannerton 7 bushels and one peck
of malt, 5lb. and of sugar and 3 pr. of children stockings and 97lb of beef
which was of an old cow that Mr. Wannerton killed, being doubtful that she
would not live over the winter. For these I will pay Mr. Jocelin for you.

I percieve you have a great mind to the lakes, and I as great a will to assist
you. If I had 2 horses and 3 men with me I would by God's help soon resolve
you of the situation of it, but not to live there myself.

The Pide-Cow arrived the eighth of Julie, the 13th day she cast anchor some
half a mile from the falls, the 18th day the ship unladen, the 19th fell
down the river, the 22d day the carpenters began about the mill, the 5th of
August the iron stoane taken in the ship. There is of 3 sorts, on sort that
the mine does cast fourth as the tree does gum, which is sent in a rundit. On
of the other sorts we take to be very rich, there is great store of it. For the
other I know not; but may it please you to take notice of the weight and
measure of every sort, before it goes into the furnace and what the stone of
such weight and measure will yield in iron. This that 'e take to be the best
stone is one mile to the southward of the great house The great house stood
opposite to the house of Mr. Temple Knight.
, it is some 200 rodd in length 6 foot wide, the depth we know not, for want
of tools for that purpose we took only the surface of the mine.

I have paled in a piece of ground and planted it. If it please God to send us
a dry time I hope there will be 8 or 10 quarters of corn. You have hear at
the great house 9 cows, 1 bull, 4 calves of the last year and 9 of this year;
they prove very well, far better than ever was expected, they are as good as
your ordinary cattle in England, and the goats prove some of them very well
both for milk and breed. If you did send a ship for the Western Islands of
six score tun or thereabouts for cowes and goats it would be profitable for
you. A stock of iron work to be put away with your boardes from the mill will
be good, nails, spikes, locks, hinges, iron works for boats and pinaces,
twine, canvis, needles and cordage, pitch and tar, graples, ankers, and
necessarys for that purpose.

Sr, I have written unto Mr. John Round to repair unto your worship; he is a
silver smith by his trade but has spent much time and means about iron, may
it please you to send for him, he dwells in Mogul street, if you are
acquainted with any finer or mettle man enquire of him and as you see cause
send for him, he is well seen in all mineralls; if you deal with him he will
give you a good light for your proceedings.

The 6th of August, the ship ready to set sail for Saco to load cloave bords
and pipe staves. A good husband with his wife to tend the cattle and to make
butter and cheese will be profitable, for maids they are soon gone in this
country. For the rest I hope Mr. Jocelyn for your own particulars will satisfye
you for I have not power to examine it. This with my humble service to your
worship, I rest,

Newichawanock, the 6th of August, 1634. Your ever loving servant, AMBROSE
GIBBINS.

No. X. An original letter from G. Vaughan to Mr. Gibbins.
Mr. Gibbens, Boston, Aug. 20, 1634.
WE only wait for a fair wind. I shall acquaint Mr. Mason and the rest of the
owners fully of what you and I have formerly discourst, and if they give me
incouradgment hope shall see you again the next year. Lookeing over my papers
found the enclosed, it being the divisyon of the towns, and the copia of what
Capt. Nele and Capt. Wiggens wroat hoome to the pattentes of Laconiah and
Hilton's Point. It may be of some use to you hereafter, therefore sent it you,
lest Capt. Wiggens should make another ^luster. Which with my kind love to you
and your spouse and little Beck,

I am your assured friend, GEORGE VAUGHAN.

No. XI. Another from the same.
Loving friend Gibbens, London, 10th April, 1636.
WE put into Ireland goinge home, and there was taken sike and left behind,
and lay so long before I got well that it was the latter end of December last
before I got to London, and Mr. Moson was ded. But I spoke with Sr Ferdinando
Gorges and the other owners, but they gave me no incouradgment for New England.
I acquainted them fully of what you and I discoursed, but they were quite could
in that matter, Mr. Mason being ded and Sr Ferdinando minding only his one
divityon. He teles me he is a geting a patten^e for it from the king from
Pascataqua to Sagadehocke, and that between Meremacke and Piscataqua he left
for Mr. Mason, who if he had lived would atooke a pattent fort hat also, and
so I supose the affairs of Laconia is ded also. I intend to go for the East
Indyes, a friend of mine have made me a very good proffer and I think to take
up with it. Which is what offers at present. Thus with my kind love to you and
your wife and daughter,

I am your loving friend, GEORGE VAUGHAN,


N. B. The ten preceding papers are in the recorder's office for Rockingham
conuty.

No. XII. Copy of a report of a Committee of Reference on the petition of Rob.
Mason, Edward Godfrey, and others to the king, [in 1661.]
To the Kings most excellent Magestie,
ACCORDING to your magesties reference upon the petition of Robert Mason,
Edward Godfrey, and others, hereunto annexed, bearing date at Whitehall the
seventeenth of November 1660, we have heard the claims and complaints of the
peticoners, and also summoned by process publi^quely executed at the Exchange
on the 21st day of January last against all persons interested in that
business, but none appeared (...) Capt. Jno. Leverett, who acknowledged that
formerly he was commissionated as an agent of the corpora^on of Boston in
New England, but that now he had noe authority to appear or act on their
behalf.

Upon producing of diverse letters pattents and examinacon of witnesses, we
find, That Capt. Jno. Mason, grandfather to Robert Mason one of the
peticoners, and Edward Godfrey another of the peticoners, by virtue of several
letters pattents under the great seal of England granted unto them and others
by your majesty's late royal father, by themselves and their assigns have been
in actual and quiet possession of several tracts parsells and divisions of land
in New England, as in and by the said letters patents is particularly
expressed, and that the said Capt. Jno. Mason and the said Edward Godfrey did
expend and lay outt considerable sums of money in settling plantacons and
collonys there; That the said Edward Godfrey has lived there for five and
twenty years, having undergone and discharged the office of governor of the
province of Main with much reputacon of integrity and justice, endeavoring
the regulacon and government of those parts where he lives according to the
known and settled laws of this kingdom; That notwithstanding, the said Edward
Godfrey has not only been turned out of his said place of governor, butt has
been utterly outed and dispossessed of his lands and estate in that country,
which the inhabitants of the Massachusetts have forcibly seized and still do
detayne the same from him; That it appears as well by testimony of witnesses as
by a copy of the letters pattents that they were not to act any thing
repugnant to the laws of England, nor to extend their bounds and limits of the
said corporacon farther than three miles nortward of Merrymacke river, and as a
memorial and evidence thereof, the governor of the Massachusetts did set up an
house about thirty years since, which is called the bound house, and is known
by that name to this day, and with this division and assignment or lot of land
the inhabitants and pattentees of the said corporacon of the Massachusetts
rested content for the space of sixteen years together, until about the year
1652 they did enlarge and stretch their line about threescore miles beyond
their known and settled bounds aforesaid; and have thereby not only invaded and
incroached upon the plantacons and inheritances of the petitioners and other
your majesty's subjects, but by menaces and armed forces compelled them to
submitt to their usurped and arbitrary government which they have declared to
be independent of this your majesty's crown of England, and not subordinate
thereunto.

It appears further by the witnesses that the collony of Massachusetts has for
these many years past endeavored to model and contrive themselves into a free
state or commonwealth without any relacon to the crown of England, assuming on
themselves the name and style of a commonwealth, issuing of writs in their own
name, imposing of oaths to be true unto themselves contrary to that of
allegiance, coining of money with their own stamps and signatures, exercising
an arbitrary power over the estates and persons of all such as submit not unto
their government allowing them noe appeals to England. And some have been so
bold as publicly ^o affirm, that if his majesty should send them a governo^
that the several towns and churches throughout the whole country under their
government did resolve to oppose him, and others have said that before they of
New England would or should submitt to any appeal to England they would sell
that country or plantacon to the king of Spain. Vide. Huth. Collec. Pap. p 339,


That by reason of the premises the said Rob. Mason and Edward Godfrey have
been damnified in their plantacons and estates to the value of five thousand
pounds, according to the judgment and estimacon of several witnesses examined
in that behalf. But by what pretense of right or authority the Massachusetts
have taken upon them to proceed and act in such manner does not appear to us.

All which we most humbly represent to your majesty in duty and obedience to
your commands, not presuming to offer any opinion in a business of so high
importance, wherein the public interest and government of your majesty
appears so much intermixed and concerned with the private interest of the
peticoners.

Robt. Mason, Ja. Bunce, Th. Exton, G. Sweit, Richard Fox, Jo. Mylles. Tho.
Povey.



[Without date] in the recorder's office for Rockingham county.

No. XIII. To the King's most excellent Majesty. The humble petition of Robert
Mason, proprietor of the province of New Hampshire, in New England, Shows.
THAT your majesty's royal grandfather king James, of ever blessed memory, did
by his highness letters patents under the great seal of England, bearing date
at Westminster the third day of November, in the eighteenth year of his
reign, give, grant and confirm unto several of the principal nobility and
gentry of this kingdom by the name of the council of New England, their
successors and assigns forever, all the land in America lying between the
degrees of 40 and 48 north latitude, by the name of New England, to be held in
fee, with many royal privileges and immunities, only paying to his majesty, his
heirs and successors, one fifth part of all the oar of gold and silver that
should at any time be found upon said lands, as by the said letters patents
does at large appear.

That John Mason, esquire. your petitioner's grandfather, by virtue of several
grants from the said council of New England, under their common seal,
bearing date the 9th of March 1621, the 10th of August 1622, the 7th of
November 1629, and the 22d of April 1635, was instated in fee in a great tract
of land in New England by the name of New Hampshire, lyeing upon the seacoast
between the rivers of Naumkeek and Pasca^away, and running up into the land
westward threescore miles, with all the islands lying within five leagues
distance of any part thereof, and also the south halte of the Isles of Shoals;
and also the said John Mason together with Sir Ferdinando Gorges, knt. was
enfeoffed by the aforesaid council of New England in other lands by the name
of Laconia by their deed bearing date the 27th day of November, 1629, the said
lands lyeing and bordering upon the great lakes and rivers of the Iroquois and
other nations adjoining. All which said lands to be held as fully, freely, in
as large, ample and beneficial manner and form to all intents and purposes
whatsoever as the said council of New England by virtue of his majesty's said
letters patents might or ought to hold and enjoye the same, as by the said
several grants appears.

Whereupon your petitioner's said grandfather did expend upwards of twenty two
thousand pounds in transporting people, building houses, forts, and magazines,
furnishing them with great store of arms of all sorts, with artillery great
and small, for defense and protection of his servants and tenants, with all
other necessary commodities and materials for establishing a settled
plantation.

That in the year 1628, in the fourth year of the reign of your majesty's
royal father, some persons did surreptitiously and unknown to the said
council, get the seal of the said council affixed to a grant of certain
lands, whereof the greatest part were solemnly past unto your petitioner's
grandfather and others long before, and soon after did the same persons by
their subtle practices get a confirmation of the said grant under the great
seal of England, as a corporation by the name of THE CORPORATION OF THE
MASSACHUSETTS BAY IN NEW ENGLAND, your majesty's royal father being unwitting
thereof, and having thus by fraud obtained a grant and confirmation, they
compelled the rightful inhabitants to desert their plantations, and by many
outrageous actions they became possessed of that part of the country,
declareing themselves to be a free people, frameing to themselves new laws,
with new methods in religion absolutely contrary to the laws and customs of
this your majesty's realm of England, punishing diverse that would not approve
thereof, some by whipping, others by burning their houses, and some by
banishing, and the like.

At last the complaints of the oppressed subjects reaching the ears of your
royal father, his magesty caused the whole matter to be examined before his
most honorable privy council and all being fully proved, his majesty did
command the council of New England to give an account by what authority, or by
whose procurement those people of the Massachusetts Bay were sent over, his
majesty concieving the said council to be guilty thereof.

But the said council of New England made it plainley to appear to his majesty
that they were ignorant of the whole matter and that they had noe share in the
evils committed and wholly disclaimed the same, and the said council finding
they had not sufficient means to give redress and rectify what was bro't to
ruin, they humbly referred to his majesty to do therein as he pleased and
thereupon the said council of New England resolved to resign, and did actually
resign the great charter of New England into his majesty's royal hands,
seeing there was an absolute necessity for his majesty to take the management
of that country to himself, it being become a business of high consequence and
only to be remedied by his sovereign power, all which appears by the
declaration of the council of New England dated the 25th of April, 1635,
together with the act of surrender of the great charter of New England dated
the 7th day of June the same year.

That immediately thereupon, his majesty in trinity term 1635, caused a quo
warranto to be brought up by Sir John Banks his majesty's then attorney general
against the governor, deputy governor and every of the assistants of the said
corporation of Massachusetts in New England severally, according to their names
mentioned in the said patents of incorporation, being twenty six persons,
whereof two being dead, of the remaining twenty four persons, there did
fourteen at several times appear at the king's bench bar and there disclaimed
the charter, the remaining tenn persons were outlawed, and thereupon judgment
given for the king, that the liberties and franchises of the said corporation
of Massachusetts Bay should be seized into the king's hands and the body of
the governor to be taken into custody for usurping the said liberties, all
which appears by the roles in the crown office, of custos brevium for the
king's bench of the proceedings in the several terms from the year 1635 to
1637.

That thereupon his said royal majesty on the 3d day of May 1637, did order in
council that the attorney genl. be required to call for the said patent and
present the same to the board, and his majesty by his declaration of the 23d of
July 1637, in the 13th year of his reign declared his royal pleasure for
establishing a general government in his territory of New England for the
prevention of the evils that otherwise might ensue for default thereof, thereby
declaring Sr Ferdinando Gorges to be governor general of the whole country and
requiring all persons to give their obediance accordingly.

That the wars and troubles immediately ensueing in Scotland and presently
after here in England did hinder his said majesty from settling that country or
prosecuting the right which he intended his subjects, however the proceedings
of his majesty caused some restraint to the further violences and oppressions
of the said Massachusetts, and they contained themselves for a time within
their pretended bounds but noe sooner was that king of blessed memory your
royal farther become a sacrifice but they renewed their former violences by
oppressing all the other colonies and designing by encouragement from some in
England to erect themselves into a commonwealth, and in order to lay a
foundation for this power and dominion which they now aspired unto they thought
it necessary to extend their bounds and spread into a larger territory then as
yet they had usurped, and that this work might not be done without a mask or
color of right they do in an assembly held at Boston the 19th of October 1652,
seriously peruse the grant (which had been procured as aforesd.) and therein
weighing the words and trying what new sense they might bear more suitable to
their increase of power, they though it fit at length to declare themselves
mistaken in what they had done in the year 1631, when they erected bound houses
and had for so many years confined themselves thereunto, whereas now by the
help of an imaginary line or rather by a new reason of state there is a sense
imposed by themselves upon their own words, and they stretch their rights to
near two hundred miles of land northward and as much southward more than they
were satisfied withal before, swallowing up your majesty's petitioner as well
as others whose properties were established long before the said people had any
being. And that they might give execution to this righteous sentence they
presently invade and by force of arms seize upon the province of New Hampshire,
and other lands of right belonging to your petitioner, besides what they did to
others, compelling the inhabitants to swear to be true to them and to cast off
their lawful lords, and such as refused were either ruined, banished or
imprisoned, and any appeals to England utterly denied unto them, then they
proceed to coining of money with their own impress, raising the coin of
England, and acting in all matters, in a most absolute and arbitrary way. And
although your petitioner by his agent Joseph Mason did demand redress of the
general court of Massachusetts setting at Boston in 1652, offering to make out
the right and title of your petitioner to the province of New Hampshire and
other lands against all persons whatsoever, yet noe restitution could be
obtained without a submission to their authority, and to hold the lands from
them which the petitioner then did refuse and has always refused choosing
rather to wait for more happy times wherein to expect relief then by a legal
resignation of his rights to those who had none at all divest himself of what
his ancestors had purchased at so dear a rate: Your petitioner having as
equal a right to the government in the sai^ province as he has to the land
itself, all which appears by a report made to your majesty the 15th of February
1661, when your petitioner first exposed to your majesty the oppressions under
which he had so long groaned, in the evil times, and which grieves him now much
more to bear while he has the protection of so just and gracious a
sovereign to resort unto.

Wherefore your petitioner most humbly implores your majesty to take notice,
that (by a plain discovery of what fraud in the beginning and the length of
troubled times has helped to conceal) the Bostoners have noe patent of
incorporation at all, that yet they have under color of right and authority
from the crown devoured your petitioner and other proprietors whose titles are
by your majesty's learned council allowed as strong as the law can make them.

That all ways have been tried and methods used to obteyn justice from the
Bostoners, but all have proved ineffectuall, that your petitioner's losses have
been so many and great, and his sufferings so continued that he cannot any
longer support the burden of them. And when your majesty will but consider how
small the respect has been wherewith those people have treated your majesty
since your happy restoration, and what daily breaches are by them made upon
your majesty's acts of navigation, which turns so greatly to the detriment of
this kingdom in general, these losses and sufferings of a particular subject
cannot much be questioned, so that your petitioner humbly hopes that your
majesty will think it high time to stretch forth your royal hand of justice to
assist your petitioner, that he may have the quiet possession of his province,
and reparation made him for the losses sustained, in such ways and methods as
the importance of the case requires, and your majesty in your royal wisdom
shall think most fit.

And your petitioner shall ever pray. ROB. MASON.


[From a copy in the possession of the Masonian proprietors.]

No. XIV. A brief declaration of the right and claim of the governor and
company of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, to the lands now in their
possession, but pretended to by Mr. Gorge and Mr. Mason, together with an
answer to their several pleas and complaints in their petitions exhibited:
Humbly presented and submitted by the said governor and company to the king's
most excellent majesty, as their defense.
IN the year of our Lord 1628, in the third year of his late majesty Charles
the first, of happy memory, several loyal and piously disposed gentlemen
obtained of the great council of New England, a grant of a certain tract of
land lying in New England, described and bounded as therein expressed; which
was in all respects fairly and openly procured and with so good an intent of
propagating the gospel among the natives, and to advance the honor and dignity
of his late majesty, of happy memory, that they were bold to supplicate his
said majesty to superadd his royal confirmation thereto, which accordingly in
an ample royal charter was passed and remains under the broad seal of England,
March the 4th 1629, in the fourth year of his majesty's reign, with further
additions and enlargments well becoming so royal a majesty and suitable for the
encouragement of so hazardous and chargeable an adventure. In pursuance whereof
many of the said patentees and other adventurers transported themselves and
estates and settled in the most known and accommodable parts of those lands
contained in the said charter, neither time, estate, nor power suffering them
speedily to survey the just extent of their limits. (...) many years different
in time several others also of his majesty's subjects obtained other grants*
and made ^ever^^ settlements in the more northern and ^^sterne parts of the
country, with whom for several year^ we had neighbourly correspondence, being
as they supposed without the limits of our patent, amongst whom the present
claimers and petitioners were. These grants partly by reason of the smallness
of some of them, and partly by reason of dark involved and dubious expression
of their limits, brought the inhabitants under many intanglements and
dissatisfactions among themselves, which there being (...) settled authority to
be applied to, being de^er^ed and forsaken of all such as by virtue of said
grants did claim jurisdiction over them and had made a successless essay for
the settlement of government among them proved of some continuance, unto the
great disquiet and disturbance of those his majesty's subjects that were
peaceable and well disposed amongst them; to remedy which inconvenience they
betook themselves to the way of combinations for government, but by experience
found it ineffectual. In this time ignorance of the northerly running of
Merrimack river hindered our actual claim and extention of government, yet at
length being more fully settled, and having obtained further acquaintance and
correspondency with the Indians possessing the uppermost parts of that river
encouraging an adventure, as also frequent solicitations from the most
considerable inhabitants of those eastern parts earnestly desiring us to make
proof of and ascertain our interest, we employed the most approved a^^ists
that could be obtained, who upon their solemn oaths made returns, That upon
their certain observation our northern patent line did extend so far north as
to take in all those towns and places which we now possess; which when the
inhabitants as well as our selves were satisfied in (urged also with the
necessity of government amongst them) they peaceably and voluntarily submitted
to the government of the Massachusetts, (viz.) Dover, Squamscot and Portsmouth
anno 1641, Kittery, York and Wells anno 1652 and 1653, from which times until
the year 1662, when there was a small interruption by a letter of Mr. Gorge,
and afterward in the year 1665, (when his majestyes commissioners, Colonel
Nichols and others came over) the inhabitants of those parts lived well
satisfied and uninterrupted under the Massachusetts government. But then the
said commissioners neither regarding the Massachusetts just right nor the claims
of Mr. Gorge and Mr. Mason, settled a new form of government there, but this
hardly outlived their departure, the people impatient of innovations, and well
experienced and satisfied in their former settlement, quickly and quietly
returned to order again and so continue unto his time. This is in a few words
the true state of the matter; for the further illustration whereof and
justification of our proceedings therein and vindication of ourselves from the
reproachful imputation of usurping authority over his majesty's subjects in the
eastern parts pretended to, with other scandals cast upon us by the
petitioners, we humbly present the following pleas by way of demonstration, and
argue that our extension of government to those eastern parts claimed is
agreeable to our indubitable patent right; our patent according to the express
term therein contained without any ambiguity or color of other
interpretation, lies between two east and west parallel lines drawn from the
most southerly part of Charles river and the most northerly part of Merrimack,
with three miles advantage upon each, which upon the observation of men of
approved and undoubted truth upon oath, are found distant one degree and forty
nine minutes north latitude, being to extend in full latitude and breadth from
sea to sea (ut in terminis) and therefore cannot be bounded by many hundreds or
infinite numbers of lines, as the river of Merrimack makes bends or angles in
two hundred miles passage from Winipesioke lake to the mouth thereof, which to
imagine, as it is irrational so would it involve us and any borderer into so
many inextricable disputes as are by no ways to be admitted by a prince
seeking his subjects peace. Besides were such a construction allowable (which
with uttermost streining is) yet all favorable interpretation is to be offered
the patentees by the gracious expression of the charter. Now according to the
before mentioned observation (so confirmed) all those eastern plantations
challenged by our opponents (ut supra) are comprehended within our northerly
line. We deny not but the artists of their selves, and if any question thence
arise we fear not to submit to trial to the most exact and rigorous test that
may be. The invincible strength of this our first plea may further appear by
the consideration of the frivolous and insignificant allegations of the
petitioners in opposition thereunto, viz. 1st. The nonextention of our line or
assertion of our right to those eastern parts for some years, ignorance as our
case was circumstanced debarring no man of his just right, neither can it
reasonably be supposed that the exact survey of so large a grant in so hideous
a wilderness possessed by an enemy would be the work of a few years, our own
poverty not affording means, and our weakness (allowing no deep adventure into
the country) permitting us not view the favorable running of the river, which
none can imagine altered its course by our delay; we may as well be deprived of
far more then we possess or ever saw on our western parts to the south sea
(which none will deny) because we have not surveyed it or are soon like to be
able, as be taken from our northern right so obvious to the meanest artist.

2dly. The Possession house in Hampton, of so little signification and so long
since disused, that Mr. Mason has forgot the name thereof and calls it
Bound-house, erected to ^ive the world to know that we claimed considerably to
^he northward of our then habitations upon the bay, though we did not know the
uttermost extent of our r^^ht, our fathers not being so ignorant of the law of
the realm to which they did appertain as to suppose the taking possession of
part did debar them of the remainder but the contrary; and we challange Mr.
Mason or any on his behalf, promising our records shall be open to the most
scrutinous search to prove it, either called or intended according to his abuse
thereof.

3dly. That notorious falsehood of stretching our right to near four hundred
miles north and south more than formerly we were satisfied with, our whole
breadth being but one hundred and nine mile, which is not much more then a
quarter part of what he would have the world believe our new claim and (as he
would insinuate) usurped territory does contain, arising (we would charitably
believe) partly from ignorance of the coasting of the country, Mr. Mason
accounting by the seaside, and we suppose coasting in the measure of every
harbor and cove to make up that calculation, which lies much of it due east
and not to the north, but we fear malevolently suggested (as many other things
as of little credit) to introduce into his majesty his royal breast a belief
that we are unreasonable in our pretentions, and so unworthy of his majesty's
favor, which we hope such unlawful endeavors will never be so prosperous as
to obtain. What may be further added to this our first plea, may be supplied
from the reasons formerly presented. We urge secondly, The invalidity of those
grants pretended to by the petitioners, which are of two sorts; 1st. Such as
bear date after ours, which we see no reason to fear any interruption from.
Secondly, Such as are pretended to bear date before ours, against which we
object that they are not authentic, wanting a sufficient number of grantors to
make them so, none of them as we presume will appear upon trial having above
six hands and seals annexed to them, the said council of New England consisting
of forty, and his majestys grant to them expressly requiring (as we are
informed) seven at the least to sign to make any validact; and indeed Mr.
Mason's own often unwearied renewal of his grants in 1621, sixteen hundred
twenty two, sixteen hundred twenty nine and 1635, (as he says) tacitly
confesses the same invalidity, in the former putting him to charge for the
latter, till at last he fell into such a trade of obtaining grants that his
last and most considerable was six years after the grant of our charter from
his majesty, and but three days before the said council's declaration of their
absolute resolution to resign, and but a few days before their actual
surrender, as he asserts; which of what value and consideration it is from the
said council's circumstanced under a necessity of resignation of their great
charter, procured rather by the clamor of such ill affected persons as the
present complaint than by any true account of dissettlement or ill management
here, is not difficult to judge. Hence it appears, first, how little reason Mr.
Mason has to brand us with fraud or surreptitiousness in obtaining our
charter; which has most show of fraud and surreptitious procuration, a
sufficient number of those honble persons subscribing ours and fewer his
pretended antidated grants, is easy to determine. In which assertion is to be
observed the high reflection cast upon the members of his late majesty and
ministers of state, groundlessly rendering the council's seal, yea the great
seal of England, exposed to fraud and deceitful clandestine practices; yea upon
his present majesty, insinuating himself better acquainted with matters of
state then he who allows and confirms our grant as authentic by his gracious
letter of sixteen hundred sixty two, which intolerable boldness how unbecoming
(not to say more) in a subject, it is not easy for us to say. To all which we
may add Sr Ferdinando Gorges application to the authority here to interpose in
his affair, which he, being one of the great council, would have been far from
acknowledging, had Mr. Mason's allegations been founded upon truth.

Secondly, That articles of charge depending upon such illegal and post dated
grants cannot take place against us were their disburse as great as it is
affirmed, which by eyewitnesses upon the place and still living, are proved
comparitively very inconsiderable.

3dly. We affirm that the whole management of the affair respecting our
government of those eastern parts was in an orderly and peaceable way, and not
without the reiterated and earnest solicitation of most of the people there
inhabiting, sufficiently appearing by their several petitions; and we challenge
Mr. Gorge and Mr. Mason by any living evidence or record to show any sign of a
forceable entrance: Some majistrates upon the clearing of our right to them and
acceptance of the tender of themselves to us, being sent thither without any
other force than each of them a servant to attend them. Indeed some years after
Capt. Boniton for mutinous carriage was seized and brought to justice;
concerning which and many other cases many inhabitants yet living and eye
witnesses can give the most impartial evidences.

4thly. We offer to consideration that the deserted and ungoverned state of the
people of those places had we not had that patent right so clearly evinced,
might warrant our actions; especially considering the obligation upon us to
secure his majesty's honor and maintain the public peace, so hazarded by the
total want of government amongst them. Our first exercise of jurisdiction being
in the year 1641, eight year after Capt. Neale, agent for Mr. Mason, had wholly
deserted the improvement of land and the government of the country, which
indeed he never used but one year, for in the year 1630 he first came over, and
in the year 1634 he quitted the place; and in the interim neglected the same in
making a voyage for England, the short time of his tarriance not admitting of
settlement of government or improvement. We may hereto subjoin that Mr. Joseph
Mason, agent for Mrs. Ann Mason, when here and all things were fresh in memory,
made no demand contrary to what is affirmed, but petitioned our justice against
his debtors there and elsewhere, and that Sr Ferdinando Gorges his grant being
so mean and uncertainly bounded that he knew not well how to find much to less
improve to considerable advantage, by his letter bearing date -- does devolve
the whole charge and care of his pretended province upon the authority here
established. Lastly, That the exercise of jurisdiction in those eastern parts
has been and is his majesty's honor, the people's great benefit, and our
charge without profit, which had it not been, the ruin of those parts would
have unavoidably ensued in the want of all government, and their seizure by the
French, who ever waited a fit opportunity for the same. They have part of them
for thirty five years and others twenty years (some small interruption
intervening producing the stronger inclination and resolution in them to be
constant to his majesty's authority here) lived under the government of the
Massachusetts a quiet, well ordered and thriving people. And as for any
complaint from ill affected persons, it is well known that the best and wisest
government is not without disquiet from from some such; and no wonder if filly
people are soon affected with such fair glozing promises as Mr. Mason has made
and published, as it were determining the case before trial by his late letters
to the inhabitants in those parts, and that our government in those places have
been no gain is so unquestionable a truth that never was any levy laid upon
them for the supply of the public treasury, though much has been and is further
like to be expended for their security, who otherwise will inevitably become an
easy pray to the heathen now in hostility with us, and at this present time
rageing in those parts.

The before written is a true copy transcribed from the records of the general
court of the late colony of the Massachusetts Bay, held by the governor and
company of the said colony at Boston, the 6th of September, 1676.

Examd. per ISA. ADDINGTON, Secry.

No. XV.
At the Court at Whitehall, July, 20, 1677. (L S.) Present the King's most
excellent Majesty. Lord Chancellor, Ld Treasurer, Ld Privy Seal, Duke of
Ormond, Marquis of Worcester, Ld Chamberlain, Earl of Northamton, Earl of
Peterborough, Earl of Stratford, E. of Sunderland, E. of Bath, E. of Craven, Ld
Bp of London, Ld Maynard, Ld Berkley, Mr. Vice Chamberlain, Mr. Sec.y Coventry,
Mr. Sec.y Williamson, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Master of the ordnance,
Mr. Speaker.
WHEREAS the right honorable the lords of the committee for trade and
plantations, did in pursuance of an order of the 7th of February last make
report to the board, of the matters in controversey between the corporation of
the Massachusetts Bay in New England, and Mr. Mason and Mr. Gorges touching the
right of soil and government, claimed by the said parties in certain lands
there, by virtue^ of several grants from his majesty's royal father and
grandfather as follows, in these words.

May it please your majesty,
Having received your majesty's order in council of the 7th of February last
past, whereby we are directed to enter into the examination of the bounds and
limits which the corporation of the Massachusetts Bay in N. E. on the one hand,
and Mr. Mason and Mr. Gorges on the other, do pretend by their several grants
and patents to have been assigned unto them, as also to examine the patents and
charters which are insisted on by either side, in order to find out and settle
how far the rights of soil and government do belong unto any of them. In
consideration whereof the lords chief justices of your majesty's courts of
king's bench and common pleas were appointed to give us their assistance, we
did on the 5th of April last together with the said lords chief justices meet
in obedience to your majesty's commands, and having heard both parties by their
council learned in the law, we did recommend unto their lordships to receive a
state of the claims made by both parties, and to return their opinions upon the
whole matter unto us, which their lordships have accordingly performed in the
words following:

In obedience to your lordships order we appointed a day for the hearing of all
parties, and considering the matters referred, having received from them such
papers of their cases as they were pleased to deliver; at which time all
parties appearing, the respondents did disclaim title to the lands claimed by
the petitioners, and it appeared to us that the said lands are in the
possession of several other persons not before us, whereupon we thought not fit
to examine any claims to the said lands, it being (in our opinion) improper to
judge of any title of land without hearing of the ter-tenants or some other
persons on their behalf; and if there be any course of justice upon the place
having jurisdiction, we esteem it most proper to direct the parties to have
recourse thither for the decision of any question of property until it shall
appear that there is just cause of complaint against the courts of justice
there for injustice or grievance.

We did in the presence of said parties examine their several claims to the
government, and the petitioners having waved the pretense of a grant of
government from the council of Plymouth, wherein they were convinced by their
own council that no such power or jurisdiction could be transferred or assigned
by any color of law; the question was reduced to the province of Maine,
whereto the petitioner Gorges made his title by a grant from king Charles the
first, in the 15th year of his reign, made to Sir Ferd. Gorges and his heirs of
the province of Maine and the government thereof. In answer to this the
respondents alleged that long before, viz. in quarto Caroli primi, the
government was granted to them, and produced copies of letters patents wherein
it is recited that the council of Plymouth having granted to certain persons a
territory thus described, viz. all that part of New England in America which
lies and extends between a great river that is commonly called Monomack alias
Merrimack, and a certain other river there called Charles river, being in the
bottom of a certain bay there called the Massachusetts Bay, and also all and
singular the lands and hereditaments whatsoever lying and being within the
space of three English miles on the south part of the said Charles river, or
any or every part thereof; and also all and singular the lands and
hereditaments whatsoever lying and being with the space of three English miles
to the southermost part of the said bay called Massachusetts Bay; and all those
lands and hereditaments whatsoever which [ lie] within the space of three
English miles to the northward of the said river called Monomack alias
Merrimack, or the northward of any and every part thereof; and all lands and
hereditaments whatsoever lying within the limits aforesaid, north and south in
latitude and breadth, and in length and longitude of and within all the breadth
aforesaid throughout the main lands there, from the Atlantic and Western sea
and ocean on the east part to the South sea on the west. By the said letters
patents the king confirmed that grant, made them a corporation, and gave them
power to make laws for the governing of the lands and the people therein. To
which it was replied that the patent of 4o Caroli primi is invalid, (1) Because
there was a precedent grant, 18o Jacobi, of the same thing then in being, which
patent was surrendered afterward and before the date of the other, 15o Car.
primi. (2) The grant of the government can extend no farther than the ownership
of the soil, the boundaries of which as recited in that patent wholly excludes
the province of Maine, which lies northward more than three miles beyond the
river Merrimack.

We having considered these matters do humbly conceive as to the first matter,
that the patent of 4o Caroli 1mi is good notwithstanding the grant made in the
18o Jac: for it appeared to us by the recital in the patent 4o Caroli 1mi that
the council of Plymouth had granted away all their interest in the lands the
year before, and it must be presumed they then deserted the government;
whereupon it was lawful and necessary for the king to establish a suitable
frame of government, according to his royal wisdom, which was done by that
patent, 4o Caroli 1mi making the adventurers a corporation upon the place. As
to the second matter it seems to us to be very clear that the grant of the
government 4o Caroli 1mi extends no farther than the boundaries expressed in
the patent, and those boundaries cannot be construed to extend further
northwards along the river Merrimack than three English miles, for the north
and south bounds of the lands granted so far as the river extends are to follow
the course of the rivers which make the breadth of the grant, the words
describing the length to comprehend all the lands from the Atlantic ocean to
the South sea of and in all the breadth aforesaid, do not warrant the over
reaching those bounds by imaginary lines or bounds, other exposition would (in
our humble opinion) be unreasonable and against the interest of the grant. The
words of and in all the breadth aforesaid show that the breadth was not
intended an imaginary line of breadth, laid upon the broadest part but the
breadth respecting the continuance of the boundaries by the river as far as the
river^ go, but when the known boundary of breadth determines it must be carried
on by imaginary lines to the South sea. And if the province of Maine lies more
northerly than three English miles from the river Merrimack, the patent of 4o
Caroli 1mi gives no right to govern there, and thereupon the patent of the same
15o Car. 1mi to the petitioner Gorges will be valid. So that upon the whole
matter we are humbly of opinion as to the power of government, that the
respondents, the Massachusetts and their successors, by their patent of 4o
martis 4o Caroli 1mi have such right of government as is granted them by the
same patent within the boundaries of their lands expressed therein, according
to such description and exposition as we have thereof made as aforesaid, and
the petitioner Sir Ferdinando Gorges his heirs and assigns by the patent 3d
April, have such right of government as is granted them by the same patent
within [ the territory] called the province of Maine according to the
boundaries of the same expressed in the same patent.

Ri. Rainsford, Fra. North.

All which being the opinion of the lords chief justices, and fully agreeing
with what we have to report unto your majesty upon the whole matter referred
unto us by the said order, we humbly submit the determination thereof unto your
majesty.

Anglesey, Ormond, Bath, Craven, H. London, G. Carteret, J. Williamson, Tho.
Chickley, Edw. Seymour.

Which having been read at the board the 18th instant, it was then ordered that
the said Mr. Mason and Mr. Gorges, as also that the agents of the corporation
of the Massachusetts Bay should be this day heard upon the said report, if they
had any objections to make thereunto. In pursuance whereof all parties
attending with their council, who not alleging any thing so material as to
prevail with his majesty and the board to differ in judgment from the said
report; his majesty was thereupon pleased to approve of and confirm the same,
and did order that all parties do acquiesce therein, and contribute what lies
in them to the punctual and due performance of the said report, as there shall
be occasion.

JOHN NICHOLAS.






N. B. The above paper, of which the copy is attested by Edw. Rawson, secretary
of Massachusetts, and John Penballow, clerk of the superior court of
New Hampshire, is in the files of the said superior court, and in the Masonian
proprietary office.

No. XVI. Copy of that part of President Cutts's commission in which the claim
of Robert Mason is recited.
"AND whereas the inhabitants of said province of New Hampshire have many of
them been long in possession of several quantities of lands, and are said to
have made considerable improvements thereupon, having no other title for the
same than what has been derived from the government of the Massachusetts Bay,
in virtue of their imaginary line; which title, as it has by the opinion of
our judges in England been altogether set aside, so the agents from the said
colony have consequently disowned any right either in the soil or government
thereof, from the three mile line aforesaid; and it appearing to us that the
ancestors of Robert Mason Esquire. obtained grants from our great council of
Plymouth for the tract of land aforesaid, and were at very great expense upon
the same until molested and finally driven out, which has occasioned a lasting
complaint for justice by the said Robert Mason ever since our restoration.
However to prevent in this case any unreasonable demands which might be made by
the said Robert Mason for (...) right he claims in the said soil, we have
obliged the said Robert Mason under his hand and seal that he will demand
nothing for the time past until the 24th of June last past, nor molest any in
their possessions for the time to come, but will make out titles to them and
their heirs forever, provided they will pay to him upon a fair agreement in
lieu of all other rents sixpence in the pound according to the just and true
yearly value of all houses built by them and of all lands, whether gardens,
orchards, arable, or pasture, which have been improved by them, which he will
agree shall be bounded out unto every of the parties concerned, and that the
residue may remain unto himself to be disposed of for his best advantage.

But if notwithstanding this overture from the said Robert Mason which seems
to be fair unto us, any of the inhabitants of the said province of
New Hampshire shall refuse to agree with the agents of the said Robert Mason
upon the terms aforesaid, our will and pleasure is, that the president and
council of New Hampshire aforesaid for the time being shall have power and are
hereby empowered to interpose and reconcile all differences if they can that
shall or may arise between the said Robert Mason and the said inhabitants, but
if they cannot then we do hereby command and require the said president and
council to send into England such cases fairly and impartially stated,
together with their own opinions upon such cases, that we, our heirs and
successors, by and with the advice of our and their privy council may determine
therein according to equity.

N. B. The same (mutatis mutandis) is inserted in Cranfield's commission.



No. XVII.
To his most excellent majesty Charles the 2d, by the grace of God, of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, king, defender of the faith, etc. The humble
address and petition of the president and council of his majesty's province of
New Hampshire, in N. England,
Humbly shows, yielding ready obedience to your majesty's commands with
reference to over relation formerly to them) although deeply sensible of the
disadvantages likely to accrue to your majesty's provinces and ourselves more
especially, by the multiplying of small and weak governments unfit either for
offense or defense, (the union of these neighbor collennyes, having been more
than a little instrumental in our preservation.) We have taken the oaths
prescribed us by your majesty, and administered to your subjects of these four
towns the oath of allegiance, and convened a general assembly for regulating
the common affairs of the people and making of such laws as may be of more
peculiar use to ourselves, having special regard to the acts for trade and
navigation set forth in the book of rates commonly printed and sold, and if
some obstruction occationed by such as make great pretenses of your majesty's
favor and authority had not hindered we might have brought matters to a
greater maturity, yet hope to perfect something by the first opportunity of
shipping from hence, but feared it might be too long to defer our humble
acknowledgment of your majesty's grace and favor in committing the power into
such hands as it pleased your majesty to nomynate, not imposing strangers upon
us, and it much comforts us against any pretended claimers to our soil or any
malevolent spirits which may misrepresent us (as they have done others) unto
your majesty or honorable council, while beside the known laws of the realm,
and the undoubted right of English men, we have the favor of a gracious
prince to fly to. We do therefore most humbly beg the continuance of your
majesty's royal favor and protection, without which we are daily liable to
disturbance if not ruin.

And as in duty bound we shall humbly pray, etc. March 29, 1680.

No. XVIII.
To the kings most excellent majesty.
WE the president and council of your province of New Hampshire having
(according to the royal pleasure) given an account of our alleigiance and
observance of your commission by Mr. Jowles in March last, and therefore shall
not give you the trouble of repetition. According to your majesty's command,
we have with our general assembly been considering of such laws and orders, as
do by divine favor preserve the peace and are to the satisfaction of your
majesty's good subjects here, in all which we have had a special regard to
the statute book your majesty was pleased to honor us with, for which together
with the seal of your province, we return most humble and hearty thanks; but
such has been the hurry of our necessary occasions and such is the shortness of
the somer, (the only season to prepare for a long winter,) that we have not
been capeable of sitting so long as to frame and finish ought that we judge
worthy to be presented to your royal view, but shall as in duty bound give as
speedy a dispatch to the affare as we may. In the mean time your subjects are
at quiet under the shadow of your gracious protection, fearing no disturbance
unless by some pretended claimers to our soil, whom we trust your majesty's
clemency and equity will guard us from injury by; and considering the
purchaiss of our lands from the heathens the natural proprietors thereof, and
our long quiet possession not interrupted by any legal claim, our defense of
it against the barbarous adversary by our lives and estates, we are encouraged
that we shall be maintained in our free enjoyment of the same, without being
tennants to those who can show no such title thereunto. Further we do
gratefully acknowledge the mark of your princely favor in sending us your
royal effigies and imperial arms, and lament when we think that they are
(through the loss of the ship) miscarried by the way. And seeing your majesty is
graciously pleased to license us to crave what may conduce to the better
promoting of our weal and your majesty's authority, we would humbly suggest
whether the allowance of appeals mentioned in the commission may not prove a
great occasion by means of malignant spirits for the obstructing of justice
among us. There are also sundry other things that a little time and experience
may more evidently discover a great convenience, in which upon the contineuance
of the same liberty from your majesty we shall with like humility present.
Thus craving a favorable construction of what is above suggested and praying
for your majesty's long and prosperous reign, begging also the continuance of
your majesty's favor, out of which, if any of our adversarys under a pretense
of loyalty or zeal for your majesty's interist should endeavor to eject us,
we hope upon liberty granted us to speak for ourselves, we shall abundantly
demonstrate that we do truly and sincerely subscribe,

Your majesty's most loyal and dutiful subjects. JOHN CUT, President with the
consent of the council.
Portsmouth, in the Province of New Hampshire, June 11, 1680.
No. XIX. Copy of the Mandamus by which Robert Mason, Esquire. was admitted to a
seat in the council, Dec. 30, 1680.
Trusty and well beloved, We greet you well.
WHEREAS we have thought it fit to take into our special care and protection
our province of New Hampshire and provide for its prosperity and good
government and the settlement of the estates and possessions of our good
subjects there. And that for the avoiding any suits or contentions in matters
of title, and the determining any demands which might be made by our well
beloved subject Robert Mason, Esquire. as propietor under us of that province by
virtue of a grant derived from our royal grandfather King James under the great
seal of England: This must mean the charter to the council of Plymouth.
We have so composed all matters with him that for the time past until the
24th day of June 1679, he shall not claim or demand any rent, dues, or arrears
whatsoever: And for the future he, his heirs or assigns shall receive only six
pence in the pound yearly of every tenant by way of quit rent, according to the
true and just yearly valu of what is improved by any of the inhabitants; as is
more fully expressed in our commission under our great seal, bearing date the
18th day of September in the 31st year of our reign. And whereas the said
Robert Mason has humbly signified to us that he is preparing to transport
himself, for the taking care of his affairs and interest in the said province,
and for the giving a secure and legal confirmation of the estates of such
persons as are now in possession but without any right or legal title to the
same. And he being a person whom we have esteemed useful to our service, as he
is chiefly concerned in the welfare of that our province; we have further
thought fit to constitute and appoint him to be one of our council therein, and
we do hereby order and require you our president and council, that immediately
after his arrival you do admit him one of our council of our province of
New Hampshire, he first taking the oaths mentioned in our said commission. And
we do further require you and him, that you do betake yourselves to such
discreet and equitable ways and methods in your proceedings, agreements and
settlements for the future, that there may be no occasion of complaint to our
royal person and authority here. We being resolved to discountenance all such
as shall wilfully or unnecessarily avoid or delay your submitting to those
determinations which may be reasonably decreed according to justice and good
conscience. Which you are to signify to all our good subjects within our said
province that they may govern themselves accordingly. And so we bid you
heartily farewell. Given at our court at Newmarket the first day of October
1680, in the two and thirtieth year of our reign.

By his majesty's command, SUNDERLAND.
To our trusty and well beloved the president and council of our province of
New Hampshire in New England.
No. XX. Answer to the claim made by Mr. Mason to the houses and lands of
New Hampshire. [In Mr. Weare's hand writing, but without date or signature.]
IT does not legally appear that Mr. Mason can lay any just claim to any of
the lands in New Hampshire, for what right he pretends is either derived from
Capt. Jno. Mason, (whom he says was his grandfather) or from his majesty's
commission: But (...) neither of these has he any right. No^ from Capt. Jno.
Mason; for, (1) it (...) appear that ever he had any right to the province of
New Hampshire. It is true there is a copy of a pattent or deed from the
council of Plymouth, which he brings over without attestation of public
notary or any other authority. Besides in said copy there is not the least
intimation of any hand or seal to the original, and there is two men that
swears this is a true copy of the original, which plainly demonstrates that
the original is but a blanck; the truth whereof we are the more confirmed in,
because it is not rational to imagine that Mr. Mason would come from England to
prosecute a right and not bring with him what he had to make good his claim;
but having nothing but blanck coppies, he could bring no better than he had,
which cannot be looked upon as authentic in any court.

(2) If it should be supposed that ever Capt. Jno. Mason had a right by
pattent, yet it does not appear how Robert Tufton Mason (as the plantiffe calls
himself) derives a title from him either as his heir, executor or
administrator, or by deed of gift: all that we can hear in court is that the
plantife calls himself Capt. Mason's heir.

(3) If the plantiffe or his ancestors ever had a title to the lands he claims
by pattent from the council of Plymouth, yet they have lost it by non use, for
they never attended the ends of granting patents by king James, of blessed
memory, in his hyness pattent to the great council of Plymouth, which was the
peopling of the land, inlargeing the king's dominions, propagating the gospel,
conversion of the heathen the native proprietor's etc. Now the plantife nor
ancestors never planted this province nor expended any thing upon it to the
upholding of it in peace nor war, but the present inhabitants did either by
themselves or predecessors, purchase their possessions from the natives, and by
their permission did sit down upon the land and manured, to the vast expense of
above 50 years time in hard labor, and expending upon it their whole estate.
And in the late Indian war did defend it against the enemy to the ^oss of many
of their lives and considerable part of their estates, without any assistance
from Mr. Mason who now claims not only what poor people have purchased and
labored hard upon but also conquered or relived from cruel attempts of the
barbarous heathen, and we conceave we were under no obligation to run such
adventures to make ourselves slaves to Mr. Mason.

(4) It does not appear that there was a quorum of the great council of
Plymouth to the making of Capt. Mason's deed according to the patent granted to
the great council of Plymouth, which renders his claim unvalide, if ever any
thing in that kind was done, which we question.

From what is said we humbly conceave Mr. Mason has no right from Capt. Jno.
Mason.

And that his majesty's commission does neither give nor confirm any title to
the lands claimed, we prove:

(1) We humbly conceave that his royal majesty who is so prudent a prince and
so solicitous for the peace of his subjects, would not have left that matter
doubtful to his subjects of this province but rather have told us that he had
given all the lands to Mr. Mason, but there is nothing of gift to him in the
commission and if his majesty had (which we cannot believe he would) we should
crave the benefit of the statute in the 17o of Charles the first, which says,
No king and council can alienate lands but by due course of law. But we were
never yet heard, and when it comes to legal trial we presume the law of
possessions will confirm our lands to us, seeing we have had peaceable
possession 50 years.

(2) If his majesty had given the lands in the province to Mr. Mason, what can
be understood by that clause in the commission That in case the inhabitants
shall refuse to agree with Mr. Mason, then the governor shall interpose and
reconcile all differences if he can, but if he cannot then to send the case,
fairl^ stated to England that his majesty and privy council might determine
according to right; which we humbly conceave puts a bar to any legal
proceedings until his majesty's mind be further known therein. The inhabitants
have offered their reasons to the governor according to commission, which he
will not admit of, only did take of one, viz. Capt. Stileman, and promised to
send them to England, but we can hear of no answer and much fear his neglect.

(3) His majesty in his commission says, To prevent unreasonable demands that
may be made by Mr. Mason for the right he claims, which claim may prove good
or bad when it comes to trial. We understand to claim and to have are
different things.

(4) His majesty intimates in his royal commission by what title Mr. Mason does
claim, viz. by a grant to his ancestors, who improved and possessed the
province with great expense, until molested and finally driven out; but this
province cannot be concluded to be the place he claims until he make these
circumstances appear, which we are sure he never can do.

Now Mr. Mason not producing any original deed for any of the lands of this
province, nor authentic copies, the inhabitants cannot make any compliance
with him both because we see no right he ever had, or believing if ever any was
he has mortgaged it already in England, and so alienated what right he had.

Although upon the former grounds we have good plea against Mr. Mason's claim,
yet we did not see cause to join issue, not only because judges and jurors were
not qualified according to law, all of them being picked for espousing Mr.
Mason's interest by the governor's order, who has a mortgadge for 21 years
from Mr. Mason for all the lands in the province. But also because we was
willing to attend the methods prescribed by his majesty in his royal commission.

No. XXI. The answer of Elias Stileman to the summons from the honble Edward
Cranfield, esquire. governor of his majesty's province of N. Hampshire in N. E. in
pursuance of the method which his majesty has been graciously pleased to
prescribe in his commission.
Portsmo. the 15th of November, 1682. May it please your Honor.
IN obedience to your command that I should render a reason why I refuse to pay
quitrent unto Robert Mason, esquire. (as he titles himself) for my house and lands,
and take deeds from him for the confirming of the same, I answer as follows:

1stly. Because my said land I bought and paid for. The title unto which is
successively derived unto me from those that have possessed it, without any
claim for at least these 50 years, upon which I have built at my own charge
without any interruption, and am in the possession thereof as my own. As to
what is said in the commission concerning Mr. Mason's proprieters, with all due
submission to his majesty, I conceive it implys rather his claim than a
positive determination of his title.

2dly. I humbly conceive that being in possession of what I have bought and
built upon, it rests upon the claimer to make out his title (if he have any by
law), begging the favor of an English subject therein, that it may be first
tried upon the place according to the statute law and the opinion of his
majesty's judges in England, and this before I am liable to pay quit-rent and
take deeds of confirmation from him.

3dly. Should Mr. Mason obtain his demands, myself and the rest of the
inhabitants would be undone forever, for then all his granted to him which he
calls commons being out of fence, which yet has been bounded out by the
several towns and possessed by them for these 50 years, and improved for the
maintenance of their cattle both winter and summer, and for timber and fire
wood, without which there is no liveing for us, it being impossible for us to
subsist upon that which in the commission is called gardens, orchards, if he
may have the disposal of the rest.

4thly. The said Mason speaks of many thousands of pounds expended upon the
place, which with submission cannot be made out, and if it could, what then
have the poor planters expended in so many years labor since their first
sitting down upon it, when they found it an howling wilderness and vacuum
domicilium, besides a great expense of blood and estate to defend it in the
late Indian war, nor can they to this day make both ends meet by all their
labor and frugality, and therefore must needs sink under the exaction of such
a propriator.

5thly. The land which Mr. Mason claims as propriator is the land on which
such vast expense has been laid out by his grandfather Captain John Mason, for
the peopling of it and the land from whence his said grandfathers servants were
violently driven out, or expeled by the inhabitants of the Massathusets, but
upon this land there was no such expense laid out by his grandfather Captain
John Mason for the end aforesaid, nor is this the land from whence any servants
of his said grandfather were so expelled, and therefore we that are possessed
of this land are not concerned in his claim, he ha^^ mistaken his province
and may endeavor to find it some other where, for here is no such place.

6thly. If Mr. Mason had a patent here, why did he not take possession in the
day thereof. If he were in possession why did he not keep it still: None ever
drove him out as he informs, had he been once settled he might to this day
have kept it as the rest of the inhabitants have done without the least
mollistation, but I am humbly of opinion that if he the said Mason or any of
his airs came hither, they only came as many ships did to Newfoundland and to
this country to make a fishing voyadge or beaver trade, and that being at an
end departed and left their room to the next taker.

This is the sum of what I have at present to answer, humbly requesting of
your honor the stating of the case, with your opinion thereupon to his majesty
as the commission directs; and when his majesty shall in his wisdom and justice
see meet to order an hearing of the matter in his courts of judicature upon the
place before a jury of uninterested and indifferent persons which may be had
out of the neighboring province, (and possibly Mr. Mason may think not
attainable in this province wherein all persons are concerned,) as he has been
pleased to do by that part of Mr. Mason's claim, which lies under his
majesty's government of the Massathusets, I hope to be able upon these and
other grounds so far to make out my title as to be held unblameable before God
and man, for not complying with his demands. Or if I should see cause to appeal
to his majesty and honorable council that I shall be put beyond all need of
paying quit rent to the pretended propriator.

Thus begginge your honor's favor, I subscribe, Sir, your humble servant, E.
S.


[ The two preceding papers are in the hand of the honorable President Wear.]

No. XXII. Copy of an order for the administration of the sacraments, according
to the mode of the church of England.
At a council held at Great Island, December 10, 1683. By the governor and
council. (...) Hampsn.
IT is hereby required and commanded, that all and singular the respective
ministers within this province for the time being, do from and after the first
day of January next ensuing, admit all persons that are of suitable years and
not vicious and scandalous in their lives, unto the blessed sacrament of the
Lord's supper and their children unto baptism. And if any person shall desire
to receive the sacrament of the Lord's supper, or their children to be baptized
according to the liturgy of the church of England, that it be done accordingly
in pursuance of the laws of the realm of England, and his majesty's command to
the Massachusetts government. And if any minister shall refuse so to do being
thereunto duly required he shall incurr the penalty of the statutes in that
case made and provided, and the inhabitants are freed from paying any duties to
the said minister.

The aforesaid order was published, R. CHAMBERLAIN, clerk council.


[ This paper is in the council minutes, second book.]

No. XXIII. Copy of the information against Mr. Moody, 1683. New Hampshire in
New England.
To Walter Barefoot, Esquire. judge of the court of pleas of the crown, etc. now
sitting at Great Island. And to Nathaniel Friar and Henry Green, Esqrs.
assistants.
The information of Joseph Rayn his majesty's attorney general for the said
province of New Hampshire, against Joshua Moody of Portsmouth in the said
province, clark, in his said majesty's behalf.

THE said Joseph Rayn informs, that the abovesaid Joshua Moody being the
present minister of the town of Portsmouth aforesaid, within the dominions of
our sovereign lord Charles the second, king of England, is by the duty of his
place and the laws and statutes of the realm of England, (viz. the statute
made in the fifth and sixth of king Edward the sixth, and the stat. of the
first year of the reign of the late queen Elizabeth, which is confirmed by the
statute made in the thirteenth and fourteenth year of the reign of our
sovereign lord king Charles the second) required and commanded to administer
the sacrament of the Lord's supper in such manner and form as is set forth in
the book of common prayer and administration of the sacraments and other rites
and ceremonies of the church of England, and shall use no other manner or form
than is mentioned and set forth in the said book. Nevertheless the said Joshua
Moody in contempt of the said laws and statutes has wilfully and obstinately
refused to administer the sacrament of the Lord's supper according to the
manner and form set forth in the said book of common prayer, unto the honble
Edward Cranfield, esquire. governor of his majesty's said province of
New Hampshire, Robert Mason, esquire. proprietor, and John Hinks, esquire. of the said
province; and does obstinately and wilfully use some other form than is by
the said statutes ordained, contrary to the form thereof: Therefore the said
Joseph Rayn in behalf of our sovereign lord the king, does pray, That the said
Joshua Moody being thereof convicted according to law, may suffer such
penalties as by the said stat. are made and provided in that case.

No. XXIV. Copy of a second information against Moody.
New Hampshire in New England. To the honble Walter Barefoot, esquire judge of the
court of pleas of the crown and other civil pleas, held at Great Island, and
now sitting this 6th Feb. 1683/4, etc.
The information of Joseph Rayn his majesty's attorney general for the said
province, in his majesty's behalf against Joshua Moody of Portsmouth, clark

WHEREAS the said Joshua Moody has in open court of the quarter sessions of
the peace held at Gr. Island aforesaid upon record, confessed and owned before
the justices, That he has administered the sacraments contrary to the rites and
ceremonies of the church of England, and the form prescribed and enjoined by
the statute made in the first year of the late queen Elizabeth, and so stands
convicted of the said offense before the justices at the said sessions: Joseph
Rayn his majesty's attorney general for the said province, who prosecutes for
our soverign lord the king does (according to the ancient law of the statue
made in the forty second year of the reign of king Edward the 3d, now in force)
in his majesty's behalf, exhibit his information to this hon. court against the
said Joshua Moody, for that he having for many years had the appearance and
reputation of a minister of G^d's word in the said province, being within the
king's dominions, and having wilfully and obstinately refused to administer the
sacraments according to the rites of the church of England, has administered
the sacraments of baptism and the Lord's supper in other manner and form than
is appointed and commanded by the statute of the first of queen Elizabeth and
other statutes, contrary to the form thereof and in contempt of his majesty's
laws: And does pray the court's judgment and that the said Joshua Moody may
suffer the penalties by the said statute in this case made and provided.

No. XXV. New Hampshire in New England.
To James Sherlock, gent. prove. marshal and sheriff of the said province, or
his deputy.
IN his majesty's name you are hereby required forthwith to take and apprehend
the body and person of Joshua Moody of Portsmouth in the said province, clark,
and carry him to the prison of Great Island in the said province; and the
prisonkeeper, Richard Abbot, is hereby required to receive him the said Joshua
Moody and keep him in safe custody in the said prison, he having been convicted
of administering the sacraments contrary to the laws and statutes of England,
and refusing to administer the sacraments according to the rites and ceremonies
of the church of England, and the form enjoined in the said statutes. There to
remain for the space of six months next ensuing, without bail or mainprize.
Fail not.

Dat. the 6th of Feb. 1683/4. WALT. BAREFOOT, (Seal.) PETER COFFIN, (Seal.)
HEN. GREEN, (Seal.) HEN. ROBY, (Seal.)

Vera copia,

Test, Richdo Chamberlain, Clro P.




[ The three preceding papers are in the Recorder's office.]

No. XXVI. Copy of an order for raising money without an assembly. New-Hamp.
At a council held at Gr. Island, Feb. 14, 1683/4. By the governor and council.
WHEREAS we have lately had intelligence by a letter from Capt. Hook to Capt.
Barefoot one of the council of this his majesty's province, that he had advice
from the captain of the fort at Casco of a sudden rising and (...) intended by
the Indians upon the English at the eastward: And whereas the assembly have
been lately tendered a bill for raising a revenue for the fortifying and
defending our selves against his majesty's enemies, did absolutely refuse and
reject the same without giving any reason for so doing, or preparing any other
for defraying the charge of the public service. We his majesty's governor and
council finding the public treasury so empty and bare that there is not so much
money as to pay a single messenger; and those persons that are the support of
the province have not estates to support themselves in the war (if any should
happen) without due payment for their service in consideration of the premises,
by virtue of his majesty's royal commission bearing date the nineth of May
1682, and also of his majesty's royal instructions to the governor bearing date
the 29th of April 1682, have, for the raising a revenue for fortifying and
defraying the necessary charges of the government, that there may be a magazeen
of ammunition and provision, and of money to pay indigent soldiers, as also
for such emergencies as a war will necessarily produce, thought fit to
continue, and do hereby continue all such taxes and impositions as have been
formerly laid upon the inhabitants (excepting only the rate of the penny in the
pound raised in time of usurpation without a general assembly) commanding and
requiring all and singular the constables and collectors forthwith to perform
their duty in levying and collecting the same, and paying it in to the
treasurer.

No. XXVII. Copy of a letter from the council to Governor Dongan. Prove. of
New Hampshire, Mar. 21, 1683/4.
Sir,
BY several advices we have received of a sudden rising intended by the Indians
in these eastern parts to fall upon the English, we judged it absolutely
necessary without delay to provide for the safety and preservation of his
majesty's subjects inhabiting this province, and to give releef (if need be) to
our neighboring colonies. We have therefore upon consideration of the best
means for the securing of these provinces concluded it very necessary to
entertain a number of southern Indians for soldiers, who are best acquainted
with the manner of these Indians skulking fight; and this being a work of piety
and charity for preventing the effusion of christian blood: And knowing that
your honor has an influence upon the southern Indians our honourble governor
was willing to take the trouble upon himself of a journey to New York to treat
with your honor for sending of such a number of Mahiquas, or other Indians, as
may be convenient to assist in this service, and to make such capitulations and
agreement as to his honor shall seem reasonable. We doubt not your honor's
readiness in any thing that may tend to his majesty's service and the safety of
his subjects, having often heard a noble character of your honor from our
governor, whom we have entreated to present our letter with our most humble
service. We have committed all matters to his honor's prudence and management
and what his honor shall judge fit to be done we shall see performed. So praying
for your honor's health and prosperity, we subscribe ourselves, (being his
majesty's council of New Hampshire)

May it please your hon. your most humble servants.

To the Honble Col. Tho. Dongan, governor of his royal highness his colony of
New York, and the territories thereto belonging, humbly present. ROBt. MASON,
WALTER BAREFOOT, R. CHAMBERLAIN, ROBt. ELLIOT, JOHN HINKS.



[ The two preceding papers are in the council's minutes, second book.]

No. XXVIII. To the king's most excellent majesty. The humble address and
petition of sundry of your majesty's loyal subjects the freeholders and
habitants of your majesty's province of New Hampshire in New England,
[From the town of Exeter.
Most humbly shows, ends proposed, viz. The glory of God, the enlarging his
majesty's dominions, and spreading the gospel among the heathen: And in order
thereunto either found the lands we now possess vacuum domicilium, or purchased
them of the heathen the native proprietors of the same, or at least by their
allowance, approbacon or consent, have sat down in the peaceable possession
of the same for the space of above fifty years; hoping that as we had attended
the ends, so we should have shared in the privileges of those royal letters
patents above menconed, and thereupon did the more patiently bear and
chearefully graple with those innumerable evils and difficulties that must
necessarily accompany the settlers of new plantacons, especially in such
climates as these, besides the calamities of the late Indian war to the loss
of many of our lives, and the great impoverishment of the survivors. We were
also further encouraged from your majesty's princely care in taking us by your
late commission under your majesty's immediate government, and appointing some
among ourselves to govern us according to those methods there prescribed, being
particulerly bound to discountenance vice and promote virtue and all good
liueing, and to keep us in a due obedience to your majesty's authority and
continuance of our just libertyes and propertyes, together with liberty of
conscience in matters of worshipp, and all in order to our liueing in all
godliness and honesty, fearing God and honoring the king, which we profess to
be our desire to do.

But contrariwise partly by the unreasonable demands of our pretended
proprietor Robert Mason, esquire. and partly from sundry other reasons that are
either effects or concomitants thereof we are in a far worse condition than
any other your majesty's plantacons, and reduced to such confusions and
extremities that necessitate our humble application to your majesty, upon whose
clemency and justice only under God we depend for our releife.

Your poor distressed and oppressed petitioners do therefore most humbly
supplicate your most gracious majesty that you will vouchsafe to give leave
unto one of ourselves, Mr. Nathaniel Wear, whom we have sent for that end to
spread before your sacred majesty and your most honorable privy council our
deploreable estate, the beholding of which we doubt not will move compassion
toward us, and your majesty's propensity to justice will incline to the using
such means as to your wisdom shall seem best that the oppressed may be
relieved, wronged ones righted, and we your majesty's almost undone subjects
now prostrate at your feet, may upon the tasteing of your equity and goodness,
be raised and further engaged in all humility and thankfulness as in duty bound
evermore heartily to pray, etc.

Andrew Wiggin, Thomas Wiggin senior, Thomas Wiggin junior, Robert Smart
senior, John Young, John Foulsham, Edward Smyth, Peter Foulsham, Theophilus
Dursely, Richard Morgen, Samuel Leavitt, John Cotton junior, John Gilman
senior, Edward Gilman, Moses Leaveitt, Jonathan Robinson, Thomas Rawlins, David
Robinson, Kinsley Hall, Bily Dudley, James Sinkler, Christian Dolhoff, Philip
Charte, Jeremiah Low, Ralph Hall, Samuel Hall, John Sinkler, John Wadleigh,
Samuel Foulsham, Eleazer Elkins, Ephraim Foulsham, Humphrey Wilson, Nathaniel
Foulsham, Jonathan Thing.

The like petition from the town of Hampton in the said province signed by,

Nathaniel Bachiler, John Marston, James Philbrick, Jacob Brown, Thomas
Brown, Henry Lamper, Jonathan Wedgwood, Henry Moulton, John Moulton, Joseph
Smith, David Wedgwood, James Cheuse, James Perkins, Morris Hobbs senior, Joseph
Moulton, Benjamin Moulton, Thomas Levitt, Thomas Derborne, John Levitt, Henry
Derborne, Aratus Levitt, Christopher Hussy, John Tucke, John Smith, Thomas
Page, Philip Towle, Josiah Sanbourne, William Sanbourne senior Ruth Johnson,
widow, Richard Sanbourne, Thomas Walker, Isaac Godfrey, Humphrey Perking, David
Lamprey, Benjamin Lauyre, William Fuller, John Sanbourne, Hesron Leavit, Samuel
Shuerborne, Francis Page, Peter Wear, Benjamin Brown, Thomas Philbrick,
Timothy Blake, Jacob Perkins, Jonathan Philbrock, Ebenezer Perkins, Caleb
Perkins, Joseph Perkins, Joseph Dow, John Clifford senior, Samuel Philbrook,
Joseph Shaw, John Clifford, Benjamin Shaw, Samuel Cogg, Timothy Hillyard,
Anthony Stanyan, John Stanyan, Joseph Sanbourne, Isaac Perkins, Moses Swett,
Joseph Swett, Joseph Cass, Duel Clemens, Samuel Cass, John Sanbourne senior.

The like petition from Portsmouth in the said province, signed by,

George Hunt, Peter Ball, John Sherborne senior, Samuel Wentworth, Sp. Lovell,
Richard Webber, Richard Waterhouse, William Davell, John Cotton, Thomas
Wacombe, Obadiah Mors, Nicolas Morrell, Samuel Keais, John Dennett, John Took,
Edward Melcher, George Lavers, Jacob Lavers, Calmorat Mashawes, John Barsham,
John Shipivay, John Johnson, John Sherborne junior, Thomas Pickerin, John
Light, William Pitman, James Jones, William Cotton, James Levitt, Jethro
Furbur, Edward Ball, Thomas Cotton, Daniel Duggen, Francis Jones, John
Partridge, Robert Purinton, Nehemiah Yartridge, Jotham Lewis, Anthony Brackett,
John Brackett, Matthias Haines, Samuel Haines, Samuel Haines junior, William
Fifield senior, Walter Neal, Leonard Weeks, Nathaniel Drake, John Hunking,
Richard Joses, Jane Joses, John Fletcher, Richard Martyn, Ph. Sueret, Richard
Waldron, Ben. Hull, John Cut, William Vaughan, George Jaffreys, John
Pickering, John Buister. The like petition from the town of Dover, signed by,
Job Clements, Thomas Roberts, Edward Allen, William Furbur senior, Henry
Santer, Richard Rows, Anthony Nutter, John Dam, William Furbur junior, John
Dam junior, John Nutter, Thomas Row, Edward Row, John Meadow, Philip Chesley,
Joseph Stephenson, Thomas Chesley, Joseph Hinneder, Stephen Jones, Edward
Small, Nathanael -- James Hucking, Catharias Jerlld, Ezekiel Wentworth, Paul
Wentworth, Gerard Gyner, Jenkins Jones, Joseph Can, Richard Waldron, John
Winget, John Gerish, William Wentworth, John Heard, John Roberts, John Hall,
jun. Robert Burnum, Saml. Burnum, Jeremiah Burnum, Samuel Hill, Ralph Wormley,
William Horn, Peter Mason, John Woodman senior, John Woodman junior, Jonathan
Woodman, John Davis senior, John Davis junior, Joseph Fields, John Bickford,
Thomas Bickford, Thomas Edgerly, John Hill, Charles Adams, Sam. Adams, William
Parkinson, Joseph Hill, Nathan. Hill, John Roberts.







[ From a copy in the hands of the honorable president Wear.]

No. XXIX. The deposition of Peter Coffin, esquire. one of his majesty's justices
of the peace for New Hampshire, being sworn, says,
THAT sometime in the beginning of February, A. D. 1683/4, I the deponent was
present at the house of Mr. John Hincks in company with the hon Edw. Cranfield,
esquire. governor of this province, where I heard the said governor send for Mr. Wm
Vaughan, and when the said Vaughan came the governor enquired of him what
affidavits those were he had that day desired to be taken. The said Vaughan
answered, those that concerned his cause against Mr. Mason. The governor asked
him who they were, he answered, if he might have summons he would bring them
before his honor to be sworn; and then the governor brake out into a passion
and told him, the said Vaughan, that he was a mutinous fellow, and asked him
what he went lately to Boston for; the said Vaughan answered he went about his
business. Then the governor said he went to carry a mutinous petition to be
sent to England by Wear, and asked him what vessel Wear went in; Mr. Vaughan
answered that he left Wear in Boston. Then the governor said, that by the next
ships after Wear was got to England and had presented his petition, he should
have an account of the persons names that subscribed it returned to him, and
that it would be the best hawl he ever had, for it would be worth L. 100 a man.
The governor f^rther said that the said Vaughan was a mutinous fellow, and
required of him bonds to the good behavior; Mr. Vaughan answered he knew none
of the king's laws he had broken, but if he could be informed of his crime he
was ready to give bonds. And that in the whole discourse Mr. Vaughan demeaned
himself with a great deal of moderation and submission. Notwithstanding which
the governor commanded a mittimes to be writ and signed the same with his own
hand, whereupon the said Vaughan was forthwith committed to prison.

PETER COFFIN.
Peter Coffin, esquire. the above named deponent, appearing in the town of Kittery
in the province of Maine this 27th of January 1684-5, made oath to the above
written, before me,

CHARLES FROST, Just. of Peace.



No. XXX. The warrant and mittimus whereby William Vaughan, Esquire. was committed
to prison.
New Hampshire. To James Sherlock, gent. sherif and provost marshal of the said
province, or his deputy.
IN his majesty's name you are hereby required to take and apprehend the body
of William Vaughan, of Portsmouth Esquire. and carry him to the prison of Great
Island; And Richard Abbot the prison keeper thereof, is hereby required to
receive the said Vaughan into the said prison and there keep him in safe
custody till he shall give good security to our sover. lord the king his heirs
and successors for his the said Vaughan's good behavior toward the same our
sover. lord the king he having refused to find security for his said good
behavior the sixth day of February 1683. Given under my hand and seal the said
sixth day of February 1683/4.

EDWARD CRANFIELD, (L. S.)


[ The two preceding papers are in the recorder's office.]

XXXI. A letter from William Vaughan, Esquire. containing a journal of transactions
during his imprisonment, etc. to Nathaniel Wear, Esquire. agent in London.
Mr. Nathaniel Wire, SIR, Portsmouth, 4th Feb. 1683/4.
THESE serves to give covert to the enclosed which were unhappily mislaid, and
so brought to Portsmouth insted of being carried by you to London though on
the other hand you carried many papers for London which ought to have been at
Portsmouth. There were several papers in the bondle which were very
impertinente unto your business, and the transpo^tinge of them very
prejudicial to some here, your especyall care about them is expected, yet may
be safely returned with you if not transmitted by you before you return. We
are now a doeinge about getinge evidenses sworn, which you shall have a
further account by the first, though retarded much by havinge no copies of them
as we expected. Sinse your departure much ado have been made, many execucyons
extended, viz. upon Mrs. Cut, Daniele, myself, Mr. Fletcher, Moody, Hunkins,
Earl, Picke^inges, Booth, etc. I went to prison but was redeemed with money,
several doors ware broken open by Mathews the marshall's deputy, chestes also
and trunks and carried out of the house till redeemed with money. John
Partridge and Wm Cotton are in prison and have been sundry days. No pay (as
fish, sheep, horses, etc.) would be taken for their executyons, so there bodies
ware levied upon and there they lie. Our menister for refusinge to admenester
the sacrament to the governor is bound over to the quarter sessions to sit
tomoro, the isshew we know not but six months imprisonment thretned. Your wife
and famely well. Great bluster at Hampton about the petityon, some weekelinges
ware whegled into a confession and they discovered the persons that carried
the petityon, who ware by justis G. and R. bound over to the quarter sessions,
but last Satterday night (on what ground know not) Mr. Green burnte there
bonds and only told them they must apere when cold for. Charles Hilton is
lately ded. As other news arrives shall hand it to you by all occatyones and
do you the like by us.

5th. Quarter sessions are come, and there Capt. Barefoote, Mr. Friar, Coffin,
Green, Roby, Edgerly, were justices, Raines was attorney. It was brought in as
a plea of the crown. Mr. Moody pleaded his not being ordained, havinge no
maintenance according to statute and therefore not obliged to that work which
the statute required. ^esides these statutes were not made for these plases,
the known end of there removal hither being that they might enjoye liberty in
these forrin plantatyones which these could not have by vertew of the statutes
at home, and ware allowed to have here, especyally our comityon grantinge
liberty of contyense. These things ware pleded, but to no purpose, after a
short pleding and that not without many interopyones and smiles by the
pragmatticke, busey impertenente atturny, he was comited to the marshall, (viz.
Long Matthews) and held in custody that night though permitted to lodge at Capt.
Stileman's. The justises debated a littell, four of them entered their
desente, viz. Mr. Friar, Green, Roby, Edgerly, but Capt. Barefoote and Coffin
ware for his condemnatyon. Judgment of the case, every man's was entered by the
secretary over night, but being deferred till next morninge informatyon was
given to somebody who came in and thretned and hectored after such a rate that
Green and Roby also consented as you see by the enclosed, and he was comited
to prison. Petyon was by him made to the court, and afterward to the
governor, that he might step up at night to his famely and settle matters
there, and that he might not go into the dismal plase the common prisson. The
court could not, the governor would not of first, though in fine gave leave to
the marshall to droap him at Capt. Stileman's where he is confined to his
chamber, though not without leave to go down stairs or into the backside, and
this was done 6th instante. At night I havinge moved for the taking of
evedenses, which was in words owned, went to the secretary for summones,
intendinge to begin with (...) Haull and Those. Wiggones, he refused to give
summones but first (I suppose) must inform somebody, I was sent for by the
marshall, huffed and hectored strangely, thretned, etc. in fine, must give
bonds to the good behavior; I refused, thereupon he made and signed my mitymos
to the prison, though by the way, I know not how, was also droped at and
confined to Mr. Moody's chamber, where we have bin this two nights very
chareful together.

Poor Wadlow who was left to the governor's mercy is com out upon security
for forty pounds money, and your Gove for a like some, only Wm Partridge is to
do it in work, buildinge and fensing, etc. The actyons go on and are turned
of hand apase, twelve at a clapp, after the old manner. Roby though a justis
is still of the jury. A new trick is on foot, several of us that ware
executed upon and paid our money the first suit, are sued again for illegal
witholding possession, though the marshall (who was by executyon required to give
possession never came to demand it;) the issue of which we know not, matters
being yet dependinge.

9th. The prisoners Vaughan and Mr. Moody ware fetched out of prison to plede
there casses at the court. Mrs. Cut, Daniell, John Partridge and myself and
Mr. Moody ware sued and all cast, but the last who had something
particulerly to say, and so he cast Mr. Mason, though we thought we all
said enoufe to cast him, viz. that he had an executyon for the land sued for
and when he levied his executyon might have taken the land also, with many
other things (enofe of we thought) to have turned the case against him before
anny indiferent ^udges and jurors, but thus we are tretted.

But above all our menester lies in prison, and a fammin of the word of god
cominge upon us. No public worship, no preachinge of the word, what ignoranse
profanes and misery must needs ensue! By the premises you see what need there
is you should be vigoros and speedy as you may about your business to do what
may be to the preventinge of uter ruin.

My imprisonment is a present stop to the getinge what evidenses is needful,
and it is like we shall not make anny further attempt here, but with what
conveniente expedityon will be don what is needful and necessary. Mr. Martin
was sued at the court in two actyones, one by Mr. Mason for fines and
forfeitures collected and received by him as treasurer from seventy nine to
eighty two, and another actyon by the governor for fines, etc. from April
eighty two. He is cast in both actyones to the value of about seventy pounds,
although he pl^ded that what he received was disposed by order of the
authority which made him treasurer, and had as good comition from his magestie
as that was in being, neither did it legally appear that either Mr. Masson or
the governor have anny right to fines and forfetures, the king appointinge
all public money to be disposed or improved for the suppo^te of the
government; however it is but ask and have, there demands in any case have the
force of an executyon.

10th. The sabath is come but no prechinge at the Bank, nor anny allowed to
com to us; we had none but the (...) with us, the pore people wantinge for lake
of bred. Motyones have bin made that Mr. Moody may go up and prech on the
Lord's day, though he com down to the prisson at night, or that naibor
ministers might be permitted to com and prech, or that the people might com
down to the prisson and here as many as could, but nothing will do; an
unparraleled example amongst christians to have a menester putt out and no
other way found to supply his plase by one menes or other. Mr. Friar was
severely thretned for refuseinge to subscribe Mr. Moody's comitment, but has
obtained fairly a dismityon from all public offices. Justice Edgerly also
caishered, and bound over to the quarter sessiones. It is said that justis
Green is much afflicted for what he has done, but Roby not. Peter Coffin can
scarce show his head in anny company. Mr. Moody in the church records remarks
thus on his judges* Not long after Green repented and made his acknowledgement
to the (...) who frankly forgave him. Robie was excommunicated out of Hampton
church for a common drunkard and died excommunicate, and was by his friends
thrown into a hole near his house for fear of an arrest of his carcass.
Barefoote fell into a languishing distemper whereof he died. Coffin was taken
by the Indians (at Cochecho 1689) his house and mill burnt, himself not being
slain but dismissed; the Lord give him repentance, though no signs of it have
yet appeared.


14th. Nuse came from the fourte at Casco that there was great danger of the
Indyanes risinge, which has occatyoned more sinse and hope it may vanish.

15th. Good Mrs Martin was buried, being not able to live above one saboth
after the shutting up the doors of the sanctuary. Somebody has said the
imprisoninge of the minister is noone of his work, he did but constitute the
court, they did it themselves, though also has said he would have don it
himself if they had not.

17th. Another sad saboth.

18th. Came Mr. Mason, Barefoote and secretary, with Thurton, who swore aginst
me a false oath, of which have enclosed a copia. Thurton said he was sent for
on purpose to give in his testimony against me; they went away, and soon
after came the enclosed mittimos directed to Mr. Raines hoo is shereff and
marshall in Mr. Sheerlock's room that have bin out of favor of late, though
now it is said in favor but not in plase again. Mr. Estwicke is also put out
of all offis. Noote, that when I went to him for takeinge oaths, he said all
oaths should be taken before the governor and counsel, but now could send to
justises to do it. We had for some nights our key taken away from the chamber
door about 8 or 9 at night but have sinse left off that trade. Sowell of
Exeter is ded. Several overtures ware made this week to John Partridge and Wm
Cotton by Raines to com out of prisson he giveinge them three months time to
provide money or anny other currante pay, though they tendered fish, planke, etc.
before they ware put in, they refused to accept.

24th. This sabbath our wives, children and servants came down and spente the
day with us in our chamber, and we (...) here nothing said against it.

25th. The marshall goes and levies upon John the Greeke's sheep and cattle for
the executyon, for which he had lain about three weeks in prisson, and then
came and ordered him to go about his busnesse, 15 sheep, sundry lambs, and
two haifers sezed for six pounds od money. This day also Mr. Jaffery havinge
had sundery warninges the week before to clear his house becase Mr. Masson
would com and take possession of it, went never the les to the Bank upon
busnes; me^e while came Mr. Mason with the marshall and turned all his servants
out of doors, set another lock on the door, and at night when his servants
came home wett they would not suffer them to com in, but there lodged Matthews
and Thurton all night. Mr. Mason said while about this work that he was
sorry Wire had no more of this nuse to carry hoome with him.

The governor havinge sent to Mr. Cotton, that when he had prepared his soul
he would com and demand the sacrament of him as he had don at Portsmouth
already. Mr. Cotton the latter end of the week before last went to Boston and
has bin out two Lord's days already; all is well with yours there, so far as I
can learn, I cannot go to see else might have given them a visit.

One word more about my busnes. I am under imprisonment about Thurton's
busness, being seized by the marshall and comited when in prisson before for
not giveing bond for the good behavior, though nothing charged upon me any more
than before, which you well know. I know nothing but they intend to keep me
here endlessly; it is said I must pay one hundred pounds for strikeinge one
of the king's officers and must have my name returned into the exchequer and
must lie in prisson till the money be paid and I am discharged from the
exchequer. The design you may esely see is to ruin me, and how vain my ples
will be you may esely guess. Though I have manny things to say, viz. that
Thurton was either no officer or at least not known to be so, however not
sworn, nor did I strike him in the hyewaye as he swears, nor is there anny
proof but his own single testimony, which how far it availes in such a case
would be considered; it^s also worthy of inquire whether ever that law was
intended for us, here being no customs to be gathered, no exchequer to be
applied to, and therefore how these methods can be observed is not
intellegable. You may esely imagen how things will be if I am forsed to complye
with there humors. Pray consult, consider and see if something may not be done
to putt a stop to such arbetrary proseedings, a trial on the plase by
indifferente unconserned judges and jurors if at least there can anny such be
found hoo will not be forsed into what some will have done, but I shall not
need to instruct you; there you have better counsel then I can give you, and
of your fedelyty to inquire and remitte by the first what is needful on this
account I doubt not.

I have given you but a taste, we that see it know more then can possibly be
understood by those that only here; in a word, such is the haith of there heat
and raidge that there is no livinge for us long in this condityon. Butt we
hope God will be seen in the mount.

I should have inserted what fell out after the desolvinge of the rebellyous
assembly, there was discourse of constables, and insted of the freemen's
chusinge as formerly they took a short and cheper course, and at the quarter
sessions constables were chosen and to begin with Mr. Speker, he has the honor
to be constable for Portsmoth, Capt. Gerrish, Lt. Nutter and John Woodman for
Dover, Smith the cooper for Hampton, John Foulsham at Exeter. Whether Mr.
Speker shall serve or fine is not yet determined. And now I am spekinge of the
general assembly, must hinte what was formerly forgotten, vz. that they
convened on the Mondaye and the choice of the speker (there old one) in words
hily approved and he complemented alamode. Then a bill was sent them down (of
which if I can get it being now in prisson shall enclose a copia) which they
talked a littel of and then brake up for the night and went up to the Bank to
lodge (the tide serving very well to go and com), the report of which hily
disgusted, and the next morning the answer to the bill vehemently urged, which
was in fine a negative. Hereupon in a great raidge telling them they had bin up
to consult with Moody an utter enemy to church and coman wealth with much of
like nature, he disolved them, which was don on the Tuesday, after which he
came up to the Bank and gave order for a sacrament on the next Lord's day as
you have herd and since the assembly men pricked for constables.

By the premises you will see how the governor is making good his word he
came for money and money he will get, and if he get it you know hoo must loose
it, and how miserable must our condityon quickly be if there be no remedy
quickly provided. He contrives and cutts out work and finds evil
instrewments to make it up, and these some among ourselves. Thus we are cloven
by our own limbs.

28th. Sinse Mr. Jaffery was dispossessed, Raines offered him for five
shillings per annum quit-rent to Mr. Mason, he should have his house again,
provided he would own him proprietor, but he refusinge it is said he shall
never have it again. The talk is that his house must be courthouse and
prison booth, and standinge so nere the governor it is judged suitable for booth
those ends, that he may have the shorter journey to court and the prisoners
may be always under his eye.

29th. John the Greek havinge lain some weeks in prisson upon executyon, his
goods havinge bin levied upon (as above), was by Raines locked out of the
prisson and bidden to be gone, but he would not, keeps his quarters still with
the other two. This day his goods was sold by the marshall and bought by
Thurton.

Mr. Cotton is com home from Boston. Great offense taken here at a sermon he
preched in Boston on Acts xii.5. though plesing to the hearers.

March 2d. This day Mr. Jeffery's goods ware all turned out of doors by the
sheriff, etc. his man received and disposed of them. Against Jaffery there are
two oaths taken, single oaths, but being for the king will pass, and orders
are given for warrants to apprehend him, he apperes not.

March 5. It is said that they are goinge this day to Major Waldrone's to
serve him as they have done Mr. Jaffery, and it is given out that the rest will
be treted in like manner; the court was adjourned yesterdaye to the next
month pbably that they might levey the executyons that are in bank before
they cut out anny more work. Justis Green seems something troubled for
sendinge the menester to prisson, and says he will never do such a thing
again, but Peter Coffin says it is a nine days wonder and will soon be
forgotten, but others think otherwise. If they go on thus we are uterly
ruined, must go away or starve if at least we be not so confined that we
cannot go away nether. I questyon whether annie aidge can parralell such
actyones

In my last I sent you a letter to Sir JOSIAH CHILD my master, of which also
you have another copia herewith. My design is that you carry the letter
yourselfe, wait on him while he reads it, and if he will plese to here you (as
I hope he may) that you amplyfie matters, inform him what further
intelligens you have and attend his directyon, if God move his heart to do
ought for us. This day the governor sent us word by the marshall that we
must remove to Mr. Jafferey's house to morro, which house is made the prisson.
We hope the nuse of the risinge of the Indyans will faule to nothing,

Ditto 5th. Thus far was sent you by way of Barbados. It follows. The
governor did say to a Salem man that Moody might go out of the prison, if he
would go out of the provinse, but we here no more sin^e.

James Robinson under great rauth and in much danger only for speaking
something to Thurton (of his being a pitiful fello, etc.) while said Thurton
was active in turning out Mr. Jaffery's goods.

6th. Matthews and Thurton hunted for Mr. Jafferey, serched in Mrs. Cutt's
house, went into every room above and below stairs, serched under her bed
where she lay sike in it but found him not. They carried it very rudely and
basely in there work. Matthews said he would caitch him or have his heart
blud, but he was not there. Mr. Jafferey's goods were carried to the other
side by night.

It is said that our imprisonment has much [ alarmed] thee hoole country and
made them more fond of there liberties. This night Matthews was beten at
Mersore's (some fudlinge boute its like), but its made a mity thing on, said to
be a deep plot, deeper than Gove's managed by strong heds, and abundanse of
that nature, and because the persons conserned ware under the inflewense of
Vaughan and Moody they should suffer for it, for not techinge them better. Though
we know no more of it then you, nor is there ought in it worth notis, but thus
we are treted. The governor went up to the Bank and made great (...) bed, etc.
was turned out of prisson and he forsed away, whoo would not depart before.

21st. Mr. Martin came to discourse about the money he was cast for, which
they have not yet levied upon him, but intend to lay it upon all the old
counsel equally that each may bare his share; at same time the governor told
Mr. Martin that he would send his executyon. Said Mr. Martin, you know it is
not my dew to pay the money. No matter (said he), I want money and will have
it. But I have none said he; then I will take your house. He added also to
Mr. Martin, that he was a church member and he would watch him and all such,
and be sure to pay them of if he could caitch them.

22d. The forest storm and the hieste tide that ever was known. Many
thousands of pounds damidge in Boston and much here. The bridge to the Great
Island broaken of in the middle to the great joy of many.

24th. The governor went to Boston in Foxe's s^oop, intendinge thense to
New-Yorke, pretendinge to discorse Colonall Dungham and bring down two
hundred Mowhawkes to kill the estward Indyanes. What is at the botham or will
be the isshew God knows. He had a could trete at Boston, staidd not a night
in town. Sinse his goinge we have had littel nuse worthy of your notis, but
all things have bin very quiet hethertoo.

I have not enlarged upon these particulers to my master CHILD, but if he will
take anny notis of the thing and be consernd about it he will (...) give you
oppertunyty of discourseing him, and you may inform what is further neeidfull.

31st. This month passed out and the other came in without anny noise, unles
the great joye that was at the Bank by Mr. Moodye's going up thither and my
goinge onse or twice after with our keepers, by Mr. Mason's permityon who
presides in the governor's absence; but we soon returned to the plase from
whense we came.

April 8th. Nath. Fox who married Mrs Stileman's d^fter sent Matthews to
arreste Capt. Stileman for his wive's portyon (though it was often tendered him in
such pay as the court ordered it, but he would have it in money.) Capt.
Stileman gave his own house and all that was in it for securety to answer the
actyon, but Matthews bringinge Thurton with him at his instegatyon, who was
terrebly insolente, they arested the woman Mrs Stileman and carried her to
prisson with much violense and course usadge, though her husband had given
securety. She was carried in the evening. Capt. Stileman wrote to Mr. Mason,
he protested against it and wrote to the marshall, it would not do. He wen^e
again and Mr. Mas^on wroote again, but no purpose, they kept her there till
the next morning; a thing not to be paralled in the English nation!
Complainte has bin made but no remedy. Abbot being up at the Bank with me,
Thurton took the key of the prisson, and when Abbot came would not permit him
to go in, but turned him away. Brave doings! No tunge can tell the horrible
imperyousness and domanereinge carridge of that wretch. The next morninge Mr.
Masson (much a do) got Mrs Stileman out and the gaillor into his plase again.

Mr. Masson gave leve for anny minister to com and pretch at the Bank, so that
we got Mr. Phillops for two Lord's days, viz. 13th and 20th, having bin nine
Lord's days without a sermon.

April 14th. Came H. Green to Mr. Moody's chamber and made a confession of his
fault and begged his pardon for putting him in prison, and said he would get
him out at quarter sessiones, etc. Good words, butt --. Capt. Barefoote went
to the prisson and told John Partridge that if he would give an order to
allow so much as his charges came to out of wha^ the provines owed him about
Gove, for the souldyers, etc. he should come out of prisson, and they would
pay him the remainder, the hoole being about thurty pounds, but he was not
forward lest he should in so doing quitt them of false imprissoninge him;
but if they would do it themselves stop so they might. Nothing is done in it.

15th. Matthews and Thurton ware sent to Hamton to levy executyones and serve
attatchments and warn jureymen for the court in May.

They arrested seven, among which Capten Shourborne one, warned the old
jureymen, executed upon Wm Sanborne, took four oxen which ware redeemed by
money, drove away seven cowes from Nath. Batchelo^* went to your house, met
your son Peter goinge with his four oxen into the woods, commanded him to turn
the oxen hoome, he would not; they cursed, swore, drew upon him, thretned to
run him through, bette him, but he did not strike again. They came to your
house, ware shutt out, your wife ferefully scared for fere of her son who was
out with them. At length she let them in, laid three pounds on the table
which they took and then levied on several young cattle but relesed and left
them. Your son came hither to advise, but complaininge is bootless, such a
dismal case are we in. They took away two bedds from old Perkins, but his
son offered his person and they took it and quitted the other; what more they
did there we as yet here not.

Capt. Gerish, John Woodman, Liften. Nutter and Nath. Bachelor are sworn
constables.

17th. I went to Mr. Masson at Capt. Barefoote's house and had several
witnesses with me, and desired him to take deposityones that I might send
them hoome, about my case and the rest of the cases, butt he refused. The
governor had putt me in prisson when I asked him, and now in his absents the
deputy governor denies to grant them. I hope this will be matter of just
complainte, that we should be hindered from applyinge to his majesty for relese
under our oppressiones. You will have evedense of his denial sent home, sworn
before some of the Baye magestrates; we can do no more unles the Baye should
assiste us, which they are loath to do and we are loath to putt them upon as
matters are surcomstansed with them; but we think it should be taken very
hainously by all that love justis and willinge to admenester it, that his
majesty's subjects should be thus treated. Surely they are afraid or ashamed
of there actyones (and they may be boath) else they would not be so shye of
having them known.

This is what offers here, what moore neidfull coz Waldron will advise from
Boston. With dew respects remain,

Your assured friend and servant.

For Mr. Nath. Wire, in London.

A discourse with the governor about my imprisonment,

May 84. [ Su^joined to the foregoing letter.]

AT a sessiones h^ld the 6th May, 1684, I was denied counsel, and to have
witnesses sworn. M^ Waldron, Captain Stileman and Captain Froste were
presented.

10th. The governor was with me in prison. Mr. Chamberlin, Mr. Hinkes and Mr.
Sherloake with him.

The governor proffered me (that whereas I was fined by the justices in
Thurton's case, that I might think they had not done me rite) that if I would
prosecute it (giveing securety so to do,) in the king's bench at Westminster,
the exchequer, or before king and counsel, I should; though by his comityon
he could not do it. My anser was, unles I could have securety given me that
in case I should recover, I might have my charge and damidge made me good, it
would be of no benefit to me. He said there was no reason for that, becase it
was for the king; though it was his becase Mr. Mason had resignd up to the
king all fines and forfitures and the king had given it to him. But he said
if I would deposite a valuable some he would do the like and would give bond,
and have it tried as abovesaid. My answer was I thought the forty pounds was
enofe and that I expected executyon would com out at the time, and should
endeavor by the time to provide enofe for it, but withal told the governor it
was at his liberty to remit it if he pleased by virtue of his comityon.

Also for my being in prison for not giveing bond for my good behavior, when
the sessiones came I was not brought to my trial for that, but remanded to
prisson again.

At ditto time the governor told me he had put me in prisson on that
account, and he would abide by it till I would give two hundred pound bound.
My anser was I had rather ly in prisson then give bond to tempt such a fello as
Thurton, (or such others) that had sworn against me already, and falsely, and
judged it might be no scruple to him to do the like again. And withal told
him that if his honor plesed to let me out of prisson, I would ingaidge
myself by bond to live out of the provines, though that would be very
detrementall to my conserns and by that I hoped he would have no thoughts of my
misbehaveinge (...) that would be detrementall to the kings governmente ^ere
or himself. Not that I scrupled giveinge bond for my good behavior, though not
accused for anny thing but for layeing a temptatyon to some base minded person
or persons to forsware themselves, as one had done before in another case
relateinge to me.

May 12th. Was informed that whereas Thurton had a comityon to be prisson
keeper, (and withal had vapored and said the prisson was to good for Vaughan,
and the room that he had fited up did intend to keep it himself and that V.
should take his quarters where he would assign it, and that the prisoners
should not be waited on as Abbot had done, for he would keep them looked up,
only com morninge and eveninge) lost his poaket book wherein was his comityon
and sundry papors of consernment.

N. B. The original of this letter and journal is in the hands of the Honorable
President Wear.

No. XXXII. Copy of a letter from the governor and council to the lords of
trade. [Council records.]
Province of New Hampshire, May 23, 1684. May it please your lordships,
SINCE Robert Wadly is returned from England having lately had an appeal
dismissed by the council board, by taking advantage of Mr. Randolph's absence,
who was attorney for the parties, he has put the people of this province into
such a ferment and disorder that it is not possible to put his majesty's
commands in execucon or any ways govern them. And though notwithstanding in
obedience to your lordships commands we have called an assembly (a copy of the
proclamation for that purpose being herein enclosed) we cannot think it prudent
or ^afe to let them sit* they being of the same ill humor or worse as when
Gove went into arms, his design being hatched at the time the assembly sat.
And it looks more like a design, they having those four constables into the
assembly that the kings peace may not be preserved (the whole number of the
assembly being eleven:) This Wadly being formerly an assembly man and has
three sons condemned in Gove's rebellion (and himself now chosen again) the
oldest of them I have pardoned, one of them is dead and the other I (...)
prison till I receive your ordships further order, all the other offenders
being pardoned. Major Waldron's son is constantly of the assembly and speaker
(this being the third that has been called) I wish his majesty's clemency do
not cause some great mischief to be done here. They have never given two pence
The first assembly voted two hundred pounds to the governor, but it is not
certain he received it though he consented to the act.
to the support of the government and that very rate that was made in the time
of president Cut and Waldron we have according to his majesty's royal
commission continued; but do not think it safe to publish it, unless we had
strength to countenance our proceedings. This we conceived our duty to inform
your lordships, and are,

May it please your lordships, Your most humble and most obedient servants,
EDW. CRANFIELD, ROBt. MASON, WALT. BAREFOOT, R. CHAMBERLAIN, JOHN HINKS, JAMES
SHERLOCK.

The appllants claim by grant from Mr. Mason; and as for Wadley he has been
these sixteen days in the country, and though I have heard much of him, I have
not yet seen him.

To the right honble. the lords of the comittee of trade and plantacon, at
Whitehall.


No. XXXIII. Copy of a letter from Cranfield to Sir Leoline Jenkins of the same
date. (Council Records.)
May it please your honor,
WE humbly beg after your honor has perused this letter to the lords of the
council, you would be pleased to lay it before their lordships and desire their
lordships to come to some speedy resolution; for it is no longer in my power to
promote the honor and interest of his majesty here, without a small fregate to
second his majesty's broad seal and other his royal commands. As to the pirates
your honor may be assured that myself and the council will punish them
according to their demerits, if they shall at any time happen to come within
this jurisdiction; and carefully obey all other commands which shall be sent
unto,

May it please your hono^^, your honor's most humble and most obedient servant,

EDW. CRANFIELD.
I most humbly beseech your honor by the first opportunity, to send the king's
letter to give me liberty to go off to Jamaica or Barbados for my health;
finding so great a weakness in my legs, which indisposition has bin contracted
by the severity of the cold.

To the Right Honorable Sir Leoline Jenkins one of his majesty's principal
secretaries of state at Whitehall.



[ The two preceding papers are in the council minutes 2d Book.]

No. XXXIV. Copy of Mr. Weare's first complaint against Cranfield.
To the king's most excellent majesty and the lords of his most honorable
privy council.
THE humble representation of Nathanael Wear, inhabitant and planter in your
majesty's province of New Hampshire in New England in America, on behalf of
himself and other your majesty's loyal subjects, inhabitants and planters
there, whose names are subscribed to the four annexed petitions, as follows:

1. That the hon. Edward Cranfield, Esquire. your majesty's governor of the said
province, upon his first entrance on that government, in order to the
enlargement of his power as governor there beyond the just bounds and limits
your majesty was by your royal commission pleased to set him, and to engross
the whole power of erecting courts, with all necessary fees, powers and
authorityes thereto into his own hands, exclusive of the general assembly
there. The said Mr. Cranfield at the first general assembly there, when the
words of his commission ran, And we do hereby give and grant unto you full
power and authority to erect or constitute and establish such and so many
courts of judicature and public justice within the said province and
^lantacon within your government, as you (...) think fit and necessary for
(...) and determining of all causes, as well criminal (...) civil, according
to law and equity, and for awarding execucon thereupon, with all reasonable and
necessary powers, authorityes, fees and privileges belonging unto them, caus^^
his commission to be entered in the council books (...) delivered a copy
thereof to the general assembly without the words [ and they], affirming those
words to have been put in by mistake of the clerk in engrossing the commission;
whereby the said Mr. Cranfield has enhanced the fees upon trials there to his
own advantage, as will appear in one of the articles following.

2. Although your majesty has been graciously pleased by your said commission
to interpose between the inhabitants of the said collony and Mr. Robt. Mason,
pretended proprietor thereof, and to direct,

That on non-agreement between those inhabitants and Mr. Mason, the said Mr.
Cranfield should interpose, who if he could not end the differences between,
was by the said commission directed to transmitt to England such cases
impartially stated, with his opinion and reasons on the same, that your majesty
with advice of your privy council might hear and determine the same. That
nevertheless the said Mr. Cranfield, instead of keeping himself indifferent
between the contending parties Mr. Mason and the said inhabitants, has by
purchase or mortgage from Mr. Mason made himself owner of the province: And the
better to come by what he has so purchased, he has under color of the
authority of your majesty's commission made courts, whereof both judges and
jurors have agreed with Mason for their own lands, and some of them have taken
grants from Mason of other men's lands. That nevertheless this jury is continued
from month to month and kept for this service.

That Mr. Mason has cast forty persons on suit by that jury, the court
rejecting all pleas, and though the verdict be given for Mr. Mason according to
your majesty's royal commission (which directs as before) and the judgment
entered accordingly, yet upon the execucon the inhabitants are turned out of
their lands and houses, as it has fared with Wm. Vaughan and others, and
deprived of all subsistence.

3. That the charge of every action is raised from 20s. to 6l. which is exacted
in money, and though goods tendered (as usual) the persons are imprisoned for
want of money in kind, and Mr. Cranfield himself takes -- of the 6l.

4. That the said Mr. Cranfield under color of trying actions, has by setting
the fees so extraordinary, forced several to quitt their claims for want of
money to carry on the suite.

5. That the said governor taking upon himself the power of priceing money not
entrusted with him by his commission, has against the agreement of the general
assembly, by advice of his council, ordered pieces of eight however wanting in
their weight to pass for 6 shillings.

6. That the said governor, without good and lawful cause, has taken upon him
to commit several men to prison, particularly Wm. Vaughan, until bonds given
for their appearances and good behavior, when nothing further objected to them.

7. That the said governor and his council took upon them to make laws and put
them in execution without the general assembly.

8. That to prove the articles above against Mr. Cranfield, the complainants
have successlessly endeavored to procure warrants or summons from the
secretary to sumon their witnesses to be sworn (which cannot otherwise be so)
the seeking of such summons has occasioned being bound to the good behavior,
so as the complaining of a wrong done one does, under Mr. Cranfield's
management, but draw a new punishment on the afflicted, but noe manner of
redress.

All which the said Nath. Wear humbly lays at your majesty's feet, imploring
your majesty's present heareing what your petitioner is able to make out of the
premises, and ordering some commission to examine the truth of the residue of
the said allegacons (since your majesty's governor on the place will not admit
of such evidence.) That on the return thereof your majesty's subjects in that
province may find such releife as to your princely wisdom shall seem meet.

And that in the mean time Mr. Cranfield be admonished not to exceed the bounds
of his commission.

And your petitioner shall ever pray, etc.
No. XXXV.
At the court at Hampton court, This 11th day of July, 1684. By the king's
most excellent majesty and the lords of his majesty's most honou^^ble privy
council.
UPON reading this day at the board the peticon and complaint of Nathaniel
Wear, inhabitant and planter in his majesty's province of New Hampshire in
New England in America, in behalf of himself and others his majesty's loyal
subjects and inhabitants and planters there, whose names are subscribed to the
four peticons thereto annexed against Edward Cranfield esquire. his majesty's
governor thereof;

His majesty was pleased to order that the said peticon and complaint be, and
they are hereby referred to the right honorable the lords comittees of this
board for trade and foreigne plantacons, who are to consider thereof and to
report to his majesty at this board their opinion thereupon, and then his
majesty will declare his further pleasure.

Philip Lloyd.
A true coppie.




[ The two preceding papers are in the hands of the Honorable President Wear.]

No. XXXVI. Letter from the lords of trade to Governor Cranfield.
AFTER our hearty commendations to you. His majesty having received the
petitions and complaints of diverse of his subjects inhabitence and planters of
New-Hampshier against you for certine irreguler procedinges alleged by them to
be had by you in the execution of your commission and administration of
justice: and it being ordered in council that the said petitions and
complaints be examined and concidered by us that we may report to his
majesty our opinions, to the end his majesty's further pleasuer may be
signified thereupon. We have therefore herwith sent unto you copies of the
said petitions and representations that you may return your particular answer
thereunto with all speed, and that we may the better distinguish the truth of
what is aleaged or complained of, and of such defense as you shall be able to
make. We do think fit that all persons whatsoever, have free liberty to
depose upon oath what they know, and to take copies of all records in these or
any other cases relating to yourselfe or the said province, and that the said
depositions be taken in wrightinge by any member of the council or justice of
the peace in that collony, whom you are duly to authorize thereunto, and as we
cannot beleve that you will put any restriction or discouragement whatsoever
upon the taking and transmittinge of all necessary proofs and records,
attested by the proper officers for the clearinge of truth in the matters
complained of, so we think it requisite that copies of all affidaves be
interchangeably delivered, to each party concerned as soon as they shall be
taken, and so not doubtinge of your compliance herein we bid you hartyly
farewell.

From the council chamber in Whitehall this 23d day of July 1684. Your very
loveing friends Radnor. Craven. Guilford. C S. Rochester. Halifax, C. P. S.
Ernle. Godolphin. L. Jenkins.

To our very lovinge friend Edward Cranfield esquire. lieutenant governor and
commander in chief of his majesty's province of New-Hampshier in New England.

A true copy, William Blathwayt.




[ This paper is in the council minutes 2 d book.]

No. XXXVII.
At the court at Whitehall the 8th of April^, 1685. By the king's most
excellent majesty and the lords of his majesty's most honorable privy
council.
UPON reading a report from the right honorable the lords of the comittee of
trade and plantacons in the words following:

May it please your majesty,
Having received an order in council dated the 11th of July last, upon the
petition and complaint of Nathanael Wear, inhabitant of your majesty's province
of New Hampshire in New England, in the behalf of himself and others your
majesty's subjects and planters there, against Edward Cranfield, Esquire. your
majesty's governor of that province, whereby we were directed to report our
opinions upon the said complaint. We did accordingly transmit a copy thereof
to the said Edward Cranfield, and upon receiving his answer, and hearing what
the complainants could allege and make out against him; We find that the said
Edward Cranfield has not pursued his instructions in reference to the propriety
of soil which Robert Mason, Esquire. claims in that province, inasmuch as the said
Edward Cranfield by his instructions is directed that in case the inhabitants
of New Hampshire should refuse to agree with the said Mason, he should
interpose and endeavor to reconcile all differences, which if he could not
bring to effect he was then to send into England such cases fairly and
impartially stated, together with his opinion, for your majesty's determinacon;
whereas instead thereof he has caused courts to be held in New Hampshire, and
permitted titles of land to be decided there, and unreasonable costs to be
allowed, without first representing the particular cases to your majesty. As
to the complaint of his having raised the value of coins against the laws of
the assembly there, we are most humbly of opinion that although it be your
majesty's undoubted prerogative to set and determine the price and value of
coins within your dominions, yet your majesty's governor ought not to have
made any alterations therein without having received your majesty's special
directions. All which we humbly propose may be signified to him by your
majesty's order, and that the differences depending between the said Robert
Mason and planters in that part of New Hampshire may be at length decided. We
further offer that William Vaughan, one of the complaynants attending this
board, may have opportunity allowed him of appealing to your majesty within a
fortnight from all verdicts and judgments given in New Hampshire in his
private case, upon hearing whereof and by the relation it has with others your
majesty will be best able to judge of the right and title of the said Robert
Mason to that part of the province of New Hampshire aforesaid, and upon
bringing the said appeal that all proceedings at law relating to the said
title may forthwith cease until your majesty's further pleasure be known.

All which is nevertheless most humbly submitted.

ROCHESTER, HALIFAX, P. CLARENDON, C.P.S. BEAUFORT, ARLINGTON, OXFORD,
CHESTERFIELD.

Council Chamber, 27 March, 1685. HIS majesty in council was graciously
pleased to approve of the said report, and to order that his majesty's pleasure
therein be signified to Mr. Cranfield accordingly. It was also ordered that
Mr. William Vaughan be allowed to appeal to his majesty within a fortnight
from all verdicts and judgments given in his private case in New Hampshire,
according to the said report.

A true copy, WM. BRIDGEMAN.




[ The preceding paper is in the hands of the hon. President Wear.]

No. XXXVIII.
AFTER our hearty comendations unto you, we have in obedience to his majesty's
comands, received and examined your answer to the complaint of Nathaniel Wear,
inhabitant of his said province of New Hampshire, in behalf of himself and
others his majesty's subjects and planters there, and having likewise heard
what the said Wear could bring in evidence of the said complaints, and
thereupon reported our opinions to his majesty, We are commanded hereby to
signify unto you, that you have not pursued your instructions in reference to
the propriety of the soil which Robert Mason, Esquire. claymes in the province of
New Hampshire inasmuch as you were directed that in case the inhabitants of
New Hampshire should refuse to agree with the said Mason you should interpose,
and endeavor to reconcile all differances, which if you could not bring to
effect, you were then to send to his majesty such cases fairly and impartially
stated, together with your opinion, for his majesty's determination; in stead
whereof you have caused courts to be held in New Hampshire, and permitted
titles of land to be decided there, and unreasonable costs to be allowed,
without first representing the particular cases to his majesty. And yet
although it be his majesty's undoubted prerogative to set and determine the
price and vallew of coin with in his majesty's dominions, you have not done
well in directing any alterations therein without his majesty's special order:
In both which you have been wanting in your duty to his majesty. But that the
chief occasion of dispute that province may be removed, we are farther
directed to acquint you that as to the differances depending between the said
Robt. Mason and the planters, his majesty has been graciously pleased by his
order in council, dat. the 8th of this instant April, to permit William
Vaughan, one of the complainants attending this board, to appeal to his
majesty with in a fortnight from the date of the said order from all the
verdicts and judgments given in New Hampshire in his private case, upon
hearing whereof, and by the relation it has with others, his majesty will be
best able to judge of the right and title of the said Robt. Mason to that part
of the province of New Hampshire: And his majesty does likewise think fit that
upon bringing the said appeal by the said William Vaughan, all proceedings at
law relating to the said title do forth with cease until his majesty's
pleasure be known. Whereof you are to take notice and to govern your self
accordingly. And so we bid you very heartily farewell. From the council
chamber at Whitehall, the 29th day of April, 1685.

Your loving friends, (Signed.) W. Cant. Guilford, C. S. Rochester, Halifax, P.
Clarindine, C. P. S. Beaufort, Lindshy, Arlington, Hunington, Bridgwater,
Chesterfield, Sunderland, Craven, Aylesbery, Midleton, Godolphan, J. Ernle,
Geo. Jaffreys.

Directed to our loving friend Edw. Cranfield, Esquire. lieut. governor and
comander in chief of his majesty's province of New Hampshire in N. England.



No. XXXIX.
AFTER our hearty comendation: His majesty has received the petition and
appeal of Wm. Vaughan, inhabitant of New Hampshire, from several verdicts and
judgments given against him in that province, which being refered to us by his
majesty's order in council of the 29th of April last, that we should examine
the allegations thereof, and make report of the same, with our opinion
thereupon, we have accordingly appointed to hear all parties concerned in the
several cases therein contained, on the first Tuesday after mid-summer day
which shall be in the year 1686: To which end we herewith send you a coppie of
the said petition and appeal, which you are to communicate unto Robt. Mason,
esquire. and to all others whom it may concern, who are to take notice thereof,
and to give their attendance at that time either by themselves or by their
agents sufficiently empowered by them, to answer the said appeal, and to
submit to such judgment hereupon as to his majesty in council shall be thought
fit. And you are likewise to permit all persons to have free access to, and
take coppies of all records with in that province relating to the matters in
dispute, and to depose upon oath what they know concerning the same, which
depositions are to be taken in writing by any of the members of the council or
justices of the peace in that province, without any hindrance or discouragment
whatsoever, in order to be transmitted unto us, for the clearing of truth in
that appeal. And so we bid you heartily farewell.

From the council chamber in Whitehall, the 22d day of May 1685. Your loving
friends, Gilford, C. S. Halifax, Pr. Ormond, Rochester, Clarindine, C. P. S.
Sunderland.

Lieut. gou. of New Hampshire, or comander in chief for the time being.




[ The two preceding papers are in the possession of John Penhallow, Esquire.]

No. XL.
To the king's most excellent majesty. The humble petition and address of your
majesty's dutiful and loyal subjects inhabiting in the province of
New Hampshire in New England. [1685.]
Most humbly shows,

That upon his late majesty's declaration and order for the settlement and
government of this province, we accounted ourselves happy for that therein we
were by his said majesty's princely grace and favor, saved from (...)
reasonable demands which Mr. Mason might have made upon us, by the limitations
in the commission for government, wherein it was provided that the said
president or governor for the time being, should use all methods by his good
advice to settle and quiet the people in the matter of Mr. Mason's title, or
otherwise impartially to state the case and report the same to his majesty,
that a final determination might thereupon have been made by his majesty in
council, which if it had been duly attended had we doubt not long since by
your majesty's justice and favor putt us into an happy estate of quiet and
repose.

That notwithstanding his said majesty's command and limitation, the said Mr.
Mason has been allowed to pursue many of the inhabitants, in several suites
and actions, wherein the government have taken to themselves power of an
absolute judgment without any regard had to the said commands and limitations,
and with that excess and rigor as to assign the said Mr. Mason sometimes tenn
pounds, other times twenty pounds cost, when damages have been sometimes not
above two shillings, very seldom ten according to the orders and limitations
abovesaid.

That the said Mr. Mason beyond and beside the said quit rents, and directly
against his majesty's order in the said commission, wherein the tennure of
improved lands is assured to the ter-tenants upon payment of the said quitt
rent, or otherwise as his majesty in council should determine, has disposed
or given away the fee to several persons of several lands which were long
before his challenge fenced and improved by others, to the great damage and
injury of his majesty's good subjects, beside many other irregularities in the
management of the government, to the great oppression and destruction of trade
within your majesty's province, and the utter impoverishing thereof.

That for the last two yeare's and upward dureing the whole management of Mr.
Mason's suits at law against your majesty's subjects, there has been generally
one jury returned to serve all the said issues with little alterations and
almost constantly one foreman, (who for that end we are apt to fear) was
early complied with by Mr. Mason for all the lands in his own possession
formerly, with addition of several other lands to his own proffitt.

That notwithstanding your majesty's late gracious order, and inhibiting of any
further procedure in the case of Mr. Mason's title, until the cause were
brought before your majesty in council, Mr. Walter Barefoote who was left
deputy governor, has since the arrival of your majesty's commands permitted
executions to be extended, and persons thereupon imprisoned in causes
concerning the said Masons title, with excessive and unreasonable costs and
damages.

And lastly, whereas your majesty has upon complaint made against the
irregular proceedings done and suffered, been graciously pleased to permit Mr.
William Vaughan, one of the principal inhabitants and merchants in this
province, to take his appeal to your majesty in council for relief, against
several oppressive judgments, one whereof referrs to the title of his lands
within this province holden in the same form with the rest of his majesty's
good subjects here, we do with all humble gratitude acknowledge your majesty's
justice and favor herein and for that the pursuance and issue of the said
appeal will therefore necessarily affect the whole province and be
introductory to the determination of all Mr. Mason's challenge, we have judged
it our duty in most humble manner to prostrate ourselves at your Majesty's
feet, and have therefore betrusted and fully empowered Mr. Nathaniel Wear one
of the inhabitants of this your majesty's province our agent to lay before your
majesty and most honorable privy council the common case and condition of your
majesty's poor and distressed subjects in this province, who is fully
instructed humbly to represent the same, and the arbitrary and severe
oppressions we have labored under, from which we are well assured of relief
by your majesty's most just and gracious determination, and to make an humble
and entire submission of ourselves unto your majesty's pleasure, most humbly
beseeching that we may henceforward have our perfect and immediate dependence
upon your majesty and the crown of England as well in the tennure of our lands
as in the affairs of government, which gracious influence of your majesty is
only able to revive and restore this province to its former flourishing estate
and growth, whereby we may at length be made serviceable to your most sacred
majesty and the crown which we are devoted to serve, resolving therein to be
exemplary to all other your majesty's subjects in the territory of New England,
and for which we shall ever pray, etc.

[ The paper is in the hands of the hon. President Wear.]

No. XLI.
At the court at Whitehall the 19th of November 1686, (LS.) Present, The king's
most excellent Majesty. Lord Chancellor, Ld Treasurer, Ld President, Duke of
Ormond, D. of Albermarle, D. of Beauford, Ld Chamberlain, Earl of Oxford, E. of
Huntington, E. of Peterborough, E. of Craven, E. of Powis, E. of Nottingham, E.
of Plymouth, E. of Morray, E. of Middleton, E. of Melford, E. of Tyrconnell,
Viscount Stauronberg, Visc. Preston, Ld Bp of Durham, Ld Arrundell of Wardour,
Ld Dartmouth, Ld Dover, Mr Chancellor of the exchequer Mr. Chancellor of the
Duchy.
UPON reading this day at the board a report from the honble the lords of the
committee of council for trade and foreign plantations, bearing date the sixth
of November instant, setting forth, that in obedience to his majesty's orders
in council of the 25th of April 1685, and the third of July last, they have
examined the appeal of Wm. Vaughan from a verdict and judgment given against
him on the 6th day of November 1683, in his majesty's courts in New Hampshire
in New England, at the, suit of Robert Mason Esquire. as proprietor of that
province, for certain lands and tenements in Portsmouth in the said province
and that they having heard the said Robert Mason and Nathaniel Wear attorney
for the appellant and his council learned in the law, are humbly of opinion
that his majesty be pleased to ratify and affirm the verdict and judgment
aforesaid.

His majesty in council was pleased to approve of their lordship's said opinion
and report, and to order the said verdict and judgment given against the said
William Vaughan on the sixth day of November 1683, in his majesty's courts in
New Hampshire in New England, at the suit of Robt. Mason, esquire as proprietor of
that prounce, for certain lands and tenements in Portsmuth in said province,
be ratified and affirmed, and they are hereby ratfied and affirmed accordingly.

WM. BRIDGEMAN.
Vera copia, per Richard Partridge, clerk.

Copy as on file in the case, Allen us Waldron.

Exam. per Geo. Jaffrey, Cl.



No. XLII. Four letters or petitions from John Hogkins, commonly called
Hakins, one of the sachems of the Penacook Indians. [From the originals in the
Recorder's office.
Honor governor my friend, May 15th 1685.
YOU my friend I desire your worship and your power, because I hope you can do
some great matters this one. I am poor and naked and I have no men at my place
because I afraid always Mohogs he will kill me every day and night. If you
worship when please pray help me you no let Mohogs kill me at my place at
Malamake ri^er called Panukkog and Nattukkog, I will submit your worship and
your power. And now I want powder and such alminishon, shatt and guns, because
I have forth at my hom and I plant theare.

This all Indian hand, but pray you do consider your humble servant, JOHN
HOGKINS. Simon Detogkom, Joseph ^ Tras^^^ King ^ Hary, Sam ^ Linis, Wapegguanat
^ Saguachuwa^^^, Old Robin ^, Mamanosgues ^ Andra. Peter ^ Robin, Mr. Jorge ^
Roddunnonukgu^ Mr Hope ^ Hoth, John ^ Tonch, John ^a Canowa, John ^
Owamosimmin, Natonill ^ Indian,



Another from the same.
Honor Mr. Governor, May 15, 1685.
NOW this day I com your house, I want se you, and I bring my hand at before
you I want shake hand to you if your worship when please then you receve my
hand then shake your hand and my hand. You my friend because I remember at old
time when live my grant father and grant mother then Englishmen com this
country, then my grant father and Englishmen they make a good govenant, they
friend always, my grant father leving at place called Malamake rever, other
name chef Natukkog and Panukkog, that one rever great many names, and I bring
you this few skins at this first time I will give you, my friend. This all
Indian hand.

[ The rest as before.]

JOHN ^ HAWKINS, Sagamor.


Another from the same.
Please your worship,
I WILL entreat you matther you my friend, now this if my Indian he do you long
pray you no put your law because some my Indins fooll, some men much love drunk
then he no know what he do, may be he do mischif when he drunk if so pray you
must let me know what he done because I will ponis him what he have done you,
you my friend if you desire my business, then sent me I will help you if I can.

Mr. JOHN HOGKINS.


Another from the same.
Mr. Mason,
PRAY I want speak you a few words if your worship when please because I come
parfas [on purpose] I will speak this governor but he go away so he say at
last night, and so far I understand this governor his power that your power
now, so he speak his own mouth. Pray if you take what I want pray com to (...)
because I want go hom at this day.

Your humble servant, JOHN HOGKINS, Indian sogmor.
May 16, 1685.

No. XLIII. Letter from Capt. Hook, advising of danger from the Indians.
Capt. Barefoot, Sir,
THIS is to inform you that just now there came to me a post, wherein I am
fully informed that there is just ground to fear that the heathen have a
souden desyne against us; they havinge lately about Sacoe affronted our English
inhabitants there by threatening of them, as also by killinge their dogs;
but more pertickularly in that on Friday, Saturday, and Lord's day last they
have gathered all their corn, and are removed both pack and packidge. A word
to the wise is enough. The old proverb is, forwarned forearmed. Myself and rest
in commission with us are forthwith settinge ourselves in a posture, and
tomorrow our counsel meet for to consider what is needful to be done. Not else,
being in great have, butt remayn, Sir, your obliged servant,

Kittery, 13 Aug. 1685. FRANCIS HOOK.

No. XLIV. Report of persons sent to enquire into the above matter. (No date or
signature.)
To the honorable Walter Barefoot, Esquire. and the council of Great-Island.
Gentlemen,
ACCORDING to your command and order to me, bearinge date the 2d instant, I
have to the utmost of my power observed every particular. Upon our arrival
there on Friday night they were all very courteous to us, and in the morninge
my orders were read which was very kindly received by them, and the reasons why
they deserted the places where they usually abode among the English was,

1 That four Indians came from fort Albany to the sort at Pennicooke and
informed them that all the Mohawkes did declare they would kill all Indians
from Uncas at mount Hope to the eastward as far as Pegypscut.

2. The reason of Natombamat, sagamore of Saco, departed his place was, because
the same news was brought there as himself declared upon reading my orders at
Pennicooke.

3. Natombamat, sagamore of Saco, is gone to carry the Indians down to the
same place where they were before departed from us, on Sunday morninge, and
desired Capt. Hook to meet him at Saco, five days after.

4. Both segamores of Pennicook, viz. Wannilanset and Mesandowit, the latter of
which is come down, did then declare they had no intention of war, neither
indeed are they in any posture for war, being about 24 men besides squaws and
paposes.

5. Asking the reason why they did not come among the English as formerly, they
answered they thought if the Mohawkes came and fought them and they should fly
for succor to the English, that then the Mohawkes would kill all the English
for harboring them.

No. XLV. Articles of peace agreed upon the eighth day of September, in the
year of our Lord 1685, between the subjects of his majesty king James the
second inhabiting the provinces of New Hampshire and Maine, and the Indians
inhabiting the said provinces.
IT is agreed there shall be for the future a lasting peace friendship and
kindness between the English and the Indians, and that no injury shall be
offered by the one to the other.

That if any Englishman does any injury to an Indian, upon complaint made to
any justice of peace the Englishman shall be punished, and the Indian shall
have present satisfaction made him. And if any Indian does an injury to the
English or threaten to do any injury, the sagamore to whom that Indian does
belong, shall punish him in presence of one of the king's justices of the peace.

That if any other Indian shall design any mischief or harm to the English,
the Indians inhabiting the aforesaid provinces shall give present notice
thereof to the English, and shall assist the English.

That so long as the aforesaid Indians shall continue in friendship with the
English, they shall be protected against the Mohawks, or any others, and may
freely and peaceably set down by the English near any their plantations.

Robert Mason, Robert Elliot, John Davis, Walter Barefoote, Henry Green,
Francis Hook. The mark of ^ Mesandowit. The mark ^ of Wahowah, alias Hopehood.
The mark ^ of Tecamorisick, alias Josias. The mark ^ of John Nomony, alias
Upsawah. The mark ^ of Umbesnowah, alias Robin.

We whose names are hereunto written do freely consent and engage to comply and
perform the within written articles as our neighbors have done, and do further
engage as follows:

Lastly, That the Indians shall not at any time hereafter remove from any of
the English plantations with their wives and children before they have given
fair and timely notice thereof unto the English, from whence they do so remove;
and in case the said Indians shall remove with their wives and children without
such fair and timely notice given to the English, that then it shall be taken
pro confesso that the Indians do intend and design war with the English, and
do thereby declare that the peace is broken; and it shall and may be lawful to
and for the English, or any on their behalfs, to apprehend the said Indians
with their wives and children, and to use acts of hostility against them until
the sagamores shall make full satisfaction for all charge and damage that may
arise thereby.

John Davis, Francis Hook, The mark ^ of Netambomet, sagam. of Saco. The mark
^ of Wahowah, alias Hopehood. The mark ^ of Ned Higgon, The mark A of Newcome.
Kankamogus, alias John Hawkins, sagamore, signed this instrument, 19 7ber,
1685, his ^ mark. Bagesson, alias Joseph Traske, ^ his mark. And agreed to all
within written.

Testis,

JOSEPH RAYN.





No. XLVI.
Portsmouth, the 7th of Sept. 1687. To the much honred court now siting in said
Portsmouth, for the prouine of Newhampshir, The humbel petishon of William
Houchins, on of his magesty subgicts belonging to said province, humbly seweth
for aduic, ade and releff in his deplorabell estat and condition.
THAT whareas it has plesed God to lay his hand upon him, and that he is in
such a condition not being abell to help him selff, as to the geting a living
or proquering help or remedy for my distemper, being low in the world, and
having useed all the means and aduic posabell for nere five year past; having
bin informed by some that it is a destemper caled the king's evil This petition
is inserted merely as a curiosity. It was a received opinion in that day that
the distemper called the king's evil could be cured only by the royal touch.
The following advertisement, taken from an old London Gazette, is of the same
nature.

These are to give notice, that the weather growing warm, his majesty will not
touch any more for the evil till toward Michaelmass. And his majesty's
surgeons desire to prevent his majesty being defrauded, that greater care be
taken for the future in registering certificates given to such as come to be
touched. Land. Gaz. May 29, 1682.


, so can not be qureed but by his magesty. Having littell or nothing in this
world, if my liff should go for it am not abell to tranesport my selff for
England to his magesty for releff; thareffor humbly and hartly beg the help,
ade and asistane of this honred cort, that they would so far commiserat my
deplorabell condition as order some way either by breff or any other way that
youer honers shall think most meet to move the hearts of all christian people with
compation to besto something upon me, to tranesport me from England, whar,
God willing, I intend forth with to goo if posabell, but without help not
posabell. This humbly leuing my selff in the sad condition I am in, trusting in
God and youer honers for help and advice, subscrib youer por deplorabe^^
saruant,

WILLIAM HOUCHINS.

No. XLVII. A letter from Secretary Addington to Major Waldron, apprizing him
of his danger from the Indians.
[The original in the hands of the hon. Thomas Westbrooke Waldron.]
Honble Sir, Boston, 27 June 1689.
THE governor and council having this day received a letter from Major
Henchman, of Chelmsford, that some Indians are come into them who report that
there is a gathering of some Indians in or about Penecooke, with design of
mischief to the English. Among the said Indians one Hawkins is said to be a
principle designer, and that they have a particular design against yourself
and Mr. Peter Coffin, which the council thought it necessary presently to
dispatch advice thereof to give you notice, that you take care of your own
safeguard, they intending to endeavor to betray you on a pretention of trade.

Please forthwith to signify the import hereof to Mr. Coffin and others as you
shall think necessary, and advise of what informations you may at any time
receive of the Indians motions.

By order in council, ISA. ADDINGTON, Secy.
For Major Richard Waldren and Mr. Peter Coffin, or either of them, at
Cochecha; these with all possible speed.



No. XLVIII. Copy of an address of the general court to Queen Anne, December. 6,
1706. [Council minutes.]
To the queen's most excellent majesty. The address of your majesty's most
dutiful and loyal subjects, the governor, council, and representatives of your
majesty's province of New Hampshire in New England, convened in general
assembly,
Most humbly shows,

That while we were thus defending ourselves and families, against the common
enemy of the repose of all your majesty's British subjects in the plantations
abroad as well as in Europe, we were pursued by the challenge of Mr. Allen for
the lands and soil under our feet, which we have this sixty years defended with
our lives and estates, as well as the assistance of our good neighbors of our
majesty's colony of the Massachusetts, your majesty of your royal and princely
regard to us has dismissed that challenge, which will forever encourage us to
our utmost power to defend this your majesty's province, since we may now hope
to leave our children in the possession of the country, with an entire
dependence upon your majesty and your royal successors without the danger of
any further unjust challenge from those persons that have so long disturbed us
with their claims.

And whereas your majesty out of a gracious regard to this and other your
provinces in these parts of America* was pleased to form a design against the
French settlements at Canada and Nova Scotia the last summer, but a more
important service in Europe requiring your majesty's forces which were intended
hither, whereby that design is laid aside for the present; we most humbly pray
your majesty that it may consist with your royal pleasure to revive the said
design, and that the expedition lately intended may be prosecuted seasonably
the next spring; and that your majesty's arms in America may have a glorious
success as in Europe, to the utter confusion of your enemies, and lasting
repose of all your majesty's good subjects inhabiting this continent.

We most humbly render our everlasting praises to Almighty God for your
majesty's most glorious successes against the tyranny and usurpation of the
French king and heartily pray for your majesty's long life and happy reign and
the continuance of the protestant succession, for the benefit of your majesty's
subjects of Great Britain, of all your majesty's dominions and plantations, and
of all Europe who have had the unspeakable benefit of your majesty's
unparalleled reign.

We are your majesty's most loyal and obedient subjects, Mark Hunking, speaker.
Signed in presence and by order of the House of Representatives. Cha. Story,
secretary. Signed in the presence and by order of the Council.

Portsmouth, in New Hampshire, 6th December, 1709.
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

