AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED JULY 4th, 1792, AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF
THE TOWN OF BOSTON, IN COMMEMORATION OF THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN
INDEPENDENCE,

By Joseph Blake, jun.

-- "HAEC OLIM MEMINISSE JUVABIT."

PRINTED BY BENJAMIN RUSSELL, IN BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS. MDCCXCII.

At a Meeting of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the Town of BOSTON,
duly qualified and legally warned, in public Town-Meeting, assembled at
FANUEIL HALL, on Wednesday the 4th of July, A. D. 1792.

VOTED, THAT the SELECTMEN be and hereby are appointed a Committee to wait on
Mr. JOSEPH BLAKE, jun. and in the name of the Town to thank him for the
spirited and elegant ORATION, this Day delivered by him, at the request of the
Town, upon the ANNIVERSARY OF THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
-- in which, according to the Institution of the Town, he considered the
feelings, manners, and principles which led to that Great National Event -- and
to request of him a Copy thereof for the Press.

Attest, WILLIAM COOPER, Town Clerk.

GENTLEMEN,
ASSURED that readers the most capable of criticism, will be the most disposed
to liberality, in compliance with your request, a Copy of the ORATION,
pronounced the 4th inst. for the Press, is submitted by, Gentlemen,

With the utmost respect, Your very humble servant, THE AUTHOR.
July 9, 1792.
AN ORATION.
AMERICANS!
THIS morning recalls the moment which inspired our country with a new
existence. -- The moment when thus inspired, she rose triumphant to the empire
of herself!

OPPRESSION was the assistant, not the sole cause of this glorious event. So
early as 1688 NOTE

About this time revolution principles began to be disseminated in England


shot through the island of Britain a beam of light which first opened the way
to Revolutions. Crossing the Atlantic it afterward diffused within these
Colonies that fervid spirit which alone must have dissolved their connection.
With an anxious eye she watched its secret progress. Her expedients to
extinguish, tended however directly to inkindle it. She attempted to invelope
their mind in ignorance, but the ray of intelligence shone upon it with
brighter effulgence. -- She loaded them with taxes, arbitrarily withholding the
right of representation: It served only to exhibit her oppression in more vivid
colors. Thus irritated, the spark first began to glimmer within the province
of New York. NOTES.

In the year 1697 passed in the Assembly of New York the first Act (...) of our
rights.


At subsequent periods, for nearly 80 years, new pressures had been as new
combustibles. -- At length it grew into a flame -- expanded, spread, glowed,
throughout the Continent!

HER arbitrary statutes no longer alarming to the ear, she displayed upon our
defenseless shore the more terrific engines of war.

IN 1770, within this peaceful town, she opened the first sanguinary scene. But
I recall not the fifth of March, and nineteenth of April -- too often already
has the eye reviewed them in tears.

THAT Britain first unsheathed the sword, while the memory shall recollect the
tongue dare not deny. -- That we exhibited patience under oppression, her own
Statesmen acknowledged. (...) in the House of Lords, 1^^^.
Her CHATHAM and CAMBDEN with anxiety observed her measures. With all the
charms of eloquence they plead in our behalf. But at that infatuated moment
Eloquence had lost her charms. The feeble voice of petition could not ascend
the summit of her imperious throne. Thus situated, in 1776 Congress pronounced
the Declaration of Independence.

OUR pen, like the thunderbolt, in an instant shook her court. From its
language was she convinced that within the American vein thrilled a spirit too
ardent for her control. A spirit which would burst the firmest walls of
imprisonment.

MOST affecting, however, was the situation of our country. Although separated
by an immense ocean she had been incorporated with Britain as with a parent.
Like the helpless babe she had clung around her, with all the warmth of
affection. In the tone of real anguish she had lisped her grievances: -- But in
vain. The tender ties of consanguinity Britain had disregarded. Her filial duty
repaid with parental austerity. Her entreaties for relief goaded with fresh
tortures. Reclining in innocent security upon her bosom, she had attempted most
unnaturally to terminate her existence!

UNAVOIDABLE although painful then was resistance. She at length conquered her
affections. Rose superior to the common awe of British omnipotence. With
ardour sprang to the standard of war!

THERE is an enthusiasm sometimes inkindled within the bosom by unprovoked
oppression which rises above every idea of impossibility. It was this which
although in the cradle, gave our country the spring of manhood. This which
diminished to a point the most mountainous difficulty. This which bore her in
triumph above every obstacle.

BY unity in exertion we repaired deficiency in resource. Despair at times
darkened the prospect but all the sinews of the country collected into one arm,
and this arm invigorated and strengthened by the friendly assistance of France,
Britain at length yielded us the palm.

EACH year have fresh garlands been offered to decorate the brow of those
splendid characters who by uniting wisdom in the cabinet with bravery in the
field -- thus secured to us this palm. The task I decline, but while the heart
shall recollect, forever will it yield them the voluntary tribute of gratitude.

NATIONS, like individuals, from turbulence naturally settle into quietude. To
the loud thunders of war succeeded the mild whispers of peace. Amidst this calm
several years rolled imperceptibly away. -- The mind at length rising from
sleep, observed in our possession the trophy for which we had waded through
fields of blood. Our government appearing inadequate to its preservation, we
again rose with unanimity to strengthen and improve it.

THAT awful reverence for ancient institutions which too often checks
innovation, did not blind our eye -- Imperfection pervading each atom of
humanity, we dared to trace its impression within our old system.

OTHER circumstances conspired to extend this boldness of thought. It was
natural that a change in situation should require a change in government. -- An
enlargement of objects in the one, an elargement of powers in the other.

THUS rose into existence our Federal Constitution.

THE comparision of this new fabric with others of ancient and modern
architecture, so fashionable on those occasions -- I forbear.

EXPERIMENT can only prove the perfection of political institutions. Already
has this proved our highest joy that which in theory was by some contemplated
as our ruin. While those too, who so wisely constructed it, now administer its
laws, we may continue to cherish hopes without fears.

THE sword which has secured the freedom of a world, now wears engraven upon
its scabbard their universal gratitude.

DAZZLING to the eye may have been the starry throne of an Alexander, splendid
the triumphal car of a Caesar, but more grateful to a Washington, that throne
which will never tarnish within the memory of man!

CIRCUMSTANCES both natural and political will conspire to the longevity of our
government.

MOST favorable is the situation of this continent. It stands a world by
itself. Barricaded from external danger on one side by vast regions of soil. On
the other by wide plains of ocean. The Atlantic upon her bosom may undulate
riches to its shore* but all the artillery in Europe cannot shake it to its
center.

INNUMERABLE rivers like veins and arteries circulate life and health
throughout the States. The broad bay of Chesepeak, the majestic Hudson and
Delaware, rolling into various channels this vital fluid, fertilize while they
bind the different regions in perpetual intimacy.

NOR less important our political advantages. -- Within its circuitous arm our
system already embraces fifteen independent states. To each extending alike all
the rights which dignify a nation. That right, so dear to Republicans, the
FREEDOM OF THE PRESS -- that wise institution of humanity, the TRIAL BY JURY --
above all, that blessing so long sought for but in vain, EQUAL LIBERTY.

AFTER all upon ourselves will depend the prosperity of our nation.

CLOUDS may gather round this bright prospect, and like the tempest upon the
clear face of the Heavens, in an instant wrapped it in darkness.

BY our conduct however we may retard, perhaps forever prevent, this gloomy
catastrophe.

RUINS of empires have generally appeared within the dreary regions of
ignorance and barbarity. like some solitary tree within the wildnerness, far
distant from the hand of culture, they have denied their fruit or fallen
lifeless to the ground.

NOTE.

One chief advantage from the introduction and progress of the Arts, was the
introduction and progress of Freedom. Hume's History of England, Vol. 3.251.


SCIENCE and the ARTS, like rivulets will revive their expiring fibers, push to
maturity their fruit, prevent their sudden decay.

NATIONAL competency can flow only from national frugality. It is not the depth
but the prudent management of resources which can insure wealth to a nation.
Within each acre of our soil might spring a mine of Peru, but prodigality might
drain it of its treasures. This prodigality once indulged, we instantly abandon
the path of innocence, slide headlong down the precipice of luxury, perish in
the torent below.

BUT of all injunctions no one can be so important as the necessity of a strict
attention to our elections. More important under our present than under our
former government. Within the sovereignty of the Union will exist a natural
prosperity to absorb by degrees the sovereignty of the states. An unrelaxed
vigilance may perhaps prevent this almost imperceptable encroachment, but a
careless security accelerating the evil, our rights one after another, like
drops around the attractive margin of a vortex, will be drawn in and buried
forever.

SECURE as may be our situation still may the whispers of jealousy assail the
ear. In all communities some few amongst the many will murmer without cause,
criminate without offense, but from such complaints men of discernment will
draw no inferences unfavourable to government.

OUR military establishment upon the western frontiers has fed profusely this
jealous disposition. -- Sensibility has censured in language the most
approbious -- but reason vindicates with fairness the justice of our cause.

OUR right in the soil now in contention has been established both by grant and
by occupancy. This right we have transferred and guaranteed to others. Our
friends in possession upon the banks of Ohio and in other settlements have been
hourly harrassed. -- The wilderness has been incrimsoned with their blood. To
prevent the further effusion, to relieve the distant voice of distress,
repeated have been our treaties. But treaties with the Indian are ineffectual.
He will propose with fairness, but the same instant violate them with
effrontry. Thus impelled, we have reluctantly drawn the sword from its
scabbard. We have waged a war justifiable by the law of nations, still more
powerfully b, that of nature. A war for the establishment of personal security
with undisturbed peace.

YOU will pardon this deviation from the path assigned me. I have wished only
to divert the slanderous arrow from the fair bosom of authority. An arrow which
would not at this time have sped with so much venom from its bow, but for the
late fall of our friends. In which fall, we have all, with PHILENIA, shed the
tear of friendship:

"NOT crimson War, nor Valor's glittering wreath,
"To the pale Corse restores the quivering breath;
"'It Is the mild power of seraph Peace alone
"Can charm each grief, and every wrong atone;
"Her healing hand shall wast oblivion round,
"And pour her opiates through each gushing wound;
"Over the cold ghost her mantling Olive spread,
"And shade the sod that laps the glorious dead."
FAR is it from my intention to close entirely the watchful eye of jealousy. I
only urge a generous confidence in government as most productive of public
peace, at the same time not dangerous to public security.

I NEED not, however, start fears which cannot of themselves exist within this
enlightened community. We elect with caution, but once elected we dare think
our rulers honest. They are a part of ourselves -- in the abuse of our rights
they equally abuse their own. As naturally then might an individual wish to
deluge the bark, when the very billow which bears it, must instantly bury
himself in the same grave with his companions.

THIS confidence so necessary to the harmony of government will in this
country, I trust, exist in its proper latitude. It certainly will so long as
wisdom shall continue the pole star in our elections.

AS the guardian of our rights within this state, annually have we chosen the
man, who in the cause of his country has nobly scorned the mandate of power,
the scepter of tyranny. Could the luxuries of health now unite with the honors
of a grateful country, bright to himself would be the evening of his life -- as
to us have been his meridian services.

AMERICANS!

THUS glorious our Revolution! -- Royalty has reared an altar, upon which
reason had been the sacrifice -- the rights of man the incense. This era has
dispelled the film from the eye of nations. Although first rising within this
western hemisphere, like the Aurora Borealis, it has instantly flashed
throughout the political concave. It has melted the diadem from the imperial
blow. Tumbled from its deep footsteps the huge Colossus of tyranny. In time
will annihilate the massy chain which has so long separated nations!

THIS noble discovery we justly claim as our own. NOTES.

Those men deserve the gratitude of ages who should discover a mode of
government that contained the greatest sum of individual happiness, with the
least national expense. DRACONETTI.


Nations yet unborn will with gratitude revere the exertions which gave it
birth. Even now are they richly repaid by our present prospects.

UNDER the direction of a HAMILTON our credit rising abroad, In THE SENTINEL of
18th April, it appeared several loans had been effected in Amsterdam and
Antwerp, for the United States, some of which at the rate of 4 per cent.
has at home already opened all the springs of wealth. At a period not far
remote, the tide which has hitherto set so rapidly to foreign shores will
return, and with the fertility of the Nile, enliven and enrich our own.

LIKE the subtle fluid has our commercial spirit penetrated the most secret
avenue of trade. Waves the most distant swell with pride beneath our ships!
Winds in climes the most foreign with joy unfurl our flag!

EXTENSIVE as has been this intercourse with nations, thank Heaven, we yet
retain our native Purity. Our exchange has been that of commodities, not of
morals. In the contrast of character we ever have, I hope, ever shall, with
undaunted pride, support our own.

THIS vivid spirit for a period in deep sleep, begins now to wake to its usual
activity. The bubble of speculation so long sustained in air by the mere breath
of infatuation has at length burst. Fatal to individuals may have been its
explosion -- copious may have been the tears of humanity; -- but misfortunes
are sometimes lessons -- mankind will in future stand aloof or approach it with
caution.

EVERY branch of business will again revive and industry wear upon her brow new
smiles of cheerfulness.

ALREADY have bridges vast and magnificent, drawn into close embrace distant
fields of fertility with flourishing towns of commerce. Future improvements of
equal utility will succeed to wild pursuits -- and arts agricultural,
manufactural, mechanical, sedulously employ the mind.

CONVULSION abroad will crowd with emigrants our peaceful shores, nor will they
ever desert them for the frozen regions of Canada and Nova Scotia.

THUS restrained from further emigration by the insurmountable barriers of
nature, soon will the hand of culture brighten every feature in the broad face
of this continent. Soon will the darkest forest become a crowded town! The most
desert field a lap for harvest! The most distant lake a bosom for navigation!

AMERICANS!

How vast the future magnitude of this rising empire! Nations afar will behold
it with wonder -- like the branches of a mighty family, its inhabitants widely
dispersed yet closely united by the invisible tie of consanguinity.
Uninterrupted in its situation, its government, its laws, its liberty.!!!


