THE Rights of Animals: AN ORATION, DELIVERED AT THE COMMENCEMENT OF
Providence-College, SEPTEMBER 7, 1791.

By HERMAN DAGGETT. Candidate for the MASTER'S DEGREE.

A Righteous man regards the life of his beast.

SOLOMON. SAGG-HARBOUR: Printed by DAVID FROTHINGHAM. M.DCC.XCII.

The Rights of Animals: An ORATION, etc.
THE design of my appearing in public, at this time, is to say a few things in
favor of a certain class of beings, whose rights have seldom been advocated,
either from the pulpit, from the stage, or from the press. I mean the INFERIOR
ANIMALS.

THE cruelty, and injustice, with which this class of beings has been treated,
by their boasted superiors of the human race, is too notorious to need a
particular recital. In general, their welfare and happiness has been looked
upon as a matter of very little importance, in the system; and in our treatment
of them, hardly to be regarded. And one species, in particular, has, by almost
universal consent, been totally excluded from any place in the benevolent
regards of mankind: So that now, "whosoever kills them, thinks that he does
God service." Yea, and many are so absurd as to suppose, that this is a
fulfillment of that ancient prophecy, "That the seed of the woman should bruise
the serpent's head."

AS every sinful indulgence, and every act of injustice, arises from the blind
and criminal selfishness of the human heart; to this must we look, as the cause
of that unfeeling disposition, together with all those acts of injustice and
cruelty, which are spent upon the inferior animals. It is the nature of
selfishness, to exclude all beings but ourselves, and those whom we consider as
being related to ourselves, from any friendly, benevolent attention. If WE are
exercised with any pain, or are the subjects of any misfortune: or, if this be
the case with any of those, who belong to our FAMILY, or the circle of our
FRIENDS, we immediately become affected by it: And always in proportion to the
nearness of the relation. Whereas, if any calamity befall those, who are no way
related to us, but who belong to a different class, or circle in society, our
feelings are not wont to be interested. This will account, at once, for that
disposition and conduct in men, which we are now censuring. For the lower order
of sensible beings, are considered as moving in a very different sphere, and
belonging to a community of a far different nature from that of ours; so far
different, that the feelings of benevolence, are, commonly, not at all
interested in their favor.

A well known circumstance, which attends some of these animals, contributes,
not a little, to confirm us in the truth of this observation. For those of them
which are tamed, and domesticated by us, immediately become the objects of our
kind regards, and our sensibility is deeply wounded, when they are abused. But
where there is no such relation, by which they are distinguished from the
common her^, to use a phrase denoting cruelty, they are treated LIKE BRUTES.
Without the least regard to justice, we commonly treat them in that manner,
which we suppose, will make them conduce the most to our own advantage; and
subject them, in all things, to what happens to be our pleasure. Though
sometimes, it must be acknowledged, that our malevolence toward them, is of a
disinterested nature, and they are tormented only for the sake of the unnatural
pleasure, which is taken in doing it.

NOW, in order to determine, in what light, these animals ought to be
considered, and how they ought to be treated, let us carefully attend to a few
things, of known and acknowledged truth, with regard to the objects of our
benevolence. And here, I think, it is past dispute, that all beings, capable of
happiness belong to the number. Let their circumstances or characters,
dispositions or abilities, color or shape, be what they may; if they are
sensible beings, and capable of happiness, they ought to be the objects of our
benevolent regards. If the moral character of any being has become hateful, and
inconsistent with truth and justice, we cannot, it is true, as such, have any
compl^cency in it: But, we observe, that the Bring itself, may, nevertheless,
be as proper an object of our benevolence, as any being whatever: And ^e ought
to wi^h, and actually endeavor, to promote the welfare, and real happiness of
such a being, as much as we possibly can, consistently with the rights and
claims of other beings. This is the natrue of true benevolence. True
benevolence is universal, and uniform. The good man, like his merciful Creator,
wishes to promote the highest happiness of that system to which his influence
extends: And feels devoted to PARTIES in society, no farther than the present
state of things, and his limited capacities render it necessary. We may, and
ought to have a true regard for all beings, according to their real worth, and
to wish them well, according to their capacity for enjoyment* although, in this
life, we are necessarily limited in the execution of such benevolent wishes.
The case is s^^h with us, at present, that we cannon (...) to all beings (...),
to whom, nevertheless, we may wish well, with (...) sincerity, and with equal
a^d^r. But we observe, that whenever an opportunity of securing, or (...)
^^^sing the happiness of any (...), the benevolent man, acting as such, always
improves it.

THESE observations, it is hoped, will help us to determine, in what light, we
ought to confider the INFERIOR ANIMALS. That they are sensible beings, and
capable of happiness, none can doubt: That their sensibility of corporeal
pleasure and pain, is less than ours, none can prove "The Millepedes rolls
itself round upon the ^ightest touch; and the Snail draws in her horns upon the
first approach of the hand. Such instances of sensibility certainly confi^^ the
observation of our inimitable Shakespere, who teaches us that " -- the poor
beetle, which we trend upon,
In coporal sufferance, feels a ping as great
As when a giant dies."
PERCIVAL.
: And that there is any kind of reason, why they should not be regarded with
proportionable tenderness, we cannot conceive.

BUT lest this mo^e of reasoning should be thought too ni^e, let us call into
view a rule of judging, instituted by a divine Philanthropist, and oracle of
wisdom, in the days of (...) Caesar. "That we do to others as we would have
them do unto us;" i. e. in a change of circumstances. This is a maxim which
approves itself to the reason and conscience of every man. Whatever obs^urity
may involve other rules of judging, this is always clear, and unexceptionable.
And it must extend to all sensible beings, with whom we have any dealings, and
in whose ^^tuation we are capable of imagining ourselves to be. Supposing
therefore, (as some have supposed,) that the doctrine of transmigration is
true, and that, after this life, we shall pass into the forms of some of the
inferior animals, and move in their sphere; how should we wish to be
considered, and treated, by those above us? Here, there is left not the least
room to doubt, what our feelings would be. Let this rule, therefore, be
faithfully applied, in every case, and cruelty to animals would no longer be
indulged.

GOD has appointed to all his creatures, a certain sphere to mo^e in, and has
granted them certain privileges, which may be called THEIR OWN. If we judge
impartially, we shall acknowledge that there are the RIGHTS of a BEAST, as well
as the RIGHTS of a MAN. And because man is considered as the Lord of this lower
creation, he is not thereby licensed to infringe on the rights of those below
him, any more than a King, or Magistrate, is licens^d to infringe on the rights
of his subjects. If the Governor of the universe has given us liberty to
prepare animal food; or, if the rights of these creatures, in certain
instances, interfere with the rights of others, or with the rights of men, so
as thereby to become forfeited; we may, in such cases, take away their lives,
or deprive them of their privileges, without the imputation of blame.

"THE creeping ver^in, loathsome to the sight.
And charged perhaps with venom, that intrudes,
A visitor unwelcome, into scenes
Sacred to neatness, or repose -- the alcove,
The chamber, or refactory, may die.
A necessary act incurs no blame.
Not so, when held within their proper bounds,
And guiltless' of offense, they range the air,
Or take their pastime in the spacious field.
There they are privileged. And he that hunts,
Or harms them there, is guilty of a wrong,
Disturbs the economy of nature's realm,
Who, when she form^^, designed them an abode.
The sum is this. If man's convenience, health,
Or safety interfere, his rights and (...)
Are paramount, and must extinguish theirs.
Else, they are all -- the meanest things that are --
As free to live, and to enjoy that life,
As God was free to form them, at the first,
Who, in his sovereign wisdom, made them all."
THUS says the Poet. And I know of nothing (...) nature, in reason, or in
revelation, which obliges us to suppose, that the UNALIENATED rights of a
beast, are not as sacred, and inviolable, as those of a man: or that the
person, who wantonly commits an outrage upon the life, happiness, or security
of a BIRD, is not as really amenable, at the tribunal of eternal justice, as
he, who wantonly destroys the rights and privileges, or injuriously takes away
the life of one of his fellow creatures of the HUMAN race. Here, perhaps, some
of my auditory will feel shocked: and will recur, in their minds, to that
horror, and desparation, which arises in the breasts of murderers: Whereas,
there is no such consciousness of guilt, when one of the inferior animals only
has been the subject of human cruelty. But this difference, I would observe, is
owing to education, and to certain contracted habits of thinking and acting.
Only let a person be taught, from his earliest years, that it is criminal to
torment, and unnecessarily to d^stroy, these innocent animals, and he will feel
a guilty conscience, in consequence of any injury, which he shall do them, in
this way, no less really, than if the injury were offered to human beings. The
force of education, and of wrong habits, in setting aside natural principles,
is amazing, and almost incred^b^e. Witness the feelings of those, who are
employed in forcing away the Natives, from the coasts of Africa. Witness the
cruelties, and the deaths, which are inflicted upon them, in the West Indies,
and in the Southern States; and witness the indifference, with which, in some
countries, they kill their children, when they become too numerous, and their
parents, when they become too old. The question, therefore, is not what CAN be
done, without remorse of conscience, but what OUGHT to be done, according to
the rules of justi^e and dictates of benevolence.

AND now, let reason judge-does not the idle, and mischievous boy, who, to
gratif, himself, climbs the tree, and wantonly destroys the habitation, and
murders the family, of an innocent Sparrow, as really transgress the rules of
justice, and is he not as really guilty of incompas^^ion, as the unfeeling
wretch, who, to make himself the secure and unsuspected owner of a little
treasure, which he has secretly removed, sets ^^re to his neighbor's house?
The crimes are of the same nature, though the guilt may not be equally
aggravated: They both act upon the same principle -- self gratification: And
the injury done, is the same, in both cases -- the dest^^^cti^n of an innocent
family. And who, that is capable of e^tering into the feelings of the
DISTRESSED, can behold the injured and bereaved bird, setting alone, upon the
naked spray, mourning, in funeral grief, over the loss of ALL that was DEAR to
her, without shedding the tear of sympathetic sorrow!

AS farther illustration of this subject, let me refer my auditors to a well
known sport, and darling amusement, with many persons of fortune and leisure.
Some wild animal, caught for the purpose, is carried to these persons, and
sold. This creature, at a convenient season, is conveyed to the middle of an
extensive plain, and set at liberty. Having advanced to a certain distance, a
kennel of hounds are let loose upon the affrighted animal, whilst their more
savage masters pursue, on horseback, until the game is taken, and destroyed.
And all this is for no other reason, in the universe, but to gratify themselves
with the terror and dismay, the labor and fatigue, the screams and death, of
this unfortunate creature!

" -- Detested sport!
That owes its PLEASURES to another's PAIN,
And feeds upon the sobs, and dying shrieks
Of harmless nature, dumb, but yet indu'd
With eloquence that agonies inspire,
Of silent tears, and heart-distending sighs!
Vain tears, alas! and sighs that never find
A corresponding tone in jovial souls."
WHAT ideas should we form of Superior beings, whose employment, or rather,
whose AMUSEMENT, it was, by certain invisible means, to ensnare, worry,
fatigue, and destroy, the human race? Or should they, (as we sometimes do with
game-cocks, and other animals,) furnish them with instruments of death, and
then contrive means to bring them together, and excite them to action, only to
make sport for themselves; would they not be execrated, and detested, by every
feeling child of humanity? How then can we justify our own conduct, which is of
the same complexion? But, to show that such treatment of animals is wrong in
itself, enough has been said. We proceed, therefore, to show that it is hurtful
in its consequences; as it ha^ a most unhappy influence upon the human mind.

THERE was a time, (it is said,) when, ^y the laws of England, all BUTCHERS
were disqualified from fitting, as jurymen, in any capital cause: Because, it
was supposed, that being accustomed to shed the blood, and take away the lives,
of other animals, they would not have the feelings, common to the rest of
mankind, about the life of a man. Now, if this be the case, where persons are
accustomed to take away the lives of these animals, with decency, and humanity;
what effect must it have upon those, with whom, allowed and voluntary acts of
cruelty, have, through long indulgence, become habitual, and pleasing? How can
any tender, and amiable dispositions dwell in that breast, which is shielded
against the sharpest sufferings of an innocent being, for no other reason, but
because it does not happen to b^ of our race? A person may, through sudden
temptation, be guilty of an act of injustice, or cruelty, which he habitually
abhors, and disapproves. But, we observ^r, that a SINGLE act of cruelty,
committed upon the MEANEST animal, if it be justified; ^pproved, and delighted
in, is utterly inconsistent with any tender sentiments of soul, or feelings of
humanity.

"That heart is hard in nature, and unfit
For human fellowship, as being void
Of sympathy, and therefore dead alike
To love and friendship both, that is not pleased
With fight of animals enjoying life,
Nor feels their happiness augment his own."
And to indulge myself still farther, in the use of a favorite Poet,

"I would not enter on my li^t of friends,
(Though graced with polished manners and fine sense,
Yet wanting sensibility) the man
Who needlessly sets foot upon a worm.
And inadvertent step may crush the snail,
That crawls, at evening, in the public path,
But he that has humanity, forewarned,
Will tread aside, and let the reptile live."
WE are led on the commission of crimes, by slow and imperceptible degrees.
Wrong habits indulged, with r^gard to any particular practice, naturally gain
strength, and lead on to kindred practices and indulgences. Why should a man,
for instance, who, without the least remorse, or rather with a pleasing
sensibility and wantonness, torments and destroys other creatures, hesitate to
do the same office, for one of the aboriginals of this country? And what is the
difference, in the nature of the thing, between this and the murder of any
other man? I am persuaded, that the obduracy of heart, and unrelenting
disposition, which we discover, in some men, is owing, in a great measure, to
the early indulgence of such a disposition, toward the inferior animals. Are
not many persons EDUCATED to torment them? A different mode of education,
however, we presume, would be an unspeakable blessing to society. It would
greatly tend to soften and meliorate the natural dispositions of mankind, and
habituate them to the pleasing sensations of tenderness, and sympathy. "Ye,
therefore, who love mercy, teach your sons To love it too"

I CANNOT close these observations, without indulging myself, for a moment, in
the plea^ing anticipation of that time, which is fast approaching, when there
shall, no longer be any disposition, in mankind, to hurt the peace of one
another, or to wage war with innocent nature: "For the earnest expectation of
the CREATURE, waits for the manifestation of the Sons of God" -- the joyful
period, when the groans of this lower creation shall have an end: "When lambs,
with wolves, shall grace the verdant mead,
And boys, in flowery bands, the tiger lead;
The steer and lion at one crib shall meet,
And harmless serpents lick the pilgrims feet;
The smiling infant, in his hand, shall take
The crested ba^ilisk, and the speckled snake,
Pleased, the green luster of the seals survey,
And with their forked tongue, and pointless s^ing shall play."



