CHRIST formed in the Soul, the only Foundation of HOPE for Eternity. A SERMON,
Addressed to YOUNG PERSONS.

By P. DODDRIDGE, D. D.

Gal. iv. 19. My little Children, of whom I travail in Birth again, until
Christ be formed in you.

PROVIDENCE: Reprinted by JOHN CARTER. M, DCC, XCII.

GAL. iv. 19. My little Children, of whom I travail in Birth again, until
Christ be formed in you.


IT was the unhappy case of Agrippa, that though almost, he was only almost,
persuaded to be a Christian Acts xxvi. 28.
; and I fear, it is now the case of many, and particularly of many young
persons, who have enjoyed the advantages of a religious education. I believe it
is difficult to find any amongst them, who have not been brought under some
serious impressions betimes. With regard to the internal operations of the
blessed Spirit, as well as external means, the morning of life is generally to
them, in a peculiar sense, the day of their visitation; and they often seem to
know it, and in some measure to improve it: but in too many instances we find
their goodness as a morning cloud, and as the early dew, which soon passes
away Hos. vi. 4.
. The blossoms open fair and beautiful, and give a very agreeable prospect of
the plentiful fruits of holiness in life: but too often, when storms of
temptation and corruption arise, the goodly appearance is laid in ruins; the
blossoms do as it were fall to the ground, and leave the tree blasted and
naked; or at best covered only with leaves of an external profession, which,
however green and flourishing they may for the present be, will not at last
secure it from being cut down and cast into the burning. Though they for a
while had escaped the pollutions of the world through lust, they are afterward
entangled and subdued; and the consequence is, they prove a scandal to
religion, and a discouragement to others, till, in the end, they bring
aggravated destruction on themselves; so that on the whole, as the apostle most
justly observes, It had been better for them not to have known the way of
righteousness, than thus, after they have known it, to turn aside from the holy
commandment 2 Pet. ii. 21.
.

THIS may be in a great measure owing to the mutability of human nature in
general, and particularly to the levity and inconstancy of youth, in
conjunction with the force of those temptations of life, which continually
surround and press upon them. Yet I apprehend this is not all, but that it is,
in part, to be charged on something defective, even in their best days, on
their resting in something short of real religion, and a true saving change.
Solomon had seen reason to say, There is a way that seems right to a man, but
the end thereof are the ways of death Prove. xiv. 12.
: and I believe every considerate person will be ready to own, that in order to
prevent so fatal a delusion, and all the train of mischiefs which may follow
upon it, great care should be taken in stating this important question; What is
the true and solid basis, on which we may securely ground our eternal hopes? It
is a question of the highest importance, and the most universal concern, both
to the aged and the young; so that I trust I need not offer any apology for
complying with the request of a pious and judicious friend, who recommended
this subject to our consideration, at this time, and on this occasion.

IN prosecution of this design, I have made choice of these words of the
apostle, which I have now been reading, and which may, without offering any
violence to them, be very fairly and naturally accommodated to the present
purpose.

IT is plain from many passages in this epistle, that the great apostle, who
had planted the Christian church among the Galatians, had reason to fear, that
many, who were by profession its members, were not sufficiently established in
their holy faith. It is probable; that he himself had an opportunity of making
but a short stay amongst them; and, partly through their own negligence and
prejudices, and partly through the artful attempts of false teachers, in the
absence of St. Paul, they appear to have fallen into a set of notions, and a
conduct, which tended not only to impair the glory, but to subvert the very
foundation of the gospel, and with it the foundation of their own eternal
hopes. Of this the apostle does, in a very awful manner, admonish them. He
tells them, in the very beginning of his epistle, that he marvelled, that they
were so soon removed from him that called them (and from the principles he had
taught them) into another gospel Gal. i. 6.
. And afterward he uses these very free and emphatical words: O foolish
Galatians, who has bewitched, or enchanted you, that you should not obey the
truth? Are you so foolish? Having begun in the spirit (having professed to
embrace the gospel, and shown the appearances of some common zeal for it) can
you now hope to be made perfect by the flesh, or by the ritual and carnal
observances of the Mosaic institution? Is it thus that you disgrace all you
have done, and all you have borne for Christ? Have you then suffered so many
things in vain Gal. iii. 1 -- 4.
? On the whole, he tells them, he was ready to apprehend, that all the
agreeable hopes he had once entertained concerning them, would be buried in
everlasting disappointment, and that it would appear, he had bestowed upon them
labor in vain Chap. iv. 11.
. Thus did he stand in doubt of them Chap. iv. 29.
; and that doubt pierced his heart with the most tender concern, and brought
upon him, as it were a second time, those pangs of soul which he had felt on
their account, when he saw them in all the ignorance and wickedness of their
Gentile state. He was hardly more solicitous then, that they might be turned
from dumb idols to the living GOD, than he was now, that they might give
convincing evidences that CHRIST was formed in them, i. e. that they had
cordially received and digested the gospel, and that their hearts were
delivered into the mould of it Rom vi. 17.
: which it did not appear they were, while they were thus making void the grace
of GOD, and the righteousness of faith, by adhering to the foolish and
pernicious doctrine of the necessity of seeking their justification, in part at
least, by the observation of the Mosaic law.

THIS seems to be the most natural sense of the words of the text, where such a
latitude of expression is used, as the apostle elsewhere seems to study, on
purpose to render his writings universally edifying, and useful to them, whose
particular circumstances in life are widely different from those of the persons
to whom they were originally addressed.

AS to the introductory words, My little children, we cannot imagine they refer
to the age of those to whom the apostle wrote. The evident design of them is,
to express that kind of parental tenderness which he entertained for them, like
that which a mother has for an infant with which she travails in birth. My
little children, of whom I travail in birth again, till Christ be formed in you.

IT would be easy to multiply observations from the words. I might especially
take occasion to show, -- that it is possible, those that once seemed very
hopeful, and still maintain an external profession, may appear, after all, in
such dangerous circumstances, that judicious ministers, and other Christian
friends, may be thrown into a great deal of perplexity and agony on their
account; -- and that the great thing necessary to establish their safety, and
the comfort of those concerned for them, is, that the Lord Jesus Christ be
formed in them.

THAT I may more particularly illustrate and improve the text, and take in what
is most important in these remarks, I will I. CONSIDER several things, on which
men are ready to build a false confidence, which will bring them into danger,
and their judicious friends into perplexity upon their account. II. I WILL
endeavor to show you, what is the only solid foundation of their own hopes,
and the joys of others with regard to them; which is here expressed by Christ
formed in them. And then, III. I SHALL conclude with some more particular
improvement, in proper inferences from the whole.


THESE are plainly matters of universal importance; but as I am now peculiarly
addressing myself to young persons, I shall endeavor to fix on those thoughts,
which may be most remarkably suitable to them: for I am much more concerned
that my discourse may be useful, than that it may be critically regular and
exact. I hope there are many amongst you, who are experimentally acquainted
with the vitals of Christianity, and have received from above an incorruptible
seed 1 Pet. i. 23.
. There are others, to whom I must say with the apostle to these Galatians, I
stand in doubt of you Gal. iv. 20.
; and to such, I hope, I can apply myself in the language of the text, My
little children, of whom I travail in birth again, till Christ be formed in
you. Pardon me, if in this instance I am jealous over you with a godly
jealousy, 2 Cor. xi. 2.
. I would endeavor, with the sincerest and tenderest affection, and with such
freedom as the importance of the case requires, to guard you against those
sandy foundations, which will bury you and your hopes deep in eternal ruins;
and to direct you to the Rock of Ages, on which they who build shall never be
ashamed.

I THEREFORE entreat your serious attention, and would humbly ask, both for
myself and you, the teachings of that blessed Spirit, whose peculiar office it
is, in the most efficacious manner, to show us our danger and our remedy; to
aid the laboring minds of ministers, and to cause them to see with
satisfaction the travail of their souls Isa. liii. 11.
while he gives to their hearers a new birth, and immortal life, by forming
Christ in them.

I. I AM to caution you against several things, on which young persons are
peculiarly prone to build a false and precarious confidence.

AND here let me particularly entreat you, as you love your souls, and value
your eternal hopes, -- that you trust not to the privileges of your birth, --
or the rectitude of your speculations in matters of religion, -- or the purity
and frequency of your forms of worship, -- or the warmth of your passions, --
or the morality of your conduct: for none of these apart, nor even all of them
united, can, according to the tenor of the gospel, be sufficient for your
security and happiness.

1. TRUST not to the privileges of your birth and education, as the foundation
of your eternal hopes.

YOU are, many of you, the seed of GOD's servants, perhaps for several
succeeding generations. You may be ready to plead, that you were born in his
house, that you were early devoted to him in baptism, and have been brought up
in the most regular and conscientious manner: you have been surrounded with
holy instructions and correspondent examples from your infancy; and repeated
fervent prayers, both in the family and in secret, have been sent up to heaven
upon your account. These are indeed signal advantages, and you may justly
rejoice in them; for, in these respects, you are the children of the kingdom:
but rejoice with trembling; for our Lord has told us, that it is more than a
possible case, that the children of the kingdom may be cast out, and have their
portion in utter darkness Mat. viii. 1^
. The peculiar regard shown to the seed of Abraham, may perhaps be abused by
some of you, as an encouragement to those presumptuous hopes. But remember,
that Ishmael was the son of Abraham, and Esau of Isaac; and yet neither the
one, nor the other, inherited the blessing of his father. Remember that
beautiful, but dreadful parable, which represents a wretched creature in hell,
that could cry, Father Abraham, and yet in vain added, Have mercy upon me, and
send me but a drop of water to cool my tongue Luke xvi. 24.
. Once more, remember those emphatical words of the Baptist, so expressly
levelled against this arrogant presumption: Think not (says he) to say within
yourselves, We have Abraham for our father; for I say unto you, that GOD is
able, of these stones, to raise up children unto Abraham Mat. iii. 9.
: As if he should have said, The promises made to those who are the children of
Abraham, respect not merely them who are lineally descended from him; but those
who are the heirs of his piety and his faith; for if GOD were to turn these
stones into men, and to form them by his grace to a holy character and temper,
such, though descended from no human parents at all, would, in the sense of the
promise, be children of Abraham. And it were more reasonable to expect such a
transmutation, than that GOD should acknowledge a generation of vipers as his
people, because they were derived from holy ancestors. On the contrary, GOD
directly assures us, that if the son of the most religious father forsake the
way of virtue and holiness, and prove as the degenerate plant of a strange vine
Jer. ii. 21.
, in his trespass that he has trespassed, and in his sin that he has sinned,
in them shall he die Ezekiel. xviii. 10 -- 13, 24.
. And surely herein the ways of the Lord are apparently equal; for it is most
evident, that a long descent from GOD's people is a reproach and condemnation,
rather than an honor, to those who abandon that good old way in which their
ancestors have trod, and, as it were, cut off that intail of piety, which has
been the care and the glory of preceding generations.

2. TRUST not to the regularity of your sentiments, in matters of religion, as
the foundation of your eternal hopes.

SO various are the workings of men's hearts, and the devices of Satan, that,
if I mistake not, there are some that place their confidence in the strictness,
and others in the latitude of their religious opinions; but the one, and the
other, will appear equally vain, when considered in the view now before us.

SOME may possibly persuade themselves, that their condition is secure, because
their sentiments are orthodox. They live perhaps in the midst of the
unbelieving and profane, and see daily contempt and derision thrown upon the
blessed gospel, or its most glorious peculiarities; but through the influence
of a good education, or from some other principle, short of true piety, they
may nevertheless not only hold fast the faith once delivered to the saints, but
even contend earnestly for it, Jude, ver. 3.
: nay, they are, perhaps, learned in the controversies of the time; and can
indeed pronounce concerning them in a very rational and accurate manner.

IF this, my friends, be the case with any of you, I congratulate you on the
happiness of a well-informed judgment, but must caution you against mistaking
it for a sanctified heart. The mystery of faith, as the apostle himself assures
us, is to be held with a good conscience 1 Timothy i. 19.
: and in vain do you profess to retain the one, while you make shipwreck of the
other. As precious a treasure as the knowledge of the truth is, if we go no
farther than mere speculation, it will be to you but as a talent of gold to a
man sinking in the sea, which only serves to plunge him so much the deeper in
ruin Dr. Bates' Works, page 938.
.

THERE are others who err in the contrary extreme. Orthodox notions are their
banter, rather than their confidence. They pride themselves in having broke the
shackles in which others are confined, and in seeing through the mist in which
multitudes have been perplexed. They are sensible, that many things which
divide the world are merely controversies about words; and are not much
concerned about others in which there is a real difference, because they are
well aware, that the fundamentals of religion lie in a very little room. They
are confident of the innocence of error, and the safety of an honest mind under
those mistakes which have been branded by the severest names. A wicked life is,
in their esteem, the only dangerous heresy; and morality the only thing that is
worth contending about. Charmed with their own wisdom and happiness in this
freedom of thought, they look down with pity on persons under the influence of
a contracted education and narrow sentiments, and possibly mingle their pity
with a great deal of scorn, not to say indignation. But they are indeed
themselves the objects of much juster pity, if, whilst they glory in their
freedom, they are the servants of corruption 2 Pet. ii. 19.
. It is certain, that the most generous speculations will no more save men of
unregenerate hearts, and unholy lives, than the most rigid and severe set of
notions. For notions and speculations are in their nature so far short of real
goodness, that if there be nothing more than these, it matters but little what
they are. Yet one cannot forbear observing a peculiar and most absurd
inconsistency in the conduct of those, who think so highly of themselves,
because they are possessed of this one speculation, that speculation in general
is a trifle, and morality is all; as if the whole of morality consisted in
bearing this testimony in its favor. I wish such a character were not almost
as common, as it is for men to be bigots in defense of catholicism, and
uncharitable in pleading the cause of charity. If this be the case with any of
you, out of your own mouth must you be condemned, Luke xix. 22.
and we may justly apply to you, in the midst of your self applauses, those
awful words of our Lord; if ye were, in this respect, blind, ye would
comparatively have no sin; whereas now you have no cloak, or excuse, for your
sin John ix. 41.
.

3. TRUST not in the external forms of devotion, as the foundation of your
great hopes for eternity.

YOU are, it may be, joined to a society, which not only wears the christian
name, but separates itself from many other professors, under the apprehension
at least of a more pure and scriptural worship. You, perhaps, so much approve
and esteem this worship, as to be diligent and constant in attending on the
public exercises of it, not only in its stated returns, but on occasional
opportunities. You fill your places here from time to time, not merely in
obedience to the commands of your parents and Governors, but by your own
voluntary choice. And, it may be, to these you add the forms of family devotion
morning and evening, and, possibly, a few moments of daily retirement for
reading and prayer. What can such religious persons have to fear? Nay, rather,
my brethren, what can you have to hope, if, while you draw near to GOD with
your mouths and your lips, you remove your hearts far from him Isa. xxix. 1^.
? If while you come before him, as his people come, and present yourselves in
the posture of humble worshippers, your heart be going after your covetousness
Ezekiel. xxxiii. 31.
? GOD has forever confounded such vain presumption, by declaring, that the
prayer of the wicked is an abomination to him Prove. xv. 8.
; and that his shall certainly be so, that turns away his ear from hearing the
law Prove. xxviii. 9.
i. e. that refuses obedience to it. The servant that knew his Lord's will, and
did it not, became justly liable to be beaten with many stripes Luke xii. 47.
; and it is not to be wondered, if, in this sense, judgment begin at the house
of GOD 1 Pet. iv. 17.
, and seize first on those who affront and profane his ordinances, by making
them to supercede the very things which they were originally appointed on
purpose to promote.

4. TRUST not to the warmth of your passions in matters of religion, as the
foundation of your most important hopes.

SOME of you, to whom I now speak, have perhaps experienced very bitter agonies
of conscience. You have been rouzed from the sleep of carnal security, as by an
earthquake, which has shook the very center of your soul; the flames of hell
have seemed, as it were, to flash in your faces; and all these mingled horrors
have compelled you to cry out, woe is me, for I am undone! Oh what shall I do
to be saved Isa. vi. 5. Acts xvi. 30.
? And yet, to allude to the story of Elijah, the Lord has not been in the
earthquake, or in the fire 1 Kings, xix. 11, 1^.
. Consider to what purpose the enquiry after salvation has been made, and with
what resolution it has been pursued; otherwise you may be fatally deceived.
The murderers of Stephen were cut to the heart by his preaching Acts vii. 54.
and we are sure that, if the most deep and terrifying convictions could have
secured a man's salvation, the traitor Judas would have been safe, who
undoubtedly felt the most violent convulsions of soul, before he proceeded to
that dreadful extremity, which sealed him up under everlasting despair.

BUT you may have been impressed with the sweeter and the nobler passions; you
have not only trembled at the thunder of the law, but rejoiced in the message
of gospel grace: The news of a Redeemer has been welcome to your souls, and the
feet of those messengers beautiful, that have come to publish peace in his name
Isa. lii. 7.
. You have, perhaps, been melted into tears of pleasure and tenderness, when
you have heard the representation of his dying love; and when the precious
promises, established by it, have been unfolded, and the prospects of eternal
glory displayed, your minds have been elevated and transported; so that you
have hung, almost with a trembling eagerness, on the lips of the speaker. -- I
readily acknowledge, that such as these are frequently the workings of the
blessed spirit of GOD, upon the souls of his chosen people; and when found in a
due connection with the great effects they are designed to produce, are highly
to be esteemed and rejoiced in. But remember, I entreat you, that every tear of
tenderness, and every sally of joy, does not arise from so divine a spring. You
might weep at a mournful scene in a well wrought tragedy, as you have done at
the story of a Redeemer's sufferings; you might find yourselves transported
with a fine poetical description of a Pagan elysium, or a Mohammedan paradise,
just as you have been with the views of a heavenly Canaan, which gospel
ordinances have presented. Mere self-love might be the foundation of such a joy
in the tidings of pardon and happiness, without the least degree of renewing
and sanctifying grace; as it probably was in those hearers, represented by the
story ground, who immediately received the word with joy, but had no root, and
so endured but for a while Mat. xiii. 20, 21.
.

BUT, perhaps, you will say, you are confident it is not merely self-love in
you, for you have often found your mind impressed with a grateful sense of the
divine goodness; so that, when you own it before GOD in prayer, or converse
with his saints on the copious and delightful subject, your souls flow forth in
love to your great benefactor, and you look up to him in the most thankful
acknowledgments of his favors. -- If it be gratitude, that captivates the soul
into a willing obedience, and engages you to yield yourselves as living
sacrifices to GOD, then is Christ formed in your souls, and you are not the
persons to whom I would give the alarm: on the contrary, I would rather confirm
your hopes, and rejoice with you in them. -- But if your gratitude does not
rise to this; if it rest only in some tender emotion of mind, or some transient
external expression of that emotion, I must faithfully tell you, that I fear it
is only a nobler degree of that natural instinct, which causes the ox to know
his owner, and the ass his master's crib Isa. i. 3.
. To find your spirit in this manner impressed, does indeed plainly prove that
the day of your visitation is not entirely past; it proves you have not sinned
yourselves into utter insensibility of soul; nay, it may possibly at length,
through the communications of sanctifying grace, lead you on to real religion,
and to eminent seize in it: but at present it falls far short. I have
often told you (and one can hardly repeat it too often, or insist too earnestly
upon it) that there is a very wide difference between a good state, and a good
frame; and that religion is not seated either in the understanding, or in the
passions, but principally in the will; which, in this disjointed state of human
nature, is far from being always in a due harmony with either. So that, on the
whole, those illuminations, or those affections, on which you are apt to lay so
great a stress, are, perhaps, at best, but the preparatory workings of the
Spirit upon your minds, which, if they are improved aright, may leave you more
hard and more miserable than they found you.

5. TRUST not to the morality of your behavior, as the foundation of your
eternal hopes.

MORALITY is certainly a very excellent thing, and it were scandalous indeed
for any professing Christian to pour contempt upon it. Wherever this is
wanting, pretenses to faith and Christian experience are not only vain, but
insolent and detestable. He that commits sin is of the devil; and only he
that does righteousness, is righteous 1 John, iii. 7, 8.
: nor has the grace of GOD ever savingly appeared to that man, through
whatever uncommon scenes of thought he may have passed, who is not effectually
taught by it to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously and godly Tit. ii. 10, 11, 12.
. But it will by no means follow from thence, that wherever there is a sober
and virtuous conduct such a soul is passed from death to life. If the whole of
the gospel be wrapped up in the rules of morality, then is Christ dead in vain;
or, at least, it is in vain that the notices of his death are published to us.
Beware, I entreat you, of so pernicious an error. I think myself obliged more
earnestly to caution you against it, because, while the devil is attempting, on
the one hand, to engage some, under the specious pretenses of an evangelical
spirit, to turn the grace of GOD into wantonness Jude ver. 4.
; he seems to be insnaring others, by extolling the virtue which he hates, in
order to lead them into a neglect of Christ, and his righteousness, and all the
peculiarities of the gospel scheme of salvation; so that it is difficult on the
whole to say, which of these devices is most destructive to the souls of men.

FROM my heart I rejoice to think, there are so many amongst you, my young
friends, whose character in life is fair and unblemished. You escape the
grosser pollutions of the world; you abhor brutal intemperance; you scorn the
mean artifices of deceit, and renounce the hidden things of dishonesty 2 Cor.
iv. 2.
you honor your parents and subordinate governors; you treat the ministers of
Christ with respect and esteem; you are affable and courteous in your behavior
to all: and on this account, we behold you and love you; we hope and conclude
you are not far from the kingdom of heaven Mark xi. 34.
. But, alas! if things rest here, you will never enter into it. All these
things had the young man in the gospel observed from his youth Mark x. ^
; and many of you have seen, in a very large and beautiful representation, how
lovely a youth was then perishing in sin Dr. Watts's Sermon. Vol. I. Ser. V.VI.
. He lacked one thing; and the lack of that was the ruin of his soul, as it
will be of yours, if you are destitute of it.

I KNOW, that they are especially in danger of being deceived here, who
converse frequently with persons of an abandoned character; or who are
themselves reformed from some gross irregularities, to which they were once
addicted. Comparing themselves with others, or with themselves in a more
licentious and corrupt state, they pronounce a favorable sentence, and
conclude they are safe and happy: but let me entreat you, my friends, that you
would rather compare your hearts and lives with that perfect law of GOD, which
cannot be repealed; weigh yourselves in that balance, and see whether you are
not found wanting there. Review even the upright conduct of these days of your
reformation, and then say, whether there be such a redundancy of merit in them
as will not only answer present demands, but atone for your past offenses too.
You will soon be confounded on such a review. You will soon acknowledge, on an
impartial examination, that the bed is shorter than a man can stretch himself
upon, and the covering narrower than he can wrap himself in Isa. xxviii. 20.
; that neither you, nor any living, can be justified by the works of the law
Romans iii. 2^.
.

I WILL conclude this head with observing, that the instance of the blessed
apostle St. Paul serves well to illustrate and confirm our discourse in each of
the particulars I have now mentioned. Had the privileges of birth and education
been a sufficient security, Paul had been secure before his conversion to
Christianity; for he was circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, of
the tribe of Benjamin (which had not, like the rest, revolted from the house of
David) and by his mother's side, as well as his father's, a Hebrew of the
Hebrews Phil. iii. ^.
. -- If the exactest regularity in religious notions, or the strictest
formality in the externals of worship, could have secured a man, Paul had been
secure; for he was, as touching the law, a Pharisee; he lived according to the
rigor of that sect, and, both with respect to doctrines and ceremonies, was
exceedingly zealous of the traditions of the fathers Gal. i. 14.
. -- If a transport of passion in the cause of GOD could have secured a man,
Paul had been secure; for, concerning zeal, or with regard to that, he
persecuted the church, and wasted it beyond measure Ver. 13.
. -- And, lastly, if morality of behavior could have done it, Paul had been
secure; for, touching the righteousness which is by the law, he was blameless
Phil. ii. 6, 7, 8.
. In these things, he was once so weak and so wretched as to place a great deal
of confidence; but when he was illuminated, and called by divine grace, he
assures us, that what things were gain unto him before, those he counted loss
for Christ, i. e. he most entirely renounced all dependence upon them: yea
doubtless, says he, and I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: which naturally leads me to the second
general, where

II. I AM to consider, what will be a solid foundation for hope and joy, when
all these precarious dependences fail.

THIS is, with the utmost propriety, expressed in the text by Christ formed in
the soul, which is exactly parallel to that phrase in Colossians, Christ in
you, the hope of glory Col. i. ^.
which is there mentioned as an epitome of the gospel, the riches of the glory
of the mystery preached among the Gentiles. -- When Paul could see that the
Galatians were brought to this, the pangs of his laboring mind would be ended,
and joy and confidence would succeed; which is plainly intimated in the words
of the text: and when you, my dear charge, are brought to it, parents and
ministers may rejoice over you, and you will have an everlasting spring of hope
and joy, a solid foundation, on which to build for eternity.

PERMIT me, therefore, a little more particularly to explain it to you; and let
me entreat you to turn your thoughts inward, that you may judge, whether you
have been experimentally acquainted with the temper and change which I shall
now describe, as signified by this remarkable expression in the text, Christ
formed in you.

NOW, I think, it implies these three things: -- that some apprehensions of
Christ have taken hold of the heart; -- that the man is brought to an explicit
choice of him, and deliberately enters into covenant with him; -- and that in
consequence of both these, something of the temper and spirit of Christ is by
divine grace wrought in his soul. I will touch on each of these, but my time
will not allow me to manage them in so copious and particular a manner as they
well deserve.

1. TO have Christ formed in the soul supposes, that some serious apprehensions
of Christ have taken hold of the heart.

IT evidently implies, that the external revelation of him has not only been
admitted as a speculative truth, but attended to as a matter of the highest
concern. Previous to the forming of Christ in the soul, there must be a
conviction, that we are naturally without Christ, and that, in consequence of
this, we are in a most unhappy condition. And this conviction must strike deep
upon the heart; for till the evil of sin be felt, what can make the news of a
Savior welcome? Since, as he himself has declared, the whole need not a
physician, but they that are sick Matt. ix. 12.
. The man in whose heart Christ is formed, has seen himself condemned by GOD's
righteous law; has seen himself equally unable to answer its demands, or to
bear up under the execution of its penalties. And feeling this to be no light
matter, but the very life of his soul, he has then been engaged, with the
greatest seriousness and earnestness, to cry out, Woe is me, for I am undone
Isa. vi. 5.
! Oh, what shall I do to be saved Acts xvi. 30.
? I before told you, there may be these convictions and awakenings, where
Christ is never formed in the soul; and I now add, that the degree of them may
be various, according to the various tempers and circumstances of different
persons: but it is most evident that something of this kind must make way for
the Redeemer's entrance, who comes to seek and to save that which was lost Luke
xix. 10.
; to bind up the brokenhearted Isa. lxi. 1.
; and to give rest to the weary and heavy-laden Mat. xi. 28, 29.
. And I the rather insist on this, because I am fully persuaded, that slight
thoughts of sin, and of the misery of our natural estate by it, have been the
principal cause of all the infidelity of the present age, and are daily ruining
a multitude of souls.

2. THE formation of Christ in the soul does farther imply an explicit choice
of him, and a deliberate entering into covenant with him.

WHEN such a soul hears of a Redeemer, and of the way of salvation by him,
exhibited in scripture, it cordially approves the scheme, as entirely worthy of
its divine author; and though corrupt nature raises up a thousand proud
thoughts, in a vain and ungrateful rebellion against it, yet they are, by
almighty grace, subdued and brought into captivity 2 Cor. x. ^.
. The man really sees such a suitableness, and such an amiableness, in the
blessed Jesus, under the character in which the gospel reveals him, that he
judges him to be the pearl of great price; and as GOD has laid him as the
foundation-stone, he is, in that view, inconceivably precious to him 1 Pet. ii.
6.
. Far from contenting himself with applauding this plan, as regular, beautiful,
and magnificent in general, the true believer is solicitous, that he may have
his own share in this edifice of mercy; and that coming to Christ as a living
stone, he may himself be one of those, who shall on him be built up for an
habitation of GOD through the Spirit Ephesians. ii. 22.
. When he considers the Lord Jesus represented as standing at the door and
knocking Rev. iii. 20.
it is with pleasure that he hears his voice, and opens to him, and, as
Zaccheus did, receives him joyfully Luke xix. 6.
. He regards him as a nail fastened in a sure place Isa. xxii. 23.
; on which he can joyfully fix all his eternal hopes, infinitely important as
he sees them to be. And while he thus anchors his soul on the righteousness,
the atonement, and the intercession of a Redeemer, he humbly bows to his
authority, as his Lord and his GOD John xx. 2^.
. It is his desire to seat him on the throne in his heart, and, as it were, to
put into his hand the scepter and the sword, that all the powers of nature may
be governed, and all the corruptions of it destroyed by him. In a word, as he
knows that Christ was given for a covenant to the people Isa. xlix. 8.
he deliberately sets his seal to that covenant, thereby devoting himself to
Christ, and, through him, to the Father. Such are his views, his purposes, and
his engagements; and by divine grace he is enabled to be faithful to them.
Which leads me to add,

3. WHEN Christ is formed in any soul, something of the temper and character of
the blessed Jesus is by divine grace wrought there.

I MIGHT with ease multiply scriptures in proof of the absolute necessity of
this; but it is so obvious, that you must yourselves know how expressly it is
required. You know how plainly St. Paul has told us, that if any man have not
the spirit of Christ, he is none of his Romans viii. 9.
: and where this spirit resides, Christ dwells in the heart Ephesians. iii. 17.
. The same mind, or temper, is in such an one, as was also in Christ Jesus
Phil. ii. 5.
; and as he professes to abide in him, it is his care so to walk, as Christ
also walked 1 John ii. 6.
. On which account the true Christian is said to have put on Christ Gal. iii.
27.
in allusion to the Hebrew phrase, of being clothed with any temper or
affection, that greatly prevails, or governs in the soul Thus we read of being
clothed with righteousness, Job xxix. 14, Psalm. cxxxii. 9; with humility, 1
Pet. v. 5; with zeal, Isa. lix. 17; with cursing, Psalm. cix. 18; with shame,
Psalm. cxxxii. 18. etc.
.

IT is a very pleasing as well as useful employment, to trace the lineaments of
the temper and conduct of Christ in his people. Our Lord is in a peculiar sense
the Son of GOD; but his people are, through him, taken into the same relation:
for they have not received the spirit of bondage again unto fear, though
perhaps they were once subjected to it, but they have received the spirit of
adoption Romans viii. 15.
; and because they are sons, GOD has sent forth the spirit of his Son into
their hearts, crying Abba, Father Gal. iv. 6.
. By this spirit a filial temper is wrought in their souls, by which their
obedience to their heavenly Father is so animated, as to be most honorable and
grateful to him, as well as most easy and delightful to themselves. Under the
influences of this spirit, the Christian desires it may be his character now,
as he trusts it will be his happiness at last, to follow the Lamb whithersoever
he goes Rev. xiv. 4.
; to follow that Jesus, who was holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from
sinners Heb. vii. 26.
. He is indeed deeply sensible, that it is impossible for him, as his Lord did,
to fulfill all righteousness Matt. iii. 15.
; and therefore, when he has done all, he calls himself an unprofitable
servant Luke xvii. 10.
: yet he sees so much of the internal beauties of holiness, so much luster and
glory in the image of GOD, as drawn on the soul of man, that it is the great
concern of his heart, and labor of his life, to pursue it. Nor would he only
abstain from grosser enormities, and practice those virtues which are most
honorable amongst men, and attended with the greatest secular advantage; but
he would in every respect maintain a conscience void of offense Acts xxiv. 16.
and perfect holiness in the fear of GOD 2 Cor. vii. 1.
. He has so affectionate a sense of the riches of the divine grace, displayed
through a Redeemer, in adopting so unworthy a creature as himself to the
dignity and privilege of a son of GOD, that he often cries out, in raptures of
holy gratitude and joy, what shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits
toward me Psalm. cxvi. 12.
? Inspired with this noble principle, he searches his Father's will
impartially; and when he has discovered it, he obeys it cheerfully, and it
is his meat and his drink to perform it John iv. 34.
. He loves the Lord his GOD above all, and loves his fellow creatures for his
sake as well as their own, and entertains the highest veneration and affection
for those who most heartily resemble his Father and their Father his GOD and
their GOD. It is his prayer, and his endeavor, that he may go about doing good
Acts x. 38.
and be useful to all as he has opportunity Gal. vi. 10.
; that he may pass through the world with a holy moderation and superiority of
soul to these things which are seen and are temporal 2 Cor. vi. 18.
; thankfully owning every mercy as proceeding from GOD's paternal love and
care, and serenely submitting to every affliction, as the cup which his Father
puts into his hand John xviii. 11.
. In a word, he desires, that in all the varieties of life he may still be
intent on the views of an everlasting inheritance, humbly looking and longing
for that blessed hope Tit. ii. 13.
yet willing patiently to wait his Father's time, having this constant
expectation, and reviving assurance, that whether he lives, he shall live unto
the Lord, or whether he dies, he shall die unto the Lord; so that whether be
live or die, he shall be the Lord's Romans xiv. 8.
.

THIS is the Christian; -- this is the man in whom Christ is formed; or,
rather, these are some faint lineaments of his character. And I will venture to
say, that he who cannot discern something in it, even as thus imperfectly
described, which is vastly superior to that morality and decency of behavior,
which arises merely from prudential views, or from the sweetness and gentleness
of a man's natural temper, is sunk below the boasted religion of nature, and
must take refuge in the wretched principles of Atheism, if he would pretend to
form any thing of a consistent scheme. But now,

III. I MUST conclude with hinting at some reflections and inferences, which my
time will not allow me to handle at large.

1. How important is it, that Ministers should lead young persons into such
views as these!

OUR great and important business in life is to promote the eternal happiness
of our hearers, and to lay a solid foundation of hope and joy in their souls.
We have seen now what it is, and other foundation can no man lay than that is
laid, which is Jesus Christ 1 Cor. iii. 11.
. Here then let all our labors center. It is the good old way, in which our
fathers in the ministry went, and in which they prospered. Let us follow their
steps, and exert our most vigorous efforts here. Modern refinements may amuse
us in our closets, but they will never feed the souls of our hearers, nor
spread the triumphs of a gospel, which was the power of GOD to the salvation of
thousands, before they were ever dreamt of. I hope GOD is my witness, that I am
heartily concerned for the interest of virtue (if by that be meant the
advancement of practical religion) but I never expected to see it promoted by
the most philosophical speculations concerning its nature, or the finest
barangues on its innate beauties, when the name and peculiar doctrines of
Christ are thrown off, as unfashionable encumbrances of a discourse.
Experienced Christians, who have tasted the bread of life, will not contentedly
be put off with such chaff: and if we imagine that the younger part of our
auditors may be trained up to a relish for it, we may, perhaps, succeed in the
attempt; but I much fear, that success will be the calamity of the church, and
the destruction of souls The author has taken a greater freedom on this head,
as the discourse was delivered before several candidates for the ministry, for
whom he had some peculiar concern.
.

2. WE may learn from hence, what are the most valuable proofs of parental
affection.

CERTAINLY there is no reason to esteem as such, that fond indulgence, which
suffers ill habits to grow up in the young mind, and fears its present
disturbance more than its future ruin: no, nor yet the more prudent care of
providing plentiful and agreeable accommodations for the subsistence and
delight of your infant-offspring, as they advance to maturity and settlement in
life. These things indeed are not to be neglected; but wretched are the
children, and I will add the parents too, where this is the principal labor.
Would you express a wise and religious tenderness, for which your children
shall have reason to thank you in their dying moments, and to meet you with joy
in the interviews of the eternal world, do your utmost that Christ be formed in
their souls; and let them plainly see, that you even travail in birth again,
till this happy work be accomplished. But this leads me to add,

3. WHAT need is there of the work of the divine Spirit on the heart, in order
to the laying this great foundation?

THE language of the text, which speaks of Christ formed in us, naturally leads
our thoughts to some agent, by whom the work is done; and when you consider
what kind of a work it is, I appeal to your own consciences, whether it is to
be thought merely a human production. Were it only a name, a ceremony, a
speculation, or a passion, it would not be worth a moment's dispute, whether
you or we should have the glory of it. But as it is nothing less than the a
transformation of a corrupt and degenerate creature, into the holy image of the
Son of GOD, it were impiety for either to arrogate it to ourselves.

LET us therefore, on the whole, learn our duty and our wisdom. Let the matter
be brought to a serious and immediate review, and let us judge ourselves by the
character described, as those that expect very shortly to be judged of the
Lord. -- If, on the examination, any of you have reason to conclude that you
are strangers to it, remember that the invincible battery of the word of GOD
demolishes all the towering hopes you may have raised on any other foundation.
Let conscience then say, whether any amusement, or any business in life, be so
important, as to be attended to, even for one single day, in neglect of this
great concern, on which all the happiness of an immortal soul is suspended. If
nothing be indeed found of greater moment, apply yourselves seriously to this,
and omit no proper and rational methods of securing it. Consider the ways by
which Christ uses to enter into a soul, and wait upon him in those ways.
Reflect seriously on your present condition; constantly attend the instructions
of his word, and the other solemnities of his worship; and choose to converse
intimately with those, in whom you have reason to think he is already formed.
But in all remember, that the success depends upon a divine cooperation, and
therefore go frequently into the presence of GOD by prayer; go into it this
day, or if possible this hour, and importunately entreat the regenerating and
sanctifying influences of his Spirit, which, when you earnestly desire them,
the gospel gives you such ample encouragement to expect. -- But if you have
reason to hope that you have already received them, learn to what the praise
should be ascribed; and let it animate you to pray, that, through farther
communications from the throne of grace, you may be made continually more and
more like to your Redeemer, till you are prepared for that world, where you
shall shine forth in his complete resemblance, and shall find it your complete
and eternal felicity. AMEN.

The DIGNITY of the SOUL, arising from its IMMORTALITY.
THE eternal Salvation of one Soul is of greater Importance, and big with
greater Events, than the temporal Salvation of an whole Kingdom, though it were
for the Space of Ten Thousand Ages; because there will come up a Point, an
Instant in Eternity, when that one Soul shall have existed as many Ages, as all
the Individuals of an whole Kingdom, ranged in close Succession, will in the
whole have existed in the Space of Ten Thousand Ages: Therefore one Soul is
capable of a larger Share of Happiness or Misery, throughout an endless
Eternity, for that will still be before it, more than an whole Kingdom is
capable of in Ten Thousand Ages.


