GURNEY's BRACHYGRAPHY, IMPROVED. Price, ONE DOLLAR.

Mr. THOM GURNEY


In less enlightened Ages had thou lived
GURNEY thine Art had Witchcraft been believed:
With doubtful Fear they would viewed the strange Design,
And thought Enchantment dwelt in every Line.
AN EASY AND COMPENDIOUS SYSTEM OF Shorthand; ADAPTED TO THE ARTS AND
SCIENCES, AND TO THE LEARNED PROFESSIONS.

FOR THE USE OF SCHOOLS.

ABSTRACTED FROM THE LARGER EDITION.

BY THOMAS SARJEANT.

Let Wise or Foolish with their words abound,
The faithful Pen shall copy every sound;
Ages unborn shall rise, shall read, and say.
THUS! THUS! our Fathers did their minds convey.
Illustrated with Ten Copperplates.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY T. LANG; SOLD BY T. DOBSON. 1792.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IT has frequently been represented by the Directors of some of our Seminaries
of Learning, by Booksellers, and others, that the Knowledge and Practice of
Gurney's Method of Shorthand writing, of which an American Edition has lately
been laid before the Public, would be more generally diffused by an Abridgment
of that Treatise; so that the Art may appear to be comprised in fewer pages,
and consequently be attained with less Labor to the Student, and the Purchase
be so inconsiderable, as to be no obstacle to the Sale.

The present selection from the larger work, has been made in Compliance with
these representations: It contains the whole theory of the Art in the First,
Second, Fifth, and Sixth Plates; a sufficient Number of Specimens of the
Practice, in the Third, Fourth, Seventh, Eighth, and Tenth; together with all
the necessary Explanations and Directions.

If, however, any Gentleman wishes for further acquaintance with the Practical
part of the Subject, he may consult the larger Treatise, where he will probably
find his curiosity gratified by Three Additional Plates of Specimens of
writing, a Supplementary Exercise from Blackstone's Commentaries, further
elucidating the Contracted form of Expression, and, perhaps, some other
particulars, with which he may think it an object to be acquainted.

PHILADELPHIA, March 1, 1792.
A SYSTEM OF Shorthand.
ARTICLE I.
LANGUAGE is the Art of communicating to the Ear the Conceptions of the Mind,
by means of significant Sounds.

II.
WRITING is the Art of exhibiting to the Sight, the Conceptions of the Mind,
and the Sounds of Language, by means of Marks or Characters.

III.
In the Writing of most Languages, the usual modes of Expression have been
Abridged and Varied, to answer the different purposes of Expedition, Secrecy,
etc. and this method of writing is termed SHORT HAND.

IV.
To constitute a Good System of Short Hand, it is requisite.

1. That the Characters be as simple as possible, in order to their being
WRITTEN with Facility -- And,

2 That they be so distinct as to be READ with Ease at any distance of Time.

Hence a system, which boasts of few Characters, as each must necessarily stand
for more words, will be found undistinct and ambiguous. On the other hand, such
a variety of Multiform and Complex Characters, to render it more legible, may
be introduced, as will annihilate all pretensions to expedition and brevity.
Each Extreme has been mistaken for that Excellence, which consists in a Medium,
equally remote from both.

V.
The System now laid before the Public, unites these different Objects of
EXPEDITION and LEGIBILITY. For Practical Purposes its superiority is
acknowledged, by its unrivalled Estimation wherever the English Language is
spoken.

VI.
It is an Improvement upon the ingenious Mr. MASON'S La Plume volante, by the
late Mr. THOMAS GURNEY of London, and the present Mr. JOSEPH GURNEY his Son,
and is the result of upwards of Fifty Years Practice and Experience in the
English Courts of Judicature, etc.

From some years Attention in Teaching, and from Hints and Communications from
several Proficients in the Art, the present Editor has been enabled to reduce
the Plan to an entire New Method, and to add a variety of Directions for its
attainment; and he flatters himself that he has the Honor to present THE SYSTEM
to the Professional Gentlemen of the American States in such a degree of
Perfection as to be scarcely capable of further Improvement.

PLATE THE FIRST.
CONTENTS. The Alphabet, and the Method of combining Letters into Words.

VII. FORMATION OF THE ALPHABET.
All the simple distinct Marks or Characters which can be made with the Pen,
may be reduced to Three; the Point, the Straight Line, and the Curved Line; for
the Circle is only a particular species of the latter.

The Point, as it cannot be distinctly joined with any Character, is not
introduced into the Alphabet.

The Straight Line may be varied by being placed Perpendicularly, Horizontally,
and Obliquely; thus,.

The Curved Line may be infinitely varied, but the only distinct form is the
Semicircumference, in different directions; as,.

The Circle admits of no variety.

VIII.
There are therefore Nine distinct Simple Characters, adapted to the Alphabet;
the Straight Line in Four different directions, the Curved Line in Four, and
the Circle.

These Characters express those Letters which most frequently occur, and most
easily join; viz. the Straight Lines T, N, A, D; the Curved Lines C, M, L, P,
and the Circle S.

The other Letters are all Compound Characters. As, for instance, B is composed
of part of a and t; E of part of d and a; F of part of m and t, etc.

IX. DIRECTIONS.
The First Object of the Pupil is to make a Perpendicular stroke; that is* to
divest himself of the Habit of making all Characters sloping; a practice
probably contracted from the frequent use of the usual Text, Round, and Running
Hands.

The Alphabet is required to be committed to memory so perfectly, as to be
written without the least Hesitation, and as Expeditiously as Three or Four
times a Minute. -- It is also requisite that the Words in the Third Column,
which the Letters of the Alphabet represent, should be committed perfectly to
Memory.

X. THE COMBINATION OF LETTERS INTO WORDS. DIRECTIONS.
In the Spelling of Words, such Letters only are made use of, as convey by
their Sound a Competent Idea of the Words designed. Thus the Characters in the
Fifth Column represent the Words in the Sixth; and are composed of the Letters
in the First Column, arranged according to the Spelling made use of in the
Fourth.

As the same Character expresses A, S, and Z, the A is struck upwards, or is an
hair stroke; and the S and Z downwards. They will also be distinguished by the
succeeding Letter which begins at the Top or Bottom, according as the other
ends, as in the words against and spelling.

The Oblique S is only to be used at the beginning and end of Words.

The Circular S is only to be written in the middle of a Word; except before T
at the beginning. At the end it always stands for - ing or - ong.

When the Letter R does not begin a Word, it is expressed by a Scratch, and, as
often as possible, upwards.

When S immediately follows R, it must be written with a much longer Scratch as
power, powers.

The Characters for the Vowels are never written, but at the beginning of some
Words where their Sound is required to prevent ambiguity. The Vowels may also
be omitted in the middle of any Word, if there is no other Word in the Language
which differs from it in the Vowels only, thus WGS will stand for WAGES,
because there are no such words as weges, wiges, woges, or wuges.

PLATE THE SECOND.
CONTENTS. The Vowels, Pronouns, and Auxiliary Verbs, etc.

XI. METHOD OF EXPRESSING THE VOWELS.
When it is necessary to distinguish the Vowels to prevent Ambiguity, as in the
word TAN, which might otherwise be mistaken for ten, tin, ton, or tun, they are
expressed by Dots, etc.

The Directions on the Plate, in the early Editions, were expressed in the
following manner, and they are here restored to assist the Memory.

1.
Your Vowels A and E, at head are put,
I, Y, in the middle, O and U, at foot.
2.
Or the next Letter where the Dot should be,
It signifies its place as here you will see.
3.
Have you two Vowels that should be expressed?
Dot for the first, the other as the rest.
XII. THE CHARACTERS FOR THE PERSONS.
He, it, ^^e, and you are taken from the Alphabet.

Thou and we are the Characters for th and w, with Dots for the Vowels.

I, she, and they, are Arbitrary Characters.

XIII. THE AUXILIARY VERBS, ETC.
Are, art, is, be, did, and have, are taken from the Alphabet.

Am, was, were, being, do, doing, done, having, will, would, can, could, may,
might, must, ought, and let, are Compound Characters, formed according to the
preceding Directions.

Been is an Arbitrary Character. In the words have been, the Character for have
is prefixed.

Does, has, had, have had, shall and should, are Deficient Characters.

PLATE THE THIRD.
CONTENTS. A Praxis on the Persons, Modes and Tenses.

XIV.
The Left Hand Column contains the Words of each Phrase, written according to
the Specimen in Plate the Second. In the Right Hand Column they are reduced to
a Form, more contracted, and better adapted for Expedition.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. The Pupil will find the advantage of Copying the Characters in the
Left Hand Column until he is quite perfect, before he attempts their
combination in the Right Hand Column.

2. The Personal Pronouns will, in every instance, supply the defect of Persons
in the Verbs, as I can, thou can, etc. not thou can.

3. The Grammatical Combination of the Auxiliary Verbs in the Language, will
enable the Writer to contract the Form of Expression without obscurity in many
instances; thus ought have, will immediately be read ought TO have, etc. as may
be observed by comparing the First and Third Columns with each other.



PLATE THE FOURTH.
CONTENTS. Continuation of the Praxis on the Persons, Modes, and Tenses.

PLATE THE FIFTH.
CONTENTS. Arbitrary and Contracted Characters and Abbreviating Rules.

XV. ARBITRARY CHARACTERS.
A principal Advantage in this System of Short Hand, consists in the small
number of Arbitrary and Contracted Characters; and in their conspicuity, by
which they will be understood, fixed in memory, and read again at first sight.

XVI. ABBREVIATING RULES.
In the early Editions of this Work, published by Mr. Thomas Gurney, they
consisted of Twenty in number. -- Mr. Joseph Gurney reduced them to eleven; and
the present Editor, by referring the termination - meant to the Letter m in the
Alphabet, has diminished their number.

The Original Method of expressing the Sound of the double r, or rer, or ror,
by writing R on each side of the Character, is however worth retaining;
according to which the words arrow, sorrow, dearer, terror and nearer, are
expressed by the Character, A, S, D, T, or N, each barbed where the Pen is
taken off; thus, arrow, sorrow, etc.

PLATE THE SIXTH.
CONTENTS. Continuation of the Abbreviating Rules.

XVII.
Mr. Joseph Gurney has introduced the Letters in the common writing Alphabet as
Arbitrary Characters in the later Editions of the Work, which seems to be a
real Improvement. The present Editor has formed them into a double Alphabet of
Capital and Small Letters, by which he has been enabled to adopt all his
significations, has added a few of his own, and furnished the Pupil with an
Exercise for his Ingenuity by leaving several Characters vacant, to be supplied
from his own Fancy, or the necessary Exigencies of his profession, as in the
following scheme.

XVIII. ARBITRARY CHARACTERS FORMED FROM THE WRITING ALPHABET.
The Italian Types are used, as most convenient to represent the common Writing
Letters.
A Administrator -tion B C Congress, Congressional D Demonstrate -tion E
Ecclesiastic -al F G H I K L M N O Origin -ate -al -ally P President of the
States Q R Representatives S Senate T U United States V W X Christianity Y Z
a accord -ing -ingly b bankrupt -cy c circum -stance -es d evident -ly,
evidence e establish -ed -meant f fraud -ulent -ulently g govern -ing -meant h
hereditary -aments i justify -ing -able -cation k l legislator -ture -tive
-tion m multitude -ply -ed -cation n notwithstanding o order -ing p precedent
-cy q r represent -ed -ation s statute, spirit -ed -ual t trespass -es,
transport -ation u unlawful -ly -ness v w witness -es -ing x extraordinary -ly
y z
PLATE THE SEVENTH.
CONTENTS. Specimen of Genesis i. 1 -- 21, written according to the preceding
Theory.

XIX. DIRECTIONS.
It is necessary that the Learner compare every Word of the Original with the
following Contracted Form of Expression; and both with the Specimen in the
Plate.

If any thing occurs which at first view seems unintelligible, it may be
advisable to pass it over for the present, till by a second perusal a more
perfect Knowledge of the Art is attained.

XX. CONTRACTED FORM OF EXPRESSION. EXPLANATION.
1. The Words, or parts of Words, in Roman, are Combinations according to the
first Plate; the Alphabetical Characters for the Vowels never being written but
at the beginning of a Word.

2. The Words, or parts of Words, in Italic, are written from some Contraction,
Arbitrary Character or Abbreviating Rule in the first, second, fifth or sixth
Plates.

3. Omissions, etc. are denoted by *, Contraries by), and Repetitions by --.

4. The Figures have the same signification as in Common Arithmetic, and the
Writing Letters are taken from Art. XVIII.

XXI. GENESIS, Chap. i. ver. 1, -- 21.
IN the bgning God cratd the Heaven and the rth

2. And the rth w^ withot frm and vod, and drkns ws upon the fas of the dep:
and the Spirit * God movd upon the fas of the wtrs.

3. And God sd, lt thr be lit: and thr ws lit.

4. And God saw the lit, that it ws good; and God dvded the lit frm the drkns.

5. And God cld the lit da, and the drkns he ^ld nit: and the evening and the
mrning wr the frst da.

6. And God sd, lt thr be a frmament in the mdst of the wtrs, and lt it dvd the
wtrs frm the wtrs.

7. And God md the frmament, and dvded the wtrs which wr undr the frmament, frm
* wtrs which wr above the frmament; and it ws so.

8. And God cld the frmament Heaven: and the evening and the mrning wr the
second da.

9. And God sd, lt the wtrs undr the Heaven be gthrd tgthr unt on pis, and lt
the dry land apr: and it ws so.

10. And God cld the dry land rth, and the gthring tgthr of the wtrs cld he
(...): and God saw that it ws good.

11. And God sd, lt the rth bring frth grs* the erb ylding sd, and the frt tr^
ylding frt after his knd, wos sd is in itslf, upon * rth: and it ws so.

12. And the rth brt frth grs, and erb ylding s^ after ^i^ knd, and the tree
ylding frt, wos sd ws in itslf, after his knd: and God saw that it ws good.

13. And the evening and the mrning wr the third da.

14. And God sd, lt thr be l^ts in the firmament of the Heaven, to dvd the da
frm the nit; and lt thm be fr sins, and fr s^ns, and fr da^ and yrs.

15. And lt thm be fr lits in the firmament of the Heaven, to giv lit upon *
rth: and it ws so.

16. And God md two grt lits; the grtr lit to rul the da, and the lsr lit to
rul): he md the strs also.

17. And God st thm in the firmament of the Heaven, to gv lit upon * rth.

18. And to rul over the da and over the nit, and to dvd the lit frm the drkns:
and God saw that it ws good.

19. And the evening and the mrning wr the fourth da.

20. And God sd, lt the wtrs bring frth abndntly the mving cratr that has lf
and fol that ma fly above the rth in the opn firmament of Heaven.

21. And God cratd grt wls, and every lving cratr that m^th, which the wtrs brt
frth abndntly after thr knd, and every wingd fol after his knd: and God saw
that it ws good.

PLATE THE EIGHTH.
CONTENTS. Specimen of Genesis i. 22 -- 31, the Apostles' Creed, and the Lord's
Prayer.

XXII. CONTRACTED FORM OF EXPRESSION.
GENESIS, Chap. i. ver. 22 -- 31.
AND God blsd thm, saing, be frt^^, and mltply, and fl the wtrs in the ses, and
l^ fol mltply in the rth.

23. And the evening and the mrning w^ the fifth da.

24. And God sd, lt the rth bring frth the lving crtr after his knd, ctl and
crping thing and bst of the rth after his knd: and it ws so.

25. And God md the bst of the rth after his knd, and ctl after thr knd, and
every thing that crpeth upon * rth after his knd: and God saw that it ws good.

26. And God sd, lt us mk mn in or imag, after or lkns, and lt thm have dmnon
over * fsh of the se, and over the fwl of the ar, -- ctl, -- all the rth, --
every crping thing that crpeth upon * rth.

27. So God cratd mn in his on imag, in the imag of God cratd he him: mal and
feml cratd he thm.

28. And God blsd thm, and God sd unto thm, be frt^^, and mltply, and rplnsh
the rth, and subdu it, and have dmnon over * fsh of the se, and over * fwl of
the ar, -- every lving thing that mouth upon * rth.

29. And God sd, beold, I have gvn you every erb baring sd, which is upon * sas
of all the rth, and every tree, in the which is the frt of a tree ylding sd: to u
it shall be fr mt.

30. And to every bst of * rth, -- fwl of * ar, -- thing that crpeth upon *
rth, wrin thr is lf, I have gvn every grn erb fr mt: and it ws so.

31. And God saw every thing that he had md, and beold, it ws very good: and
the evening and the mrning wr the sixth da.

The APOSTLES' CREED.
I Blv in God the Fathr Almity, mkr of Heaven and rth; and in Jesus Christ his
only son or Lord: woe ws cncvd by the oly Gft, brn of the vrgn Mry, ^frd undr
Pntus Pilat, ws crsfid, ded, and bred, he dsnded into el, the third da he ros
agn frm the ded, -- asnded into heaven, and ^^eth on the rit hand o^ God the
Fathr Almity; frm thns he shall cm to juj the qik). I blev in the oly Gft; the
cathlc church; the cmnon of snts; the frgvns of sns; the rsrxn * * bdy, and the
lf everlsting. Amn.

The LORD'S PRAYER.
OR Fathr which art in heaven, alod be thy nm. Thy Kingdm cm. Thy will be dn on
rth, as it is in heaven. Gv us ths day or daly brd. And forgv us or trespasses,
as we forgv thm that trespass agnst us. And ld us n^^ into tmtsn, but dlver us
frm evl, fr thin is the Kingdm, and the power, and the glry, frever --. Amn.

PLATE THE TENTH.
CONTENTS. Specimen of The Ornaments of Youth, by Dr. WATTS, and The Character
of a True Friend, by Dr. ENFIELD.

XXIII. THE ORNAMENTS OF YOUTH.
AMONG all the Accomplishments of Youth, there is none preferable to a decent
and agreeable Behavior among Men, a modest Freedom of Speech, a soft and
elegant Manner of Address, a graceful and lovely Deportment, a cheerful Gravity
and good Humor, with a Mind appearing ever serene under the ruffling accidents
of human Life: Add to this, a pleasing Solemnity and Reverence when the
Discourse turns upon any Thing sacred and divine, a becoming Neglect of
Injuries, a Hatred of Calumny and Slander, a Habit of speaking well of Others,
a pleasing Benevolence and Readiness to do Good to Mankind, and special
Compassion to the Miserable; with an Air and Countenance, in a natural and
unaffected Manner, expressive of all those excellent Qualifications.

CONTRACTED FORM OF EXPRESSION.
AMong all the acmplshments of yth, thr is non prfrable to a d^nt and an agrable
baver among men. a modst frdm of spch, a sft and elgnt manr of adrs, a gr^^^
and lvly dprtment, a chrfl grvity and good ymr, with a mnd apring ever sern
undr the rfling acsdnts of human lf: ad to ths, a p^sing slmnity and rverns wen
the dscrs turns upon any thing sacrd and dvn, a bcming nglct of njrs, a htrd of
clmny and slndr, a hbit of spking wl of othrs, a plsing bnvlns and rdns to do
good to manknd, and spsl cmpsn to * msrable; with an ar and contnans in a ntrl
and unf^ed manr, xprsv of al the xlnt q^fcsns.

XXIV. CHARACTER OF A TRUE FRIEND.
CONCERNING the Man you call your Friend -- tell me, Will he weep with you in
the hour of your distress? Will he faithfully reprove you to your face, for
actions for which others are ridiculing or censuring you behind your back? Will
he dare to stand forth in your defense, when detraction is secretly aiming its
deadly weapons at your reputation? Will he acknowledge you with the same
cordiality, and behave to you with the same friendly attention, in the company
of your superiors in rank and fortune, as when the claims of pride or vanity do
not interfere with those of friendship? If misfortunes and losses should oblige
you to retire into a walk of life, in which you cannot appear with the same
distinction, or entertain your friends with the same liberality as formerly,
will he still think himself happy in your society, and, instead of gradually
withdrawing himself from an unprofitable connection, take pleasure in
professing himself your friend, and cheerfully assist you to support the burden
of your afflictions? When sickness shall call you to retire from the gay and
busy scenes of the world, will he follow you into your gloomy retreat, listen
with attention to your "tale of symptoms," and minister the balm of consolation
to your fainting spirit? And, lastly, when death shall burst asunder every tie,
will he shed a tear upon your grave, and lodge the dear remembrance of your
mutual friendship in his heart, as a treasure never to be resigned? The man who
will not do all this, may be your companion -- your flatterer -- your seducer
-- but, believe me, he is not your friend.

CONTRACTED FORM OF EXPRESSION.
COnsrning the man you call yr frnd, tell me, wl he wep with you in the or of yr
dstrs? Wl he fthfly rprov you to yr fas fr axns fr which othrs are rdcling and
cnsring you behind yr bak? Wl be dar to stand frth in yr dfns wen dtrxn is
scrtly aming its dedly wpns at yr rptsn? Wl he aknlg you with the sam crdlity,
and ba^ to you with the sam frndly atnsn in the cmpny of yr sprrs in rnk and
frtn, as wen the clms of prd or vanity do not ntrfr with those of frndshp? If
m^frtns and lss should oblg you to rtr nto a wlk of (...) in which you cannot
apr with the sam dstnxn, or nrtn yr frnds with the sam lbrlity as frmrly, wl he
stl thnk himslf apy in yr socity, and, nstd of grdly withdring himslf frm an
unprftable cnxn, tak plsr in prf^ing himself yr frnd, and chr^ly asst you to
sprt the brdn of yr a^^xns? Wen sckns shall call you to rtr from the ga and bsy
sens of the world, wl he folo you nto yr glmy rtrt, l^tn with atnsn to yr "tal
of simtoms," and mnstr * blm of cnslsn to yr fenting spirit? And, lstly, wen
death shall brst asndr every tie, wl he shd a tr upon yr grav, and log the dr
rmbrns of yr mutal frndshp in his art, as a trsr nver to be rsnd? The man woe wl
not do al the, ma be yr cmpanon, yr flatrr, yr sedsr, but, blv me, he i^ not yr
frnd.

The Pupil is referred to the Bible, etc. for the ORIGINAL MATTER of the
Seventh and Eighth Plates.

CONCLUSION. XXV.
THE WHOLE THEORY is contained in part of the First, the Second, Fifth and
Sixth Plates; -- the other Five contain SPECIMENS OF THE PRACTICE.

XXVI.
After the Pupil has committed to memory the Theory, and compared the Engraved
Specimens in the Seventh, Eighth and Tenth Plates with their Original Matter,
and Contracted Form of Expression, he may begin to make an Attempt at Writing.

XXVII.
The Proverbs of Solomon, the Economy of Human Life, or any other subject in
short detached sentences, and especially those parts where the same words are
often repeated, will be most proper for the first attempt.

XXVIII.
Two Persons may mutually assist each other, by reading or writing alternately
a small portion of time every day. -- The reader must proceed faster or slower
according to signals given by the writer, so as to keep just before the pen. --
The clock will discover what advances are made in Expedition, etc. if the same
lesson is written several times over.

XXIX.
In order for Expedition, the writer is advised to the use of an hard-nibbed
pen.

XXX.
He is to consider whether each Word, or any part of it, is to be formed from
the Letters of the Alphabet, in the first Plate, or whether from any Arbitrary,
or Contracted Character, or Rule, in the other Plates. -- It may also be
observed, that after some Practice and Experience, little, or no difficulty,
will occur in the Reading, if every particular is not so minutely attended to.

Thus, in PLATE X. in the fourth line of the Ornaments of Youth, the word
Injuries has the S marked downwards, contrary to the direction in Art. X.

XXXI.
If any Arbitrary Character or Contracting Rule should not be instantaneously
recollected, it will be attended with no other inconvenience than the loss of
the advantage arising from such Abbreviation, etc. as the Writer will then be
obliged to form the word after the Alphabet.

Thus, in the last line of PLATE IV. in the right hand Column, the word Here is
formed by the letters ER, and not expressed by the Alphabetical R alone, as in
the left hand Column.

XXXII.
It would be impossible to invent an Expeditious System of Short Hand, in which
every Character should have a distinct Signification. -- The same Characters
will sometimes stand for different Words, as for people or been; but in the
Combination of Words, or their Association into Sentences, ambiguity can seldom
arise; for, (as in the above instance) people is a Noun and generally comes
before the Verb, whereas been is a Participle following the Preterite Auxiliary
have.

Languages themselves are not exempt from Ambiguities of this kind; thus, for
instance, in the English, when the word BEAR occurs, it is the sense or the
Grammatical Construction that must determine whether it means to carry, to
bring forth, or the animal of that name; and in the Latin Tongue, the word sine
may be either a Preposition, or the Imperative Mood of the Verb sino, etc.

XXXIII.
When a word is meant to be erased, draw two lines through it, thus. If several
words are to be obliterated, a single line, drawn through them all, will be
sufficient.

XXXIV.
Were Points or Stops introduced into Short Hand, they would both impede the
Writer's Dispatch, and confuse the Characters. -- To remedy the want of them,
leave a short Vacancy between each Sentence; and for every new Paragraph begin
a Line.

XXXV.
To enable a Writer to follow Public Speakers, it is advisable, before he
attempts a Lecture, Sermon, or Oration, he should make his first effort in a
Court of Judicature. The Repetitions, the frequent Interruptions, the length of
Time usually taken in the examination of witnesses, etc. will enable him to
take down the principal parts of a Trial, before he could be supposed
sufficiently expeditious in the Art to retain an uninterrupted Speech.

XXXVI.
When a Council quotes an Author or Statute, or a Divine a Passage of
Scripture, etc. the Writer needs only to take down the Folio, Chapter, Verse,
etc. leave a Space, and Supply the Quotation at his Leisure.

THE END.
BOOKS -- By the same Author.
Sold by T. DOBSON, Philadelphia, and the principal Booksellers in the United
States.
I. GURNEY'S BRACHYGRAPHY IMPROVED -- the large Edition -- illustrated with
Thirteen Copper Plates. Price, Half a Guinea, bound. II. The ELEMENTARY
PRINCIPLES OF ARITHMETIC; with their Application to the Trade and Commerce of
the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. III. An INTRODUCTION TO THE COUNTING HOUSE; or a
short Specimen of Mercantile Precedents, adapted to the present Situation of
the Commerce of THESE STATES. IV. The FEDERAL ARITHMETICIAN, or the Science of
Numbers improved.
Preparing for the Press,
V. SELECT ARITHMETICAL EXERCISES; or the Application of the Elementary
Principles of Arithmetic to the Mathematical Sciences, and to various branches
of Natural Philosophy.
PLATE I.


PLATE II.


PLATE III.


PLATE IIII.


PLATE V.


PLATE VI.


PLATE VII.


PLATE VIII.


PLATE X.



