AN ORATION, SPOKEN BEFORE THE SOCIETY OF THE CINCINNATI, OF THE STATE OF
CONNECTICUT, Met in HARTFORD, on the 4th of JULY, 1792.

BY THEODORE DWIGHT, ESQUIRE.

PRINTED AT HARTFORD, BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN. MDCCXCII.

At a Meeting of Connecticut State Society of the CINCINNATI, at Hartford, the
4th of July, A. D. 1792.
VOTED, That Maj. SEYMOUR and Capt. BULL, be a Committee, to wait on Theodore
Dwight, Esquire, to return the Thanks of this Society for his ORATION delivered
this Day, and to desire a Copy that it may be printed.

A true Copy, J. TRUMBULL, Sec.

To JEREMIAH WADSWORTH, Esquire, PRESIDENT OF THE SOCIETY OF THE CINCINNATI, OF
THE STATE OF CONNECTICUT.
SIR,
A SIMPLE Proof of sincere Esteem and Gratitude, affords higher Pleasure to a
Mind not distinguished by Ostentation, than can possibly be derived from the
most painful Effort at Adulation. In the Belief of this Remark, the following
ORATION, composed and spoken at your Request, without Professions, or Flattery,
is dedicated to you, by the Author.

HARTFORD, July 12, 1792.
AN ORATION.
IT may perhaps be impossible on the present occasion to suggest an idea, which
has not often been the subject of contemplation to every member of this
Assembly. But as the impression of events, even the most interesting and
important, becomes easily effaced from the mind, it may not be an unpleasing,
or unprofitable employment, to recur for a few minutes to the consequences of
that illustrious event, which the present anniversary is designed to
perpetuate. And if this remark is just as it respects the audience in general,
it applies with peculiar force to the society, at whose request the speaker has
undertaken the task. As actors, and sharers, in the toils, the dangers, and the
glory of the late American Revolution, the stated period of recollection, must
be, to them, the stated period of rational joy. Under the influence of this
truth, he claims the attention of the Assembly, and particularly the society of
Cincinnati, to those events, which have succeeded as consequences of the
Independence of the United States. Nor will the view be confined to the nation
of which we are citizens; but will be extended to Europe; and perhaps may
stretch into imagination, and prophecy. And should the speaker, in his
progress, discover the extravagance of a zealot, the only apology he has to
offer, is a truth which no American will deny -- that the love of freedom is
nearly allied to enthusiasm -- and his flight, if not directed by the tame
guidance of reason, will be winged with the warmest affection for human
happiness.

WHEN the citizens of the United States, assembled in Congress, affixed their
hands and seals, to the declaration of Independence, the world beheld with
astonishment a few infant Colonies, engaged in a cause of infinite difficulty
and hazard, in opposition to the force and vengeance, of the wealthiest and
most haughty nation on earth. Accustomed to habits of submission to
sovereignty, nothing less was expected than absolute slavery, or total
destruction; and every friend to the freedom, and happiness of mankind, waited
with the highest solicitude, the event of a contest, on which was suspended the
existence of Liberty, and the rights of human nature. The inhabitants of this
country, instead of being spectators, were the actors on this stupendous scene.
Alarmed at the voice of hovering danger, without a moment for reflection, or
preparation, they were impelled to union and exertion. The standard of
Independence was erected, citizens of every description rushed into the field,
the useful implements of agriculture were beaten into weapons of war, and the
onset was distinguished by veteran fortitude and bravery. The progress of
freedom through the war was sometimes wild and irregular; her sacred purity was
often stained with murder and depredation; but her struggles were crowned with
glory and success. The military, and naval forces of tyranny, retreatted with
infamy from the field of action; while acclamations of thanksgiving, ascended
from the lips of millions, to the GOD of heaven, for the restoration of peace,
and the establishment of freedom and happiness.

ANIMATED by the same virtue and patriotism, which planned, and accomplished
their Independence, the citizens of the United States, in the enjoyment of
profound tranquillity, have framed, adopted, and put into operation, a system
of national government, which, if possible, reflects higher honor on their
wisdom, union, and love of liberty, than even the events of the war. Under the
influence of this government, the nation has assumed a new, and more dignified
character; her councils are admired, her wisdom and firmness revered. To her,
the nations of the earth look for lessons on rational happiness, and her
progress is traced by the eye of prophecy, to the summit of national dignity
and felicity.

ON these events, every being in the United States, and especially those of my
fellow citizens who fought, suffered, and bled for their accomplishment, must
reflect with the liveliest satisfaction. By the blessing of JEHOVAH on their
resolute, and generous exertions, this country has been led to high national
dignity and enjoyment. Every valuable property was risqued; and inestimable
wealth has been gained. Yourselves, your children, and your friends, are
secured against the encroachments of despotism -- freedom, independence, and
happiness, constitute the inheritance, which must descend to the last
generation of your posterity, unless forfeited by folly, or alienated by
madness.

IN this animating view of the subject, let me remind you of those patriot
citizens and soldiers, by whose counsels, and exertions, the revolution was
achieved. From the President of the first Continental Congress, and the
illustrious commander in Chief -- the head of the society of Cincinnati -- to
the lowest active citizen, and soldier, they are entitled to your affectionate
regard. But the public voice has anticipated me; their merits have been the
steady theme of eloquence and poetry; and a single character among them has
exhausted the language of praise; and Admiration remains silent under the
accumulating weight of gratitude and affection.

BUT amidst the festivity of the era we have met to celebrate, let us not fail
to recollect those dignified and illustrious characters, who lost their lives
in the cause of freedom: or those who have yielded to the arm of death, since
the establishment of Independence. Every blessing we share, every moment we
live, ought to remind us of their merits; and on this day let us shed the tear
of affectionate lamentation for their glorious, but untimely fate.

AND here with peculiar propriety, my subject leads me to address the society
of Cincinnati, on the death of a worthy member of their institution. The
objects of this society were highly endearing, and respectable. A train of
severe, painful and glorious services, had formed a bond of union between the
officers of the army, at the separation of which the heart recoiled. For the
purposes of perpetual friendship, and extensive benevolence, your society was
formed, and an annual meeting appointed, among other important objects, to pay
the tribute of a tear to the memory of your deceased friends. Since the last
meeting of the society, you have been called to bemoan the fate of Major
JONATHAN HEART. In your minds, the mention of his name will awaken every tender,
and affectionate idea. An attachment founded on the sympathy of generous
dispositions, receives redoubled strength, and ardour, from the mutual
services, and sufferings of war. This brave man was your companion, during the
revolution which gave birth to your society. Perfectly acquainted with his
amiableness, generosity, and heroism, "no tongue can teach your sorrows when to
flow." The termination of the war with Great Britain, was not the termination
of his military life. The service of his country called him to a different
field of action where his career was finished with the distinguishing
characteristics of an officer, and a hero.

BUT while the recollection of his fate claims the sincere sorrow of his
acquaintance; it gives me pleasure to reflect, that his worth lives in the
hearts of his companions, and his countrymen -- and that as often as the
anniversary of American Independence, shall collect the members of this
society, the tears of regret and affection, shall be shed at the remembrance of
their friends who are no more; while the blessings of their treasure shall
extend relief to the widow, and cause the heart of the orphan "to sing for
joy." In the language of a poet of our country, who lamented the fate of a
soldier Major J. P. WYLLYS.
and a friend, in a similar situation, I shall end this tribute to the memory
of your brother.

"Lamented Hero! far from weeping friends,
"No funeral honors to thy corse were paid,
"And no memorial over thy grave extends,
"To mark the lonely spot where low you are laid.
"Yet what avails to please the senseless clay,
"The trophied tomb, the monumental bust,
"Or reeks the spirit mid the realms of day,
"The empty rites attendant on its dust.
"A fairer wreath shall friendship's hand bestow,
"A fairer tribute shall thy shade receive,
"Than all the idle pageantry of woe,
"Than all its pompous monuments can give.
"Long, long, shall memory's ardent eye recall
"Thy worth, thy milder virtues to her view;
"Thy country long lament her hero's fall,
"And over thee fame her brightest laurels strew.
"Over the lone spot, where rests thy mouldering form,
"Shall opening spring her mildest breezes wave,
"And Flora's hand with every fragrant charm,
"Deck the soft turf that forms thy verdant grave.
"There the wild rose in earliest pride shall bloom,
"There the Magnolia's gorgeous flowers unfold,
"The purple violets shed its sweet perfume,
"And beauteous (...) wave her plumes of gold.
"Rest much loved shade, "in fame immortal dressed,
"Amid yon realms of light, yon seats of joy,
"Where hushed is sorrow in perpetual rest,
"And pleasure smiles unconscious of alloy."
HAVING traced the course of freedom over this country, where the limits of a
Continent were too circumscribed, the mind with pleasure pursues her progress
over Europe, and the globe. Having learned the invaluable lesson of liberty in
the American war, the citizens of the French nation returned to their country,
intent on glorious practice. There, in cooperation with the patriots of the
kingdom, the French members of the society of Cincinnati, conceived, and
accomplished a revolution, which has renewedly excited the astonishment, and
the admiration of the universe. By the still, but persuasive voice of reason
and liberty, with scarcely a momentary aid from terror, or from arms, more than
twenty millions of people have been rescued from the sufferings, and the
ignominy of slavery, and elevated to the dignity and happiness of freedom, and
Independence. Awed at the approach of the standard of liberty, the Bastile,
that right arm of oppression, drew back, and withered. The votaries of absolute
sway, and the subordinate representatives of despotic power, fled, and sought
an asylum under the protection of the neighboring tyrants -- while the monarch
of a powerful, and extensive empire, found himself stripped of the diadem and
scepter, which had too long been prostituted to the purposes of tyranny, and
obliged to abandon the throne or to resume it to promote the happiness of his
subjects. Charmed with the conduct of free, but affectionate citizens, the king
of the French re-ascended his throne. At the head of a nation in the eager
pursuit of every great, and majestic object, he finds abundant compensation for
the loss of useless, and dangerous prerogative, in the testimony of the
respectful, and manly attachment of a great, wise, and independent people.

FIRM, and unshaken, in the midst of amazing difficulties and dangers, the
citizens of France have pursued their object with unremitted diligence and
fidelity. Their efforts have been gloriously successful; and the nation warmed
with the love of freedom, is rapidly progressing to be the arbiter of Europe.
The other kingdoms must adopt her plans of strength and greatness, or they must
submit to her sway -- for twenty millions of freemen, can give law to an
universe of slaves.

ROUSED at the spreading evil, which threatened to reach the throne of every
tyrant in Europe, the surrounding sovereigns espoused the cause of the princes
of France, and agreed to combine their forces, to produce a counter-revolution
in favor of despotism. This confederation, which had united the emperor of
Germany, the king of Sweden, and the empress of Russia, wore an alarming
aspect. But the nation supported by conscious rectitude, and the strength of
Independence, remained unmoved. Wisdom, firmness, and caution, marked the
measures of the national council, while the citizens prepared for a vigorous,
and manly defense of those liberties they had so recently obtained. With the
same alacrity and ardour, which distinguished the inhabitants of this country
-- their predecessors in danger, and in glory -- they trained for the field by
a steady attention to military discipline; and a few months exhibited an army
of freemen, sufficient, in the cause of liberty, to have checked the progress
of united Europe. But the eye of Jehovah watched the progress of this
iniquitous combination. At the moment, when the imperial Leopold was to have
made a spirited effort for declining tyranny, a fatal distemper deprived him of
existence. This important event, was succeeded by another, not less important.
Gustavus the third, king of Sweden, the intended commander of this powerful,
confederated army, was assassinated in the face of the nation, by one of his
subjects. Benevolence will sigh at the recollection of human depravity, when
told of such fatal effects of it; while the superintendence of Providence,
shines with all the effulgence of the Godhead, in this divine interposition for
the salvation of freedom.

THE long reign of the Empress of Russia, bears evidence of superior talents
for government, in the sovereign. But absolute dominion is her object, instead
of "that righteousness which exalts a nation." Every friend to the rights of
man, will therefore listen with satisfaction to the probability, that her own
enslaved, and hardy vassals, are beginning to feel their frozen bosoms melt
with the fire of liberty. May a whirlwind of the Lord go forth in fury among
them, even a grievous whirlwind -- and may it fall grievously upon the head of
the wicked -- that the anger of the Lord may not return until he has executed,
and until he has performed the thoughts of his heart -- that in the latter
days they may consider it perfectly Jere. xxiii 19 -- ^^.
."

WITH exquisite pleasure we view the female character, in a land of equal
liberty and happiness. With minds enlarged by science, and ornamented with
every refined, dignified, and delicate sentiment, the women of America
establish their sovereignty, by the united influence of beauty, modesty, and
virtue. Removed from the splendor, and vices of courts, their hearts cultivate
the accomplishments of peaceful, elegant, and domestic life. The names of wife,
parent, and friend, are infinitely more captivating to them, than all the
titles of royalty; while benevolence, and religion, designate them as the
objects of the peculiar regard of heaven.

FROM this view of the state of liberty in France, the mind will necessarily
extend to the rest of Europe. Scarcely a nation in that quarter of the globe,
but has been alarmed at the approaches, or at the commencement of a revolution.
The subject engrosses universal attention, and supersedes every other object of
regard. The dignity of human nature has awaked from a long night of stupid
submission to injury, and is calling loudly at the doors of tyrants for relief,
and for compensation. The scepter of domination trembles in the hands of every
monarch in Europe. The glory, and the pomp of royalty, "like the morning cloud,
and the early dew, is passing away." Every idea which superstition, or
slavishness had framed, respecting sovereigns, has vanished; and kings are
viewed by reason and common sense, as tyrants, "or as ministers of GOD, for
good." Even the imperial pontiff of Rome, instead of holding the keys of death,
and of hell, finds himself reduced to the mortifying insignificance of being
slighted and despised, by those, who have heretofore been blind devotees to his
arrogance, and his blasphemies. The animated apostrophe of the prophet,
describes his situation with all the clearness and certainty of divine
prediction --

HELL from beneath is moved for thee, to meet thee at thy coming: it stireth up
the dead for thee, even all the chief ones of the earth; it has raised up from
their thrones all the kings of the nations. All they shall speak, and say unto
thee -- art thou also become weak as we? art thou become like unto us? Thy pomp
is brought down to the grave, and the noise of thy viols; the worm is spread
under thee, and the worms cover thee. How art thou fallen from Heaven, O
Lucifer, son of the morning! How art thou cut down, who did weaken the
nations! For thou have said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven: I will
exalt myself above the stars of GOD: I will ascend above the heights of the
clouds: I will be like the Most High. Yet thou shall be brought down to hell,
to the sides of the pit. They that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee, and
consider thee, saying, Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, that did
shake kingdoms? Isaiah xiv.9, etc.


NOR is freedom deemed the exclusive birthright of civilized nations. The
negroes of Africa, whose injuries exceed computation, conception, or credulity,
behold the day star of liberty, rising on the gloomy, and desperate region of
slavery. The sound of Independence, first raised in the United States, "has
gone out, and filled the earth." Forced into a conviction of the iniquity of
tyranny, by the successful struggles of America against oppression, the friends
of man through out the globe, are promoting the cause of equal liberty and
happiness. Societies, associations, and plans, are forming for the purpose of
destroying this scion of infernal policy. Even the miserable victims of slavery
have themselves aroused from the abyss of injury, and in some parts of the
world made a noble, vigorous, and manly attack on their oppressors. Humanity
will lament the indiscriminate sufferings of the innocent, and guilty
inhabitants of the revolted countries; while justice must behold with a smile
of approbation, the rapid progress of the slaves to triumph, and independence.

To the citizens of the United States, and especially to the actors in the
American revolution, these events must be the subject of the most animating
reflection. To your exertions is owing the measure of liberty now enjoyed in
the world; and the glorious prospect of its spreading over the habitable globe.
The fire of freedom caught from this continent, flames with godlike ardour in
the other parts of the earth. The forces of tyranny are consumed by its power,
and the sinews of despotism shrink from before it. The feeblest hands, and the
palest faces in Europe, (...) upon thrones. Equal, and universal (...) burst
the chains of confinement; and (...) of liberty has "risen, and shook his
(...)," Europe is on the eve of a general convulsion. The love of freedom is
implanted in the soul of man, by the GOD of nature; and the spirit it inspires
is irresistible. The Lord shall cause his glorious voice to be heard, and shall
show the lightening down of his arm, with the indignation of his anger, and
with the flame of a devouring fire, with scattering, and tempest and
hailstones. For through the voice of the Lord, shall the Assyrian be beaten
down, who smote with a rod. Isaiah xxx.30 -- 31.
The prediction in scripture of a season of universal freedom, and
tranquillity, is rapidly fulfilling; a spirit of toleration pervades all
nations; and the religion of EMANUAL is extending its influence over the the
regions of bigotry, persecution, and idolatry.

LET us then, in the midst of the joy and festivity of this illustrious day,
adore that God, who raised us to the enjoyment of peace, happiness and liberty
--

"Oh liberty, Heaven's choice prerogative!
"True bond of law, thou social soul of property!
"Thou breath of reason, life of life itself,
"For thee the valiant bleed. O sacred liberty!
"Winged from the (...) snare, from flattering ruin,
"Like the bold stork you seek the wintry shore,
"Leave courts, and pomps, and palaces to slaves,
"Cleave to the cold, and rest upon the storm.
"Upborne by thee, (...) souls disdained the terms
"Of empire -- (...) hands of tyrants.
"With thee we (...) his favorite soil, with thee
"These favorite (...) sought; thy sons, O liberty!
"For even amid (...) of life you lead them,
"Lift their low raft^^ ^ottage to the clouds,
"Smile over their hea^^^, and from their mountain tops
"Beam glory to the nations." Brook.

FINIS.

