CONSTITUTION OF THE FRANKLIN SOCIETY, (PRINTERS) OF THE CITY OF PHILADELPHIA;
INSTITUTED MARCH 8, 1788.

ARS ARTIUM OMNIUM CONSERVATRIX.

PRINTED BY STEWART and COCHRAN, NO. 34, SOUTH SECOND-STREET.

DECEMBER, 1792.

CONSTITUTION, etc.
TO provide, Preamble.
in the time of health and strength, against the infirmities of old age,
distress and want, among their own members, -- to support their widows, and
educate their orphan children -- have been the objects of many charitable
institutions in various parts of Europe, and long experience bears witness to
their utility. -- As manufactures, and consequently the number of persons
employed in them, have rapidly increased in this country, it has become
necessary to form societies here, on plans nearly similar. The PRINTERS of the
city of Philadelphia, therefore, sensible of the advantages which may be
derived from such institutions, when wisely planned, and conducted with
prudence and fidelity, have formed themselves into a society for the above
purposes, subject to the following regulations, viz.

ARTICLE I.
THAT this Society be entitled the FRANKLIN SOCIETY; Title of the Society.
the propriety of such an institution in this city having been first suggested
by the late Dr. Benjamin Franklin -- that patriot, philosopher, and friend to
the arts, particularly the typographical.

ARTICLE II.
Officers.
1. The executive business of the Society shall be managed by a President,
Number of officers.
Treasurer, two Directors, and a Secretary, who shall be chosen by ballot; but
the judicial shall remain wholly with the Society. Their duration in office.
No officer shall continue in office longer than six months, except the
Secretary, who may be re-elected.

2. The President shall preside at all meetings, Duty of the President.
and preserve proper order and decorum. In all cases where the Society or
Directors are equally divided, he shall have the casting vote.

All applications, on business concerning the Society, shall be addressed to
its Secretary, who must immediately communicate the same to the President, or
forfeit the sum of Four Dollars.

That the President shall issue his orders in writing, to the Directors of the
Society, for the transacting of its business, beginning with senior Director,
(the first chosen) and so in rotation; and for nonperformance of such order,
said Director shall forfeit the sum of Four Dollars for such neglect.

That the President, if neglecting to issue his orders, and forward the
business of the Society, touching his official department, he shall forfeit the
sum of Five Dollars.

3. If any member, Fine for not obeying the President.
when called to order by the president, refuses to obey, he shall be subject to
a fine of 1-16th of a dollar, and this sum shall be doubled for every after
offense of the same kind, committed at the same meeting; and if said fines are
not paid in to the Society at the receipt of the monthly payments preceding the
next general meeting, the Society shall take into consideration the same, and
he be subject to expulsion.

4. The Treasurer shall give a good and sufficient bond for twenty pounds more
than the sum which he receives at the time of his accepting the office; Duty of
the Treasurer.
and shall, at the expiration of the six months for which he is elected,
present a fair statement of his accounts, deliver the bonds granted to the
Society for moneys loaned, and the cash which may be in his possession, to his
successor in office, and receive an acquittance from the President, in presence
of the Society. He shall make no disbursements of money without a written order
from the President and Directors; and such written order or orders, and the
receipt or receipts from the person or persons in whose favor such orders have
been drawn, when produced by the Treasurer, shall be the only authority for the
Secretary to notice them, and give credit in the books of the Society for the
same.

5. The Directors shall visit by rotation, Duty of the Directors.
the persons who may be entitled to receive support from the Society, if within
the city and liberties, and, in conjunction with the President, order the
Treasurer to make the necessary disbursements; they shall provide any books,
etc. necessary for the use of the Society, and, in short, manage all the
ordinary concerns of the Society, in strict conformity to the Constitution.

In case of the death of an officer, Vacancy in the office of Director, how
supplied
or his leaving the city, the remaining officers shall choose another to fill
his place until the next quarterly meeting.

6. The Secretary shall keep a fair record of all the proceedings of the
Society, Duty of the Secretary.
and also keep an exact account of the moneys received and disbursed by the
Treasurer. He shall make an index to all the resolutions and proceedings of the
Society, and distinctly folio the same. He shall receive all moneys at
meetings, and hand it over to the Treasurer, and take his receipt for the same,
for the use of the Society. For which services, His compensation.
and for every other service incumbent upon him as Secretary, he shall receive
at the rate of six dollars per annum, to be paid out of the fund of the Society.

7. In case any of the officers, Fines for refusing offices.
when duly elected, refuse to serve, they shall pay the following fines, viz. a
President, one dollar -- a Treasurer, 5s7 1-2 -- and a Director or Secretary,
5s.

ARTICLE III.
Funds.
THE funds of the Society shall consist of the entrance-money, Entrance-money
and monthly payment.
fines, and monthly payment of 5-16ths of a dollar, by each member, to be made
to the President, Treasurer and Directors, on the first Saturday in every month.

If any member neglect to pay the above sum of 5-16ths of a dollar, Fine for
neglecting the monthly payment.
he shall be subject to a fine of 1-16th for every month he may be delinquent;
and should he continue such neglect until his arrearages amount to the sum of
five dollars, he shall be served by the Secretary with a written notice --
which notice shall be delivered to said delinquent member, or left at his usual
place of abode; and shall be in the form following: SIR,
You are hereby noticed, Form of certificate to delinquent members.
That you stand indebted to the Franklin Society, (Printers) in the sum of
which, if you neglect to pay to the said Society, on or before their next
general meeting, on the day of next, you forfeit all right of membership
therein.



ARTICLE IV.
Meetings.
THE Society shall hold a general meeting on the third Saturday of February,
General meetings, and
May, August and November, meetings of the Directors, when to be held.
in every year; and the President, with the Treasurer, Directors, and
Secretary, shall meet on the first Saturday of every month, to receive the
payments of the members. The hours for transacting business shall not be
limited, but, on motion, shall be determined by adjournment.

2. A majority of resident members of the Society shall be sufficient to form a
quorum, Number necessary to form a quorum.
who may proceed to business.

3. If any officer of the Society absent himself from any meeting, Fines for
non-attendance.
he shall pay a fine of 5-16ths of a dollar; and if any member shall absent
himself from a general, quarterly or special meeting, having had regular
notice, he shall pay a fine of 1-4th, unless an excuse be given which shall be
deemed satisfactory by a majority of the officers. Every officer of the Society
not attending within ten minutes after the hour of meeting, shall forfeit
1-8th, and every other member 1-16th of a dollar.

4. No officer or member of the Society, Penalty for absenting during the time
of business.
after the commencement of business, at any meeting, shall absent himself more
than five minutes, at any one time, nor oftener than twice in one evening,
without permission from the chair. -- Every member who shall be guilty of a
breach of this section, shall forfeit and pay a fine of 1-8th of a dollar for
each offense.

5. At every general, Sum allowed for defraying the expenses of meetings.
special and quarterly meeting of the Society, the sum of 1-8th of a dollar
shall be levied on every resident member, to defray the expense of said
meeting. The monthly payment of members shall not be received until such
payment is made.

ARTICLE V.
Aliment.
1. ANY member falling into sickness, Weekly sum allowed to members incapable
of working.
and notice thereof being given to the Directors, one of them shall visit him
-- and if, upon such visitation, the said Director shall find him incapable of
working at his business, he shall make report thereof to the President; who
shall thereupon, in conjunction with the Directors, draw an order on the
Treasurer, in writing, for the sum of Fifteen Shillings per week, during his
sickness. And should claims on the Society's fund accumulate, Fund not to be
reduced below L160
so as to reduce it to L.160, then all demands, of every kind, shall be
provided for by such an addition to the monthly payment of each member as the
case may require.

2. Any member residing at a distance from the city, Members in distress,
residing at a distance, to send a certificate,
shall be entitled to the same benefit as above specified, on sending the
certificate of a magistrate, clergyman, or two respectable freeholders in the
place where he resides, of his indisposition.

3. No person shall be entitled to receive any support from this society, One
year's membership, etc. requisite to granting support.
until he has been a member for one year.

4. In case of a member's dying, Sum allowed at the funeral, and to the widow
of a deceased member.
the Society, if applied to, shall expend a sum not exceeding twenty-five
dollars toward defraying the expenses of his funeral; and a sum not exceeding
six dollars a quarter shall be allowed to the widow of a deceased member,
during the time of her widowhood.

5. Should the fund of the Society increase, Additions to be made to claiments
as the funds increase.
the following additions shall be made to the sums before specified in 1. and
4. of this article, viz. when the Society's stock amounts to L. 350, one-fourth
to be added to the specified appointments, -- when to L. 650, one half, -- but
said allowance to cease, when the capital is reduced, in the first case to L.
300, and in the second to L. 600. When the stock of the Society amount to L.
850, the Society shall have a discretionary power to make further additions for
the benefit of claimants, but only agreeably to the ratio above laid down. All
sums, however, granted in consequence of such discretionary power, shall cease
on the stock's being reduced to L. 800.

6. The society shall also provide for the education of the children of
deceased members; Allowance for the education of the children of deceased
members.
and for this purpose, a sum not exceeding 15s. per quarter, at the direction
of the President and Directors, shall be paid by the Treasurer, for a term of
time not exceeding five years, or as the case may require, for each child to be
educated. The directors to enquire into their progress, etc. and report to the
society every quarter.
And it shall be the duty of the directors to wait on the schoolmaster, at
least once in a quarter, and enquire whether the child, or children, have
regularly attended school, and what progress they have made -- and make report
thereof at the next meeting of the Society.

7. Each member of the Society shall attend the funeral of a deceased member,
Penalty for not attending the funeral of a deceased member.
with a crape round his arm, in the same manner as funerals are usually
attended by the brethren of other societies, under the penalty of one dollar.

ARTICLE VI.
Qualifications of Members.
1. No person can become a member of the Franklin Society (Printers) but a
printer, A good character, serving an apprenticeship, etc. requisite in persons
admitted.
of a good character, and who has served an apprenticeship to the printing
business -- free from any bodily infirmity at the time of entrance, and not
above forty-five years of age.

2. Every person admitted a member shall be present at the time of his
admission; Persons admitted members to be present, and to receive a certificate
of their membership.
and shall, thereupon, be furnished with a certificate of his membership, after
the following form, signed by the President and Secretary for the time being,
with the Society's seal affixed.

This is to certify, Form of the certificate,
That at a Meeting of the Franklin Society, (Printers) held on A. B. was
proposed as a fit person to become a member. He was accordingly balloted for,
agreeably to the rules of the Society, and was, and is hereby declared to be
duly admitted, and entitled to all the benefits and privileges resulting from
membership.

Dated this day of in the Year of our Lord Signed by order of the Society.
President. Secretary.

L. S.
ARTICLE VII.
Terms of Admission.
1. CANDIDATES, Mode of admitting members.
qualified as in the preceding article, being proposed for admission by a
member, and the question being seconded, it shall be determined by ballot.

2. Each candidate shall pay, Sums to be paid by persons admitted according to
their respective ages.
on his admittance as a member, as follows, viz. If not more than thirty years
of age, 1s. for every year of his age -- if thirty, and not more than
thirty-five, 1s3. -- if thirty-five, and not more than forty, 1s9, -- if forty,
and not more than forty-five, 2s6.

3. Any person proposed as a candidate for admittance, Persons admitted, not
paying their entrance money in three months, excluded.
shall not be considered a member of the Society, unless, at the expiration of
three months from the time of his being approved of, he shall have paid his
entrance money. If after three months he shall continue desirous of becoming a
member, May be again proposed;
he may be again proposed, and shall be subject to the same formality as at the
time of his being first proposed; But not a third, time.
but no person shall be proposed a third time.

ARTICLE VIII.
Loans.
1. No sum of money less than ten pounds shall be loaned by the Society. -- No
sum less than L10 to be loaned.
When application is made for any sum above ten pounds, the Society shall
determine on the propriety of the grant, according to the stock in hand. Should
there be, If more than one applicant, how to be settled.
however, more than one applicant, and the stock in the hands of the Treasurer
not be sufficient to satisfy them all, (if it is agreed that moneys shall be
loaned) the Society shall determine on the sum which shall be loaned to each
person.

2. No money shall be loaned by the Society, Freehold security requisite.
without sufficient freehold security therefore, approved of by the Society; nor
shall a member be accepted as a security for any loan, either jointly or
separately, unless the said member be a freeholder, and his security be deemed
sufficient by the Society.

3. The name of the security must be made known by the applicant, Name of the
security to be given at the time of application.
when the application is made; and if a member, he, together with the
applicant, must withdraw until a decision is bad, -- which shall be determined
by ballot.

4. Any person applying for money, Members to have notice of intended
applications.
shall give such timely notice thereof to the Secretary, as will be sufficient
for him to give notice to the members, one week prior to the meeting, of the
nature of such application.

5. All applications for loans shall be made in writing. Applications to be
made in writing.


6. The sum of twenty pounds must be retained in the hands of the Treasurer, L.
20 to be retained in the Treasurer's hands.
for answering any demands which may be on the Society.

ARTICLE IX.
Society-seal.
THAT a society-seal shall be made use of on all occasions, A society-seal to
be used.
wherein it shall be necessary.

ARTICLE X.
IF any member of this Society shall be guilty of a felonious breach of the
laws of the country, Members guilty of felony, to be excluded.
he shall be for ever excluded this Society.

ARTICLE XI.
So long as three members remain of this Society, The fund, how to be disposed
of, in case the number of members is reduced to two.
the fund shall never be alienated to any other purpose than that expressed in
the foregoing articles. Should, it ever unfortunately happen, that the number
is reduced to two, in that case the American Philosophical Society shall
receive the moneys on hand, the interest of which to be applied by them in an
annual premium for the best essay on such subject as they may think proper;
they paying to the two remaining members the sums they have respectively paid,
during the time they have belonged to the society, and to the widows and
orphans of deceased members the quarterly sums stipulated in Article V. 3, 4.


