FRUITS OF SOLITUDE, IN REFLECTIONS AND MAXIMS RELATING TO THE CONDUCT OF HUMAN
LIFE.

By WILLIAM PENN.

THE TENTH EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY BENJAMIN JOHNSON. M.DCC.XCII.

THE PREFACE.
READER,
THIS enchiridion, I present thee with, is the fruit of solitude: a school few
care to learn in, though none instructs us better. Some parts of it are the
result of serious reflection; others the flashings of lucid intervals; written
for private satisfaction, and now published for an help to human conduct.

The author blesses God for his retirement, and kisses that gentle hand which
led him into it: for though it should prove barren to the world, it can never
do fo to him.

He has now had some time he could call his own, a property he was never so
much master of before: in which he has taken a view of himself and the world;
and observed wherein he has hit and missed the mark; what might have been
done, what mended, and what avoided, in his human conduct: together with the
omissions and excesses of others, as well societies and governments, as private
families and persons. And he verily thinks, were he to live over his life
again, he could not only, with God's grace, serve him, but his neighbor and
himself, better than he has done, and have seven years of his time to spare.
And yet, perhaps, he has not been the worst or the idlest man in the world;
nor is he the oldest. And this is the rather said, that it might quicken thee,
reader, to lose none of the time that is yet thine.

There is nothing of which we are apt to be so lavish as of time, and about
which we ought to be more solicitous; since without it we can do nothing in
this world. Time is what we want most, but what, alas! we use worst; and for
which God will certainly most strictly reckon with us, when time shall be no
more.

It is of that moment to us in reference to both worlds, that I can hardly wish
any man better, than that he would seriously consider what he does with his
time; how and to what end he employs it; and what returns he makes to God, his
neighbor, and himself for it. Will he never have a ledger for this; this, the
greatest wisdom and work of life?

To come but once into the world, and trifle away our true enjoyment of it, and
of ourselves in it, is lamentable indeed. This one reflection would yield a
thinking person great instruction. And, since nothing below man can so think,
man, in being thoughtless, must needs fall below himself. And that, to be sure,
such do, as are unconcerned in the use of their most precious time.

This is but too evident, if we will allow ourselves to consider, that there is
hardly any thing we take by the right end, or improve to its just advantage.

We understand little of the works of God, either in nature or grace. We pursue
false knowledge, and mistake education extremely. We are violent in our
affections, confused and immethodical in our whole life; making that a burden,
which was given for a blessing, and so of little comfort to ourselves or
others; misapprehending the true notion of happiness, and so missing of the
right use of life, and way of happy living.

And until we are persuaded to stop, and step a little aside, out of the noisy
crowd and incumbering hurry of the world, and calmly take a prospect of things,
it will be impossible we should be able to make a right judgment of ourselves,
or know our own misery. But after we have made the just reckonings which
retirement will help us to, we shall begin to think the world in great measure
mad, and that we have been in a sort of Bedlam all this while.

Reader, whether young or old, think it not too soon or too late to turn over
the leaves of thy past life: and be sure to fold down where any passage of it
may affect thee: and bestow thy remainder of time, to correct those faults in
thy future conduct, be it in relation to this or the next life. What thou
would do, if what thou have done were to do again, be sure to do as long as
thou live, upon the like occasions.

Our resolutions seem to be vigorous, as often as we reflect upon our past
errors; but, alas! they are apt to flag again upon fresh temptations to the
same things.

The author does not pretend to deliver thee an exact piece; his business not
being ostentation, but charity. It is miscellaneous in the matter of it, and by
no means artificial in the composure. But it contains hints, that may serve
thee for texts to preach to thyself upon, and which comprehend much of the
course of human life: since whether thou art parent or child, prince or
subject, master or servant, single or married, public or private, mean or
honorable, rich or poor, prosperous or improsperous, in peace or controversy,
in business or solitude; whatever be thy inclination or aversion, practice or
duty, thou will find something not unsuitably said for thy direction and
advantage. Accept and improve what deserves thy notice; the rest excuse, and
place to account of good will to thee and the whole creation of God.

THE INDEX.
A
APPAREL 21 Avarice 24 Ambition 126 Applause 127
B
Bounty 17 Bearing 43 Balance 62
C
Censoriousness 14 Charity, bounds of 16 Caution and Conduct 32 Conversation,
rules of 34 Complacency 38 Country life 49 Capacity 75 Clean hands ibid.
Conformist 153 Charity 161
D
Disappointment 12 Discipline 18 Detraction 56 Dispatch 76
E
Education 3 Eloquence 35 Envy 123 Estates, interest of the public in 147
F
Frugality 17 Friendship 30, 31 Fidelity 44 Friends, union of 131 Formality 132
G
Government 66 God, of the mean notion we have of 139 God, of the obligations
of great men to 154
H
Happiness 52 Hazard 55
I
Ignorance 1 Inconsideration 11 Industry 18, 51 Justice 37, 140 Interest 38
Inquiry 39 Jealous 47 Impartiality 78 Indifference 81 Inconsiderateness 134
Judging, rule of 136 Jealousy 142
K
Knowledge 40
L
Luxury 11 Life, man's 125 Living, of being easy in 132
M
Murmuring 13 Marriage 22, 26 Master 45 Moderation 57 Moralist, the right 106
N
Neutrality 81
O
Obedience to parents 42 Ostentation 83
P
Pride 7 Promising 43 Posterity 47 Project 50 Passion 58 Personal cautions 60
Popularity 64 Privacy 65 Private life 73 Public life 74 Patience 77 Party 82
Praise 127 Partiality 134
Q
Qualification 75
R
Resignation 12 Reparation 33 Right timing 40 Respect 54 Religion 85 Refining
on other men's actions or interests 159
S
Secresy 37 Shifts 38 Servant 46 Speech, conduct in 129 State 143 Servant, good
144
T
Temperance 19 Temper 36 Truth 37 Trick 58 Thoughts, government of 119
V
Virtue, complete 84 Vain man 151
W
Wit 41 World's able man 109 Wise man 117 World, immoderate pursuit of 146
FRUITS OF SOLITUDE, IN REFLECTIONS AND MAXIMS. PART I.
IGNORANCE.
1. IT is admirable to consider how many millions of people come into and go
out of the world, ignorant of themselves, and of the world they have lived in.

2. If one went to see Windsor-Castle, or Hampton Court, it would be strange
not to observe and remember the situation, the building, the gardens,
fountains, etc. that make up the beauty and pleasure of such a seat. And yet
few people know themselves: no, not their own bodies, the houses of their
minds, the most curious structure of the world; a living, walking tabernacle;
nor the world of which it was made, and out of which it is fed; which would be
so much our benefit, as well as our pleasure, to know. We cannot doubt of this
when we are told that the "invisible things of God are brought to light by the
things that are seen;" and consequently we read our duty in them, as often as
we look upon them, to him that is the great and wise author of them, if we look
as we should do.

3. The world is certainly a great and stately volume of natural things, and
may be not improperly styled the hieroglyphics of a better; but, alas, how
very few leaves of it do we seriously turn over! This ought to be the subject
of the education of our youth; who, at twenty, when they should be fit for
business, know little or nothing of it.

EDUCATION.
4. We are in pain to make them scholars, but not men; to talk, rather than to
know; which is true canting.

5. The first thing obvious to children is what is sensible; and that we make
no part of their rudiments.

6. We press their memory too soon, and puzzle, strain, and load them with
words and rules to know grammar and rhetoric, and a strange tongue or two,
that it is ten to one may never be useful to them; leaving their natural genius
to mechanical, and physical or natural knowledge uncultivated and neglected;
which would be of exceeding use and pleasure to them through the whole course of
their lives.

7. To be sure, languages are not to be despised or neglected; but, things are
still to be preferred.

8. Children had rather be making of tools and instruments of play; shaping,
drawing, framing, and building, etc. than getting some rules of propriety of
speech by heart: and those also would follow with more judgment, and less
trouble and time.

9. It were happy if we studied nature more in natural things; and acted
according to nature: whose rules are few, plain, and most reasonable.

10. Let us begin where she begins, go her pace, and close always where she
ends, and we cannot miss of being good naturalists.

11. The creation would not be longer a riddle to us. The heavens, earth, and
waters, with their respective, various, and numerous inhabitants, their
productions, natures, seasons, sympathies, and antipathies, their use, benefit,
and pleasure, would be better understood by us; and an eternal wisdom, power,
majesty, and goodness, very conspicuous to us, through those sensible and
passing forms: the world wearing the mark of its Maker, whose stamp is every
where visible, and the characters very legible to the children of wisdom.

12. And it would go a great way to caution and direct people in their use of
the world, that they were better studied and known in the creation of it.

13. For how could men find the confidence to abuse it, while they should see
the great Creator stare them in the face, in all and every part thereof?

14. Their ignorance makes them insensible; and to that insensibility may be
ascribed their hard usage of several parts of this noble creation: that has the
stamp and voice of a Deity every where, and in every thing, to the observing.

15. It is pity therefore that books have not been composed for youth, by some
curious and careful naturalists, and also mechanics, in the Latin tongue, to
be used in schools, that they might learn things with words: things obvious and
familiar to them, and which would make the tongue easier to be obtained by them.

16. Many able gardeners and husbandmen are ignorant of the reason of their
calling; as most artificers are of the reason of their own rules that govern
their excellent workmanship. But a naturalist and mechanic of this sort is
master of the reason of both; and might be of the practice too, if his industry
kept pace with his speculation: which were very commendable; and without which
he cannot be said to be a complete naturalist or mechanic.

17. Finally, if man be the index or epitome of the world, as philosophers tell
us, we have only to read ourselves well, to be learned in it. But because there
is nothing we less regard than the characters of the Power that made us, which
are so clearly written upon us, and the world he has given us, and can best
tell us what we are and should be, we are even strangers to our own genius: the
glass in which we should see that true, instructing, and agreeable variety,
which is to be observed in nature, to the admiration of that wisdom, and
adoration of that power, which made us all.

PRIDE.
18. And yet we are very apt to be full of ourselves, instead of him that made
what we so much value; and but for whom we can have no reason to value
ourselves. For we have nothing that we can call our own; no, not ourselves: for
we are all but tenants, and at will too, of the great Lord of ourselves, and
the rest of this great farm, the world that we live upon.

19. But, methinks, we cannot answer it to ourselves, as well as our Maker,
that we should live and die ignorant of ourselves, and thereby of him, and the
obligations we are under to him for ourselves.

20. If the worth of a gift sets the obligation, and directs the return of the
party that receives it, he that is ignorant of it, will be at a loss to value
it, and the giver for it.

21. Here is man in his ignorance of himself: he knows not how to estimate his
Creator, because he knows not how to value his creation. If we consider his
make, and lovely compositure, the several stories of his wonderful structure,
his diverse members, their order, function, and dependency; the instruments of
food, the vessels of digestion, the several transmutations it passes, and how
nourishment is carried and diffused throughout the whole body, by most
intricate and imperceptible passages; how the animal spirit is thereby
refreshed, and, with an unspeakable dexterity and motion, sets all parts at
work to feed themselves; and, last of all, how the rational soul is seated in
the animal, as its proper house, as is the animal in the body; I say, if this
rare fabric alone were but considered by us, with all the rest by which it is
fed and comforted, surely man would have a more reverent sense of the power,
wisdom, and goodness of God, and of that duty he owes to him for it. But if he
would be acquainted with his own soul, its noble faculties, its union with the
body, its nature and end, and the providence by which the whole frame of
humanity is preserved, he would admire and adore his good and great God. But
man is become a strange contradiction to himself; but it is of himself; not
being by constitution, but corruption, such.

22. He would have others obey him, even his own kind; but he will not obey
God, that is so much above him, and who made him.

23. He will lose none of his authority; no, not bate an ace of it. He is
humoursome to his wife, beats his children, is angry with his servants, strict
with his neighbors, revenges all affronts to the extremity; but, alas! forgets
all the while that he is the man; and is more in arrear to God, that is so very
patient with him, than they are to him, with whom he is so strict and impatient.

24. He is curious to wash, dress, and perfume his body, but careless of his
soul; the one shall have many hours, the other not so many minutes; this shall
have three or four new suits a year, but that must wear its old clothes still.

25. If he be to receive or see a great man, how nice and anxious is he that
all things be in order; and with what respect and address does he approach and
make his court? But to God, how dry and formal, and constrained in his devotion?

26. In his prayers he says, "Thy will be done;" but means his own: at least
acts so.

27. It is too frequent to begin with God, and end with the world. But he is
the good man's beginning and end, his Alpha and Omega.

LUXURY.
28. Such is now become our delicacy, that we will not eat ordinary meat, nor
drink small, palled liquor; we must have the best, and the best-cooked for our
bodies, while our souls feed on empty or corrupted things.

29. In short, man is spending all upon a bare house, and has little or no
furniture within to recommend it; which is preferring the cabinet to the jewel,
a lease of seven years before an inheritance. So absurd a thing is man, after
all his proud pretenses to wit and understanding.

INCONSIDERATION.
30. The want of due consideration is the cause of all the unhappiness man
brings upon himself. For his second thoughts rarely agree with the first; which
pass not without a considerable retrenchment or correction. And yet that
sensible warning is, too frequently, not precaution enough for his future
conduct.

31. Well may we say, "Our infelicity is of ourselves;" since there is nothing
we do that we should not do, but we know it, and yet do it.

DISAPPOINTMENT AND RESIGNATION.
32. For disappointments, that come not by our own folly, they are the trials
or corrections of heaven: and it is our own fault, if they prove not our
advantage.

33. To repine at them does not mend the matter: it is only to grumble at our
Creator. But to see the hand of God in them, with an humble submission to his
will, is the way to turn our water into wine, and engage the greatest love and
mercy on our side.

34. We must needs disorder ourselves, if we only look at our losses. But if we
consider how little we deserve what is left, our passion will cool, and our
murmurs will turn into thankfulness.

35. If our hairs fall not to the ground, less do we, or our substance, without
God's providence.

36. Nor can we fall below the arms of God, how low soever it be we fall.

37. For though our Savior's passion is over, his compassion is not. That
never fails his humble, sincere disciples. In him they find more than all that
they lose in the world.

MURMURING.
38. Is it reasonable to take it ill, that any body desires of us that which is
their own? All we have is the Almighty's: and shall not God have his own when
he calls for it?

39. Discontentedness is not only in such a case ingratitude, but injustice:
for we are both unthankful for the time we had it, and not honest enough to
restore it, if we could keep it.

40. But it is hard for us to look on things in such a glass, and at such a
distance from this low world; and yet it is our duty, and would be our wisdom
and our glory, to do so.

CENSORIOUSNESS.
41. We are apt to be very pert at censuring others, where we will not endure
advice ourselves. And nothing shows our weakness more, than to be so
sharp-sighted at spying other men's faults, and so purblind about our own.

42. When the actions of a neighbor are upon the stage, we can have all our
wits about us, are so quick and critical we can split an hair, and find out
every failure and infirmity; but are without feeling, or have but very little
sense, of our own.

43. Much of this comes from ill nature, as well as from an inordinate value of
ourselves: for we love rambling better than home, and blaming the unhappy,
rather than covering and relieving them,

44. In such occasions some show their malice, and are witty upon misfortunes;
others their justice, they can reflect apace; but few or none their charity,
especially if it be about money matters.

45. You shall see an old miser come forth with a set gravity, and so much
severity against the distressed, to excuse his purse, that he will, ever he has
done, put it out of all question that riches is righteousness with him. 'This,'
says he, 'is the fruit of your prodigality, (as if, poor man, covetousness were
no fault) or, of your projects, or grasping after a great trade:' while he
himself would have done the same thing, but that he had not the courage to
venture so much ready money out of his own trusty hands, though it had been to
have brought him back the Indies in return. But the proverb is just, "Vice
should not correct sin."

46. They have a right to censure, that have a heart to help: the rest is
cruelty, not justice.

BOUNDS OF CHARITY.
47. Lend not beyond thy ability, nor refuse to lend out of thy ability:
especially when it will help others more than it can hurt thee.

48. If thy debtor be honest and capable, thou have thy money again, if not
with increase, with praise. If he prove insolvent, do not ruin him to get that
which it will not ruin thee to lose: for thou art but a steward, and another is
thy owner, master, and judge.

49. The more merciful acts thou do, the more mercy thou will receive: and if
with a charitable employment of thy temporal riches, thou gainest eternal
treasure, thy purchase is infinite: thou will have found the art of multiplying
indeed.

FRUGALITY OR BOUNTY.
50 Frugality is good, if liberality be joined with it. The first is leaving
off superfluous expenses; the last bestowing them to the benefit of others that
need. The first without the last begins covetousness; the last without the
first begins prodigality. Both together make an excellent temper. Happy the
place where that is found.

51. Were it universal, we should be cured of two extremes, want and excess:
and the one would supply the other, and so bring both nearer to a mean; the
just degree of earthly happiness.

52. It is a reproach to religion and government, to suffer so much poverty and
excess.

53. Were the superfluities of a nation valued, and made a perpetual tax or
benevolence, there would be more almshouses than poor, schools than scholars,
and enough to spare for government besides.

54. Hospitality is good, if the poorer sort are the subjects of our bounty;
else too near a superfluity.

DISCIPLINE.
55. If thou would be happy and easy in thy family, above all things observe
discipline.

56. Every one in it should know their duty; and there should be a time and
place for every thing; and, whatever else is done or omitted, be sure to begin
and end with God.

INDUSTRY.
57. Love labor: for if thou do not want it for food, thou may for physic.
It is wholesome for thy body, and good for thy mind. It prevents the fruits of
idleness, which many times comes of nothing to do, and leads too many to do
what is worse than nothing.

58. A garden, an elaboratory, a workhouse, improvements, and breeding, are
pleasant and profitable diversions to the idle and ingenious; for here they
miss ill company, and converse with nature and art; whose varieties are equally
grateful and instructing, and preserve a good constitution of body and mind.

TEMPERANCE.
59. To this a spare diet contributes much. Eat therefore to live, and do not
live to eat. That is like a man, but this below a beast.

60. Have wholesome, but not costly food: and be rather cleanly than dainty in
ordering it.

61. The receipts of cookery are swelled to a volume, but a good stomach excels
them all: to which nothing contributes more than industry and temperance.

62. It is a cruel folly to offer up to ostentation so many lives of creatures,
as make up the state of our treats; as it is a prodigal one to spend more in
sauce than in meat.

63. The proverb says, "That enough is as good as a feast;" but it is certainly
better, if superfluity be a fault, which never fails to be at festivals.

64. If thou rise with an appetite, thou art sure never to sit down without one.

65. Rarely drink but when thou art dry; nor then, between meals, if it can be
avoided.

66. The smaller the drink, the clearer the head, and the cooler the blood:
which are great benefits in temper and business.

67. Strong liquors are good at some times, and in small proportions: being
better for physic than food; for cordials, than common use.

68. The most common things are the most useful: which shows both the wisdom
and goodness of the great Lord of the family of the world.

69. What, therefore, he has made rare, do not thou use too commonly: lest thou
should invert the use and order of things, become wanton and voluptuous, and
thy blessings prove a curse.

70. "Let nothing be lost," said our Savior; but that is lost that is misused.

71. Neither urge another to that thou would be unwilling to do thyself; nor
do thyself what looks to thee unseemly, and intemperate in another.

72. All excess is ill; but drunkenness is of the worst sort. It spoils health,
dismounts the mind, and unmans men. It reveals secrets, is quarrelsome,
lascivious, impudent, dangerous, and mad. In fine, he that is drunk is not a
man: because he is so long void of reason, that distinguishes a man from a
beast.

APPAREL.
73. Excess in apparel is another costly folly. The very trimming of the vain
world would clothe all the naked one.

74. Choose thy clothes by thine own eyes, not another's. The more plain and
simple they are, the better; neither unshapely, nor fantastical; and for use
and decency, and not for pride.

75. If thou art clean and warm, it is sufficient; for more does but rob the
poor, and please the wanton.

76. It is said of the true church, "The King's daughter is all glorious
within." Let our care, therefore, be of our minds, more than of our bodies, if
we would be of her communion.

77. We are told with truth, 'That meekness and modesty are the rich and
charming attire of the soul:' and the plainer the dress, the more distinctly,
and with greater luster, their beauty shines.

78. It is great pity such beauties are so rare, and those of Jezebel's
forehead are so common: whose dresses are incentives to lust; but bars, instead
of motives, to love or virtue.

RIGHT MARRIAGE.
79. Never marry but for love; but see that thou love what is lovely.

80. If love be not thy chiefest motive, thou will soon grow weary of a married
state, and stray from thy promise, to search out thy pleasures in forbidden
places.

81. Let not enjoyment lessen, but augment, affection: it being the basest of
passions to like when we have not, what we slight when we possess.

82. It is the difference betwixt lust and love, that this is fixed, that
volatile. Love grows, lust wastes, by enjoyment: and the reason is, that one
springs from an union of souls, and the other springs from an union of sense.

83. They have diverse originals, and so are of different families: that inward
and deep, this superficial; this transient, and that permanent.

84. They that marry for money, cannot have the true satisfaction of marriage;
the requisite means being wanting.

85. Men are generally more careful of the breed of their horses and dogs, than
of their children.

86. Those must be of the best sort, for shape, strength, courage, and good
conditions: but as for these, their own posterity, money shall answer all
things. With such, it makes the crooked straight, sets squint-eyes right, cures
madness, covers folly, changes ill conditions, mends the skin, gives a sweet
breath, repairs honors, makes young, works wonders.

87. O how sordid is man grown! man, the noblest creature of the world, as a
God on earth, and the image of him that made it; thus to mistake earth for
heaven, and worship gold for God!

AVARICE.
88. Covetousness is the greatest of monsters, as well as the root of all evil.
I have once seen the man that died to save charges! 'What! Give ten shillings
to a doctor, and have an apothecary's bill besides, that may come to I know not
what! No, not he: valuing life less than twenty shillings. But, indeed, such a
man could not, well, set too low a price upon himself; who, though he lived up
to the chin in bags, had rather die, than find in his heart to open one of
them, to help to save his life.

89. Such a man is 'felo de se,' and deserves not Christian burial.

90. He is a common nuisance, a way across the stream, that stops the current,
an obstruction, to be removed by a purge of the law. The only gratification he
gives his neighbors, is to let them see that he himself is as little the
better for what he has, as they are. For he always looks like Lent; a sort of
Lay-Minim. In some sense he may be compared to Pharaoh's lean kine; for all
that he has, does him no good. He commonly wears his clothes till they leave
him, or that nobody else can wear them. He affects to be thought poor, to
escape robbery and taxes; and by looking as if he wanted an alms, excuses
himself from giving any. He ever goes late to markets, to cover buying the
worst; but does it because that is cheapest. He lives of the offal. His life
were an insupportable punishment, to any temper but his own: and no greater
torment to him on earth, than to live as other men do. But the misery of his
pleasure is, that he is never satisfied with getting, and always in fear of
losing what he cannot use.

91. How vilely he has lost himself, that becomes a slave to his servant, and
exalts him to the dignity of his Maker! Gold is the God, the wife, the friend,
of the money-monger of the world. But in.

MARRIAGE
92. Do thou be wise: prefer the person before money, virtue before beauty, the
mind before the body: then thou have a wife, a friend, a companion, a
second-self, one that bears an equal share with thee, in all thy toils and
troubles.

93. Choose one that measures her satisfaction, safety, and danger, by thine;
and of whom thou art sure, as of thy secretest thoughts: a friend as well as a
wife; which, indeed, a wife implies; for she is but half a wife that is not, or
is not capable of being, such a friend.

94. Sexes make no difference; since in souls there is none: and they are the
subjects of friendship.

95. He that minds a body and not a soul, has not the better part of that
relation; and will consequently want the noblest comfort of a married life.

96. The satisfaction of our senses is low, short, and transient; but the mind
gives a more raised and extended pleasure, and is capable of an happiness
founded upon reason; not bounded and limited by the circumstances that bodies
are confined to.

97. Here it is we ought to search out our pleasure, where the field is large,
and full of variety, and of an enduring nature: sickness, poverty, or disgrace,
being not able to shake it; because it is not under the moving influences of
worldly contingencies.

98. The satisfaction of those that do so is in well-doing, and in the
assurance they have of a future reward; that they are best loved of those they
love most; and that they enjoy and value the liberty of their minds above that
of their bodies: having the whole creation for their prospect; the most noble
and wonderful works and providence of God, the histories of the ancients, and
in them the actions and examples of the virtuous, and lastly, themselves, their
affairs, and family, to exercise their minds and friendship upon.

99. Nothing can be more entire and without reserve; nothing more zealous
affectionate, and sincere; nothing more contented and constant, than such a
couple; nor no greater temporal felicity, than to be one of them.

100. Between a man and his wife, nothing ought to rule but love. Authority is
for children and servants; yet not without sweetness.

101. As love ought to bring them together, so it is the best way to keep them
well together.

102. Wherefore use her not as a servant, whom thou would, perhaps, have
served seven years to have obtained.

103. An husband and wife that love and value one another, show their children
and servants that they should do so too. Others visibly lose their authority in
their families by their contempt of one another; and teach their children to be
unnatural by their own examples.

104. It is a general fault, not to be more careful to preserve nature in
children; who, at least in the second descent, hardly have a feeling of their
relation: which must be an unpleasant reflection to affectionate parents.

105. Frequent visits, presents, intimate correspondence, and intermarriages
within allowed bounds, are means of keeping up the concern and affection that
nature requires from relations.

FRIENDSHIP.
106. Friendship is the next pleasure we may hope for: and where we find it not
at home, or have no home to find it in, we may seek it abroad. It is an union
of spirits, a marriage of hearts, and the bond thereof virtue.

107. There can be no friendship where there is no freedom. Friendship loves a
free air, and will not be penned up in straight and narrow enclosures. It will
speak freely, and act so too; and take nothing ill, where no ill is meant; nay,
where it is, it will easily forgive, and forget too, upon small acknowledgments.

108. Friends are true twins in soul; they sympathize in every thing, and have
the same love and aversion.

109. One is not happy without the other; nor can either of them be miserable
alone. As if they could change bodies, they take their turns in pain as well as
in pleasure; relieving one another in their most adverse conditions.

110. What one enjoys, the other cannot want. Like the primitive Christians,
they have all things in common, and no property, but in one another.

QUALITIES OF A FRIEND.
111. A true friend unbosoms freely, advises justly, assists readily,
adventures boldly, takes all patiently, defends courageously, and continues a
friend unchangeably.

112. These being the qualities of a friend, we are to find them before we
choose one.

113. The covetous, the angry, the proud, the jealous, the talkative, cannot
but make ill friends, as well as false.

114. In short, choose a friend as thou do a wife, till death separate you.

115. Yet be not a friend beyond the altar, but let virtue bound thy
friendship; else it is not friendship, but an evil confederacy.

116. If my brother, or kinsman, will be my friend, I ought to prefer him
before a stranger; or I show little duty or nature to my parents.

117. And as we ought to prefer our kindred in point of affection, so too in
point of charity, if equally needing and deserving.

CAUTION AND CONDUCT.
118. Be not easily acquainted; lest, finding reason to cool, thou make an
enemy instead of a good neighbor.

119. Be reserved, but not sour; grave, but not formal; bold, but not rash;
humble, but not servile; patient, not insensible; constant, not obstinate;
cheerful, not light; rather sweet, than familiar; familiar, than intimate; and
intimate with very few, and upon very good grounds.

120. Return the civilities thou receivest, and be ever grateful for favors.

REPARATION.
121. If thou have done an injury to another, rather own it than defend it One
way thou gainest forgiveness; the other, thou doublest the wrong and reckoning.

122. Some oppose honor to submission; but it can be no honor to maintain
what it is dishonorable to do.

123. To confess a fault that is none, out of fear, is indeed mean; but not to
be afraid of standing in one, is brutish.

124. We should make more haste to right our neighbor, than we do to wrong
him; and instead of being vindictive, we should leave him to judge of his own
satisfaction.

125. True honor will pay treble damages, rather than justify one wrong by
another.

126. In such controversies, it is but too common for some to say, 'Both are to
blame,' to excuse their own unconcernedness; which is a base neutrality. Others
will cry, 'They are both alike;' thereby involving the injured with the guilty,
to mince the matter for the faulty, or cover their own injustice to the wronged
party.

127. Fear and gain are great perverters of mankind: and where either prevails,
the judgment is violated.

RULES OF CONVERSATION.
128. Avoid company, where it is not profitable or necessary: and in those
occasions, speak little, and last.

129. Silence is wisdom where speaking is folly, and always safe.

130. Some are so foolish, as to interrupt and anticipate those that speak,
instead of hearing and thinking before they answer: which is uncivil, as well
as silly.

131. If thou think twice before thou speak once, thou will speak twice
the better for it.

132. Better say nothing, than not to the purpose. And to speak pertinently,
consider both what is fit, and when it is fit, to speak.

133. In all debates, let truth be thy aim; not victory, or an unjust interest:
and endeavor to gain, rather than to expose, thy antagonist.

134. Give no advantage in argument, nor lose any that is offered. This is a
benefit which arises from temper.

135. Do not use thyself to dispute against thine own judgment, to show wit;
lest it prepare thee to be too indifferent about what is right: nor against
another man, to vex him, or for mere trial of skill; since to inform, or to be
informed, ought to be the end of all conferences.

136. Men are too apt to be more concerned for their credit, than for the cause.

ELOQUENCE.
137. There is a truth and beauty in rhetoric; but it oftener serves ill turns
than good ones.

138. Elegancy is a good mien and address given to matter, be it by proper, or
by figurative speech: where the words are apt, and allusions very natural,
certainly it has a moving grace; but it is too artificial for simplicity and
oftentimes for truth. The danger is, lest it delude the weak; who, in such
cases, may mistake the handmaid for the mistress, if not error for truth.

139. It is certain, truth is least indebted to it, because she has least need
of it, and least uses it.

140. But it is a reprovable delicacy in them that despise truth in plain
clothes.

141. Such luxuriants have but false appetites; like those gluttons, that by
sauce force them, where they have no stomach, and sacrifice to their palate,
not their health: which cannot be without great vanity, nor that without some
sin.

TEMPER.
142. Nothing does reason more right, than the coolness of those that offer it;
for truth often suffers more by the heat of its defenders, than from the
arguments of its opposers.

143. Zeal ever follows an appearance of truth, and the assured are too apt to
be warm; but it is their weak side in argument: zeal being better shown against
sin, than persons, or their mistakes.

TRUTH.
144. Where thou art obliged to speak, be sure to speak the truth; for
equivocation is halfway to lying, as lying the whole way to hell.

JUSTICE.
145. Believe nothing against another, but upon good authority: nor report what
may hurt another, unless it be a greater hurt to others to conceal it.

SECRECY.
146. It is wise not to seek a secret; and honest not to reveal one.

147. Only trust thyself, and another shall not betray thee.

148. Openness has the mischief, though not the malice of treachery.

COMPLACENCY.
149. Never assent merely to please others; for that is, besides flattery,
oftentimes untruth, and discovers a mind liable to be servile and base: nor
contradict to vex others; for that shows an ill temper, and provokes, but
profits nobody.

SHIFTS.
150. Do not accuse others to excuse thyself; for that is neither generous nor
just. But let sincerity and ingenuousness be thy refuge, rather than craft and
falsehood: for cunning borders very near upon knavery.

151. Wisdom never uses or wants it. Cunning to the wise, is as an ape to a man.

INTEREST.
152. Interest has the security, though ^ot the virtue, of a principle. As the
world goes, it is the surest side; for men daily leave both relations and
religion to follow it.

153. It is an odd sight, but very evident, that families and nations of cross
religions and humors unite against those of their own, where they find an
interest to do it.

154. We are tied down by our senses to this world; and where that is in
question, it can be none with worldly men, whether they should not forsake all
other considerations for it.

INQUIRY.
155. Have a care of vulgar errors. Dislike, as well as allow, reasonably.

156. Inquiry is human, blind obedience brutal. Truth never loses by the one,
but often suffers by the other.

157. The usefullest truths are plainest: and while we keep to them, our
differences cannot rise high.

158. There may be a wantonness in search, as well as a stupidity in trusting.
It is great wisdom equally to avoid the extremes.

RIGHT TIMING.
159. Do nothing improperly. Some are witty, kind, cold, angry, easy, stiff,
jealous, careless, cautious, confident, close, open, but all in the wrong place.

160. It is ill mistaking, where the matter is of importance.

161. It is not enough that a thing be right, if it be not sit to be done. If
not prudent, though just, it is not advisable. He that loses by getting, had
better lose than get.

KNOWLEDGE.
162. Knowledge is the treasure, but judgment the treasurer, of a wise man.

163. He that has more knowledge than judgment, is made for another man's use
more than his own.

164. It cannot be a good constitution, where the appetite is great, and the
digestion weak.

165. There are some men, like dictionaries, to be looked into upon occasion;
but have no connection, and are little entertaining.

166. Less knowledge than judgment, will always have the advantage upon the
injudicious knowing man.

167. A wise man makes what he learns his own; the other shows he is but a
copy, or a collection at most.

WIT.
168. Wit is a happy and striking way of expressing a thought.

169. It is not often, though it be lively and mantling, that it carries a
great body with it.

170. Wit, therefore, is fitter for diversion than business, being more
grateful to fancy than judgment.

171. Less judgment than wit, is more sail than ballast.

172. Yet it must be confessed that wit gives an edge to sense, and recommends
it extremely.

173. Where judgment has wit to express it, there is the best orator.

OBEDIENCE TO PARENTS.
174. If thou would be obeyed being a father, being a son be obedient.

175. He that begets thee owns thee, and has a natural right over thee.

176. Next to God, thy parents: next them, the magistrate.

177. Remember that thou art not more indebted to thy parents for thy nature,
than for their love and care.

178. Rebellion, therefore, in children was made death by God's law, and in the
people, the next sin to idolatry, which is renouncing of God, the great parent
of all.

179. Obedience to parents is not only our duty, but our interest. If we
received our life from them, we prolong it by obeying them; for obedience is
the first commandment with promise.

180. The obligation is as indissoluble as the relation.

181. If we must not disobey God to obey them, at least we must let them see
that there is nothing else in our refusal; for some unjust commands cannot
excuse the general neglect of our duty. They will be our parents, and we must
be their children still: and if we cannot act for them against God, neither can
we act against them for ourselves, or any thing else.

BEARING.
182. A man in business must put up many affronts, if he loves his own quiet.

183. We must not pretend to see all that we see, if we would be easy.

184. It were endless to dispute upon every thing that is disputable.

185. A vindictive temper is not only uneasy to others, but to them that have
it.

PROMISING.
186. Rarely promise; but, if lawful, constantly perform.

187. Hasty resolutions are of the nature of vows; and to be equally avoided.

188. 'I will never do this,' says one, yet does it. 'I am resolved to do
that,' says another; but flags upon second thoughts; or does it, though
aukwardly, for his word's sake; as if it were worse to break his word, than to
do amiss in keeping it.

189. Wear none of thine own chains; but keep free, whilst thou art free.

190. It is an effect of passion that wisdom corrects, to lay thyself under
resolutions that cannot be well made, and worse performed.

FIDELITY.
191. Avoid, all thou can, being entrusted; but do thy utmost to discharge
the trust thou undertakest: for carelessness is injurious, if not unjust.

192. The glory of a servant is fidelity, which cannot be without diligence, as
well as truth.

193. Fidelity (...), and adopted servants to be sons.

194. Reward a good servant well: and rather quit, than disquiet thyself with,
an ill one.

MASTER.
195. Mix kindness with authority; and rule more by discretion than rigor.

196. If thy servant be faulty, strive rather to convince him of his error,
than discover thy passion; and when he is sensible forgive him.

197. Remember he is thy fellow creature; and that God's goodness, not thy
merit, has made the difference betwixt thee and him.

198. Let not thy children domineer over thy servants; nor suffer them to
slight thy children.

199. Suppress tales in the general; but where a matter requires notice,
encourage the complaint, and right the aggrieved.

200. If a child, he ought to entreat, and not to command; and if a servant, to
comply, where he does not obey.

201. Though there should be but one master and mistress in a family, yet
servants should know that children have the reversion.

SERVANT.
202. Indulge not unseemly things in thy master's children, nor refuse them
what is fitting: for one is the highest unfaithfulness, and the other
indiscretion, as well as disrespect.

203. Do thine own work honestly and cheerfully; and when that is done, help
thy fellow, that so another time he may help thee.

204. If thou will be a good servant, thou must be true; and thou can not be
true if thou defraudest thy master.

205. A master may be defrauded many ways by a servant: as in time, care,
pains, money, trust.

206. But a true servant is the contrary: he is diligent, careful, trusty. He
tells no Tales, reveals no secrets, refuses no pains, is not to be tempted by
gain, or awed by fear, to unfaithfulness.

207. Such a servant serves God, in serving his master; and has double wages
for his work, to wit, here and hereafter.

JEALOUSY.
208. Be not fancifully jealous, for that is foolish; as to be reasonably so is
wise.

209. He that superfines upon other men's actions, cozens himself, as well as
injures them.

210. To be very subtle and scrupulous in business is as hurtful, as being
overconfident and secure.

211. In difficult cases such a temper is timorous, and in dispatch irresolute.

212. Experience is a safe guide; and a practical head is a great happiness in
business.

POSTERITY.
213. We are too careless of posterity; not considering that as they are, so
the next generation will be.

214. If we would amend the world, we should mend ourselves; and teach our
children to be, not what we are, but what they should be.

215. We are too apt to awaken and tune up their passions by the example of our
own; and to teach them to be pleased, not with what is best, but with what
pleases best.

216. It is our duty, and ought to be our care, to ward against that passion in
them, which is more especially our own weakness and affliction: for we are in
great measure accountable for them, as well as for ourselves.

217. We are in this, also, true turners of the world upside down: for money is
first, and virtue last, and least in our care.

218. It is not how we leave our children, but what we leave them.

219. To be sure, virtue is but a supplement, and not a principal, in their
portion and character: and therefore we see so little wisdom, or goodness,
goodness, among the rich, in proportion to their wealth.

A COUNTRY LIFE.
220. The country life is to be preferred, for there we see the works of God;
but in cities, little else but the works of men: and the one makes a better
subject for our contemplation than the other.

221. As puppets are to men, and babies to children; so is man's workmanship to
God's: we are the picture, he the reality.

222. God's works declare his power, wisdom, and goodness; but man's works, for
the most part, his pride, folly, and excess. The one is for use, the other,
chiefly, for ostentation and lust.

223. The country is both the philosopher's garden and library, in which he
reads and contemplates the power, wisdom, and goodness of God.

224. It is his food, as well as study; and gives him life, as well as learning.

225. A sweet and natural retreat from noise and talk, and allows opportunity
for reflection, and gives the best subjects for it.

226. In short, it is an original, and the knowledge and improvement of it
man's oldest business and trade, and the best he can be of.

ART AND PROJECT.
227. Art is good, where it is beneficial. Socrates wisely bounded his
knowledge and instruction by practice.

228. Have a care, therefore, of projects; and yet despise nothing rashly, or
in the lump.

229. Ingenuity, as well as religion, sometimes suffers between two thieves;
pretenders and despisers.

230. Though injudicious and dishonest projectors often discredit art; yet the
most useful and extraordinary inventions have not, at first, escaped the scorn
of ignorance; (...) their authors rarely have cracking of their heads, or
breaking of their backs.

231. Undertake no experiment in speculation, that appears not true in art; nor
then, at thine own cost, if costly or hazardous in making.

232. As many hands make light work; so several purses make cheap experiments.

INDUSTRY.
233. Industry is certainly very commendable, and supplies the want of parts.

234. Patience and diligence, like faith, remove mountains.

235. Never give out while there is hope; but hope not beyond reason: for that
shows more desire than judgment.

236. It is a profitable wisdom, to know when we have done enough: much time
and pains are spared, in not flattering ourselves against probabilities.

TEMPORAL HAPPINESS.
237. Do good with what thou have, or it will do thee no good.

238. Seek not to be rich, but happy. The one lies in bags, the other in
content, which wealth can never give.

239. We are apt to call things by wrong names. We will have prosperity to be
happiness, and adversity to be misery; though that is the school of wisdom, and
oftentimes the way to eternal happiness.

240. If thou would be happy, bring thy mind to thy condition, and have an
indifferency for more than what is sufficient.

241. Have but little to do, and do it thyself: and do to others as thou
would have them do to thee: so thou can not fail of temporal felicity.

242. The generality are the worse for their plenty. The voluptuous consumes
it, the miser hides it; it is the good man that uses it, and to good purposes.
But such are hardly found among the prosperous.

243. Be rather bountiful, than expensive.

244. Neither make nor go to feasts; but let the laborious poor bless thee at
home in their solitary cottages.

245. Never voluntarily want what thou have in possession; nor so spend it as
to involve thyself in want unavoidable.

246. Be not tempted to presume by success; for many, that have got largely,
have lost all by coveting to get more.

247. To hazard much to get much, has more of avarice than wisdom.

248. It is great prudence, both to bound and use prosperity.

249. Too few know when they have enough; and fewer know how to employ it.

250. It is equally advisable not to part lightly with what is hardly gotten,
and not to shut up closely what flows in freely.

251. Act not the shark upon thy neighbor; nor take advantage of the
ignorance, prodigality, or necessity of any one: for that is next door to a
fraud, and, at lest, makes but an unblessed gain.

252. It is oftentimes the judgment of God upon greedy rich men, that he
suffers them to push on their desires of wealth to the excess of overreaching,
grinding, or oppression; which poisons all they have gotten: so that it
commonly runs away as fast, and by as bad ways, as it was heaped up together.

RESPECT.
253. Never esteem any man, or thyself, the more for money; nor think the
meaner of thyself, or another, for want of it: virtue being the just reason of
respecting, and the want of it of slighting, any one.

254. A man, like a watch, is to be valued for his goings.

255. He that prefers him upon other accounts, bows to an idol.

256. Unless virtue guide us, our choice must be wrong.

257. An able bad man is an ill instrument, and to be shunned as the plague.

258. Be not deceived with the first appearances of things; but give thyself
time to be in the right.

259. Show is not substance: realities govern wise men.

260. Have a care, therefore, where there is more sail than ballast.

HAZARD.
261. In all business, it is best to put nothing to hazard: but where it is
unavoidable, be not rash, but firm and resigned.

262. We should not be troubled for what we cannot help: but if it was our
fault, let it be so no more. Amendment is repentance, if not reparation.

263. As a desperate game needs an able gamester; so consideration often would
prevent, what the best skill in the world cannot recover.

264. Where the probability of advantage exceeds not that of loss, wisdom never
adventures.

265. To shoot well flying, is well; but to choose it has more of vanity than
judgment.

266. To be dexterous in danger, is a virtue; but to court danger to show it,
is weakness.

DETRACTION.
267. Have a care of that base evil, detraction. It is the fruit of envy, as
that is of pride, the immediate offspring of the Devil: who, of an angel, a
Lucifer, a son of the morning, made himself a serpent, a Devil, a Beelzebub,
and all that is obnoxious to the Eternal Goodness.

268. Virtue is not secure against envy. Men will lessen what they will not
imitate.

269. Dislike what deserves it; but never hate, for that is of the nature of
malice: which is almost ever to persons, not things; and is one of the blackest
qualities sin begets in the soul.

MODERATION.
270. It were an happy day, if men could bound and qualify their resentments
with charity to the offender: for then, our anger would be without sin, and
better convict and edify the guilty; which alone can make it lawful.

271. Not to be provoked is best; but if moved, never correct till the fume is
spent; for every stroke our fury strikes, is sure to hit ourselves at last.

272. If we did but observe the allowances our reason makes upon reflection,
when our passion is over, we could not want a rule how to behave ourselves
again on the like occasions.

273. We are more prone to complain than redress, and to censure than excuse.

274. It is next to unpardonable, that we can so often blame what we will not
once mend. It shows that we know, but will not do, our Master's will.

275. They that censure, should practice; or else, let them have the first
stone, and the last too.

TRICK.
276. Nothing needs a trick, but a trick; sincerity loathes one.

277. We must take care to do things rightly: for a just sentence may be
unjustly executed.

278. Circumstances give great light to true judgment, if well weighed.

PASSION.
279. Passion is a sort of fever in the mind, which ever leaves us weaker than
it found us.

280. But, being intermitting, to be sure it is curable with care.

281. It, more than any thing, deprives us of the use of our judgment; for it
raises a dust very hard to see through.

282. Like wine, whose lees fly up, being jogged, it is too muddy to drink.

283. It may not unfitly be termed the mob of the man, that commits a riot upon
his reason.

284. I have oftentimes thought, that a passionate man is like a weak spring,
that cannot stand long locked.

285. And it is as true, that those things are unfit for use, that cannot bear
small knocks without breaking.

286. He that will not hear, cannot judge; and he that cannot bear
contradiction, may, with all his wit, miss the mark.

287. Objection and debate sift out truth; which needs temper, as well as
judgment.

288. But above all, observe it in resentments; for there passion is most
extravagant.

289. Never chide for anger, but instruction.

290. He that corrects out of passion, raises revenge sooner than repentance.

291. It has more of wantonness than wisdom; and resembles those that eat to
please their palate, rather than their appetite.

292. It is the difference between a wise and a weak man; this judges by the
lump, that by parts, and their connection.

293. The Greeks used to say, 'All cases are governed by their circumstances.'
The same thing may be well and ill, as they change or vary the matter.

294. A man's strength is shown by his bearing. 'Bonum agere, and mala pati,
regis est.'

PERSONAL CAUTIONS.
295. Reflect without malice, but never without need.

296. Despise nobody, nor no condition; lest it come to be thine own.

297. Never rail, nor taunt. The one is rude, the other is scornful, and both
evil.

298. Be not provoked by injuries, to commit them.

299. Upbraid only ingratitude.

300. Haste makes work, which caution prevents.

301. Tempt no man; lest thou fall for it.

302. Have a care of presuming upon after-games; for if that miss, all is gone.

303. Opportunities should never be lost, because they can hardly be regained.

304. It is well to cure, but better to prevent a distemper. The first shows
more skill, but the last more wisdom.

305. Never make a trial of skill in difficult or hazardous cases.

306. Refuse not to be informed: for that shows pride or stupidity.

307. Humility and knowledge in poor clothes, excel pride and ignorance in
costly attire.

308. Neither despise, nor oppose, what thou do not understand.

BALANCE.
309. We must not be concerned above the value of the thing that engages us;
nor raised above reason, in maintaining what we think reasonable.

310. It is too common an error, to invert the order of things, by making an
end of that which is a means, and a means of that which is an end.

311. Religion and government escape not this mischief: the first is too often
made a means, instead of an end; the other an end, instead of a means.

312. Thus men seek wealth, rather than subsistence; and the end of clothes is
the least reason of their use. Nor is the satisfying of our appetite our end in
eating, so much as the pleasing of our palate. The like may also be said of
building, furniture, etc. where the man rules not the beast, and appetite
submits not to reason.

313. It is great wisdom to proportion our esteem to the nature of the thing:
for as that way things will not be undervalued, so neither will they engage us
above their intrinsic worth.

314. If we suffer little things to have great hold upon us, we shall be as
much transported for them, as if they deserved it.

315. It is an old proverb, 'Maxima bella ex levissimis causis:' The greatest
feuds have had the smallest beginnings.

316. No matter what the subject of the dispute be, but what place we give it
in our minds; for that governs our concern and resentment.

317. It is one of the fatalest errors of our lives, when we spoil a good cause
by an ill management: and it is not impossible but we may mean well in an ill
business; but that will not defend it.

318. If we are but sure the end is right, we are too apt to gallop over all
bounds to compass it: not considering, that lawful ends may be very unlawfully
attained.

319. Let us be careful to take just ways to compass just things; that they may
last in their benefits to us.

320. There is a troublesome humor some men have, that if they may not lead,
they will not follow; but had rather a thing were never done, than not done
their own way, though otherwise very desirable.

321. This comes of an over-fulness of ourselves, and shows we are more
concerned for praise than the success of what we think a good thing.

POPULARITY.
322. Affect not to be seen, and men will less see thy weakness.

323. They that show more than they are, raise an expectation they cannot
answer; and so lose their credit, as soon as they are found out.

324. Avoid popularity. It has many snares, and no real benefit to thyself; and
uncertainty to others.

PRIVACY.
325. Remember the proverb, 'Bene qui latuit, been vixit:' They are happy, that
live retiredly.

326. If this be true, princes and their grandees, of all men, are the
unhappiest; for they live least alone: and they that must be enjoyed by every
body, can never enjoy themselves as they should.

327. It is the advantage little men have upon them; they can be private, and
have leisure for family comforts, which are the greatest worldly contents men
can enjoy.

328. But they that place pleasure in greatness, seek it there: and, we see,
rule is as much the ambition of some natures, as privacy is the choice of
others.

GOVERNMENT.
329. Government has many shapes: but it is sovereignty, though not freedom, in
all of them.

330. Rex and Tyrannus, are very different characters: one rules his people by
laws, to which they consent; the other by his absolute will and power. That is
called freedom; this, tyranny.

331. The first is endangered by the ambition of the populace, which shakes the
constitution; the other by an ill administration, which hazards the tyrant and
his family.

332. It is great wisdom, in princes of both sorts, not to strain points too
high with their people; for whether the people have a right to oppose them or
not, they are ever sure to attempt it when things are carried too far: though
the remedy oftentimes proves worse than the disease.

333. Happy that king who is great by justice, and that people who are free by
obedience.

334. Where the ruler is just, he may be strict; else it is two to one it turns
upon him: and though he should prevail, he can be no gainer, where his people
are the losers.

335. Princes must not have passions in government, nor resent beyond interest
and religion.

336. Where example keeps pace with authority, power hardly fails to be obeyed,
and magistrates to be honored.

337. Let the people think they govern, and they will be governed.

338. This cannot fail, if those they trust are trusted.

339. That prince who is just to them in great things, and humors them
oftentimes in small ones, is sure to have and keep them from all the world.

340. For the people is the politic wife of the prince, that may be better
managed by wisdom, than ruled by force.

341. But where the magistrate is partial, and serves ill turns, he loses his
authority with the people, and gives the populace opportunity to gratify their
ambition: and so lays a stumblingblock for his people to fall.

342. It is true, that where a subject is more popular than the prince, the
prince is in danger; but it is as true, that it is his own fault: for nobody
has the like means, interest, or reason, to be popular, as he.

343. It is an unaccountable thing, that some princes incline rather to be
feared than loved; when they see, that fear does not oftener secure a prince
against the dissatisfaction of his people, than love makes a subject too many
for such a prince.

344. Certainly service upon inclination is like to go farther, than obedience
upon compulsion.

345. The Romans had a just sense of this, when they placed Optimus before
Maximus, to their most illustrious captains and Cesars.

346. Besides, experience tells us, that goodness raises a nobler passion in
the soul, and gives a better sense of duty, than severity.

347. What did Pharaoh get by increasing the Israelites task? Ruin to himself
in the end.

348. Kings, chiefly in this, should imitate God; their mercy should be above
all their works.

349. The difference between the prince and the peasant is in this world; but a
temper ought to be observed by him that has the advantage here, because of the
judgment of the next.

350. The end of every thing should direct the means: now that of government
being the good of the whole, nothing less should be the aim of the prince.

351. As often as rulers endeavor to attain just ends by just mediums, they
are sure of a quiet and easy government; and as sure of convulsions, where the
natures of things are violated, and their order overruled.

352. It is certain, princes ought to have great allowances made them for
faults in government, since they see by other people's eyes, and hear by their
ears; but ministers of state, their immediate confidents and instruments, have
much to answer for, if, to gratify private passions, they misguide the prince
to do public injury.

353. Ministers of state should undertake their posts at their peril. If
princes overruled them, let them show the law, and humbly resign; if fear,
gain, or flattery prevail, let them answer it to the law.

354. The prince cannot be preserved, but where the minister is punishable; for
people, as well as princes, will not endure 'imperium in imperio.'

355. If ministers are weak or ill men, and so spoil their places, it is the
prince's fault that chose them; but if their places spoil them, it is their own
fault to be made worse by them.

356. It is but just, that those that reign by their princes, should suffer for
their princes: for it is a safe and necessary maxim, not to shift heads in
government, which the hands are in being that should answer for them.

357. And yet it were intolerable to be a minister of state, if every body may
be accuser and judge.

358. Let, therefore, the false accuser no more escape an exemplary punishment,
than the guilty minister.

359. For it profanes government to have the credit of the leading men in it
subject to vulgar censure, which is often ill-grounded.

360. The safety of a prince, therefore, consists in a well chosen council: and
that only can be said to be so, where the persons that compose it are qualified
for the business that comes before them.

361. Who would send to a tailor to make a lock, or to a smith to make a suit
of clothes?

362. Let there (...) merchants for trade, seamen for the admiralty, travelers
for foreign affairs, some of the leading men of the country for home-business,
and common and civil lawyers to advise of legality and right, who should always
keep to the strict rules of law.

363. Three things contribute much to ruin government; looseness, oppression,
and envy.

364. Where the reins of government are too slack, there the manners of the
people are corrupted: and that destroys industry, begets effeminacy, and
provokes heaven against it.

365. Oppression makes a poor country, and a desperate people, who always wait
an opportunity to change.

366. "He that rules over men, must be just, ruling in the fear of God;" said
an old and wise king.

367. Envy disturbs and distracts government, clogs the wheels, and perplexes
the administration: and nothing contributes more to this disorder, than a
partial distribution of rewards and punishments in the sovereign.

368. As it is not reasonable that men should be compelled to serve; so those
that have employments should not be endured to leave them humoursomely.

369. Where the state intends a man no affront, he should not affront the state.

A PRIVATE LIFE.
370. A private life is to be preferred; the honor and gain of public posts
bearing no proportion with the comfort of it. The one is free and quiet, the
other servile and noisy.

371. It was a great answer of the Shunamite woman, "I dwell among my own
people."

372. They that live of their own, neither need, nor often list, to wear the
livery of the public.

373. Their subsistence is not during pleasure, nor have they patrons to please
or present.

374. If they are not advanced, neither can they be disgraced; and as they know
not the smiles of majesty, so they feel not the frowns of greatness, or the
effects of envy.

375. If they want the pleasures of a court, they also escape the temptations
of it.

376. Private men, in fine, are so much their own, that, paying common dues,
they are sovereigns of all the rest.

A PUBLIC LIFE.
377. Yet the public must and will be served; and they that do it well,
deserve public marks of honor and profit.

378. To do so, men must have public minds, as well as salaries; or they will
serve private ends at the public cost.

379. Governments can never be well administered, but where those entrusted
make conscience of well discharging their places.

QUALIFICATIONS.
380. Five things are requisite to a good officer; ability, clean hands,
dispatch, patience, and impartiality.

CAPACITY.
381. He that understands not his employment, whatever else he knows, must be
unfit for it; and the public suffer by his inexpertness.

382. They that are able should be just too; or the government may be the worse
for their capacity.

CLEAN HANDS.
383. Covetousness in such men prompts them to prostitute the public for gain.

384. The taking of a bribe, or gratuity, should be punished with as severe
penalties as the defrauding of the state.

385. Let men have sufficient salaries, and exceed them at their peril.

386. It is a dishonor to government, that its officers should live of
benevolence; as it ought to be infamous for officers to dishonor the public,
by being twice paid for the same business.

387. (...) to be paid, and not to do business, is rank oppression.

DISPATCH.
388. Dispatch is a great and good quality in an officer, where duty, not gain,
excites it. But of this too many make their private market, and overplus to
their wages. Thus the salary is for doing, and the bribe for dispatching the
business: as if business could be done before it were dispatched: or they were
to be paid apart, one by the government, the other by the party.

389. Dispatch is as much the duty of an officer, as doing; and very much the
honor of the government he serves.

390. Delays have been more injurious than direct injustice.

391. They too often starve those they dare not deny.

392. The very winner is made a loser, because he pays twice for his own; like
those that purchase estates, mortgaged before to the full value.

393. Our law says well, 'To delay justice, is injustice.'

394. Not to have a right, and not to come at it, differ little.

395. Refusal, or dispatch, is the duty and wisdom of a good officer.

PATIENCE.
396. Patience is a virtue every where: but it shines with greatest luster in
the men of government.

397. Some are so proud or testy, they will not hear what they should redress.

398. Others so weak, they sink, or burst, under the weight of their office;
though they can lightly run away with the salary of it.

399. Business can never be well done, that is not well understood: which
cannot be without patience.

400. It is cruelty, indeed, not to give the unhappy an hearing, whom we ought
to help; but it is the top of oppression to brow-beat the humble and modest
miserable, when they seek relief.

401. Some, it is true, are unreasonable in their desires and hopes; but then
we should inform, not rail at and reject them.

402. It is, therefore, as great an instance of wisdom as a man in business can
give, to be patient under the impertinencies and contradictions that attend it.

403. Method goes far to prevent trouble in business: for it makes the task
easy, hinders confusion, saves abundance of time, and instructs those that have
business depending, what to do, and what to hope.

IMPARTIALITY.
404. Impartiality, though it be the last, is not the least part of the
character of a good magistrate.

405. It is noted as a fault in holy writ, even to regard the poor in judgment;
how much more the rich?

406. If our compassions must not sway us; less should our fears, profits, or
prejudices.

407. Justice is justly represented blind, because she sees no difference in
the parties concerned.

408. She has but one scale and weight, for rich and poor, great and small.

409. Her sentence is not guided by the person, but the cause.

410. The impartial judge, in judgment, knows nothing but the law; the prince,
no more than the peasant; his kindred, than a stranger. Nay, his enemy is sure
to be upon equal terms with his friend, when he is upon the bench.

411. Impartiality is the life of justice, as that is of government.

412. Nor is it only a benefit to the state; for private families cannot
subsist comfortably without it.

413. Parents that are partial, are ill obeyed by their children; and partial
masters not better served by their servants.

414. Partiality is always indirect, if not dishonest: for it shows a bias,
where reason would have none; if not an injury, which justice every where
forbids.

415. As it makes favorites without reason, so it uses no reason in judging of
actions: confirming the proverb, 'The crow thinks her own bird the fairest.'

416. What some see to be no fault in one, they will have criminal in another.

417. Nay, how ugly do our failings look to us in the persons of others; which
yet we see not in ourselves.

418. And but too common it is, for some people not to know their own maxims
and principles in the mouths of other men, when they give occasion to use them.

419. Partiality corrupts our judgment of persons and things, of ourselves and
others.

420. It contributes more than any thing to factions in the government, and
feuds in families.

421. It is a prodigal passion, that seldom returns till it is hunger-bit, and
disappointments bring it within bounds.

422. And yet we may be indifferent, to a fault.

INDIFFERENCE.
423. Indifference is good in judgment, but bad in relation, and stark naught
in religion.

424. And even in judgment, our indifference must be to the persons, not
causes; for one, to be sure, is right.

NEUTRALITY.
425. Neutrality is something else than indifference; and yet of kin to it too.

426. A judge ought to be indifferent; and yet he cannot be said to be neutral.

427. The one being to be even in judgment, and the other not to meddle at all.

428. And where it is lawful, to be sure, it is best to be neutral.

429. He that espouses parties, can hardly divorce himself from their fate; and
more fall with their party, than rise with it.

430. A wise neuter joins with neither but uses both, as his honest interest
leads him.

431. A neuter only has room to be a peacemaker: for being of neither side, he
has the means of mediating a reconciliation of both.

A PARTY.
432. And yet where right or religion gives a call, a neuter must be a coward
or an hypocrite.

433. In such cases, we should never be backward; nor yet mistaken.

434. When our right or religion is in question, then is the fittest time to
assert it.

435. Nor must we always be neutral, where our neighbor is concerned: for
though meddling is a fault, helping is a duty.

436. We have a call to do good, as often as we have the power and occasion.

437. If Heathens could say, 'We are not born for ourselves;' surely Christians
should practice it.

438. They are taught so by His example, as well as doctrine, from whom they
have borrowed their name.

OSTENTATION.
439. Do what good thou can unknown; and be not vain of what ought rather to
be felt than seen.

440. The humble, in the parable of the day of judgment, forgot their good
works, "Lord, when did we so and so?"

441. He that does good for good's sake, seeks neither praise nor reward,
though sure of both at last.

COMPLETE VIRTUE.
442. Content not thyself that thou art virtuous in the general: for one link
being wanting, the chain is defective.

443. Perhaps thou art rather innocent than virtuous, and owe more to thy
constitution than to thy religion

444. To be innocent is to be not guilty; but to be v^^^^ous is to overcome our
evil inclinations.

445. If thou have not conquered thyself in that which is thy own particular
weakness, thou have no title to virtue, though thou art ^ of other men's.

446. For a covetous man to inveigh against prodigality, an atheist against
idolatry, a tyrant against rebellion, or a liar against forgery, and a drunkard
against intemperance, is for the pot to call the kettle black.

447. Such reproof would have but little success, because it would carry but
little authority with it.

448. If thou would conquer thy weakness, thou must never gratify it.

449. No man is compelled to evil; his consent only makes it his.

450. It is no sin to be tempted, but to be overcome.

451. What man, in his right mind, would conspire his own hurt? Men are beside
themselves, when they transgress against their convictions.

452. If thou would not sin, do not desire; and if thou would not lust, do
not embrace the temptation: no, not look at it, nor think of it.

453. Thou would take much pains to save thy body: take some, prithee, to
save thy soul.

RELIGION.
454. Religion is the fear of God, and its demonstration good works; and faith
is the root of both: "For without faith we cannot please God;" nor can we fear
what we do not believe.

455. The devils also believe and know abundance: but in this is the
difference, their faith works not by (...) nor their knowledge by obedience;
and therefore they are never the better for them. And if ours be such, we shall
be of their church, not of Christ's; for as the head is, so must the body be.

456. He was holy, humble, harmless, meek, merciful, etc. when among us; to
teach us what we should be when he was gone: and yet he is among us still, and
in us too, a living and perpetual preacher of the same grace, by his spirit in
our consciences.

457. A minister of the gospel ought to be one of Christ's making, if he would
pass for one of Christ's ministers.

458. And if he be one of his making, he knows and does, as well as believes.

459. That minister, whose life is not the model of his doctrine, is a babbler
rather than a preacher, a quack rather than a physician of value.

460. Of old time they were made ministers by the Holy Ghost: and the more that
is an ingredient now, the fitter they are for that work.

461. Running streams are not so apt to corrupt as stagnant waters; nor
itinerant, as settled preachers: but they are not to run before they are sent.

462. As they freely receive from Christ, so they give.

463. They will not make that a trade, which they know ought not, in
conscience, to be one.

464. Yet there is no fear of their living, that design not to live by it.

465. The humble and true teacher meets with more than he expects.

466. He accounts content with godliness great gain, and therefore seeks not to
make a gain of godliness.

467. As the ministers of Christ are made by him, and are like him, so they
beget people into the same likeness.

468. To be like Christ, then, is to be a Christian. And regeneration is the
only way to the kingdom of God, which we pray for.

469. Let us today, therefore, hear his voice, and not harden our hearts, who
speaks to us many ways: in the scriptures, in our hearts, by his servants and
providence: and the sum of all is holiness and charity.

470. St. James gives a short draught of the matter, but very full and
teaching, "Pure religion, and undefiled before God the Father, is this, to
visit the fatherless and the widows in their affliction, and to keep ourselves
unspotted from the world:" which is comprised in these two words, charity and
piety.

471. They that truly make these their aim, will find them, their attainment;
and, with them, the peace that follows so excellent a condition.

472. Amuse not thyself, therefore, with the numerous opinions of the world;
nor value thyself upon verbal orthodoxy, philosophy, or thy skill in tongues,
or knowledge of the fathers; (too much the business and vanity of the world)
but in this rejoice, "That thou know God, that is the Lord, who exercises
loving kindness, and judgment, and righteousness in the earth."

473. Public worship is very commendable, if well performed. We owe it to God
and good example. But we must know, that God is not tied to time or place, who
is every where at the same time; and this we shall know as far as we are
capable, if, wherever we are, our desires are to be with him.

474. Serving God, people generally confine to the acts of public and private
worship: and those the more zealous do often repeat, in hopes of acceptance.

475. But if we consider that God is an infinite spirit, and as such, every
where; and that our Savior has taught us, that he will be worshipped in spirit
and in truth, we shall see the shortness of such a notion.

476. For serving God concerns the frame of our spirits, in the whole course of
our lives; in every occasion we have, in which we may show our love to his law.

477. For as men in battle are continually in the way of shot, so we, in this
world, are ever within the reach of temptation: and herein do we serve God, if
we avoid what we are forbid, as well as do what he commands.

478. God is better served in resisting a temptation to evil, than in many
formal prayers.

479. This is but twice or thrice a day; but that every hour and moment of the
day. So much more is our continual watch, than our evening and morning devotion

480. Would thou then serve God? Do not that alone, which thou would not
that another should see thee do.

481. Do not take God's name in vain, or disobey thy parents, or wrong thy
neighbor, or commit adultery, even in thine heart.

482. Neither be vain, lascivious, proud, drunken, revengeful, or angry; nor
lie, detract, backbite, overreach, oppress, deceive, or betray; but watch
vigorously against all temptations to these things, as knowing that God is
present, the overseer of all thy ways and most inward thoughts, and the avenger
of his own law upon the disobedient; and thou will acceptably serve God.

483. Is it not reason, if we expect the acknowledgments of those to whom we
are bountiful, that we should reverently pay ours to God, our most munificent
and constant benefactor?

484. The world represents a rare and sumptuous palace; mankind, the great
family in it; and God, the mighty Lord and Master of it.

485. We are all sensible what a stately seat it is; the heavens adorned with
so many glorious luminaries; and the earth with groves, plains, valleys, hills,
fountains, ponds, lakes, and rivers; and variety of fruits and creatures for
food, pleasure and profit; in short, how noble an house he keeps, and the
plenty, and variety, and excellency of his table; his orders, seasons, and
suitableness of every time and thing. But we must be as sensible, or at least
ought to be, what careless and idle servants we are, and how short and
disproportionable our behavior is to his bounty and goodness; how long he
bears, how often he reprieves and forgives us; who, notwithstanding our breach
of promises, and repeated neglects, has not yet been provoked to break up
house, and send us to shift for ourselves. Should not this great goodness raise
a due sense in us of our undutifulness, and a resolution to alter our course,
and mend our manners; that we may be for the future more worthy communicants at
our Master's good and great table? Especially since it is not more certain that
we deserve his displeasure, than that we shall feel it, if we continue to be
unprofitable servants.

486. But though God has replenished this world with abundance of good things
for man's life and comfort, yet they are all but imperfect goods. He only is
the perfect good to whom they point. But alas! men cannot see him for them;
though they should always see him in them.

487. I have often wondered at the unaccountableness of man in this, among
other things, that, though he loves changes so well, he should care so little
to hear or think of his last, great, and, if he pleases, his best, change.

488. Being, as to our bodies, composed of changeable elements, we, with the
world, are made up of, and subsist by, revolution; but our souls being of
another and nobler nature, we should seek our rest in a more enduring
habitation.

489. The truest end of life is to know the life that never ends.

490. He that makes this his care, will find it his crown at last.

491. Life else were a misery, rather than a pleasure; a judgment, not a
blessing.

492. For, to know, regret, and resent, to desire, hope, and fear, more than a
beast, and not live beyond him, is to make a man less than a beast.

493. It is the amends of a short and troublesome life, that doing good, and
suffering ill, intitles man to one longer and better.

494. This ever raises the good man's hope, and gives him tastes beyond this
world.

495. As it is his aim, so none else can hit the mark.

496. Many make it their speculation, but it is the good man's practice.

497. His work keeps pace with his life, and so leaves nothing to be done when
he dies.

498. And he that lives to live for ever, never fears dying.

499. Nor can the means be terrible to him that heartily believes the end.

500. For though death be a dark passage, it leads to immortality; and that is
recompense enough for suffering of it.

501. And yet faith lights us, even through the grave; being the evidence of
things not seen.

502. And this is the comfort of the good, that the grave cannot hold them, and
that they live as soon as they die.

503. For death is no more than a turning of us over from time to eternity.

504. Nor can there be a revolution without it; for it supposes the dissolution
of one form, in order to the succession of another.

505. Death, then, being the way and condition of life, we cannot love to live,
if we cannot bear to die.

506. Let us, then, not cozen ourselves with the shells and husks of things;
nor prefer form to power, nor shadows to substance: pictures of bread will not
satisfy hunger, nor those of devotion please God.

507. This world is a form; our bodies are forms; and no visible acts of
devotion can be without forms. But yet the less form in religion the better,
since God is a spirit: for the more mental our worship, the more adequate to
the nature of God; the more silent, the more suitable to the language of a
spirit.

508. Words are for others, not for ourselves: nor for God, who hears not as
bodies do, but as spirits should.

509. If we would know this dialect, we must learn of the divine principle in
us. As we hear the dictates of that, so God hears us.

510. There we may see him, too, in all his attributes; though but in little,
yet as much as we can apprehend or bear: for as he is in himself, he is
incomprehensible, and "dwells in that light no eye can approach." But in his
image we may behold his glory; enough to exalt our apprehensions of God, and to
instruct us in that worship which pleases him.

511. Men may tire themselves in a labyrinth of search, and talk of God; but if
we would know him indeed, it must be from the impressions we receive of him:
and the softer our hearts are, the deeper and livelier those will be upon us.

512. If he has made us sensible of his justice, by his reproof; of his
patience, by his forbearance; of his mercy, by his forgiveness; of his
holiness, by the sanctification of our hearts through his spirit; we have a
grounded knowledge of God. This is experience, that speculation; this
enjoyment, that report. In short, this is undeniable evidence, with the
realities of religion, and will stand all winds and weathers.

513. As our faith, so our devotion, should be lively. Cold meat will not serve
at those repasts.

514. It is a coal from God's altar must kindle our fire: and without fire,
true fire, no acceptable sacrifice.

515. "Open thou my lips, and then" said the royal prophet, "my mouth shall
praise God." But not 'till then.

516. The preparation of the heart, as well as the answer of the tongue, is of
the Lord: and to have it, our prayers must be powerful, and our worship
grateful.

517. Let us choose, therefore, to commune where there is the warmest sense of
religion; where devotion exceeds formality, and practice most corresponds with
profession; and where there is, at least, as much charity as zeal: for where
this society is to be found, there shall we find the church of God.

518. As good, so ill men, are all of a church: and every body knows who must
be head of it.

519. The humble, meek, merciful, just, pious, and devout souls, are every
where of one religion; and when death has taken off the mask, they will know
one another, though the diverse liveries they wear here make them strangers.

520. Great allowances are to be made for education and personal weaknesses;
but it is a rule with me, 'That man is truly religious, that loves the
persuasion he is of for the piety, rather than the ceremony, of it.'

521. They that have one end, can hardly disagree when they meet. At least
their concern in the greater, moderates their value for, and difference about,
the lesser things.

522. It is a sad reflection, that many men hardly have any religion at all,
and most men have none of their own; for that which is the religion of their
education, and not of their judgment, is the religion of another, and not
theirs.

523. To have religion upon authority, and not upon conviction, is like a
singer-watch, to be set forwards or backwards, as he pleases that has it in
keeping.

524. It is a preposterous thing, that men can venture their souls, where they
will not venture their money: for they will take their religion upon trust, but
not trust a synod about the goodness of half a crown.

525. They will follow their own judgment when their money is concerned,
whatever they do for their souls.

526. But, to be sure, that religion cannot be right, that a man is the worse
for having.

527. No religon is better than an unnatural one.

528. Grace perfects, but never sours or spoils, nature.

529. To be unnatural in defense of grace is a contradiction.

530. Hardly any thing looks worse than to defend religion by ways that show it
has no credit with us.

531. A devout man is one thing, a stickler is quite another.

532. When our minds exceed their just bounds, we must not discredit what we
would recommend.

533. To be furious in religion is to be irreligiously religious.

534. If he that is without bowels is not a man: how, then, can he be a
Christian?

535. It were better to be of no church, than to be bitter for any.

536. Bitterness comes very near to enmity, and that is Beelzebub; because the
perfection of wickedness.

537. A good end cannot sanctify evil means; nor must we ever do evil that good
may come of it.

538. Some folk think they may scold, rail, hate, rob, and kill too; so it be
but for God's sake.

539. But nothing in us unlike him can please him.

540. It is as great presumption to send our passions upon God's errands, as it
is to palliate them with God's name.

541. Zeal dropped in charity, is good; without it, good for nothing: for it
devours all it comes near.

542. They must first judge themselves, that presume to censure others: and
such will not be apt to over-shoot the mark.

543. We are too ready to retaliate, rather than forgive, or gain by love and
information.

544. And yet we could hurt no man that we believe loves us.

545. Let us, then, try what love will do: for if men do once see we love them,
we should soon find they would not harm us.

546. Force may subdue, but love gains; and he that forgives first, wins the
laurel.

547. If I am even with my enemy, the debt is paid; but if I forgive it, I
oblige him for ever.

548. Love is the hardest lesson in Christianity; but, for that reason, it
should be most our care to learn it. 'Difficilia quae pulchra.'

549. It is a severe rebuke upon us, that God makes us so many allowances, and
we make so few to our neighbor: as if charity had nothing to do with religion;
or love with faith, that ought to work by it.

550. I find all sorts of people agree, whatsoever were their animosities, when
humbled by the approaches of death; then they forgive, then they pray for, and
love one another: which shows us, that it is not our reason, but our passion,
that makes and holds up the feuds that reign among men in their health and
fullness. They, therefore, that live nearest to that state in which they should
die, must certainly live the best.

551. Did we (...) reckoning and judgment (...) think enough of what (...) we
should allow more love (...) than we do: since religion itself is nothing else
but love to God and man.

552. "He that lives in love, lives in God," says the beloved disciple: and, to
be sure, a man can live no where better.

553. It is most reasonable men should value that benefit which is most
durable. Now tongues shall cease, and prophecy fail, and faith shall be
consummated in sight, and hope in enjoyment; but love remains.

554. Love is indeed heaven upon earth; since heaven above would not be heaven
without it; for where there is not love, there is fear; but, 'Perfect love
casts out fear." And yet we naturally fear most to offend what we most love.

555. What we love, we will hear; what we love, we will trust; and what we
love, we will serve, aye, and suffer for too. "If you love me," says our
blessed Redeemer, "keep my commandments." Why? Why then, he will love us; then
we shall be his friends; then he will send us the Comforter; then whatever we
ask we shall receive; and then, where he is we shall be also, and that for
ever. Behold the fruits of love; the power, virtue, benefit, and beauty of love!

556. Love is above all; and when it prevails in us all, we shall all be
lovely, and in love with God, and one with another.

Amen.
FRUITS OF SOLITUDE, IN REFLECTIONS AND MAXIMS. PART II.
THE RIGHT MORALIST.
1. A RIGHT moralist is a great and good man; but, for that reason, he is
rarely to be found.

2. There are a sort of people that are fond of the character, who, in my
opinion, have but little title to it.

3. They think it enough, not to defraud a man of his pay, or betray his
friend; but never consider, that the law forbids the one at his peril, and that
virtue is seldom the reason of the other.

4. But certainly, he that covets can no more be a moral man, than he that
steals; since he does so in his mind. Nor can he be one that robs his neighbor
of his credit, or that craftily undermines him of his trade or office.

5. If a man pays his tailor, but debauches his wife, is he a current moralist?

6. But what shall we say of the man that rebel; against his father, is an ill
husband, or an abusive neighbor; one that is lavish of his time, of his health
and of his estate, in which his family is so nearly concerned? Must he go for a
right moralist, because he pays his rent well?

7. I would ask some of those men of morals, whether he that robs God, and
himself too, though he should not defraud his neighbor, be the moral man?

8. Do I owe myself nothing? And do I not owe all to God? And, if paying what
we owe makes the moral man, is it not fit we should begin to render our dues
where we owe our very beginning; aye, our all?

9. The complete moralist begins with God; he gives him his due, his heart, his
love, his service: the bountiful giver of his well-being, as well as being.

10. He that lives without a sense of this dependence and obligation, cannot be
a moral man, because he does not know his returns of love and obedience, as
becomes an honest and a sensible creature: which very term implies he is not
his own; and it cannot be very honest to misemploy another's goods.

11. But how! can there be no debt but to a fellow creature? Or, will our
exactness in paying those trifling ones, while we neglect our weightier
obligations, cancel the bonds we lie under, and render us right and thorough
moralists?

12. As judgments are paid before bonds, and bonds before bills or bookdebts;
so the moralist considers his obligations according to their several dignities.

In the first place, him to whom he owes himself. Next, himself, in his health
and livelihood. Lastly, his other obligations, whether rational or pecuniary;
doing to others, to the extent of his ability, as he would have them do unto
him.

13. In short, the moral man is he that loves God above all, and his neighbor
as himself: which fulfils both tables at once.

THE WORLD'S ABLE MAN.
14. It is by some thought the character of an able man, to be dark, and not
understood. But I am sure that is not fair play.

15. If he be so by silence, it is better; but if by disguises, it is insincere
and hateful.

16. Secresy is one thing, false lights are another.

17. The honest man, that is rather free than open, is ever to be preferred;
especially when sense is at the helm.

18. The glorying of the other humor is in a vice: for it is not human to be
cold, dark, and unconversable. I was going to say, they are like pickpockets in
a crowd, where a man most ever have his hand on his purse; or as spies in a
garrison, that, if not prevented, betray it.

19. They are the reverse of human nature; and yet this is the present world's
wise man and politician: excellent qualities for Lapland! where, they say,
witches (though not many conjurers) dwell.

20. Like highwaymen, that rarely rob without vizards, or in the same wigs and
clothes, but have address for every enterprise.

21. At best, he may be a cunning man, which is a sort of lurcher in politics.

22. He is never too hard for the wise man upon the square; for that is out of
his element, and puts him quite by his skill. Nor are wise men ever catched by
him, but when they trust him.

23. But as cold and close as he seems, he can and will please all, if he gets
by it; though it should neither please God nor himself at bottom.

24. He is for every cause that brings him gain; but implacable, if
disappointed of success.

25. And what he cannot hinder, he will be sure to spoil by over-doing it.

26. None so zealous then as he, for that which he cannot abide.

27. What is it he will not, or cannot do, to hide his true sentiments?

28. For his interest he refuses no side or party; and will take the wrong by
the hand, when the other will not do, with as good a grace as the right.

29. Nay, he commonly chooses the worst, because that brings the best bribe: his
cause being ever money.

30. He sails with all winds, and is never out of his way, where any thing is
to be had.

31. A privateer, indeed, and every where a bird of prey.

32. True to nothing but himself; and false to all persons and parties, to
serve his own turn.

33. Talk with him as often as you please, he will never pay you in good coin;
for it is either false or clipped.

34. But to give a false reason for any thing, let my reader never learn of
him, no more than to give a brass half-crown for a good one: not only because
it is not true, but because it deceives the person to whom it is given; which I
take to be an immorality.

35. Silence is much more preferable; for it saves the secret, as well as the
person's honor.

36. Such as give themselves the latitude of saying what they do not mean, come
to be arrant jockeys at more things than one: but in religion and politics it
is pernicious.

37. To hear two men talk the reverse of their own sentiments, with all the
good breeding and appearance of friendship imaginable, on purpose to cozen or
pump each other, is, to a man of virtue and honor, one of the most melancholy,
as well as most nauseous things in the world.

38. But that it should be the character of an able man, is to disinherit
wisdom, and paint out our degeneracy to the life, by setting up fraud, an
arrant impostor, in her room.

39. The trial of skill between these two is, who shall believe least of what
the other says; and he that has the weakness, or goodnature, to give out
first, ( viz. to believe any thing the other says) is looked upon to be tricked.

40. I cannot see the policy, any more than the necessity, of a man's mind
giving the lie to his mouth; or his mouth giving false alarms of his mind: for
no man can be long believed, that teaches all men to distrust him: and since
the ablest have sometimes need of credit, where lies the advantage of their
politic cant or banter upon mankind?

41. I remember a passage of one of queen Elizabeth's great men, as advice to
his friend: 'The advantage,' says he, 'I had upon others at court, was, that I
always spoke as I thought; which being not believed by them, I both preserved a
good conscience, and suffered no damage from that freedom;' which, as it shows
the vice to be older than our times, so does it that gallant man's integrity to
be the best way of avoiding it.

42. To be sure it is wise, as well as honest, neither to flatter other men's
sentiments, nor dissemble, and less to contradict, our own.

43. To hold one's tongue, or to speak truth, or talk only of indifferent
things, is the fairest conversation.

44. Women that rarely go abroad with out vizard masks have none of the best
reputation. But when we consider what all this art and disguise are for, it
equally heightens the wise man's wonder and aversion; perhaps it is to betray a
father, a brother, a master, a friend, a neighbor, or one's own party.

45. A fine conquest! what noble Grecians and Romans abhorred: as if government
could not subsist without knavery, and that knaves were the usefullest props to
it; though the basest, as well as greatest, perversions of the ends of it.

46. But that it should become a maxim, shows but too grossly the corruptions
of the times.

47. I confess I have heard the style of 'An useful knave,' but ever took it to
be a silly or a knavish saying; at least an excuse for knavery.

48. Is it as reasonable to think a whore makes the best wife, as a knave the
best officer.

49. Besides, employing knaves encourages knavery, instead of punishing it, and
alienates the reward of virtue: or, at least, must make the world believe the
country yields not honest men enough, able to serve her.

50. Art thou a magistrate? Prefer such as have clean characters where they
live; and men of estates to secure a just discharge of their trusts, that are
under no temptation to strain points for a fortune: for sometimes such may be
found sooner than they are employed.

51. Art thou a private man? Contract thy acquaintance in a narrow compass, and
choose those for the subjects of it that are men of principle; such as will make
full stops, where honor will not lead them on; and that had rather bear the
disgrace of not being thorough-paced men, than forfeit their peace and
reputation by a base compliance.

THE WISE MAN.
52. The wise man governs himself by the reason of his case, and because what
he does is best: best, in a moral and prudent, not a sinister, sense.

53. He proposes just ends, and employs the fairest and most probable means and
methods to attain them.

54. Though you cannot always penetrate his design, or his reasons for it, yet
you shall ever see his actions of a piece, and his performance like a workman:
they will bear the touch of wisdom and honor, as often as they are tried.

55. He scorns to serve himself by indirect means, or to be an interloper in
government; since just enterprises never want any unjust ways to make them
succeed.

56. To do evil that good may come of it is for bunglers, in politics as as
well as morals.

57. Like those surgeons that will cut off an arm they cannot cure, to hide
their ignorance and save their credit.

58. The wise man is cautious, but not cunning; judicious, but not crafty;
making virtue the measure of using his excellent understanding in the conduct
of his life.

59. The wise man is equal, ready, but not officious; has in every thing an eye
to sure-footing; he offends no body, nor is easily offended; and is always
willing to compound for wrongs, if not forgive them.

60. He is never captious, nor critical; hates banter and jests; he may be
pleasant, but not light; he never deals but in substantial ware, and leaves the
rest for the toy-pates, (or shops) of the world; which are so far from being
his business, that they are not so much as his diversion.

61. He is always for some solid good, civil or moral: as to make his country
more virtuous, preserve her peace and liberty, employ her poor, improve land,
advance trade, suppress vice, encourage industry, and all mechanic knowledge;
and that they should be the care of the government, and the blessing and praise
of the people.

62. To conclude, he is just, and fears God, hates covetousness, and eschews
evil, and loves his neighbor as himself.

OF THE GOVERNMENT OF THOUGHTS.
63. Man being made a reasonable and so a thinking creature, there is nothing
more worthy of his being than the right direction and employment of his
thoughts: since upon this depends both his usefulness to the public, and his
own present and future benefit in all respects.

64. The consideration of this has often obliged me to lament the unhappiness
of mankind, that, through too great a mixture and confusion of thoughts, have
hardly been able to make a right or mature judgment of things.

65. To this is owing the various uncertainty and confusion we see in the
world, and the intemperate zeal that occasions them.

66. To this, also, is to be attributed the imperfect knowledge we have of
things, and the slow progress we make in attaining to a better* like the
children of Israel, that were forty years upon their journey from Egypt to
Canaan, which might have been performed in less than one.

67. In fine, it is to this that we ought to ascribe, if not all, at least most
of the infelicities we labor under.

68. Clear, therefore, thy head, and rally and manage thy thoughts rightly and
thou will save time, and see and do thy business well: for thy judgment will be
distinct, thy mind free, and thy faculties strong and regular.

69. Always remember to bound thy thoughts to the present occasion.

70. If it be thy religious duty, suffer nothing else to share in them. And if
any civil or temporal affair, observe the same caution, and thou will be a
whole man to every thing, and do twice the business in the same time.

71. If any point over labors thy mind, divert and relieve it by some other
subject, of a more sensible or manual nature, rather than what may affect the
understanding: for this were to write one thing upon another, which blots out
our former impressions, or renders them illegible.

72. They that are least divided in their care, always give the best account of
their business.

73. As, therefore, thou art always to pursue the present subject till thou
have mastered it, so if it fall out that thou have more affairs than one upon
thy hand, be sure to prefer that which is of most moment, and will least wait
thy leisure.

74. He that judges not well of the importance of his affairs, though he may be
always busy, must make but a small progress.

75. But make not more business necessary than is so; and rather lessen than
augment work for thyself.

76. Nor yet be over-eager in pursuit of any thing; for the mercurial too often
happen to leave judgment behind them, and sometimes make work for repentance.

77. He that over-runs his business, leaves it for him that follows more
leisurely to take it up: which has often proved a profitable harvest to them
that never sowed.

78. It is the advantage that slower tempers have upon the men of lively parts,
that though they do not lead, they will follow well, and glean clean.

79. Upon the whole matter, employ thy thoughts as thy business requires, and
let that have place according to merit and urgency, giving every thing a review
and due digestion; and thou will prevent many errors and vexations, as well as
save much time to thyself in the course of thy life.

OF ENVY.
80. It is the mark of ill nature, to lessen good actions, and aggravate ill
ones.

81. Some men do as much begrudge others a good name, as they want one
themselves: and perhaps that is the reason of it.

82. But certainly they are in the wrong that can think they are lessened,
because others have their due.

83. Such people generally have less merit than ambition, that covet the reward
of other men's; and, to be sure, a very ill nature, that will rather rob others
of their due, than allow them their praise.

84. It is more an error of our will than our judgment: for we know it to be an
effect of our passion, not our reason; and therefore we are the more culpable
in our partial estimates.

85. It is as envious as unjust, to under-rate another's actions, where their
intrinsic worth recommends them to disengaged minds.

86. Nothing shows more the folly, as well as fraud of man, than clipping merit
and reputation.

87. And as some men think it an alloy to themselves, that others have their
right; so they know no end of pilfering, to raise their own credit.

88. This envy is the child of pride; and mis-gives rather than mis-takes.

89. It will have charity to be ostentation; sobriety, covetousness; humility,
craft; bounty, popularity. In short, virtue must be design, and religion only
interest. Nay, the best of qualities must not pass without a but to alloy their
merit, and abate their praise. Basest of tempers! and they that have it, the
worst of men.

90. But just and noble minds rejoice in other men's success, and help to
augment their praise.

91. And, indeed, they are not without a love to virtue, that take a
satisfaction in seeing her rewarded; and such deserve to share her character,
that do abhor to lessen it.

OF MAN'S LIFE.
92. Why is man less durable than the works of his hands, but because this is
not the place of his rest.

93. And it is a great and just reproach upon him, that he should fix his mind
where he cannot stay himself.

94. Were it not more his wisdom to be concerned about those works that will go
with him, and erect a mansion for him, where time has power neither over him
nor it?

95. It is a sad thing for a man so often to miss his way to his best, as well
as most lasting, home.

OF AMBITION.
96. They that soar too high, often fall hard; which makes a low and level
dwelling preferable.

97. The tallest trees are most in the power of the winds; and ambitious men of
the blasts of fortune.

98. They are most seen and observed, and most envied; least quiet, but most
talked of, and not often to their advantage.

99. Those builders had need of a good foundation, that lie so much exposed to
weather.

100. Good works are a rock that will support their credit; but ill ones, a
sandy foundation, that yields to calamities.

101. And truly they ought to expect no pity in their fall, who, when in power,
had no bowels for the unhappy.

102. The worst of distempers; always craving and thirsty, restless and hated;
a perfect delirium in the mind; insufferable in success, and in disappointments
most revengeful.

OF PRAISE OR APPLAUSE.
103. We are apt to love praise, but not to deserve it.

104. But if we would deserve it, we must love virtue more than that.

105. As there is no passion in us sooner moved, or more deceivable, so, for
that reason, there is none over which we ought to be more watchful, whether we
give or receive it: for if we give it, we must be sure to mean it, and measure
it too.

106. If we are penurious, it shows emulation; if we exceed, flattery.

107. Good measure belongs to good actions; more looks nauseous, as well as
insincere: besides, it is persecuting the meritorious, who is out of
countenance to hear what he deserves.

108. It is much easier for him to merit applause, than hear of it: and he
never doubts himself more, or the person that gives it, than when he hears so
much of it.

109. But, to say true, there need not many cautions on this hand; since the
world is rarely just enough to the deserving.

110. However, we cannot be too circumspect how we receive praise: for if we
contemplate ourselves in a false glass; we are sure to be mistaken about our
dues: and because we are too apt to believe what is pleasing, rather than what
is true, we may be too easily swelled beyond our just proportion, by the windy
compliments of men.

111. Make ever, therefore, allowances for what is said on such occasions; or
thou exposest, as well as deceivest thyself.

112. For an overvalue of ourselves, gives us but a dangerous security in many
respects.

113. We expect more than belongs to us; take all that is given us, though
never meant us; and fall out with those that are not so full of us as we are of
ourselves.

114. In short, it is a passion that abuses our judgment, and makes us both
unsafe and ridiculous.

115. Be not fond, therefore, of praise; but seek virtue that leads to it.

116. And yet no more lessen or dissemble thy merit, than over-rate it: for,
though humility be a virtue, an affected one is none.

OF CONDUCT IN SPEECH.
117. Inquire often, but judge rarely, and thou will not often be mistaken.

118. It is safer to learn than to teach; and he who conceals his opinion has
nothing to answer for.

119. Vanity or resentment often engage us, and it is two to one but we come
off losers; for one shows a want of judgment and humility, as the other does of
temper and discretion.

120. Not that I admire the reserved; for they are next to unnatural that are
not communicable. But if reservedness be at any time a virtue, it is in
throngs, or ill company.

121. Beware also of affectation in speech: it often wrongs matter, and ever
shows a blind side.

122. Speak properly, and in as few words as you can, but always plainly: for
the end of speech is not ostentation, but to be understood.

123. They that affect words more than matter will dry up that little they have.

124. Sense never fails to give them that have it, words enough to make them
understood.

125. But it too often happens in some conversations, as in apothecaries shops;
that those pots that are empty, or have things of small value in them, are as
gaudily dressed and flourished as those that are full of precious drugs.

126. This laboring of slight matter with flourished turns of expression is
fulsome; and worse than the modern imitation of tapestry, and East India goods,
in stuffs and linens. In short, it is but taudry talk, and next to very trash.

UNION OF FRIENDS.
127. They that love beyond the world cannot be separated by it.

128. Death cannot kill what never dies.

129. Nor can spirits ever be divided, that love and live in the same divine
principle, the root and record, of their friendship.

130. If absence be not death, neither is theirs.

131. Death is but crossing the world, as friends do the seas; they live in one
another still.

132. For they must needs be present that love and live in that which is
omnipresent.

133. In this divine glass they see face to face; and their converse is free,
as well as pure.

134. This is the comfort of friends, that though they may be said to die, yet
their friendship and society are, in the best sense, ever present, because
immortal.

OF BEING EASY IN LIVING.
135. It is an happiness to be delivered from a curious mind, as well as from a
dainty palate.

136. For it is not only a troublesome but slavish thing to be nice.

137. They narrow their own freedom and comforts, that make so much requisite
to enjoy them.

138. To be easy in livng is much of the pleasure of life; but difficult
tempers will always want it.

139. A careless and homely breeding is therefore preferable to one nice and
delicate.

140. And he that is taught to live upon little, owes more to his father's
wisdom, than he that has a great deal left him, does to his father's care.

141. Children cannot well be too hardily bred: for besides that it fits them
to bear the roughest providence, it is more active and healthy.

142. Nay, it is certain, that the liberty of the mind is mightily preserved by
it; for so it is served, instead of being a servant, indeed a slave, to sensual
delicacies.

143. As nature is soon answered, so are such satisfied.

144. The memory of the ancients is hardly in any thing more to be celebrated,
than in a strict and useful institution of youth.

145. By labor they prevented luxury in their young people, till wisdom and
philosophy had taught them to resist and despise it.

146. It must be therefore a gross (...) to strive so hard for the pleasure of
our bodies, and be so insensible and careless of the freedom of our souls.

OF MAN'S INCONSIDERATENESS AND PARTIALITY.
147. It is very observable, if our civil rights are invaded or encroached
upon, we are mightily touched, and fill every place with our resentment and
complaint; while we suffer ourselves, our better and nobler selves, to be the
property and vassals of sin, the worst of invaders.

148. In vain do we expect to be delivered from such troubles, till we are
delivered from the cause of them, our disobedience to God.

149. When he has his dues from us, it will be time enough for him to give us
ours out of one another.

150. It is our great happiness, if we could understand it, that we meet with
such checks in the career of our worldly enjoyments: lest we should forget the
giver, adore the gift, and terminate our felicity here, which is not man's
ultimate bliss.

151. Our losses are often made judgments by our guilt, and mercies by our
repentance.

152. Besides, it argues great folly in men to let their satisfaction exceed
the true value of any temporal matter; for disappointments are not always to be
measured by the loss of the thing, but the overvalue we put upon it.

153. And thus men improve their own miseries, for want of an equal and just
estimate of what they enjoy or lose.

154. There lies a proviso upon every thing in this world, and we must observe
it at our own peril, viz. to love God above all, and act for judgment; the last
I mean.

OF THE RULE OF JUDGING.
155. In all things reason should prevail: it is quite another thing to be
stiff, than steady in an opinion.

156. This may be reasonable, but that is ever wilful.

157. In such cases it always happens, that the clearer the argument, the
greater the obstinacy, where the design is not to be convinced.

158. This is to value humor more than truth, and prefer a sullen pride to a
reasonable submission.

159. It is the glory of a man to vail to truth; as it is the mark of a good
nature to be easily entreated.

160. Beasts act by sense, man should act by reason; else he is a greater beast
than ever God made: and the proverb is verified, 'The corruption of the best
things is the work and most offensive.'

161. A reasonable opinion must ever be in danger where reason is not judge.

162. Though there is a regard due to education, and the tradition of our
fathers, truth will ever deserve, as well as claim the preference.

163. If, like Theophilus and Timothy, we have been brought up in the knowledge
of the best things, it is our advantage; but neither they nor we lose by trying
the truth; for so we learn their, as well as its, intrinsic worth.

164. Truth never lost ground by inquiry; because she is, most of all,
reasonable.

165. Nor can that need another authority that is self-evident.

166. If my own reason be on the side of a principle, with what can I dispute
or withstand it?

167. And if men would once consider one another reasonably, they would either
reconcile their differences, or maintain them more amicably.

168. Let that, therefore, be the standard, that has most to say for itself:
though of that let every man be judge for himself.

169. Reason, like the sun, is common to all: and it is for want of examining
all by the same light and measure, that we are not all of the same mind: for
all have it to that end, though all do not use it so.

OF FORMALITY.
170. Form is good, but not formality.

171. In the use of the best of forms there is too much of that, I fear.

172. It is absolutely necessary, that this distinction should go along with
people in their devotion; for too many are apter to rest upon what they do,
than how they do their duty.

173. If it were considered, that it is the frame of the mind that gives our
performances acceptance, we would lay more stress on our inward preparation
than our outward action.

OF THE MEAN NOTION WE HAVE OF GOD.
174. Nothing more shows the low condition man is fallen into, than the
unsuitable notion we must have of God, by the ways we take to please him.

175. As if it availed any thing to him, that we performed so many ceremonies
and external forms of devotion; who never meant more by them, than to try our
obedience, and, through them, to show us something more excellent and durable
beyond them.

176. Doing while we are undoing is good for nothing.

177. Of what benefit is it to say our prayers regularly, go to church, receive
the sacrament, and, may be, go to confessions too; aye, feast the priest, and
give alms to the poor; and yet lie, swear, curse, be drunk, covetous, unclean,
proud, revengeful, vain, or idle, at the same time.

178. Can one excuse or balance the other? Or will God think himself well
served, where his law is violated? Or well used, where there is so much more
show than substance?

179. It is a most dangerous error, for a man to think to excuse himself in the
breach of a moral duty, by a formal performance of positive worship; and less,
when of human invention.

180. Our blessed Savior most rightly and clearly distinguished and determined
this case, when he told the Jews, "That they were his mother, his brethren, and
sisters, who did the will of his Father."

OF THE BENEFIT OF JUSTICE.
181. Justice is a great support of society, because an insurance to all men of
their property; this violated, there is no security; which throws all into
confusion to recover it.

182. An honest man is a fast pledge in dealing. A man is sure to have it, if
it be to be had.

183. Many are so, merely of necessity; others not so only for the same reason;
but such an honest man is not to be thanked; and such a dishonest man is to be
pitied.

184. But he that is dishonest for gain is next to a robber, and to be punished
for example.

185. And, indeed, there are few dealers but what are faulty; which makes trade
difficult, and a great temptation to men of virtue.

186. It is not what they should, but what they can, get: faults or decays must
be concealed, big words given where they are not deserved, and the ignorance or
necessity of the buyer imposed upon, for unjust profit.

187. These are the men that keep their words for their own ends; and are only
just for fear of the magistrate.

188. A politic rather than a moral honesty; a constrained, not a chosen
justice: according to the proverb, 'Patience per force, and thank you for
nothing.'

189. But of all injustice, that is the greatest that passes under the name of
law. A cutpurse in Westminster Hall exceeds; for that advances injustice to
oppression, where law is alleged for that which it should punish.

OF JEALOUSY.
190. The jealous are troublesome to others, but a torment to themselves.

191. Jealousy is a kind of civil war in the soul, where judgment and
imagination are at perpetual jars.

192. This civil dissension in the mind, like that of the body politic,
commits great disorders, and lays all waste.

193. Nothing stands fase in its way: nature, interest, religion, must yield to
its fury.

194. It violates contracts, dissolves society, breaks wedlock, betrays friends
and neighbors: no body is good, and every one is either doing or designing
them a mischief.

195. It has a venom that more or less rankles where ever it bites: and as it
reports fancies for facts, so it disturbs its own house, as often as other
folks.

196. Its rise is guilt or ill nature; and by reflection it thinks its own
faults to be other men's: as he that is over run with the jaundice takes others
to be yellow.

197. A jealous man only sees his own spectrum when he looks upon other men,
and gives his character in their's.

OF STATE.
198. I love service, but not state: one is useful, the other superfluous.

199. The trouble of this, as well as charge, is real; but the advantage only
imaginary.

200. Besides, it helps to set us up above ourselves, and augments our
temptation to disorder.

201. The least thing out of joint, or omitted, makes us uneasy; and we are
ready to think ourselves ill served about that which is of no real service at
all; or so much better than other men, as we have the means of greater state.

202. But this is all for want of wisdom, which carries the truest and most
forcible state along with it.

203. He that makes not himself cheap by indiscreet conversation, puts value
enough upon himself every where.

204. The other is rather pageantry than state.

OF A GOOD SERVANT.
205. A true, and a good servant, are the same thing.

206. But no servant is true to his master that defrauds him.

207. Now there are many ways of defrauding a master, as, of time, care, pains,
respect, and reputation, as well as money.

208. He that neglects his work robs his master, since he is fed and paid as if
he did his best: and he that is not as diligent in the absence as in the
presence of his master, cannot be a true servant.

209. Nor is he a true servant that buys dear to share in the profit with the
seller.

210. Nor yet he that tells tales without-doors; or deals basely, in his
master's name, with other people; or connives at other's loiterings, wastings,
or dishonorable reflections.

211. So that a true servant is diligent, secret, and respectful: more tender
of his master's honor and interest, than of his own profit.

112. Such a servant deserves well; and, if modest under his merit, should
liberally feel it at his master's hand.

OF AN IMMODERATE PURSUIT OF THE WORLD.
213. It shows a depraved state of mind, to cark and care for that which one
does not need.

214. Some are as eager to be rich, as ever they were to live: for superfluity,
as for subsistence.

215. But that plenty should augment covetousness, is a perversion of
providence; and yet the generality are the worse for their riches.

216. But it is strange, that old men should excel; for generally money lies
nearest them, that are nearest their graves; as if they would augment their
love, in proportion to the little time they have left to enjoy it: and yet
their pleasure is without enjoyment, since none enjoy what they do not use.

217. So that instead of learning to leave their great wealth easily, they hold
it the faster, because they must leave it: so sordid is the temper of some men.

218. Where charity keeps pace with gain, industry is blessed: but to slave to
get, and keep it sordidly, is a sin, against providence, a vice in government,
and an injury to their neighbors.

219. Such as they, spend not onefifth of their income; and, it may be, give
not one-tenth of what they spend to the needy.

220. This is the worst sort of idolatry, because there can be no religion in
it, nor ignorance pleaded in excuse of it; and that it wrongs other folks that
ought to share therein.

OF THE INTEREST OF THE PUBLIC IN OUR ESTATES.
221. Hardly any thing is given us for ourselves, but the public may claim a
share with us. But of all we call ours, we are most accountable to God, and the
public, for our estates: in this we are but stewards; and to hoard up all to
ourselves is great injustice, as well as ingratitude.

222. If all men were so far tenants to the public, that the superfluities of
gain and expense were applied to the exigencies thereof, it would put an end to
taxes, leave not a beggar, and make the greatest bank for national trade in
Europe.

223. It is a judgment upon us, as well as weakness, though we will not see it,
to begin at the wrong end.

224. If the taxes we give are not to maintain pride, I am sure there would be
less, if pride were made a tax to the government.

225. I confess I have wondered that so many lawful and useful things are
excised by laws, and pride left to reign free over them and the public.

226. But, since people are more afraid of the laws of man than of God, because
their punishment seems to be nearest, I know not how magistrates can be excused
in their suffering such excess with impunity.

227. Our noble English patriarchs, as well as patriots, were so sensible of
this evil, that they made several excellent laws, commonly called sumptuary, to
forbid, at least limit, the pride of the people; and, because the execution of
them would be our interest and honor, their neglect must be our just reproach
and loss.

228. It is but reasonable that the punishment of pride and excess should help
to support the government; since it must otherwise inevitably be ruined by them.

229. But some say, 'It ruins trade, and will make the poor burdensome to the
public;' but if such trade, in consequence, ruins the kingdom, is it not time
to ruin that trade? Is moderation no part of our duty, and is temperance an
enemy to government.

230. He is a Judas, that will get money by any thing.

231. To wink at a trade that effeminates the people, and invades the ancient
discipline of the kingdom, is a crime capital, and to be severely punished,
instead of being excused, by the magistrate.

232. Is there no better employment for the poor than luxury? Miserable nation!

233. What did they before they fell into these forbidden methods? Is there not
land enough in England to cultivate, and more and better manufactures to be
made?

234. Have we no room for them in our plantations, about things that may
augment trade, without luxury?

235. In short, let pride pay, and excess be well excised: and if that will not
cure the people, it will help to keep the kingdom.

THE VAIN MAN.
236. But a vain man is a nauseous creature: he is so full of himself, that he
has no room for any thing else, be it ever so good or deserving.

237. It is I, at every turn, that does this, or can do that. And as he abounds
in his comparisons, so he is sure to give himself the better of every body
else; according to the proverb, "All his geese are swans."

238. They are certainly to be pitied that can be so much mistaken at home.

239. And yet I have sometimes thought, that such people are, in a sort, happy,
that nothing can put out of countenance with themselves, though they neither
have nor merit other people's.

240. But, at the same time, one would wonder they should not feel the blows
they give themselves, or get from others, for this intolerable and ridiculous
temper; nor show any concern at that, which makes others blush for, as as well
as at them; viz. their unreasonable assurance.

241. To be a man's own fool is bad enough; but the vain man is every body's.

242. This silly disposition comes of a mixture of ignorance, confidence, and
pride: and as there is more or less of the last, so it is more or less
offensive, or entertaining.

243. And yet, perhaps, the worst part of this vanity is its unteachableness.
Tell it any thing, and it has known it long ago; and out-runs information and
instruction, or else proudly puffs at it.

244. Whereas the greatest understandings doubt most, are readiest to learn,
and least pleased with themselves; this, with nobody else.

245. For though they stand on higher ground, and so see farther than their
neighbors, they are yet humbled by their prospect, since it shows them.
something so much higher, and above their reach.

246. And truly then it is that sense shines with the greatest beauty, when it
is set in humility.

247. An humble able man is a jewel worth a kingdom: it is often saved by him,
as Solomon's poor wise man did the city.

248. May we have more of them, or less need of them.

THE CONFORMIST.
249. It is reasonable to concur, where conscience does not forbid a
compliance; for conformity is at least a civil virtue.

250. But we should only press it in necessaries; the rest may prove a snare or
temptation to break society.

251. But, above all, it is a weakness in religion and government, where it is
carried to things of an indifferent nature; since, besides that it makes way
for scruples, liberty is always the price of it.

252. Such conformists have little to boast of, and therefore the less reason
to reproach others that have more latitude.

253. And yet the latitudinarian that I love, is one that is only so in
charity: for the freedom I recommend is no skepticism in judgment, and much
less so in practice.

THE OBLIGATIONS OF GREAT MEN TO ALMIGHTY GOD.
254. It seems but reasonable that those whom God has distinguished from others
by his goodness, should distinguish themselves to him by their gratitude.

255. For though he has made of one blood all nations, he has not ranged or
dignified them upon the level, but in a sort of subordination and dependency.

256. If we look upwards, we find it in in the heavens, where the planets have
their several degrees of glory; and so the other stars, of magnitude and luster.

257. If we look upon the earth, we see it among the trees of the wood, from
the cedar to the bramble; among the fishes, from the leviathan to the sprat; in
the air, among the birds, from the eagle to the sparrow; among the beasts, from
the lion to the cat; and among mankind, from the king to the scavenger.

258. Our great men, doubtless, were designed, by the wise framer of the world,
for our religious, moral, and politic planets; for lights and directions to
the lower ranks of the numerous company of their own kind, both in precepts and
examples; and they are well paid for their pains too, who have the honor and
service of their fellow creatures, and the marrow and fat of the earth for
their share.

259. But is it not a most unaccountable folly, that men should be proud of the
providence that should humble them; or think the better of themselves, instead
of him that raised them so much above the level; or of being so in their lives,
in return of his extraordinary favors?

260. But it is but too near akin to us, to think no farther than ourselves,
either in the acquisition, or use, of our wealth and greatness: when, alas!
they are the preferments of heaven, to try our wisdom, bounty, and gratitude.

261. It is a dangerous perversion of the end of providence, to consume the
time, power, and wealth, he has given us above other men, to gratify our sordid
passions, instead of playing the good stewards, to the honor of our great
benefactor, and the good of our fellow creatures.

262. But it is an injustice too; since those higher ranks of men are but the
trustees of heaven, for the benefit of lesser mortals: who, as minors, are
entitled to all their care and provision.

263. For though God has dignified some men above their brethren, it never was
to serve their pleasures; but that they might take pleasure to serve the
public.

264. For this cause, doubtless, it was that they were raised above necessity,
or any trouble to live, that they might have more time and ability to care for
others: and it is certain, where that use is not made of the bounties of
providence, they are embezzled and wasted.

265. It has often struck me with a serious reflection, when I have observed
the great inequality of the world that one man should have such numbers of his
fellow creatures to wait upon him, who have souls to be saved as well as he;
and this not for business, but state. Certainly a poor employment of his money,
and a worse of their time.

266. But that any one man should make work for so many, or rather keep them
from work to make up a train, has a levity or luxury in it very reprovable,
both in religion and government.

267. But even in allowable services, it has an humbling consideration, and
what should raise the thankfulness of the great men to him who that so much
bettered their circumstances; and moderate the use of their dominion over those
of their own kind.

268. When the poor Indians hear us call any of our family by the name of
servants, they cry out, 'What! call brethren servant! we call our dogs
servants, but never men.' The moral certainly can do us no harm, but may
instruct us to abate our height, and narrow our state and attendance.

269. And what has been said of their excess may, in some measure, be applied
to other branches of luxury, that set ill examples to the lesser world, and rob
the needy of their pensions.

270. God Almighty touch the hearts of our grandees with a sense of his
distinguished goodness, and the true end of it; that they may better
distinguish themselves in their conduct, to the glory of him that has thus
liberally preferred them, and to the benefit of their fellow creatures!

OF REFINING UPON OTHER MEN'S ACTIONS OR INTERESTS.
271. This seems to be the masterpiece of our politicians; but no body shoots
more at random than those refiners.

272. A perfect lottery, and mere hazard! since the true spring of the actions
of men is as invisible as their hearts; and so are their thoughts too, of their
several interests.

273. He that judges of other men by himself does not always hit the mark:
because all men have not the same capacity, nor passions in interest.

274. If an able man refines upon the proceedings of an ordinary capacity,
according to his own, he must ever miss it: but much more the ordinary man,
when he shall pretend to speculate the motives to the able man's actions: for
the able man deceives himself by making the other wiser than he is in the
reason of his conduct; and the ordinary man makes himself so, in presuming to
judge of the reasons of the abler man's actions.

275. It is, in short, a wood, a maze; and of nothing are we more uncertain,
nor in any thing do we oftener befool ourselves.

276. The mischiefs are many that follow this humor, and dangerous: for men
misguide themselves, act upon false measures, and meet frequently with
mischievous disappointments.

277. It excludes all confidence in commerce; allows of no such thing as a
principle in practice; supposes every man to act upon other reasons than what
appear; and that there is no such thing as uprightness or sincerity among
mankind; a trick, instead of truth.

278. Neither allowing nature, or religion, but some worldly turn or advantage,
to be the true, the hidden motive of all men.

279. It is hard to express its uncharitableness, as well as uncertainty; and
has more of vanity than benefit in it.

280. This foolish quality gives a large field; but let what I have said, serve
for this time.

OF CHARITY.
281. Charity has various senses, but is excellent in all of them.

282. It imports, first, the commiseration of the poor and unhappy of mankind,
and extends an helping-hand to mend their condition.

283. They that feel nothing of this are, at best, not above half of kin to
human race; since they must have no bowels, which makes such an essential part
thereof, who have no more nature.

284. A man! and yet not have the feeling of the wants or needs of his own
flesh and blood! a monster rather! and may he never be suffered to propagate
such an unnatural stock in the world!

285. Such an uncharitableness spoils the best gains; and two to one but it
entails a curse upon the possessors.

286. Nor can we expect to be heard of God in our prayers, that turn the deaf
ear to the petitions of the distressed amongst our fellow creatures.

287. God sends the poor to try us: as well as he tries them by being such: and
he that refuses them a little, out of the great deal that God has given him,
lays up poverty in store for his own posterity.

288. I will not say these works are meritorious, but I dare say they are
acceptable, and go not without their reward; though, to humble us in our
fullness, and liberality too, we only give what is given us to give, as well as
to use: for if we ourselves are not our own, less is that so which God has
entrusted us with.

289. Next, charity makes the best construction of things and persons; and is
so far from being an evil spy, a back-biter, or a detractor, that it excuses
weakness, extenuates miscarriages, makes the best of every thing, forgives
every body, serves all, and hopes to the end.

290. It moderates extremes, is always for expedients, labors to accommodate
differences, and had rather suffer than revenge: and is so far from exacting
the utmost farthing, that it had rather lose, than seek its own violently.

291. As it acts freely, so zealously too; but it is always to do good, for it
hurts nobody.

292. An universal remedy against discord, and an holy cement for mankind.

293. And lastly, it is love to God and th^^^ brethren, which raises the soul
above all worldly considerations; and as it gives a taste of heaven upon earth,
so it is heaven, in the fullness of it, to the truly charitable here.

294. This is the noblest sense charity has: after which all should press, as
that "more excellent way."

295. Nay, most excellent: for as faith, hope, and charity, were the more
excellent way that the great apostle discovered to the Christians; (too apt to
stick in outward gifts and church performances) so, of that better way, he
preferred charity as the best part, because it would outlast the rest, and
abide for ever.

296. Wherefore a man can never be a true and good Christian without charity,
even in the lowest sense of it; and yet he may have that part thereof, and
still be none of the apostle's true Christian: since he tells us, "That though
we should give all our goods to the poor, and want charity (in her other and
higher senses) it would profit us nothing."

297. Nay, "Though we had all tongues, all knowledge, and even gifts of
prophecy, and were preachers to others, aye, and had zeal enough to give our
bodies to be burned; yet if we wanted charity, it would not avail us for
salvation."

298. It seems it was his (and indeed ought to be our) "Unum necessarium," or
the "One thing needful;" which our Savior attributed to Mary, in preference to
her sister Martha, that seems not to have wanted the lesser parts of charity.

299. Would to God this divine virtue were more implanted and diffused among
mankind, the pretenders to Christianity especially: and we should certainly
mind piety more than controversy; and exercise love and compassion, instead of
censuring and persecuting one another, in any manner whatsoever.

FINIS

