TOUR THROUGH THE SOUTHERN AND WESTERN TERRITORIES OF THE UNITED STATES OF
NORTH AMERICA; THE SPANISH DOMINIONS ON THE RIVER MISSISSIPPI, AND THE
FLORIDAS; THE COUNTRIES OF THE CREEK NATIONS; AND MANY UNINHABITED PARTS.

By JOHN POPE.

MULTORUM P^UC^RUM PLURIUM OMNUM INTEREST. RICHMOND: PRINTED BY JOHN DlXON. FOR
THE AUTHOR AND HIS THREE CHILDREN, ALEXANDER D. POPE, LUCINDA ^ POPE, AND ANNE
POPE. M,DCC,XCII.

TO THE PUBLIC.
EVERY Man who commits his Sentiments to public Criticism, whether his Motive
be Honor, Interest, or other Consideration, will be supposed to hope for Public
Patronage, or Applause. But the Man who shall servily condescend to obtain
Success; who shall by debasing himself, attempt to elevate or exalt another,
deserves not private Regard or Public Favor.

The Author of the following Sheets, is strongly impressed with these
Sentiments, and Although he feels as all Authors must do, who commit themselves
to the World: Although he knows many great and respectable Men, whose Friendship
would please him, and whose Patronage would do him Honor; he prefers to obtain
their Assentation to his Labors, as the voluntary Essusions of their own
Hearts, than as the Tribute to his Flattery or Solicitation. Thus thinking,
none will blame, thus acting, all will applaud, who are admirers of the native
Independancy, which is the Birthright of Man. --

Inaccuracies will, in this Work, probably obtain, but let the Reader reflect,
that it is the genuine Offspring of positive Observation, taken sometimes on
Horseback, sometimes on a Stump, but always in Haste, amidst the Hurly Burly of
uninformed and generally Indian Companions.

A TOUR, etc.
ON the first Day of June, 1790, I took my Departure from the City of Richmond,
with an Intention of visiting the Western Regions of Kentuckey, and exploring
the Spanish Dominions of Louisiana and the two Floridas; as also the
Territories of the Creek Nation, now under the Governance of Alexander
M'Gillivray, Esquire who from the concurrent Approbation which he has merited and
received from the whole Nation, may, with Propriety, be said to hold imperial
Power, having many Kings and Princes subordinate to him.

How far I have succeeded in the Exploration of those Countries, the Reader
will determine from a candid Perusal of my Journal.

June 10th. Contractcd a violent Rheumatism from wetting my Feet, in an Attempt
to cross the Rapedan, which retarded my Progress for about eight Weeks in the
County of (...); where the Humanity and Politeness of Col. John ^ho^nt^n and
his Lady mitigated my Distress, and ultimately restored me to my pristine
Health and Vigor. This Gentleman, as well as his Brother William, possesses a
rare mechanical Genius, and to which he has superadded a practical Knowledge
in Medicine and Surgery; the Advantages of which, his poor Neighbors often
experience with Tears of Gratitude.

Some Years since, the Assembly of Virginia voted a Premium to Mr. John Hobdy,
for his Invention of a Machine, which he submitted to their Inspection, well
calculated for the Purposes of beating out Wheat and other small Grain. Col.
William has improved upon Hobdy's Invention by constructing a Water-Mill,
which without the Aid of animal Exertion, shatters out and prepares more small
Grain of any Kind in one Day, than Hobdy's can in one Week. With this Mill
alone, he speedily prepares his Flax and Hemp for Market or the Distaff. It is
a Model well worth the Attention of every opulent Farmer, or of those who raise
large Crops of Flax and Hemp.

August 10. Crossed the Blue-Ridge and halted for three Days at New-Town,
within about eight Miles of Winchester. This flourishing little Town I think,
bids fair to eclipse Winchester in a few Years, or, be connected with her by a
lengthy Village: Its Locality gives it a decided Preference to Winchester, as
being in a fertile Neighborhood, and nearer to Mills, Iron-Works and the future
Navigation of the Shenandeah.

From this Place I made some few Excursions into the Country, particularly to
the Houses of Colonels Zane and Thruston; the former of whom possesses a
greater Originality of Thought, Speech and Action, than any other Gentleman I
ever was acquainted with.

Over many Waters, he has been,
And Knowledge great acquired,
From reading Books as well as Men,
For shining Parts admired:
From every great Metropolis,
I Ie some Instruction draws,
By ascertaining its Police
Of Manners, Customs, Laws.
He is the Proprietor of the Iron-Works, which, under his judicious Management
yield an amazing Profit. All the Works which are very complex, are driven by
the Water issuing from one Spring, whose Source is not above a Quarter of a
Mile from the pot.

August 14th. Found myself happy in the Family of the sensible, humane and
generous Col. ^. M. Thruston, whose public and private Characters will bear the
strictest Scrutiny. His late ^^isplay of unparralled Generosity to a
distressed, though reputable Family, will be enrolled in the Court above; and
from the rec^r^ing Angel, instead of a Tear, extort an approbative Smile. This
Gentleman at an early Period of the War, laying aside his sacerdotal Habit,
appeared at the Head of a Regiment in Defense of his injured Country. His
Achievements in the Field, his Wisdom in Council, and the general Tenor of his
Conduct, through the various Scenes of Life, do him Honor, and claim from a
grateful Country its warmest Acknowledgments.

On this Gentleman's Farm I observed about an Acre of Ground well beset with
Jerusalem Artichokes, of a most luxuriant Growth; the Colonel told me that he
was confident the Production would exceed one Thousand Bushels. To this
Vegetable, Swine and horned Cattle of every Description, particularly Sheep,
are surprisingly attached -- I do not discover it to be any Way inferior to
the Garden Artichoke for Table Use.

August 17th. Arrived in Winchester much relaxed from the Heat of the Weather,
and whilst lolling on a Couch, was saluted by a Mr. John Welsh, who had served
in my Regiment in the Capacity of a common Soldier during the last War. With
great self-Complacency he informed me, that since the War he had been
prosperous in Life, had acquired a snug little Retreat in the Country, and then
(...) a large Drove of Cattle within four Miles of the Place, which he meant to
dispose of to the French emigrants then stationary in Winchester -- that he
wished to go back, meet the Drove and hurry them into Town, least others might
supplant him in the Sale; but that he had sent his Horse to the same Pasture
where his Cattle were, so that he should be under the Necessity of going on
Foot. unless he could beg, borrow, or steal a Nag to ride that small Distance:
Mr. Welsh, I am happy to hear of your Prosperity, and you are entirely welcome
to the Use of my Horse to ride that Distance -- Sir, you are very good, and
I Will embrace your generous Offer, and on my Return this Evening give myself the
Pleasure of Dining with you. I fear some Accident has happened to Mr. Welsh, as
I have neither seen him, the Horse, Bridle or Saddle from that Hour to this! In
this situation, on a Journey with 180 Miles in Rear, and 500 in Front, I began
like St^ap to moralize, with only this Difference, he said "A Fool and his
Money is soon parted;" I used the Word Horse instead of Money.

During my Continuance in Winchester, I was frequently in the Company of
General Morgan, whose Character as a Military Man, is held in high Estimation
even by his Enemies -- Possessed of an easy Fortune, he now enjoys all the
Sweets of Domestication, and the Heart felt Pleasure arising from a conscious
Rectitude. He is fond of the social Pleasures, and will sometimes in his gayer
Moments, amuse the Company with Narratives of martial Feats, and how Somebody,
and who it was, that plucked the Laurels from fierce Tarlton's Brow.

September. Hearing that the Monongali^ and Ohio were innavigable, I resolved
to spend my Time until they should rise among my Friends in Berkeley County,
which for its Temperature of Air, Salubrity of Baths and Fertility of Soil,
justly claims the Preference of every other County in Virginia, but less so of
Frederick than the rest, whether for the Properties already mentioned or the
Hospitality and safe (...) of its People in general.

I paid a Visit to Mr. Clarks Washington, the Brother of our beloved President,
where I had the Pleasure of seeing a most affectionate Meeting between him and
his Sister, attended with several Female Relations from Fredericks^ury. Mr.
Robert Rutherford, a Member of the Virginia Senate was also there, and
contributed much to the Cheerfulness of the Company, by singing several most
excellent and sentimental songs. I am indebted to this Gentleman and Mr.
Washington for furnishing me with a joint Letter of Introduction, to some of
the most reputable Characters in Kentuckey: Messrs. David Gray and Moses Hunter
are among the number of these who have imposed Obligations on me.

October. Pursued my Route through Shepherd's Town and Martinsburg, two
flourishing little Towns. At the former I saw General Gates and his Family on
their Way to New York, and at the latter, General Stephen, who observed that
the Triamvirate was now entirely dissolved, alluding to Generals Lee, Gates and
himself;

Wh^d D^^e Fortune in a merry Mood,
Cu^enter'd in one Neighborhood;
Evincing well, that Birds of Feather,
Always chirp and flock together.
Began to ascend the Alleghany Mountains in Company with old Col. Shepherd, who
observed, that for many Years he had made it an invariable Rule to take a
hearty Drink of Grog at a Spring near the Road-ide, where the Eastern and
Western Waters very amicably take their Leave of each other, intimating that we
and our Western Brethren ought to do so likewise. I shall not undertake a
Description of a Sixty Miles Passage over those Alpine Hills, but content
myself with saying, that I passed through the Shadow of Death -- saw General
Washington's Intrenchment at the Meadows, and undismayed, rode over Braddock's
Grave. From the Western Side of Laurel Hill, on a pleasant Eveaning, I was
ravished with the Prospect of Beeson Town and the circumjacent Country. Ten
Miles from Beeson Town lies the Old Fort, at the Junction of a smail Stream,
called Redstone and the Monongalia. At this Place we were detained about a
Week, experiencing every Disgust which Rooks and Harpies could excite.

October. Wenton Board a Kentuckey Roat in Company with three Danville
Merchants, and a Mr, Fooley from the State of Mary^na, and in Twenty-three
Hours r^^ched P^burg. The last mentioned Gentlemen from his Singularities and
Fooleries merits a minute Description, which, however, I am at a Loss to give.
Suffice it to say, that Mr. Thomas Fooley, of a very reputable Family in
Maryland, is about six Feet three Inches high, and every Way disproportionate
in his Shape and contradictrory in the Lineaments of his Face, which at first
View excited a Refibility in the most serious Beholder. The Deformities of his
Conduct vie with those of his Person. It was sometime last Month that Mr.
Fooley eloped from his Lady, under an Apprehension that she was preparing
through the Medium of her Friends an Instrument of Writing for him to sign,
whereby a considerable Part of his Fortune was to be vested in the Hands of
Trustees, subject to her Control. To this Mr. Fooley was utterly opposed --
However, previous to his Elopement he left her an unlimited Power of Attorney,
which he delivered into the Hands of his Overteer. At Redstone he disposed of
his elegant Horse and Furniture for an old Brass Watch, which has the Property
of being right once in every Twelve Hours: Notwithstanding thy, Mr. Fooley is a
Gentleman of Refinement, being both a Philosopher and Politician, with some
Knowledge of Astrology and Palmistry.

October. Apprehending a Return of the Rheumatism, I resolved to awart the
Event in Pittsburg, where I could be comfortably lodged and duly attended; I
staid ten Days Here I saw the celebrated Hugh Henry Breckenridge, Author of the
six political Sermons in the beginning of the War, and of various other Traits
since -- He had been lately married to a Miss Sabina Wolf, Daughter of an old
Dutch Farmer in Washington County -- The Circumstances of his Courtship,
Marriage and subsequent Conduct I shall relate, with some slight References to
the Person, Temper and Disposition of the Man.

Mr. Breckenridge on his Way from Washington Court. called in at Mr. Wolfe's to
have his Horse fed and escape a Rain which was then descending. The Horse was
fed, the Rain had subsided, and Mr. Breckenridge to avoid wet Feet, ordered his
Horse to be brought to the Door; Miss Wolf was directed to perform that Office.

Nut brown were her Locks, her Shape was full (...),
Her Eyes were as black as a Sloe;
Milk while were her Teeth, full smart was her G^it,
And sleek was her Skin as a Do.
These Allurements made a deep Impression upon the susceptible Heart of
Breckenridge -- He prevented her in the servile Office, mounted his Nag and off
he went. He had not gone more than a Sabbath Day's Journey, (for such his
really was) before his Horse, at the Instigation of the Rider, turned short
about and revisited Mr. Wolfe's. A familiar Application was made to the old
Gentleman for his Daughter, which he considered as nothing more than Pleasantry
in Mr. Breckenridge, for which he is so remarkable. Mr. Breckenridge declared
that he was serious, that his Intentions were honorable, and that this future
Happiness rested on the Event of his then Application. Miss Sabina had been
employed in Shrubbing the old Man's Meadow, which saved him the annual Expense
of about ten Dollars. This with him was an insuperable Objection to parting
with his Girl -- Mr. Breckenridge obviated the Difficulty by paying down a Sum
of Money, obtained the Young Lady's Consent, married her, and sent her to
Philadelphia, where she now is under the Governance of a reputable female
Character, whose Business will be to polish the Manners, and wipe off the
Ru^ticities which Mrs. Breckenridge had acquired whilst a Wolf.

As an Introduction to an Acquaintance with this Gentleman, I composed,
enclosed and sent to him on the Evening of my Arrival, the following hasty
Production, which without my Knowledge or Consent, he had inserted in the
Pittsburg Gazette.

To H. H. BRECKENRIDGE, Esquire on his being fairly NOOS'D.
THY great and independent Soul did love'r,
And from the fairest Stalk select the Flower:
Which in the Wild unknown to public View,
In mild Pudicity so sweetly grew.
SABINA learn! It was not giddy Chance,
That led fair Merit up to high Advance?
No, 'twas Heaven which opened on his Eyes,
When Love and be first viewed thee with Surprise.
The Malron shall ever long by him be taught.
To speak and act ab^^n the vulgar Thought.
His plastic Hand shall fashion and so mould,
And turn as 'twere, thy unwrought Ore to Gold.
That neither in l^ra nor Romance,
Or in Metropolis of ^^lish'd France;
Shall any Daine ^e sound to equal thee,
In Manners soft, and true Gentility.
Thus augur I of thee, oh pureless Dame,
Whose Conduct soon shall swell the Trump of Fame.
And well evinced when formed on Wisdom's Plan,
Who can reward and soothe an honest Man.
In Company with this Gentleman I viewed the Fort and neighboring Eminencies
of Pittsburg, which will one Day or other employ the historic Pen, as being
replete with strange and melancholy Events. The town at present, is inhabited
with only some few Exceptions, by Mortals who act as if possessed of a Charter
or Exclusive Privilege to filch from, annoy and harrass her Fellow Creatures,
particularly the incautious and necessitous; many who have emigrated from
various Parts, to Kentuckey can verify this Charge -- Goods of every
Description are dearer in Pittsburg than in Kentuckey, which I attribute to a
Combination of pensioned Scoundrels who insest the Place. "Some Men in Power
and Trusts, have made
"The one Hand with the other trade;
"Gained vastly by their joint Endeavor,
"The right a Thief, the lest Receiver;
"And what the one by Tricks forestalled,
"The other by as sly retail'd."
HUDIBRAS.

Was a Spaniard to reside among the Pittsburgers only one Week, he would be apt
to exclaim in the Words of Quevedo:

"M^^^a la cola el Can,
"No por li sino por ci Pan."
TRANSLATED.

It Is not for thee; but for thy Bread,
Tray wags his Tail and shakes his Head.
November. I proceeded down the Ohi^ in Mr. ^eall's Boat, which was a moveable
Fortification; having about one Hundred and Fifty Salt Pans so arranged, as to
render a few Men within, capable of repulsing ten Times their Number without.
Nothing materially occurred -- We had a tolerable Passage of five Days and
Nights down to Limestone, a little Town, situate on the Banks of the Ohio, at
the Mouth of Limestone Creek, where Emigrants from Virginia and all the Eastern
States most commonly debark. Leaving this Place, I passed on in a direct Route
through the most fertile Parts of Kentuckey, by Washington, Bourbon and
Lexington Townships to Danville, the present Metropolis of the District. In
this Place and its Vicinage I continued about a Month, experiencing every
Civility and Hospitality which so remarkably characterize the People. The
Topography of Kentuckey is foreign to my Purpose, as Mr. Filson and others have
treated that Subject with great Candor and Precission. Mere Occurrencies, and
the most conspicuous Traits of Men and Manners, are the principal Objects of my
Investigation. General Willinson and Scott are too generally known both at Home
and abroad, to require any Eulogium from me: I shall, therefore, wishing them
every Prosperity, proceed on to Louisville and its Neighborhood, and rouse up
Genesis George Rogers Clarke, who, the Kentuckians say, has actually been in a
profound Slumber for upwards of four Years, without the least Symptoms of
Wakefulness whatever.

December 15th. Arrived at his House under an Apprehension that he had
forgotten me. He immediately recognized me, and without Ceremony, entered into
a familiar. though desultory Conversation, in which I was highly pleased with
the Atticism of his Wit, the genuine Offspring of native Genius. On serious and
important Occasions he displays a Profundity of Judgment, aided by Reflection
and matured by Experience. I cannot dismiss this Gentleman without observing
that some few Years since he shone forth in all the Glory of military Pro^ess.
He appeared from his Plans and Successes to have possessed an intuitive
Knowledge of the Maneuvers and Designs of the Enemy, having in no Instance out
of many concerted his Operations injudiciously.

At Louisville the first Object that caught my Attention was the ludicrous Mr.
Fooley -- Having exhausted all his Cash, he had exchanged his fine long tail'd
broad Cloth Coat for a Sailor's coarse Jerkin, which reached within four Inches
of the Waistband's of his red Plush Breeches -- He had swapped his Beaver for a
coarse high crowned narrow brimm'd Wool Hat, which he thought expedient, though
contrary to all Precedent, to throw into a smart triangular Cock; by the last
Exchange he gained a round Half Dollar Piece. In this Garb, our Hero fraught
with consummate Impudence, set out in Quest of Adventures. As he had been a
Fellow Traveller in a strange Land, I could not help remonstrating with him
upon the Impropriety of his Conduct, which, however he endeavored to defend,
by observing that his then Appearance was in Honor to the Memories of Mr.
Stern and Lord Verulam. -- For Sir, added he, Mr. Stern has written
expressly on the Subject of Jerkins in these Words, "A Man's Body and his Mird,
with reverence I speak it, are exactly like a Jerkin and a Jerkin's Lining --
Rumple the one, you Rumple the other:" And as to my Lord Verulam, "Smell-fungus
in his History of England represents his Lordship's Chappo, as similar to what
now covers the Noddle of your humble Servant."

In the Neighborhood of Louisville I continued upwards of two Months; those
with whom I associated, were affable and humane: The Stranger here may consider
himself as at Home -- for such is the extreme Hospitality of the People, that
unknown to their Guest, they will confer, or rather impose Acts of Beneficence,
which cannot be refused without Rudeness.

March 4th. 1791. Proceeded down the Ohio in Company with a Frenchman, who was
taking his American Wife and Children along with him to Langue la Graisse, or,
the Greasy Bent; now called by the Spaniards Neuvo Madrid, on the Western Side
of the Missisippi. The Governor of Pensacola says, that the Etymology of Langue
la Graisse originates from the Rivers forming an extensive Curve; where, upon
the first Settlement of the Place, great Quantities of Bear-Meat (...) stored
up for the Use of the Garrison and the French and Spanish Navigators up and
down the Missisippi, which Meat is of a very oleose Quality; though in my
Opinion, the Greasiness of the Soil, with the Devexity of the River,
sufficiently justify the Epithet.

During our Passage from (...) to this Place, we were frequently alarmed at the
hostile Appearance of Indians on both Sides of the Ohio and Missisippi;
suspecting our Numbers to be superior to their own, they were deterred from
coming against us in Force; which had they done, we should have fallen Victims
without a Possibility of Escape to their merciless Barbarity.

March 12th. 1791. Breakfasted and dined with Signior Pedro Foucher, Commandant
at Neuvo Madrid. The Garrison consist of about Ninety Men, who are well
supplied with Food and Raiment; they have an excellent Train of Artillery,
which appears to be their chief Defense -- Two Regular Companies of Musketeers
with charged Bayo^ets might take this Place. Of this Opinion is the Commandant
himself, who complains that he is not sufficiently supported -- He is a Cr^l^
of French Extraction, of Patagonian Size, polite in his Manners, and of a most
noble Presence. On the Evening of this Day embarked in a Boat called the
Smoke-House, bound to New Orleans, and anchored on the Georgian Shore, about
Thirty Miles below Madrid.

13th. Setting at the Vessel's Head I espied about a Dozen Fowls as large as
Muscovile Ducks, of a blai^h gray Color, with remarkable short Necks, the Name
of which no one on Board knew, as never having seen any of the Kind before,
though they had long been accustomed to the Navigation of the Missisippi, and
visited most Parts of the habitable Globe. An Hibernian on Board swore that
from the shortness of their Necks they were either Cygnets or young Cranes; for
that the old Ones liad Necks ten Times as long.

14th. The Trecs on the Margin of the River in Verdue. At 9 o'Clock encounted a
Congeries of Aiots and passed the first Chickasaw Bluff, where the River is
about Five Hundred Yards wide -- At 12 o'Clock we lost Sight of Mans^^ur's Boat
in a strong Gale of Wind -- 8 o'Clock at Night one of Mr. Craig's Tobacco
Boats, with Forty Hogsheads of Tobacco, and a large Quantity of Flour and Plank
passed us whilst we lay in Harbor, she had lost her Rudder and sprung a Leak.
In this Situation, with only three Hands on Board, they implored our Aid, which
through prudential Motives was denied.

15th. At Sunrise espied the Frenchman's Boat in good Harbor and uninjured;
but different was the Fate of Mr. Craigs, which had sprung a Leak in her Bow
and appeared to be stranded opposite to the second Chickasaw Bluff, where the
River is about Four Hundred Yards wide. At 9 o'Clock we viewed the third
Chickesaw Bluff, opposite to the Bayone St. John, where the River is not quite
Four Hundred Yards wide. The Colors of this Bluff are white, red, yellow,
blue, gray, black, brown, purple, etc. Here the Chickasaws once had a small
Pottery -- Upon this Bluff is the most eligible Situation for a Town which I
have as yet seen on the Banks of the Missisippi. -- Just under this Bluff,
within six Feet of the Shore, a first Rate Man of War might ride in Safety,
unassailed by Winds, etc. At the upper End of this Bluff is an old Blockhouse,
built by a Captain Besheare's Company, who had the Convoy of military Stores
for the Chickasaws, which they deposited therein, until they could procure the
Assistance of additional and fresh Hands. From the lower End of this Bluff, the
River suddenly opens to the amazing width of four, five and sixth Miles. Upon
Examination, I find our Crew consist of one Irishman, one Anspacher, one
Kentuckean, one Person born on Sea, one Virginian, and one Welchman; six Total.
At 12 o'Clock came on a violent Storm, which with Difficulty we evited, by
exerting every Nerve to gain the Shore.

March 17th. 1791. The Irishman in Honor of St. Patrick, purloined all our
Brandy, Sugar and Eggs to make a Tub of Egg-Nog, of which he drank so
copiously, that whilst at the Helm, he insensibly run the Vessel into a strong
Eddy, to get her out of which, employed all Hands in hard Labor the Balance of
the Day.

March 18th. At Sunrise came on a slight Snow, which formed a curious Contrast
to the Verdure of the Trees -- All the Afternoon of this Day we run due North.

19th. At 8 o'Clock we run due South -- All this Day the Weather was intensely
cold, the Wind blowing from North. About Noon six Indians of the Chactaw Nation
came on Board and presented us with two Strings of jerked Venison, for which we
in Return gave them six Pound of Bacon and a Peck of Salt, which they
pronounced to be very good. At 1 o'Clock we were hailed by a Pennsylvanian and
a Lad in a Peroch, laden with Bear and Buffaloc Meat, taken on the St. Francis
River, and bound up the Os^rque River, where there is a Settlement of Thirty
Families about Thirty Miles from its Mouth. At 3 o'Clock overtaken by two Boats
laden with Flour and Tobacco.

20th. At Sunrise drew up a Kitten of about Twenty lbs. Weight, which with the
Help of God and an Irish Cook, we made into most excellent Broth. At 9 o'Clock
came up with two large Pittsburg Boats at Anchor laden with Flour, on the
Shore, opposite to which, was a Conceurs^ of Osarque Indians. An old Man among
them was in Mourning, having his Face blackened over with a Commixture of
Bear's Oil, Charcoal and Turpentine: Just under his Jowls were two Streaks of
red and white, which ran parallel to each other -- The Indian Ladies very
innocently displayed their Navels, and the curious Dye might have explored
other Parts which civilized Nations industriously conceal. Twenty Miles up the
Osarque River are their Wigwams, opposite to which, on the Eastern Side, is a
Spanish Garrison of Twenty-nine Men -- The Place is high, well watered, and as
yet the Garrison have experienced no Sickness.

21st. At 8 o'Clock descried a Keel bottomed Boat with a square Sail, bound to
New Madrid -- Her Progress under a fair Wind was at the Rate of two and a half
Miles per Hour, which might have been accelerated by the Addition of Oars. At
ten o'Clock entered a narrow Part of the Missisippi, where it is not more than
Two Hundred Yards wide. At 12 o'Clock discovered another Keel bottomed Boat,
destined to the same Place with the former. At Sunset, three of Mr. Craig's
Tobacco Boats came up with us whilst we lay in Harbor, the fourth being still
under the Command of the Rear Admiral, whose Intrepidity has often endangered
his Vessel by opposing the poor Planters and Sawyers, who have taken up their
Residence in this spacious River. It is shrewdly suspected that the Rear
Admiral will be tried by a Board of Dons, so soon as he makes the Port of
Natchez.

22d. At Sunrise, espied a Vessel of General Wilkinson's, under the Command of
Captain Swain, bound to New Orleans -- At 8 o'Clock we had in View six Sail of
the Line.

23d. At 12 o'Clock we ran North Westwardly -- Here the Missisippi forms on the
Spanish Side an exact Resemblance of an Horse Shoe.

24th. At Break of Day espied the Walnut Hills about ten Miles below the Yasous
River, which his Catholic Majesty limits as his Boundary, and below which, his
Vicegerents say, that Citizens of the United States shall not inhabit, unless
they throw themselves under the Laws, Banners and Protection of the King of
Spain. At 10 o'Clock espied a Shingle roosed House, occupied by a Family of
New-Yorkers -- Near this Spot the Governor of the Natchez has fixed upon an
Eminence for the Erection of a Fort. The Family informed, that the intended
Garrison were at the Natchez, taking in military Stores and Provision. The
River opposite to the intended Fort is about Six hundred Yards wide. Whoever
undertakes a Description of the Walnut Hills, must have a fertile Imagination,
be happy at Landscape Painting, and use Something like Romance, or he will fall
infinitely short of that Eulogium which the Place so justly merits.

23d. At Sunrise, saw two small Houses on the Eastern Side of the River upon a
beautiful Eminence, from whence runs off a great Extent of very level fertile
Ground: The Eminencies resemble the round Hills of Stafford County, in the
Northern Neck of Virginia. At 2 o'Clock I went on Board the Governor of
Natchez' Barge, his Name is Gayoso. Here I was regaled with delicious Nuts and
excellent Wines, This Gentleman has a majestic Department, softened by Manners
the most engaging and polite. Having been brought up at the Court of London, he
is well acquainted with the Etiquette of Mortals who move in the more exalted
and splendid Scenes of Life, He had in Company with him two Victualling Boats
and an armed Schooner, laden with military Stores. I could not ascertain their
Destination, though it was probably to the Walnut Hills. His Soldiery including
Mariners and Mechanics, did not exceed one Hundred Men. Doctor O'Fallan, Agent
for the Yajous Company, ardently pants for the Cultivation of this delicious
Soil; but by Connoiseurs, it is shrewdly conjectured, that having pitched his
Tent in the Grotto of Miss Clarke, his Ardency, like his Constitution, will
turn into downright Frigidity.

24th. At Sunrise, we shot the Grand Gulf, opposite to which, on either Side,
the Cane grows to the enormous Height of Forty and sometimes Forty-five Feet.
At 8 o'Clock an impervious Fog arose, so as to prevent a Discovery of Sawyers
and other Obstacles not more than ten Feet from us. It might with Propriety
have been called "Darkness visible." At 9 o'Clock passed the Bayone Pierre, on
the Banks of which are three small Houses and about Thirty Acres of Ground
under Cultivation -- About ten Miles higher up the Country it is pretty thickly
inhabited by Virginians, Carolineans, Georgians, and some few Stragglers from
the Eastern States.

26th. At Sunrise came in Sight of the Town of Natchez, situate on the Eastern
Bank of the River. It contains about an Hundred Houses, and is the Metropolis
of the District and Residence of Don Gayoso, the Governor last mentioned. In
this Town and its Vicinage we continued about a Week.

27th. On Sunday I took a View of the Governor's Palace, as also of the Fort;
which from its elevated Situation has a fine Command of the River for about a
Mile up, and double that Distance down it: though I think it might be assailed
with Success by a single Regiment, or taken by Surprise with a less Number. The
lying of the back Ground, and the Paucity and Insignificance of the Garrison
would favor either Plan. They have a good Train of Artillery, though very
injudiciously arranged; the back Part of the Fort being pregnable to a Dozen
Men.

28th. Paid a Visit to Don Gra^frey, Commandant of the Regular Forces
throughout the Natchez District: he lives about Two Miles from Town. Here I was
regaled with different Kinds of Fruits, Wines and Parmesan Cheese, which were
succeedent to a very good substantial Dinner. Hospitality and Urbanity presided
at his Board: His Lady is young, handsome and polite -- His Visitants consisted
of five reputable Gentlemen and three Ladies. One of the Gentlemen spoke the
English and Spanish Languages with great Propriety and Fase. Him we fixed upon
as Linguist to the Company, and through whom we carried on a brisk and cheerful
Conversation. The Spanish Gentlemen and Ladies with whom I had an Opportunity
of conversing, do not possess that Austerity and Reserve, which are so
generally ascribed to their Nation. The Character of the Spaniards is thus
drawn by the celebrated Mr. Swinburne, after his late Travels through the
Country.

"The Catalans appear to be the most active, stirring Set of Men, the best
calculated for Business, Traveling and Manufactures -- The Valencians a more
sullen, sc^ate Race, better adapted to the Occupation of Husbandry, less eager
to change Place, and of a much more timid suspicious Cast of Mind than the
former -- The Andalu^ans seem to be the greatest Talkers and Rhodemontadoes of
Spain -- The Casti^ians have a manly Frankness, and less Appearance of Cunning
and Deceit -- The New Casti^ians are perhaps the least industrious of the whole
Nation -- The Old Casti^ians are laborious, and retain more of ancient
Simplicity of Manner; both are of a firm determined Spirit -- The Arragoness
are a Mixture of the Casti^ian and Catal^, rather incling to the former -- The
B^scayner are acute and diligent, fiery and impatient of Control, more
resembling a Colony of Republicans, than a Province of an absolute Monarchy --
And the Galacians are a plodding Painstaking Race of Mortals, that roam over
Spain in Search of an hardly earned Subsistence."

From this Description: those with whom I conversed are certainly Castilians,
or of that Pedigree. To Mr. Swinburne's Character of the Nation I shall have
frequent Reference, as I shall be much among them, and probably see Mortals
answering each provincial Description. About some ten or fifteen Miles above
the Town of Natchez, lies the Settlement of the Bayoue Pierre -- It comprehends
a Neighborhood of about Thirty Miles in Length and Twenty Miles in Width,
composed generally of People who have moved, and still continue to move in
elevated Stations, when compared to those, who, though now possessed of Wealth,
ushered into Life without the Advantages of Fortune, Family, or Education.

29th. At the Natchez I observed an Advertisement relating to a stray Horse,
for the Setting up of which, the Owner was obliged to get the previous Sanction
of a Magistrate. An Inhabitant under the Jurisdiction of Spain may be said to
be,

"Homo sine Spe, sine Sede, sine Re." The Soil of this District is better
adapted to the Growing of Corn, Rice and Indigo, than of Tobacco, the
Cultivation of which, is gradually falling into Difuse; as an Admittance of it
into the King's Store is now positively refused, from some political Motives,
which the Governor thinks himself under no Obligation to communicate: though
the present Crop was raised under a Confidence reposed in his Promise, to
receive and allow eight Dollars per Hundred for it.

30th. At 10 o'Clock discovered the Wreck of one of Mr, Craig's Tobacco Boats,
which he had directed to be got under Way. Into this Boat, exclusive of
Tobacco, he had stowed a considerable. Quantity of Bacon, Butter, Flour and
Plank -- He lost almost the whole. His Boatsmen (for whom he now no longer had
Occasion) appeared to bear his Loss with great Composure and Christian
Fortitude. At 1 o'Clock moved from the Natchez, and in two Hours viewed the
white Bluff on the Eastern Side of the River. This Situation is Romantic and
boasts a Gentleman's Seat, near which lay three large Tobacco Boats unlaunched.
Mr. Ellis, from Amelia County, of Virginia, resides at this Place. Here I
discovered the first Pine Trees since I crossed the Allegheny Mountains.

31st. At 12 o'Clock past Lestus's Bluff, where the River is about Two Hundred
Yards wide. This Situation is beauteous, and has two Plantations on the summit
laid off in oblong Squares, and a little Way below, a fine extensive Meadow. At
3 o'Clock hailed by a Row Galley from New Orleans, bound to New Madrid, At 4
o'Clock espied the Long Reach, where the Eye may take in an uninterrupted Water
Prospect of Twenty-three Miles. At our Entrance into the Long Reach we viewed
the Red River, about a Quarter of a Mile wide, on the Western Side of the
Missisippi; and three Miles below it the Bayoue Chappaliere, which taking its
Leave of this River, disembogues its gentle Stream into the Gulf of Mexico,
several Leagues from the Mouths of the Missisippi.

April 1st. At Sunrise we heard the Reville beaten on the Western Side of the
River, where there is a small Spanish Garrison.

2d. Hailed by two Perochs, one bound to the Natchez, the other to the Bayoue
Pierre. For two Days past we have been much harrassed by Musquettoes -- The
poor Indians who go almost naked, construct an elevated Bed of Reeds, which
they Suffumigate, so as to banish Insects of every Description from their
Lodgements. Slight whitewashed airy Buildings become more common on the Eastern
Side of the River, and are, in general, occupied by People from the United
States. Here are the most delightful Prospects that ever caught my View -- On
the Western Side there is a Meadow three Miles in Length and Half a Mile in
Width, beset with English Clover about eighteen Inches high, which depastures
about Three Hundred Head of Horses, and an equal Number of horned Cattle.

3d. At 10 o'Clock viewed Point Couper, a Village Twenty-one Miles in Length,
though narrow, consisting of inferior Buildings, interspersed now and then
with dwelling Houses, and Chapels of tolerable Elegance. At 4 o'Clock saw eight
Country Seats on the Eastern Bank, and at the lower End of some high Bluffs, a
large Building of extraordinary Workmanship, and a Dock-yard about Have a Mile
below it. At 6 o'Clock viewed the Alexandrian Bluffs, from which on both Sides
of the River there is a Continuation of beauteous Farms and elegant Buildings
for the Distance of Sixty-one Miles. The general Width of the River all this
Day is about three Quarters of a Mile, or rather less.

4th. About Noon espied the Suburbs of New Orleans, and at 2 o'Clock came
abreast of the City on the Eastern Side of the River, in an Island formed by
the Missisippi and the Bayoue St. John. This City is the Residence of Don Miro
a Spanish Viceroy, and Emporium of Louisiana and the Indian Territories
dependent thereon -- It lies in almost an exact Square. The Streets which are
wide, and some of them well paved with Brick, intersect each other at right
Angles. The public Buildings are capacious and elegant. The private Houses
generally neat and commodious. Both Descriptions lie compact and cover a Space
of Ground of rather more than Half a Mile square. As the Situation of New
Orleans was originally Nothing more than an extensive Morass, and subject to
the Inundation of the Missisippi, it became necessary to exclude the Water, by
constructing Dikes from about ten to fifteen Feet in Height, and double that
Measure in Width The steady Exertions of many Hands were, and still are
employed in the Business; notwithstanding which, the Dikes are sometimes broken
through, and considerable Damage sustained by the Influx of Water into their
Cellars, Gardens and lower Rooms.

Along a spacious Canal from the Bayoue St. John, to the Western Entrance of
the City, both Fish and Fowl of every Kind in great Abundance are brought to
their Market; which is also well supplied with fresh Meats from various other
Quarters.

April 7th. The French and Spanish Subjects of Louisiana, are strict Romanists,
and therefore, enthusiastically fond of Pageantry in their religious Festivals.
This I can avouch from a Procession of Yesterday, when a crucified Redeemer was
crucified afresh, in being represented like a Felon, in the Habiliment of a
Jesuit. The Virgin Mother was dressed out a-la-mode de Paris; and Traitor
Judas, for political Reasons, appeared in the Regimental Uniform of a Spanish
Soldier, under Sentence of Death, for having divulged the Countersign to the
Enemy in Consideration of a Bribe.

In this Procession, I observed a young Kentuckean who had been educated in all
the Strictness of Presbyterianism, from which he had apostatized, and embraced
Anabaptism and Methodism, which he highly honored, by using each Profession
alternately, as Hypocrisy might suggest. He was presented with a waxen Candle,
which he devotionally received; and, like the Knight of the woeful Countenance,
joined the cheating and the cheated Throng.

On the Morning of the Procession, I planted myself near the Door of the
Monastry, and had a faint Glimpse of the Nuns whilst thus were adjusting their
Capuchins. The Monastery is near the Center of the Town, and remarkable only
for its Length, which if I mistake not, is about Two Hundred Feet. The Hospital
is situate in the Western Edge of the City, where Nothing interrupts its
Ventilation from the East, South and North; but unfortunately, as if intended
to banish Cheerfulness from its Mansions, the Priests have laid off a Burial
Ground, which is enclosed on one Side by the Front Wall of the Building. The
Chapel is in a ruinous State, and will not be repaired -- A new one is
trecting, to which, all the internal Decorations of the Old will be transferred.

Don Andrea, a Catalan, arrived in New Orleans about Twenty Years ago:

"Propt on a Staff, deformed with Age and Care,
"And hung with Rage that ^uller a in the Air."
For ten Years past he has been the richest Subject in Louisiana or either of
the Floridas. About three Years since, he got disgusted with his Lady, against
whom he prayed on obtained a Divorce a V^ncu^^ Matrimonii, a Dispensation from
the Archbishop of ^^^ledo, Primate of Spain and great Chancellor of Castile,
for an incestuous Marriage with her younger Sister. To procure an Indulgence of
this Kind, required a considerable Largess from the Coffers of the old
Mammomist. He is now erecting to the Glory of God. and in Atonement of his
Rascalities a superb Church and Hospital. No Doubt when these shall be
completed, but that he will be reminded by the Priests, who will know how to
excite the Passions of Hope and Fear, that some other expiatory Acts remain;
and which he is indispensably bound to perform, under no less Penalty than of
having his Soul everlastingly damned in the liquid Flames of Hellfire, To
soothe his Vanity, his Name and Pious Deeds, will be ensculptured over the
Front Doors and other Parts of the Buildings.

"Who builds a Church to God, and not to Fame,
"Will never mark the Marble with his Name."
Pope. The Orleanois as I observed before, are staunch Romanists, and consider
People of all other religious Denominations as Heretics, and to whom they not
long since denied christian Burial. Their Custom was to throw the Body of the
deceased, unshrouded and uncoffin'd into the Missisippi. Not many Years ago, an
Englishman, by the Name of Howard, influenced by Motives to Humanity, purchased
about four Acres of Land in the Suburbs of the City, and generously assigned it
as a Burial Ground for Protestants and Strangers. I saw the Interment of a
Corpse. The Grave was about four Feet deep. The Water rose within ten Inches of
the Surface, and the Coffin was sunk down with heavy Stones.

Private Adventurers from New York Philadelphia and Baltimore, carry on a
tolerable Trade at this Place -- They have an Advance of Cent per Cent on their
Goods, which are nevertheless cheaper than Spanish Importations. I could not
ascertain what Impost is exacted here, but imagine it to be about fifteen per
Cent ad Valorem.

During my Continuance in New Orieans, I got acquainted with the celebrated
Major Fairlamb, whose Name will be memorable from the Circumstance of his
having in the Course of the last War, with only Sixtythree Men in a Blockhouse,
withstood and repulsed General Wayne's whole Brigade. He is now
Surveyor-General for the King of Spain in Louisiana. I had an ironical Message
from him to General Wayne, whom I had not the Pleasure of Seeing, in my Route
through Georgia.

May 16th. Went on Board the Governor's Packet at the Bayoue St. John, bound to
Mobille and Pensacola. In this Bayoue I counted Seventy-three Alligators, which
the Eye could easily take in at one View. The Tail part of this Animal yields a
very nutritious Food, and on which, the Indians and Negroes voraciously englut
and gormandize. They are eaisily killed with a Rifle Ball, discharged about an
Inch below the Eyes -- All other Parts except the Belly, are clothed with
impenetrable Scales. The usual Length of those I saw, were from six to ten
Feet; though some few are now and then seen, which measure upwards of Twenty
Feet. I was informed by an intelligent Spaniard that they are of the same Genus
with the Crocodile on the River Nile, many of which he had critically examined
in the Course of his late Travels. On Board of this Vessel were Passengers, ten
miserable Spaniards and a poor Negro, laden with combrous Chains, whose
incessant clangous Sounds, united with Heartrending Groans, transpierced my
Ear, and sadden'd all my Soul. They were under the Care of an Ensign, whose
Feelings appeared to be equally wounded with my own. Their Fate will be
confinement in a Prison Ship, till they, with many others, now in the Ca^
^house at Mobille, reach their ten Years gloomy Abode in the Copper Mines,
where they will be excluded from the Light of Heaven, and drag out a miserable
Existence under the Iron Rod of ruthless Oppression, in hard and ^remitting
Labor. Providence was kind to these poor Wretches. At times they were
cheerful, and by no Means seemed to anticipate the subterraneous Horrors which
await them.

17th. Arrived at Pensacola, the Metropolis of West Florida. There are some
elegant Buildings in this Place, particularly the Palace, Barrack and Chapel.
Whilst Pensacola was in Possession of the British Government, it was under an
excellent Police, and wore a very different Aspect from what it now does; a
great Part of the Town being in a ruinous State. There is but one Tavern for
the Accommodation of Americans and Foreigners, and its Rates are enormously
high. Their Market is well supplied with aquatic Productions of every Species
peculiar to the Climate, and with slight Industry, might vie with Northern
Markets in Mutton, Beef and Pork, with the superior and additional Advantage
of Venison. Perennial Fruits of all Kinds, except Apples, they have in the
greatest Profusion.

Don Arturo O'Neil, Governor of this Province informed me, that during an
eleven Years Residence in Pensacola, he had never experienced a Moment's
Sickness; and that all the Citizens enjoyed uninterrupted Health, except the
Spanish Garrison; whose Mode of Living, will, at all Times, and in all Places,
be productive of complicated Diseases. Inordinate Use of Ardent Spirits and bad
Wine, superadded to high seasoned Meats and pro^^iscuous Intercourse with lewd
Women, will disorder any the most ^obust Habit of Body.

Immediately back of the Town is a delightful Acclivity, from whence issue many
bubbling Fountains of wholesome pleasant Water, filtrated through the Sand
which constitutes the Hill. The upper and lower Greek Nation trade to this
Place, where they are uniformly imposed upon by a Mr. Panton, who has
monopolized their Trade. The poor Indians barter their Deer Skins at fourteen
Pence Sterling per Pound, for Salt at nine Shillings Sterling per Bushel.
Penton is Part Owner of the Salt Works in the Island of Providence, and has it
brought to Pensacola in his own Bottoms, at the Average Expense of about three
Pence per Bushel. I think his Goods at Mobille, Pensacola and St. Marks, are
generally vended at about Five Hundred per Cent on their prime Cost.

After having spent about a Week in Pensacola, experiencing greater Civilities
from his Lordship than my most sanguine Expectations could have depicted, I
departed with an Escort of eleven Indians, to whom I was introduced by the
Governor, as an English Ambassador Incog. This ludic^ous Title I endeavored to
support, during my Passage through ^ Wilderness of Three Hundred Miles, by
assuming wise Catonia Looks, big with momentous and mystical Concerns. My mock
Gravity forsook me whenever I drew over the Stage of Imagination, a Groupe of
old Acquaintance viewing me in my new and farcial Capacity of Ambassador from
the Court of London to an Indian Emperor.

My Indian Companions (from their Conduct I judge) were much pleased with
various Parts of my Diess which they would in my Presence, try on and pull off,
and pack away in their Budgets; always remembering to make a Bow and say, "Tank
you Sir, which extorted from me a Nod of Consent, with the Addition of, You're
welcome Gentlemen. The very ample Stock of Rum, Wine, etc. with which the
Governor had supplied use, was with like Ceremony by them, and other Parties
which we frequently met, consumed in about three Days. In about 20 Miles from
Pensacola we reached the Indian Boundary, no Part of their Territory ever
approaching higher than that Distance to the Sea-board. Notwithstanding the
natural Stevility of Soil from Pensacola almost to the Tallipoosee River, the
Long-leaf'd Pine, Hickory, Oak, Poplar, and Walnut Trees grow to their usual
Height, and protect from the scorching Rays of the Sun the tall and tender
Grass; among which Plants, Shrubs and Flowers of variegated Hue, and of rare
medicinal Virtues, are interspersed; a Catalogue of which, shall be subjoined
to some future Page.

June 1st. Arrived at General McGillivray's House, situate on the Cousee River,
about 5 Miles above its Junction with the Tallipoosee, which forms the Alabama,
whose Confluence with the Tombigbee forms the Bay of Mobille. -- At the Mouth
of Mobille River, which empties into the Bay, is a Town of similar Name, of
which having only a (...) View, I shall not attempt a Description; but only
observe that it is garrisoned, and from its Locality, must 'ere long surpass
Pensacola, in Population, Trade and Buildings. -- The fertile Grounds upon all
the above last mentioned Rivers are settled and settling by Corn, Hemp and
Tobacco-Makers, who will have a nearer and better Navigation to Mobille than to
Pensacola -- add to this the Peltry-Trade, which will trebly exceed that of
Tensacola, as being nearer to the Hunting-Grounds from whence they may have
Water-Carriage, except at one or two places, where a very slight Portage will
be necessary.

On my Arrival at McGillivray's where my Indian Escori left me, I was informed
that he had just gone to his upper Plantation, on the same River, about 6 Miles
distant from his present Residence: Thither I impaired in Company with his
Nephew, who supplied me with an Indian's stray Horse. -- We had not ridden far,
before we unfortunately met the Owner, who, with a menacing Countenance and
sans Ceremony, seized the Bridle and ordered me To dismount immediately. -- An
Hour's Walk brought me to the Place, where the General was superintending some
Workmen in the Erection of a Log House embel^^^d with dormer Windows, on the
very Spot where his Father resided whilst a Trader ^n the Nation. Here are some
tall old Apple Trees planted by his Father, which make a venerable Appearance,
though greatly obstruct the Prospect to and from his rural humble Palace.

He received me with Frankness and Civility; modestly enquired into my
Business, and promised every Assistance in his Power toward my Accommodation,
whilst I should think proper to make his House my Home: -- Do they order Things
better in France? This Gentleman to Appearance is at least Five and Forty, though
in Fact only Thirty-two Years of Age -- Dissipation marked his juvinile Days,
and sapped a Constitution originally delicate and feeble. -- He is subject to
an habitual Headache and Cholic, notwithstanding which his Temper is placid and
serene, and at Intervals of Ease quite joyous. He possesses an Atticism of
Diction aided by a liberal Education, a great Fund of Wit and Humor,
meliorated by perfect good Nature and Politeness. -- His Lady considering the
Mode of Education to which she was subjected in the early Part of Life, is a
Model of Prudence and Discretion; and could her Complexion, which is olive, be
commuted for the lovely Tints of red and white, she would be

"A Woman loveliest of the lovely Kind,
"Perfect in Body, and complete in Mind."
By this Lady the General has two lovely Children, Alexander and Elizabeth.
They speak the English Tongue as well as Children of a similar Age usually do
among us.

He has a considerable Number of Negroes at his different Plantations, probably
more than Fifty, and common Report says, double that Number in the Spanish
West India islands; as also large Stocks of Horses, Hogs, and horned Cattle.
Two or three White Men superintend their respective Ranges, and now and then
collect them together in Order to brand, mark, etc: This they effect by giving
them a little Salt in their Enclosures. His Table smokes with good substantial
Diet, and his Side-board displays a Variety of Wines and ardent Spirits. -- The
General encourages his People in all Kinds of gymnastic Exercises; his Motives
for which may be easily conjectured -- He invited me to a Ball-Match, about 10
miles from his House, between two Townships. Sixty-two alert young Fellows were
selected from each Town. The Goals were set up about a Quarter of a Mile apart,
near the Center of an extensive Campaign or Praire. -- They consist of two
blazed Saplings fixed in the Ground about 10 Feet asunder at either End, through
which every Time either Party throws the Ball with their Rackets, they are
entitled to count one -- The Number of the Game is arbitrary. -- Midway between
the Goals, the Ball is thrown up alternately by two old Men, who are mutually
chosen by the contending Parties to decide, all Controversies which may arise
in the Course of the Game -- Upon throwing up the Ball a violent Struggle
ensues between the Parties which sometimes lasts 8 or 10 Minutes, before either
Side can give it a cast; and when they do, there are others of their Opponents
ready to intercept and give it an adverse Direction. -- On this Game Property
to a very considerable Amount is generally risqued, consisting of Broaches,
Bracelets, Gorgets, Medals, Paints, Arms and Ammunition piled up in a
pyramidical Form. Sometimes their whole Family Stock of Food and Raiment is
hazzarded. -- A dislocated Joint or fractured Bone is not uncommon: Suffer what
they may, you will never see an angry Look or hear a threatening Word among them.

(...) Players divest themselves of all their Clo^^s, except their Flaps. They
ingeni^u^ disguise themseves with various colored Pa^ and assume the Somb ^nce
of Rattle-Sn^^ entwined about their Legs Thighs and A^, whilst spiral Streaks
of red, white, black, and ^^ue, alternately adorn their other Parts. -- The
vanquished Party immediately upon the Conclusion of the Game, betake themselves
to their Heels, in Order to avoid the Scoffs and Ridicule of their boastful
Conquerors.

Our President, whilst M'Gillivray was in New York, complimented him with a
Selection of elegantly gilt bound Books; as also with the Golden Epaulet which
he had worn throughout the War, The latter McGillivray considers as a great
Honor conferred upon him; and therefore, says, he "prizes it far above Rubies
and much fine Gold." He receives annual Presents from his Father in Scotland,
which he modestly displays to his Friends, saying, those I received from my
natural, these from from my political and adopted Father.

The Reader is here presented with a Specimen of McGillivray's epistolary
Composition, extracted from two Letters addressed to Messrs. Boyd and Ker of
Richmond, and to Mr. Collin Douglass of Manchester, bot^ written in Haste, and
in a Circle of many Chieftains, whose Garrulity would have confused any other
Man than McGillivray.

Little Tallisee, Upper Creek Nation, 5th June, 1791. DEAR SIRS,
MR. Pope having called here on his Way Home, I embrace the Opportunity of
making you my warmest Acknowledgements, for the polite Attention which you were
pleased to show to me, when I had the Pleasure of being with you last Suwmer.

The (...) with (...) I was attacked at New York. (...) me unable to return by
the Route I had promised myself and (...) me to make a Passage by Sea, (...) my
Health

In the Hurry of (...) early Hour from Richmond, I (...) to discharge a small
Account I owed you. Not recollecting the exact amount ^ but imagine it to be
within the Compass of a Guinea: I have given Col. P^^^ one to deliver to you on
my Account.

Wishing you every Prosperity, I remain Gentlemen, your very obliged Humble
Servant. ALEXANDER MCGILLIVRAy.

MESS'RS. BOYD and KER.

Upper Cr^^k Nation, 8th June, (...). DEAR SIR,
THE (...) Col. Pope being on his Return Homeward^ from a Western Tour and
learning that he lives in your Neighborhood. I embrace the favorable
Opportunity to make you and your very accomplished Lady my warmest
Acknowledgements, for the polite and friendly Attention shown me when on my
Tour last Summer.

The Effects of a severe Indisposition at New York rendered me incapable of
returning by the Route in which I came: and after a tolerable Passage of
Fifteen Days, we landed at St. Mary's in Georgia.

I felt great Regret that it was not in my Power to make my Respects in Person,
to the hospitable and friendly Gentleman of Manchester and Richmond: but be
(...) I shall long remember them -- And "Sweet Jim of Aber deen." still
vibrates on my Ear.

That you and your accomplished Lady may long enjoy Happiness, and every
Prosperity, is the Wish of

DEAR SIR. Your most obedient Humble Servant. ALEXANDER McGILLIVRAY.

COLLIN DOUGLASS, ESQUIRE.

Having spent an agreeable Time among the upper Creeks, I took my Departure on
the General's Horse, with his Overseer as an Escort to the Lower Towns of
Coweto, Broken-Arrow and Cussatee. The two former lie on the Western, and the
latter on the Eastern Side of the Chattahoutchee River, which takes its Name
from two Indian Words; Chatta, a Stone, and Houtchee, which signifies marked or
inscribed. This Stone lies about 3 Miles above the Coweta, at the Rapids,
covered over with hieroglyphic Inscriptions, which the present Race do not
understand. On the Western Side of the River, upon the low Grounds of the
Cussatees is a Mount, on whose Summit are the evident Traces of a Parapet
sufficiently large to have contained one Thousand Men. This Mount appears to
have been the Work of Ages and of many Hands, being upwards of 600 Yards in
Circumferrence at its Base, and about 100 Feet in perpendicular Height. On the
Western Side and immediately opposite to the Mount, are the Vestiges of a very
large and deep Intrenchment, thrown up in a circular Form by the Ancestors of
the present Race, as a Defense against a numerous Tribe of the Seminolies, whom
the Creeks after a long and bloody Contest of 20 Years, extirminated, and
re-peopled the deserted Villages by ^ow Emigrations from their own victorious
Tribes. This Event according to the oral Tradition of the Creeks, happened
about Ten Thousand Years ago, when they had a Giant-King of most stupendous
Size, called Billy Pig, who in Times of Dearth, would stop the Chattahoutchee
with his Foot, and divert the Current over all the neighboring Fields: That
the Alligators got offended at his Conduct, and begged their King to snap off
his great Toe; the Loss of which prevented him from damming up the Water any
more with that Foot; and so he died of Grief, and was burried under the
circular Mount already mentioned, coil'd uplike a Rattle-Snake.

During my Tarriance at the lower Towns, I formed an Intimacy with the Little
King of the Broken Arrow, who is friendly, communicative and intelligent.
Through him, with the Aid of an Interpreter, I attempted to compose a small
Vocabulary of the Creekish Tongue, particularly of such Words as most
frequently occur in common Intercourse. In the prosecution of this, I enquired
of him what Appellation he had for God? he replied, Sawgee Putchehassee, which
signifies the Giver and Taker of Breath: And pray with what Epithet is your
Majesty pleased to honor the poor old Devil? with Emotions of Contempt he
replied; there is no Devil: God Almighty is too much of a Gentleman to keep bad
Servants about him. Just at this Instant, his Majesty received an Invitation to
a Rum-Drinking, which in Opposition to all my Dissuasions, he resolved to
honor with his Presence. This Rum-Drinking or Spewing-Match was held in the
public Square, contiguous to their Hot-House; in one or other of which Places,
as the Season may require, the Wittenagemote of the District assemble for the
Discussion of all Subjects, whether civil or military, moral or divine. Here
also they hold their War Dances, display their Trophies of War, and keep their
annual Festival called the Busk. This Festival generally commences about the
middle of July, upon the first Discovery of ripened Corn, and is the grand
Epoch of the Creeks. All the Male Class who have attained the Age of Puberty,
religiously abstain from all Intercourse with the other Sex, and every Kind of
Sustenance, except Water, for three Days; which from the Catharties and Emeties
they then swallow, are called the Days of Purgation. Thus cleansed from the
Impurities of the former Year, they extinguish every Particle of Fire
throughout their District, and rekindle more by the Friction of a round
Sassafras Stick, in an Augur Hole bored into a Piece of dry Poplar. This
Relighting of the Fire, is performed by their Chief Priest or Sachim, and
communicated by Torches to the Master or Mistress of each respective Family.
This done, a multifidous Mess of new Corn, cooked over the new Fire, is brought
into the Center of the Square, and distributed with great Formality among the
Guests, agreeable to Seniority and Rank, by old Men and Women deputed for that
Purpose. When the Repast is over, they rise up with one Consent, and with many
strange Gesticulations and loud Shouts of Indian Triumph, dance down the Sun,
Moon, and Seven Stars. At the Close of almost every Day throughout the Year,
about 15 or 20 principal Townsmen assemble in the Square, for the Purpose of
giving or receiving the most recent Intelligence, whether foreign or domestic,
which if important, is reported to their grand Council, and by them to the
National Assembly, whose Decrees on the Occasion, are generally ratified by
their Emperor, who has Power also of rejecting them. -- The Creeks consider
Fornication as a Faux Pas or venial Crime at most: but Woe! to the Sons and
Daughters who commit Adultry: Vengeance in a swift Career pursues them and
cannot be appeased, but by the corporeal Sufferance of the Aggressors. Upon a
Detection of the Crime, about 50 or 60 Persons of each Sex, repair to a
Thicket, and supply themselves with Hickory Clubs; this done, the Men de
termine upon the Measure of Punishment to be inflicted on the Woman and permit
the Women to decide upon the Man's. They then saparate, brandishing their
Clubs; the Men in Quest of the Woman, in Quest of the Man. The ^d^ltress when
found, is seized upon, and ign^m^iously ^r^g^ed into a Circle formed by the
Men, who beat her with their Clubs till she can no longer stand; and whilst
extended on the Ground, the Avengers proceed to dock her Hair, crop her Ears,
and slit her Nostrils; of all this her ^^morato, is made an unwilling
Spectator, and sometimes an Agent; who, in Turn, suffers a similar Disgrace in
the Circle of the Women, his fair Dulcinea looking on. What I have here
mentioned are the highest Punishments they ever inflict, even upon the most
atrocious Offenders. -- Sometimes they dispense with cropping their Ears and
slitting the Nostrils, and content themselves, with giving the Offender a found
Drubbing and a short Deck: -- This Lenity was extended a few Days ago to a Mr.
Patrick Murphy, who plead Justification; alleging that he was a Foreigner,
ignorant of their Usages and Laws; that the Woman was no Christian, having
never been baptized; and that not having the Fear of God before her Eyes: what
he had done was altogether accidenta^

If the Club Bearers ever relinquish, or lay down their Clubs through any
Mishap or ^ecessity; before they encircle the Object of their Vengeance, they
dare not resume them again, as it is presumed, that it was so ordered by their
God, in tender Mercy to the Delinquents, who are accordingly acquitted of that
Offense.

Upon the Decease of an Adult of either Sex, the Friends and Relations of the
Decedent religiously collect whatever he or she held most dear in Life, and
inter them close by and sometimes in their Owner's Grave. This pious Tribute to
their Dead includes Horses, Cows, Hogs and Dogs, as well as Things inanimate. A
Girl of about 16 Years of Age died a few Days before I left the Nation. She had
procured from a Spanish Officer at Pensacola, a likely Boar-Pig of the Spanish
Breed, which she brought Home, and cherished in her Bosom, until he waxed
strong, and became an useful Member in his Generation. Now when her Brethren,
and the young Men of the Land, perceived that the Damsel was dead; they arose
up and pursued after the Boar and slew him. And a certain young Man of the
House of Illesenekaw stood up in the Midst of the Congregation, and said; I
will go unto my Lord the King and unto the Elders and Chief Men of the Land,
and say unto the Verily the Big Boar of Chattaboutchee is slain; by the Arrows
of the Sons of Ninewaw is he fallen! And they said unto him Go: And he departed
and went unto the King, and unto the Elders and Chief Men of the Land, and
reported all these Things; saying, Verily the Big Boar of Chattaboutchee is
slain, by the Arrows of the Sons of Ninewaw is he fallen. And when the King and
the Elders and Chief Men heared thereof, they drank strong Drink and grew
exceeding Wroth, saying; the Blood of the Boar be upon the Head of those, who
have wrought this Evil in Coweta; for they wist not that the Damsel was dead --
This extraordinary Circumstance extorted from me an Epitaph on the Damsel and
the Boar, who are now Jointenants of one Grave.

Beneath this Turf a Woman,
Lies burried with a Bear;
Which to all Sows was common,
A^ she to all Men, Whore.
The Creeks regularly make a Burnt Offering of what they conceive to be the
most delicious Parts of every Animal taken in Hunting, before they presume to
taste a Mouthful. The Parts they commit to the Flames are proportioned to the
Size of the Animal, probably about 2 or 3 lb. from a Buffalo, and still less in
a regular gradation down to the smallest Quadrupede, Fish or Bird,

The Creeks like the Ot^beiteans as mentioned in Cook's Voyages, have a Custom
of T^towing themselves, and probably upon similar Principles. The young and old
of both Sexes undergo this Operation in Silence, and without the least muscular
Distortion. I saw it per^oru^ed upon a Child of 4 Years old, who when released
gave a Shout, and said, now " (...) a Man, and a Warrior too."

Those who live in Townships are Tenants in Common of large extensive Fields of
Corn, Rice and Potatoes, which commonly lie on the fat low-Grounds of some
River convenient to their Towns.

The Cultivation of the Soil and almost every domestic Drudgery are imposed
upon their Women, who are less prolific than ours; probably owing to their hard
Labor and excessively co^rse and scanty Liet. A long rainy Season had rendered
their Fields so quaggy that all Cultivation was impracticable; they durst not
even venture to cut down the tall rank W^^^^s which towered above their Corn.
In this general Distress an old Conjuror, of the Na^ of S^n^^^h^wgo stepped forth
into the Square, and thus harrangued the listening Crowd:

"Men and Wariours of Coweta Broken-Arrow and Cussatee.

"THE great God of Thunder and Lightning and of Rain, who stands upon the
aerial Battlements of Heaven, has raised his angry territonous Voice, and with
the Lightnings ^^ashing from his Eyes, has rent the Bosom of the Clouds! He
has hidden the Sun behind the Moon, and covered her Face with a Bear-Skin:
With the Tails of numerous Beavers, he has concealed the twinkling Stars! We
have been Traitors to our God, to Hippu ilk Mee^, to Lauco Wasington; We have
rejected the good Talk of Hippo ilk Meco, and listened to the lying; Talk of
Cherokees! We have infringed the Treaty with Lauco Washington in stealing
Horses from his Children! Our young Men refuse to hunt: -- their Guns are rusty
and their Hatchets dull! They sell their Horses, Clothes and silver Ornaments
for Rum. Our Women laugh at us and refuse to work: they are Prostitutes and
suckle the Children of white Men! Our Men are worse than the Excrement of Dogs
or Spaniards: -- Our Women viler than the Urine of (...)-Cats or the Vomit of
Buzzard^! For these Causes are our Fields ^renched by the angry Clouds of the
Firmament.

When will the gladsome Rays of Sol return and de^iccate our flooded Fields?
Ah! never till in Dust and Ashes we repent, and forsake our evil Ways. Men and
Warriors, let us confess our Faults and amend our Manners; and then Sawgee
Putchehassee will forgive us, and bid the Sun to show himself, and with a
genial Warmth revive our drooping Corn. -- My Sons, I Am very old and chilly;
the Marrow of my Bones is dry, and scarcely creeps the Blood along these Veins,
which once in rapid Currents flowed -- I want a Keg of Rum. -- My Daughters, I
have fasted for three Days and Nights, and invoked my God in your Behalf. -- I
am hungry as a Wolf. -- I want to eat some Hog and Hominy."

A plaintive dull Monoty constitutes the vocal Music of the Creeks. They are
passionatey fond of instrumental Music, particularly that of the Violin, to
which like Persons bitten by the Turantula, they will dance for several Hours
without the least Intermission.

No People under Heaven are more attached to, or swerve less from, the Customs
of their Ancestors than the Creeks. Whether this Attachment originates in
filial Piety, or in Ignorance I cannot determine: But as a Clue for Conjecture,
let me relate their Mode of Cropping.

They plant their Corn in Holes at an unequal, though never greater Distance than
Tobacco Hills, from one another. Twenty or thirty Grains are frequently thrown
into an Hole which produce as many earless Stalks, and which they will upon no
Consideration suffer to be thin'd. They say a plough is nothing but a
Horse-trap, and therefore never use it, contenting themselves with light
Weeding Hoes, with which they barely scalp the grassy Surface of their Fields.
Their Enclosures are Fork and Rail Fences just high enough to keep out horned
Cattle. Whilst their Crops are in the Ground they tether out their Horses, Hogs
etc, to Trees, Stumps and Stakes. Though they have numerous limpid Streams of
excellent Spring Water gushing from their River Banks, yet like old Seneca they
prefer the tepid Waters from their Creeks and Rivers. They scarcely ever weed,
hill, prime, top or succor their Tobacco, and always cut and cure it very
green over an hasty blast of Fire, as they do their Killicanic or Sumac Leaves,
which when mixed with Tobacco, emit a most delightful Odor from the Pipe. This
Preparation of S^mac and Tobacco, the Indians constantly ^^oke and consider as
a sovereign Remedy in a^^cephalic and pectoral Complaints.

The Creeks in approaching the Frontiers of Georgia, always encamp on the right
Hand side of the Road or Path, assigning the left as ominous, to the Larv^ or
Ghosts of their departed Heroes w^^ have either unfortunately lost their
Scalps, or remain unburied. The Ghost of an Hero in either Predicament, is
refused Admittance into the Mansions of Bliss, and sentenced to take up its
invisible and darksome Abode, in the dreary Caverns of the Wilderness; until
the Indignity shall be retaliated on the Enemy, by some of his surviving
Friends.

Agriculture among the Creeks is little understood and less practiced. -- I
know of but one Man in the whole Nation, who pcssesses tolerable Industry, and
that is a private Citizen, called the Bully, who from a very humble Beginning
has accumulated an easy Fortune, consisting of the following Species of
Property, viz. Of Negroes, 16 Men, 19 Women and 26 Children. Of Horses, 5
Studs, 32 Geldings, 127 Mares and 83 Colts. Of black Cattle, 19 Bulls, 58
Steers, 326 Cows, and 132 Calves. Of Hogs about 300 Head; besides Household
Furniture, Peltry and Sto^ Goods, to a very considerable Amount. Tw^ likely
young Wenches between the Ages 15 and 20, are the only Children the Bully has,
and from his advanced Age, its probable he will never increase the Number. It
is said the Black Dog is a Man of Property, the' a most egregious (...) and
^^^gard. -- I once saw his Majesty in a Pud^^ of his own Excrement and Urine,
which attracted Swarms of Spanish Flies and Beetles, whose constant Buzz had
l^^l'd him into sweet Repose. T^^ ^owe^^ of their Kings appear to be very
^^^^^^scribed and (...) a Par with those (...) common (...) Magistrate with us,
the ^^mits of their respective Governments being sometimes (...) to a single
Township, (...) a Spot of (...) not more than Ten Mi^^^ Square. M'Gillivray who
is perpetual Dictator, in Time of War subdelegates a ^^^ber of (...) for the
Direction of (...) Operations; and when the (...) they, in Compensation (...)
Achievements are invested by the Dictator (...) civil Authority which (...)
Powers of their (...) Kings.

June 29th. The Little King of the Broken-Arrow returned, and furnished me with
the following Catalogue of Indian Words, with a literal Translation to each by
Mr. Da^isou^ Linguist (...) the Lo^er Creeks.

(...), God or the (...) and Ta^er of Breath. (...) the good child king. (...)
the great (...). (...), the mad Lightwood. (...) (...) the mad King. (...) by
his Side. So^ (...) (...). (...), the (...). (...). (...) (...) for the Day.
(...) (...) Putch-sun An axe, Wawraw Nu^^^^^, a Bull. Chutksacv^, a Bridle.
Hatchee, a Creek. Atcher, Corn. H^cussee, a Child. Etchoo, a Deer. Toatson, an
Eye. Ah. Hissee, my Friend. C^^po i^oka, an Hat. Chatto, Iron. Meco, a King.
O^wina, Land. Is^e Hatkee, a white Man. Iste Chautee, an Indian or red Man.
Istee Lust, a negro or black Man. Hoakta, a Woman. Stignee, an Owl. Cat^^a, a
Panter. Chuloc, an Horse. Itch^n, a Gun. Slaufc^u, a Knife. Cappo, a Coat.
Cappo La^co, a great Coat. Chautee, Blood. Stillepiga, a Maccoson or Shoe.
Itlee, a tree. Toatka, Fire. Tos^^na, Bacon. Wawcaw Pissee, Milk. Wawcaw Pissee
Nehaw, Butter. Wawcaw Pissee Tuckaliga, Cheese. Tuckaliga, Bread. Ockchaunswaw,
Salt. Haswaw, Penes. Hasnilcaw, Testiculi. Chulua, Pude^^um Moliebre. Hi^ska,
F^eminam subagistare. Pissee, the Breast. Epha, a Dog. Epha Hoakata, a Bitch.
Naw^see, a Bear. Chawcawcaw, a Goose. Futchu, a Duck. Pinnua, a Turkey. Ilklo,
a Squirrel. Fuswaw, a Bird. Chafee, a Sheep. Chafoch^^, a Hare or little Sheep.
Wootcon, a Racoon. Suka, a Hog. Suka Hatkee, an Opossum or white Hog. Telafo, a
Town. P^nunga, an Indian Talk. Nin^ce He Mattee? is this the Way? Iste na
af^cha? where are you going? N^^^c^u Pen^acola? I am going to Pensacola. Isle
nata is^a? where did you come from? Nataesca New Orleans. I came from
New-Orleans. We Hu^^unee, Rum, or strong Water. Fo in Chumba, a Be, or a Fly
in Sweetness. Netta Hassee, the Sun. Netlee Hassee, the Moon. Cochiechumba, a
Star. Tustaniga, a Warrior. Telawgo Hatchee, Pea Creek, and Chaulee Hatchee,
Red River from a Bay of great Extent between St. Marks and Pensacola. We
launco Hatchee, yellow water River, makes a large Bay in Sight of Pensacola.
We Lust^e, black Water Creek, empties into yellow Water River. Was Hatkee,
white Water Creek, and We (...). Cold Water Creek, empty into Conakee Hatchee,
which forms the Bay of Pensacola.
Took my Departure from the Nation in Company with a Mr. John Turvin, who in
Course of the last War, to escape the Persecution of the Georgians fled for
Protection to the British Standard, where he continued till the Surrender of
St. Augustine, from whence he repaired to the Creek Nation, took a Wife, and
commenced a Trader. He is a friendly honest Man, though very irritable when he
conceives the least Indignity offered to him. To sooth his captious Temper
which involved both him and me in frequent Difficulties, I had Recourse to
Adulation, such as, I Am surprised Mr. Turvin, that a Gentleman of your good
Sense should condescend to word it with such low-liv'd Wretches! -- You, who
have been educated in the British Camp, among Officers of the first Rank and
Dignity! -- Fie! Fie! For a Gentleman to put himself upon a Level with such
Cattle!

June 30th. Late in the Evening we arrived at an old deserted Indian Village,
situate on the Banks of Flint River, near an Hundred Miles from Chattahoutchee,
with which it unites, and empties into the Ocean 50 Miles South of St. Marks.
-- About 30 Families from the Chattahoutchee Townships are resettling this
Place. The late Rains had forced the River out of its Banks and rendered it
impassable to Mr. Turvin's Horses which Were loaded with Beaver-Skins. In this
perplexity two young Fellows very opportunely came up and proffered their
Assistance in the Construction of a Raft, composed of the Timbers from the old
Village Houses. -- When we had crossed the Stream, they proposed going with us
as far as the foederal Fort on the Oconee, to which we readily assented, and
found them very tractable in rendering every possible Aid in similar
Predicaments.

July 2 Encamped on the Banks of Ockmulga about 30 Miles from Flint. Here also
we had Recourse to our India Friends for another Raft as well as a Shelter from
a most violent Rain which was then descending. They soon constructed both; the
former with dry Logs, the latter with the Bark of Pines -- Ockmulga unites with
the Oconee, and forms the Alatamaha which empties into the Sea North of St.
Mary's River, and is navigable for Vessels of 40 or 50 Tons Burden 300 Miles
from its Mouth. Late in the Evening arrived at, and continued on the Banks of
the Oconee, which was impassible for two Days. -- Here our Provissions were
exhausted, and Turvin and myself appeared like Men without Hope, having left
all our Ammunition on the South Bank of the Ockmulga at our last Encampment We
communicated our Distress and Misfortune to our Indian Friends. They smiled at
our Perplexity, and without informing us of their Intentions, immediately took
different Routes, and in about 3 Hours returned, one with an Opossum, the other
with about a Peck of Turtle Eggs, on which we fared sumptiously during our two
Days Confinement.

July -- Early in the Morning we divested ourselves of all our Clothing, and
confined it on the Tops of the Beaver Packs; then each Man with one end of a
long Rope tied round his Horse's Neck, and holding the other in his left Hand,
plunged into the Stream and swam to the opposite Shore. In this hazardous and
voluntary Attempt we in some Measure imitated what Caesar did through Accident
and Love of Fame, when cast away. Thus having braved Oconee's rough, rocky,
rapid Stream which was then upwards of 200 Yards in Width, we resumed our
Dress, mounted our Nags, and in 2 Hour's Time reached the Foederal Fort on the
Eastern Bank of the River, about 10 Miles below the Place where we crossed, and
2 Miles below the Rock Landing. At the Fort I continued 4 Days; being invited
by Major Call, Capt. Rudolph, Lieut. Martin and Ensign Clay to spend the
Anniversary of American Independence with them. The Rejoicings of the Day were
ushered in by the Discharge of Musketry and Cannon under the Direction of
skillful Officers in each Department, at whose Expense a genteel Dinner was
provided under a spacious Booth; to the Participation of which, Ladies and
Gentlemen from the Country were invited. Several sentimental Toasts suitable to
the Celibrity of the Day were drank, and at 6 o'Clock the Company repaired to a
large Room in Town and partook of an excellent Supper, after which, with the
Introduction of Minuets, Cotillions and Country Dances, the Evening was closed
to the entire satisfaction of all Parties. On this Occasion Major Call with his
usual Politeness invited my two Indian Companions, who expressed a strong
Desire to enlist into our service, in which they concluded that a Man might
wear fine Clothes and fare sumptuously every Day. The Town lies about half a
Mile below the Fort, and the Buildings at both Places, consist of very rough,
slight Materials, as if intended merely to answer a temporary Shelter for a few
Sojourners The Citizens however like other Southern People, are indolent,
luxurious, fond of gaudy Apparel and pompous Equ^page. Hither the Crack
Indians. since their late Treaty with Congress, bring their Peltry, Furs, etc.
in Barter for West India and European Goods to the almost entire Exclusion of
their former Merchants at Mobille, Pensucola and St. Marks. -- In Digging a
Well at this Place near the River Bank, the Workmen discovered many Strata of
white black and red friable Loam, which are appropriated to three several Uses,
viz: the whit^ for Starch, the black for Soap and the red for common Paint. The
latter Kind excited the Curiosity of an Indian so far, that I saw him
industriously employed near an Hour, in the Collection of about a dozen Pounds
which he carefully packed away in his Paint-bag.

July --.Took our leave of this Place at about 10 o'Clock, and by 4 in the
Evening arrived at, and passed through Washington, a small Township situate on
the South Side of Oguechee River, at the upper End of the Falls, and moved on
to another little Town about a Mile below it on the North Side, at the mouth of
the Falls. I had only a transient View of these little Towns, which appeared to
have been very lately erected; a Description therefore cannot be expected. At
Sunset, encamped about half a Mile from the Road, convenient to a Spring, on
whose little Stream, our Horses met with most delightful tender virgin Cane.
Here I undertook to teach Turvin the Lord's Prayer, which he soon learned,
having, as he said, had some little Smattering of it before he went to the
Creek Nation and married a damned Heathen. -- After a short Repose in order to
avoid the sultry Heat of Noon, we arose, collected our Horses, and pursued our
Journey till 10 o'Clock the next Day, when we halted and refreshed ourselves
and Nags till 3. At 5 o'Clock we passed the Battle Ground where Turvin had been
defeated by the Creeks, previous to our War with Britain. The Recollection of
former Disasters rendered him somewhat phlegmatic; but when at 6 we came in
Sight of the House in which he had been born and raised to Man's Estate, and
from which he had been driven

His laboring Breast inten'd a sullen Moan,
"And Melancholy marked him for her own."
What Is the Matter my Friend, you appear to be melancholy? Oh! no Nothing, in
particular: -- I was thinking about some Parts of the Lord's Prayer. What Parts
my Friend? Why, that Part where i^ says "as we forgive them that trespass
against us," its very good I agree, but by G -- d I don't think it will ever be
in my Power to comply with it.

Encamped within 15 Miles of Augusta, the Metropolis of Georgia, and entered it
early the next morning. -- Here my Friend Turvin and I separated, with mutual
Expressions of Regret, and solemn Assurances of lasting Friendship, and future
Rememorance. He wished me Health, Peace and Competence, and advised that
whenever I should encamp in the Woods, always to raise a good ^ire, and sleep
with my Feet next to it. I wished him the like, and recommended to his
particular Attention the Lord's Prayer, as the best Directory that was ever
given to man.

The Soil, from Pensacola to Augu^^^, except upon the Water Courses where it is
very fertile wears the gloomy Face of uniform Sterility; though being in a mild
Region, is more Productive than Ground of a similar Appearance in Virginia -- I
was much pleased with Au^sta and its high level Situation, but more so with her
Citizens and the reputable Families in its Vicinage. Previous to my Arrival
here I was told by common Fame, that a great proportion of them consisted of
insolvent Refugees. from the northern States: but this is not the only Instance
in which her Ladyship has diviated from the Line of Truth and Candor.
Influenced by some Nabobs in the Modern Colchis, she has also misrepresented
the whole State of Georgia, together with all Persons and Things whatsoever,
unto her belonging or in any wise appertaining.

A wonderful Spirit for Building seems to have permeated every Rank and Class
of People in and about this Place -- A fine elegant Bridge of superior Strenth
to any of its Size I ever saw, stretches itself over the noble River Savannah,
right abreast of the Town, where it is navigable for Vessels of 50 or 60 Tons
Burden. The Bridge, together with many fine Houses now erected and erecting
here and in its Neighborhood, do honor to Auguste, which will e're long vie
with, if not eclipse the former Seat of Government, in Buildings, Population,
Trade and Commerce. -- The Augu^tians are remarkable for their Generosity and
Politeness, the Effects of which, I as a ^tranger particularly experienced, at
the Hands of two professional Gentlemen, Messrs Smelt and Wilhamt^m. -- During
my Continuance in this Neighhoorhood, I paid a Visit to his Excellency William
Telfair, the present Governor of the State. He appeared to be a worthy honest
Man, endowed with plain good Sense and great Simplicity of Manners. I am told
that he is an Encourager of Agriculture and Mechanics, a good Moralist and
bounteous Benefactor to the m^ritorious Poor and Indigent. After having spent
an agreeable Time at this Place, in the Society of both old and new
Acquaintance. I proceeded down the River in a long Keelbottomed decked Boat,
laden with 72 Hogsheads of Tobacco, and several Thousand Pounds Weight of
various Kinds of Peltry. etc. This ^oat had a decent Cabin sufficiently large
for the Accommodation of the Captain and myself.

Just below Augusta large extensive Corn and Tobacco Fields commence, and from
their Luxuriance of Growth evince the amazing Fertility of Soil. On Beech
Island and the Plantations of Messrs Bugg and Watkins, I saw Cornfields of
equal, if not superior Growth and Production, to the best Spots in Kentuckey.
On the 4th Day of our Passage from Augusta, we anchored abreast of Ebenezer, an
old inconsiderable and declining Village, situate on an high commanding Bluff,
on the Georgian Side, from whence runs off a great Extent of level, though very
sandy, piney barren Land -- Here the British Troops, whilst in Possession of
Savannah in 1779, established a Garrison of about 1500 Men, aided by a good
Train of Artillery, strong Fortifications and deep Intrenchments, which however
were no Impediment to the rapid Career of General Wayne, at the Head of his
victorious Myrmidons.

At Break of Day weighed Anchor and proceeded down to a Col. M -- e's on the
North Side of the River, in Order to land some Dry Goods for a neighboring
Gentleman, Previous ous to my Arrival at his House, the Captain had given me a
particular Detail of his punitory Inflictions, on the Tories and others during
the last War, all which he carried on under the specious Pretext of his being a
Whig-Officer in the American Service; though in Fact nothing more than a common
Free-booter. I shall ever remember the Voice and patibulary, Cain-like
Countenance of the Man, when the Captain introduced him to me. Though he is very
uxorious of his present Spouse, and tender of her Offspring, yet common Report
does not hesitate to say, that he dispatched his former Wife and only Son, by a
Bowl of strong and deadly Poison, which he imposed upon them as a Dose of
Indian Physic.

"A Rugged Wight the worst of Brutes this Man
"On his (...) a Fellow Creatures ruthless preyed:
"The strongest he, the weakest overran
"And over each Band of Brother-Robbers swayed;
"For Guile and russian Force were all his Trrde:
"His Life a Scene of Rapine. Want and Woe;
"Swift as in Indian Arrow Blood to shed
"And cause the Orphan's, Widow's ^ears to Flow."
-- OR THUS: --

Dame Nature once produced a Dunce,
Her plastic Art to show,
And o^^r his Head, replete with Lead,
A brazen Helmet threw.
With solid Block from Mountain Rock,
Hewed out with little Art,
She though it the best, to fill his Chest,
And represent a Heart.
Thus Head and Heart, she did impart,
Adapted to the Size.
Of this huge Breast, who stands confessed,
A Bugbear to our Eyes.
His Wife and Son, he first seized on,
And soon deprived of Breath;
His tortured Slaves next found their Graves,
And sealed their Woes in Death.
The Tory Herd next felt his Sword,
Distained with Human Gore:
And heard the Cry of Traitor die,
Beneath the Hand of M -- c.
July 20th. Early in the Morning weighed Anchor, and took a final Adieu of this
Son of Iniquity. -- Before the dread Tribunal of Almighty God he must e're long
appear, and ^^^ceive his final Doom -- May the Lord (...) Mercy on his Soul! --
At Noon we passed a small and almost depopulated Town, on the North Side of the
River, called Purisburg, which was once to Savannah, what German-Town is now to
Philadelphia. Late in the Evening of this Day, our Pilot run our Vessel
aground, opposite to the Seat of the late Major General Green, where we
continued until 4 o'Clock P. M. of the succeeding Day, when with Difficulty we
got afloat, by the Assistance of the General's Slaves,

Here begin on both Sides of the River very extensive Fields of Corn, Rice and
Indigo, convenient to which are Mills, Vats, etc to manufacture the Produce: --
but when I turn my View toward the numerous Herds of poor miserable Slaves,
whose Powers of Body are worn down amidst Stripes and Insults, in clearing
Woods and draining Marshes, my very Soul revolts and sickens at the Thought.

Many and sharp the numerous Ills
Inwov^^ with our Frame!
More pointed still we make ourselves,
Regret, Remorse and Shame.
And Man, whose Heav'n-erected Face
The Smiles of Love adorn,
Man's Inhumanity to Man
Makes countless Thousands (...)!
See yonder poor o'er-labour'd Wight
So abject, mean, and vile.
Who be^s a Brother of the Earth,
To mitigate his Toil;
And see his lordly Fellow-I^ orm
The poor Petition spurn
Unmindful, though a weeping Wife
And helpless Offspring mourn!
Oh Death! the poor Man's dearest Friend.
The kindest and the best!
Welcome the Hour my aged Limbs
Are laid with thee at Rest!
The Great, the Wealthy ^ear thy Blow,
From Pomp and Pleasure ^orn;
But oh! a blessed Relief to those
That weary-laden mourn. Burn's Poems
From this Place to Savannah, the Eye is delighted with a continued Succession
of beauteous Farms and elegant Buildings, inhabited by gay and liberal
Proprietors, who in general appear to be of French Extraction. -- Came abreast
of the City about 8 o'Clock at Night, and although denied the Light of Moon or
Star, yet a tall white sandy Bluff^^ttiguous to the public Wharf served as a
Pharos to direct our Vessel safely into Port.

Early the next Morning took Breakfast, and engaged Lodgings at the City Coffee
House, and then fauntered till 10 o'Clock through the most public Parts of the
City, in order to see, or be seen by, some old Friend or Cro^y, who might
probably be engaged upon a similar and equally important Business with myself.
To my great Joy, the first Person that saluted me was Col. Joseph Habersham, a
Gentleman who in the Course of the last War, had been a Refugee in the County
of Ambe-st, where I then resided, and got acquainted with him. -- He is a
Gentleman of strict Honor and Integrity, a safe Companion, and an easy Friend,
and though a Mortal, he cannot be altogether exempt from the Failings of
Humanity, yet few and trivial as they are, they always 'lean to Virtue's Side.'
By this Gentleman I was introduced to General M'Intosh, with whom I had been
formerly acquainted, whilst on his Way to join the grand Army in the North. As
an Officer he is too generally known to require any Encomium from my Pen; but
as a private Citizen is a most excellent Model for the State. He is descended
from a very ancient Family in ScotLand. (...) is Father who was a famous
Chieftain of a numerous Highland Clan, and remarkable for his Valor, and that
rare Virtue in a Soldier, called Temperance, fell in Battle^^ whilst our H^ro
was yet a Minor, and bequeathed the Virtues to his Son, with an Injunction on
him to settle in America as soon as he should attain the Age of 21. His Mother
whose Christian Name was Fortune did not long survive her Husband; On her
Deathbed, she called our Hero to her (for he was her favorite Son) and thus
addressed him: -- "My Son the Patrimony which my honored Husband and your
valiant Father left you, may ^e of Service to you, in the Hurly Burly Scenes of
blustering War, it is therefore my Request, that you never part with them: --
but as when you come to be old, you may exchange the Army for the peaceful
Walks of Life, I here deliver into your Possession for a Beginning, all my
Dower, consisting of two faithful Handmaids named Industry and Frugality --
Take them my Son, and use them well -- they will be of Service to you, whether
you go to America or continue here; though my Advice is to obey your Father's
last Request" -- Blessed with a vigorous Constitution and a vi^tuous Education,
our Hero crossed the Atlantic and settled in the State of Georgia, bringing
along with him his paternal and maternal Legacies. By Means of the former he
rose to high Preferment in The United States Army; and by the latter has
accumulated an almost immense and princely Fortune.

In this Place I spent 3 Days, chiefly at the Houses of the two last mentioned
Gentlemen, Being much relaxed by Fatigue and Heat of Weather, I declined taking
such an accurate View of the City, as I at first intended. It is however
happily situated for both foreign and internal Trade, as verging on The
Atlantic to the East, and lying abaut Midway on the inland Navigation, which
extends from Charles^on to St. Mary's River, the Southern Extremity of the
United States.

Savannah is, and ever will be, a Place of Opulence, so long as human Nature
shall require Food and Raiment, or, Commerce spread her Canvass to the Wind.

July -- About 2 o'Clock P. M. went on Board a large Packet Schooner, bound to
Charleston, and commanded by a Captain Ross, in Company with Major Butler, a
Congressional Senator, Mr. -- a Charleston Merchant and Miss -- of Savannah. In
this Company I promised myself a pleasant Passage enlivened with agreeable
Conversation, in which however I was miserably disappointed; for no sooner had
we put to Sea, than squally Weather there and adverse Winds arose, and so tossed
and rocked our Vessel, that "we reeled to and fro and staggered like drunken
Men, and were at our Wit's End." -- In this Situation we continued till 10
o'Clock the following Day. The Agitation of the Vessel brought on a violent Sea
sickness upon all The Passengers except myself, and lasted with little
intermission, till we made the wished for Port of Charleston -- Between the
Paroxisms of the Major's Qualms, I found him to be a lively conversable
Gentleman, possessed of a great Fund of Wit, sound Judgment, and good Breeding.
-- The last Morning of our Passage, I saluted the Merchant with, a good Morning
to you Sir, how does Mr. -- find himself to day? Why Sir; I have cast up my
Accounts over and over again, and find myself, upon striking a Balance, a
better Man by an Hundred Per Cent, than I was this Time Yesterday, He! He! He!
And pray how does Miss -- find herself? I thank you Sir, I Am inclined to
believe I think I (...) a little better at the Stummick.

August 1st. Entered Charleston about two o'Clock P. M. and immediately
repaired to M'Crady's Hotel, which I had been told was, and found to be
superior to any other in the City, whether for its Accommodations, the Civility
of its Master, or, the amazing Concourse of polite People from all the other
States who frequent it. At this Hotel General Washington on his late Visit
through the Southern States took up his Residence, and during which Persons of
all Ranks vied with each other in paying every Homage to him, which Gratitude
could excite, and splendid ^ables, Garb and Equipage attest.

The Situation of Charleston, the Character of her Citizens and the Nature of
her Police fit her for Trade and Commerce, which however are not driven to that
Extent as is observable in some Northern Towns which do not possess the third
Part of her Opulence. The Topography of this City, is too generally known to
require any Description from my Pen. I shall therefore only observe that in
Point of Prospect, it eclipses all other Cities in the Union and is inferior to
only Three in Size, Wealth, Population, Trade and Elegance of Buildings. Her
Citizens are a gay, luxurious People, fond of Dress and pompous Equipage, in
which they give the Ton to Augusta and Savannah, who are most excellent
Copyists. Was the young Phaeton of this State with his servile Imitators, to
repair to Charleston, he would be to the Gentry there, what his Imitators here,
are to him.

At M'Crady's I formed an Intimacy with Andrew Robertson, Esquire who had beer, a
Captain in the British Service, which he quitted upon (...) honorable Conn^xion
with a Staten Is^^^ young Lady of most exquisite Beauty. The (...) and manly
Appearance of young Robertson attracted the Attention of the young Lady, which
he improved by his Assiduity, and most excellent good Sense. Although Miss was
strongly fortified by Whiggism, yet she was ultimately obliged to succumb to
the Prowess of the young Officer, and about a Year ago became his Bride. This
Gentleman is nearly related to the celebrated Robertson, Author of the History
of the Reign of Charles the Fifth, Emperor of Germany, and under whose plastic
Hand he received the Rudiments of that liberal Education, which so eminently
distinguish and adorn his Character. From this Place I paid a Visit to Col.
William Washington, whom I found in Company with my old Preceptor the Rev. Mr
Wilson. They were seated opposite to each other, about 5 Feet asunder,
separated by two Wine Glasses and a Decanter of generous old Mad^ira. Upon my
Entrance into the Room, after the first Gratulations and mutual Professions of
Friendship were over, a third Glass and another Decanter (as if by Enchantment)
made their Appearance on the Table, and the Duumvirate was soon converted into
a Triumvirate by the Addition of their humble Servant. Here gentle Reader, let
me whilst Friendship and the generous Glass expand my Heart, detain thee, with
what Gratitude commands, in listening to my humble Eulogy of Washington. 'Twas
just after Harmer's Defeat that these Thoughts occurred.

Young Washington a former Friend in Need,
I view him mounted on his generous Steed;
The Foe he views with circumspective Care,
Cities H^^o^^ and (...) slip the Dogs of War:
His s^oking Horses at their utmost Speed
He las^es on and urges over the Dead:
Their ^etlocks run with Blood and when they bo^nd.
The G^re and g^h^ting Dust are dashed around.
Every Body is, or ought to be, acquainted with the Brilliancies of this
Gentleman as an Officer and Soldier: -- extraordinary as they are, his mil^
engaging Virtues in the peaceful Walks of Domestication, and in Society of
Friends, keep an equal Pace with his military Talents, and draw from his
admiring Countrymen, the Plaudits of Sincerity.

Ravished with Wars and Danger's horrid Charms,
He with impetuous Ardour flew to Arms:
Soon as the ranged Battalions came in Sight
He felt fierce Joy and terrible Delight.
And shudder'd with an Eagerness to fight.
What Flames flew from his Eyes, when be from far
Viewed the four Brows, and murdering Jaws of War!
-- OR THUS. --

-- rough in Battle
As the first Romans when they went to War;
Yet after Victory more pitiful,
Than all their praying Virgins left at Home.
DRYDEN. August 6th. Returned to my Lodgings where I found Capt Robertson under
Preparation for a Duel with Capt. Sweetman, an English Gentleman and Merchant.
-- I acted as a Mediator betwixt them, and happily terminated the Dispute to
their mutual Satisfaction, by decrecing, that they both possessed indubitable
Courage, which was often called into Action by their too punctilious Adhe^ence
to the military Character; for which their respective Countries had for many
Centuries been so remarkable, and contributed equally with ancient Greece and
Rome to give the historic Pen a just and full Employ -- That inheriting these
national Principles, what they had done, might be fairly traced up to the
Source of an Amor Pugna^ (...): -- That Capt. Sweetman had been too precipitat^
and Capt Robertson too hasty: -- that they therefore make their reciprocal
Concessions, and be at Peace; and that neither might infringe the Punctilios of
military Etiquette, they should stand 10 Yards asunder, then advance to the
Center, make their Concessions at the same Instant, protruding their dextral
Hands, until they came into Conta^^^on, as an Indication and Declaration of a
Continuation of Pacification: that they should then repair to the Hotel and
take a Comp^^ation of a late Importation from the Madeira Plantation, in
Corroboration of the aforesaid Pacification.

Quicquid volumus sacile credimus -- The Duellist wishes to defend his Conduct.
I will here transcribe the Sentiments of a modern Author upon the Subject of
Duelling, which he observes, has in many Countries a Law against it -- but can
never be prevented. The Law can inflict no greater Penalty for any Breach of it
than Death; which the Duellist contemns -- There are also some Cases of Injury
which the Law cannot prevent, nor punish when commisted. These must be
redressed by the Man who suffers, and by him ONLY. He is prompted to do this by
something antecedent, and superior to all Law, and by a Desire as eager as
Hunger or Lust; so that it is as easy for Law to prevent or restrain the two
latter, as the former. Very luckily for us Occasions for the Gratification of
this Passion occur but seldom: and though a Man may be restrained from a Duel
by personal Fear, which is its only Counteractor, there are very few Instances,
perhaps none of its being prevented by considering it as a Breach of Law. In
the Beginning of the last Century Duels were so frequent, particularly in
France, as to occasion a severe Edict to prevent them -- Indeed by their
Frequency, they were by Degrees improved into Combats of 2, 3, and sometimes
more of a Side -- In those Days a French Nobleman was making up his Party to
decide a Quarrel with another Man of equal Rank; it came to the Ears of the
King, who sent to him one of the most rising Men at Court, with a Command to
desist, assuring him of the strict Execution of the Edict in Case of
Disobedience -- Every one knows the Attachment of the French to their Soverign,
but yet it proved weak when set against this all-powerful Passion. The Nobleman
not only refused to obey the King, but actually engaged the Messenger to be one
of his Party. -- The above seem to be the principal Reasons why Duelling has so
deep a Root in the Mind of Man -- but there are others which come in Aid. The
Desire of Superiority is of itself almost sufficient to produce this great
Effect.

Having spent an agreeable Time among these gay and hospitable Citizens, I took
my Departure on Board the Exchange Schoorser, the Property of Capt. Robertson.
and commanded by Capt. Baine; her Destination was to St. Mary's River in Quest
of Live-Oak.

A Bostonian of the Name of James ^oste, had (...) with the Captain to work his
Passage from Charleston, (...) St. Mary's to New York. He appeared to be about
50 Years of Age, and extremely anxious to see his Wife and five Children, whom
he had lest in Boston about a Year before I saw him. He had been detained by
Sickness. On the second Day of our Passage, being as yet in a State of
Convalescence, he expressed in his Words and Actions a fixed Melancholy,
approaching to a State of Desperation. 'Twas about 2 o'Clock in the Morning,
when Mr. Foot, to court the cooling Breeze, had seated himself upon the
Quarter Deck and received an accidental Stroke from the Tiller on his Head. --
He rose up and exclaimed, My God, My God, I cannot bear it all! and quickly
disappeared. -- I sincerely regret, that when I saw him melancholy and
despondent, I had not spoken to him -- I might probably have said Something to
him, or done Something for him, that might have soothed the Anguish of his
Soul, and by exciting Hope, have chased the gloomy Demon from his Breast, and
caused the poor despairing Mortal yet to live. This Voyage is usually performed
in about 4 Days, though through the Inadvertency, or Ignorance of the Captain,
we made it seven, having overran our Reckoning, and instead of St. Mary's
sailed a considerable Distance up the St. John's River in East-Florida; when to
our great Astonishment we were hailed by a Spanish Officer, who authoritatively
demanded of us, if we knew where we were? We answered Yes, in St. Mary's River
-- Gentlemen I can assure you, that you are mistaken; you are now in the
Dominions of Spain, and have risqued the Forfeiture of your Vessel and Cargo,
together with that of your Liberties. However you are welcome to depart -- St.
Mary's River the Place of your Destination, lies about 6 Leagues to the
Eastward of this. We thanked the Officer, instantly put about, and in 5 Hours
reached the Mouth of St. Mary's, cast Anchor, and waited the Approach of a
Pilot. -- On our Entrance into this fine River, I observed the Remains of an
old Fort, composed of Portland Stone, Liverpool Brick, and strong Cement,
which, from its Exposure to the Sun and Wind, has acquired a greater
Durability than either the Brick or Stone. The Channel at the Mouth, which
extends above an Hundred Yards in Width, is generally from 3 to 4 Fathom deep,
and in no Part less than 2^. We navigated a large Schooner deeply laden about
16 Miles up this River, and met with no Impediment whatever, A similar Distance
we run up the St. John's, previous to our Arrival here -- I think in Width and
Depth they are nearly on a Par. The St. Mury's is navigable for Sloops etc.
about 60 Miles -- ^oats may proceed on as far us the Lake which feeds this
Stream. -- It is about 8 Miles long and 3 Miles wide, situate in the Center of
a very extensive Swamp, and distant about 150 Miles from the Ocean. A small
Town of the same Name with the River, now in the early Dawn of Infancy, lies
about 6 Miles up the Stream, where they have a Fort garrisoned by a Company of
Foederal Troops -- The Evacuation of this Fort was talked of when I left the
Place, in Order to strengthen the Garrison stationary on the Oconee.

Disappointed in having our Frieght of Live Oak in Readiness, we had much
Leisure on our Hands, which Capt Robertson and I resolved to appropriate to the
Exploration of several Parts of East-Florida -- For this Purpose we chartered a
small keel bottomed Boat, and taking four Oars-men with us, proceeded along the
inland Navigation, which leads directly to the Neighborhood of St. Augustine,
which however we were not permitted to enter, and received repeated
Intimations, that a speedy Return to St. Mary's would argue the Height of
Prudence in us, with which the Captain and I were by no means chargeable: For
we had concerted no Plan or plausible Excuse by which we might elude the
Vigilance or Jealousy of the Spanish Guarda Costas. Robertson carried in his
Pocket, a Pencil and a small Book, in which he had made some rough Sketches of
Charleston and St. Mary's. I wished his Book and Pencil had been in his --
Bureau. Our Oars-men who were much alarmed, raised a Blanket Sail, and plied
the Oar with unremitting Assiduity, until we reached St. Mary's, which
exclusive of the Fort already mentioned, boa^ts two Stores, and a Tavern under
the Direction of a Captain Kearns, who is a sensible, intelligent Man, and
furnishes superior Accommodations than what are generally obtained in populous
Cities. The River abounds in Scale and Shellfish, all excellent in their Kind,
and is often overshadowed by the Flight of numerous Flocks of Swans, Geese and
Ducks. These aquatic Productions are perennial, and from the Facility with
which they are taken, render the Inhabitants near the Water, extremely averse
to agricultural Pursuits.

Having now explored the principal Parts of West and had a cursory View of
East-Florida, I am induced to hazard my Opinion founded on Observation as to
the former, and on Conjecture as to the latter. This I shall do by a Quotation
from Guthrie's Grammar, which conveys my Sentiments. "The Air of both East and
West-Florida is pure and wholesome -- The Size, Vigor, and Longevity of the
Floridian Indians, in these Respects, far exceed their more Southern Neighbors
the Mexicans" -- and I think Propriety may add, with few Exceptions, their
Northern Neighbors too. -- The Soil of the Floridas, is in general sandy,
especially near the maritime Coasts, tho far from being unfruitful. -- It
produces two Crops of Indian Corn a Year, and Garden Vegetables in great
Perfection and Abundance. Without Cultivation the Orange and Lemon Trees attain
a proper Size, and produce a large and highly flavoured Fruit. The interior
Country is hilly, and on the Flats adjoining, extremely rich and fertile,
producing spontaneously, and in great Luxuriance, similar Fruits, Vegetables
and Gums with Georgia and the Carolinas; as also Rice, Indigo, Ambergrise,
Cochineal, Amethysts, Lapis Lazuli, and other precious Stones; Copper,
Quicksilver, Pit-Coal and Iron-Ore.

Pearls are found upon the Coasts -- and Mahogany on the Southern Peninsula,
but inferior in Size and Quality to that of Jamaica. -- The Animal Creation
here, are incredibly numerous. -- What I have here advanced, must be taken
under some Limitation; as in applies in toto and positively to East, and only
in Part to West-Florida.

Milton's Ode on May Morning, often occured to my Recollection, whilst
traversing these delightful Regions, dressed out by the Hand of Nature, with
Flowers selected from her Lap.

ODE.
Now the bright Morning Star, Day's Harbinger,
Comes dancing from the E^t and ^eads with (...)
The flowery May, who from her green Lap throw^,
The yellow Cowssip, and the pale Prim-rose.
Hail! bounteom May that does inspire
Mirth and Youth and warm Desire;
Woods and Groves a^e of thy Dressing,
Hill and D^le does boast thy Blessing:
Thus we salute thee with our early Song
And welcome thee and with thee long.
Here as I am on the extreme Southern Verge of the United States, and in a
similar Latitude with the Place where I promised to subjoin a Catalogue of
medicinal Plants, Herbs, etc. I will attempt a Compliance.

WHITE WALNUT. Juglans alba. The Creeks make a strong Decoction from the Bark
of this Tree, and use it both as a Cathartic and a Dye. In the former, they
dulcify it with a little Honey, or the Syrup from the Sugar-Maple -- It is very
drastic in its Operation, and therefore administered with great Caution.

BLACK POPLAR. Populus nigra. Large Potions of a Decoction from the Bark of
this Tree, especially the Root, is a sovereign Antidote to the Bite of the
Rattle-Snake and other Serpents -- I was informed of this by General Clarke,
whilst in Kentuckey, who had seen its salutary Effects on five different
Soldiers under his Command. The constant Use the Indians make of it on similar
Occasions, corroborates the General's Assertion.

DOGWOOD. Cornus Florida. The pulverized Bark of this Tree, is cooling, drying,
astringent and stomachic, and appropriated to similar Purposes among the Creeks
that Jesuits Bark is among us, and for which it is most excellent Substitute.

THE CASSINE is a low umbrageous Tree: the Flower of which is patent, divided
into five suboval, obtuse Segments larger than the Cup; the Fruit is a roundish
(...) with three Cells, containing solitary suboval Seeds -- It Is from the
Leaves of this Tree, which are serrated and terminating in a Point, the Creeks
make their Black Drink, of which they swallow copious Draughts, whenever they
convene in their Square or Hot-House, and which holding themselves erect, they
as copiously regurgitate. I am unacquainted with its medicinal Virtues, if it
has any. -- It is used by the Spaniards as a Tea and has a superior Flavor to
the Green Bohea, or Souchong.

SASSAFRAS. Laurus Sassafras. A yellow odoriferous Wood, of a brisk, aromatic
Scent, somewhat resembling Fennel; being the Produce of a Tree, of which there
are whole Forests growing in the Floridas, as well as in this State. The
principal Virtue lies in the Bark, which warms, dries, rarifies, attenuates,
attracts and promotes Sweats and Urine. The Indians deooct and use it in all
venerial Complaints, and I am told with great Success.

ELDER. Sambucus nigra. The Creeks decorticate the Stalk, and use the Bark in
pectoral Decoctions. Sir William Temple extols it as a Medicine in dropsical
Complaints. The Creeks express the Juice, and use it as a Lotion in Burns,
Scalds and scabious Complaints.

SUMAC. Rhus. Applied to the first Purpose as mentioned of the Elder, as also
to the Use of smoking with Tobacco.

POKE. Phytolacca decandra. The Creeks collect the Berries whilst in a greenish
State, express the Juice, and expose it to the Sun until it coagulates, this
they use in Plasters over schirrous Sores, or to extract Briars, Thorns, etc.
from their Hands and Feet. -- I have known it to be used in extracting the
Claws or Roots of Cancers, etc.

ASH. Frazinus Americana. A Decoction from the Root of prickly (...), is a good
Purgative and Lotion in a con^^^rmed Lues; and as such is used by the Creeks.

JUNIPER. Juniperus. An Infusion of the Berries of this Tree, in Water or
Spirits, is stomachic, expels Wind, clears the Lungs, provokes the Menses and
remo^es Obstructions of the Viscera.

LOBELIA. With a Decoction of the Root of this Plant, the Creeks cure the
Venerial Disease in every Stage It usually grows in Meadows, and on the fat
low-Grounds of Rivers, Creeks, etc. It has a beauteous crimson monopetalous
Flower, and in Property is somewhat tingent. The Fruit is an oval Capsule,
containing a great Number of very small Seeds. The Decoction is usually
dulcified with Honey, which is a great Apperient. The Operation is by Stool,
Urine, Sweat and Expectoration, all in a constant, though moderate Degree. Vide
Buchan on a confirmed Lues, from the Beginning of Page 598 to the end of the
Page following.

SERPENTARIA Virgi^i^a, is an alexipharmic and sovereign Remedy or Antidote
against the Bite of the Rattle-Snake. -- ^^e different species of Serpe taria
or Snake (...) are universally known throughout the United States, by all (...)
of People. The Kind I allude to is what is popularly called Rattlesnake ^oot,
which from its strong aromatic Smell, the Rattle-Snake will never approach, and
is accordingly used by the Indians to banish that and other Serpents from their
Lodgments.

VALERIAN, Valeriana Sylvestris, Ex Verb^ v^ler. It is warm and aromatic, but
somewhat foetid in its Scent. The Indians use it in nervous Disorders. Its
Efficacy as a Sudorifis, is supported by the Testimony of both ancient and
modern Practice.

ANGELICA. Angelica Sylvestris. Is used as a Luxury in Smoking and Chewing.

ANA^A Is a Shrub of about five Feet high, bearing a red Flower, which the
Creeks infuse in Water or decot. With this Infusion or Decoction, they dye
their Leggens, Moccasons, Feathers, Belts, and other ornamental Parts of Dress.

The Seminolies who are connected with the Creeks, are said, though more
unpolished in their Manners, to have a greater Knowledge in Botany, than their
more Northern or Western Brethren.

Sept. -- Weighed Anchor, left St. Mary's, entered the Gulf Stream, and after
a Passage of Thirteen Days, reached the City of New York; where, and in its
Vicinage I continued about a Fortnight, experiencing Nothing more than common
Civility from the Citizens. -- The City of New York is situate on Manhatan
Island; being a large handsome, and populous Place; where there is an excellent
Harbor, furnished wi^ commodious Quays and Warehouses, from whence numerous
Ships and other Vessels are annually employed in its foreign Trade and
Fisheries.

Passed on in the New York Packet Schooner to Brunswick, the Metropolis of
New Jersey, where I visited Col. White, who resides in this Place. He is a
brave, generous, old, Continental Officer, and made a conspicuous Figure on the
Theater of the last American War with Britain. At this Place and in New York,
Messieurs Pain, Chevallie, Higbee, Laurence, and Griffin, Gentlemen from
Virginia, rendered me polite Attention and Assistance. -- Gratitude shall
impress a long Remembrance of them (...) Tablet of my Heart. A young Englishman
of the Name of William Collier, during my Indisposition at New York, displayed
played a Line of Conduct toward me, which does Honor to his Country and to
human Nature.

This Indisposition arose from the Bite of a Ground Rattle Snake, on the Margin
of St. Mary's River, in which I had been bathing. This little Reptile is about
Fourteen Inches long, and about as thick as a Man's little Finger. It conceals
itself in the Dust, and makes its malignant Stroke on the unwary and
unsuspecting Passenger, which is equally fatal with the Bite of the larger
Rattle-Snake or Moccason, and requires as speedy and powerful Antidotes to its
baneful Injections of strong and deadly Poison. -- Providentially for me, it
made its Puncture on the Cuticle of my great Toe, at the Adhesion of the Nail,
which prevented a general Diffussion of the Poison into my Vital Parts.

As I passed rapidly in the Stage through Princeton and Tren^on, on my Way to
Philadelphia, I must wave a Description of (...) former, and slightly touch
upon (...) la^er which is a large, populous and exter^ Place, the Capitol and
Emporium of Pennsylvania. In this charming City I continu^ ten Days, though
unfortunately often confined to my Room, from the Indisposition last mentioned.
At Intervals of Ease, I could not refrain from strolling through various Parts
of the City, which for its Size and Regularity is unequalled by any other in
the Union, and probably not surpassed by any in Europe, as to the latter. Her
Merchants are very wealthy, and her Citizens in general, from their Industry
and Frugality, raised above the Frowns of Indigence, and many, though in
humble, modest Garb, far above a Mediocrity of Fortune.

Voltaire's Account of Pennsylvania, often occurred to my Recollection, whilst
encircled by the humane unambitious Citizens of Philadelphia. In a Groupe of
Quakers I particularly observed an itenerant Preacher, whose Aspect was a good
Index of the Temper and Disposition of Quakers in general. -- I will attempt a
Description of him, by some Quotations from, and Interpolations of, Mr.
Dryd^n's Parish Priest.

The PREACHER.
A Quaker Preacher, of the Pilgrim-Train:
An awful, reverend, and religious Man.
His Eyes deffu'd a venerable Grace,
And Charity (...) was in his Face.
Rich was his Soul, though his Attire was poor,
As God had clothed his own Ambassador;
For such, on Earth, his blessed Redeemer bore.
Refined himself to Soul, to curb the Sense,
And made almost a Sin of Abstinence.
Yet had his Aspect nothing of severe.
But such a Face as promised him sincere.
Nothing reserved, or sullen was to see;
But sweet Regards, and pleasing Sanctity,
Mild was his Accent; and his Action free.
With Eloquence innate his Soul was armed;
Though harsh the Precept, yet the Preacher charmed.
He bore his great Commission in his Look:
But sweetly tempered Awe and softened all he spoke.
From his slight Stock he had somewhat to spare,
To feed the famished, and to cloth the Bare:
And ever was at Hand without Request,
To serve the Sick, and succor the Distressed.
The Proud be tamed, the Penitent he cheered,
Nor to reprove the Rich Offender feared;
His Preaching much, but more his Practice wrought,
(A living Sermon of the Truth he Taught.)
With what be begged, his Brethren he relieved,
And gave the Charities himself received:
Gave, while he taught, and edified the more,
Because he showed by Proof, 'twas easy to be poor.
In my Perambulations through Philadelphia, (whose Police is most excellent) I
do not recollect ever to have seen a Beggar, or heard that Prophanity and
Vulgarity of Expression, so common amongst the lower Class in all other
populous Cities; but on the contrary, discovered all Ranks decently habited,
with a Serenity of Countenance, mild Address, and in Steady, though moderate
Pursuit of their respective Vocations.

A minute Description of this City is both foreign to my Purpose, and beyond my
KEN. I shall therefore only convey my Sentiments in a few Lines of doggrel
Verse, on three Gentlemen who reside in this Place, and from whom I have
recieved Favors and Polite Attention.

To HENRY KNOX, ESQUIRE Secretary at War. To EDMUND RANDOLPH, Esquire Attorney Gen, To
SAMUEL PLEASANTS, Esquire Merchant.
GENTLEMEN,
FROM me this Letter you will receive,
The Offspring of Affection,
Whilst I my highest Plaudits give
To your wise Election:
For who as Secretary could
In Competition vic
With Knox the generous, brave and good?
Pale Envy answers -- I.
And who with Randolph can Compare
In smooth. Oratory
When e're he brightens up the Bar,
With sweet Mel in Ore.
There were two, Men dame Candor said,
Who equaled him I ^is,
In Rome and Athens once they plead,
Tully and Demostth'nes.
Who can a nobler Work narrate
Then what Sam: Pleasants is
I must recur is ancient Date
And quote Aristides.
Who the Epithet, of Just acquired
From his Intrinsic Worth;
Like him, hall Pleasants be admired
For Honor, Justice, Truth --
By which I Am regulated when,
It Is no Offense I hope^
I say you are three worthy Men
As ever obliged --
POPE


