A SELECTION OF MISCELLANEOUS PIECES, IN VERSE AND PROSE, RESPECTFULLY
DEDICATED TO THE YOUTH OF BOTH SEXES. PART I.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY DANIEL LAWRENCE, NO. 78. NORTH 4th STREET,
NEAR RACE. M.DCC.XCII.

CONTENTS OF PART I.
The Modern Quaker, 1 Address to Youth of both Sexes, 9 Contemplating the
Divine Power, 13 Wisdom, a Poem, 15 Soliloquy written in a Churchyard, 32 On
Time, 35 The sick Man's Address to his Candle, 37 An Evening Thought, ibid.
Procrastination, 38 Tomorrow, 40 The Wheel of Time, 41 The Negro Boy, 42 The
Negro's Prayer, 44 Paraphrase of the Lord's Prayer, 45 To Lavinia, 46 Lavinia's
Answer, 47 Address to Winter, 49 Reason, a Poem, 51 An Hymn, 52 On the Love of
God, 54 Prayer of a wise Heathen, ibid. Epitaph, by Cowley, ibid.
CONTENTS OF PART II.
On the Necessity of improving Time, 55 On the World, 59 The Unhappiness
consequent on the Neglect of early improving our Time, 61 Address to the Sea,
63 Monitor, 66 An Address to Youth, 69 The Ornaments of Youth, 72 Soliloquy on
human Life, ibid. How to enjoy Life, 73 The Christian's Soliloquy on Nature's
Charms, 75 On Reproof, 77 The Charms of Virtue, 78 Advice of an Heathen
Philosopher, 79 Rules out of Ptolemy's Golden Table, 80 Extracts, ibid.
THE MODERN QUAKER.
A comparative view of the PRIMITIVE and PRESENT state of the Society of
FRIENDS, particularly addressed to the Youth. Written in ENGLAND by an
Observer, and presented to FRIENDS' Children.

THY daughters, FOX, in former days
When they deserved, contemned all praise;
But with a self-approving mind,
No charms in human praise they find;
Yet let my muse their virtues trace,
And dwell with joy on every grace:
The lovely portrait hung on high,
Perhaps may strike some fair one's eye;
Its charms shall touch the modern dame,
And flush her cheek with conscious shame.
No costly robes, no broider'd hair,
No silks adorned the modest fair:
Distended hoops would shock the eye --
A naked breast would terrify!
They held that wanton, gay attire,
Was fuel for lascivious fire,
And valued more St. Paul's advice,
Which bade them seek the pearl of price.
And why should dress, our parents shame,
Their daughters breasts with pride inflame?
But though in simple robes arrayed,
Behold what beauties grace the maid.
Upon her lip sits sacred truth,
Temperance gives the bloom of youth;
Within her breast dwells tranquil peace,
With modest blushes in her face;
Love sparkles in her dove-like eyes,
For innocence needs no disguise,
But prudence on her brow enthroned
Commands respect from all around.
Fair Chastity her soul inspires,
And Charity's immortal fires;
Virtue within her spotless mind
Sits like a DEITY enshrined.
No vain romance, or wanton play,
Could waste a moment of the day,
But often with deep, attentive thought,
They read the book with wisdom fraught.
They could employ their vacant hours,
Extracting health from herbs and flowers,
Which freely on the waters cast,
They doubt not will return at last.
But see them now in crowds repair,
To dwell within the house of prayer.
Here no cold forms, no slavish rules
(So often the sacrifice of fools)
Confine the spark of heavenly flame,
That would ascend from whence it came*
Now every human care resigned,
Deep silence fills the adoring mind;
Patient they wait the inspiring breath,
Which bade them rise to life from death;
That flame celestial, which inspires
The ardent soul with strong desires.
But vain my efforts to describe
The virtues of this chosen tribe:
In their descendants can we trace
Such virtues, sanctity and grace?
Ye fair apostates! who so long
Have learned the Babylonish song,
When ever you turn the sacred page,
Let Dinah's fate your thoughts engage;
None did assault the spotless maid
Whilst in the Patriarch's tent she stayed,
But when she quits the sacred fence,
She loses fame and innocence.
So you, while by sage rules confined,
Rules which by wisdom were designed,
You shine as stars, with heavenly fire,
Even I, a Gentile The author did not belong to the profession of Friends.
, must admire,
But when beyond these bounds you stray,
Temptations thick lie in the way;
Beware fair Nymphs! on glass you stand,
And Hamor's sons are near at hand.
Why is the bosom open laid,
Or veiled beneath a cob-web shade?
Why does the wanton eye impart
Its fire into another's heart?
Are hoops, ye fair backsliders! say,
Fit for the broad or narrow way?
Will a fair face, or graceful mien
Keep sickness off, or banish pain?
Will time's relentless weapon spare
The faultless shape or braided hair?
In vain my sisters you conceal
What every motion must reveal;
Oh pardon then the friendly care
That says you are not what you were.
Six days I pass, nor will I ask
How you in them performed your task;
But let your friend a tale relate,
Instruction may in trifles wait.
Chance lately led my wandering feet
Where all the friendly circle meet;
There no proud columns lifted high,
Nor sculptured dome attract the eye;
Fair decency with solemn grace,
And frugal plainness marks the place.
" Here," said your friend, " is virtue's seat,
" And here the just assembly meet;
" Fair piety breathes all around,
" I tread, methinks, on holy ground!
" Here solemn prayer ascends the skies,
" A thousand winged petitions rise.
" Shall I presume to mix with these,
" Or dare to offer human praise?"
At Ramah Saul forgets his pride,
And lays his savage rage aside.
I entered -- and with great surprise
Around I cast my wondering eyes!
" What can this mean! -- each blooming maid
" In rich and gaudy robes arrayed?
" What rainbow dies! what changing hue!
" What forms decked out in public view!"
The hair in graceful arches rose,
The sweeping train as graceful flows;
No lavish ornament's denied,
Can Sion's daughters stoop to pride?
Where is the sweetly timed air,
The gentle movements of the fair?
The chaste reserve, the modest grace,
Charms which outshine the finest face? --
I find them not; but in their stead
Bold confidence erects her head.
Is this the solemn house of prayer?
Is naught but solemn silence here?
I hear indeed a vocal sound,
Uneasy silence reigns around;
" Uneasy silence!" -- yes I find
No signs of a collected mind,
And Charity herself might say,
Your thoughts are wandering far astray;
The seats of honor vacant lie,
Alas! will none assume so high!
Oh Pennington, bright son of fame!
And Fox, thou great unrivaled name!
Thou Barclay! whose well-guarded page
Defies the critic's force and rage;
Unnumber'd worthies! sons of light,
Who stem'd the superstitious night
With rage divine, where are you fled?
Ah -- numbered with the silent dead!
If earth's low cares can now engage,
Oh look to this luxurious age;
What prisons, racks, and death obtained,
By your degenerate race disdained.
Yet some there are, and but a few,
Who tread the paths prescribed by you.
Many have fallen, but yet not all,
Some have not bowed the knee to Baal;
Some like fixed stars divinely bright,
Shine through this intellectual night;
And chief of these MARIA thou --
Ye giddy fair in homage bow
To that chaste name, or let it fire
Your frozen breasts with strong desire;
Your thoughts and hearts let it inflame
To imitate the matchless dame;
But thou MARIA shall engage
The labors of a loftier page:
Ill would keen satire's muse agree
With meek-ey'd Charity and thee.
But you ye modern dames attend,
Regard the counsels of a friend,
And all religion's claim apart,
If man's esteem can touch your heart:
If from the Gentiles you expect
The tribute of sincere respect,
Would you from Esau's lineage prove
Sincere and undissembled love;
If this you seek, alike renounce
The hoop, the ruffle, and the flounce;
A little lower set the hair,
Forbid the practiced eye to stare,
And lay the sweeping train aside,
With all the gaudy plumes of pride,
Which but too much would tire the muse,
Should she the copious subject choose.
Your native dignity resume,
Shun the rich labors of the loom;
Condemn the unavailing art
Which strikes the eye but not the heart*
Do this my friends, but stop not here,
Something remains well worth your care.
The gems enclosed in cells of clay
Methinks beam but a feeble ray;
Its native luster is obscured
In the dark cells of sin immured;
I see the clouds around it spread,
Dark ignorance here rears her head;
Unblushing confidence is here,
Presumption, pride, and foolish fear,
Here folly's bolt at random flies,
Pride, eagle-wing'd, attempts the skies;
And love I see, but not that love
Which boasts a sanction from above.
Say, is your monitor too bold,
Who deems it is the love of gold?
I see -- But hold, presumptuous muse!
A subject less offensive choose;
No more unveil the female breast,
Let thy fair pupils find the rest;
But rather, if thou can, display
A light to guide them on their way;
It Is owned by all the friendly band
A guide, unerring, is at hand;
A ray divine, whose sovereign light
Can pierce the thickest shades of night;
A potent friend for ever near,
A "still small voice," which all can hear.
And oh! ye fair, in vain would I
The great, the solemn truth deny.
There is indeed a power within,
That can both show, and shield from sin;
Its gentle dictates, if obeyed,
Will to the paths of safety lead:
And sure its aid is wanting here,
Oh! learn in time, prudential fair;
Let folly at a distance play,
To shun temptation is the way.
Trust not too far in human strength,
The strongest may be foiled at length.
The moth around the candle plays,
'Till drawn by its attracting blaze
Still near and nearer to the beam,
It sinks in the devouring flame.
An empty name no longer boast --
For ah! you bear that name at most;
Up to your high profession stand,
Or join the "daughters of the land."
If as you are, you will remain,
If satire is employed in vain,
At least forgive the friendly care
That tells you truly what you are.
A cake unturned in Ephraim now,
You in the house of Rimmon bow:
And some -- I speak with grief and shame,
Some that were washed in Jordan's stream.
To Idol Gods shall Israel bow?
Like Laodicea, lukewarm grow?
And maids of Judah sacrifice,
With hearts impure, and wanton eyes?
To things forbidden, Saul aspire?
And Korah light unhallowed fire?
The Ark is taken! -- Palestine
Exulting cries, "the day is mine!"
AN AFFECTIONATE ADDRESS TO THE YOUTH OF BOTH SEXES,
By a Young Woman in England.
REFLECTING on the slippery paths of youth,
My heart's engaged that you may buy the truth;
That you may take the counsel of a friend,
And that a blessing may with it descend.
What shall I say? how shall I you address?
Or in what words my sentiments express?
I know my dears you stand on slippery ground,
I know that many dangers you surround,
That naught can save you but Almighty Power,
Oh fly to him for refuge every hour,
That no man take your crown, but that you may
Be numbered with the lambs at the last day.
Often have I viewed you with a tender eye,
Often have I longed for your prosperity:
Oh! could I bring you up in Zion's ways,
Methinks it would delight my latter days.
You pleasant Plants, a Garden of sweet Flowers,
Who often have been refreshed by gospel showers;
What goodly persons, full of health and ease,
Not one among you but are formed to please.
Are your lamps filled with oil? do they burn bright?
If not, begin the work this very night;
Make no excuses, but with one accord
Freely give in your names to serve the Lord;
He Is no hard Master I am bold to say,
But takes delight his laborers to pay.
You may remember once a Fig Tree stood,
Its leaves and branches I suppose were good;
This tree not doubt, as well as all of you,
Partook of sunshine, rain and morning dew,
But oh! it only cumber'd up the ground,
For not one fruitful branch was to be found:
What was the consequence? the tree was cursed!
A dreadful sentence! but methinks 'twas just.
Well, let a little on this head suffice,
A word's sufficient to the truly wise;
For oh! I hope not one of you will be found
A fruitless Fig Tree, cumb'ring up the ground,
But if you live to see another YEAR,
A little Fruit will on each Branch appear.
We want your help young MEN and WOMEN too;
Methinks you say, alas! what can we do?
Has not your Maker's will been made appear?
Has not the Trump been sounded in your ear?
Come forth to Battle in your Maker's cause,
In vindication of his HOLY LAWS.
We Have need enough of Warriors in our day,
When many careless ones are heard to say,
Aha! this People in one cent'ry more
Will mingle with the Nations as before.
It Is true the Church is in a wintry state,
Her Barrenness and Poverty are great;
Her Judges are removed and out of sight,
Her Pillars gone, her Altars broken quite;
I Have seen the desolation long ago,
And secretly have mourned because 'twas so.
How many sprightly Youths in this our day
Have left the Flock, took wing and gone away;
Like broken Bows they start and twist aside,
Spending their Time in Vanity and Pride,
And will you also from Christ's Law's depart?
Well then I Am sure 'twill wound my tender heart;
The very thought does make my eyes to flow,
For if you leave the Flock where will you go?
Without a Pilot how the Ship is tossed,
Without a Shepherd many Sheep are lost,
Exposed to Bears and Wolves, and nipping Frost;
But if our Zion should again arise,
And from the Wilderness lift up her Eyes,
It must be by the help of such as you,
For without this I Am sure 'twill never do;
Come boldly forth then, fear no Opposition,
No Wounds nor Blows, for Christ is your Physician.
He Will be your Battle-axe, your Sword and Shield,
If unto him you due OBEDIENCE yield.
Clothed with his Armor you will be made complete,
And Foes subdued shall fall beneath your Feet.
Remember my dear Friends, those that partake
Of Persecution for the GOSPEL's sake,
Shall be invited to the Royal Board,
The Harvest Supper of the LAMB our LORD,
To whose great Name eternal Praise be given
By Saints on earth, and Seraphims in heaven.
How would my heart expand, could I but see
The Church come forth from her Captivity;
To view her glorious as in ancient days,
And each uniting to exalt her praise;
To see her broken walls built up again,
And Youths like you attending on her train:
Then will the Lord descend with open hand,
And Peace and Plenty crown the prostrate land:
He Will dry our Tears, and graciously restore
Judges and Counselors as heretofore,
To each he will assign their proper place,
To each he will give an ornament of grace;
Then shall the prison-doors wide open flee,
And captive Souls be set at LIBERTY:
Then shall the voice of Lamentation cease,
And Wars and Conflicts terminate in Peace.
Instead of sighing melody will sound,
Instead of mourning praises will be found;
The clouds shall break, the shadows flee away,
And joy and gladness usher in the day;
A glorious Gospel-day shall then arise,
And scenes of wonder open to our eyes;
Stones ready formed shall be then beautified,
The Vessels of the Temple purified,
And stately Oaks shall spread their branches wide:
Trees of renown, planted by GOD's right hand,
These are the Oaks that will be sure to stand.
Instead of joining with the nations' ways,
The nations will unite with us in praise;
Like Doves unto their Windows they will run,
Basking themselves in the bright Gospel Sun,
And own in them a mighty work begun,
Feel its enlivening power to warm their heart,
To cheer each wound, and strengthen every part.
A sight of this would animate me more
Than corn and wine and oil laid up in store.
But stop a while; I Have one thing more to say,
That if from all advice you turn away;
If no Entreaties will prevail with you,
Nor soft Persuasions the great business do,
The Summons is gone forth, but not in vain,
Nor shall the Word come empty back again,
But will perform its office as you will see,
I speak under Divine Authority --
Others will be called in from distant lands,
That will be glad to run at his Commands;
So be admonished, turn, repent and live,
And to your Maker his due honor give;
Despise not prophesying, quench not the Spirit,
So shall each one a GLORIOUS CROWN inherit.
Contemplating the Divine Power.
ON Lebanon's fair towering head,
Where the tall Cedars grow,
May his great Name exalted stand,
Who lays their Forests low.
Praise ye the Lord in lofty strains!
Ye Cedars tall record
His Name who spread your waving tops;
Praise ye the Almighty Lord!
The storms and tempests that are sent
At his supreme command,
Will cause your heads to bow quite low,
Though you deep-rooted stand.
Our God is terrible in arms!
How bright his Glories rise!
He rolls and rules the spacious earth,
And through the vaulted skies.
Ye sinners, who his Grace contemn,
Exalted high with pride,
Yield to the Lamb that once was slain,
Who for our sins has died.
His justice will avenge his wrongs,
Although it long delay:
He can bring down the lofty Pines,
And low the Cedars lay.
Oh! may we to his stroke submit,
For he is yet our friend;
Though we were strong as sturdy Oaks,
We must like Willows bend:
For he that lays the Mountains low,
And bids the Valleys rise,
Can lift the wondering Soul to heaven,
Or sink it with surprise:
And if we up to heaven are raised,
The Glory who can tell?
Or sunk to Misery beneath,
Who knows the depths of Hell?
Come then with me, and learn to praise
That power which long forbears,
But will, in honor to his Name,
Accomplish what he swears.
WISDOM, A POEM.
WISDOM I sing: what bearded sage can choose
A theme more weighty, more sublime a muse?
A muse from which, if I but catch a ray,
The good shall bless, the just approve the lay.
Oh thou! the source of life, and light, and soul,
Thou great supreme, thou wisdom of the whole!
It Is thine alone to light the poet's flame,
The glory's thine -- Jehovah is thy name.
Unblest by thee, how poor the proudest strain!
Reason perplexes, genius shines in vain;
Wit sparkles in the dark, and learning tries
On cobweb steps to climb into the skies.
Vain efforts all! though proudly all combine
To raise the giant-bard, he falls supine;
If thou bright sun art absent, all is shade,
Is darkness all, and soon the laurels fade.
Then grant, Omniscient, grant a heavenly beam
To warm my heart, and sanctify my theme;
For though an abject worm, thy power, I trust,
Can make that worm sing praises in the dust;
Nor hopeless can it sing, for thou have spoke,
And never was thy gracious promise broke;
Oh let it be remembered in my strain,
That none can ever serve the Lord in vain.
Come then great patron, and thy will be done,
For thou can finish what thou have begun:
Though feeble pinioned in the dust I lie,
Yet thou, the great I AM, can raise me high.
If thou but touch the mountains they shall smoke,
Oh! strike that rock, my heart, and be it broke;
The living waters will gush forth amain,
Run through the desert mind, and overspread the plain.
Thus as, erewhile, I silent, musing sat,
In deep humility, at wisdom's gate,
Soft over my breast a sacred fervor came,
Caught the cold muse, and wrapped her in a flame.
Soft as the softest summer-dews distill,
Sweet as the music of the trickling rill,
The quickening effluence fell, and close behind
A small, but cogent voice, addressed my mind:
" Though Wisdom cries aloud, and in the streets
" Utters her voice to every one she meets;
" Though pleads, persuades, enforces and alarms,
" While sweetly eloquent the charmer charms,
" Deaf as an Adder to the sacred strain,
" Folly prevails, and Wisdom pleads in vain.
" And is there none, none willing to defend
" Her glorious cause? no proselyte or friend?
" Arise, young man, in all the power of truth,
" Be thine the task, wed Wisdom in thy youth."
Thus far the voice persuasive, but the muse
Unequal to the task, would fain refuse;
When lo! more awful, speaks the eternal word,
" Go on, fear not, I Am with thee, I the Lord."
Obedient now, with faith I take the pen;
Awake, arise, attend ye sons of men!
Before the Almighty Fiat had gone forth,
Before depths were, or ever was the earth;
From everlasting, ere the hills were made,
Or the foundations of the mountains laid;
Before creation's ensigns were unfurled,
Or raised the lofty summits of the world,
She was! --
When first the great Creator did prepare
The heavens, and heaven of heavens, she then was there.
Wisdom divine! adorable the name!
Death and destruction both have heard her fame.
Who knows her knows, as did her sons of old,
How much more valued she than Ophir's gold.
The precious onyx, and the sapphire are
With her too mean, too worthless to compare.
Talk not of corals, pearls, and such like wares,
For above rubies is the price she bears.
Her dower is honor, riches length of days,
Her paths are peace, and pleasant all her ways.
So sung the bard affliction taught to sing,
And so her own sweet child, the experienced king;
And though but few the immortal songs receive,
And fewer still the eternal truths believe,
Yet Wisdom is a mistress all pursue,
The false too often mistaken for the true.
In nature's pride they wish the heavenly prize,
Seek it in earth and seas, in air and skies,
And every place but where the jewel lies.
Why glories this man in intrigues of state,
Why that in learned harangues and deep debate;
Why one in proud philosophy, and why
Another in thy arts, sweet poetry? --
Why this in Cynic, that in Stoic rules,
And why, ah why! in foolishness even fools?
Oh Wisdom! injured beauty, it is thy fame
They vainly court; thy everlasting name!
Like earthly suitors among the men of parts,
But few, too few, are lovers in their hearts;
With toys and trifles some would win thy praise,
And some by study's more laborious ways.
The trifler and the student are the same,
Dissemblers both, and know thee but by name;
With borrowed jewels they approach thy shrine,
Rich in the lore of every grace but thine;
Adorned with all fair science can bestow,
Or truth impart, or moral virtue know;
But still distempered like a sick man's dream,
The heart unhallowed, blesses not thy beam;
And but for this, a Bolingbroke had stood
First in the rank among the wise and good;
And but for this, in philosophic fame
Learning and wisdom had been still the same;
Like stars of greatest magnitude had shone,
For ever wedded, and for ever one.
Ye worst of counterfeits, ye falsely wise,
Why toil ye thus in vanities and lies?
Say what avails, to know what angry stars
Threat kings with death, and states with bloody wars*
What insect tribes on earth's broad surface creep,
What finny shoals inhabit in the deep;
In air aloft what feathered nations soar,
What savage monsters through the desert roar;
What bears the field, or what the lonely wood
Of herbs for physic, or of plants for food;
To know all nature's secrets what avails,
If in a greater point your knowledge fails?
Know ye yourselves -- alas! how vain to roam
In search of that which must be found at home!
Have ye found Wisdom? it is a gross mistake,
A dream that will be painful when you wake.
Claim not the glorious title of my song,
To you proud nat'ralists in cannot belong;
Exterior honors may by man be given,
But Wisdom is a name that is writ in heaven.
Speak thou Horatio, thou the pride of schools,
Great sophister, revered by learned fools.
Say for thou can, in what their studies end;
Confess, be honest, and I Will call thee friend.
When heaps of volumes have been pondered over,
When crossed each sea, and traversed every shore;
When learnt the songs the Heathen bards have sung,
Skilled in each art, and versed in every tongue;
When all the alps of science are o'erpast,
Tell me Horatio what is gained at last?
" The world's applause, perhaps the prince's smile,
" And flatt'ry's poisonous potions, smooth as oil;
" The poet's laurel, or the victor's palm,
" But not one drop of Gilead's precious Balm."
Then poor is every recompense beside,
Vainly pre-eminent ye wander wide;
It Is naught but folly still to study on,
To weary out the flesh and never have done;
Still over your toils will darker doubts arise,
And you will be further still from being wise,
There are who boast (so great is human pride)
Reason alone, and laugh at all beside;
Who measure all things by its glimmering ray,
Nor heed the sunshine of the gospel-day.
Though born, oh Britain! on thy awful shore,
Where Judah's Lion has been heard to roar;
Though trained, oh Albion! in thy happy isle,
Where truth and freedom wear a holy smile,
About thee still remain their country's shame,
Apostates scornful of the christian name,
Who all unawed, in mortal prowess stand,
Ready to question each divine command;
Eager to blot, with more than Jewish rage,
The glorious truths that fill the Christian page,
Though proved through ages by the just and good,
And signed and sealed with many a martyr's blood.
Lo on false Wisdom's pinnacle how proud
Hilarious stands, and overlooks the crowd!
Great Newton gone, his heart exults to see
None in astronomy more learned than he.
So far he trusts his reason in the skies,
He half suspects his bible tells him lies.
" Sun, stand thou still in Gibeon!" Joshua said,
" And thou, oh moon! in Ajalon be stayed,"
And is it not written, that they both obeyed?
" 'Twas writ and 'twas believed, Hilarious cries,
" In ancient times, but moderns are more wise;
" Nor sun nor moon to me it plain appears
" Could ever stop, unless expelled their spheres;
" And if from thence one moment they were hurled
" At once would perish every lower world."
Thus argue rati'nals, nor will believe
Of Wisdom aught beyond what they conceive;
But know Hilarious, if the power I sing
Finds in thy heart one tender trembling string
On which to strike, the muse may stay thee soon,
Though hard thou seem to stop as sun or moon.
Say first of reason why this proud dispute,
Why proud of that which but o'erlooks the brute?
In things exposed quite obvious to the view,
What with thy boasted reason can thou do?
Can thou dissect an atom? can thou frame
The spider's textile dome, or grasp a flame?
Can thou, audacious! to Olympus rise,
And stop the rapid lightning when it flies?
If here thy reason fails, and thou refuse
To answer aught before a trembling muse,
Thus to thy heart (oh let that heart be awed!)
In powerful Wisdom speaks the voice of God:
" Gird up thy loins oh man! before me stand,
" And answer thou to what I shall demand.
" If thou have understanding, show it now;
" When first I founded earth say where wast thou?
" Know thou whereon it is fastened? is it thine
" Now to declare what mighty hand divine
" Its measures spread; who stretched the line thereon,
" Or who it was that laid the corner stone,
" What time the morning stars together sang,
" And heaven with joyful acclamations rang?
" Have thou an arm like God, thou earthly limb!
" Or can thou thunder with a voice like him?
" Are heaven's high ordinances thine to scan,
" Can thou on earth their great dominion plan?
" Can thou the Pleiades sweet influence bind,
" Or loose Orion's bands and rule the wind?
" Can thou in season bring huge Mazz'roth forth,
" Or guide Arcturus over the stormy north?
" Have death's dark gates been opened to thy sight,
" Or do thou know the place where dwells light*
Abashed Hilarious stands; and quite controlled,
Trembles that heart which was of late so bold.
Mute is that tongue which never was mute before;
Reason adores, nor can the mortal more.
Yet stay Hilarious, yet a moment stay,
Nor let vain notions hurry thee away;
Now while thy soul thus solemnly o'eraw'd
Trembles beneath the idea of a God,
With faith affirms his being, nor denies,
But that he is almighty and all-wise;
Oh keep the grand conception in thy view,
And let the muse the important point pursue.
His truth endures for ever, and his fame
Is everlasting; holy is his name!
What can he not? his powerful word of old
Lighted the stars, and clothed the sun in gold,
Cinctur'd the moon with silver, bid them shine,
And ordered all with majesty divine.
As at his word thus gloriously they shone,
All brightness, though but dust beneath his throne,
So at his word by Joshua conveyed,
The sun stood still, the moon obedient stayed.
Perish the thought in which it is conceived
What passes reason should not be believed.
Reason Hilarious ever wanders wide,
Unless she walks with Wisdom by her side.
Her powers exerted may be false or true,
As good or bad the purpose they pursue.
False is her light, and endless may she stray
When pride in natural knowledge leads the way.
But sure her path when faithful virtue guides,
And humble, awful, holy fear presides;
Then is she fair and noble, fit to rule
And judge aright; but truant once from school,
(The school of Wisdom) nothing is so bad;
No frenzy half so desperately mad.
Reason unawed runs counter to her rule,
Loses her function and becomes a fool;
In speculation's field she roams abroad,
And in dead works forgets the living God;
Distrusts his truths, and dares his power assail,
Armed like Goliath in a coat of mail;
A heart so hardened that it dares defy
Even all the armies of a God most high;
Wit, like a brazen helmet, may be said
To glare, and cast false luster from her head;
Learning her pompous target may appear,
Her staff vain glory, argument her spear;
Before her bold presumption bears her shield,
And thus against God himself she takes the field.
Is this true reason? never be it said
A thought so impious in thy heart was bred.
True reason is intelligent, and knows
The sacred source from which her current flows.
In all the wondrous works she meets abroad,
She owns her blindness, and submits to God.
But why abroad for wonders should we roam,
When greater wonders may be found at home?
That sun or moon should stop thou think it strange
Unless the system of the skies should change;
But is it not stranger, proof of greater power,
Thou ever had life, or now should live an hour?
Know thou the nature of the human frame,
That world of wonders, more than we can name?
Say have thy busy curious eye surveyed
The proofs of boundless Wisdom there displayed?
How ranged each fiber with amazing skill,
That every muscle may attend thy will;
How every tendon acts upon its bone,
And how the nerves receive their nicer tone;
Convey the keen vibrations of the sense,
And give the wakeful mind intelligence;
How some strong guard each vital part sustains,
How flows the purple balsam through the veins;
That how commix'd, disposed, how wondrous these,
Here in one trunk, there ramify'd like trees;
The finer vessels of the brain how small,
How numberless, and yet we see not all,
But see enough Hilarious; for we see
God is the maker, and his creatures we.
It Is not for us to question, but to praise
The great Creator, wise in all his ways.
But say, can reason, or can ought below
Make heavenly streams from earthly fountains flow?
Can man polluted praise the God of light?
Not pure are purest angels in his sight.
Oh then, what muse can proper praise inspire,
" Hallow the heart and touch the lips with fire?"
To Wisdom only does the power belong;
Wisdom the muse, the mistress and the song!
Vain is all praise, unless by her it is given;
Here Is is the praise of every harp in heaven!
Music is all her own, she tunes the spheres,
And sets to numbers hours, days, months and years,
And what is more Hilarious, does impart
Her notes celestial to the human heart;
Attunes the springs of joy, and charms despair,
Calms to sweet peace, and ope's the door of prayer;
Gives the sick soul with livelier hopes to rise,
And seek an heritage beyond the skies.
Oh, what amazing wonders does she hear!
Makes barren fruitful, makes the rough path clear;
Makes roses spring where thistles grew before,
And lambs to bleat where wolves were wont to roar.
Before her tempests cease and storms subside,
Rocks melt and mountains sink, and seas divide:
Over death's dark shades she pours her living ray,
And ope's the gates of everlasting day.
Can Reason this? then why art thou distressed
At aught in life, or why not always blessed?
When friends or fortune take their hasty leave,
Why art thou then so great a fool to grieve?
For grieve thou will, nor all thy Reason can
Dry up thy tears, and make thee more a man.
When over thy head affliction's billows roll,
And big distress weighs down thy sinking soul,
Can Reason guide thee to a happier coast,
And land thee safe that not an hair be lost,
Then why do tremble -- why heaven's aid implore?
It Is plain thy Reason helps thee then no more.
And what Hilarious, if I dare to say
Mere human Reason knows not how to pray?
Thou beg'st a blessing, think the boon no worse,
Which might if granted prove to thee a curse.
" Teach my best Reason, Reason," he who said,
Most wisely thought and most devoutly prayed.
Without that Wisdom infinite which guides
Our finite views, and good from bad divides,
It Is not in human wit nor human might
To act or pray, or think one thought aright.
Though thy proud genius build its house as high
As human knowledge possibly can fly;
Prop it with Reason prouder still to rise,
And tell the world that lie that thou art wise,
Not long the house so raised, so prop'd can stand,
For " like the fools," it is built upon the sand.
Though bold the truth accept it, for it flows
Free from a heart that dictates what it knows;
Free from a muse, who near the sacred fount
Of Wisdom sings, nor seeks the Aonian mount;
Who courts no patron, no scholastic aid,
No alien-grace nor Heliconian maid,
But trusts her humble, artless song to fill
With simple truths of power, to save or kill;
Through him alone who Ancient is of Days,
" From babes and sucklings he ordains praise:"
Do ask what praise? oh let thy reason bow!
Know thy own self, and happily thou shall know
More than a sun is in thee, tho it is hurld
Beneath the worthless rubbish of the world.
Immersed in vanity's inconstant tide,
And buried deep beneath the waves of pride;
Though undiscovered in thy natural will,
The gem thou seek'st for is about thee still;
Attends thy footsteps wheresoe'er they stray,
Thy path, thy bed, and every secret way;
Flashes conviction through the proudest breast,
And brings each boasted virtue to the test;
Makes manifest whatever is wrong or right,
And shines the just man's ever burning light.
Though suns and stars, and this terraqueous globe,
And yon blue firmament should all disrobe;
Though night with ten-fold darkness intervene,
And second chaos more deform the scene,
Yet will it glitter through the general gloom,
And hell itself be forced to give it room,
While fierce Gehenna's troops with dread amaze
See and believe, and tremble as they gaze.
Though different nations hold a different creed,
As at the Ganges taught or near the Tweed;
Though sects divide and subdivide again,
Like parting rivers seeking still the main,
The nice distinction lies but in the name,
For virtue, grace and goodness are the same.
Could the eye glance beyond the bounds of time,
Or the thought soar through regions more sublime,
Yet all remote from Wisdom might we stray,
And 'midst stupendous systems lose our way.
In his own sphere man's proper business lies,
In his own heart the rule to make him wise.
The voice that thunders on the mountain's brow,
And stirs the bottom of the deep below;
The voice that roars wherever the tempest rolls,
And rends the isles, and shakes the distant poles;
The voice that spoke "as never man was heard,"
Speaks in thy heart -- oh be that voice revered!
Be passion still, parts, genius overaw'd*
The voice of Wisdom is the voice of God!
Mild as the breath of summer, or the gales
Of young Favonius over the smiling vales;
Soft as the love-lorn mourner's secret sigh,
It whispers to thy soul "why will you die?
Why in a land of sorrows and of tears*
Where joys are thinly sown and choked with cares,
Where ceaseless change afflicts the roving eye,
And nature's brightest beauties bloom to die;
Where parting comforts, ever on the wing,
Though closely tied, must soar and break the string;
Why seek amidst the dying and the dead
For false support, for that which is not bread?
Why with a soul of pure, etherial fires,
Fed with high hopes and infinite desires,
With life and immortality in view,
Make earth your home, and every toy pursue?
Ah! how deceived amidst thy choicest store,
Indulged in all till thou can ask no more!
Though wealth awaits thee with overflowing hand,
And fame proclaims thy honors through the land;
Though power and ease, and every gay delight
Flatters thy fancy even from morn to night;
Though pleasure woos thee with delusive charms,
And binds in silken bands thy manly arms;
Though health and strength their better blessings grant,
And thou have all a happy man can want,
Full soon must all these summer birds be gone,
Take to their wings and leave thee every one.
Not a day passes, not a wind that blows,
A wave that is ebbing, nor a tide that flows,
But bears away some transitory joy,
Some darling hope or visionary toy,
Which fancy formed, or friendship taught to charm,
Or nature fondled with embraces warm.
This the best state the sons of earth can boast,
To see by slow degrees their glories lost.
Yet not to all the mild gradation's given,
Through the high wisdom of all-righteous heaven.
Often is the pitying eye distressed to see
The man who grew and flourished like a tree,
With all his blooming honors thick around,
Vigorous and fair, the pride of all the ground,
By some swift blast of bleak misfortune's air
Stripped all at once -- an object of despair.
Or grant the blessings, boast a longer date,
And more remote the period fixed by fate,
Such is the state of sublunary joy,
The mere possessing does the bliss destroy;
The pride of nature still its frailty bears,
And fortune's favors ever bring their cares.
Health in continuance loses half its charms,
And smiling pleasure dies within your arms.
Fame, wealth and power, and much invited ease,
False to their promise, pain you more than please;
Even human virtue but aspires to sigh,
By sad experience taught the reason why.
Bliss is a dream, and life a fleeting shade,
Bedecked with flowers that in an instant fade.
Earth's hopes are bubbles, bursting ere they fall,
And vanity of vanities is all.
Yet there is a power, who through this sinking scene
Can keep the soul unshaken and serene;
Can sweeten every blessing to the taste,
And make amends for all that time can waste;
Whose providence our glory can advance
From every ill we call the work of chance;
Can set us free amidst a land of slaves,
Or lead us safely over affliction's waves,
And plant our feet upon a happier shore,
Where chance and time and death shall be no more.
Ye who in search of Wisdom travel far,
Under the guidance of that glorious star
That shone over Bethlehem, when the seers of old
The joyful tidings of Emanuel told;
And ye who come all curious to enquire,
Like Sheba's queen, to hear and to admire;
And you sweet mourners, who in silence sit
Weeping for sins you know not to commit,
Come ever gentle spirits, haste along,
Breathe through the verse, and animate the song,
While I to WISDOM's sacred fane repair,
And thence invoke the oracle by prayer.
Oh thou! who ever wast, and wilt be still,
The sole great arbitress of good and ill;
Whose full perfection dwells in God alone,
Adored by every angel round his throne;
Who all that passes can minutely tell,
From highest heaven, down to the deepest hell;
Descend, bright guardian of our better parts,
Maintain thy grand tribunal in our hearts;
Renew thy gracious visits every hour,
And grant some emanations of thy power
To shine through all our spirits, and afford
Light to our darkness -- speak thou but the word;
" Let there be light," and light will instant shine,
And feeble mortals feel the ray divine.
Whether in pleasure's flowery paths we stray,
Or sorrowing tread affliction's thorny way;
Whether our barks on life's deceitful seas
Are tempest-tost, or careless drive at ease,
In every trial keep us safe from harm,
Guard us becalmed, and guide us in the storm:
Confirm that knowledge which thy grace decrees,
Strengthen that faith which shakes at every breeze;
Raise and ennoble every thought confined,
And pour instruction over the darkened mind;
Wake into light the truths that lie concealed,
And in thy own bright beauty stand revealed;
By charmed attention woo us to thy praise,
Win us and wed us firmly to thy ways.
To thee alone make all our wishes tend,
Our glory now, our comfort in the end.
It Is thou alone can fit us to fulfill
Thy sacred laws, and judge of good and ill;
It Is thou alone can teach us to decide
'Twixt virtue's nobler aims and human pride;
Can reach, with irresistible control,
Through nature's finest feelings to the soul,
And make the tender mother in the strife
Forego her darling child, to save his life.
To thee in deep humility we bend,
The rich man's ornament, the poor man's friend;
The good man's monitor, the pilgrim's guide,
The mourner's comfort, and the sage's pride;
The christian's lamp, the saint's supreme desire,
The prophet's spirit, and the seraph's fire!
Daughter of heaven who reigns through earth and seas,
And air and skies; whose beauty, order, ease,
Shines forth in all -- complete the glorious plan,
And sway thy scepter in the heart of man.
Though at thy awful tasks we shrink dismayed,
Spare not, but be thy high behests obeyed.
If at thy bidding through the deeps we go,
Or wander in a wilderness of woe,
Eternal WISDOM, grant us thy supplies,
('It Is all we ask) oh teach us to be wise!
Soliloquy written in a Churchyard.
STRUCK with religious awe and solemn dread,
I view these gloomy mansions of the dead!
Around the tombs in mixed disorder rise,
And in mute language teach me to be wise.
Time was these ashes lived; and time will be
When others thus may stand and look at thee.
Alarming thought! no wonder it is we dread
Over these uncomfortable vaults to tread,
Where blended lie the aged and the young,
The rich, the poor -- an undistinguished throng;
Death conquers all -- and time's subduing hand
Nor tombs nor marble statues can withstand.
Mark yonder ashes in confusion spread!
Compare earth's living tenants with her dead!
How striking the resemblance, yet how just!
Once life and soul informed this mass of dust!
Around these bones, now broken and decayed,
The streams of life in various channels played.
Perhaps that skull, so horrible to view,
Was some fair maid -- ye belles as fair as you!
These hollow sockets two bright orbs contained,
Where the loves sported, and in triumph reigned:
Here glowed the lips -- there white as Parrian stone
The teeth dispersed in beauteous order shone.
This is life's goal -- no farther can we view,
Beyond it all is wonderful and new.
Oh deign! some courteous guest, to let us know
What we must shortly be, and you are now!
Sometimes you warn us of approaching fate,
Why hide the present knowledge of your state?
With joy behold us tremblingly explore
The unknown gulf that you can fear no more.
The grave has eloquence! -- its lectures teach
In silence louder than divines can preach.
Hear what it says -- ye sons of folly hear,
It speaks to you, oh give it then your ear!
It bids you lay all vanity aside;
Oh what a lecture this to human pride.
The clock strikes twelve -- how solemn is the sound!
Hark how the strokes from hollow vaults rebound!
They bid us hasten to be wise, and show
How rapid in their course the minutes flow.
See yonder yew -- how high it rears its head,
Around their gloomy shade the branches spread;
Old and decayed, it still retains a grace,
And adds more solemn horror to the place! --
Whose tomb is this? it say it is MIRA's tomb,
Plucked from the world in beauty's fairest bloom!
Attend ye fair, ye thoughtless and ye gay,
For MIRA died upon her nuptial day!
The grave, cold bridegroom! clasped her in his arms,
And the worm rioted upon her charms!
In yonder tomb the old AVARO lies,
(Once he was rich, the world esteemed him wise)
Schemes unaccomplish'd labored in his mind,
And all his thoughts were to the world confined.
Death came unlooked for! -- from his grasping hands
Down dropped his bags, and mortgages and lands.
Beneath that sculptured, pompous marble stone,
Lies youthful FLORIA, aged twenty-one;
Crop'd like a flower, he withered in his bloom,
Though flattering life had promised years to come*
Ye silken sons, ye Florias of the age,
Who tread in giddy maze life's flowery stage,
Mark here the end of man! -- in FLORIA see
What you and all the sons of earth shall be!
There low in dust the vain HORATIO lies,
Whose splendour once we viewed with envious eyes;
Titles and arms his pompous marble grace,
With a long history of his noble race;
Still after death his vanity survives,
And on his tomb all of HORATIO lives!
Around me as I turn my wandering eyes*
Unnumber'd graves in awful prospect rise!
Whose stones say only when their owners died*
If young or aged, and to whom allied;
On others, pompous epitaphs are spread,
In memory of the virtues of the dead.
Vain waste of praise, since flattering or sincere
The judgment-day alone will make appear.
How silent is this little spot of ground --
How melancholy looks each object round!
Here man, dissolved in shattered ruin lies,
So fast asleep, as if no more to rise;
It Is strange to think how these dead bones can live,
Sleep into form, and with new heat revive,
Or how this trodden earth to life shall wake,
Know its own place -- its former figure take!
But whence these fears? -- When the last trumpet founds
Through heavens expanse, to earth's remotest bounds,
The dead shall quit these tenements of clay,
And view again the long extinguished day.
It must be so -- the same almighty power,
From dust who formed us, can from dust restore.
Cheered with this pleasing hope, I safely trust
Jehovah's power to raise me from the dust;
On his unfailing promises rely,
And all the horrors of the grave defy.
On Time. To a Friend.
TIME goes -- death comes -- two truths in one dull line!
A third should tell thee, that the verse is mine;
But, known already by the theme I choose,
My name that knowledge will of course excuse;
Of past or present, what remains to say?
One is of yesterday, and one today.
Tomorrow, if it comes, shall not behold
The hours those slighted fugitives have told.
So quickly gone, and to return no more,
No spell, no charm, their virtue shall restore;
Yet they had virtues of sufficient power
To raise the value of each future hour.
If we (long prodigal, scarce wise at last)
Have marked the winged blessings as they passed,
Of twice ten years of mingled joys and pains,
Of hopes and fears -- what mighty sum remains!
It Is this (in reason's eye it is nothing more)
We Are twice ten winters older than before;
Twice ten years hence, where then? -- Ah, who can tell?
Perhaps ere then we bid the world farewell,
Quit the vain bustle of this pressing scene,
And join the list of those who once have been;
Or if protracted life to us should give
Another period like the past to live,
'Twere but with new reflections to deplore
The vanished moments that return no more,
And with less vigor to improve the sum
Of those which heaven might still permit to come.
Resigned to either fate, it is ours to tread*
The paths which surely lead us to the dead.
Start not -- not lonely in the road we take;
All human kind this pilgrimage now make;
The journey with humanity began,
And when it is finished, then too ceases man.
'Till then it is open, and employed by all,
The common passage of the great and small,
And spite of all this giddy world admires,
Still death approaches, as the hour retires.
The sick Man's Address to his Candle.
THY size, bright taper, does so quickly waste,
It bids me think the present day my last;
Though narrow limits my short date confine,
Compared to infinite -- what more is mine?
This night must end thy being, and before
Tomorrow's dawn, myself may be no more.
Both in life's morn with gayest luster shine,
And, as the night advances, both decline;
Both by one common fate seem closely linked,
And after one short blaze shall be extinct;
Our lives the same; our periods both agree,
So where is the difference 'twixt thou and me?
An Evening Thought.
NOW down the steep of heaven the source of day
Pursues, unwearied, his diurnal way;
Mild shine his rays, his beams serene descend,
And over the earth a sweet effulgence send;
The blustering winds a pleasing silence keep,
And in their caves with folded pinions sleep.
No longer from the clouds descends the rain,
But a clear azure spreads the etherial plain;
A solemn, pleasing silence hovers round,
And peace with downy wing, o'erspreads the ground;
While silver Cynthia sheds her milder light,
And ushers in the awful reign of night.
So when the lamp of night shall dimly burn,
And this frail frame to kindred dust shall turn,
May the rude strife of earth-born passions cease,
And life's short journey terminate in peace.
May then no cares terrestrial break my rest,
Or keen reflections discompose my breast;
May then no fear, no dread of ills to come,
Make me shrink back with terror from the tomb;
But when the awful mandate from on high
The sentence shall proclaim that bids me die,
Resigned and peaceful let me bow my head,
And heaven enjoy, when numbered with the dead.
PROCRASTINATION.
WRETCH that I am! what friendly power
Shall fix my wavering soul,
Teach me to seize the present hour,
And Custom's charms control?
Why thus persist, from day to day,
To err, in Wisdom's spite?
I see my path -- Why then delay
What Reason tells me's right?
The present day the attempt is vain;
We Have something still to do:
But when tomorrow comes, it is plain
That will be present too:
And then the same reluctant will,
TO attend the ungrateful theme,
Will thwart our resolutions still,
And frustrate every scheme.
How soon, amidst these faint resolves,
The spring of life is over;
How quick each annual sun revolves!
But -- youth returns no more!
Manhood to youth, and soon old age
To manhood's strength succeeds:
O! then let each successive stage
Be marked by virtuous deeds.
Whilst yet your strength of mind remains,
Resist the rising storm:
Break loose from Passion's irksome chains*
And every vice reform.
" Dare to be wise! begin" today,
Nor trust uncertain fate:
Your long-plann'd reformation may
Tomorrow come too late.
Tomorrow, oh! how often you swore
To change your course, my friend!
Thus 'twill be always one day more,
Ere you begin to mend.
" When once I Have finished this affair,
" My actions I Will review:
" And when I Have brought that scheme to bear,
" Begin my life anew."
The idiot thus, who saw his way
Across the Severn lie,
Resolved upon its banks to stay*
'Till all the stream ran by.
But torrents, with united force,
Augment the copious river;
Which proudly still pursues its course,
And murmuring flows forever.
TOMORROW.
TOMORROW, did thou say!
Methought I heard Horatio say, tomorrow:
Go to -- I will not hear of it -- tomorrow!
It Is a sharper, who stakes his penury
Against thy plenty -- who takes thy ready cash,
And pays thee naught but wishes, hopes and promises,
The currency of idiots. Injurious bankrupt,
That gulls the easy creditor. -- Tomorrow!
It is a period no where to be found,
In all the hoary registers of time,
Unless perchance in the fool's calendar.
Wisdom disclaims the word, nor holds society
With those who own it. No, my Horatio,
It Is fancy's child, and folly is its father;
Wrought of such stuff as dreams are, and baseless
As the fantastic visions of the evening.
But soft, my friend; arrest the present moments;
For be assured, they all are arrant tell-tales;
And though their flight be silent, and their path
Trackless, as the winged couriers of the air,
They post to heaven, and there record thy folly;
Because, though station'd on the important watch,
Thou, like a sleeping, faithless sentinel,
Did let them pass unnotic'd, unimprov'd.
The Wheel of Time.
WHILE we are on this rolling Wheel,
And round and round are swiftly whirled,
Let us consider that its motion
Will land us in another world.
Where are our Fathers and our Mothers,
Who lately here on earth were found?
Where are our Friends and our Acquaintance --
Are they not laid beneath the ground?
This Wheel of Time, though unobserved
By us, has swept them all away;
We by its motion too are hurried,
And soon the summons must obey!
May we, though at the midnight hour,
Cock crowing, or the morn, be found,
When the pale herald shall be sent us,
Prepared to tread yon heavenly ground.
Days, weeks and months, roll swiftly on,
Often unobserved by mortal eye;
May we thereby instructed be,
And learn this lesson, how to die!
Are we not all preparing here
For length of days and happy life,
But in the midst of this great bustle
Grim Death steps in, and ends the strife!
Oh would we! in the strife for riches,
But attend to WISDOM's call,
She would instruct us how to find
Her Golden Treasure -- ALL IN ALL!
Her sacred voice we will not hear,
Or hearing we will not obey;
For it is she, and nothing less,
That can direct us how to pray.
" Thy kingdom come, thy will be done,"
We with indifference may express,
But to have power to do the same,
Is something more, we must confess.
The kingdom of the Lord we read
Does not consist in meats and drinks,
But righteousness and holiness;
Not in what a free-thinker thinks.
May we then learn to know and do
The will of God with filial fear,
And when the Wheel of Time shall carry
Us from this to a higher sphere --
May we then know our day's work done,
And be prepared for the skies,
Faith, hope and love, point out the way,
And bid our gladden'd souls arise.
THE NEGRO BOY.
An African Prince, lately arrived in England, being asked what he had given
for his Watch, answered, "What I never will again: I gave a fine Boy for it."

WHEN avarice enslaves the mind,
And selfish views alone bear sway,
Man turns a savage to his kind,
And blood and rapine mark the way:
Alas! for this poor simple toy
I sold a blooming Negro Boy.
His father's hope, his mother's pride,
Though black, yet comely to the view;
I tore him helpless from their side,
And gave him to a ruffian crew;
To fiends that Afric's coast annoy
I sold the blooming Negro Boy.
From country, friends, and parents torn,
His tender limbs in chains confined*
I saw him over the billows borne,
And marked his agony of mind;
But still, to gain this simple toy,
I gave away the Negro Boy.
His wretched parents long shall mourn,
Shall long explore the distant main,
In hope to see the youth return,
But all their hopes and sighs are vain;
They never shall the sight enjoy
Of their lamented Negro Boy.
Beneath a tyrant's harsh command,
He wears away his youthful prime,
Far distant from his native land,
A stranger in a foreign clime;
No pleasing thoughts his mind employ,
A poor dejected Negro Boy.
But HE who walks upon the wind,
Whose voice in thunder's heard on high;
Who does the raging tempest bind,
Or wing the lightning through the sky,
In his own time will sure destroy
The oppressors of a Negro Boy.
THE NEGROE's PRAYER.
The following prayer was penned by a Black Man, a slave, in the lower part of
Virginia, and was presented by him to his master, which struck him with
admiration, and surprise, as he acknowledged to a Friend. -- Written in 1790.

LORD, if thou do with equal eye
See all the sons of Adam die;
Why do thou hide thy face from slaves?
Consigned by fate to serve the knaves.
Stolen, or sold in Africa,
Imported to America,
Like hogs and sheep in market sold,
To stem the heat and brook the cold.
To work all day and half the night,
And rise before the morning light;
Sustain the lash, endure the pain,
Exposed to storms of snow and rain,
Pinched both with hunger and with cold,
And if we beg, we meet a scold;
And after all the tedious round,
At night to stretch upon the ground.
Has heaven decreed that negroes must
By cruel men be ever cursed;
Forever drag the galling chain,
And never enjoy themselves again?
When will Jehovah hear our cries?
When will the sun of freedom rise?
When will a Moses for us stand,
And free us all from Pharaoh's hand?
What though our skin be black as jet,
Our hair be curled, our noses flat,
Must we for this no freedom have,
Until we find it in the grave?
Paraphrase of the Lord's Prayer.
FATHER of all, be thou alone
In Heaven and earth adored;
Earth is thy footstool, Heaven thy throne,
Thou universal Lord.
What power to praise thee and obey,
Thy grace to man has given,
That praise and duty let him pay
Till earth resemble Heaven.
"This day be bread and peace our lot;
All else beneath the sun,
Thou know if best bestowed or not;
And let thy will be done."
Thy love expecting, let us love;
Relieved, let us relieve;
Thy pity let our pity move;
Forgive, as we forgive.
When from without temptations come,
Or lusts inflame within,
Thy grace descend, and save us from
The greatest evil, sin.
Supreme in power, all nature waits
Obedient at thy call;
O first! O last! for thought too great,
O source and end of all!
The following is the copy of a letter reported to be written by a Clergyman,
and addressed to a young Woman among the people called Quakers, in London.
TO LAVINIA.
HARK how the sacred thunder rends the skies!
Repent and be baptized, Christ's herald cries!
Repent and be baptized, consenting heaven replies!
And can LAVINIA unaffected hear
The awful message echoing in her ear?
Will my LAVINIA unconverted prove,
Rebel to God, and faithless unto love?
Say -- shall a parent's absolute command
The mighty voice of God himself withstand?
Shall heavenly calls to earthly ties give place,
And filial fondness frustrate christian grace?
Shall human wit Omniscience engage?
Shall Barclay endless war with Jesus wage?
Must each Apostle wave his claim to merit,
That Fox may shine first Martyr of the Spirit?
Must common sense be banished from the soul,
Ever gospel salve can make the sinner whole?
Must each adept in Calvery's great school
Be not in meekness, but in fact a fool?
Must Paul at Corinth be a babbler too?
And Peter when a Baptist, be a Jew?
Must Philip's process be superfluous thought,
Because he washed the Eunuch he had taught?
Must fed'ral rights be metaphor'd away,
And actual homage construed, disobey?
Such juggling art may change each part of speech,
Make water spirit, and baptize to teach,
But if such jargon Jesus represents,
The light alone indeed is lent to saints;
Then in the letter double death we find,
And Christ in figure only saved Mankind.
LAVINIA's ANSWER.
" HARK how the sacred thunder rends the skies!
" Repent and be baptized, Christ's herald cries!
" Repent and be baptized consenting heaven replies!"
The christian heart reveres the solemn sound!
And deeply humbled, treads the sacred ground --
Owns the injunction's undisputed claim,
Its awful import, and its glorious aim!
But here a difference mutual zeal excites,
You plead for outward, we for mental rites.
We think the gospel's hallowed page inspires
Superior efforts, nor one type requires;
Since no lavations can effectual prove,
The innate stains of nature to remove;
No mode of words true purity impart
To an infantile and unconscious heart:
As vain and foolish hence we disallow
The faithful surety, and baptismal vow,
As being shadows which men may observe,
Yet from the substance flagrantly they swerve.
While superstitious rites their time divide,
They cease to follow virtue for their guide;
Enslaved by canons, and the partial rules
Of Councils, Synods, Colleges and Schools.
Thus might mankind (for some an ample field)
To Circumcision's ancient custom yield;
Or humbly prostrate in the public street,
With blind devotion wash each other's feet:
It Is thus to holiness that form gives place,
And solemn trifling frustrates-christian grace.
In Jordan's stream well pleased the Almighty saw
His son beloved, submitting to the law;
But his Apostles through the world he sent
With a baptizing power beyond the element.
This power does all true ministry attend;
'Twas promised, and will never have an end:
This mighty power his herald did proclaim --
" He shall baptize you with an holy flame."
Yet water was in use, an ancient rite,
Allowed the common way to proselyte,
But no dependence placed thereon you will see,
And Paul and Peter in this point agree;
Then real Christians, with illumined thought,
View Truth unbias'd, as its author taught:
No typic observations are revered,
Since their immortal Archetype appeared!
Fox preached this doctrine to a seeking age;
It shines in Barclay's unrefuted page.
Simple their scheme, no vain self-love they knew,
But freely preached without a sordid view;
With hearts devoted, gospel truths displayed,
And scorned to make Divinity a Trade:
No juggling arts were used -- no low disguise,
Over obvious texts and sense to tyranize;
Discerning truth by its own native light,
And by its guidance practiced what was right:
This state attained, prophetic signs no more
Demand observance, as in days of yore.
It Is grace alone, exalted and refined,
Imparts instruction to the attentive mind;
Convicts of error, and restrains from sin,
For what these are, is manifest within;
Each wayward passion by its aid subdued,
The soul's enthroned in native rectitude;
Cleans'd of its stains, and sprinkled from above
With pure descendings of atoning love.
A Baptism this essential thou will find,
Or "Christ in figure only saved mankind."
This then alone my suppliant spirit craves,
Since but one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism saves.
ADDRESS TO WINTER.
WHAT! though thou come in sable mantle clad,
Yet, Winter, art thou welcome to my eye;
Thee here I hail, though terrors round thee wait,
And winds tempestuous howl along the sky.
But shall I then so soon forget the days
When Ceres led me through her wheaten mines!
When Autumn plucked me, with his tawny hand,
Empurpled clusters from ambrosial vines!
So soon forget when up the yielding pole
I saw ascend the silver bearded hop!
When Summer, waving high her crown of hay,
Poured over the mead her odoriferous crop!
I must forget them, and thee too, O Spring!
Though many a chaplet thou have wreathed for me;
For, now prepared to quit the enchanting scenes,
Cold, weeping Winter! I come all to thee.
Hail to thy rolling clouds and rapid storms!
Though they deform fair Nature's lovely face;
Hail to thy winds that sweep along the earth!
Though trees they root up from their solid base.
How sicklied over is the face of things!
Where Is the sweet kisses of the southern gale!
Where the wild rose, that smiled upon the thorn,
The mountain flower, and lilly of the vale!
How gloomy it is to cast the eye around,
And view the tree disrobed of every leaf*
The velvet path grown rough with clotting showers,
And every field deprived of every sheaf;
How far more gloomy, over the rain beat heath
Alone to travel in the dead of night;
No twinkling star to guide the arch of heaven;
No moon to lend her temporary light.
To see the lightning spread its ample sheet,
Discern the wild waste through its liquid fire!
To hear the thunder rend the troubled air,
As Time itself and Nature would expire.
And yet, O Winter! has thy poet seen
Thy face as smooth and placid as the spring;
Has felt, with comfort felt, the beam of heaven,
And heard thy valleys and thy woodlands ring:
What time the sun with burnished looks arose,
The long lost charms of nature to renew;
When pearls of ice bedecked the grassy turf,
And tree tops floated in the silver dew.
Father of heaven and earth! this change is thine;
By thee the seasons in gradation roll,
Thou great omniscient Ruler of the world!
The alpha and omega of the whole!
Here humbly bow we down our heads to thee!
It Is ours the voice of gratitude to raise:
Thine to diffuse thy blessings over the land;
Thine to receive the incense of our praise.
Pure if it rises from the conscious heart*
With thee forever does the symbol live;
Though small for all thy love is man's return,
Thou ask'st no more than he has power to give.
REASON. A Poem.
REASON, best of Heaven's blessings,
Given only to mankind;
Life would not be worth possessing,
Did not reason rule the mind.
When we see capricious fortune
Striving all the rich to bless,
Reason tells us envy not them,
Riches are not happiness.
When in height of beauty blooming,
CLARA exercises power,
Reason whispers in our hearing,
" Beauty is a fading flower."
When in pomp and power parading,
Kings and Presidents we see;
Reason tells us they are fading,
They must die as well as we.
When fell poverty invades us,
And our lot is slaves to be;
Reason tells us, bear with patience;
Time will come we shall be free.
When our passions drag us headlong,
Through lust, ambition, avarice -- where --
In search of happiness and pleasure,
Reason tells us, it is not there.
Let pain and poverty attend us,
All our life in trouble spent,
Reason has a balm to send us,
And that balm is called content.
When we are on our death bed lying,
Full of anguish and of pain;
Reason tells us be of comfort,
You shall surely live again.
AN HYMN.
HAVE thou beheld the glorious sun
Through all the skies his circles run;
At rising morn -- at closing day,
And when he beamed his noontide ray?
Say, did thou ever attentive view
The evening cloud, or morning dew?
Or, after rain, the watery bow
Rise in the east -- a beauteous show?
When darkness had overspread the skies,
Have thou ever seen the moon arise,
And with a mild and placid light,
Shed luster over the face of night?
Have thou ever wandered over the plain,
And viewed the fields and waving grain*
The flowery mead, thy leafy grove,
Where all is melody and love?
Have thou ever trod the sandy shore,
And heard the restless ocean roar,
When roused by some tremendous storm,
Its billows rose in dreadful form?
Have thou beheld the lightning stream
Through night's dark gloom, with sudden gleam,
While the bellowing thunder's sound
Rolled rattling through the heavens profound?
Have thou e're felt the cutting gale,
The sleety shower, the biting hail;
Beheld bright snow overspread the plains,
The water bound in icy chains?
Have thou the varied beings seen,
That sport along the valley green;
That sweetly warble on the spray,
Or wanton in the sunny ray?
That shoot along* the briny deep,
Or under ground their dwellings keep;
That through the gloomy forests range,
Or frightful wilds and deserts strange?
Have thou the wondrous scenes surveyed,
That all around thee are displayed,
And have thou never raised thine eyes
To him who bade these scenes arise?
'Twas God that formed the concave sky,
And all the glorious orbs on high;
Who gave the various beings birth
That people all the spacious earth.
It Is he that bids the tempest rise,
And rolls the thunder through the skies;
His voice the elements obey --
Through all the earth extends his sway.
His goodness all his creatures share,
But man is his peculiar care;
Then while they all proclaim his praise,
Let man his voice the loudest raise.
On the Love of GOD.
COULD we with ink the ocean fill;
Was the whole earth of parchment made;
Was every single stick a quill,
And every man a scribe by trade:
To write the Love of God above,
Would drain the ocean dry;
Nor could the scroll contain the whole,
Though stretched from sky to sky.
Prayer of a wise Heathen.
GREAT Jove! this one petition grant,
Thou know best what mortals want:
Asked or unasked, what is good supply --
What Is evil, to our prayers deny.
Epitaph by Cowley.
HERE lies the great! -- False marble tell me where!
Nothing but poor and sordid dust lies here!
MISCELLANEOUS PIECES IN PROSE. PART II.
On the Necessity of improving Time.
HOW quick are the advances of time! The day is gone, almost as soon as dawned!
The silent moments slip away insensibly! No thief steals more unperceived from
the pillaged house. Wherever we are, however employed, time pursues his
incessant course. Though we are listless and dilatory, the great measurer of
our days passes on, in his unwearied career, and whirls our weeks, and months,
and years away. Is it not then surprisingly strange, to hear some complain of
the tediousness of their time, and how heavy it hangs upon their hands? To see
them contriving a variety of amusing artifices to accelerate its flight, and
get rid of its burden. Why, thoughtless mortals! need you urge the headlong
torrent? Your days are swifter than a post, which carrying dispatches of the
utmost importance, with unremitted speed scours the road. They pass away like
the nimble ships, which have wind in their wings, and skim along the watery
plain. They hasten to their destined period with the rapidity of an eagle,
which leaves the stormy blast behind her, while she cleaves the air, and darts
upon her prey.

And, when it is gone, how short it appears! When the fond eye beheld in
perspective, it seemed an extensive plain; but on the retrospective view, how
wonderfully is the scene altered! The landscape, large and spacious, which a
warm fancy drew, brought to the test of cool experience, shrinks into a span;
just as the shores vanish, and mountains dwindle to a spot, when the sailor,
surrounded by skies and ocean, throws his last look on his native land.

Shall we, then, be industrious to shorten what is no longer than a span, or to
quicken the pace of what is ever on the wing? Shall we squander away what is
unutterably important, while it lasts; and when once departed, is altogether
irrecoverable? Forbear the folly, forbear the desperate extravagance. Shall we
chide, as a loiterer, the arrow that boundeth from the string; or sweep away
diamonds, as the refuse of our houses? How parsimonious should we be of our
days; how carefully husband our precious hours! They go indissolubly connected
with happiness or misery. Improved, they are a sure pledge of everlasting
glory; wasted, they are a sad preface to never-ending confusion and anguish. On
these, therefore, our eternal all depends. And will an affair of such
unspeakable weight, admit of a moment's delay, or consist with the least
remissness? -- Especially since much of our appointed time is already elapsed,
and the remainder is all uncertainty.

But, suppose we had made a covenant with the grave, and were assured of
reaching the age of Methuselah, how soon would even such a lease expire! Let it
be extended yet farther, and made co-existent with nature itself; yet, how
speedily will the consummation of all things commence! For, yet a little while,
and the commissioned archangel will lift his hand to heaven, and swear by the
Almighty name, "That time shall be no longer." The abused opportunities will
never return, and new opportunities will never more be afforded. Then, should
negligent mortals wish ever so passionately, for a few moments only to be
thrown back from opening eternity, thousands of worlds would not be able to
procure the grant.

What inexpressible consternation must overwhelm unthinking mortals, who have
squandered their time in vice, when the general conflagration commences! That
dreadful day will soon approach, "in which the heavens shall pass away with a
great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat; the earth also, and
all the works that are therein, shall be burnt up." That mighty hand, which
once opened the windows from on high, and broke up the fountains of the great
deep, will then unlock all the magazines of fire, and pour out a second deluge
upon the earth. The vengeful flames, kindled by the breath of the Almighty,
will spread themselves from the center to the circumference; nothing will
withstand their impetuosity, nothing escape their rage. Magnificent palaces and
solemn temples will be laid in ashes: Spacious cities and impregnable towers
buried in one smoking mass. Not only the productions of human art, but the
works of almighty power, will be fuel for the devouring element. The mountains
will melt, like the snows which cover their summits; and even the vast oceans
serve only to augment the inconceivable rapidity and fury of the blaze.

These are events, the greatness of which nothing finite can measure. Such, as
will cause whatever is considerable, or momentous, in the annals of all
generations, to sink into littleness and nothing. Events, big with the
everlasting fates of all the living and all the dead. We must see the graves
cleaving, the sea teeming, and swarms unsuspected, crowds unnumbered, yea,
multitudes of thronging nations rising from both. We must see the world in
flames; must stand at the dissolution of all terrestrial things, and be
attendants on the burial of nature. We must see the vast expanse of the sky
wrapped up like a scroll, and the incarnate God issuing from light
inaccessible, with ten thousand times ten thousand angels, to judge both men
and devils. We must see the curtain of time dropped, see all eternity disclosed
to view, and enter upon a state of being that will never have an end.

Ought we not, therefore, to husband well every moment of our time, and take
heed to our ways? Is there an inquiry, is there a care of greater, of equal, of
comparable importance? For, otherwise, how shall we stand with boldness, when
the stars of heaven fall from their orbs? How shall we look up with joy, and
see our salvation drawing nigh, when the hearts of millions fail for fear?

ON THE WORLD.
THIS World is like a Lottery, in which we must expect to meet with many
unlucky chances.

It is fancy, not the reason of things, that makes life so uneasy to us as we
find it. It is not the place, or the condition, but the mind alone, that can
make any body happy or miserable.

When our estate in this world is perplexed and uncertain, we should be more
than ordinarily concerned to make sure of something, that we may not be
miserable in both worlds.

A man cannot be truly happy here, without a well-grounded hope of being happy
hereafter.

A firm trust in the assistance of an Almighty Being, naturally produces
patience, cheerfulness, and all other dispositions of mind, that alleviate
those calamities which we are not able to remove.

None should despair, because God can help them; and none should presume,
because God can cross them.

Excess of sorrow is as foolish as profuse laughter. Loud mirth, or immoderate
sorrow; inequality of behavior, either in prosperity or adversity, are alike
disgraceful in a man that is born to die.

As there is no prosperous state of life, without its calamities; so there is
no adversity without its benefits. Ask the great and powerful, if they do not
feel the pangs of envy and ambition? Enquire of the poor and needy, if they
have not tasted the sweets of quiet and contentment? Even under the pains of
body, the infidelity of friends, or the misconstructions put upon our laudable
actions, our minds (when for some time accustomed to these pressures) are
sensible of secret flowings of comfort, the present reward of a pious
resignation. The evils of life appear like rocks and precipices, rugged and
barren at a distance, but at our nearer approach, we find little fruitful
spots, and refreshing springs, mixed with the harshness and deformity of nature.

It may boldly be affirmed, that good men generally reap more substantial
benefit from their afflictions, than bad men do from their prosperities; and
what they lose in wealth, pleasure, or honor, they gain with vast advantage in
wisdom, goodness, and tranquillity of mind.

Afflicton is spiritual physic for the soul. It is compared to a furnace; for
as gold is tried and purified therein, so men are proved, and either purified
from their dross, and fitted for good uses, or entirely burnt up and undone for
ever.

Happy are they who, laboring under any kind of affliction, can say with Job,
"When he has tried me, I shall come forth as gold."

Let a man live but two or three years without affliction, and he is almost
good for nothing: he cannot pray nor meditate, nor keep his heart fixed upon
spiritual things; but let God smite him in his child, health, or estate, now he
can find his tongue and affections again; now he awakes, and falls to his duty
in earnest; now God has twice as much honor from him, as he had before. "Now,
says God, this amendment pleases me; this rod was well bestowed; I have
disappointed him to his great benefit and advantage." And thus God is in
friendship with his people again.

The Unhappiness consequent on the Neglect of early improving the Mind.
THERE is not a greater inlet to misery and vices of all kinds, than the not
knowing how to pass our vacant hours. For what remains to be done, when the
first part of their lives, who are not brought up to any manual employment, is
slipped away without an acquired relish for reading, or taste for other rational
satisfactions? That they should pursue their pleasures? -- But, religion apart,
common prudence will warn them to tie up the wheel as they begin to go down the
hill of life. Shall they then apply themselves to their studies? Alas! the
(...) time is already past: The enterprizing and spirited ardor of youth being
over, without having been applied to those valuable purposes for which it was
given, all ambition of excelling upon (...) and laudable schemes, quite
stagnates. If they have not some poor expedient to deceive the time, or, to
speak more properly, to deceive themselves, the length of a day will seem
tedious to them, who, perhaps, have the unreasonableness to complain of the
shortness of life in general. When the former part of our life has been nothing
but vanity, the latter end of it can be nothing but vexation. In short, we must
be miserable, without some employment to fix, or some amusement to dissipate
our thoughts: The latter we cannot command in all places, nor relish at all
times; and therefore there is an absolute necessity for the former. We may
pursue this or that new pleasure; we may be fond for a while of a new
acquisition; but when the graces of novelty are worn off, the briskness of our
first desire is over, the transition is very quick and sudden, from an eager
fondness to a cool indifference. Hence there is a restless agitation in our
minds, still craving something new, still unsatisfied with it, when possessed;
till melancholy increases, as we advance in years, like shadows lengthening
toward the close of day.

Hence it is, that men of this stamp are continually complaining that the times
are altered for the worse: Because the sprightliness of their youth represented
every thing in the most engaging light; and when men are in high good humor
with themselves, they are apt to be so with all around: The face of nature
brightens up, and the sun shines with a more agreeable luster: But when old age
has cut them off from the enjoyment of false pleasures, and habitual vice has
given them a distaste for the only true and lasting delights; when a retrospect
of their past lives presents nothing to view but one wide tract of uncultivated
ground; a soul distempered with spleen, remorse, and an insensibility of each
rational satisfaction, darkens and discolours every object; and the change is
not in the times, but in them, who have been forsaken by those gratifications
which they would not forsake.

How much otherwise is it with those, who have laid up an inexhaustible fund of
knowledge! When a man has been laying out that time in the pursuit of some
great and important truth, which others waste in a circle of gay follies, he is
conscious of having acted up to the dignity of his nature; and from that
consciousness there results that serene complacency, which, though not so
violent, is much preferable to the pleasures of the animal life.

ADDRESS TO THE SEA.
HAIL! thou inexhaustible source of wonder and contemplation! Hail! thou
multitudinous ocean! whose waves chase one another down, like the generations
of men; and after a momentary space, are immerged for ever in oblivion! Thy
fluctuating waters wash the variated shores of the world; and while they
disjoin nations, whom a nearer connection would involve in perpetual war, they
circulate their arts and their labors, and give health and plenty to mankind.

How glorious -- how awful the scenes thou displayest! Whether we view thee
when every wind is hushed; when the morning sun, as now, silvers the level line
of the horizon, or when its evening track is marked with flaming gold, and thy
unrippled bosom reflects the radiance of the overarching heavens! Or whether we
behold thee in thy terrors! -- when the blackest tempest sweeps the swelling
billows, and the boiling surge mixes with the clouds -- when death rides the
storm, and humanity drops a fruitless tear for the toiling mariner, whose heart
is sinking with dismay!

And yet, mighty deep! it is thy surface alone we view. Who can penetrate the
secrets of thy wide domain? What eye can visit thy immense rocks and caverns,
that teem with life and vegetation? or search out the myriads of objects, whose
beauties lie scattered over thy dread abimes?

The mind staggers with the immensity of its own conceptions! -- and when she
contemplates the flux and reflux of thy tides, which from the beginning of the
world were never known to err, how does he shrink at the idea of that DIVINE
POWER, which originally laid thy foundations so sure, and whose omnipotent
voice has fixed the limits where thy proud waves shall be stayed!

But from the spot where I am now sitting, I must address thee as that
oblivious flood, into which we plunge to drown our infirmities. How many
diseases, real or imaginary, are now washing off under yonder range of canvass
machines, drawn up in rows on the water, like a flying camp!

The fine lady withdraws herself from the pleasurable tolls of high life, to
new brace those nerves which luxury has relaxed.

The glutton, who has eat away his stomach, solicits from thee a new appetite.

The antiquated virgin, who has shunned every warmer embrace, flies eager and
unattired into thine.

The young and the healthy, court thee for pleasure; the barren, to become
fruitful; the debauche asks of thee a restorative; the corpulent, a scouring;
the feeble, strength; the hypochondriac, spirits; and the numerous family of
the rheumatic, a set of muscles more pliant than those they possess.

What a world of wants! and what claims, bountiful Ocean, for thee to answer!

Whether the diseases of life multiply, or that thy medicinal virtues have been
but lately discovered, is a question which I leave to the decision of the
college. Certain it is, that thy shores are daily more crowded with suppliants.
Every little town thou washest, so swarms now with a species of inhabitants,
unknown to it in former times, that the ancient tenants of the place are
compelled to stretch out their homely dwellings, into more spacious houses, for
the admission of the migrating stranger! This circumstance proves in one sense,
a considerable gain to them; but an evil that accrues from it is, that neither
their manners, nor their morals, remain long what they were. The incursions of
the opulent and the profligate, disturb their peaceful domains; while their
examples excite desires unfelt before; and being felt, cannot always be
gratified, but at the expense of integrity.

The old inhabitant possibly takes his revenge, by imposing on the stranger as
much as he can; but alas! how greatly is he a loser on the whole! -- Could he
ever have reflection enough to strike the balance, he would find the gain which
arises from the exercise of low cunning, is but a poor exchange for that calm
plainness, which is the moderator of the heart, and that simplicity, which is
the guardian of virtue.

MONITOR.
Some from the stranded vessel force their way,
Fearful of fate, they meet it in the sea;
Some who escape the fury of the wave,
Sicken on earth, and sink into the grave:
In journeys or at home, in war or peace,
By hardships many, many fall by ease.
Each changing season does its poison bring,
Rheums chill the winter, agues blast the spring;
Wet, dry, cold, hot, at the appointed hour,
All act subservient to the tyrant's power;
And, when obedient nature knows his will,
A fly, a grape-stone, or a hair can kill.
PRIOR. THE miseries to which human nature is liable, have often been the
subject of contemplation. Viewing the gloomy side of the question, the feelings
of a benevolent heart are apt to be exceedingly agitated.

Man is born unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward; he comes forth like a
flower, and is cut down; he flourishes in health and vigor, but continues
not; his days pass like a shadow, and he is gone; he eats in darkness, has
much sorrow, and returns to his original dust, and no further remembrance of
him remains.

Death is the law of our nature, the debt which all must pay, and there is no
discharge in that war. The works of nature wax old and decay: the loftiest
monuments of human art, pyramids, cities, states and empires, have their
periods, beyond which they will not endure. All things have a tendency to
change; and man, amongst the rest of the creation, when called by Providence,
must submit to part with the life which was given him. The great and the good,
the wise and the prudent, the learned and the ignorant, the renowned and the
obscure, the prince and the peasant, are all traveling the road which leads to
the grave.

The time of our departure is utterly uncertain, and the accidents which may
deprive us of life are innumerable. An unexpected bruise, an undesigned blow, a
fall from a horse, the scratch of a pin, the pairing of a nail, or the dust of
a wall, may be made the instruments of immediate death: thus Anacreon, the
poet, was choked with a grape-stone; Fabius, the Roman Senator, was suffocated
with a single hair in a draught of milk; Pope Alexander with a fly, which slew
accidentally into his mouth; Homer died of grief; Sophocles with excess of joy;
Dyonisius with the good news of a victory he had obtained, and Aurelianus in
the midst of a dance.

Diseases and deaths, says an ingenious author, are secretly lurking every
where; they are in our bosoms, in our bowels, in every thing we taste, in every
thing we enjoy. We have death dwelling with us in our houses, walking with us
in the fields, lying down with us in our beds, and wrapped about us in our very
clothes, always ready, at the Divine command, to give the fatal blow. If Heaven
permits, Benhadad is slain in his bed, and Ammon at his table; Belshazzar in
his cups, the Egyptian firstborn in their sleep; Saul in the field; Caesar in
the Senate; Caligula in the theater; Antiochus in his coach; Zechariah in the
temple, and Pope Victor at the sacrament.

To exclude from our thoughts that which cannot be avoided, betokens a weakness
and timidity, which a wise and prudent man, who desires to act his part with
propriety, would not indulge. Meditation on death, which terminates every scene
of the short period of existence allotted to man in this transitory state,
though gloomy, is interesting, and may be highly beneficial; it induces us to
enquire, wherefore we were made, to ascertain the duties incumbent upon us, and
to a serious and attentive practice of them. No event is more solemn and
important, than that which is to close the connections of life. To prepare for
this last hour is a momentous object: to be able to meet it with a rational
composure and dignity, calmness and fortitude, should be the earnest desire,
and engross the principal attention of man.

That we may have a peaceful and happy exit, when we are called to quit this
mortal scene, it becomes us to renounce the pursuits and indulgences of vice
and error, and to walk in the paths of virtue, which alone lead to true
felicity.

"Boast not thyself of tomorrow; for thou know not what a day may bring
forth."

AN ADDRESS TO YOUTH.
FINE parts, learning, or rank in life, without Virtue, are not sufficient
qualifications in a man whom you admit to your intimacy and friendship. You
will derive more solid advantage, and profitable instruction, from one hour's
converse with a man of sobriety and virtue, than from a year's intimacy with
one of more shining talents, if joined with profligate principles, and a
licentious conduct.

The greater a bad man's accomplishments are, the more dangerous he is to
society, and the less fit for a companion. Vice, in a pleasing garb, is most
likely to prove destructive.

Reject the first intrusions of pride; "it was not made for man," and very ill
becomes him. Pride is a Proteus, which, the more easily to gain admission in
the mind, assumes innumerable forms; but there is one certain test, whereby it
may always be discovered: all its secret suggestions center in the exaltation
of self, and a comparative depreciation of others. At first a Pigmy, it
secretly solicits an entrance into the mind; when once admitted, it will
enlarge to a Monster, and usurp sole dominion there. What, alas! has vain man
to be proud of? If he be wise, wealthy, comely, and honorable, these are not
self-acquired accomplishments, but the gracious gifts of his Creator, for which
humble thanksgiving is due. To whatever seize he arrives, whatever
excellencies he may possess, they all proceed from the bounty of that Being,
who can divest him of them all in a moment, and leave him an idiot.

If you consider your own numerous imperfections, and the infinitely great
obligations we are under to the Source of every Blessing, it will produce
humility; and this is the most excellent state of the human mind. In proportion
as we are proud of our own accomplishments, self-confidence will ensue, which
is the certain path to ruin. An humble trust in, and continual dependence upon,
the greatest and best of Beings, for strength and preservation, is the only
state of safety, and will best promote our present, as well as eternal
happiness.

Humility in ourselves, will produce kindness for and from others. To be
humble, kind, benevolent and grateful, is to possess a disposition of mind ever
acceptable to that God, whose Omniscience pervades our most secret thoughts, as
well as actions; and pleasing in the sight of wise men. "The humble he will
teach of his ways, and the meek he will lead in the paths of true judgment."
Happy are the youth who are thus taught and led; the preservation of Divine
Providence will protect them here, and their end will be "joy unspeakable, and
full of glory."

Friendship is the balm of life; the "cordial drop" dispensed by Heaven to
exhilarate its languor, and alleviate its cures; yet you can have but few
friends in the extensive sense of the term. Such is the frailty and depravity
of human nature, that a few only are susceptible of, or know how to cultivate a
true and lasting friendship. It is indeed a plant of celestial extract, "of
tender violations apt to die:" an exotic on earth, it will not flourish in
every soil. The man who, in the unreserved openness of his heart, exposes his
weakness freely (and if I may be allowed the metaphor) strips himself naked
before his supposed friends, will find among them more Hams than Japhets. Many
who may be warm in the profession friendship will, either from a fond desire of
revealing secrets, or the baser motive of detraction, expose his failings with
cruel aggravations.

The base officiousness of such detractors may, perhaps, receive approbation
from the self-righteous and the profane, for they will not consider, that it is
only exercised by the betrayers of friendship, to gain reputation on the
comparison, and to hide still greater deformity in themselves: therefore, in
the choice of your friends, be cautious whom you admit under that sacred
character. A false friend will injure you more than a thousand open enemies,
and is, in reality, a very despicable character.

The Ornaments of Youth.
AMONG all the accomplishments of youth, there is none preferable to a decent
and agreeable behavior among men, a modest freedom of speech, a soft and
elegant manner of address, a graceful and lovely deportment, a cheerful gravity
and good humor, with a mind appearing ever serene under the ruffling accidents
of human life: Add to this, a pleasing solemnity and reverence, when the
discourse turns upon any thing sacred and divine; a becoming neglect of
injuries, and hatred of calumny and slander; a habit of speaking well of
others; a pleasing benevolence and readiness to do good to mankind, and special
compassion to the miserable; with an air and countenance expressive of all
these excellent qualifications.

Soliloquy on Human Life.
WHAT are Life's miseries, or what its joys? We increase the former by our
impatience; and by raising our expectations too high, disappoint ourselves in
the latter.

Experience has taught me these truths, said I; and the more I see of the
world, the more I am convinced, that man has created more wretchedness,
diseases, and dissatisfaction for himself, than the bountiful founder of the
world designed he should encounter, "What a number of distempers have luxury,
vice and pleasure brought upon the descendants of Adam? How many are daily
toiling, and suffering a thousand hardships, in order to increase their
substance? The good of their children is their excuse: the love of wealth alone
actuates others to put in practice a thousand arts of deceit and chicanery, in
order to obtain the prize in view. But why should we suppose that riches will
give happiness to our children, when it has so often been seen to have a
contrary effect on ourselves? Or of what value is gold to him, who has more
than enough to supply his wants, yet lets it remain untouched in his coffers?
We envy those we think happier than ourselves, and by so doing, increase our
discontents. But why should I dwell longer on the weakness, madness, and folly
of others, when I myself am a compound of the same materials! What is all my
boasted philosophy, when I am led by others to follow their example, and trifle
away moments which are too precious to be so foolishly squandered?

HOW TO ENJOY LIFE.
ONE seldom goes into mixed company, without hearing, if the conversation grows
serious, frequent complaints against life, viz. That it is nothing but one dull
round of the same enjoyments, over and over again; that those pleasures that
appeared so tempting unpossest -- possessed, are trifling, and not worth living
for; that we rise up to eat and drink, and pay a few ridiculous visits, and
then lie down again to sleep; that even this happy state is often interrupted
by sickness, or one disappointment or other; and that at last old age comes on,
robs us of our health and senses, and renders us the object of the contempt of
the younger, till death closes the scene.

If we consider life in the contracted view of these murmurers, and make it
consist only in so ridiculous a rotation, life would indeed become a burden;
but if we employ the nobler powers we have, in considering what life is, and
act in consequence of such knowledge, we shall find a scene of so exalted and
dignified a nature, that we shall be apt to think the spectacle Providence has
introduced us to, by vesting us with human faculties, so noble, that we should
stand indebted only for one day's acquaintance with it.

Life, properly understood, offers to the human creature an unlimited scene of
pleasure: but if he will confine his own sphere of action in a narrower compass
than his powers extend, whom can he blame? If, instead of employing his reason
in considering the various parts of the universe, and acquiring a knowledge
productive of the noblest happiness, he will make no manner of use of those
faculties he is master of, but bury his senses in the grosser part of himself,
it is no wonder if he finds the enjoyments of life trivial, few, and not worth
living for. A man who makes no other use of life than what his animal frame
points to, must of course find a void in happiness; since the senses gratified,
the little reason he has is just enough to make him feel a want, and that want
to make him repine. The senses, as part of the human constitution, have indeed
a natural right to be indulged, but still subordinately.

If these complaints were only in the mouths of the sensual or ignorant, or the
poorer part of mankind, I should not be so much surprised; but when I hear
persons of tolerable good sense talk in this manner, it raises a sort of
indignation in me at their ingratitude. For my part, when I consider mankind in
their different pursuits of pleasure, all actuated by the same principle,
instead of arraigning, I cannot but admire the wonderful sagacity of
Providence, who has bestowed such a variety of entertainments to please the
contrary tastes of each particular person.

This consideration brings on another, a no less proof of the wisdom of
Providence, viz. the desire implanted in our minds of enjoying one thing above
another; since the want of such a desire would either make the mind sicken
through inaction, and grow a burden to itself, or else surfeit in the contrary.

The Christian's Soliloquy on Nature's Charms.
THE charms of rural nature, especially in the months of spring and summer,
afford pleasure (...) the eye, fruit to the taste, music to the ear, and
instruction to the mind; the birds on every bough, the flowers on every side,
and variegated scenes presented to the view around, all conspire to excite
pleasure, admiration, and devout acknowledgments in the thinking and serious
spectator, while sun, moon, stars, and all the orbs above appear "To sing the
God of Seasons as they roll."


But what are Nature's charms, when put in competition with the beauty and
loveliness of the GOD of GRACE? whose smile alone makes Heaven, with all the
glorious inhabitants thereof, rejoice, with joy unspeakable and full of glory.
The world, with all it can afford to felicitate and ennoble the possessors of
its riches, honors, joys and pleasures, is but a mere blank, when compared to
HIS all-gracious presence, and the joys at his right hand, where there are
pleasures for ever more. Oh, then, my soul! let it be thy constant wish to know
more, love more, serve more and better, HIM, whose handy works all nature
shows, while grace and glory speak his matchless praise, and teach both heaven
and earth to spread abroad his fame.

Earth flies with all the charms it has in store;
Its snares and gay temptations are no more;
Creatures no longer their allurements boast;
Creation's self, with all her beauty's lost;
The sun, moon, stars, and yonder fields of light,
Withdraw and vanish from my gazing sight:
While God is all in all.
ON REPROOF.
NOTHING is more common than to give reproof to others; nothing more
displeasing to many than to receive it themselves. Instructions flatter the
self-love of him who gives them, and denote his superiority over him who is
instructed: he is pleased at thinking himself wise enough to direct the conduct
of another, and yet has not the power to follow his own good counsels. To
receive advice gives us displeasure, as it shows us our folly or our vices are
known to the world: and however weak or vicious men may be, few but have such
an opinion of their wisdom, or are not so far past shame, but it gives them
some uneasiness to be found out.

The censuring of faults in our friends has been attributed, and not unjustly,
more to pride than love or charity, as we endeavor not so much to correct, as
to make them believe we are without them ourselves. Such a reproof is only a
cover to our own hypocrisy.

Reproof, as Wycherly somewhere observes, is often to the weak mind what physic
is to the weak body -- which either, not timed seasonably, or given in too
great a quantity, makes the remedy worse than the disease. Nothing requires
more care, experience and knowledge, than the office of a reprover. He who
would correct his friend must do it with caution, and make a nice choice of a
convenient time and place: he should be free also from prejudice, passion and
invective, and consult the temper of him to whom he speaks, that he may talk to
him in that manner which is most suitable to it. -- To do all this is not so
easy a task.

Though there are many absurdities in giving reproof, there are some also in
receiving it. To reprove a self-opinionist, though with ever so much caution
and friendship, as it calls his own conduct in question, will be only
affronting him; he cannot bear to think he has acted foolishly, or at least
that any one has perceived it. Many receive the reproof of their friends
according to the dignity of the reprover; they have a pride in being instructed
by some one above them, but cannot bear advice from an equal.

No one is either too wise or too good to be reproved: therefore when reproof
is just and gentle, it should be esteemed as the kindest office of a friend. To
give reproof is the most difficult. He who sets up for a reformer of others,
ought always to watch over himself; for should he happen to fall into the
frailty he condemns, he affords a public scene of laughter and ridicule.

The Charms of Virtue.
THE enjoyment of Virtue is wholly internal, and the chief pleasure of her real
votaries, that of doing good.

God, in his divine mercy, says Sadi the Philosopher, introduced a certain
vicious man into a society of religious, whose manners were pure and holy.
Struck with their virtues, he quickly began to imitate them, and shake off all
his former habits; in a word, to be a model of justice, sobriety, patience,
industry and benevolence. His good works were undeniable, but people imputed
them to unworthy motives. They were always for judging of him by what he had
been, not by what he was. -- Overwhelmed with sorrow, he poured forth his tears
into the bosom of an ancient Solitary, who was more just, as well as more
humane, than the rest.

"O my son," said the old man to him, "return thanks to the Almighty, that thou
art superior to thy reputation. Happy is he who can say, My enemies and rivals
stigmatize me for vices of which I am not guilty. If thou art good, what
matters it to thee, that men persecute and even punish them as being one of the
wicked? Have thou not, for thy comfort, two unerring testimonies of thy
actions, God and thy Conscience?"

Advice of an Heathen Philosopher.
LET not sleep, says Pythagoras, fall upon thy eyes, till thou have thrice
reviewed the transactions of the present day. Where have I turned aside from
rectitude? What have I been doing? What have I left undone, which ought to have
been done? Begin thus from the first act, and proceed; and in the conclusion,
at the ill which thou have done be troubled, and rejoice for the good.

Rules out of Ptolemy's Golden Table.
I NEVER exalted the proud rich man, nor hated the poor just man. I never
denied justice to the poor for poverty, nor pardoned the wealthy for his
riches. I never gave reward for affectation, nor punishment upon passion. I
never suffered evil to escape unpunished, nor goodness unrewarded. I never
denied justice to him that asked it, nor mercy to him that deserved it. I never
punished in anger, nor promised in mirth. I never did evil upon malice, nor
good for covetousness. I always sought to be loved by the good, and feared by
the wicked. I always favored the poor, that were able to do little, and God,
who was able to do much, favored me.

EXTRACTS.
AS we can neither recall one moment of our life, nor suppress the most minute
action of it; to lament what is past, to repine at our ill fortune or
indiscretion, is wasting reflection, and grieving to no purpose.

IN all changes, we should have regard to these three things: God's
approbation, our own benefit, and the not harming our neighbor.

ONE day spent according to the precepts of Virtue, is infinitely to be
preferred to an eternity of Vice.

HOW few are there like Tully, who wished, that every man's thoughts were
written in his forehead.


