SOME THOUGHTS ON THE GLOOMY CLOUD THAT HANGS OVER NEW ENGLAND, BY THE Numerous
Errors in Doctrine, AS WELL AS Schools of instruction, Such as Universalists,
Hopkintonians, Armenians, and Shakers.

BOSTON: PRINTED for the AUTHOR, (...)

SOME THOUGHTS ON THE GLOOMY CLOUD THAT HANGS OVER NEW ENGLAND.
SOME say, because Christ died for ALL, that ALL will be saved; because the
scripture says that the LORD will have ALL men to be saved and come to the
knowledge of the truth And as GOD is a Being of power, to perform his will, so
consequently none can be lost.

HOPKINTO'S. Say, CHRIST died for the Elect only, and they only can be saved:
That although God calls upon all men to turn, repent, and be saved, that he does
not intend they shall, for he has before decreed, their sin and damnation, and
that God intended sin should come into the world and make a part of the
creation eternally miserable: and to prove it, they say, God had power to save
all, of he pleased; and that he delights as much in the damnation of those that
are damned, as in the salvation of those that are saved.

The Armenians says, children are born free from sin, and if they do as well as
they can, God will have mercy upon them, and save them.

Shakers say, that men will be damned, if they lodge with their own wives, and
that they must believe God through the mother, and the elders, or they cannot
be saved, and that they must obtain victory over sin and lust, by dancing and
shaking.

Many school masters say, the bible is not a suitable book to bring into our
common schools, but after children have learnt to read, they say it is more
suitable for them to read in some history, idle tales, or novels.

Answer to Universalists.
WE read of the last judgment, "That the dead small and great, stand before
God, and that the Sea gave up the dead that were in it, and death and hell
delivered up the dead that were in them; and they were judged according to
their works: and death and hell were cast into the lake of fire, which is the
second death; and they that were not written in the book of life, were cast
into the lake of fire, which is the second death", and we read of no
restoration after that in the holy scriptures.

Answer to Hopkintonians.
IF God has chosen the sin and destruction of those that are damned, then the
scriptures must be read that God has long chosen the sin and destruction of
the old world, instead of its being read, That the long sufferings of God,
waited in the days of Noah.

Answer to Armenians.
"BEHOLD I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me." And
the scripture says, "Not unto us, not unto us; but to thy name be the glory".

Answer to Shakers.
"THE angel of the Lord, said unto Joseph, fear not to take unto thee, Mary thy
wife, for that which is conceived of her, is of the Holy Ghost". And afterward
we read of Christ's mother and his brethren.

Answer to Schoolmasters, Who would neglect the bible in Schools, with such
excuses as these, That it belongs to ministers to teach them religion, and that
it is not suitable to teach the bible in schools, because the schools will make
a mock of it.
IS this thy care, O vain schoolmaster? to neglect the bible in thy school,
and teach mockery and novelty; will thou render thy schools so much like a
company of swine, that pearls should not be cast before them? will thou teach
them so much abomination, that they will abominate those who insist on their
attention to the scriptures, and require them to neglect their mockery, now in
their youth.

When ministers and schoolmasters set in the scorners seat, how hard it is for
religious parents to restrain their children, and to bring them up in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord.

When America has so manfully fought for liberty, shall they now breed and
nurse up a serpent in it, to enslave them; and must the church be driven to the
wilderness, to be nurished from the face of the serpent. Must evil customs
bring on evil laws. Shall we believe selfish men, that are nursing up young
lions to devour. Shall we hear their voice on the mountains of America?

Blessed is the man that trusts in God, knows his holy word, and turns his eyes
from vanity, whose soul alone on God relies.

Let us learn to despise the vain flatteries of men, and trust in God. Can men
pray to the God of truth, for his blessing on their novelties, or on their
exhibitions and plays, do such ministers pray to God to lead them in the way of
holiness, when they are going to the place of wickedness, are they turning off
their eyes from beholding vanity, and meditating on the law of God. Can a
fountain at the same place send fourth salt water and fresh?

"Can a man serve God and his own lusts" Woe to them that call evil good, and
good evil.

Be not of them that do evil, that good may come, whose damnation is just. Must
we not give an account for every idle word, at the day of judgment? Some are
saying, this new mode of learning is to make them great men.

The scriptures says, "the merchants are the great men of the earth, for by
their sorceries were all nations deceived".

Some say, that children will learn faster, to teach them vanity, than to teach
them that which is good. Shall schoolmasters, because children choose the way
that leads to destruction help them along? are such teachers friends or enemies
to the children?

"The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and to depart from evil is
good understanding".

FINIS.

