Mr. Ripley's SERMON, AT THE DEDICATION OF HIS Meeting House.

A SERMON PREACHED ON THE COMPLETION OF A GENERAL REPAIR OF THE MEETING HOUSE
IN CONCORD, January 24 th, 1792.

By EZRA RIPLEY, A. M. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN THAT TOWN.

BOSTON: Printed by B. EDES and SON, in Kilby-Street, M,DCC,XCII.

The Church God's peculiar care. A DEDICATION SERMON.
ISAIAH LX.21, 22. THY PEOPLE ALSO SHALL BE ALL RIGHTEOUS* THEY SHALL INHERIT
THE LAND FOR EVER, THE BRANCH OF MY PLANTING, THE WORK OF MY HANDS, THAT I MAY
BE GLORIFIED.

A LITTLE ONE SHALL BECOME A THOUSAND, AND A SMALL ONE A STRONG NATION: I THE
LORD WILL HASTEN IT IN HIS TIME.


WHEN the first parents of mankind had violated the covenant of their God, all
their pleasing prospects were destroyed. Futurity, to them, was wrapped in
impenetrable darkness. Conscious guilt and terrifying expectations filled their
minds, while they waited, nor waited long, the awful decision of their offended
Sovereign.

IT is not rational to suppose, that they could even conjecture any scheme,
which promised the least hope of escape from the threatened punishment to
disobedience. Confused with guilt, shame and terror, they attempted, but in
vain, to hide from the presence of the Lord. Genesis iii.8.


HITHERTO divine goodness reigned toward man. Divine mercy, now needed, began
to dawn, and thenceforth shown brighter and brighter to the perfect day of
revealed truth. Then came gospel grace to the condemned, through a Redeemer.
Then was first made known the promisory declaration of the eternal God, that
the seed of the woman should bruise the serpent's head. Ver. 15.


IF upon the lapse of man, the Almighty had have forthwith deprived the
transgressors of the light of life, and there have ended for ever the human
race, it would have been perfectly just. But mercy suspended justice; in the
display of which, God said to man, Live, I have found a ransom. Job xxxiii.24.
comp. 1 Timothy ii.9,
While the angel of justice guarded the tree of life, by which man's life was
to have been perpetuated, the angel of mercy, if I may so speak, pointed to
another and better tree of life, even Jesus Christ, who, for man, has brought
life and immortality to light. 2 Timothy i.10.


IN this glorious scheme of redemption, all the perfections of Deity harmonize.
It continues the human race, which without it must have been extinct, puts man
into a salvable state, under a new covenant of grace; according to which, sin
is deservedly punished, and God can be just, and the justifier of the sinner
which believes in Jesus. Romans iii.26.


THIS admirable plan of grace and salvation to man, was gradually opened from
the first promise to the fullness of time. Then Jesus Christ, the Sun of
Righteousness, the light and life of the world, arose with divine splendour, and
mightily dispelled the clouds of ignorance, error and uncertainty which
darkened the moral world. In this plan, as revealed in the scriptures, is
contained the will of God to man. According to this, we are to learn what God
is, and what we should be. To know and conform to the will of God thus made
known, is the first duty and highest happiness of man. It is his proper study,
and should be his supreme concern.

LET it be our endeavor, my hearers, to search the will of God to men, not
only in those things which have been, and now are, but those also which shall
be made plain by accomplishment. Not indeed with vain curiosity, nor the
presumptuous thought of searching out the Almighty to perfection, Job xi.7.
but, that we may see more reason, and be more excited to believe and obey, to
adore and praise with increased fervency and firmness.

WITH such views, let us attend to the will of God expressed in our text. It is
a prophetic discourse of Isaiah respecting the purity, enlargement and glory of
the church of God. In the whole chapter, the prophet evidently looks forward to
gospel times, and seems in one passage, to extend his views to the permanent
blessedness of the church triumphant. He begins the chapter with great
animation. Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is
risen upon thee. For behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross
darkness the people; but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be
seen upon thee. And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the
brightness of thy rising. Many more blessings of a similar nature are promised,
and the chapter is closed with the words of the text. THY PEOPLE ALSO SHALL BE
ALL RIGHTEOUS, etc.

THE prophet addresses himself to the Church, or Zion. THY PEOPLE SHALL BE ALL
RIGHTEOUS, therefore, may intend, that all the professing people of God shall
be internally and personally righteous; that every one that names the name of
Christ shall depart from iniquity. 2 Timothy iii.19.


THE expression may extend in its meaning, to the conversion of the Gentiles
from dumb idols to the living God, and the spread of christianity through the
world* The former is the most probable. In either construction, the increase
and prosperity of the church are intended. This is to our present purpose.

THE people thus righteous SHALL INHERIT THE LAND FOR EVER. This may teach us,
that the church and all good people are the peculiar choice and care of God,
and shall be preserved. For them more especially, the earth is upheld, and made
fruitful. For them, civil governments are instituted and changed, the nations
controled, and the world continued. They shall possess, and eat the good of the
land. Isa. i.19.
All things are theirs. 1 Cor. iii.21.


THE BRANCH OF MY PLANTING, THE WORK OF MY HANDS, are expressions which
evidently, in this place, intend, and apply to the church. Elsewhere, THE
BRANCH signifies the same. Isa. iv.2.
In other passages of scripture it has a different meaning. Jesus Christ is
frequently intended. Isa. xi.1. Jer. xxxiii.15. Zac. iii.8.
So by THE WORK OF GOD'S HANDS, we are sometimes to understand his works of
creation and providence. But the church, including religion, is emphatically
THE WORK of God. Hence the prophet prays, Lord, revive thy work. Hab. iii.2.


THE Lord will prosper the church, THAT HE MAY BE GLORIFIED. In and by the
church, God is actively GLORIFIED. But his care and love manifested toward her,
and by all his works of mercy, of justice, and of judgment among the nations,
he is, and he will be objectively GLORIFIED. The divine conduct toward the
church, from first to last, is, and will be vastly more for the glory of God,
than all his other works and ways respecting the children of men.

A LITTLE ONE SHALL BECOME A THOUSAND, AND A SMALL ONE A STRONG NATION, point
us to the vast increase of the church, as to number and influence from small
beginnings. The words may also have respect to the growth of states and
empires, under the smiles of Heaven.

I THE LORD WILL HASTEN IT IN HIS TIME. The Almighty will accomplish the
prophecies and promises of his holy word in favor of Zion, and WILL HASTEN IT
in the fittest time; or in Christ's time, when the triumphs of his cross shall
be spread, and all shall bow the knee to Jesus, and confess that He is Lord to
the glory of God the Father. Isa. xlv.23. Phil. ii.10, 11.


FROM our text in its connection, the following comprehensive doctrine naturally
arises, viz.

ALTHOUGH the church has been small in her beginning, yet the Lord has
increased her, and will do so more abundantly, even to greatness and glory; and
in order to this, he has, and will cause earthly powers and governments to
subserve her interests.

TO confirm and illustrate this doctrine, and prepare the way for some
occasional improvement and practical remarks, I shall take a brief view of the
small beginning and progress of the church and people of God; of what the Lord
has done, is doing, has promised, and, therefore, will perform IN HIS TIME,
in behalf of his peculiar people.

LITTLE needs be said to prove, that the church has been very small in her
beginning, and the cause of religion in the world apparently weak and
neglected. From Adam to the flood, through the space of about six hundred
years, we find on sacred record, as leading characters, only Abel, Seth, Enoch
and Noah. It is probable, however, that the posterity of Seth, who are supposed
to be called the sons of God, Genesis vi^2.
did maintain, for some time, the worship of the true God; until they formed
contracts of marriage with the daughters of men, who are also supposed to be
the descendants of Cain. Stackhouse's Compl. Body of Div. p. 312
Be this as it may. There was a general corruption of manners immediately
preceding the flood. All flesh had corrupted his way. Genesis vi.11.
The earth was deluged with wickedness before it was with water. Eight persons
only were saved from the deluge.

IF we trace the visible church for hundreds of years farther, even to the
twelve Patriarchs, still we find her very small. In Christ's time, though many
were called, yet few were chosen. Matt. xx.16.
Centuries after Christ, error and wickedness prevailed, and gross darkness
covered the people.

SHOULD we pass by all periods and places but those of our forefathers, the
smallness of the church, and of the people is obvious. A small number from
Holland, whither they had fled from civil and ecclesiastical oppression and
persecution in England, landed at Plymouth, December 22d, 1620. That number was
soon greatly diminished by mortal sickness. They were A LITTLE, A SMALL ONE.
But A LITTLE ONE HAS BECOME A THOUSAND, AND A SMALL ONE A STRONG NATION, both
as to the church and the state. THE BRANCH OF GOD's PLANTING has increased,
not only in this, but in other countries; not only in our days, but in other
periods of the world. Compare the church in Noah's and Abraham's time, with her
state and number when Israel was delivered from Egyptian bondage, and when the
chosen nation flourished in Canaan, and the increase appears great.

IN the reign of king Solomon, things went well in Judah, and in all Israel.
The civil polity of the state, and the religious interests of the church were
happy and flourishing. Then was built and consecrated for the special presence
and public worship of God, the magnificent and vastly expensive temple. Then
the church prospered, and Mount Zion, beautiful for situation, was the joy of
the whole earth, and the temple the admiration of the world. Psalm xlviii.2.


AT the time of Christ's advent, religion was in a declined state. By the
preaching of John the Baptist, it was revived. Multitudes believed his
doctrine, and received his baptism: and all men accounted him a prophet. Mat.
xiv.5. Mark xi.3^.
Wh^^ Jesus Christ publicly preached his gospel, tho^^^ ^e met with violent
opposition and cruel persecution, yet many people felt the power of divine
truth, and followed him: insomuch that the chief priests and pharisees said* If
we let him thus alone, all men will believe on him. John xi.43.


IN the days of the apostles, though persecution and death stared christians in
the face, yet the church under the effusions of the Holy Spirit, increased by
thousands in a day. Acts ii.41.
Although in succeeding centuries, there was a great declension from pure
christianity; heresies were broached; sectaries multiplied; false teachers
arose; corrupt and designing men insinuated their specious, but poisonous
doctrines among the credulous and ignorant people, and superstition, bigotry
and error shed their baneful influence far and wide; yet the light of the
gospel was not wholly extinguished. From the days of Martin Luther, in the
beginning of the sixteenth century, and John Calvin and others soon after,
religion has revived. The church, on the whole, has prospered,
notwithstanding all her severe trials, and even bloody persecutions. Kings have
been nursing fathers, and queens nursing mothers to her. Isaiah xlix.23.


I MUST omit to mention the various success and trouble of the Church in
Europe, during several centuries, and only touch upon the progress of religion,
and spread of the gospel in our land.

THE great number of regular churches and the many thousands of people, in the
New England states especially, have arisen chiefly from one flock which first
settled at Plymouth. It was little, poor, defenseless. Only one hundred and
seventy-one years since, our ancestors inspired with the love of liberty and
religion, relinquished their pleasant, native soil and cities, and preferred a
strange land, a howling wilderness. Their zeal for God braved all dangers.
Though pressed with innumerable difficulties and hardships, they fainted not.
The Lord was their helper. Heb. xiii.6.
They passed the dangerous atlantic as with a staff, like Jacob over Jordan;
and now, behold they are become two bands; Genesis xxxii.10.
yea, a numerous, A STRONG NATION! In a manner which has fully manifested the
hand of God, has he driven out the heathen before us. He has gotten glory to
himself by prospering this BRANCH OF HIS OWN PLANTING.

AT a view of these great things which God has done for us, are we not
constrained, in a mixture of adoration, wonder and joy, to adopt the words of
the Psalmist, Come and see the works of God! lxvi.5.
Let us also join him farther, and say, O bless our God, ye people, and make
the voice of his praise to be heard. ver. 8, 9.


AT different times, and in many places, the Lord has sent down his spirit in
the rain of righteousness, by which many have been turned from the error of
their ways to the wisdom of the just. Witnesses for God and the church have
been raised up, so that her cords have been lengthened and her stakes
strengthened. Isai. live.2.


IN this town, we believe, the Lord has revived his own work of grace, at
times, and made additions to his true church. Notwithstanding the charges of
enthusiasm and disorder alleged by some, which we pretend not were wholly
groundless, we have good reason to believe, that the periods refered to, The
years 1741, 1742 and 1763. In the first of these years, fifty; in the second,
sixty-five; and in the third, fifty persons were added to the church in full
communion. From ten to twenty in other years.
were days of God's power upon men's hearts, and that many were made willing to
receive and obey the Lord Jesus Christ for ever. Some still live witnesses and
monuments of the mighty grace of God in those days, whose firmness in faith and
holiness of life prove their renovation from a carnal to a spiritual mind.

THUS the church universal and particular has been increased from small
beginnings. She will continue to grow, until HER PEOPLE SHALL BE ALL RIGHTEOUS,
AND SHALL INHERIT THE LAND FOR EVER.

WE will now take a general view of what the Lord has done for his church and
the cause of religion; by which it will appear, that earthly powers and
governments have, and must submit to the church, and promote her interest.

THIS is not argued upon the hypothesis, that civil government, in its nature
and tendency, is inimical to the church, and therefore, must be subjected as an
enemy; but upon this truth, that the Lord loves the gates of Zion more than
all the dwellings of Jacob: Psa. lxxxvii.2.
-- that in God's view, the church is far more important and excellent, than
the state. Therefore, while good governments and rulers tend and aim to support
and advance her interests, all unrighteous principalities and powers shall be
overruled, and made subservient to the same cause, even the cause of truth and
righteousness, goodness and grace, peace and happiness.

IN the direction now given to our thoughts, an extensive field is opened. It
affords ample scope for the pen of the learned and the good, and is highly
worthy their attention. In this field, therefore, I can take but here and there
a step, through deficiency both of time and ability.

WHATEVER may be the dispositions of the great men of the earth; whatever the
tendency of any particular forms of government; whatever devices there may be
in the hearts of men; yet the Lord has the hearts of all in his hands, and his
counsel shall stand, Prove. xix.21.
to the confusion and ruin of his enemies, and the advancement of religion and
his little flock. God stands in the congregation of the mighty: he judges
among the gods. Psa. lxxxii.1.
There is no event too high for his control, nor too small for his notice.

AS soon as the spirit of wickedness burst forth in the murder of pious Abel,
the righteous Lord who loves righteousness interposed. He espoused the cause
of his favorite, fixed a mark of infamy and divine displeasure upon the
murderer, and banished him to a foreign country. When the wickedness of man was
great, and every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil
continually, Genesis vi.5.
in what an astonishing manner, as to mercy and wrath, did the Almighty
manifest himself! The Ark, a stupendous work, was prepared for the salvation of
the church, and the reception of the creatures which were to preserve their
species in the earth, while the whole world of man and beast, and every living
thing beside, were destroyed by a flood of waters!

THE antediluvians were, no doubt, immensely numerous. By the computation of
some, Whiston's and Burnet's Theory.
the number, in the times near the flood, would easily amount to above 500,000
millions; that is, to a thousand times as many, as our present earth has, in
all probability, now upon it; and indeed, to ten times as many, as the earth,
in its present constitution, can be supposed capable of maintaining. Stakh.
comp. body div.
And yet, God destroyed those millions in his wrath, and saved alive eight
persons only who were found righteous!

THE divine procedure toward Abraham, Lot, and the inhabitants of Sodom and
Gomorrah, is another wonderful instance of God's care for his people, and
vengeance to his and their enemies. The disposition of the Lord to show mercy
to men in every consistent way, and his tender respect to the righteous, are
fully evinced in his familiar discourse with Abraham, concerning the then
hastening destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah; in the close of which, he affirms,
that if there could be found ten righteous persons in those cities, he would
not destroy them. Genesis xviii.32.


ST. Peter speaking of the vindictive justice of God to the wicked, and his
mercy to the righteous, says, He spared not the old world, but saved Noah the
eighth person, a preacher of righteousness, bringing in a flood upon the world
of the ungodly; and delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy conversation of
the wicked. 2 Pet. ii.5 -- 9.
This proves what he farther says, The Lord knows how to deliver the godly
out of temptation, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be
punished.

ABUNDANTLY did the Lord show favor to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; more
especially to the former. He conversed with him as a friend, face to face. He
condescended to make a covenant with him, and greatly to bless him. In the
singular affair of his offering in sacrifice his only son Isaac, by divine
command, scarce any thing human appears. It seems all of God! all divine!

TO provide for his chosen, and save much people alive, the Lord overruled the
wicked intentions of the brethren of Joseph, in selling him into Egypt. They
meant it unto evil, and to frustrate his dreams; but God meant it unto good,
Genesis l.20.
and to accomplish them more conspicuously.

GRIEVOUS famine compelled the Patriarchs to visit Egypt. But God being with
them, they found it the way to distinguished blessings. Their increase in
number and wealth excited the jealousy, and nourished the avarice of the
monarch of Egypt. Perhaps, earthly powers were never more assiduously and
cruelly exerted to cramp the growth of a people, and yet gain advantage from
them, than were those of Pharaoh and his court. And never were attempts more
completely frustrated. The more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied
and grew. Ex. i.12.
In process of time, the despised Hebrews successfully resisted the power, and
spoiled the glory of Egypt. The God of heaven was with his people. His
understanding is infinite. He takes the wise in their own craftiness; and the
counsel of the froward is carried headlong. But he saves the poor from the
hand of the mighty. Job. v.13, 15.


THE cruel edict by which all the male children were consigned to a watery
grave, in the river Nile, when the tyrant's charge to the midwives proved
ineffectual, gave rise to the affecting expedient by which Moses was saved from
untimely death, and tenderly nursed by the daughter of the inhuman Pharaoh.
Exodus i.
In this way, Moses was better qualified for the arduous work to which he was
afterward called; and in due time he delivered his people from bondage.

THE Lord turns the evil machinations of oppressors to their own ruin, and
causes them to promote the interest and happiness of those they would destroy.
He exalts the horn of his people, even of the children of Israel, a people
near unto him. Psa. cxlviii.14.


CAN any thing be more conspicuous, than the hand of God through all the
sufferings and deliverances of his chosen people in Egypt, and all their
tedious journey from thence to the promised land? Can we read or hear of the
miraculous pillar of cloud by day, and fire by night, Ex. xiii.21* 22.
to direct the untried way of Israel; of the mighty power of God in dividing
the red sea, that his people might pass through on dry ground, and his awful
wrath in returning the waters to the utter destruction of the Egyptians, and
not be disposed religiously to admire, and profoundly to adore?

AT a serious view of these things, can we doubt whether the Lord makes a
difference between the righteous and the wicked? whether he will defend his
church, and destroy her enemies? has not enough been offered to convince us,
that earthly powers and governments have been made subservient and submissive
to the church; and that those which would not, have been miserably broken and
destroyed? A cloud of witnesses still remains.

WHEN we look farther, and behold the numerous and powerful nations of Canaan
flying before the armies of Israel; the walls of cities fallen to the ground
without the touch of a weapon; Jos. vi.20.
thousands of the enemy sunk in death by their own swords; Jud. vii.22.
in one instance, a hundred fourscore and five thousand slain by the angel of
the Lord in one night; 2 Kings xix.35.
the three faithful worshippers of the true God thrown into a burning fiery
furnace, and coming forth of the midst of the fire unhurt, while the deadly
flame licked up the spirits of the officers who cast them in; Dan. iii.
the prophet Daniel delivered from hungry lions; vi.22.
and many other instances of the interposition of Heaven equally miraculous;
when, I say, we seriously view these things, we must adopt the words of Balaam,
who was constrained contrary to his strong inclination, to promote the
interest, and bless the people of God. Surely there is no enchantment against
Jacob, neither is there any divination against Israel: according to this time
it shall be said of Jacob and Israel, what has God wrought. Number. xxiii.23.


I WILL pass by many, and take notice only of a few more important events which
strikingly evince the tender care of the Lord for his church, his wrath to her
enemies, his abhorrence of sin, and his all-controling influence upon the great
men and governments of the earth.

TO punish for abounding iniquity, a holy God, who will not justify the wicked,
visited his chosen nation with desolating judgments. He permitted
Nebuchadnezzar, the haughty Chaldean monarch, to lay waste the holy city and
temple, and to lead captive the people. But though in wrath he smote, yet in
favor he had mercy. Nebuchadnezzar, having made havoc in Jerusalem, falls
himself into the hands of the living God. According to the word of the Lord by
Daniel, he was driven from his throne and from men, had his dwelling with the
beasts of the field, was wet with the dew of heaven, 'till his hair was grown
like eagles' feathers, and his nails like birds' claws; Dan. iv.32 -- to the
end.
'till he acknowledged and submitted to the God of heaven.

BELSHAZZAR, his son, and his successor in the kingdom, while impiously
feasting, and profaning the vessels of the house of God, saw to his amazement,
a portentous handwriting on the wall. This, Daniel only could interpret. It
was fraught, not with seeming, but real evils to the king; and certainly
pointed out his impiety, his death, the division and end of his kingdom. Dan. v.
Thus the success of the church's enemies hastened their own ruin, and
proclaimed the honor of the most high God.

THE restoration of the Jews from the Babylonish captivity to their own land,
and former privileges, is still farther evidential of the divine care for his
people. This great event the Lord effected, by stirring up the spirit of Cyrus,
king of Persia; who made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and put it
in writing. Thus says Cyrus, the Lord God of heaven has given me all the
kingdoms of the earth, and he has charged me to build him a house in
Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Who is there among you of all his people? his God
be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem, and build the house of the Lord
God of Israel (he is the God) which is in Jerusalem. Ez. i.1, 2, 3.


THAT this was all the work of God, must be obvious to every mind, when we turn
to the prediction of Isaiah, near two hundred years before the events took
place. Speaking of God, -- That says of Cyrus, he is my Shepherd, and shall
perform my pleasure, even saying to Jerusalem, thou shall be built; and to the
Temple, thy foundation shall be laid. Isa. xliv.23.
Thus says the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden,
to subdue nations before him, etc. For Jacob my servant's sake, and Israel mine
elect, I have even called thee by name: I have surnamed thee, though thou have
not known me. xlv.1, 2, 3.
Nothing can can more fully prove, that human powers and governments, at God's
command, shall promote the interest of the church. Nothing, scarcely, more than
the events above recited, can verify the words of the prophet in our context,
which extend to present and future, as well as now past nations and periods.
Speaking of Zion, or the church, he says, And the sons of strangers shall
build up thy walls, and their kings shall minister unto thee: for in my wrath I
smote thee, but in favor have I had mercy on thee.. -- For the nation and the
kingdom that will not serve thee, shall perish: yea, those nations shall be
utterly wasted. The sons also of them that afflicted thee, shall come bending
unto thee; and all they that despised thee shall bow themselves down at the
soles of thy feet; and they shall call thee, the City of the Lord, the Zion of
the holy One of Israel. Let us here devoutly say and pray with the Psalmist, Oh
that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to
the children of men. Psa. cvii.^.


PASSING over in silence many interesting scenes, and mavelous displays of
divine perfections, from the rebuilding of the temple, through the times of
Christ and his Apostles, the final destruction of Jerusalem and dispersion of
the Jewish nation, and centuries after, I request your attention, for a few
minutes, to the times, and the operation of God's hand, within the compass of
our observation.

IS it not manifest, that the ways of God to men in our days, are astonishing,
and coincide with his doings in ancient times? Does he not, in many ways,
discover the same favor for the righteous, care for the church, and displeasure
toward the wicked oppressors of mankind? Has he not, with a mighty hand and a
stretched out arm, judged among the nations,, humbled the pride of tyrants,
wrested from them the instruments of cruelty, and vindicated the rights of the
oppressed? In several instances, a nation has been born at once, by political
regeneration. America, France, Poland.
Millions of people in different countries, have been emancipated from the
griping hand of despotic government, and by happy constitutions formed with
wisdom and deliberation, put in possession of glorious liberty. May not all
see, who religiously discern the times, that the Lord, by his providence and
grace, is carrying on, as from the morning of time, an inscrutable, but yet
perfectly consistent plan for the instruction, reformation and salvation of
mankind?

THE late, mighty revolutions in this and other countries, are fraught with
important consequences to mankind, and mark distinguished eras in the annals of
nations. Beyond controversy, they are the work of God. It is true, they have
been attended with temporal evils. Many individuals have suffered extremely:
but still, those very changes so injurious to a few, are favorable to the
morals and the happiness of men in general. Republican governments, in their
nature, are ever more friendly to virtue and rational enjoyments, than
monarchical. A people suddenly liberated from a state of absolute subjection to
the will of a sovereign of nobility, are likely to run to the opposite extreme
of licentiousness; yet, when the administration of free government takes place
with wisdom and energy, they see their duty and interest united, and soon
settle in the medium of just subordination and rational obedience.

VAST progress is made in the science of civil government. This knowledge is
reduced to practice in many places, and the happy effects are enjoyed. The
genius of the Christian religion is more clearly perceived; superstition and
bigotry are more done away; and we hope in God for a brighter exhibition of the
gospel in practice.

IN America and Europe, the civil and religious "rights of man" are better
understood, and more fully enjoyed, than in former periods: Hence, the spirit
of civil and religious liberty prevails, except in a few places. The nations of
chistendom, and different denominations of christians, are more than ever
convinced, that the kingdom of God, among men, is not meat and drink; that it
consists not in external forms, human creeds, articles of faith and modes of
worship, but in righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost; Romans xiv.17.
-- that it is not saying, Lord, Lord, but doing the will of God, Ver. 18.
that constitutes the good man. He that in these things serves Christ, is
acceptable to God, and approved of men. Mat. vii.21.


OUR federal and state governments are propitious to religion. It is, however,
wished by some, that for the good of society, if from no other motives, the
visible observance of the sabbath, and the public worship of God, were more
strictly enforced by the civil arm.

MEN of liberality in sentiments are of the opinion, that such an exercise of
civil power would be very beneficial to the community, and perfectly compatible
with the principles of a free government.

OUR rulers, in general, are men of religion, as well as men of wisdom. At the
head of the Union sits our beloved and admired PRESIDENT, the friend of
mankind, the glory of his country, and the ornament of human nature. He
completes the unrivalled character by adding that of a christian. From his
exalted station, he recommends religion with peculiar advantage, and enforces
it by an example as great as it is singular, and as illustrious as it is rare.
Long may he live a blessing to his people. Eternally may he wear a crown of
glory.

IN the churches of our Lord in America, peace and harmony are generally
enjoyed among brethren, and between ministers and people. Our young men are
raised up for prophets, and the sons of the church for nazarites Amos ii.2.
to God. Schools and Colleges are encouraged; useful knowledge is promoted and
happily diffused through the great body of the people. In a word, such is the
present, harmonious, and, on the whole, growing condition of the church in this
land; such are the strides of liberty and free inquiry in this and foreign
lands; such the diminution of Papal influence and bigoted zeal where they have
long tyrannized, that we have reason to hope, that the promised period is not
far distant, when, under the spirit of truth, all shall know the Lord from the
least unto the greatest, Jer. xxxi.34. Heb. viii.2.
and the righteousness of the church shall go forth as brightness, and the
salvation thereof as a lamp that burns. Isa. lxii.1.


IN a political view, I will only add, that (considering the youth of the
people, and the infancy of our national existence) the present, flourishing
state and progress of arts, agriculture, commerce, learning and knowledge in
general, the wisdom and energy of the federal government, the union, harmony
and population of the people, the natural resources and vast extent of our
country, have the most pleasing and promising aspect on the future growth and
greatness of our nation. May the God of our fathers, whose right hand has
PLANTED and nourished THIS BRANCH, make us a people willing and obedient, and
cause this land for ever to be the glory of all lands, for national prosperity,
civil privileges, social happiness and pure religion.

AGREEABLY to my plan, I have a few words to offer on the future greatness and
glory of the church, according to the promises of God who cannot lie. Your
patience is requested.

IF there be any thing in nature, beyond the reach of our bodily senses, on
which we may safely depend, surely it is the truth of divine revelation.
Nothing of the kind, could have been better proved than the scriptures. Every
passage that has not been, will be accomplished. GOD WILL HASTEN IT IN HIS
TIME, in the set time to favor Zion Psa. cii.13.
. Glorious things are spoken of Zion; Psa. lxxxvii.3.
such as we cannot, in any rational construction, suppose are fulfilled. The
greatness and glory, the purity and influence of the church are yet to come.
This is but the cause of goodness and happiness; and this a God of infinite
benevolence and mercy will ever plead. Jesus Christ, the blessed Son of God,
descended from the throne of the universe, assumed human nature, submitted to
unspeakable sufferings and ignominious death, that he might redeem, purify,
Tit. ii.14.
and raise to glory, a church from among men; and that in and by her, God might
receive the greatest glory and praise. She is the bride, the Lamb's wife. Rev.
xxi.9.
Christ will nourish and honor, as well as love her. He has proved, that she
is dearer to him than life. Her duration, and final victory over all her
spiritual enemies, are secured. She is founded upon a rock; and her almighty
Redeemer, her bridegroom has promised, that the gates of hell shall not
prevail against her. Mat. xvi.18.


TO establish farther these sentiments, I shall have recourse to the infallible
oracles of God. There it is promised, That in the last days, the mountain of
the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be
exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it. And they shall
beat their swords into plough-shares, and their spears into pruning hooks:
nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any
more. Isa. ii.2, 4.
Notwithstanding the increase of the church hitherto, as mentioned, the vast
spread of christianity since the days of our Savior, and that many nations and
kingdoms embrace the religion of Jesus; yet, at this day, such multitudes bow
not to Christ, so many nations know not his gospel, and such wars and fightings
actually exist in many parts of the world, that we cannot believe, that the
above prediction is fully accomplished.

ANOTHER prophecy of Isaiah to the same point, is worthy of notice. Speaking of
the happy state of the kingdom of Christ, he says, The wolf also shall dwell
with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid: the calf, and the
young lion, and the fatling together, and a little child shall lead them. And
the cow and the bear shall feed, their young ones shall lie down together; and
the lion shall eat straw like the ox. And the sucking child shall play on the
hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice --
den. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain; for the earth
shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea. xi.6,
7, 8, 9.
Here universal, social agreement, and religious harmony of the most jaring
tempers, discordant sentiments, and opposite characters, are predicted, under
the peaceful reign of the Prince of peace. Such happy and glorious days are
arrived only in part.

THAT we might depend upon such great things in behalf of the church, the Lord
speaks in the most absolute manner. Look unto me and be ye saved all the ends
of the earth; for I am God and there is none else. I have sworn by myself, the
word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness, that unto me every knee shall
bow, and every tongue confess. Surely shall one say, in the Lord have I
righteousness and strength: even to him shall men come, and all that are
incensed against him shall be ashamed. In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel
be justified, and shall glory. Isa. xlv.22 -- 25.
Since the God of heaven and earth has undertaken, and confirmed it by an
oath, we may with confidence rely, that He will overturn, overturn, overturn,
in all the kingdoms of the world, until He come whose right it is Ezekiel. xxi.27.
to wear the crown of universal empire, and the Father shall give to his Son
the heathen for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his
possession. Psa. ii.8.
Then as Daniel saw in his vision, The saints of the most High shall take the
kingdom, and possess the kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever. Dan. vii.18.
And the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the
saints of the most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all
dominions shall serve and obey him. vii.27.


IN the accomplishment of these predictions, is included the return of the Jews
from their long dispersion into all quarters of the globe, to believe in the
Savior already come. When the precious promises and prophesies of God's word
shall be thus completed, for which the church and godly people now wait and
pray, then will commence the period termed the millenium. Then will be the
thousand years special reign of Christ on the earth. That day is considered as
emphatically the latter-day-glory of the church. For the hastening of such a
day of universal knowledge, reformation, unity, holiness and happiness, we join
and pray, Even so, come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Rev. xxii.20.


SOME improvement adapted to the present occasion is now to be made.

WE, my brethren of this church and town, may, in part at least, adopt the
answer of the rebuilders of the temple at Jerusalem to those who inquired of
them. We are the servants of the God of heaven and earth, and build the house
that was builded these many years ago. Ex. iv.11.
Though unavoidable difficulties have retarded the work, yet it is now
completed. The Reverend the Clergy, and the people in the vicinity, from
affection and friendship, are assembled with us, to assist and join in our
devotions and rejoicings. While we felicitate ourselves, they, we doubt not,
sincerely congratulate us, that a public spirit, and religious respect for the
interests of the church, and the worship of God, have prevailed among us, with
so much peace and unanimity.

WE rejoice and are glad, that as affectionate friends and brethren, we may say
to one another, Let us go into the house of the Lord. Our feet shall stand
within thy gates, O Jerusalem. Psa. cxxii.1, 2.
We may add, into a house far more convenient and elegant, than we have
hitherto enjoyed. But while I say thus on my own account most feelingly, The
house formerly was very hard for the speaker.
and on yours sincerely, far be it from me, from every one of us, to despise
the day of small things. I venerate the memory, and applaud the pious zeal of
our predecessors, who, with great labor and cost erected this house in its
former fashion, for the service and honor of God. For those days, Built about
eighty years ago.
it was a house more spacious and distinguished, than this for the present
times.

TO aid our meditations, on this occasion, and excite us more religiously to
regard the operation of the Divine hand, and the times that pass over us, I
shall take a brief, historical view of the town and church, as far as records
and my knowledge of facts will permit.

THIS TOWN was incorporated as a plantation, at Musquetequid, The original
Indian name.
by the name of CONCORD, by an act of the General Court of the then province,
held at Newtown, September 3d, 1635. This is made certain by the records in the
Secretary's office of this Commonwealth.
The town was fairly purchased of the natives, and payment duly made to their
satisfaction. The tract of land first purchased, was six miles square; the
center being very near the spot where the Meeting House now stands. The
purchase, payment, extent, etc. of the town, are certified by the depositions
of two white men, viz. William Butterick and Richard Rice, and two christian
Indians, viz. Jehojakin and Jethro. They unitedly testify and say, "That they
were present at the making the bargain for the town of Concord. -- That at the
house of Mr Peter Bulkeley. (the Rev. P. Bulkeley) Mr. Simon Willard, Mr. John
Jones, Mr. Spencer and others, did purchase of Squaw Sachem, Tahattawau and
Nimrod, a tract of land six miles square, the center being the place (or near)
where the bargain was made. -- That said Willard and others did pay for said
land in wampam peage, hatchets, hoes, knives, cotton cloth and chintz, to the
said Indians. -- And, that Wappacowet, husband to Squaw Sachem, received a suit
of cotton cloth, a hat, a white, linen band, shoes, stocking and a great coat,
on account of said bargain. -- That in the conclusion, the Indians declared,
that they were satisfied, and that the English were welcome."

The above depositions were taken by authority, before Thomas Danforth, Esquire of
Cambridge, and are recorded in the town-book of Concord, in lieu of the first
town records which were burnt.


Additions were afterward made by grant and purchase.

IT appears, that the first settlers of the town, were very careful to have a
just and fair title to the soil. They were not only just, but generous. Charity
obliges us to believe, that they feared God and regarded man, and exemplified
to the Savages the religion of Jesus; the love of which induced them to
encounter innumerable hardships, Johnson's Wonder-Working Providence of Zion's
Savior in New England.
in this then dreary wilderness. History informs us, that the first adventurers
suffered extremely, both from want and fatigue; but, that they endured manfully
the greatest difficulties and forest labors that ever any people with such weak
means have done. Ibid.
This was the first inland settlement in New England, at any considerable
distance from the seashore. In that day, it was a long and tedious journey
from Cambridge to Concord. They had to pass a gloomy, pathless wilderness,
through brush, briars, swamps, etc. So that, not only their clothes, but their
flesh was torn, and their strength sometimes exhausted. Ibid.
A larger number came at first to this place, than usually begin new
settlements. Some men of spirit and great enterprise were among them. Among the
brave soldiers of Jesus Christ, who began this town, Bulkeley, Willard, Jones
and Spencer, appear to have been leaders. Mr. Henry Woodhouse and Thomas Flint,
Esquire. were men of property and usefulness. The latter came two years after the
settlement, and bro't L4,000. sterling, which he expended chiefly for the
benefit of the town. TAM. RECORDS.


HAD there been only a few families, they would, probably, have perished, or
been obliged to return to older settlements.

IT was with great difficulty, they could procure comfortable food. Indeed,
they scarce ever had such as we, at this day, should think tolerable. They had
little other than alewives and shad (with which our river then abounded,)
Indian corn, meal and water, pumpkins and squashes, and sometimes a little
rackoon-meat of the Indians. It was very difficult even to raise corn. They
manured the corn-ground with fish from the river.
Cattle of every kind were very dear and scarce The price of a cow was L.25.
sterling.. Swine were destroyed by wolves, and sheep could not live in a place
so new, and without English hay. Author of Wonders, etc.
They gave up their earthly treasures and comforts, for those of religion and
heaven. The Lord, whose is the earth and the fullness thereof, Psa. xxi v.1.
did not forsake them. He fed them in this wilderness, not indeed miraculously,
but wonderfully. Of them it may be said, as of Israel, that they were made to
know, that man does not live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds
out of the mouth of the Lord does man live. Deuteronomy. viii.3.


LET us cultivate a grateful remembrance of our pious ancestors, and sedulously
imitate their amiable virtues, while we quietly enjoy the fruit of their
singular toils.

IN the infancy of this town, it was remakably protected from the rage of the
savages. It is rationally supposed that the full satisfaction which the Indians
received, when they sold the land, rendered them more peaceable toward the
inhabitants. Especially, did the God of his praying people here, lay his
restraints upon the aborigines. Although, at other settlements round about, the
white people were greatly disturbed, their houses burnt, men, women and
children killed and scalped, and others carried into captivity dreadful as
death, yet never was an attack made upon this town, and only three persons
killed by the Indians, within the bounds of it. Hubbard 's Nar. Ind. war.

One-eyed John, a vile Indian warrior, threatened destruction to CONCORD, and
other places; but was soon taken and hanged at BOSTON.

Hub. Nar.
Our father's God nourished and shielded this part of his beloved BRANCH. The
town has increased in number and opulence, and largely experienced the
essential comforts and blessings of life. The air and soil are propitious to
health and longevity. This is contrary to the opinion of some, who have
occasionally visited the place, and have judged, probably, from appearances.
The above assertion will bear examination. The average number of deaths
annually, for thirteen years past, is 17 or 18. January 1792, there were living
in the town, seventy-five persons above 70 years of age.
No desolating sickness has prevailed in this, as in many other places. I do
not mention these things boastingly, but that we may consider and be thankful
for the rich blessings of our heavenly father, who is the health of our
countenance and our God. Psa. xlii.11.
At times, however, we have felt the tokens of God's righteous displeasure. We
have had occasion to sing of judgments as well as mercies. But though, for a
small moment, he has corrected, yet, in great kindness, he has remembered
mercy. Isa. live.7, 8.


AS the town became very extensive, by after grants and otherwise, it has been
greatly lessened also by the incorporation of other towns. The greater part of
Bedford, incorporated Sept. 23d. 1729, was taken from Concord. The whole of
Acton, incorporated July 3d. 1735; and the most of Lincoln, incorp. April 19th.
1754. The greater part of Carlisle also, including the Bloods' farms, so
called, which were annexed to Concord formerly. Carlisle was incorp. a district
of Acton, April 28th, 1780. Concord is not now as large as the first purchase.
This house, considered as only repaired, The dimension, fashion, etc. inside
and out, are new. The old frame only remains. To the length 12 feet are added.
The tower, steeple, porches are new; and one gallery is erected instead of two.
is the third which has been built in this town for the public worship of God.
There was indeed a kind of building in which the people first worshipped. It
stood east of the present house about a qaurter of a mile. This would make a
fourth, were it reckoned as one.
All have stood upon the same plat of ground. The people were at first happy in
finding a convenient plot for a meeting house, in the center. They have since
been generally harmonious in continuing it there, though the center has been
changed by the incorporation of other towns, as mentioned. May the name which
designates this tract of land ever characterize its inhabitants.

WE leave the civil and secular, and will attend to the ecclesiastical state of
this people.

HERE also we have to lament the irreparable loss of records, or, that there
were none made, from the first incorporation of the church, to the settlement
of the Rev. Mr. Bliss. We can, however, with certainty trace the succession of
ministers.

IT is recorded by order of Mr. Bliss, that "in the year 1636, the Rev'd. Peter
Bulkeley, the Rev'd. -- Jones, Major Simon Willard, and others brethren and
members, came and erected themselves into a church." This agrees with the
author of Wond. Work, etc. He mentions the coming of the same men, about the
same time; particularly the two ministers and S. Willard. Some accounts say,
the church was incorporated August 12, 1636. The above author says, that the
twelfth church that was gathered in New England, was at Concord.
Mr. Bulkeley Mr. P. Bulkeley was born in England in 1582 -- educated at St.
John's College, in Cambridge, -- was sometime Fellow of said College, and came
to New England in 1635. He was a man of distinguished abilities and piety. He
preached in this town the contents of a volume on the Covenant of Grace, which
was printed in London, 1651.
is considered as the first and principal minister in this town, though Mr. Jones
was colleague, or assistant to him.

Mr. Jones tarried here only two or three years, and is not considered as one
of the pa^^ors in succession. Mr. Jones and near half the church and people,
finding this place too scanty for the comfortable subsistence of so many, sold
their possessions, went to Connecticut, and settled the town of Fairfield. This
separation was, probably, the occasion of the destruction of the town-records.
Mr. P. Bulkeley died at Concord, March 9th, 1658/9, aged about 77. His son,
the the Rev. Edward Bulkeley, succeeded him in the ministry. Mr. E. B. was
invited from another place, where he was settled or had preached a considerable
time. It appears by some records, that he was an infirm man, that he lived to
be old, and years longer than he could preach. His age we know not.
When he was ordained we know not. He was born and educated in England, and
died in this town, January 2d, 1695/6.

The Rev'd. Joseph Eastabrook was ordained colleague with Mr. E. Bulkeley. The
year we cannot say. He died May 23d, 1711. We know not the age of Mr. E. He was
a very pious, good man, and minister, respectable for his abilities, especially
as a divine.


The Rev'd. John Whiting Mr. W. was one of the Tutors of Harvard College,
Cambridge; was a Gentleman of learning, of benevolence and a large estate.
was ordained in May, 1712, and continued in the ministry upwards of twenty
years. His pastoral relation to the church here was dissolved before he died.

The Rev'd. Daniel Bliss was ordained, March 7th, 1738. At that time, the
church consisted of eighty members. During his ministry of about twenty-five
years, two hundred and ninety persons were admitted to full communion, and one
thousand four hundred and twenty-four baptized in this church. How actively he
lived, and more abundantly labored; how fervently he prayed and preached, many
who now hear me, having both seen and heard him, are more competent judges than
I am. He died, May 11th, 1764, aged 49.

THE Rev'd. William Emerson was ordained, January 1st, 1766. His love for his
country involved in a distressing war, prevailed over the tenderest ties of
social, domestic and pastoral connections. That love, however, must have been
aided by a sense of duty, and hope of greater usefulness, or it had not been so
invincible. He left his beloved flock, and endeared family, to join the army,
at Ticonderoga, August 16th, 1776. He fell a prey to dire disease, October
following, at Rutland, Otter-Creek. Could he have died in the presence of his
family and friends; or could the kind hand of a partner, a child, a parent have
administered cordials, in that solitude, it had been some consolation, and even
the distresses of a dying bed had been mitigated. But I forbear. Infinite
wisdom directed otherwise. His covenant God did not forsake him. We have
plenary evidence, that he died in strong faith for himself and his family, and
like a christian hero. We doubt not, he is a conqueror through Jesus Christ.

UNDER his ministry, almost eleven years, sixty-six persons were admitted to
full communion, and five hundred and six baptized. His memory must still be
dear to this people. Being Mr. Emerson's immediate successor, and having had
some personal acquaintance with him, it may be expected, and with good reason,
that I take more notice of him and his character, than of my other predecessors.
Though his animating voice can no more be heard, he being dead, yet he speaks
to us. His premature death Aged 33 years.
must be viewed a striking instance of human frailty, and an affecting proof,
that God destroys the hope of man. Job xiv.19.
With his ministerial talents which were eminent, with his love for human
happiness and immortal souls, and his rising character promising extensive
usefulness, most of you, my hearers, are well acquainted. Alas! how did that
star, to which nature and religion had given peculiar luster, fall untimely! In
yonder, distant land, I had almost said wilderness, lie his mortal remains.
Buried at Rutland, Otter-Creek.
If his benevolent spirit have permission to visit us, on this occasion, he
participates in our joy, and blesses us in the name of the Lord. Hail, gentle
shade! To thee we owe a grateful remembrance, and now promise faithfully to pay
it.

THE present Speaker is the seventh pastor of the christian society here. He
was ordained November 11th, 1778. Since that time sixty-two persons have been
admitted to full communion, and four hundred baptized, It is judged, that about
three-fourths of the children born in town are baptized.
in this church. Since the death of the Rev'd. Mr. Bliss, when the church has
been vacant, one hundred and twenty-six have been baptized. The present number
of communicants is one hundred and fifty-one. It is now, and long has been the
practice with us, that many make a prosession of religion, and yet attend not
the holy supper.
Of the unworthiness of the present pastor, to fill a golden candlestick of
Jesus Christ, and the small success in his work, it is more suitable for him to
be deeply sensible, than to give a description.

THUS has the church increased from small beginnings, and the town in
proportion. Thus one generation passes away, and another comes. Eccl. i.4.
Thus time, which never ebbs, flows rapidly on to the period when time shall be
no more.

Having obtained help of God, we continue to this day, Acts xxvi.22.
and are assembled in this temple built for the public worship of God. In this
work, you, my brethren of this town, have done yourselves honor. The harmony
that has prevailed, is commendable. That a large society should all agree in
judgment, and have the same mind in circumstantials, is scarce possible. Nor
would such unanimity have been so much to your praise, as with different
sentiments, and clashing interests, to preserve the unity of the spirit in the
bonds of peace. This praise I may publicly give you, without incurring the
charge of flattery.

BUT, let me not forget to mention the worthy deeds of the fair sex of this
town.

WITH minds peculiarly formed for the exercise of friendship and generosity,
and sweetly vibrating to the impressions of religion as well as friendship, you
have nobly imitated the famed daughters of Israel, Ex. xxxv.22, 25, 26, 29.
in beautifying the house of the Lord. Ez. vii.27.
This exhibition of your reverence for the Deity, for his worship, and the
house of his glory, is highly praiseworthy. It is a much better recommendation
of you, than the richest, external ornaments of your persons. But your goodness
ends not here. To piety you have added charity. You have expressed your love to
your pastor, for his works sake, and have generously given him the sacerdotal
robe in which he now appears A Gown and Cassock.
Ladies, you have done virtuously, and have excelled. While I look above for
the power of divine grace to aid me in suitable returns in my office, you are
now requested to accept my grateful acknowledgments for your favors. May the
provision of God's house be ever blessed to your spiritual nourishment, and
prepare you for white robes in the kingdom of glory.

LET us now, my brethren, duly consider the design for which this house is
built, and improve it accordingly.

LET this day of dedication be a day of united and personal conversation of
ourselves to God and his service. Let this day be the epoch of general
conversion to God; and more memorable for our thorough reformation, and careful
departure from all iniquity, than for any other transactions.

To do thus is our privilege, and will forever be our happiness. Here may the
eternal God, whose servants we are, condescend to dwell by his spirit and
grace. May he accept, through his son Jesus, our services, this day; and ever,
when we here worship, have respect to the prayer of his servants. 2 Chronicles.
vi.19.
May he glorify this house of his glory, Isa. lx.7.
and help us to glorify his holy name. May the gospel of his grace be preached
here, in purity and power, and to multitudes be made a savor of life unto
life. It is my duty to be more active and faithful. It is your duty to be more
constant in your attendance where the blessing is ordained. By taking heed how
we preach, and how we hear, we may hope, that many sons and daughters of grace
shall be born here. Of this part of Zion may it be said, in respect to very
many, This and that man was born in her. Psa. lxxxvii.5.


PRAYING for this, we adopt the sentiment of the Psalmist, in the words of Dr.
Watts.

Peace be within this sacred place,
And joy a constant guest!
With holy gifts and heavenly grace,
Be her attendants blessed! Psa. cxxii.

THE undertakers and artificers will allow me to congratulate them on the
completion of their work; and to express my wishes for their highest happiness.

Gentlemen, YOUR lives and limbs have been preserved through all the dangers
and fatigue of the work. Let God be praised for his goodness. May he establish
the work of your hands. May you have a building of God, a house not made with
hands, eternal in the heavens! 2 Cor. v.1.
Your art is good. Your skill is displayed. Your works praise you. But, let me
tell you, there is an art more excellent; the divine art of living religiously
to that God, who dwells not in temples made with hands. In the exercise of
this art, you must, each one for yourself, on Christ the foundation, rear the
spiritual building of faith and holiness. You must yourselves be the living
temples of the living God, 1 Cor. iii.16, 17.
his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works. Ephesians. ii.10.
Otherwise, this house which ye have builded, will witness against you, and ye
will not be admitted into the new Jerusalem, and the temple of God above. O
build for eternity!

A FEW practical remarks shall close this discourse.

First. IN all the concerns and increase of the church, God should be
acknowledged and praised. This is peculiarly the duty of a people professing
godliness, and embracing christianity. As in all our ways, so especially in
religious concernments, we should acknowledge God, ask wisdom of him, and be
ever ready to say, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give
glory, for thy mercy, and for thy truths sake. Psa. cxv.1.


SINCE the canon of scripture has been completed, such visible manifestations
of Deity are not to be expected, as were frequent under the Theocracy of the
Jewish nation; yet the Lord is not the less present with his people, and has
not the less love to his church. Her support and increase ever have been, and
ever will be of the power and grace of God. For his own Name sake, he will
preserve and prosper Zion. Collectively and individually, she is dear to him as
the apple of his eye. Psalm. xvii.8.
The Lord Jesus Christ is head over all things to the church; and has all
power given unto him* both in heaven and in earth. Ephesians. i.22. Mal. xxviii.18.
To our Savior God let christians ever seek, and offer unceasing praise.

Secondly. IT is the obvious duty of all to improve, and cooperate with every
revival of religion. Every commotion among people, with pretensions to
religion, is not a genuine concern to know and obey the Lord. Every spirit is
not of God. We are, therefore, directed to try the spirits, whether they are of
God. 1 John iv.1, 2, 3.
But there are times, when the Spirit of God is sent down in more plentiful
effusions; when the Lord comes and raineth down righteousness. Then the minds
of men are more susceptible of divine impressions, and opened to receive the
truth. For such times the godly pray, as did the prophet, O Lord revive thy
work. When such seasons do come, and people are inquiring the way to heaven,
the ministers of the gospel should be very attentive to discern, and faithful
to improve the favorable opportunity for the conversion of sinners, and the
comfort and confirmation of believers. Those who are men in Christ also, though
not teachers, should gently lead babes to the sincere milk of the word, that
they may grow thereby. All should welcome and join such influence as disposes
sinners to inquire what they shall do to be saved, and the wicked to forsake
his way. All should be very careful not to break the bruised reed, nor quench
the smoking flax. Matt. xii.20.


Thirdly. I SHALL here be permitted, I trust, a very natural remark which
respects the ministers of Christ. It arises, my fathers and brethren, from our
office; and is contained in the words of the apostle: We then are workers
together with God. 2 Cor. vi.1.
We are commissioned and sent forth for the express purpose of promoting the
interests of religion, the increase of the church, and the salvation of
precious souls. We are engaged in the same glorious cause of peace on earth and
good will to men, leading to heavenly glory, with the God of all grace, the
Savior of sinners, and the Spirit of truth. Men never were employed in a better
cause than that which we plead. It must be pleasant to a benevolent mind, to
proclaim pardon to the guilty, salvation to the wretched, and to beseech
sinners to be reconciled to God. 2 Cor. v.20.
Can we be indolent? Shall we not exert ourselves? Yes; through Christ
strengthening us, we will take heed to ourselves, and to our doctrine. We will
carry the church, and the souls of our people, in the arms of our affection and
prayer, to the throne of grace. We will pray so fervently, preach so
faithfully, and live so piously, as to save both ourselves and them that hear
us. 1 Timothy iv.16.
To encourage us, we may call to mind what our Lord said to his first
ministers; Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world. Mat.
xxviii.20.


Fourthly. IN the darkest times, as to religion, there is ground for faith and
hope. God is in the church, and is engaged to defend and prosper her. IN HIS
TIME HE WILL HASTEN IT. The burning bush which Moses saw in Horeb, justly
represents the church. The bush burned; but was not consumed. The Lord was in
the midst of the bush. Ex. iii.2, 4.
So he is in the midst of the church, in all her afflictions and trials, and
will never suffer her to be consumed. The Lord has comforted his people, and
will have mercy upon his afflicted. The most glorious works of God, before the
children of men, have been in behalf of the church. Our discourse has been
chiefly to this point.

SHOULD mothers prove monsters, and forget to nourish their tender babes, yet,
says the Lord, will I not forget thee. Behold, I have graven thee upon the
palms of my hands, thy walls are continually before me. Isa. xlix.15, 16.
With such precious promises of such an Almighty Friend, the church may rejoice
in hope, amidst the most gloomy appearances.

Fifthly. WE remark, the unavailing power of the enemies of the church, and of
religion. To such enemies we may say, Perceive ye how ye prevail nothing? Joh.
xii.19.
Were they duly to read the holy scriptures, and consider the divine procedure,
they would tremble at the thought of being enemies to religion, and the people
of God. Every moment they are exposed to the insupportable wrath of an infinite
and angry God, whose government, goodness and church they oppose. They who set
themselves against the honor of God, the peace, happiness and salvation of men,
may be certain, that, in such a mind, they shall perish, and be utterly wasted.
To the Lord belongs vengeance and recompense; their foot shall slide in due
time: for the day of their calamity is at hand, and the things that shall come
upon them make haste. Deuteronomy. xxxii.35.
It is the madness of folly to oppose that cause which the infinite God is
engaged to promote, even to the utter destruction of its enemies.

THE church may say, as Elisha said to his servant, when a host compassed the
city to destroy him. Fear not; for they that be with us are more than they that
be with them. 2 Kings vi.16.


IT has been shown abundantly, that no wisdom, nor might, nor dignity of man,
can prevail against God. If God be for us, who can be against us? Romans viii.31.
Consider these things, ye who forget God, who submit not to his government,
who despise the church, who make light of Christ, and practice not his holy
religion. Collect your thoughts, and see, who has hardened himself against
God, and has prospered? Job ix.4.


ONCE more. Our duty, interest and happiness, all urge us to join the cause of
God and religion, of Christ and the church. This is obvious through the whole
discourse. Let all who hear me, be persuaded to this. Let every one bow the
knee to Jesus Christ, and regulate their faith and practice by his heavenly
doctrines and example. My hearers, it is not a vain thing for you; because it
is your life. Deuteronomy. xxxii.47.
Choose this day whom you will serve; and henceforth, may we all be the true
disciples of Jesus Christ, and qualified to join the church triumphant in
endless glory.

WITH overcoming faith, lively hope and ardent prayer, let christians look
forward to the future peace, purity and glory of the church, predicted and
promised in the holy scriptures. The prospect is calculated to animate you in
duty, and to comfort you under sorrows. I have a disposition to dwell upon this
thought; but, perhaps, I have already been too lengthy.

I WILL close, therefore, with the prophetic words of the Psalmist, ultimately
expressive of future, spiritual blessings to the gospel church and children of
God. They shall fear thee, as long as the sun and moon endure, throughout all
generations. He shall come down like rain upon the mown grass; as showers that
water the earth. In his days shall the righteous flourish: and abundance of
peace, so long as the moon endures. He shall have dominion from sea to sea,
and from the river to the ends of the earth: they that dwell in the wilderness
shall bow before him* and his enemies shall lick the dust. His name shall
endure for ever; men shall be blessed in him, and all nations shall call him
blessed. Psalm lxxii.
Let us all join in the praise, while we add, Blessed be the Lord God, the God
of Israel, who only does wondrous things. And blessed be his glorious name for
ever; and let the whole earth be filled with his glory. AMEN AND AMEN. ibid.



