A SERMON, On LUKE 8th, 18.

Take heed therefore how you hear.

Preached in one of the Churches in London.

By GEORGE WHITEFIELD, Before he embarked the first time for Georgia.

For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own
soul, or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul. -- Mat. 16.26.
Reprinted, 1792.

DIRECTIONS HOW TO HEAR SERMONS.
LUKE viii.18. Take heed therefore how you hear.
THE Occasion of our LORD's giving this Caution was this: Perceiving that much
People were gathered together, to hear him, out of every City, and knowing,
(for he is GOD and knows all Things) that many, if not most of them, would be
Hearers only, and not Doers of the Word, he spoke to them by a Parable,
wherein, under the Similitude of a Sower, that went out to sow his Seed, he
plainly intimated how few there were amongst them who would receive any saving
Benefit from his Doctrine, or bring forth Fruit unto Perfection.

The Application, one would imagine, should be plain and obvious: But the
Disciples, as yet unenlightened in any great Degree by the Holy Spirit, and
therefore unable to see into the hidden Mysteries of the Kingdom of GOD, dealt
with our Savior, as People ought to deal with their Ministers -- discoursed
with them privately about the Meaning of what he had taught them in Public,
and with a sincere Desire of doing their Duty, asked for an Interpretation of
the Parable.

Our blessed LORD, as he always was willing to instruct those that were
teachable (herein setting his Ministers an Example to be courteou^ and e^sy o^
Access) freely told them the Signification of it. And withal, to make them more
cautious and more attentive to his Doctrine for the future. He tells them, that
they were in an ^special Manner to b^ the Light of the (...), and were to
proclaim on the Housetop whatsoever he told them in Secret. And as their
improving the Knowledge already imparted, was the only Condition upon which
more was to be given them, it therefore highly concerned them to take heed how
they heard.

From the Context then it appears, that the Words were primarily spoken to the
Apostles themselves. But because they were the Representatives of the whole
Church, and it is to be feared out of those many Thousands that flock to hear
Sermons, but few comparatively speaking are effectually influenced by them; I
cannot but think it very necessary to remind you of the Caution given by our
LORD to his Disciples, and to exhort you with the utmost Earnestness to take
heed how you (...).

In Prosecution of which Design I shall in the following Discourse, I. FIRST,
Prove that every one ought to take all Opportunities of hearing Sermons. And
II. SECONDLY, I shall lay down some Cautions and Directions, in order to your
hearing them with Profit and Advantage.


I. And, FIRST, I am to prove that every one ought to take all Opportunities of
hearing Sermons.

That there have always been particular Persons set apart by GOD to instruct
and exhort his People to practice what he should require of them, is evident
from many Passages of Scripture. -- St. Jude tells us, that Enoch the seventh
from Adam prophesied, or preached, concerning the LORD's coming with ten
Thousand of his Saints to Judgment. And Noah, who lived not long after, is
styled by St. Peter, a Preacher of Righteousness. And though in all the
intermediate Space between the Flood and Giving of the Law, we hear but of few
Preachers, yet we may reasonably conclude, that GOD never left himself without
Witness, but at sundry Times, and after diverse Manners, spoke to our Fathers by
the Patriarchs and Prophets.

But however it was before, we are assured that after the Delivery of the Law,
GOD has constantly separated to himself a certain Order of Men to preach to, as
well as pray for his People; and commanded them to enquire their Duty at the
Priests Mouths. And though the Jews were frequently led into Captivity, and for
their Sins scattered abroad through the Face of the Earth, yet he never utterly
forsook his Church, but still kept up a Remnant of Prophets and Preachers, as
Ezekiel, Jeremiah, Daniel, and others, to reprove, instruct, and call them to
Repentance.

Thus was it under the Law. Nor has the Church been worse, but infinitely
better provided for under the Gospel: For when JESUS CHRIST, that great High
Priest, had through the Eternal Spirit offered himself as a full, perfect,
sufficient Sacrifice, Oblation and Satisfaction for the Sins of the whole
World, and after his Resurrection had all Power committed to him both in Heaven
and Earth, he gave Commission to his Apostles, and in them to all succeeding
Ministers, to go and preach his Gospel to every Creature; promising to be with
them to guide, assist, strengthen and comfort them always, even to the End of
the World.

But if it be the Duty of Ministers to preach (and woe be to them if they do
not preach the Gospel, for a Necessity is laid upon them) no doubt, the People
are obliged to attend to them; for otherwise, wherefore are Ministers sent?

And how can we here avoid admiring the Love and the tender Care which our dear
Redeemer has expressed for his Spouse the Church? Who, because he could not be
always with us in Person, on account it was expedient he should go away, and as
our Forerunner take Possession of that Glory he had purchased by his precious
Blood, yet would not leave us comfortless, but first settled a sufficient
Number of Pastors and Teachers; and afterward according to his Promise,
actually did and will continue to send down the Holy Ghost to furnish them and
their Successors with proper Gifts and Graces for the Work of the Minstry, for
the perfecting of the Saints, for the edifying of his Body in Love, till we all
come in the Unity of the Spirit, to the Fullness of the Measure of the Stature
of CHRIST.

Oh! how insensible are those of this unspeakable Gift who do despite to the
Spirit of Grace, who crucify the Son of GOD afresh, and put him to an open
Shame, by wilfully refusing to attend so great a Means of their Salvation? How
dreadful will the End of such Men be? How aggravating, that Light should come
into the World, that the glad Tidings of Salvation should be so very frequently
proclaimed in this City, and that so many should loath this spiritual Manna,
his Angels rood, and call it light bread? How much more tolerable will it be
for ^yre and S^on, for Sodom and Gomorrah, than for ^uch Sinners? For better,
Men had never heard of a Savior's b^ing born, than after they have heard, not
to give heed to the Ministry of those, who are employ^^, as his Ambassadors, to
transact Affairs between GOD and their Souls.

We may, though at a Distance, without a Spirit of Prophesy, foretell the
deplorable Condition of such Men; and behold them cast into Hell, lifting up
their Eyes, being in Torment, and crying out, How often would our Ministers
have gathered us, as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings! -- But we
would not. -- Oh that we had known in that our Day, the Thing that belonged to
our everlasting Peace! -- But now they are for ever hid from our Eyes.

Thus wretched, thus inconceivably miserable, will such be as slight and make a
mock at the public Preaching ^f the Gospel. -- But taking it for granted, there
are b^t few, if any of this unhappy Stamp, who think it not worth their while
to tre^d the Courts of the LORD's House, I pass on now to the

II. SECOND general Thing proposed, -- To lay down some Cautions and
Directions, in order to your hearing Sermons with Profit and Advantage.

And here, if we reflect on what has been already delivered, and consider that
Preaching is an Ordinance of GOD, a Means appointed by JESUS CHRIST himself,
for promoting his Kingdom amongst Men, you cannot reasonably be offended, if,
in order that you may hear Sermons with Profit and Advantage, I

First, direct or entreat you to come to hear them, not out of Curiosity, but
from a sincere Desire to know and do your Duty.

For^ality and Hypocrisy in any religious Exercise is an Abomination unto the
LORD. And to enter his House merely to have our Ears entertained, and not our
Hearts reformed, must certainly be highly displeasing to the Most High GOD, as
well as unprofitable to ourselves.

Hence it is, that so many remain Unconverted, yea, unaffected with the most
Evangelical Preaching; so that like St. Paul's Companions, they only hear the
Preacher's Voice with their outward Ears, but do not experience the Power of it
inwardly in their Hearts. Or like the Ground near Gideon's Fleece, they remain
untouched, whilst others that came to be fed with the sincere Milk of the Word,
like the Fleece itself, are watered by the Dew of GOD's Heavenly Blessing, and
grow thereby.

Flee therefore, my Brethren, flee Curiosity; and prepare your Hearts by a
humble Disposition to receive with Meekness the engrafted Word, and then it
will be a Means, under GOD, to quicken, build up, purify, and save your Souls.

A Second Direction I shall lay down for the same Purpose, is, not only to
prepare your Hearts, before you hear, but also to give diligent heed to the
Things that are spoken, whilst you are hearing the Word of GOD.

If an earthly King was to issue out a Royal Proclamation, on performing or not
performing the Conditions wherein contained, the Life or Death of his Subjects
entirely depended, how solicitous would they be to hear what those Conditions
were? And shall not we pay the same Respect to the KING of KINGS, and LORD of
LORDS, and lend an attentive Ear to his Ambassadors, when they are declaring in
his Name on what Terms our Pardon, Peace, and Happiness may be secured?

When GOD descended ^n Mount Sinai in terrible Majesty, to give unto his People
the Law, how attentive were they to his Servant Moses? And if they were so
earnest to hear the Thundrings or Threatenings of the Law, shall not we be as
solicitous to hear from the Ministers of CHRIST, the glad Tidings of the Gospel?

In particular, take heed therefore how you hear the Redeemer's calls. See Luke
11.9. Ask and it shall be given you. It is not do this or that, or the other
duty, and it shall be given you, but ask, and it shall be given you. Your
duties are what you owe to GOD, and they are his right; if you should take the
goods of a neighbor, to purchase any thing of him, it would be no better than
stealing. See what our Savior says, John 10.1. Verily, verily, I say unto you,
he that enters not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some
other way, the same is a thief and a robber.

But to neglect doing duties, is the way to provoke the Most High.

The next words are, seek and ye shall find. The word seek implies a great
earnestness to find some valuable thing that is lost, or something of great
value or importance, and what can be of greater importance than the restoration
of a dead soul to life. Remember the importunate widow, how by her importunity
she obtained the restoration of her daughter. Knock, and it shall be opened
unto you. When any person sees what is in his own heart, he sees his nature is
depraved; but let no one, even in his heart, charge GOD with a fault in that
matter, whether his shallow reason can comprehend it or not. Therefore, to be
renewed in the spirit of your minds, it is the gift of GOD."

Whilst CHRIST was himself on Earth, it is said, that people hung upon him to
hear the gracious Words that proceeded out of his Mouth. And if we looked on
Ministers as we ought, as the representatives of JESUS CHRIST, we should hang
upon them to hear their Words also.

Besides the sacred Truths that Gospel Ministers deliver are not dry insipid
Lectures on Moral Philosophy, intended only to amuse us for a while; but the
great Mysteries of Godliness, which therefore we are bound studiously to listen
to, lest through our Negligence we should either not understand them, or by any
other (...) let them slip.

But how regardless are those of this Direction, who instead of hanging on the
Preacher to hear him, doze or sleep whilst he is speaking to them from God?
Unhappy Men! Can they not watch with our blessed LORD one Hour? What; Have they
never read how Eutichus fell down as he was sleeping, when St. Paul continued
his discourse till Midnight, and was taken up dead?

But to return. Though you may prepare your Hearts, as you may think, by a
teachable Disposition, and be attentive whilst discourses are delivering, yet
this will profit you little, unless you observe a

Third Direction, -- not to entertain any the least Prejudice against the
Minister.

For could a Preacher speak with the Tongue of Men and Angels, if his Audience
was prejudiced against him, he would be but as a sounding Brass, or a tinkling
Cymbal.

That was the Reason why JESUS CHRIST himself, the eternal Word, could not do
many mighty Works, nor preach to any great Effect among those of his own
Country; for they were offended at him. And was this same JESUS, this GOD
incarnate again to bow the Heavens, and to come down speaking as never Man
spoke; yet if we were prejudiced against him, as the Jews were, we should
harden our hearts as the Jews did theirs.

But, Fourthly, as you ought not to be prejudiced against, so you should be
careful not to depend too much on a Preacher, or think more highly of him than
you ought to think. For though this be an Extreme that People seldom run into;
yet preferring one godly Teacher, in Opposition to another, has often been of
ill Consequence to the church of GOD.

That, we read, was a Fault which the great Apostle of the Gentiles condemned
in the Corinthians: For whereas one said, I am of Paul; another I am of
Apollos: Are ye not Carnal, says he? For who is Paul and who is Apollos, but
Instruments in GOD's Hand by whom you believed? And are not all godly Ministers
sent forth to be ministering Ambassadors to those who shall be Heirs of
Salvation? And are they not all therefore greatly to be esteemed for their
Work's Sake.

The Apostle, it is true, commands us to pay double Honor to those who labor
in the Word and Doctrine. But then to perfer one truly pious Minister at the
Expense of the Character of another, is earthly, sensual, devilish.

Not to mention that Popularity and Applause cannot but be exceeding dangerous
even to a rightly informed Mind; and must necessarily fill any thinking Man
with a holy Jealousy, lest he should take that honor to himself, which is due
only to GOD; who alone qualifies him for his Ministerial Labors, and from whom
alone every good and perfect Gift comes.

A Fifth Direction I would recommend is, to make a particular Application of
every Thing that is delivered, to your own Hearts.

When our Savior was discoursing at his last Supper with his beloved
Disciples, and foretold that one of them should betray him, each of them
immediately applied it to his own Heart and said, LORD, Is it I? And would
Persons in like Manner, when Preachers are dissuading from any Vice, or
persuading to any Virtue, instead of crying, this w^^ designed against such and
such a one, turn their Thoughts inwardly, and say -- LORD, Is it I? How far
more beneficial should we find Discourses to be, than they generally are now?

But we are apt to wander too much abroad: Always looking at the Mote which is
in our Neighbor's Eye, rather than the Beam which is in our own.

Haste we now to the Sixth and last Direction: If you would receive a Blessing
from the LORD, when you hear his Word preached, pray to him, both before, in,
and after every Sermon, to endue the Minister with Power to speak, and to grant
you a Will and Ability to put in Practice what he shall show from the Book of
GOD to be your Duty.

This would be an excellent Means to render the Word preached effectual to the
enlightening and enflaming your Hearts, and without this all the other Means
before prescribed will be in vain. No doubt it was this Consideration that made
St. Paul so earnestly entreat his beloved Ephesians to intercede with GOD for
him, -- Praying always, says he, with all Manner of Prayer and Supplication in
the Spirit; and for me also, that I may open my Mouth with Boldness, to make
known the mysteries of the Gospel. And if so great an Apostle as Paul, needed
the Prayers of his People, much more do those Ministers who have only the
ordinary Gifts of the Holy Spirit.

Besides, this would be a good Proof that you sincerely desired to do as well
as know the Will of GOD: And it must highly profit both Ministers and people;
because GOD through your Prayers will give them a double Portion of his Holy
Spirit, whereby they will be enabled to instruct you more fully in the Things
which pertain to the Kingdom of GOD.

And oh, that all that hear me this Day, would seriously apply their Hearts to
practice what has now been told them! -- How would Ministers see Satan like
Lightning fall from Heaven, and People find the Word preached sharper than a
two-edged Sword, and mighty through GOD to the pulling down of the Devil's
strong Holds!

The Holy Ghost would then fall on all them that heard the Word; as when St.
Peter preached. The Gospel of CHRIST would have free Course, run very swiftly,
and Thousands again be converted by a Sermon.

For JESUS CHRIST is the same Yesterday, to Day, and for ever. His all-powerful
Hand is not shortened. He has promised to be with his Ministers always, even
unto the End of the World.

It does indeed sometimes happen that GOD to magnify his Free Grace in CHRIST
JESUS, is found of them that sought him not; a notorious Sinner is forcibly
worked upon by a public Sermon, and plucked as a Firebrand out of the Fire.
But this is not GOD's ordinary Way of acting. No; for the Generality, he only
visits those with the Power of his Word who humbly wait to know what he would
have them to do. And sends unqualified Hearers not only empty, but hardened,
away.

Take heed, therefore, ye careless curious Professors, if any such be here
present, how you hear. Remember that, whether we think of it or not, we must
all appear before the Judgment Seat of CHRIST, where Ministers must give a
strict Acco^nt of the Doctrine they have delivered, and you as strict a one,
how you have impro^ed under it. And good GOD! how will you be able to stand at
the Bar of an angry, Sin avenging Judge, and see so many Discourses you have
despised, so many Ministers who once longed and labored for the Salvation of
your precious and mortal Souls, brought out as so many swift Witnesses against
you? Will it be sufficient then think you, to allege that you went to hear
them only out of curiosity, to pass away an idle Hour, to admire the Oratory,
or ridicule the simplicity of the preacher? No, GOD will then let you know,
that you ought to have come out of better Principles, that every Sermon has
been put down to your account, and that you must then be justly punished for
not improving by them.

But fear not, you little Flock, who with Meekness receive the ingrafted Word,
and bring forth the peaceable Fruits of Righteousness; for it shall not be so
with you. No; you will be your Minister's Joy, and their Crown of Rejoicing in
the Day of our Lord JESUS. And they will present you in a holy Triumph
faultless and unblameable to our common Redeemer, saying, Behold us, O LORD,
and the Children which Thou have given us.

But still take you heed how you hear. For upon your improving the Grace you
have, more shall be given, and you shall have abundance. For He is faithful
that has promised. Who also will do it. Nay, GOD from out of Sion shall so
bless you, that every Sermon you hear shall communicate to you a fresh Supply
of Spiritual Knowledge. The Word of GOD shall dwell in you richly; you shall go
on from Strength to Strength, from one Degree of Grace unto another, till being
grown up to be perfect Men in CHRIST JESUS, and filled with all Fullness of GOD,
you shall be translated by Death to see him as he is, and to sing Praise before
the Throne with Angels and Archangels, Cherubims and Seraphims, and the general
Assembly of the Firstborn, whose Names are written in Heaven for ever and ever.

AMEN.
(...) ^erhaps some people in the state of nature, may dispute (...) the last
line of the 4th verse in the following Hymn, they (...) de^^^^^ to consider the
following texts in the word of God, (...) ^. 15, 16. Jereh. 5.2. John 1.49. and
chap. 8.19. and (...) the experience of christians.
HYMN.
1.
WHEN the blessed day of penticost,
Was fully come, the Holy Ghost
Descended from above,
That ministers be fit to teach,
And Christ's redemption fully preach,
The Lord of life and love.
2.
To every nation under heaven,
To hear the gospel sound is given*
The call to all extends:
As ours was parted long ago,
So God divides his language too,
And after sinners sends.
3.
And were these first disciples blessed
With heavenly gifts, and shall the rest
Be past unheeded by:
What, has the Holy Ghost forgot,
To quicken souls that Christ has bought,
And let them lifeless lie?
4.
No, thou Almighty God of love,
Thou send'st thy mercy from above,
Thou visit'st sinners still:
With breath of life, with quickening flame,
O let thy mercy be the same,
Thy self to souls reveal.
5.
Not for the gift of tongues we pray,
Nor deafs nor blinds to take away;
Nor power the sick to heal,
But O to be renewed within,
To have our souls washed clean from sin,
And love to do thy will.'

