AMERICAN POEMS, SELECTED AND ORIGINAL.

VOL. I.

LITCHFIELD: PRINTED BY COLLIER AND BUEL.

(THE COPY-RIGHT SECURED AS THE ACT DIRECTS.)

PREFACE.
IN the following pages, the Public, according to the promise of the
Publishers, is presented with a Volume of American Poems; partly Selected, and
partly Original. In undertaking this Work, they have been actuated by a variety
of motives, and drawn onward by a number of objects. When looking round them,
they saw many Poems, written by the most eminent American Authors, from the
loose manner of their publishment, known only to a few of their particular
acquaintance, and unheard of by the generality of their Countrymen. The value
of the performances, and the regard which authors generally feel for their
literary offspring, left them no room to doubt, but that, at some future
period, each person would think it not unworth the while to collect what he had
scattered. But this period was uncertain; and the publishers though it that it
would not be rendering an unacceptable service to the Public, if they undertook
the business of collecting, and arranging each Author's productions in a
volume, which from its size should claim a more universal attention. -- Beside
the smaller Poems of Gentlemen, distinguished for their poetical talents, many
others, of very great merit, have appeared in the different Periodical
publications of the United States. Performances of this kind, falling from the
pens of persons not intent on literary fame; or intent on reputation different
from poetical reputation; or whose names have not yet been dignified by
national applause; especially as many of them are adapted to particular and
local occasions; notwithstanding their desert, are constantly liable to be
forgotten and lost. And the publishers have observed it to be a matter of much
regret, among persons of reading and taste, that the frail security of an
obscure newspaper, was the only one they had for some of the hansomest
specimens of American Poetry. To afford a stronger, and more durable security,
is one of the objects of this Publication. -- Among other things, it did not
appear to be a matter altogether destitute of usefulness, to bring together, in
one view, the several poetical productions of the different States. By this
means a more certain estimation can be made of the comparative merit of their
various writers; a more thorough acquaintance may be obtained of the state of
the belles-lettres in the individual parts of the Union; and hereby will be
promoted a more intimate combination of literary interests. -- It especially
seemed a matter of importance, to draw forth, for the amusement of the lovers
of poetry, those Poems which, for want of a Repository of this kind, alone,
were withheld from the Public. It was easy to foresee, that many persons,
acting with a proper regard to the worth of their own writings, would readily
give up that advantage, which newspapers bestow, of having them known to every
body; if they could by means of a Work like the present one, secure them a
certain conveyance to the attention of the scientific and refined. It was
l^kewise the wish of the Publishers, to excite the attention of thos^ possessed
of talents and leisure, to similar pursuits; by holding out to them a Work
where, united with the like performances of the most celebrated among their
Countrymen, their Poems may be equally secure of preservation and notice. --
These have been the intentions of the Publishers. How far their design is
accomplished, is not for them to determine. That it should be completely so,
was not to be expected. This is but the beginning of an Undertaking; and they
hope, not an unpromising one. The Public alone, have the power to countenance
and support them in its accomplishment. -- Should the Volume, now published,
meet with that success which the value of the Poems it contains seems to
warrant, it is the intention of the Publishers to add another; and to continue
the Collection as long as the present supply of Materials, and that for which,
in future, they may be indebted to the generosity of the literarty, will enable
them.

They have, now, only to return, to their subscribers, their most unfeignedly
grateful acknowledgments for the generous support which they have afforded
them; and to express a hope, that though the publication owing to some
unfortunate circumstances, has been delayed longer than their first purpose, no
other expectation, which they have held forth, may be disappointed on a careful
examination of the Work.

Litchfield (Connecticut) June 1793.
POSTSCRIPT.
IT is the intention of the Editors, as mentioned in the Preface, to pursue
their design; and, should sufficient encouragement appear, to publish a Second
Volume, in the course of the next two years. -- Many disappointments, the ill
health of one of the Editors, and other circumstances, too complicated and
painful to mention, have contributed to render their part of this Work less
perfect than their expectations, and promises. They intend to finish the
succeeding Volume, or Volumes, in a more elegant manner; and, if a second
edition of the present volume should be called for, it is their further
intention to make it equal, in beauty, to the others; to all of which suitable,
and well-executed decorations shall be added.

CONTENTS.
SELECTED POETRY.
PAGE. ELEGY on the Times, TRUMBULL, 1 -- on Buckingham St. John, do. 13 -- on
Ambition, do. 17 Balaam's Prophecy, do. 21 Downfall of Babylon, do. 25 Speech
of Aristeus. do. 29 Trial of Faith, DWIGHT. 33 Address to the Convention, do.
55 Columbia, do. 6^ Seasons Moralized, do. 64 Hymn, do. 66 Song, do. 68 The
Critics, do. 70 Letter to Col. Humphries. do. 75 Prospect of Peace, BARLOW. 85
Poem spoken at Commencement, do. 94 Elegy on Titus Hosmer. do. 108 Elegy on
Fairfield, HUMPHREYS. 117 -- on De Heart, do, 120 Ode, Mount Vernon, do, 123 To
Laura, do. 126 Genius of America, do. 127 Song from the French do. 134 Letter
to Dr. Dwight. do. 129 The Hypocrite's Hope, Dr. HOPKINS. 139 Epitaph on a
Patient killed by a Cancer Quack. do. 137 Verses on General Ethan Allen. do.
142 Oration that might have been delivered. HOPKINSON. 143 Philosophic
solitude. LIVINGSTON. 154 Descriptive Lines, PHILENIA. 176 Ode to the
President, do. 180 Invocation to Hope, do. 182 Prayer to Patience, do. 183
Lines to Della Crusca. do. 184 Alfred to Philenia, 186 Philenia to Alfred, 187
Alfred to Philenia, 188 Philenia to Alfred. 190 Poem written at Boston, etc. J.
ALLEN. 193 An intended inscription, etc. do. 199 Elegiac Ode to the memory of
Genesis Green. RICHARDS. 201 The Country School, ANON. 206 Hesper's Speech, do.
209 African Distress, do. 217 The New Year's Wish, do. 219 Verses sent with a
Cake Heart, do. 221 Verses from the American Magazine. do. 222 Ella, a
Norwegian Tale. W. DUNLAP. 226 Eulogium on Rum. J. SMITH. 231 The Country
Meeting. T. C. JAMES. 234 Verses written in a Heavy Gale at Sea. FRENEAU. 239
To Ella. 240 To Ella. 242 To Ella. 245 Sonnet to Reflection. 249 ORIGINAL
POETRY.
An Elegy, etc. R. ALSOP. 251 Versification of Ossian, etc. do. 255 Habbakuk,
do. 263 Twilight of the Gods, do. 265 Conquest of Scandinavia. do. 271 Ode to
Conscience. T. DWIGHT. 284 Cololoo. W. DUNLAP. 287 Ode to Time. 292 Ode to Miss
-- J. HOW. 297 Message of Esther to Mordecai, Dr. DWIGHT. 299

AMERICAN POEMS. SELECTED POETRY.
ELEGY OF THE TIMES. First printed at BOSTON, Sept. 20th, 1774.
By JOHN TRUMBULL, Esquire.
OH BOSTON! late with every pleasure crowned,
Where Commerce triumphed on the favoring gales,
And each pleased eye, that roved in prospect round,
Hailed thy bright spires and blessed thy opening sails!
Thy plenteous marts with rich profusion smiled;
The gay throng crowded in thy spacious streets;
From either IND thy cheerful stores were filled;
Thy ports were gladden'd with unnumber'd fleets.
For there more fair than in their native vales,
Tall groves of masts arose in beauteous pride;
The waves were whitened by the swelling sails,
And plenty wafted on the neighboring tide.
Alas, how changed! the swelling sails no more
Catch the fair winds and wanton in the sky;
But hostile beaks affright the guarded shore,
And pointed thunders all access deny.
Where the bold Cape its warning forehead rears,
Where tyrant Vengeance waved her magic wand,
Far from the sight each friendly vessel veers,
Calls the kind gales and flies the fatal strand.
The ruined Merchant turns his mournful eyes
From the drear shore and desolated way;
Thy silent marts unusual glooms surprise,
And through thy streets the sons of rapine stray.
Such the dread stillness of the desert night,
When brooding ho^ror settles on the groves;
While powers of darkness claim their ha^eful right,
And fierce for prey the savage tiger roves.
Along thy fields, which late in beauty shone
With lowing herds and grassy vesture fair,
The insulting tents of barbarous troops are strown,
And bloody standards stain the peaceful air.
Are these thy deeds, oh Britain? this the praise,
That points the growing luster of thy name?
These glorious works that in thy latter days,
Gild the bright period of thine early fame?
Shall thy strong fleets, with awful sails^unfurl'd,
On Freedom's shrines the unhallowed vengeance bend?
And leave forlorn the desolated world,
Crushed -- every foe, and ruined -- every friend!
And damped alas! thy soul-inspiring ray,
Where Virtue prompted and where Genius soared,
Or quenched in darkness, and the gloomy sway
Of Senates venal and the liveried Lord!
There shame sits blazoned on the unmeaning brow,
And over the scene thy factious Nobles wait,
Prompt the mixed tumult of the noisy show,
Guide the blind vote and rule the mock debate.
To these how vain, in weary woes forlorn,
With fearful hands the fond complaint to raise,
Lift fruitless offerings to the ear of Scorn --
Of servile vows and well-dissembled praise!
Will the grim savage of the nightly fold
Learn from their cries the blameless flock to spare?
Will the deaf gods, that frown in molten gold,
Bless the dup'd hand, that spreads the prostrate prayer?
With what pleased hope before the face of Pride,
We reared our suppliant eyes with filial awe;
While loud Disdain with ruffian voice replied,
And Injury triumphed in the garb of Law!
While Peers enraptured hail the unmanly wrong,
See Ribaldry, vile prostitute of shame,
Stretch the bribed hand and prompt the venal tongue,
To blast the laurels of a FRANKLIN's fame!
But will the Sage, whose philosophic soul,
Controlled the lightning in its fierce career,
Heard unappal'd the aerial thunders roll,
And taught the bolts of vengeance where to steer; --
Will he, while echoing to his just renown
The voice of kingdoms swells the loud applause;
Heed the weak malice of a Courtier's frown,
Or dread the coward insolence of laws?
See envying Britain rends the sacred bays;
Illuded Justice pens the mock decree;
While Infamy her darling scroll displays,
And points well pleased, oh, WEDDERBURNE, to thee!
For naught avail^ the virtues of the heart,
The vengeful bolt no Muse's laurels ward;
From Britain's rage, and death's relentless dart,
No worth can save us, and no fame can guard.
Over hallowed bounds see dire Oppression roll;
Fair Freedom buried in the whelming flood;
Nor charter'd rights the tyrant course control,
Though sealed by Kings and witnessed in our blood.
No more shall Justice with unbiased hand,
From lawless Rapine snatch her trembling prey,
While in her balance by supreme command
Hang the dead weights of ministerial sway.
(For taught by pain, our injured bosoms feel
The potent claims whence all our woes began,
And own supreme the power, that could repeal,
Those laws of heaven, that guard the rights of man.)
In vain we hope from Britain's haughty pride
An hand to save us, or an heart to bless;
It Is strength, our own, must stem the rushing tide,
And our own virtue yield the wished success.
But, oh, my friends, the arm of blood This is not meant as a caution against
defending our rights with our blood, if we should be driven to that extremity;
but only against the impolitic zeal of those, who seem desirous to let loose
the rage of popular resentment, and bring matters immediately to a crisis in
this Province.
restrain!
(No rage intemperate aids the public weal)
Nor basely blend (too daring, but in vain)
The assassin's madness with the patriot's zeal.
[ For the Note, see next page.]

Shall the fields blush, with vital crimson stained,
When blind resentment marks the victim'd breast?
Will reeking life, by vengeful hands profaned,
Our wrongs relieve, or charm our woes to rest?
Ours be the manly firmness of the sage,
From shameless foes the ungrateful wounds to bear;
Alike removed from baseness and from rage,
The flames of faction, and the chills of fear.
Check the vast torrent of commercial gain,
That buys our ruin at a price so rare;
And while we scorn Britannia's servile chain,
Disdain the livery of her marts to wear.
For shall the lust of fashions and of show,
The cursed idolatry of silks and lace,
Bid our proud robes insult our Country's woe,
And welcome Slavery in the glare of dress?
Will the blind dupe, in liveried tinsel gay,
Boast the shamed trappings, that adorn the slave?
Will the fond mourner change his sad array,
To attend in gorgeous pomp a parent's grave?
No! the rich produce of our fertile soil,
Shall cloth the neatness of our cheerful train,
While heaven-born virtues bless the pious toil,
And gild the humble vestures of the plain.
No foreign labor in the Asian field
Shall weave her silks to deck the wanton age,
But, as in Rome, the furrowed vale shall yield
The unvanquish'd Chieftain and paternal Sage.
And ye, whose heaven in ermin'd pomp to shine,
To run with joy the vain, luxurious round,
Bless the full banquet with the charms of win^
And roll the thundering chariot over the ground*
For this, while guis'd in sycophantic smile,
With hearts all mindless of your country's pain,
Your flattering falsehoods feed the ears of Guile,
And barter freedom for the dreams of gain!
Are these the joys, on vassal'd climes that wait --
In downs of ease luxuriant to repose,
Quaff streams nectareous in the domes of state,
And blaze in splendour of imperial shows?
No -- the hard hand, the tortured brow of Care,
The thatch-roof'd hamlet and defenseless shed,
The tattered garb, that meets the inclement air,
The famished table, and the matted bed. --
These are their fate -- In vain the arm of toil
With gifts autumnal crowns the bearded plain;
In vain glad Summer prompts the genial soil,
And Spring dissolves in softening showers in vain;
There savage Power extends his dismal shade,
And chill Oppression, with her frosts severe,
Sheds her dire blastings over the springing blade,
And robs the expecting labors of the year.
So must we sink? -- and at the stern command
That bears the terrors of a tyrant's word,
Bend the crouch'd knee and raise the suppliant hand,
The scorned, dependant, vassals of a Lord?
The wintry ravage of the storm to meet,
Brave the scorched vapors of the autumnal air,
Then pour the hard-earn'd harvest at his feet,
And beg some pittance from our pains to share?
But not for this, by heaven and virtue led,
From the mad rule of hierarchal pride,
From slavish chains our injured fathers fled,
And followed freedom on the adventurous tide;
Dared the wild horrors of these climes unknown,
The insidious savage, and the crimsoned plain,
To us bequeathed the prize, their woes had won,
Nor deemed they suffered, or they bled in vain.
And think thou, NORTH, the sons of such a race,
Where beams of glory blessed their purpled morn,
Will shrink unnerv'd before a tyrant's face,
Nor meet thy louring insolence with scorn?
Look through the circuit of the extended shore,
That checks the surges of the Atlantic deep!
What weak eye trembles at the frowns of power?
What leaden soul invites the bands of sleep?
How Goodness warms each heaven-illumin'd heart*
What generous gifts the woes of want assuage,
And sympathetic tears of pity start,
To aid the destined victims of thy rage!
No clamourous faction with unhallowed zeal
To wayward madness wakes the impassioned throng;
No thoughtless furies sheath their breasts with steel,
Or call the sword to avenge the oppressive wrong.
Fraternal bands with vows accordant join;
One guardian Genius, one enrapturing Soul
Nerves the bold arm, inflames the just design,
Combines, inspirits, and illumes, the whole.
Now meet the Fathers of this western clime;
Nor names more noble graced the rolls of fame,
When Spartan firmness braved the wrecks of time,
Or Rome's bold virtues fanned the heroic flame.
Not deeper thought the immortal Sage inspired,
On Solon's lips when Grecian senates hung;
Nor manlier eloquence the bosom fired,
When genius thundered from the Athenian tongue.
And hopes thy pride to match the patriot strain
By the bribed slave in pension'd lists enrolled;
Or awe their councils by the voice profane,
That wakes to utterance at the calls of gold?
Can frowns of terror daunt the warrior's deeds,
Where guilt is stranger to the ingenuous heart?
Or Craft illude, where godlike Science sheds
(...) of knowledge and the gifts of art?
Go, raise thy hand, and with its magic power
Pencil with night the sun's ascending ray,
Bid the broad veil eclipse the noontide hour,
And damps of stygian darkness shroud the day. --
(Such night as lours over Britain's fated land,
Where rayless shades the darkened throne surround;
Nor deeper glooms at Moses' waving wand,
Poured their thick horrors over the Memphian ground.)
Bid heavens dread thunders at thy voice expire,
Or chain the angry vengeance of the waves;
Then hope thy breath can chill the eternal fire,
And free souls pinion with the bonds of slaves.
Thou can not hope -- Attend the flight of days,
View the bold deeds, that wait the dawning age,
Where Time's strong arm, that rules the mighty maze,
Shifts the proud actors on this earthly stage!
Then tell us, NORTH, -- for thou art sure to know;
For have not Kings and fortune made thee great?
Or lurks not genius in the ennobled brow,
And dwells not wisdom in the robes of state?
Tell how the powers of luxury and pride,
Taint thy pure zephyrs with their poisoned breath;
How dark Corruption spreads the envenomed tide,
And Britain trembles on the verge of death.
And tell how, rapt by Freedom's deathless flame,
And fost'ring influence of the fav^ring skies,
This Western World, the last recess of fame,
Sees in her wilds a newborn empire rise:
A newborn Empire, whose ascendant hour
Defies the foes, that would its life destroy,
And like Alcides, with its infant power
Shall crush those serpents, who its rest annoy.
Then look through time, and with extended eye,
Pierce the deep veil of fate's obscure domain!
The morning dawns, the effulgent star is nigh,
And crimsoned glories deck her rising reign!
Behold afar beneath the cloud of days,
Where rest the wonders of ascending fame;
What Heroes rise, immortal heirs of praise!
What fields of death with conquering standards flame!
See her thronged cities' warlike gates unfold!
What towering armies stretch their banners wide
Where cold Ontario's icy waves are rolled,
Or far Altama's silver waters glide!
Lo from the groves, the aspiring cliffs that shade,
Ascending pines the surging ocean brave,
Rise in tall masts, the floating canvas spread,
And rule the dread dominions of the wave!
Where her clear rivers pour the mazy tide,
The laughing lawns in full luxuriance bloom,
The golden harvest spreads her wanton pride,
The flowery garden breathes a glad perfume.
Her potent voice shall hush the storms of fate,
Where the meads blossom or the billows roar;
And cities, gay with sumptuous domes of state,
Stretch their bright turrets on the sounding shore.
There mark that Coast, which seats of wealth surround,
That haven, rich with many a flowing sail,
Where mighty ships, from earth's remotest bound,
Float on the chearly pinions of the gale.
There BOSTON smiles, no more the sport of scorn,
And meanly imprisoned by thy fleets no more;
And far as ocean's billowy tides are borne,
Lifts her feared ensigns of imperial power.
So smile the shores, where lordly Hudson strays,
(Whose floods fair YORK and proud ALBANIA lave)
Or PHILADELPHIA's happier clime surveys
Her glist'ring spires in Schuylkyll's lucid wave.
Or southward far extend thy wondering eyes,
Where fertile streams the garden'd vales divide;
And mid the peopled fields distinguished rise
Virginian towers, and Charlestown's spiry pride.
Genius of arts, of manners and of arms,
See decked with glory and the blooms of grace,
This Virgin-clime unfolds her brighter charms,
And gives her beauties to thy fond embrace!
Hark, from the glades, and every listening spray,
What heaven-born Muses wake the enraptured song*
The vocal shades attune the enchanting lay,
And echoing vales harmonious strains prolong.
Through the vast series of descending years,
That lose their currents in the eternal wave,
Till heaven's last trump shall rend the affrighted spheres,
And open each empire's everlasting grave;
Propitious skies the joyous field shall crown,
And robe her valleys in perpetual prime,
And ages blessed of undisturbed renown,
Beam their mild radiance over the imperial clime.
And where is BRITAIN? -- In the skirt of day,
Where stormy Neptune rolls his utmost tide,
Where suns oblique di^fuse a feeble ray,
And lonely waves the fated coasts divide;
See thou yon Isle, whose desert landscape yields
The mournful traces of the fame she bore;
Where matted thorns oppress the cultured fields,
And piles of ruin choke the dreary shore? --
From those loved seats, the Virtues sad withdrew,
From fell Corruption's bold and venal hand;
Reluctant Freedom waved her last adieu,
And Devastation swept the vassal'd land.
On her white cliffs, the pillars once of fame,
Her melancholy Genius sits to wail;
Drops the fond tear, and over her latest shame,
Bids dark Oblivion draw her sable veil.
AN ELEGY, On the death of Mr. BUCKINGHAM ST. JOHN; who was drowned in his
passage from New Haven to Norwalk, May 5th, 1771. BY THE SAME.
THE world now yields to night's returning sway;
The deeper glooms lead on the solemn hour,
And call my steps, beneath the moon's pale ray,
To roam in SADNESS on the sea-beat shore.
Now glide the inconstant shadows over the plain,
The broad moon swimming through the broken clouds,
The gleam of waters brightens on the main,
And anchored navies lift their wavering shrouds.
Deep silence reigns; save on the moory ground,
The long reed rustling to the passing gales,
The noise of dashing waves, and hallow sound
Of rushing winds, that murmur through the sails.
Far hence, ye pleasures of a mind at ease,
The sprightly joys, that rural scenes can yield,
When spring, led jocund by the softening breeze,
Wakes the glad morn, and robes the dewy field!
Far be the giddy raptures of the gay,
The midnight joys licentious youth can share,
When ruin, smiling over her destined prey,
In sweet allurements hides the deadly snare.
Mine be the music of the rolling wave,
The moonlight shadows and surrounding gloom;
Min^ the dread haunts of contemplation grave,
That lift the soul to scenes beyond the tomb.
Here while deep midnight holds her silent reign,
And fancy bears the ravished thought along,
Dark melancholy spreads her airy train,
And friendship calls, and grief inspires the song.
As through these mournful glooms I stretched my sight,
Mid sounds of death, that bid the soul attend,
Mid empty forms, and fleeting shapes of night,
Slowly I view a white-rob'd shade ascend,
That says -- "I once was St. John! from the bounds
Of unknown realms beneath the dreary wave,
Where ever-restless floods, in nightly rounds,
Roll their dark surges over my watery grave;
From seats, which never to mortal sight displayed,
The gates of dread eternity surround,
In night concealed, and death's impervious shade,
My voice ascends: attend the warning sound!
Oh thou, attend! who flushed with early bloom,
In life's new spring, and vernal sweetness gay,
Heedless of fate, that must thy branch entomb,
Spread'st thy green blossoms to the morning ray.
With thee how late, how like, alas! to thee;
To mortal joys, by opening youth beguiled,
I stretched my airy wish, and followed free,
Where pleasure triumphed, and where fancy smiled.
Then, while fond hope her glittering pinions spread,
Mr. St. John was meditating a voyage to Europe.
Pointing to climes beyond the distant wave,
Even then, unnotic'd, over my destined head,
Hung death's dire form, and sealed me for the grave.
How vain the thought for many a joyous morn,
To taste of raptures unallay'd by woe!
At once from life and every pleasure torn,
From all I wished, and all I loved below.
The faithless morning, on our opening sails,
Smiled out serene, and smoothed our gliding way,
While the gay vessel, fanned by breathing gales,
Played on the placid bosom of the sea.
When lo, descending on the darkening wind,
Burst the dire storm, -- and feeble to sustain
The rushing blasts, in warring fury joined,
The frail skiff sinks beneath the surging main.
And see, afar the oarless boat conveys
The trembling sailors to the distant shore;
Alone, of aid bereft, with one last gaze,
I sunk in deeps: and sunk to rise no more.
In that sad hour, what fearful scenes arise,
What pangs distress, what unknown fears dismay!
When future worlds disclosing on our eyes,
The trembling soul forsakes the kindred day!
Before the awful bar, the Almighty throne,
In dread I Have stood the Eternal Judge to see,
And fixed in bliss, or doomed to endless moan,
Have heard the long, the unrevers'd decree:
Nor earth must know the rest." -- Where art thou now,
In youthful joys my partner and my friend;
Of those blessed hours thy fortune gave below,
Of all our hopes is this the fatal end?
Ah what availed that energy of mind,
The heights of science, and of arts to explore,
That early led where genius unconfined,
Spreads her glad feast, and opes her classic store!
Ah what availed, in earthly bliss so frail,
The fame gay-dawning on thy rising years!
Ah what availed, -- for what could then avail? --
Thy friend's deep sorrows, or thy country's tears!
In pleasure's paths, by vivid fancy led,
Mid every hope that blooming worth could raise,
The wings of death with fatal horror spread,
Blank'd the bright promise of thy future days.
So, from the louring west, the darkened clouds
Rush on the sun and dim his orient ray,
And hateful night in glooms untimely shrouds
The ascending glories of the vernal day.
Adieu, my friend, so dear in vain, adieu,
Till some short days their fleeting courses roll;
Soon shall our steps thine earlier fate pursue,
Moved in the race, and crowding to the goal.
The approaching hour shall see the sun no more,
Wheel his long course, or spread his golden ray;
Soon the vain dream of mortal life be over,
The brightness dawning of celestial day.
Then joined in bliss, as once in friendship joined,
May pitying Heaven our purer spirits raise,
Each crime atton'd, each virtue well refined,
To pass a blessed eternity of praise! --
AMBITION. AN ELEGY. BY THE SAME.
HENCE, gaudy Flattery, with thy siren song,
Thy fading laurels, and thy trump of praise,
Thy magic glass, that cheats the wondering throng,
And bids vain men, grow vainer, while they gaze.
For what the gain, tho nature have supplied
A tender soul, to feel the sting of pain?
That same how poor, that lifts our baseless pride,
And shows the heights our steps must never attain!
How vain those thoughts that through creation rove,
Returning fraught with images of woe!
Those gifts how vain that please not those we love!
With grief oppress^d, how small the gain to know!
And oh, that fate, in life's sequestered shade,
Had fixed the limits of my silent way,
Far from the scenes in noisy pomp arrayed,
Where hope and fame but flatter to betray.
The lark had called me at the birth of dawn,
My cheerful toils and rural sports to share;
Nor, when mild evening glimmer'd on the lawn,
Had sleep been frighted at the voice of care.
So the soft flocks in harmless pleasure stray,
Or sport in rapture on the flowery mead,
Enjoy the beauties of the vernal day,
And no sad prescience tells them they must bleed.
Then wild ambition never had swelled my heart,
Nor had my steps pursued the road to fame;
Then never had slander raised the envenomed dart,
Nor hung in vengeance over my hated name.
Nor views of bliss that never must be mine,
Urged the fond tear, or swelled the bursting sigh;
Nor tenderest pangs had bid my soul repine,
Nor torture warned me that my hopes must die.
Farewell, ye glittering phantoms of the mind,
The golden vision, or ambitious dream,
The fickle forms by fairy fancy joined,
The pride of laurels and the muse's theme.
Vain hope, adieu! thou dear deluding cheat,
Whose magic charm can burst the bonds of pain;
By thee decoyed, we clasp the gay deceit,
And plan the scenes of future joys in vain.
Come Sadness! come, mild sister of Despair,
The helpless sufferer's last support and friend,
Lead to those scenes that sooth the wretch's care,
Where life's false joys, and life itself, must end!
Well pleased, I wander over the solemn ground,
Where Death in horror holds his dread domain,
While night sits gloomy in the etherial round,
And swimming vapors cloud the dreary plain.
Ye ghosts, the tenants of the evening skies,
That sweep in sadness over the dusky vale,
Enrob'd in mists, I see your forms arise;
I hear your voices sounding in the gale!
Of life ye speak, and life's fantastic toys,
How vain the wish, that grasps at things below!
How disappointment lours on all our joys,
And hope bequeaths the legacy of woe!
Ye too, perhaps, while youth supplied its beam,
On fancy's pinions soaring to the sky,
Fed your deluded thoughts with many a dream,
Of love and same, and future scenes of joy.
Like yours how soon our empty years shall fade,
Past, like the vapors that in clouds decay,
Past, like the forms that flit along the shade,
Ourselves as worthless, and as vain as they!
Here the kind haven greets our weary sail,
When the rude voyage of troubled life is over,
Safe from the stormy blast, the faithless gale,
The gulphs that threaten, and the waves that roar.
The heart no more the pains of love shall share,
Nor torturing grief the wayward mind enslave,
Through toil-worn years fatigued with restless care,
Peace, sought in vain, awaits us in the grave.
Nor peace alone! death bre^ks the sullen gloom,
That dims the portals of eternal day,
Bids the freed soul her nobler powers assume,
And wing from woes her heaven-directed way.
Fly hence ye shades! ye brighter scenes arise!
Ye joys celestial, opening on my view!
Vanish, ye griefs, that dwell beneath the skies,
Ye streaming tears, ye fond complaints, adieu!
THE PROPHECY OF BALAAM. Numbers: Chap. xxiii. 24. An IRREGULAR ODE. Written,
Anno 1773. BY THE SAME.
I
ON lofty Peor's brow,
That rears its forehead to the sky,
And sees the airy vapors fly,
And clouds in bright expansion sail below,
Sublime the Prophet stood.
Beneath its pine-clad side,
The distant world her various landscape yields;
Winding vales and lengthening fields,
Streams in sunny maze that flowed;
Stretched immense in prospect wide
Forests green in summer's pride;
Waving glory gilds the main,
The dazzling sun ascending high;
While earth's blue verge at distance dimly seen,
Spreads from the aching sight, and fades into the sky.
II.
Beneath his feet along the level plain,
The host of Israel stretched in deep array;
Their tents rose frequent on the enameled green;
Bright to the winds the colored streamers play.
Red from the slaughter of their foes,
In awful steel the embattled heroes stood;
High over the shaded ark in terror rose
The cloud, the dark pavilion of their God.
Before the Seer's unwilling eyes,
The years unborn ascend in sight.
He saw their opening morn arise,
Bright in the sun shine of the favoring skies;
While from the unsufferable light,
Fled the dire demons of opposing night.
No more, elate with Stygian aid,
He waves the wand's enchanted power,
And baleful through the hallowed glade,
His magic footsteps rove no more.
Filled with prophetic fire, he lifts his hand,
Over the dim host in deep array;
And awed by Heaven's supreme command,
Pours forth the rapture of the living lay.
III.
Fair, oh Israel, are thy tents!
Blessed the banners of thy fame!
Blessed the dwelling of the saints,
Where their God displays his name!
Fair as these vales, that stretch their lawns so wide,
As gardens smile, in flowery meadows fair,
As rising cedars on the streamlet's side,
That lift their branches to the fragrant air!
Vain is magic's deadly force,
Vain the dire enchanter's spell,
Waving wand, or charmed curse,
Vain the pride, the rage of hell!
From Peor's lofty brow,
I see the eternal powers revealed,
And all the lengthened plains below
O'ershrouded by the Almighty shield!
God, their guardian God, descends,
And over the favored host Omnipotence extends.
IV.
And see, bright Judah's star ascending
Fires the east with crimson day,
Aweful over his foes impending,
Pours wide the lightning of his ray,
And flames destruction on the opposing world!
Death's broad banners, dark, unfurled,
Wave over his blood-encircled way!
Sceptered king of Moab, hear,
Deeds, that future times await,
Deadly triumph, war severe,
Israel's pride, and Moab's fate!
What echoing terrors burst upon my ear!
What aweful forms in ghastly horror rise!
Empurpled rage, pale ruin, heart-struck fear,
In scenes of blood ascend, and skim before my eyes!
V.
Dimly on the skirt of night
Over thy sons the cloud impends,
Louring storm with wild affright
Loud the astonished either rends.
Long hosts, emblaz'd with sun-bright shields appear,
And victory severe
Sits on their lightening swords: along the shores,
Armed with the bolts of fate,
Impending navies wait;
Above, around, the shout of ruin roars.
For naught avails, that clad in spiry pride,
Thy rising cities glittered on the day;
The vengeful arms wave devastation wide,
And give thy pompous domes to mouldering flames a prey.
VI.
Edom bows her lofty head;
Seer submits her vanquished bands;
Amalek, of hosts the dread,
Sinks beneath their wasting hands.
See, whelmed in smoky heaps, the ruined walls,
Rise over thy sons' unhappy grave;
Low their blasted glory falls;
Vain the pride that could not save!
Israel's swords arrest their prey;
Back to swift fate thy frighted standards turn;
Black desolation rolls along their way;
War sweeps in front, and flames behind them burn:
And death, and dire dismay,
Unfold their universal grave, and open the mighty urn.
THE DOWNFALL OF BABYLON. An Imitation of sundry passages in the thirteenth and
fourteenth Chapters of the Prophecy of Isaiah, and the eighteenth Chapter of
the Revelations of St. John. Written, anno 1775. BY THE SAME.
IT WAS now the day, devote to blessed repose,
From realms of darkness, when the Savior rose,
In Patmos's Isle, with sacred light inspired,
The great Apostle from the world retired;
Before his eyes eternal wonders roll,
And future visions open on his soul,
Unfolding skies the scenes of fate display,
And Heaven descending in the beam of day.
He saw with joy the promised Church arise,
Famed through the earth, and favored from the skies;
A starry crown invests her radiant head,
Around her form the solar glories spread,
Her power, her grace, by circling realms approved,
By angels guarded, and by Heaven beloved:
Till mystic Babel, with blaspheming pride,
For idol forms the eternal power defied;
Then martyred blood the holy offering sealed,
And persecution dyed the carnag'd field,
Religion sunk in superstitious lore,
And Heaven-built temples swam with fainted gore.
But not in rest, till virtue should expire,
Slept the just vengeance of eternal ire.
The Seer beheld, till God's avenging han^
Smote the proud foe, and swept the guilty (...)*
Then pious rapture triump'd on his tongue*
And inspiration breathed the exulting song.
"What sudden fall has dimmed thy boasted ray,
Son of the Morn! bright Phosphor of the day!
How sunk in death, a victim of the grave,
Thy pride so vaunting, and thy arm so brave!
Where now the haughty boast?" Above the skies,
Over the starr'd arch my towering steps shall rise,
To Heaven's high walls my glories shall ascend,
My throne be 'stablish'd, and my power extend,
Over the wide world to stretch my arm abroad;
A God in splendour, and in might a God."
Behold from rage the bold oppressor ceased;
Thy glory wan, and all thy treasures waste!
Eternal wrath, awakened over thy land,
Tears the weak scepter from the injurious hand;
H^aven gives its captive sons a kind release,
And earth smiles, joyous, at the songs of peace.
Lo, at thy fall, in realms of night below,
Hell greets thine entrance to the worlds of woe!
See from their thrones, along the infernal shade,
Rise the dark specter of the mighty dead,
Friends to thy sway, and partners in thy crimes,
Kings once on earth, and tyrants in their times!
"And art thou fallen?" -- their looks of wonder crave --
"Swept, undistinguished, to the darksome grave?
Over thy pale cheek funereal damps are spread,
And shrouds of sable wrap thee with the dead;
What awed the world oblivion's shadows hide,
And glad worms revel on the wrecks of pride.
Is this the Power, whose once tremendous eye
Shook the wide earth, and dared the avenging sky,
Opposing kingdoms from their sceptres hurled,
And spread sad ruin over the vanquished world?
Is this the Power, that rose in boasted state,
Proud judge of thrones, and arbiter of fate?
The Power, whose sorceries, used in every clime,
Stained the dark annals of recording time,
While persecution taught the infernal lore,
And zeal was sated with the martyr's gore? --
Lo! closed thine eyes that wont the Heavens to brave,
Exposed thou lie, an outcast from the grave;
No splendid urn thy funeral dust contains,
Nor one kind turf conceals thy sad remains;
For thee no marble lifts its tablet high,
Where kings deceased in mournful glory lie;
For just renown divides thee from the blessed,
Nor decks the clods that lull thy bones to rest."
And see Destruction from the Almighty hand,
Sweeps her broad besom over thy guilty land;
Careering flames attend her dreadful way,
And rising darkness intercepts the day;
The dim sun sinks in fearful shades of night,
The moon and planets veil their trembling light,
Over thy doomed walls the louring storms ascend,
And fate's dread omens mark thy hastening end.
See mid the o'erarching canopy of shade,
An angel-form, in robes of blood arrayed,
Lifts his red arm, that bids the tempest rise,
Winged with the etherial vengeance of the skies;
And calls the wintry winds, that all around,
Roll on the storms, and sweep the deluged ground,
And far beneath, where direful earthquakes sleep,
Bursts the dark chambers of the affrighted deep!
Lo! Heaven avenging pours the fiery tide;
Thy whelmed walls sink, thy tottering turrets slide,
Thy glittering domes sulphurous torrents lave,
And doom thy seats, a desert and a grave!
For there no more shall gay assemblies meet,
Crowd thy full marts, and throng thy spacious street;
No more the bridegroom's cheerful voice shall call
The viol, sprightly in the sounding hall;
No more the lamp shall yield her cheerful light,
Gild thy lone roofs and sparkle through the night.
Each morn shall view thy desolated ground,
With falling domes and shattered spires around,
And clad in weeds, in wild confusion thrown,
The marble trophy, and the sculptured stone.
No suture age thy glories shall recall,
Thy turrets lift, or build thy desert wall;
Where the gilt palace pierced the admiring skies,
The owl shall stun thee with funereal cries,
The baleful dragon through thy gardens rove,
And wolves usurp the consecrated grove.
No shepherd there the wandering flock shall spread,
Nor, tired, repose beneath the tented shed;
No stranger there with devious footsteps stray,
Where circling horrors guard the fated way;
Eternal Ruin rears her standard wide,
And vengeance triumphs over the realms of pride."
THE SPEECH OF PROTEUS TO ARISTAEUS, CONTAINING THE STORY OF ORPHEUS AND
EURIDICE Translated from the fourth Book of Virgil's Georgies. A Collegiate
Exercise: Written, Anno 1770. BY THE SAME.
A GOD pursues thee with immortal hate,
By crimes provoked that prompt the wrath of sat.
In guiltless woe the hapless Orpheus died,
And calls the powers to avenge his injured bride.
Along the streams, with flying steps she strove,
To shun the fury of thy lawless love;
Unhappy fair! nor on the fated way
Saw the dire snake that ambush'd for her prey.
Her sister Dryades wail'd the fatal wound;
The lofty hills their melting cries resound;
Then wept the rocks of Rhodope, the towers
Of high Pangaeus, and the Rhesian shores;
The mournful sounds the Attic lands convey,
And Hebrus rolls in sadden'd waves away.
He, on his lyre, essayed with tuneful art,
To sooth the ceaseless anguish of his heart;
Thee, his fair bride, to lonely grief a prey,
Thee sung at rising, and at falling day:
Then sought the realms of death and Stygian Jove,
Through black'ning horrors of the infernal grove,
Mid direful ghosts, and powers of deep despair,
Unknown to pity, and unmoved by prayer.
From hell's dark shores, to Orpheus' melting song,
On every side the gloomy nations throng;
Thin, airy shades, pale specter void of light,
Like fancied forms that glide athwart the night.
As flitting birds in summer's checkered shade,
Dance on the boughs, and flutter through the glade,
Or seek the woods when night descends amain,
And pours in storms along the wintry plain:
Men, matrons, round the sweet musician pressed,
The spouseless maidens, and the youths unblest,
Snatched from their parents' eyes, or doomed to yield
To war's dire combats on the bloody field;
Whom the deep fens, that drain the moory ground,
And black Cocytus reedy lake surround,
Where baleful Styx her mournful margin laves,
And deadly Lethe rolls the oblivious waves.
Hell heard the song; and fixed in deep amaze,
On the sweet bard the snaky Furies gaze;
Grim Cerberus hung entranced; and ceased to reel
The giddy circle of Ixion's wheel.
These dangers 'scap'd, he seeks the upper air,
^late wi^^ joy, and followed by the fair:
Such law the Fates imposed: but doomed to prove
The sudden madness of ill-omen'd love!
Could fate relent, or melt at human woe,
A venial crime, were venial aught below!
Light gleam'd at hand; the Stygian shades retire;
With wishes wild, and vanquished with desire,
His fears forgot, he turned; his lovely bride
Given to his hope, with trembling glance espied.
There end his joys, and vanished into air
His fancied raptures and his fruitless care,
Broke is the league -- and thrice tremendous roars
The distant thunder on the infernal shores.
What rage, she cried, has dashed our joys again,
Paired in sad fates, and doomed to endless pain.
I hear the voice that calls me back to woes,
My swimming eyes eternal slumbers close.
A last farewell! the infernal glooms arise,
And, wrapped in night, my parting spirit flies;
Vain my weak arms, extended to restore
The bridal hand, that must be thine no more.
She said, and vanished instant from his eye,
Like melting smoke that mingles with the sky.
No kind embrace, his deepening grief to allay,
No farewell word, tho much he wished to say,
Nor hope remained. Stern Charon now no more
Consents to waft him to the infernal shore.
Forever snatched from all his soul could love,
What prayers, what tears, what songs, the Fates could move?
Her, breathless, pale, to mansions of the grave,
The bark bore floating on the Stygian wave.
In gelid caves, with horrid glooms arrayed,
Where cloud-topt hills project an awful shade,
Along the margin of the desert shore,
Where lovely Strymon's rushing waters roar,
Seven ^^apless months he wail'd his fatal love,
His ravished bride, and blamed the hand of Jove.
St^rn tigers softened at the tuneful sound,
The thickets move, the forests dance around:
So in so^e popl^r's shade, with soothing song,
Sad Ph^lo^ela mourns her captive young;
When some rude swain has found the unfeather'd prey,
Her nest despoil^d, and borne the prize away;
Through the long night she breathes her plaintive strain,
The slow, deep moan resounds, and echoes over the plain.
Pleasure no more his soul estranged could move,
The charms of beauty, or the joys of love.
Alone he strayed, where wintry Tanais flows,
Through deserts whitened with eternal snows.
Mourned his lost bride, the infernal powers' deceit,
And curs^d the vain, illusive, gifts of fate.
When Bacchus' Orgies slain'd the midnight skies,
Their proffers scorned, the Thracian matrons rise;
Their hopeless rage the bleeding victim tore,
His severed limbs are scattered on the shore;
Rent from his breathless corse, swift Hebrus sweeps
His gory visage to the distant deeps.
Yet when cold death sat trembling on his tongue.
With fainting soul, Euridice he sung,
Ah dear, ah lost Euridice, he cries,
Euridice, the echoing shore replies.
THE TRIAL OF FAITH. THIS Poem is reprinted from the New Haven Gazette, and the
Connecticut Magazine, published by Meigs and Dana, for the year 1736; -- where
it forms three Numbers of a Periodical Paper, undertaken by Dr. Dwight -- and
is introduced by the following Preface, viz. -- The enclosed Poem is handed you
for publication. I have long thought that the Bible furnished many subjects for
poetry, far more deserving the ambition and efforts of genius, than those to
which it is commonly dedicated. I do not mean merely that they are subjects
more friendly to virtue, but to poetry. They are more sublime, novel,
beautiful, agreeable, and in every way interesting. -- Perhaps this experiment
may not have been so happily made, as to elucidate the truth of this opinion.
But as it is, it is submitted to the judgment of your readers. Should it have
the happy influence to induce even one person of poetical talents, to apply
those talents to this method of ornamenting his own character, and that of his
country, I shall think my labors not unhappily directed.

BY TIMOTHY DWIGHT, D. D.
PART I. DANIEL, CHAP. I.
BENEATH the dawn, over Babel's fruitful plain,
In proud effulgence moved the conquering train.
Full on the sun's broad beam their buckler's ray
Streaked the glad fields, and gave a mimic day.
With spiry splendour varying standards glowed;
In pomp sublime majestic chieftains rode;
The silver clarions gave a solemn sound,
And cars unnumber'd, thundering shook the ground.
There JUDAH's spoils in proud display were borne;
There purple vesture mocked the rising morn;
There sacred vessels, rich from Ophir's mine,
Beamed their strong light, and imag'd art divine;
There moved the prince, the queen, the lord, the sage,
And hapless captive throngs of every age.
High-thron'd, the monarch from his golden car,
Surveyed the trophies of successful war.
Majestic, tall, the mighty hero rose,
Born to command, and dreadful to his foes:
His lofty limbs, enrob'd in rich attire
Of steel, and gold, were circled round with fire:
His pride, his soul, expanded at the sight,
And his glad eye balls warmed with living light.
As over the captive train he cast his eyes,
And heard, unmoved, their mingled groans and cries,
Four youths, companions, silent passed along,
By form distinguished from the vulgar throng.
Fair over them trembled beauty's purple flame;
Their eyes, as angels', cast a sunny beam;
Sublime their port; serene their solemn lock;
By sear unawed, by heaviest woes unbroke;
To ills superior; earth and time above;
But touched with kindred woe, and yearning love.
The monarch gazed. -- His fierce and hardy mind
Then first with sweet and tender thoughts refined;
He felt each nerve with strange emotion thrill,
And down each cheek new tears in silence steal.
No more the host, no more the spoils appeared;
No more the trump's inspiring voice was heard;
Fixed as he gazed, to soft compassion won,
The pomp was buried, and the triumph gone.
To ARIOCH then, his favored, faithful slave,
The turning prince his sovereign pleasure gave:
"See thou, my ARIOCH, those bright, youthful forms;
"What grace surrounds them, and what beauty warms!
"With what fair pride, magnificently great,
"They move superior to their humble fate!
"For arms, for empire, not for bondage made,
"They win my soul, and claim imperial aid.
"Go then, my ARIOCH, go, their steps pursue;
"With gentle sympathy their souls subdue;
"Their monarch's favor to their hearts ensure;
"Win them from grief; disrobe their rags impure;
"Their course immediate to the palace bend;
"Let faithful ASHPENAZ their steps attend;
"Superior far to all in every grace,
"Among the chosen youths appoint the place."
The monarch spoke. The faithful chief obeyed,
And to the palace strait the youths conveyed.
There ASHPENAZ, the eunuch's prince, received,
To hope restored them, and from want relieved.
Cheered with kind words, their every wish obeyed,
And thus, with soft and tender accent, said: --
"All-lovely youths! attired with every grace,
'The best, and brightest, of your hapless race,
'Think not, from war's dire scenes, the Assyrian mind,
'To love imp^rvious, or to misery blind.
'Even the great prince, our mighty realm who sways,
'Train'd in fierce wars, and nursed in bloody ways,
'Though proudly borne on Conquest's lofty wings,
'Lord of a world, and king of countless kings,
'Yet bade me kindly every want supply,
'No hope extinguish, and no joy deny.
'By his command, on kingly dainties fed,
'Serv'd by his slaves, and in his palace bred,
'In every art, in every mystery trained,
'By lords approved, by royal love sustained.
'Your lives, in peace serene, shall glide away,
'New joys returning with returning day.
'For me, my bosom, not of stubborn steel,
'Well knows to love, and long has learned to feel.
'Your woes, O Youths, your nation's fate severe,
'Pierce my sad soul, and prompt the tender tear.
'Each gentle act, that marks a parent's hand,
'From faithful ASHPENAZ assured command;
'From earliest years, to youths a constant guide,
''Tis joy to bless them, and to serve is pride."
Thus spoke the prince. With meek, but solemn grace,
The elder youth returned this sad address:
'O Prince of Eunuchs, soothing friend of woe!
'Thy gentle solace bids our sorrows flow:
'With love, with gratitude, our bosoms burn,
'But, pierced with grief, our hapless nation mourn.
'For ah! her sons, of every good forlorn,
'Waste with dire want, or shrink from piercing scorn;
'Or rage, in slaughter bids them weltering roll;
'Or gloomy slavery blasts the withered soul;
'Her childless mothers spread the reeking ground;
'Her babes, unpitied, glut the hungry hound;
'Levell'd in dust, her heaven-built Temple lies,
'And SALEM's smoking ruins fill the skies.
'More dread these splendors show the fearful doom,
'As day more deeply shades the darksome tomb:
'Then, mid all joys, permit our hearts to mourn,
'Nor think thy goodness meets a base return."
He spoke. The prince, to chambers proud and fair,
Led the sad youths, and soothed their rising care,
Their graceful forms in splendid garments dressed,
And kindly cheered their troubled minds to rest.
As now all-fragrant spread the rich repast,
Cates of all climes, and wines of every taste;
Deep cares revolving in his troubled breast,
His chosen friends the elder youth addressed: --
"O youths, refined in fierce affliction's flame,
'Like gold, refulgent with undrossy beam!
'Now new alarms your virtuous minds assail,
'New-dangers tempt, and untried foes prevail.
'As icy rocks, by winter beat in vain*
'Yeild to mild suns, and melt in vernal rain,
'So the firm heart, no cruelty could move,
'May lose each virtue in the beams of love.
'Those cates, composed of all things rich and rare,
'Cull'd with nice art, and dressed with skilful care,
'From truth's fair path our footsteps softly charm,
'Our prayers enfeeble, and our faith disarm.
'To purest food the sacred law confined,
'The taste luxurious, and the wandering mind.
'Fix'd be our hearts its high behests to obey,
'Nor let vain banquets lure our feet astray.
'From humble pulse serenest peace shall spring,
'Health nerve the limbs, and lift the mental wing;
'The soul, the form, with health and beauty bloom,
'And heaven complacent grant a milder doom."
Thus spoke the youth. With smiles of pure delight,
In duty's path the assenting friends unite,
To heaven the feast, the roving wish resigned,
And gained the banquet of the obedient mind.
The courteous prince, by soft entreaties led,
Indulged their prayer, and gave the humble bread.
Heaven blessed its sons. -- As mid the inferior grove,
Four beauteous pines ascend the clouds above,
Mid heats, and droughts, and storms, and frost, and snow,
Through the full year with living verdure grow,
Over every wood, with pride majestic, reign,
And wave exulting round the adjacent plain:
In port, in stature, thus, with thoughts sublime,
And worth, superior to the assaults of time,
Their gentle manners, great beyond disguise,
Friendly to man, and faithful to the skies,
The favored captives grew, and learned to soar
Through all the mysteries of Chaldean lore;
Learned how the stars in solemn splendour roll;
How countless realms compose one mighty whole;
What arts, what mazes, through the system run;
How hosts are marshalled, and how fields are won.
THE TRIAL OF FAITH. BY THE SAME.
PART II. DANIEL, CHAP. II.
THUS rose the youths, by lords and kings approved,
By earth exalted, and by Heaven beloved,
When, lost in slumbers as the sovereign lay,
What time fair Phosphor sings the approach of day,
Full to his eyes a vision rose sublime,
Big with dread mysteries of ascending time.
Alarmed, awaked, he left the thorny bed;
His sleep all vanished, and the vision fled:
In vain he tried the wonders to restore,
The fleeted phantom met his eyes no more.
Then deep convulsions shook his stormy mind,
That knew no crosses, and no wish resigned.
At once he summoned all the learned and wise,
Skilled to explain, and artful to disguise,
Practiced to bode, in words of soothing guile,
New feats, new triumphs, and new realms of spoil.
And thus the king -- "Let every sage and seer,
Dreamer of dreams, and star-taught prophet hear!
This night, as sunk in sleep, your monarch lay,
When truth's clear dreams attend approaching day,
Before my eyes a solemn vision rose,
Clear, full, distinct, as morn's full splendour glows;
Filled with dread scenes, with acts of mighty name,
With change of empires, and with years of fame.
I waked -- I rose -- but all the events of night
Fled from m^ view, and took their final flight.
Then hear ye sages; borne by skill sublime,
Through the dark ages of ascending time,
Explore the vision, make the wonders known;
And tell what changes wait the Assyrian throne."
The Hero spoke. Around the spacious room
The strange command diffused a solemn gloom;
When thus a hoary sage -- "O king divine,
Be endless life, and power, and honor thine!
Thy high behests our hearts delight to obey;
We own thy glory, and we bless thy sway.
But, O dread Prince, thy visions to reveal,
Tra^scends the efforts of terrestial skill.
Could thou, by m^mory's aid, the scenes restore,
Easy thy seers the mystery would explore;
Would teach, for thee what crowns of triumph bloom,
Or what new nations meet the general doom.
The Gods alone, to whose unbounded eye
Spread, in clear sight, all realms beneath the sky,
In obvious view the stars immensely roll,
Or on fleet pinions roves the wandering soul,
Can bid the eventful scenes of night return,
Or open the vanished visions of the morn.
A new command, a labor yet undone,
Thy will enjoins us, and thy voice makes known,
Nor lord required, nor prophet ever divined,
The secret motions of the mazy mind."
The monarch heard. With sudden anger bright,
From his fierce eye balls flashed a withering light:
Sternly he cried, -- "Base, impious wretches, hear
What wrath betides you, and what fate is near.
If, taught by heaven, your hearts the dream divine,
Wealth waits your steps, and crowns before you shine:
Prophets of truth, your race shall then be seen,
Loved by the Gods, and precious gifts to men.
But if this feat your purblind skill denies,
Each wretch, who soils the robe of wisdom, dies.
Mocked by your boasts, my soul, no longer tame,
Shall rouse to sense, and bid just vengeance flame;
Each pampered carcass this right hand shall tear,
Glut the robbed wolves, and feast the fowls of air.
Your hosts, your houses, give to flames a prey,
And sweep the nuisance from the world away."
He spoke: the seers withdrew. -- The realm around,
From voice to voice diffused the dismal sound.
From ARIOCH, ASHPENAZ the tidings knew!
With thoughts all anxious to the youths he flew,
Rehearsed the tale -- and "You, by worth betrayed,
Must soon," he cried, "be numbered with the dead."
"Fear not, O Prince," -- the elder youth replied:
"While heaven commands no ills the just betide.
Virtue refines, beneath affliction's power,
As gold runs beauteous from dissolving ore.
To light the dream shall rise, or, if the sky
Ordains our death, it is highest gain to die*
Unmoved, our hearts, that thousand deaths have known
In Judah's woes, will meet the pangs of one;
From toil, and grief, and shame, unpinion'd rise,
And mix with angels in their native skies.
But haste, ah haste, and faithful ARIOCH bring,
E're he commence the vengeance of the king*
This night, shall Heaven the vanished scenes restore,
And save the prophets from vindictive power."
The Prince to ARIOCH flew, and, bathed in tears,
Rehearsed the tale of mingled hopes, and fears.
He came: And pleased to stay the monarch's rage,
Led to the throne the young, unbearded sage.
With mild regard, the softening sovereign viewed,
While worth, and beauty, half his wrath subdued,
Heard him, with modest mien, his hope propose,
That Heaven, ere morn, the vision would disclose,
And bade glad ARIOCH vengeance dire delay,
'Till the wished hour should open the promised day.
Those hours, the youths consumed in fasts severe,
And the pure fervence of effectual prayer.
The God of worlds, to whom, with beam divine,
Fairer than morn the sons of Zion shine,
With love all bounteous bade the vision rise,
Dread, full, and clear, to DANIEL's slumbering eyes.
At earliest dawn, the youths, in bright array,
Toward the new palace bent their early way;
Through rows of lords, and rows of kings they passed,
While eyes of wonder thousands on them cast;
For round the court had spread the fearful doom,
That marked the guiltless Magi to the tomb.
Before the throne the beardless prophets stood;
Round their fair forms the grace of virtue glowed;
Pleased, the great monarch viewed* With softer ray,
His eye balls smiled their fiercer flames away;
His settling visage lost its wrathful form,
As Spring looks fair behind a wintery storm.
"O KING of kings?" the elder youth began --
"Thy dread request transcends the power of man.
In vain thy seers the vision would regain;
Like ours, their wishes, toils, and tears, are vain.
It Is God alone the wonders can display,
The God, who formed the heaven, the earth, and sea;
Naked, and clear, before whose searching eye,
The soul, the thoughts, and deep affections lie;
He brought the eventful vision to thy sight,
And he again commands it into light.
"What time the dew of peace around thy bed
The silent slumbers of the morning spread,
Dread to thine eyes a wondrous image shone,
Awful in form, in splendour like the sun.
Its head of flaming gold, its arms (...) breast,
Of silver fair, inferior worth confessed;
Its thighs and belly glowed with brazen light;
Its legs, of iron, marked resistless might;
Its iron feet, commix'd with miry clay,
Displayed unsolid power, to time a prey.
When lo! spontaneous, from the mountains rent,
A stone came thundering down, with swift descent;
Full on the form, with mighty force it burst,
Crushed all its limbs, and ground its frame to dust;
Borne by the winds, thou saw its ruins fly,
Like chaff, when whirlwinds sweep the summer sky.
And as a rising cloud, but just beheld,
Approaching, widens over the aerial field,
Expands, ascends, and, slow through either driven,
Sails through the immense, and fills the bounds of heaven:
So the small cliff to rise, and swell, began,
Spread through the fields, the neighboring groves o'er-ran,
Over towns, over realms, over mountains, left the eye,
Uprose beyo^^ (...) clouds, and heaved the boundless sky.
"'It Is thus, O king! the Lord of Heaven declares,
What scenes roll onward with the tide of years.
By us, his sovereign voice to thee makes known,
And tells what changes wait the Assyrian throne.
"Thou art this head of gold: Thy power sublime,
Rules thousand kings, and spreads through every clime.
But soon thy glory hastens to decay,
Soon the bright arms commence a humbler sway;
That too shall sail; the brazen kingdom rise,
Like ocean, spreading to surrounding skies.
As iron then an empire strong shall spring,
Subdue each realm, and vanquish every king:
Beneath its wondrous power, all nature yields,
Europe's lone wilds, and Asia's cultured fields.
Hence various kings, to art, and force, a prey,
As iron potent, yet dissolved like clay:
Unsound, unsolid, shall their empire rise,
Varying, as clouds their changes in the skies.
In those far distant days, over every land,
Shall God's dread scepter rear its high command:
Before its power, resisting powers decay;
Nations, and kings, and empires, melt away;
Through unknown wilds the vast dominion roll,
Extend its conquering force from pole to pole;
From morn's far regions reach the shores of even,
Fill earth, and time, and rear its pomp to heaven.
Thus, King of kings! the heavens thy dream restore,
And teach the changes of terrestial power."
The monarch heard, and looked, when heavenly flame,
Round the fair youths should cast a golden beam;
Or over their limbs instinctive lightnings run;
Or rainbow'd pinions lift them to the sun.
Prostrate to earth he fell: and, -- "Oh!" he cries,
"Your God is Lord of gods, and worlds, and skies:
He, only he, could make these visions known;
Let praise, and glory, wait his heavenly throne."
To DANIEL, then the raptured hero bade
Incense be fired, and rich oblations paid;
Over his prime lords his favorite place ordained,
A prince to every king, and every land:
While, high over BABEL's realm, his partners sat
In kingly favor, and judicial state.
Wherever they passed, pursuing wonder came;
The Magi blessed, the children lisp'd their name;
To them were Judah's prayers and blessings given,
And the poor marked them as the sons of Heaven.
THE TRIAL OF FAITH. BY THE SAME.
PART III. DANIEL, CHAP. III.
AND now once more, the spacious empire round,
War's fearful clarion ceased its shrilling sound;
Her voice harmonious, on subsiding gales,
Sweet peace resounded through the gladdening vales:
When lo, new fears the faithful friends await,
And other trials lour'd approaching fate.
Long through the monarch's soul the project ran,
(Grateful to proud and heaven-dethroning man)
To bind the soul, the conscience to enchain,
And force one worship through his wide domain.
Fired with the fond design, an image fair,
Rich with pure gold, and gem'd with many a star.
He formed, fair image of the morning sun,
Acknowledged guardian of the Assyrian throne.
To this, his soul decreed mankind should bow,
Each victim burn, and rise each sacred vow,
And bade his mighty lords direct their way
To meet their sovereign, on the appointed day.
North of proud Babel's walls, from sky to sky,
The plain of Dura left the laboring eye:
There willows waved over Tygris flowery side:
There broad Euphrates rolled his mighty tide.
This the dread scene the monarch's will ordained;
And hither thronged the lords of many a land.
As now the destined morn her luster shed,
Here over the fields a host immensely spread;
Kings, nobles, chieftains, every sage and seer,
And hosts of slaves, and warriors gathered here.
Bright rose, in pomp divine, the imperial sun;
Light, life, and joy danced round his golden throne;
The heavens unclouded smiled a fairer blue;
Reviving beauty clothed the world anew;
As on old ocean glows the sun's broad ray,
And lights his glassy fields with mimic day;
So, kindled by his beams, around the plain,
A new morn trembled over the unnumber'd train;
From helms, and shields, and steeds, and cars, aspires
A general glory of immingling fires:
The Tygris brightened in the golden beam,
And sweeter murmurs softened over the stream.
On a tall pedestal, before them shone
The sacred image of the rising sun;
In solemn pomp, a hero rose sublime,
His eye deep piercing through the scenes of time.
When first the orb, ascending from the main,
Cast his far levelled beams along the plain,
The form superb with every splendour shone,
Streaked the gay fields, and seemed another sun.
There the deep ruby poured a crimson ray;
The sunny topaz shed a rival day:
Of every hue the mimic rainbow came,
And joined its varied lights in one transcendant flame.
Far ^ound the plain the throng unnumber'd stood,
And gazed in silence on the imag'd god,
When thus the heralds cried, "With reverent ear
Your Monarch's voice, ye kings and nations, hear,
What time the notes of mingled music roll,
With magic influence on the enraptured soul,
Before yon golden form, ye suppliants all
Prostrate on earth, with sacred homage, fall.
They spoke: as, borne through some far winding vale,
The voice of ocean leads the springing gale;
More loud, more solemn from the distant shore,
The slow, deep murmurs rise, and swell, and roar;
Propp'd on his staff, the hoary seaman stands,
And calls back happier times, and other lands;
Through his limbs thrills the youth-renewing charm,
And skies, and winds, and waves, his bosom warm:
So sudden, from ten thousand pipes and strings,
Loud, full and clear, the voice of music springs:
Over the glad plain, the breathing sounds exhale,
And swell, and wanton in the rising gale;
Now deep, majestic in dread pomp they roll;
Now softly languish on the yiedling soul;
Now solemn awe, now lively zeal inspire,
Wake heavenly dreams, and light romantic fire:
Now sunk on earth, the unnumber'd suppliants lie,
And smoking altars cloud the fragrant sky.
'Mid the vast throng, the friends of Daniel stood,
Nor bent the knee before the golden god.
Alone they stood; for at the palace gate,
So the king bade, in judgment Daniel sat,
The Magi saw, and straight, by envy led,
Flew to the king, and thus impatient said --
(For though the youths preserved from death their race,
Their bosoms sicken'd at their rivals' place)
O prince! regardless of thy dread decree,
The Jews, so honored, loved and blessed by thee,
Before yon golden God refuse to bow,
Present the prayer, or pay the solemn vow.
They slight thy gods, despise thy glorious name,
Nor heed the vengeance of the fearful flame.
Fired at the tale, before their sovereign king
He bade fierce guards the sons of Judah bring.
Serene they came. And dare your hearts, he cries,
Against the terrors of my anger rise?
Dare ye refuse before yon god to bow,
Present the prayer, and pay the solemn vow?
Then know from me, vain youths, repenting know,
Before you flames of fearful vengeance glow.
Nor hope to 'scape. What man, what god can save,
When I command you to the burning grave?
Be warned; be wise, your monarch's god adore;
Nor tempt the danger^ of resistless power.
He spoke. As cherubs, dressed in robes of light,
To earth, on heaven's high errands, wing their flight,
With solemn, sweet, complacent smile appear,
And blossom in immortal beauty here:
So, rosy splendour purpling over his face,
With meekly dignity and matchless grace,
Whilst on the king he cast a heavenly look,
That half reversed the sentence ere he spoke.
His lifted eye serene with solemn pride,
With gentle voice, the elder SHADRACH.
youth replied,
Well pleased, O prince! our hearts confess thy sway,
And all thy just commands with joy obey;
Faithful and patient, every toil sustain,
Unawed by danger, and unmoved by pain.
But the great GOD who formed the earth and seas,
First claims our homage, first demands our praise:
To him alone our knees in worship bend;
To him our praises and our prayers ascend;
His mighty arm his faithful sons shall save
From all the terrors of the burning grave;
Or bid the flames with harmless fury glow;
Or crown with endless bliss the transient woe.
But know, Assyrian prince! should ills most dire
Rend our racked hearts, and bid our lives expire;
Should virtue yield to unrelenting power*
And heaven forsake us in the dreadful hour;
Still to his throne our sacred thoughts shall rise,
Nor heed the gods that dwell beneath the skies.
He spoke: Again, with ecstasies of ire,
The king's full visage flashed infernal fire;
Fiercely he bade his guards the offenders bind,
And bear them sorth, their feet and arms confined,
Through the wide host their guilt and fate proclaim,
And light the furnace with a sevenfold dame.
The guards obeyed. As near the seat of woe,
Their eyes beheld the fearful vengeance glow,
They claimed, with fervent prayers, the pitying sky,
And fixed their souls to suffer and to die.
Serene, they saw the dark and dreadful fires,
Felt the fierce heat, and eyed the gloomy spires;
Serene, they heard the long, deep murmurs roar,
As distant, rising whirlwinds rend the shore.
Forth to the flames the unfriended youths they cast;
Nor 'scap'd the eager guard^ the scorching blast:
Far round the^^ shot a long unfolding spire,
And ^^ap'd the^^ (...) the mantling ^ire.
Mean time the king, the storm of vengeance o'e^,
His wrath provoked, his will opposed no more,
Felt other thoughts, and passions more refined
Compose the settling tumult of his mind.
Softening, he thought on all their conduct past,
Their virtue spotless, and their wisdom vast,
The wondrous dream, to them, with Daniel, given,
And all their pillar'd confidence in heaven.
His will they braved, of pains nor death afraid;
But still with mildest meekness disobeyed;
With such firm truth, such peaceful words denied,
As spoke the soul of virtue, not of pride.
Who knows, he whispered, but their well taught mind,
Serves nobler gods, with worship more refined?
Who knows but he who could the dream restore,
May save his favorites from the furnace' power?
As thus he spoke, with wandering course and slow,
He turned his footsteps toward the seat of woe:
'Till, with unguided, heedless feet he came
Where full before him burned the dismal flame.
When lo, dread scenes amazed his wilder'd sight:
The youths walked peaceful through the horrid light:
Harmless around them climbed the circling spires,
And mild as zephyrs played the lambent fires.
Hymns of sweet praise the adoring prophets sung,
And mid hoarse murmurs raptured warblings rung.
He gazed: at once, with light and beauty new,
Through the dread cavern sudden splendour flew;
A new dawn brightened over the dreary tomb,
Drowned the dark flames and quenched the sullen gloom.
So when the mo^n's bright face, in fair attire,
Through orient windows strikes the wintry fire,
The red flames wither in the etherial ray,
And all their earthly luster dies away.
He gazed; when lo! a form of bodied light,
Sprung from the sun and like the parent bright,
In slow and stately grandeur, trod the scene,
And the dread cavern smiled, a Heaven within.
Fair stars his wondrous crown, his strange attire
The lucid rainbow's many-colour'd fire;
Like threads of burnished silver, round his head,
His twinkling locks in solemn glory played;
In pomp divine above his shoulders borne,
And dipped in roseate beams of rising morn,
His long wings waving, fell: beneath his feet,
The unnumber'd streams of springing lightenings meet.
Full on the friends he beamed a sun-bright smile,
Transcendent meed of all their faith and toil!
Complacence pure, all thoughts, all minds above,
That opened the yearnings of redeeming love.
Such smiles salute the unbodied soul forgiven;
Such smiles improve the sainted race of Heaven;
Such smiles serene, with unextinguish'd ray,
Purpled the opening morn of endless day.
At once soft sounds of gratulation rung;
Strange music played, unseen musicians sung;
The solemn sounds with more than mortal fire,
Waved with mild warblings, over the etherial lyre:
Marbled, on earth the prostrate monarch lay,
And swoon'd his vanquished sense and soul away.
At length resummon'd from the gloomy (...),
His opening eyes beheld the vision sled.
With strong, but plaintive voice, amazed he cried,
Sons of the sky and earth's transcendent pride!
Forth from those dreary flames triumphant come,
And quit the mansions of the destined tomb.
Forth came the youths; unsing'd their fair attire,
Their limbs unconscious of the potent fire;
The king, the nobles marked with solemn ga^e,
And sighs and silence owned their deep amaze
Round the wide plain the (...) pomp decayed;
The music died, the vast assembly sled;
The knee unbent, the image ceased to adore,
The extinguished altars shed perfumes no more;
The golden form apart forsaken stood,
And not a suppliant hailed the sligh^^d god:
Round the wide circuit brooding silence lay,
And clouds of deepest gloom overcast the day.
Then through his boundless empire Heaven's great name,
The humbl'd monarch bade his criers proclaim.
To Heaven^s great God, they cried, your honors pay,
Let kings and nations own his sovereign sway;
With power divine to earth his angel came,
And saved his prophets from the sevenfold flame.
To Babel's walls returned the royal train:
Their wonted honors clothed the youths again.
With transport, Daniel heard his friends relate
Their glorious triumph over the destined fate;
The flames by heavenly power innoxious made;
The solemn glories on the angel shed;
In dreams the labored pomp forever gone;
The tyrant vanquished and his god overthrown.
Beloved, revered, the sons of virtue shined,
Heirs of the skies, and patrons of mankind.
Through all the Assyrian world their bounty spread;
All Judah triumphed; all oppression fled;
Their glad approach, instinctive homage blessed;
Crowds bent before them, lords and kings caressed;
To them the songs of every realm were given,
And ceaseless round them glowed the light of heaven.
ADDRESS OF THE GENIUS OF COLUMBIA, TO THE MEMBERS OF THE CONTINENTAL
CONVENTION. BY THE SAME.
FROM western skies, a cloud of glory came,
A small, dim spot, a torch of lambent flame;
Ascending, widening, slow the skirts unroll'd,
Rainbow'd with fire, and warmed with glowing gold.
There, borne by summoned winds, in pomp sublime,
His look far-piercing down the vast of time,
Where the long, narrowing vale deserts the eye,
Unbosom'd dimly on the eternal sky,
The Genius sat. He saw, when faction spent,
No more with war his darling kingdom rent,
The stream of kindred blood forbore to flow,
And morn faint trembled over the night of woe,
Called from each sister realm, the wise and great,
In Penn's fair walls, and awful council sat;
Poised in their hands, Columbia's mighty sway,
And tottering laws, and rights, and freedom, lay.
He saw, when fairer than the glow of even,
And bright as visions of disclosing heaven,
Full in his face a sacred splendour shone,
And the west kindled with another sun.
"All hail, my sons," he cried, "my voice attend,
Your country's genius, guardian, guide, and friend:
The counsels mark, that faithful friend supplies,
Attend, and learn the dictates of the skies.
Before you, lo! what scenes of glory spread,
The fairest, brightest, noblest, heaven has made:
Their home, where freedom, science, virtue, find,
The last recesses of oppressed mankind.
The immense of empire here, amazed, descry,
Where realms are lost, and hidden oceans lie;
Where Persia's vast would sink in shades concealed,
And Rome's proud world diminish to a field.
See, from the pole, where frozen fountains rise,
And pour their waters under torrid skies,
Where Rhines and Danubes, rills and streamlets play,
To swell the pomp of Missisippi's sea;
Where a zone's breadth majestic woods extend,
And other Andes over the storms ascend;
Where meadows bound the morn and evening rays;
Where plains are kingdom^, and where lakes are seas.
See through all climes the unmeasured empire run,
And drink each influence from the lingering sun;
Pure skies unbosom'd, days serenest roll,
And gales of health, from Darien fan the pole.
In each blessed clime, to crown industrious toil,
See every product spring from every soil,
Here the fur whitens in the frozen shade;
Here flocks unnumber'd crowd the pastur'd glade;
Here threatening famine double harvests scorn --
Europe's rich grains, and India's useful corn --
Virginia's fragrant pride, huge fleets convey,
And fields of rice float cumbrous over the sea,
While all its wealth, the world of waters yields,
And treasures fill the subterranean fields.
These goods to waft wherever expands the wind,
To bless and to sustain the human kind,
See, stretched immense from Cancer to the pole,
On either side contending oceans roll;
Over this, all Europe wings her haughty sails;
Over that, all India wafts on spicy gales;
While bays, and streams, and lakes, her realms explore,
And land each product at each happy door.
To fill these realms, a generous race behold,
Of happiest genius, and of firmest mould;
In thoughts, in arts, in life, in language joined,
One faith, one worship, one politic mind,
Patient, serene, in toils and dangers dire,
Their nerves of iron, and their souls of fire:
Called from all realms, these chosen sons have joined
Expansive manners, and a genial mind,
The liberal sentiment, the adventurous thought,
With greatness teeming, and with goodness fraught;
Chained to no party; by no system bound;
Confining merit to no speck of ground;
Nor Britons, Frenchmen, Germans, Swiss, or Huns,
Of earth the natives, and of heaven the sons,
Regarding, loving, all the great and good,
Of every rank, clime, party, sect, and blood.
The swain, with bliss to Europe's climes unknown,
His wife, his house, his lands, his flock, his own,
Treads, independent, on the subject soil,
Prepared for every danger, every toil;
Prepared to see antarctic oceans roll,
To circle earth, and search the lonely pole;
Or through the immense of science wind his way;
Or lift poetic wings beyond the day;
The ridgy front of death for freedom dare,
Or, round all regions, hush the voice of war.
Heaven from all climes this happy realm concealed,
While wolves and Indians roam'd the bloody field,
Till human rule a softening aspect wore,
Till war's black chariot ceased to roll in gore,
Till bigot zeal resigned his scarlet sway,
And his dread thunders puffed in smoke away.
Thus oh how blessed the era of her fate,
How bright the morning, and how long the date!
For now each fair improvement of the mind,
Each nobler effort lifts the human kind;
Vast means of bliss mechanic arts combine;
All liberal arts the rugged soul refine;
Freedom, and right, and law, their reign assume,
Stern Power re^^st, and cheer the world's sad doom;
On nature's ocean, science lifts her sails,
Finds other stars, and catches nobler gales;
While dawning virtue beams from yonder sky,
And brighter suns arise on human joy.
Such scenes of bliss, ye sages, bless your eyes:
For men, for realms like these, your plans devise
Be then your counsels, as your subject, great,
A world their sphere, and time's long reign their date.
Each party-view, each private good, disclaim,
Each petty maxim, each colonial aim;
Let all Columbia's weal your views expand,
A mighty system rule a mighty land;
Yourselves her genuine sons let Europe own,
Not the small agents of a paltry town.
Learn, cautious, what to alter, where to mend;
See to what close projected measures tend.
From pressing wants the mind averting still,
Thinks good remotest from the present ill:
From feuds anarchial to oppression's throne,
Misguided nations hence for safety run;
And through the miseries of a thousand years,
Their fatal folly mourn in bloody tears.
Ten thousand follies through Columbia spread;
Ten thousand wars her darling realms invade.
The private interest of each jealous state;
Of rule the impatience, and of law the hate.
But ah! from narrow springs these evils flow,
A few base wretches mingle general woe.
Still the same mind her manly race pervades,
Still the same virtues haunt the hallowed shades.
But when the peals of war her center shook,
All private aims the anxious mind forsook.
In danger's iron-bond her race was one:
Each separate good, each little view unknown.
Now rule, unsystem'd, drives the mind astray;
Now private interest points the downward way:
Hence civil discord pours her muddy stream,
And fools and villains sloat upon the brim;
Over all, the sad spectator casts his eye,
And wonders where the gems and minerals lie.
But never of freedom, glory, bliss, despond*
Uplift your eyes those little clouds beyond;
See there returning suns, with gladdening ray,
Roll on fair spring to chase this wintry day.
It Is yours to bid those days of Eden shine:
First, then, and last, the federal bands entwine:
To this your every aim and effort bend:
Let all your efforts here commence and end.
Over state concerns, let every state preside;
Its private tax control; its justice guide;
Religion aid; the morals to secure;
And bid each private right through time endure.
Columbia's interests public sway demand,
Her commerce, impost, unlocated land;
Her war, her peace, her military power;
Treaties to seal with every distant shore;
To bid contending states their discord cease;
To send through all the calumet of peace;
Science to wing through every noble flight;
And lift desponding genius into light.
Through every state to spread each public law,
Interest must animate, and force must awe.
Persuasive dictates realms will never obey;
Sway, uncoercive, is the shade of sway.
Be then your task to alter, aid, amend;
The weak to strengthen, and the rigid bend;
The prurient lop; what is wanted to supply;
And graft new scions from each friendly sky.
Slow, by degrees, politic systems rise;
Age still refines them, and experience tries.
This, this alone consolidates, improves;
Their sinews strengthens; their defects removes;
Gives that consistence time alone can give;
Habituates men by law and right to live;
To gray-hair'd rules increasing reverence draws;
And wins the slave to love even tyrant laws.
But should Columbia, with distracted eyes,
See over her ruins one proud monarch rise;
Should vain partitions her fair realms divide,
And rival empires float on faction's tide;
Lo fixed opinions against the fabric rage!
What wars, fierce passions with fierce passions wage!
From Cancer's glowing wilds, to Brunswick's shore,
Hark, how the alarms of civil discord roar!
"To arms," the trump of kindled warfare cries,
And kindred blood smokes upward to the skies.
As Persia, Greece, so Europe bids her flame,
And smiles with eye malignant, over her shame.
Seize then, oh! seize Columbia's golden hour;
Perfect her federal system, public power;
For this stupendous realm, this chosen race,
With all the improvements of all lands its base,
The glorious structure build; its breadth extend;
Its columns lift, its mighty arches bend!
Or freedom, science, arts, its stories shine,
Unshaken pillars of a frame divine;
Far over the Atlantic wild its beams aspire,
The world approves it, and the heavens admire;
Over clouds, and suns, and stars, its splendors rise,
Till the bright top-stone vanish in the skies."
COLUMBIA. BY THE SAME.
COLUMBIA, Columbia, to glory arise,
The queen of the world, and child of the skies!
Thy genius commands thee; with rapture behold,
While ages on ages thy splendors unfold.
Thy reign is the last, and the noblest of time,
Most fruitful thy soil, most inviting thy clime;
Let the crimes of the east never encrimson thy name,
Be freedom, and science, and virtue, thy fame.
To conquest, and slaughter, let Europe aspire;
Whelm nations in blood, and wrap cities in fire;
Thy heroes the rights of mankind shall defend,
And triumph pursue them, and glory attend.
A world is thy realm: for a world be thy laws,
Enlarged as thine empire, and just as thy cause;
On Freedom's broad basis, that empire shall rise,
Extend with the main, and dissolve with the skies.
Fair Science her gates to thy sons shall unbar,
And the east see thy morn hide the beams of her star.
New bards, and new sages, unrivaled shall soar
To fame, unextinguish'd, when time is no more;
To thee, the last refuge of virtue designed,
Shall fly from all nations the best of mankind;
Here, grateful to heaven, with transport shall bring
Their incense, more fragrant than odours of spring.
Nor less shall thy fair ones to glory ascend,
And Genius and Beauty in harmony blend;
The graces of form shall awake pure desire,
And the charms of the soul ev^r cheri^h the fire;
Their sweetness unmingled, their manners refined
And virtue's bright image, instamp'd on the mind,
With peace, and soft rapture, shall teach life to glow,
And light up a smile in the aspect of woe.
Thy fleets to all regions thy power shall display,
The nations admire, and the ocean obey;
Each shore to thy glory its tribute unfold,
And the east and the south yield their spices and gold,
As the dayspring unbounded, thy splendour shall flow,
And earth's little kingdoms before thee shall bow,
While the ensigns of union, in triumph unfurled,
Hush the tumult of war, and give peace to the world.
Thus, as down a lone valley, with cedars overspread,
From war's dread confusion I pensively strayed --
The gloom from the face of fair heaven retired;
The winds ceased to murmur; the thunders expired;
Perfumes, as of Eden, flowed sweetly along,
And a voice, as of angels, enchantingly sung:
"Columbia, Columbia, to glory arise,
The queen of the world, and the child of the skies."
THE SEASONS MORALIZED. BY THE SAME.
BEHOLD the changes of the skies,
And see the circling seasons rise;
Hence, let the moral truth refined,
Improve the beauty of the mind.
Winter, late with dreary reign,
Ruled the wide unjoyous plain;
Gloomy storms with sole on roar
Shook the hoarse, resounding shore.
Sorrow cast her sadness round,
Life and joy forsook he ground,
Death, with wild imperious sway,
Bade the expiring world decay.
Now cast around thy raptured eyes,
And see the beauteous spring arise;
See, flowers invest the hills again,
And streams re-murmur over the plains.
Hark, hark, the joy-inspiring grove
Echoes to the voice of love;
Balmy gales the sound prolong,
Wafting round the woodland song.
Such the scenes our life displays,
Swiftly fleet our rapid days;
The hour that rolls forever on,
Tells us our years must soon be gone.
Sullen Death, with mournful gloom
Sweeps us downwards to the tomb;
Life, and health, and joy decay,
Nature sinks, and dies away.
But the soul in gayest bloom,
Disdains the bondage of the tomb;
Ascends above the clouds of even,
And, raptured, hails her native heaven.
Youth, and peace, and beauty there
Forever dance around the year;
An endless joy invests the pole,
And streams of ceaseless pleasure roll.
Light, and joy, and grace divine
With bright and lasting glory shine:
Jehovah's smiles, with heavenly ray,
Diffuse a clear, unbounded day.
A HYMN, Sung at the PUBLIC EXHIBITION of the SCHOLARS, belonging to the
Academy in Greenfield, May 2d, 1788. BY THE SAME.
HAIL child of light, returning Spring,
Fair image, foretaste sweet, of heaven!
In thee our hearts thy Maker sing,
By whose blessed bounty thou wast given.
From thee the wintry glooms retire,
The skies their purest beams display,
And winds, and showers, and suns conspire,
To clothe the world with life and May.
Hail knowledge, hail, the moral spring
That wakes the verdure of the mind!
To man, thy rays indulgent bring
All fragrant flowers, and fruits resin'd.
Thy progress with the morn began,
Before thee every region smiled;
The savage brightened into man,
And gardens blossomed in the wild.
All hail fair Virtue, noblest good,
The bliss and beauty of the skies!
By whom, to yonder blessed abode,
The humble, and the faithful rise.
While here fair Learning smiles benign,
And Spring leads on the genial year,
From realms of life and peace divine,
Descend, and bloom, and flourish here.
And O thou fount of good supreme,
The sun that lights eternal spring,
At once of knowledge source and theme,
Thee first, and last, our voices sing!
Virtue, in every charm arrayed,
For this dark world, thy sufferings won;
Those charms thy matchless life displayed,
When here the incarnate splendour shone
As dews refresh, as suns revive,
When clear and cloudless shines the day,
Command our rising race to live,
And win them from the world away.
With thee, the source of every grace,
Our song shall end, as it began;
Our hope, our trust, our joy, and praise,
The Savior, and the Friend of Man.
A SONG. BY THE SAME.
LOOK, lovely maid, on yonder flower,
And see that busy fly,
Made for the enjoyment of an hour,
And only born to die.
See, round the rose he lightly moves,
And wantons in the sun,
His little life in joy improves,
And lives, before it is gone.
From this instinctive wisdom, learn,
The present hour to prize;
Nor leave to-day's supreme concern,
'Till morrow's morn arise.
Say, lovliest fair, can thou divine
That morrow's hidden doom?
Know thou, if cloudless skies will shine,
Or heaven be wrapped in gloom?
Fond man, the trifle of a day,
Enjoys the morning light,
Nor knows, his momentary play
Must end, before it is night.
The present joys are all we claim;
The past are in the tomb;
And, like the poet's dream of fame,
The future never come.
No longer then, fair maid, delay
The promised scenes of bliss;
Nor idly give another day,
The joys assigned to this.
If then my breast can soothe thy care,
'Twill now that care allay;
If joy this hand can yield, my fair,
'Twill yield that joy today.
Quit then, oh quit! thou lovely maid,
Thy bashful, virgin pride;
Today the happy plot be laid,
The bands, tomorrow, tied!
The purest joys shall be our own,
That ever to man were given;
And those bright scenes, on earth begun,
Shall brighter shine in heaven.
THE CRITICS. This Poem is reprinted from The Gazette of the United States, of
July 13, 1791; where it was first published.
A FABLE. Written September 1785. 'To every general rule there are exceptions.'
-- Common Sense. BY THE SAME.
IT IS said of every dog that is found,
Of mongrel, spaniel, cur, and hound;
That each sustains a doggish mind,
And hates the new, sublime, refined.
It Is hence the wretches bay the moon,
In beauty throned at highest noon;
Hence every nobler brute they bite.
And hunt the stranger-dog (...)*
And hence, the nose's dictates parrying,
They fly from meat to feed on carrion.
It Is also said, the currish soul
The critic race possesses whole;
As near they come, in tho'ts and natures,
As two legged can, to four legged creatures;
Alike the things they love and blame,
Their voice, and language, much the same.
The Muse this subject made her theme,
And told me in a morning dream.
Such dreams you sages may decry;
But Muses know they never lie.
Then hear, from me, in grave narration,
Of these strange facts, the strange occasion.
In Greece Cynethe's village-lay,
Well known to all, who went that way,
For dogs of every kindred famed,
And from true doggish manners named.
One morn, a greyhound passed the street;
At once the foul-mouthed conclave met,
Huddling around the stranger ran,
And thus their smart review began.
"What tramper" with a grinning sneer,
Barked out the clumsy cur, "is here?
No native of the town, I see;
Some foreign whelp of base degree.
I Would show, but that the record's torn,
We true Welsh curs are better born.
His coat is smooth; but longer hair
Would more become a dog by far.
His slender ear, how strait and sloping!
While ours is much improved by cropping."
"Right," cried the blood-hound, "that strait ear
Seems made for nothing, but to hear;
It Is long agreed, through all the town,
That handsome ears, like mine, hang down;
And though his body's gaunt, and round,
It Is no true rawboned gaunt of hound.
How high his nose the creature carries!
As if on bugs, and flies, his fare is;
I Will teach this strutting, stupid log,
To smell's the business of a dog."
"Baugh-waugh!" the shaggy spaniel cried,
"What wretched covering on his hide!
I wonder where he lives in winter;
His strait, sleek legs too, out of joint are;
I hope the vagrant will not dare
His fledging with my fleece compare.
He never plunged in pond or river,
To search for wounded duck and diver;
By kicks would soon be set a skipping,
Nor take, one half so well a whipping."
"Rat me," the lap-dog yelp'd, "through nature,
Was ever seen so coarse a creature?
I hope no lady's sad mishap
Ever led the booby to her lap;
He Would fright PRIMRILLA into fits,
And rob FOOLERIA of her wits;
A mere barbarian, Indian whelp!
How clownish, countryish, sounds his yelp!
He never tasted bread and butter,
Nor played the petty squirm and flutter;
Nor ever, like me, has learned to fatten,
On kisses sweet, and softest patting."
"Some parson's dog, I vow," whined puppy;
"His rusty coat how sunburned! stop ye!"
The beagle called him to the wood.
The bull-dog bellowed, "Zounds! and blood!"
The wolf-dog and the mastiff were,
The Muse says, an exception here;
Superior both to such soul play,
They wished the stranger well away.
From spleen the strictures rose to fury,
"Villain," growl'd one, "I cannot endure you."
"Let Us seize the truant," snarl'd another,
Encored by every soul-mouth'd brother.
"'It Is done," barked all, "we'll mob the creature,
And sacrifice him to ill nature."
The greyhound, who despised their breath,
Still tho^t it best to shun their teeth.
Easy he winged his rapid flight,
And left the scoundrels out of sight.
Good JUNO, by the ancients holden,
The genuine notre-dame of scolding,
Sat pleased, because there'd such a fuss been,
And in the hound's place wished her husband;
For here, even pleasure bade her own,
Her ladyship was once outdone.
"Hail dogs," she cried, "of every kind!
Retain ye still this snarling mind,
Hate all that is good, and fair, and new,
And I Will a goddess be to you.
Nor this the only good you prove;
Learn what the fruits of JUNO's love.
Your souls, from forms, that creep all four on,
I Will raise, by system Pythagorean,
To animate the human frame,
And gain my favorite tribe a name.
Be ye henceforth (so I ordain)
Critics, the genuine curs of men.
To snarl be still your highest bliss,
And all your criticism like this.
Whatever is great, or just, in nature,
Of graceful form, or lovely feature;
Whatever adorns the ennobled mind,
Sublime, inventive, and refined;
With spleen, and spite, forever blame,
And load with every dirty name.
All things of noblest kind and use,
To your own standard vile reduce,
And all in wild confusion blend,
Nor heed the subject, scope, or end.
But chief, when modest young beginners,
Against critic laws, by nature sinners,
Peep out in verse, and dare to run,
Through towns and villages your own,
Hunt them, as when yon stranger dog
Set all your growling crew agog;
Till stunned, and scared, they hide from view,
And leave the country clear for you."
This said, the goddess kind caressing,
Gave every cur a double blessing.
E^ch doggish mind, though grown no bigger,
Henceforth assumed the human figure,
The body walked on two; the mind
To four, still chose to be confined;
Still creeps on earth, still scents out foes,
Is still led onward by the nose;
Hates all the good, it used to hate,
The lofty, beauteous, new, and great;
The stranger hunts with spite quintessent,
And snarls, from that day to the present.
EPISTLE TO COL. HUMPHRYES. GREENFIELD, 1785. BY THE SAME.
FROM realms, where nature sports in youthful prime,
Where Hesper lingers over his darling clime,
Where sunny genius lights his sacred flame,
Where rising science casts her morning beam,
Where empire's final throne in pomp ascends,
Where pilgrim freedom finds her vanished friends,
The world renews, and man from eastern fires,
Phoenix divine, again to Heaven aspires,
Health to my friend this happy verse conveys,
His fond attendant over the Atlantic seas.
Health to my friend let every wish prolong;
Be this the burden of each artless song;
This in the prayer of every morn arise;
Thou angel guardian, waft it to the skies!
His devious course let fostering Heaven survey;
Nor ills betide, nor foes arrest his way.
Nor health alone -- may bliss thy path attend;
May truth direct thee, and may (...) befriend;
From virtue's fount thy taintless actio^^ flow;
The shield of conscience blunt the dart of woe;
To rising bliss refined above alloy,
Where budding wishes blossom into joy,
Where glory dwells, where saints and seraphs sing,
Let Heaven, in prospect, tempt thy listed wing.
Me the same views, the same soft tide of cares,
Bear gently onward down the stream of years,
Still the same duties call my course along;
Still grows, at times, the pain-deluding song;
Still scenes domestic earthly joys refine,
Where blessed Maria mingles cares with mine;
The same fond circle still my life endears,
Where Fairfield's elms, or Stamford^s groupe appears;
Or where, in rural guise, around me smile
Mansions of peace, and Greenfield's beauteous hill;
Still to my cot the friend delighted h^es,
And one loved parent waits beneath the skies.
To thee, far summoned from each native scene,
With half the breadth of this wide world between,
How blessed the news my happy verse conveys,
Of friends, divided by interfluent seas?
Health, peace, and competence, their walks surround,
On the bright margin of yon beauteous Sound;
Where Hartford sees the first of waters glide,
Or where thy Avon winds his silver tide.
Yet thou must mourn a friend, Major Elijah Humphreys, brother to Col.
Humphreys, who died in the West Indies, in 1785.
a brother dear,
And over departed merit drop a tear.
Him sense illum'd, the hero's warmth inspired,
Grace taught to please, and patriot virtue fired;
Alike in peace, in war, at home, abroad,
Worth gained him honor, where his footsteps trod;
Yet all in vain: his laureled garlands bloom;
But waste their beauty on the untimely tomb.
Meantime, invited over the Atlantic tide,
Where arts refined allure thy feet aside,
May thou, unmoved by splendor's painted charms,
And steeled, when pleasure smiling spreads her arms,
The great simplicity of soul retain,
The humble fear of Heaven, and love of man.
When round thy course temptations sweetly throng,
When warbling sirens chant the luscious song,
When wealth's fair bubble beams its hues afar,
When grandeur calls thee to her golden car,
When pleasure opes the bosom bright of joy,
And the died serpent gazes to destroy;
Oh! may the heavenly Guide thy passions warm*
Up virtue's hills thy feet resistless charm,
Show thee what crowns reward the glorious strife,
And quicken fainting duty into life.
Often has thine eyes, with glance indignant seen
Columbia's youths, unfolding into men,
Their minds to improve, their manners to adorn,
To Europe's climes by fond indulgence borne;
Often have thou seen those youths, at custom's shrine,
Victims to pride, to folly and to sin,
Of worth bereft, of real sense forlorn*
Their land forget, their friends, their freedom spurn;
Each noble cause, each solid good desert,
For splendour happiness, and truth for art;
The plain, frank manners of their race despise,
Fair without fraud, and great without disguise;
Where, through the life the heart uncovered ran,
And spoke the native dignity of man.
For these, the gain let Virtue blush to hear,
And each sad parent drop the plaintive tear!
Trained in foul stews, impoison'd by the stage,
Hoyl'd into gaming, Keyser'd into age,
To smooth hypocrisy by Stanhope led,
To truth an alien, and to virtue dead,
Swollen with an English butcher's sour disdain,
Or to a Fribble dwindled from a man,
Homeward again behold the jackdaw run,
And yield his fire the ruins of a son!
What though his mind no thought has ever perplexed,
Converse illum'd, or observations vexed;
Yet here, in each debate, a judge he shines,
Of all, that man enlarges, or refines;
Religion, science, politics, and song;
A prodigy his parts; an oracle his tongue.
Hist! hist! ye mere Americans, attend;
Open wide your months; your knees in homage bend;
While Curl discloses to the raptured view
What Peter, Paul, and Moses, never knew*
The light of newborn wisdom sheds abroad,
And adds a An awkward addition to a dwelling house, very common in New England.
leanto to the word of God.
What Creole wretch shall dare, with home-made foils,
Attack opinions, brought three thousand miles;
Sense, in no common way to mortals given,
But on Atlantic travelers breathed by Heaven;
A head, en queue, by Monsieur Frizzle dressed;
Manners, a Paris Taylor's arts invest;
Pure criticism, formed from acted plays;
And graces, that would even a Stanhope grace?
Commercial wisdom, merchants here inhale
From him, whose eye has seen the unfinished bale;
Whose feet have passed the shop, where pins were sold,
The wire was silvered, and the heads were rolled!
Convened, ye lawyers, make your humblest leg!
Here stands the man has seen Lord Mansfield's wig!
Physicians hushed, hear Galen's lips distill,
From Buchan's contents, all the Art to heal!
Divines, with reverence cease your scripture whims,
And learn this male Minerva's moral schemes;
Schemes theologic found in Drury Lane,
That prove the bible false, and virtue vain!
Heavens! shall a child in learning, and in wit,
Over Europe's climes, a bird of passage slit;
There, as at home, his stripling self unknown,
By novel wonders stupefied to stone,
Shut from the wise, and by no converse taught,
No well-read day, nor hour of serious thought,
His head by pleasure, vice, and hurry, turned,
All prudence trampled, all improvements spurned;
Shall he, with less of Europe in his cap,
Than satchell'd schoolboy guesses from the map,
On every subject struttingly decree,
Ken the far shore, and search the unfathomed sea,
Where learning has her lamp for ages oil'd,
Where Newton ponders, and where Berkeley toiled?
Of all the plagues, that rise in human shape,
Good Heaven, preserve us from the traveled Ape!
Pope's prologue to the Satires.
"Peace to all such:" but were there one, whose mind
Bold genius winged, and converse pure, refined,
By nature promp^ed science' realms to roam,
And both her Indies bring with rapture home;
Who men, and manners, searched with eagle eye,
Exact to weigh, and curious to descry;
Himself who burnished with the hand of care,
Till kings might boast so bright a gem to wear;
Should he, deep plunged in Circe's sensual bowl,
Imbrue his native manliness of soul,
With eye estranged, from fair Columbia turn,
Her youth, her innocence, and beauty scorn;
To that soul harlot, Europe, yield his mind,
Witch'd by her smiles, and to her snares resigned;
To nature's bloom prefer the rouge of art,
A tinsell'd outside to a golden heart,
Show, to the bliss by simple freedom given,
To virtue, Stanhope, and Voltaire to Heaven;
Who but must wish, the apostate youth to see?
Who but must agonize, were Humphreys he?
But all thy soul shall 'scape, the escape to aid,
Fair to thy view be every motive spread.
Of each gay cause the dire effects survey,
And bring the painted tomb disclosed to day.
Though there proud pomp uprears his throne on high;
Though there the golden palace lights the sky;
Though wealth unfolds her gay, Edenian seats,
Her walk of grandeur, and her wild of sweets;
The stage, the park, the ring, the dance, the feast,
Charm the palled eye, and lure the loathing taste;
Yet there fierce war unceasing sounds alarms;
Pride blows the trump, and millions rush to arms;
See steel and fire extinguish human good!
See realms manured with corses, and with blood!
At slaughter's shrine expires the new-born-joy,
And all Jehovah's bounty fiends destroy.
See the huge jail in gloomy grandeur rise,
Lower over mankind, and mock the tempted skies!
Hear the chain clank! the bursting groan attend!
And mark the neighboring gibbet's pride ascend.
See earth's fair face insatiate luxury spoils!
For one poor tyrant, lo, a province toils!
To brothels, half the female world is driven,
Lost to themselves, and reprobates of heaven.
There too refinement glances over the mind;
And naught but vice, and outside, is refined;
To vice auspicious, brilliant manners blend,
The waxen saint, and sinner, foe and friend,
Melt from the soul each virtue, as they shine,
And warm the impoison'd blossom into sin.
In fair Columbia's realms, how changed the plan;
Where all things bloom, but, first of all things, man!
Lord of himself, the independent swain,
Sees no superior stalk the happy plain:
His house, his herd, his harvest, all his own,
His farm a kingdom, and his chair a throne.
Unblench'd by foul hypocrisy, the soul
Speaks in her face, and bids his accents roll;
(Her wings un^lipp'd) with fire instinctive warms,
Strong pulses seals, and bold conceptions forms;
At noblest objects aims her slight supreme,
The purpose vast, and enterprise extreme.
Hence round the pole her sons exalt the sail,
Search southern seas, and rouse the Falkland whale;
Or on bold pinions hail the Asian skies,
And bid new stars in spicy oceans rise.
Hence in bright arms her chiefs superior flame,
Even now triumphant on the steep of fame,
Where Vernon's Hero mounts the throne sublime,
And sees no rival grace the reign of time.
Hence countless honors rising Medicine claims;
Hence Law presents her constellated names;
The Sacred Science sees her concave bright
Instarr'd, and ^ous, with the sons of light:
Hence Edwards cheered the world with moral day,
And Franklin walked, unhurt, the realms where lightnings play.
Mechanic genius hence exalts his eye,
All powers to measure, and all scenes descry,
Bids Rittenhouse the heavenly system feign,
And Bushnell search the chambers of the main.
Hence too, where Trumbull leads the ardent throng,
Ascending bards begin the immortal song:
Let glowing friendship wake the cheerful lyre,
Blessed to commend, and pleased to catch the fire.
Be theirs the fame, to bards how rarely given!
To fill with worth the part assigned by Heaven;
Distinguished actors on life's busy stage,
Loved by mankind, and useful to the age;
While science round them twines her vernal bays,
And sense directs, and genius fires their lays.
While this fair land commands thy feet to roam,
And, all Columbian, still thou plan'st for home,
From those bright sages, with whose mission joined,
Thou seek'st to build the interests of mankind,
Experience, wisdom, honor, may thou gain,
The zeal for country, and the love of man.
There through the civil science may thou run;
There learn how empires are preserved, or won;
How arts politic wide dominions sway;
How well-train'd navies bid the world obey;
How war's imperial car commands the plain,
Or rolls majestic over the subject main;
Through earth, how commerce spreads a softer sway,
And Gal^^a's sons negociate realms away.
Then, crowned with every gift, and grace, return,
To add new glories to the western morn;
With sages, heroes, bards, her charms display,
Her arts, arms, virtues, and her happy sway;
Bid over the world her constellation rise,
The brightest splendour in the unmeasured skies,
Her genial influence through all nations roll,
And hush the sound of war from pole to pole.
And oh, may he, who stilled the stormy main,
And lightly winged thee over the glassy plain,
Through life's rough-billow'd sea, with kinder gales,
With skies ferener, and with happier sails,
Each shoal escaped, afar each tempest driven,
And naught but raptures round the enchanted Heaven,
To bliss, fair shore, thy prosperous course convey,
And join my peaceful bark, companion of thy way.
THE PROSPECT OF PEACE. This Poem is reprinted from the 12mo edition, printed
by Thomas and Samuel Green, New Haven, 1788, -- and was delivered, by the
Author, in Yale-College, at the Public Examination of the Candidates for the
Degree of Bachelor of Arts; July 23, 1778.

BY JOEL BARLOW, ESQUIRE.
THE closing scenes of Tyrants' fruitless rage,
The opening prospects of a golden age,
The dread events that crown the important year,
Wake the glad song, and claim the attentive ear.
Long has Columbia rung with dire alarms,
While Freedom called her injured sons to arms;
While various fortune fired the embattled field,
Conquest delayed, and victory stood concealed;
While closing legions marked their dreadful way,
And millions trembled for the dubious day.
In this grand conflict heaven's Eternal Sire,
At whose dread frown the sons of guilt expire,
Bade vengeance rise, with sacred fury driven,
On those who war with Innocence and Heaven.
Behold, where late the trembling squadrons fled,
Hosts bowed in chains, and hapless numbers bled,
In different fields our numerous heroes rouse,
To crop the wreath from Britain's impious brows.
Age following age shall these events relate
'Till Time's old empire yield to destined Fate;
Historic truth our guardian chiefs proclaim,
Their worth, their actions, and their deathless fame;
Admiring crowds their life-touch'd forms behold
In breathing canvass, or in sculptured gold,
And hail the Leader of the favorite throng,
The rapturous theme of some heroic song.
And soon, emerging from the orient skies,
The blissful morn in glorious pomp shall rise,
Wafting fair Peace from Europe's fated coast;
Where wandering long, in mazy factions lost,
From realm to realm, by rage and discord driven,
She se^med resolved to reascend her heaven.
This LEWIS viewed, and reached a friendly hand,
Pointing her flight to this far-distant land;
Bade her extend her empire over the West,
And Europe's balance tremble on her crest!
Now, see the Goddess mounting on the day,
To these fair climes direct her circling way,
Willing to seek, once more, an earthly throne,
To cheer the globe, and emulate the sun.
With placid look she eyes the blissful shore,
Bids the loud-thundering cannon cease to roar;
Bids British navies from these ports be tossed,
And hostile keels no more insult the coast:
Bids private feuds her sacred vengeance feel,
And bow submissive to the public weal;
Bids long, calm years adorn the happy clime,
And roll down blessings to remotest time.
Hail! heaven-born Peace, fair Nurse of Virtue hail!
Here, fix thy scepter and exalt thy scale;
Hence, through the earth extend thy late domain,
'Till Heaven's own splendour shall absorb thy reign!
What scenes arise! what glories we behold!
See a broad realm its various charms unfold;
See crowds of patriots bless the happy land,
A godlike senate and a warlike band;
One friendly Genius fires the numerous whole,
From glowing Georgia to the frozen pole.
Along these shores, amid these flowery vales,
The woodland shout the joyous ear assails;
Industrious crowds in different labors toil,
Those ply the arts, and these improve the soil.
Here the fond merchant counts his rising gain,
There strides the rustic over the furrowed plain,
Here walks the statesman, pensive and serene,
And there the school boys gambol round the green.
See ripening harvests gild the smiling plains,
Kind Nature's bounty and the pride of swains;
Luxuriant vines their curling tendrils shoot,
And bow their heads to drop the clustering fruit;
In the gay fields, with rich profusion strow'd,
The orchard bends beneath its yellow load,
The lofty boughs their annual burden pour,
And juicy harvests swell the autumnal store.
These are the blessings of impartial heaven,
To each fond heart in just proportion given.
No grasping lord shall grind the neighboring poor,
Starve numerous vassals to increase his store;
No cringing slave shall at his presence bend,
Shrink at his frown, and at his nod attend;
Afric's unhappy children, now no more
Shall feel the cruel chains they felt before,
But every State in this just mean agree,
To bless mankind, and set the oppressed free.
Then, rapt in transport, each exulting slave
Shall taste that Boon which God and nature gave,
And, fired with virtue, join the common cause,
Protect our freedom and enjoy our laws.
At this calm period, see, in pleasing view,
Art vies with Art, and Nature smiles anew:
On the long, winding strand that meets the tide,
Unnumber'd cities lift their spiry pride;
Gay, slowery walks salute the inraptur'd eyes,
Tall, beauteous domes in dazzling prospect rise;
There thronging navies stretch their wanton sails,
Tempt the broad main and catch the driving gales;
There commerce swells from each remotest shore,
And wafts in plenty to the smiling store.
To these thronged seats the country wide resorts,
And rolls her treasures to the opening ports;
While, far remote, gay health and pleasure slow,
And calm retirement cheers the laboring brow.
No din of arms the peaceful patriot hears,
No parting sigh the tender matron fears,
No field of fame invites the youth to rove,
No^ virgins know a harsher sound than love.
Fair Science then her laureled beauty rears,
And soars with Genius to the radiant stars.
Her glimmering dawn from Gothic darkness rose,
And nations saw her shadowy veil disclose;
She cheered fair Europe with her rising smiles,
Beamed a bright morning over the British isles,
Now soaring reaches her meridian height,
And blessed Columbia hails the dazzling light!
Here, rapt in though it, the philosophic soul
Shall look through Nature's parts and grasp the whole.
See Genius kindling at a FRANKLIN's fame,
See unborn sages catch the electric flame,
Bid hovering clouds the threatening blast expire,
Curb the fierce stream and hold the imprisoned fire!
See the pleased youth, with anxious study, rove,
In orbs excentric through the realms above,
No more perplexed, while RITTENHOUSE appears
To grace the museum with the rolling spheres.
See that young Genius, that inventive soul,
Whose laws the jarring elements control:
Who guides the vengeance of mechanic power,
To blast the watery world and guard the peaceful shore.
And where is the rising Sage, the unknown name,
That new advent'rer in the lists of fame,
To find the cause, in secret nature bound,
The unknown cause, and various charms of so^^d?
What subtle medium leads the devious way:
Why different tensions different sounds convey;
Why harsh, rough tones in grating discord roll,
Or mingling concert charms the enraptured soul.
And tell the cause why sluggish vapors rise,
And wave, exalted, through the genial skies;
What strange contrivance nature forms to bear
The ^^^derous burden through the lighter air.
These last Displays the curious mind engage,
And sire the genius of the rising age;
While mor^^ tho'ts the pleased attention claim,
Swell the w^rm soul, and wake the virtuous flame;
While Metaphysics soar a boundless height,
And launch with EDWARDS to the realms of light.
See the blessed Muses hail their roseate bowers,
Their mansions blooming with poetic flowers;
See listening Seraphs join the epic throng,
And unborn JOSHUAS rise in future song.
Satire attends at Virtue's wakening call,
And Pride and Coquetry and Dullness fall.
Unnumber'd bards shall string the heavenly lyre,
To those blessed strains which heavenly themes inspire;
Sing the rich Grace on mortal Man bestowed,
The Virgin's Offspring and the filial God;
What love descends from heaven when JESUS dies!
What shouts attend him rising through the skies!
See Science now in lovelier charms appear,
Graced with new garlands from the blooming Fair.
See laureled nymphs in polished pages shine,
And S^pphic sweetness glow in every line.
No more the rougher Muse shall dare disgrace
The radiant charms that deck the blushing face;
But rising Beauties scorn the tinsel show,
The powdered coxcomb and the flaunting beau;
While humble Merit, void of flattering wiles,
Claims the soft glance, and wakes the enlivening smiles.
The opening luster of an angel-mind,
Beauty's bright charms with sense superior joined,
Bid Virtue shine, bid Truth and Goodness rise,
Melt from the voice, and sparkle from the eyes;
While the pleased Muse the gentle bosom warms,
The first in genius, as the first in charms.
Thus age and youth a smiling aspect wear,
Awed into virtue by the leading Fair;
While the bright offspring, rising to the stage,
Conveys the blessings to the future age.
THESE are the views that Freedom's cause attend;
THESE shall endure 'till Time and Nature end.
With Science crowned, shall Peace and Virtue shine,
And blessed Religion beam a light divine.
Here the pure Church, descending from her God,
Shall fix on earth her long and last abode;
Zion arise, in radiant splendors dressed,
By Saints admired, by Infidels confessed;
Her opening courts, in dazzling glory, blaze,
Her walls salvation, and her portals praise.
From each far corner of the extended earth,
Her gathering sons shall claim their promised birth.
Through the drear wastes, beneath the setting day,
Where prowling natives haunt the wood for prey,
The swarthy Millions lift their wondering eyes,
And smile to see the Gospel morning rise:
Those who, through time, in savage darkness lay,
Wake to new light, and hail the glorious day!
In those dark regions, those uncultur'd wilds,
Fresh blooms the rose, the peaceful lilly smiles;
On the tall cliffs unnumber'd Carmels rise,
And in each vale some beauteous Sharon lies.
From this fair Mount the excinded stone shall roll,
Reach the far East and spread from pole to pole;
From one small Stock shall countless nations rise,
The world replenish and adorn the skies.
Earth's blood-stained empires, with their Guide the Sun,
From orient climes their gradual progress run;
And circling far, reach every western shore,
'Till earth-born empires rise and fall no more.
But see the imperial GUIDE from heaven descend,
Whose beams are Peace, whose kingdom knows no end;
From calm Vesperia, through the etherial way,
Back sweep the shades before the effulgent day;
Through the broad East, the brightening splendour driven,
Reverses Nature and illumines heaven;
Astonished regions bless the gladdening sight,
And Suns and Systems own superior light.
As when the asterial blaze over Bethl'em stood,
Which marked the birthplace of the incarnate God;
When eastern priests the heavenly splendour viewed,
And numerous crowds the wondrous sign pursued;
So eastern kings shall view the unclouded day
Rise in the West and streak its golden way:
That signal spoke a Savior's humble birth,
This speaks his long and glorious reign on earth!
THEN Love shall rule, and Innocence adore,
Discord shall cease, and Tyrants be no more;
'Till yon bright orb, and those celestial spheres,
In radiant circles, mark a thousand years;
'Till the grand fiat burst the etherial frames,
Worlds crush on worlds, and Nature sink in flames!
The Church elect, from smouldering ruins, rise,
And sail triumphant through the yielding skies,
Hailed by the Bridegroom! to the Father given,
The Joy of Angels, and the Queen of Heaven!
A POEM, This Poem is reprinted from the Hartford Edition; to which the
following Advertisement was prefixed. -- It may not be amiss to inform the
subscribers for the following performance that a copy was not given at the time
it was requested, on account of its containing several passages taken from a
larger work which the author has by him, unfinished. Upon farther consideration
however, it is thought not improper to present to the Public a specimen of that
work, in this incorrect manner, that a conjecture may be formed what success it
may meet, when the whole shall make its appearance. The passages are those that
respect the affairs of America at large, and the future progress of Society. As
to the other parts of the Poem which are confined to the state of education in
Connecticut, although the subject may be thought too particular to be relished
beyond the limits of a Commencement Auditory, yet if they should serve to turn
the attention of any part of the Public to the real situation of Yale College,
it may justify the publication.
Spoken at the PUBLIC COMMENCEMENT at YALE-COLLEGE, in NEW HAVEN, Sept. 12,
1781. BY THE SAME.
ONCE more, thou sacred Seat, the changing year
Has circled heaven and bid the day appear,
That opes thy portals, gilds thy spiry dome,
And calls thy children from their joyous home.
Through seven long years has war's terrific power
Ranged every town and crimsoned every shore,
Pursued fair Science from each happy seat,
Raved in her domes and forced her last retreat,
And often, Yalensia, doomed thy final fall,
While thy sad Genius trembled for thy wall.
Now see, at last, the venerable train,
Thine elder sons ascend thy courts again!
We joy the reverend, happy throng to see,
We wake thy own blessed Muse, and bid her sing to thee.
Long have we lived beneath thy nurturing care,
And joy and friendship crowned our labors there;
No more within those blissful haunts we dwell,
To all thy train we bid a long farewell;
One gentle grasp, one silent, sorrowing tear,
And joys and friends forever disappear;
Fate calls us hence the world's broad stage to tread,
Act a short part, and mingle with the dead.
We go -- but may thy glory still ascend,
Thy fame, thy virtues through the world extend;
Thy future sons, a calm, delightful throng,
As following years shall lead their steps along,
To peace, to happiness, to glory rise,
Shine through the earth and brighten in the skies.
No ruffian force that treads the distant shore,
Shall dare invade thy peaceful labors more;
While the proud foes beneath our standards yield,
And our brave brethren claim the crimson field,
Within thy courts shall pride and slaughter cease,
And genius dignify the wal^s of peace.
And oh! may some blessed hand regard thy cries,
Some great, some liberal benefactor rise,
Whose soul awakes at thy inspiring call,
To lift thy spires, enlarge thy scanty wall,
Who joys to aid the Muse's feeble voice,
And bid bright learning in her sons rejoice,
Bid wealth and dignity thy steps attend,
And rival arts and rival virtues blend,
Over all the happy land thy beauties shine,
And every joy, and every wish be thine.
Ye patriot worthies, whom these strains assail,
Ye Reverend Sires, and all ye Sons of Yale,
Behold our seat, by former bounty given,
Pride of our land and favorite child of heaven,
Whence liberal arts and liberal thoughts ye drew,
When sew her children and her wants were few;
Now see, the narrow bounds can scarce contain
Half the thronged numbers of her joyous train,
While every friend averts the unconscious eye,
And power, and interest, pass unheeding by.
As late, when war's grim terrors sought repose,
And evening mists and distant sires arose,
Far in a gloomy grove I pensive strayed,
Where death's pale phantoms walked the midnight shade,
Thin clouds of sickening damps, over either driven,
Obscured the stars and shut the eye from heaven;
Unwonted sighs within my bosom rose,
Cities o'erturn'd and all my country's woes
Poured on my heart; but chief thy feeble cries,
Neglected Science, bade my griefs arise.
I saw, from Briton's Isle, thy genius flown,
In these fair climes to fix a nobler throne,
While here thy sons the peaceful myrtle yield,
To pluck the crimson laurel of the field.
I saw thy seats to scenes of slaughter turned,
Thy walls defaced, thy fairest labors burned;
Even Yale, thy lovliest handmaid, now no more,
Knew the gay smiles of youth she knew before,
Her funds decreased, her strength, her interest fled,
Her friends neglected, and her HOSMER dead.
Now a calm splendour burst the saddening gloom,
And gales etherial breathed a glad perfume,
Mild in the midst a form celestial shone,
Robbed in the vestments of the rising sun;
Tall rose his stature, dignity and grace
Moved in his limbs and wantoned in his face,
His folding mantle flowed in easy pride,
His harp divine lay useless by his side,
His locks in curls from myrtle chaplets hung,
And sounds melodious melted from his tongue.
"Mortal, attend, behold before thee stand
Learning's bright Genius, guardian of the land;
Let grief no more awake the piteous strain,
Nor think fair Science left her heaven in vain.
Awhile my skill must guide the wild affray,
Range the red field and sweep thy foes away,
Soon shall this arm a milder scepter bear,
And blessed Yalensia prove my favorite care.
Mean time her friends her glory shall attend,
Enlarge her stores and bid her walls ascend;
Bid every art from that pure fountain flow,
All that the Muse can sing or man can know;
The various branches various teachers claim,
And universal knowledge lift her fame.
And see! ere long in that delightful seat,
Her sons and friends, a numerous concourse, meet;
Once more to view her, greet her youthful train,
And hear her feeble, saddening voice complain.
Go thou, in pride of youth attend them there,
And these commands in strains melodious bear.
Say it is for them to stretch the liberal hand,
While war's dread tumults yet involve the land,
Sustain her drooping, rear her radiant eyes,
And bid her future fame begin to rise.
Tell them the wild commotions soon shall cease,
And blessed Columbia hail the charms of peace,
Where rest the future deeds on earth designed
To raise, to dignify and bless mankind.
While Europe's numerous courts my cause attend,
And mutual interest fix the mutual friend,
Behold, from each far realm, what glories shine!
Their power, their commerce and their science mine.
And here, what roving views before them spread!
Where this new empire lifts her daring head!
What wide extent her waving ensigns claim!
Lands yet unknown and streams without a name.
Where the deep gulf unfolds Floridia's shore,
To where Ontario bids hoarse Laurence roar;
Where Missisippi's waves their sources boast,
Where gr^ves and floods and realms and climes are lost,
To where the mild Atlantic's lengthening tide,
Laves numerous towns, and swells their naval pride.
And see! by nature's hand over all bestowed,
The last pure polish of the forming God.
What various grandeur strikes the gladdening eyes!
Bays stretch their arms and mountains li^^ the skies;
The lakes, unfolding, point the streams their way,
The plains, the hills their lengthening skirts display,
The vales draw forth, fair wave the glimmering wilds,
And all the majesty of nature smiles.
On this broad theater, unbounded spread,
In different scenes, what countless throngs must tread!
Soon as the new formed empire, rising fair,
Calms her brave sons now breathing from the war,
Unfolds her harbors, spreads the genial soil,
And welcomes freemen to the cheerful toil.
Wh^^ numerous sages must exalt her name!
What numerous bards must tell the world her fame!
What numerous chiefs beneath my forming care,
Must blaze in arms and ward the waste of war!
While every art and all the graces meet,
To form her thousands to the cares of State,
To heal pale sickness, bid diseases cease,
And sound the tidings of eternal peace.
Those must arise the present age to lead,
And following millions hail the paths they tread.
Such gladdening views will open the bounteous store,
The grasp of interest and the pride of power,
Yalensia's friends shall thus attend her call,
And youths unnumber'd bless the favorite wall.
And though thou see the rage of slaughter roll,
And different views thy wayward race control,
Though still opposed their interest, and their laws,
And every scepter leads a different cause,
Yet through the whole the same progressive plan,
Which draws, for mutual succor, man to man,
From men to tribes, from tribes to nations spreads,
And private ties to public compact leads,
Shall rise by slow degrees, and still extend,
Their power, their interest, and their passions, blend;
Their wars grow milder, policies enlarge,
Increasing nations feel the general charge,
Form broad alliances for mutual aid,
Mingle their manners and extend their trade,
Till each remotest realm, by friendship joined,
Link in the chain and harmonize mankind,
The union'd banner be at last unfurled,
And wave triumphant round the accordant world.
Already now commencing glories rise,
The work begins beneath yon northern skies;
The Russian forests to the deep advance,
The ports unfold, the glimmering navies dance,
For commerce armed, the different powers combine,
And heaven approving aids the blessed design.
Though rival regions still the combat wage,
And hold in bickering strife the unsettled age,
Yet no rude war, that sweeps the crimson plain,
Shall dare disturb the labors of the main;
For heaven, impartial to the earth born race,
Bade one broad circling deep their shores embrace,
Spread to all realms the same wide, watery way,
Liberal as air and unconfined as day,
That every distant land the wealth might share,
Exchange their wants and fill their treasures there,
Their speech assimilate, their empires blend,
And laws and mildness through the world extend.
Raise now thine eye, the hastening years shall roll,
And these glad scenes delight thy rising soul."
We th^n be^^ld, 'till where ^o lonely pr^de,
The far, blue Bal^ic pours his laboring tide;
At once in gathering squadrons, from the north,
The mingling streamers lead the nations forth;
From different shores unnumber'd masts arise,
And wave their peaceful curtains to the skies;
Broader and broader still the wings unfold,
All Europe's coasts the streaming pomp behold,
From Gallia's ports, from Albion's hoary height,
United flags are pointed into sight;
Where broad Hispania's strand two oceans lave,
And the rich Tagus mingles with the wave,
The countless navies lift their banners wide,
And stream their glories over the foamy tide;
While through the glimmering Strait, in long array,
Poured from the fleets that crowd the midland sea,
The sails look forth and swell their beauteous pride,
With wider waves and bolder barks to glide;
While far, far distant, where the watery way
Spreads the blue borders of descending day,
The misty sails advance in lengthening sweep,
Pride of the western world and daughters of the deep.
From all the bounds that meet the Atlantic wave,
While to our view the crowded squadrons heave,
In sign of union, each advancing line,
Leads a calm nation, bids their banners join,
Till far as pole from pole, the cloudlike train
Skirts the dim heavens and shades the whitening main.
We saw, in other seas and other skies,
With equal pomp unnumber'd streamers rise;
Where Asia's isles and utmost shores extend.
Like rising suns the sheeted masts ascend,
Sw^ep from all ports tha^ cle^ve the orient strand,
Load every ocean, compass every land,
For peaceful commerce join the friendly train,
No more to combat on the watery plain.
We saw new barks to new discoveries roll,
Where unknown waves salute each distant pole;
Far in the north, where seas Pacific pour,
And open Columbia from the Asian shore,
The daring sails the unmeasured flight pursue,
And isles and countless nations rise to view.
While some bold Sage, Columbus like, designed
By other stars and waves to lead mankind,
With conscious pride and philosophic eye,
Treads the lone borders of the southern sky,
With persevering toil the deeps explores,
Till there a new found world extends her lengthening shores.
We saw, from each new realm, new arts ascend,
New manners rise, new wealth and power extend,
Allure the hero, feed the enquiring sage,
Enlarge the genius, dignify the age,
Till laws and empires swell their rising reign,
And their own navies whiten on the main.
Such views around us spread, when thus the guide,
"These are my works that load the sweeping tide;
Nor less my power the walks of science claim,
In this fair land to raise her noblest name.
No more shall war disturb her peaceful reign,
And call to fields of death her youthful train,
No more her views by wealth and power immured,
To rage alone and scenes of blood inured,
To teach the lance to thirst for human gore,
To teach pale Avarice to swell the store,
To teach the milder arts the prize to yield,
Teach her own muse the clangor of the field,
From ruined regions fill the voice of fame,
And call celestial fire to blaze a tyrant's name.
No more in bolder breasts, to dwell confined,
And hold her seat in half the human mind,
Over gentler passions s^read a harsh control,
And light the glare o^ g^^ndeur in the soul;
But softer virtues now demand her care,
And her own laurels grace the rising fair.
Each rival sex to rival arts aspires,
Each aids alike the universal quires;
This bids bold comme^ce load the laboring main,
Or rear the peaceful harvest of the plain;
That leads the hours of calm domestic toil,
And cheers the household with an evening smile,
To each fond heart an equal task assigned,
And equal virtues raise the mutual mind.
While daring thoughts and deeper tracts of truth
Through philosophic mazes lead the youth,
The softer arts demand a softer care,
And loves and graces dignify the fair.
While states and empires, policies and laws,
Lure the firm patriot in the bolder cause,
To stem the tide of power or ward the war,
Like me to suffer and like me to dare.
Behold, with equal dignity and grace,
The matron virtues guide her peaceful race;
A pleasing task her tender bosom warms,
The infant care now smiling in her arms,
Now ripening features, as the form improves,
Speak the dear image of the man she loves;
She lures the rising wish to thoughts refined,
And her own virtues swell the opening mind,
The prattling throng to lisping reason grown,
To ape her loveliness improve their own;
The sire beholds the living beauties bloom,
Pride of his life and hope of years to come,
Aids every virtue taught by her to rise,
Joins the delightful task, and trains them for the skies.
Thus different arts their kindred cares employ,
In fields of action or domestic joy,
Then, rising from the useful to the fine,
Their mingling souls with rival glory shine.
From each pure taste consenting graces blend,
When the tall pillars of the dome ascend,
The walls heave stately, arches bend on high,
And full proportion meets the roving eye.
Or when the garden to the impassioned heart,
Unfinished lies and asks the rural art,
With just design their equal fancies play,
From each alike the rambling beauties stray,
Till through the whole the different scenes prevail,
Here flows the fountain and there draws the dale,
The laughing lawn, the frowning footless grove,
And all the seats of innocence and love.
Nor less their power the living canvas warms,
And breathes the pencil'd passion into charms;
Heroes and beauties hear the wakening call,
And distant ages fill the storied wall.
Two kindred arts the swelling statue heave,
Wake the dead wax and teach the stone to live;
The daring chissel claims the bolder strife,
To rouse the sceptred marble into life,
While fairer hands the livelier fire control,
And into softer figures shed the soul.
In hearts attun'd the voice of music dwells,
Steals over the lip and into passion swells,
Swept by the alternate hand the living lyre,
To mutual rapture wakes the floating fire,
Till all the magic melody of sound,
Pours in delightful harmony around.
And when the breath of heaven from Angel quires,
With life divine the joyous Muse inspires,
In rival bosoms, see the Goddess glow!
And bind her bays on each consenting brow.
The soaring bard awakes the trembling string,
Virtues and loves and heavenly themes to sing;
No more of vengeful chiefs and bickering Gods,
Where ocean crimsons and Olympus nods,
Or heavens, convulsing rend the dark profound,
To chain fierce Titans to the groaning ground,
But, fired by milder themes, and charms refined,
Beamed from the beauties of the fair one's mind,
His soul awakes the peace inspiring song,
And life and happiness the strain prolong;
To moral beauties bids the world attend,
And jarring realms in social compact blend;
Bids laws extend and commerce stretch the wing,
Far distant shores their bartered tributes bring;
He sees the nations join, their bliss increase,
(Leagued in his lays) and sings them into peace.
While pleased, the Muse divides her equal care,
And the same ardor warms the listening fair;
From his pure breath she lights a bolder flame,
The same her genius and her flight the same,
In mutual smiles the borrowed graces play,
In mutual sweetness slide the hours away,
In mutual aid the borrowed numbers roll,
And swelled to rapture breathes the mutual soul.
From their own loves, thus softened and refined,
The general wish extends to all mankind,
The neighbor's cares, the family, the friend
Pour on the heart, and in the bosom blend;
The poor, the stranger find a welcome home,
The vagrant foot is pointed where to roam,
The eye of anguish, when no help is near,
Looks the fond wish and finds the mingling tear;
Even to their foes their equal goodness bends,
And hostile minds are softened into friends.
And when their lays have poured the bounteous mind,
In warm benevolence, to all their kind,
They lift the bolder note, the raptures glow,
To loves pure source whence all her streamlets flow.
Rapt into vision of the bright abode,
From angel harps they catch the inspiring God;
Through heavens, o'er-canopy'd by heavens, they soar,
Where floods of light in boundless beauty pour,
Seraphs and system'd worlds innumerous move,
Linked in the chain of harmonizing love;
Thence following down* the effulgent glory trace,
Which brought salvation to their kindred race.
Thus, on the stream of life, with gentle sweep,
They roll delightful to the welcome deep,
Where, unconfined, their spirits gently sail,
View happier climes and taste a purer gale;
Through ether's boundless realms together rise,
And claim their kindred mansions in the skies;
There fill the rapture of the adoring throng,
Whose lays on earth prelude the heavenly song."
AN ELEGY On the late honorable TITUS HOSMER, Esquire. one of the Counselors of
the State of Connecticut, a Member of Congress, and a Judge of the Maritime
Court of Appeals for the United States of America. INSCRIBED TO MRS. LYDIA
HOSMER, Relict of the late honorable TITUS HOSMER, Esquire. As a testimony of the
Author's veneration for the many amiable virtues which rendered her the delight
and ornament of so worthy a Consort, and still render her an honor to a very
numerous and respectable acquaintance. BY THE SAME.
COME to my soul, O shade of HOSMER, come,
Though doubting senates ask thy aid in vain;
Attend the drooping virtues round thy tomb,
And hear a while the orphan'd Muse complain.
The Muse which thy indulgence bade aspire,
And dare pursue thy distant steps to fame*
At thy command she first assumed the lyre,
And hoped a future laurel from thy name.
How did thy smiles awake her infant song!
How did thy virtues animate the lay!
Still shall thy sat the dying strain prolong,
And bear her voice with thy lost form away.
Come to my soul thou venerable Sage,
In all the sheeted majesty of night,
Snatch the bold quill, control the noble rage,
And seize the raptured fancy in her flight.
Come in the form that shadowy spirits dress,
When death's dim veil has shrouded all their pride,
While yon tall cloud but emulates thy face,
Where the lone moon-beam trembles through its side.
Come on the gale that listening midnight heaves,
When glare-ey'd phantoms, bending with a bier,
Stalk through the mist, ascend the sounding graves,
And wake wild wonders in the startled ear.
In this dread scene no more the wonted fires
Kindle my breast, or open a wish within,
The soul, distracted, from herself retires,
And sighs to mingle and to soar with thine.
And where, thou blessed immortal, art thou flown!
Can these deep shades detain thy willing ear?
Can thou from loaded breezes hear a groan?
Or stain thy spotless mantle with a tear!
Can ought on earth thy flight has left behind,
Borne in the music of a once loved strain,
Approach the unbody'd mansion of the mind?
Or bend one pitying look to earth again?
Can thence no thought to that fair seat descend?
The seat once joyous in thy joys below,
Where robes of sable sadness now depend,
And all the still solemnities of woe.
Can the dear partner of thy tender years,
Sad as the misty fading face of even,
With all the wasted treasure of her tears,
Avert no smile nor bribe a care from heaven?
While that young throng, that dear deserted train,
Where thy loved image softened sweetness wears,
Swell with new tenderness each following pain,
And add unnumber'd, undivided cares.
Around the fair one see their beauties bloom,
(Or will thou not the moving fair one heed?)
How their keen anguish points the distant tomb,
Where all their joys and every hope is fled!
So lonely Cynthia, on her evening throne,
And all her young-ey'd planetary train,
In languid luster seek their sire the sun,
Down the still chambers of the western main.
Yet that broad splendour from his nightly race,
With rising radiance shall the day restore;
Another spring renews fair nature's face,
And years and ages die to waken more.
But thou, alas! no more on earth wilt tread,
Nor one short hour thy blessed employments leave,
Though the sad knell, that hailed thee to the dead,
Had doomed thy helpless country to her grave.
Thy country, whose still supplicating moan,
Implores thy counsels with an infant cry;
And loads the same stern Angel with a groan,
Which bore thy kindling spirit to the sky.
Will thou (since nothing here can bribe thy stay,
And nothing here can tempt thee from on high,
Since tears of innocence must idly stray,
And grateful millions breathe the fruitless sigh;
Since every tender tie that mortals prize,
And all that fame's immortal children gain,
Yield to the untimely mandate of the skies,
And ask thy kind continuance still in vain:)
Will thou in seats of blessedness above,
Where cares of empire claim the eternal ear,
Among thy country's guardian seraphs prove
The hand to cherish and the heart to hear?
There, while the dread sublimity of soul
Over all the star-ey'd heaven exalts thy throne,
While worlds beneath immeasurably roll,
And show the well-known circuit of thine own,
Will thou remark the bluely-bending shore?
Where hills and champaigns stretch abroad their pride,
Where opening streams their lengthiest currents pour,
And heaps of heroes swell the crimson tide.
Will thou recognize that confused uproar?
Towns curled in smoaky columns mounting high,
Mixed with the clarion's desolating roar;
Rending and purpling all the nether sky.
Amid the tumult, will thou see afar
Our laureled heroes striving for the day?
While clouds, unfolding, open the wings of war,
Where the grim legions sweep the foes away.
And while their deeds thy blessed approvance claim,
While crowds of rival chiefs thy guidance share,
Behold that first, that finished heir of fame,
And be the best of heroes still thy care.
That hero whose illuminating sword
Lights death and victory through the darkened field,
Bids realms and ages waken at his word,
Their sire, their soul, their savior and their shield.
Behold that Senate, whose delightful ear
With thy bold eloquence has often rung,
Where trembling realms, for many a doubtful year,
Have learnt their sure salvation from thy tongue.
While cares of empires sit upon their brow,
And all the increasing counsels of an age,
Demand, alike, bold virtue's warmest glow,
And the wide walks of science in the sage;
Let thy own wisdom's ever beaming light
Illume their well-known dignity of soul,
Let thy benevolence their hearts unite,
And every voice, and every wish control.
Lift the deep curtain from the vale of time,
Where unborn years their future circles wind,
Where the broad interests of a growing clime
Spread to all realms and regulate mankind.
Unfold to their keen penetrating view,
What to the infant empire should be known,
That worlds' and ages' happiness or woe,
Hang on the important issue of their own.
And sure thou will that honored realm revere,
Where first thine early steps began their fame,
Where thy loved memory, ever doubly dear,
Awakes a tenderer tribute to thy name.
Can thou forget, when youthful years began,
Where opening ^^^ence kindled every grace,
And smiled to see, ascending in the man,
The friend, the pride, the glory, of his race?
Where civil rights, the dignity of men,
And all the extensive privilege of laws,
Rolled from thy voice or brightened from thy pen,
Compelled attention and secured applause.
Where rising worth thine early name enrolled
Among the first famed fathers of the age,
And bade the untarnish'd characters of gold
Flame in the front of glory's deathless page.
Attentive still to virtue's noble aim,
And greatly strenuous to advance her cause,
Lead thou her counsels, animate her flame,
Sire of her sons, and guardian of her laws.
And see! aloft in that sublime retreat,
Where injured rights obtain their last appeal,
How pensive justice over thy vacant seat,
With faltering hand suspends her turning scale.
If chance some Hosmer, with an even eye,
And skilled like thee to poize the trembling weight,
Should cheer the nymph, thine honored place supply,
And bless the nations with a longer date;
When from all bounds of this extensive land,
Or where wide oceans spread their coasts abroad,
Dark causes rise, demanding from his hand,
The impartial deep discernment of a god;
Then in his breast may all thy virtues rise,
And all thy dignity around him shine,
Then drop thy own blessed mantle from the skies,
And make the person as the place divine.
He will, my friends -- the unbodied life above,
With every virtue brightened and refined,
That glowed below, with patriotic love,
The love of happiness and human kind,
Will burn serener in a purer sky,
Where broader views and bolder thoughts unroll,
Where universal Being fills the eye,
And swells the unbounded wishes of the soul.
No tender thought by heaven's own breath inspired,
Which taught the gentle bosom here to glow,
Which the warm breast with patriot ardor fired,
Or stole the secret tear for silent woe;
No tender thought by heaven's own will approved,
Can ever forsake the mansion first assigned;
But reaches still the object once beloved,
And lives immortal in the immortal mind.
Fixed in a brighter sphere, with surer aim,
Though greater scenes his growing views employ,
Yet Hosmer kindles with an Hosmer's flame,
And his dear country feeds his noblest joy.
He sees our rising, all-involving cause,
Spread like the morn to every distant clime,
Awake the mild magnificence of laws,
And roll down blessings on the stream of time.
Nor think, O hapless fair one, though awhile,
From thy fond arms his happier spirit rove,
That soaring innocence can cease to smile,
Or his Seraphic bosom cease to love.
In Heaven's own breast the self-existent fires,
Ever time began, illum'd the eternal flame,
Lit from the beam, the Archangellic quires
Preserve the unchanging ardor still the same.
And shall the heaven-born spirit after death,
Robbed of its virtues from its nature fly,
Or lose in climes of bliss the aspiring breath,
Which winged its passage to its kindred sky?
Think, in the chambers of eternal morn,
Where beauty blooms along the vernal vale,
Where loves and virtues every smile adorn,
And hymns of Angels swell the floating gale;
Think how his well-known sympathy of soul
Views every pain thy tenderness can know;
Counts the full tears in silence as they roll,
And learns the tale of every speaking woe.
Thou know, while here, he joy'd to give relief,
To call dark merit to the eye of day,
To rob the silent orphan of her grief,
And breathe the sigh from innocence away.
How did the trembling visage of the poor,
With grateful glow embolden at his smile!
And learn, well pleased, within his wonted door,
Its joys to cherish, and its cares beguile.
Thou know his early wish began to prize
The bliss that wayward mortals seldom find,
That lists the frequent suppliant to the skies,
While answering blessings fill the raptured mind.
Know then, fair mourner, from the climes of day,
(While these drear shades of solitude you tread)
His unseen hand companion of thy way,
Through the dark paths thy wandering steps shall lead.
While all thy virtues rise before the throne,
And all thy griefs be numbered in his sight,
Those shall refine and ripen with his own,
And these be hushed in everlasting night.
Thy children too, his images below,
Fair as young plants, and smiling as the morn,
With thy own loveliness shall learn to glow,
And all thy graces brighten and adorn.
Short is the date that virtue from its home,
In these deep shades, can suffer and refine;
And when kind heaven relieves it from the doom,
Ours be the choice to tremble and resign.
Vain were the task, the daring thought were vain,
To check the sun's bold circuit as he flies;
Nor think the cling of fondness can detain
The soaring seraph from his kindred skies.
Then cease, fond partner of his earthly joys,
And leave behind each unavailing care;
Think what a scene his happier flight employs,
And haste to meet him and to mingle there.
AN ELEGY On the burning of FAIRFIELD, in CONNECTICUT. Written on the spot, --
anno 1779.
BY COL. DAVID HUMPHREYS.
YE smoking ruins, marks of hostile ire,
Ye ashes warm, which drink the tears that flow,
Ye desolated plains my voice inspire,
And give soft music to the song of woe!
How pleasant, Fairfield, on the enraptured sight
Rose thy tall spires, and opened thy social halls!
How often my bosom beat with pure delight,
At yonder spot, where stand the darkened walls!
But there the voice of mirth resounds no more,
A silent sadness through the streets prevails,
The distant main alone is heard to roar,
And hollow chimnies hum with sullen gales;
Save where scorched elms the untimely foliage shed,
Which rustling hovers round the faded green;
Save where at twilight mourners frequent tread,
'Mid recent graves over desolation's scene.
How changed the blissful prospect, when compared
These glooms funereal with thy former bloom:
Thy hospitable rights when Tryon shared,
Long ere he sealed thy melancholy doom.
That impious wretch, with coward voice decreed
Defenseless domes and hallowed fanes to dust,
Beheld with sneering smile the wounded bleed,
And spurred his bands to rapine, blood and lust.
Vain was the widow's, vain the orphan's cry,
To touch his feelings or to sooth his rage;
Vain the fair drop that rolled from beauty's eye,
Vain the dumb grief of supplicating age.
Could Tryon hope to quench the patriot flame,
Or make his deeds survive in glory's page?
Could Britons seek of savages the fame,
Or deem it conquest thus the war to wage?
Yes, Britons scorn the councils of the skies,
Extend wide havoc, spurn the insulted foes!
The insulted foes to tenfold vengeance rise,
Resistance growing as the danger grows.
Red in their wounds and pointing to the plain,
The visionary shapes before me stand;
The thunder bursts, the battle burns again,
And kindling fires encrimson all the strand. --
Long dusky wreaths of smoke, reluctant driven,
In blackening volumes over the landscape bend;
Here the broad splendour blazes high to heaven,
There umber'd streams in purple pomp ascend.
In fiery eddies round the tottering walls,
Emitting sparks, the lighter fragments fly;
With frightful crash the burning mansion falls,
The works of years in glowing embers lie.
Tryon! behold thy sanguine flames aspire,
Clouds tinged with dies intolerably bright!
Behold well pleased the village wrapped in fire;
Let one wide ruin glut thy ravished sight!
Ere fades the grateful scene, indulge thine eye,
See age and sickness tremulously slow,
Creep from the flames -- see babes in torture dye --
And mothers swoon in agonies of woe.
Go, gaze, enraptured with the mother's tear,
The infant's terror, and the captive's pain,
Where no bold bands can check thy cursed career;
Mix fire with blood on each unguarded plain.
These be thy triumphs! this thy boasted same!
Daughters of memory, raise the deathless songs!
Repeat through endless years his hated name,
Embalm his crimes and teach the world our wrongs!
AN ELEGY ON LIEUTENANT DE HEART, This young warrior was killed in the attack on
the block-house, near Fort Lee, 1780.
Vol. Aid to Genesis Wayne. BY THE SAME.
WHEN autumn all humid and drear
With darkness and storms in his train
Announcing the death of the year,
Despoiled of its verdure the plain:
When horror congenial prevailed,
Where graves are with fearfulness trod,
De Heart by his sister was wail'd,
His sister thus sighed over his sod:
"Near Hudson, a fort, on these banks,
"Its flag of defiance unfurled:
"He led to the storm the first ranks;
"On them, iron tempests were hurled.
"Transpierc'd was his breast with a ball --
"His breast a red fountain supplied,
"Which, gushing in waves still and small,
"Distained his white bosom and side.
"His visage was ghastly in death,
"His hair, that so lavishly curled,
"I saw, as he lay on the heath,
"In blood, and with dew-drops impearl'd.
"How dumb is the tongue, that could speak
"Whatever could engage and delight!
"How faded the rose on his cheek!
"Those eyes, how envelop'd in night!
"Those eyes, that illumined each soul,
"All darkened to us are now grown:
"In far other orbits they roll,
"Like stars to new-systems when gone.
"My brother, the pride of the plain,
"In vain did the graces adorn;
"His blossom unfolded in vain,
"To die like the blossom of morn.
"Oh war, thou have wasted our clime,
"And tortured by bosom with sighs:
"My brother, who fell ere his prime,
"Forever is torn from my eyes.
"To me, how distracting the storm,
"That blasted the youth in his bloom!
"Alas, was so finished a form
"Designed for so early a tomb?
"How bright were the prospects that shone!
"Their ruin it is mine to deplore --
"Health, beauty, and youth were his own,
"Health, beauty, and youth are no more.
"No blessings of nature and art,
"Nor music that charmed in the song,
"Nor virtues that glowed in the heart,
"Dear youth, could thy moments prolong!
"Thrice six times the spring had renewed
"Its youth and its charms for the boy;
"With rapture all nature he viewed,
"For nature he knew to enjoy.
"But chiefly his country could charm:
"He felt -- 'twas a generous heat --
"With drums and the trumpet's alarm,
"His pulses in consonance beat.
"Ye heroes, to whom he was dear,
"Come weep over this sorrowful urn,
"Come ease the full heart with a tear --
"My hero will never return:
"He died in the dawn of applause,
"His country demanded his breath;
"Go, heroes, defend the same cause,
"Avenge with your country his death."
So sung on the top of the rocks,
The virgin in sorrow more fair;
In tears her blue eyes; and her locks
Of auburn flew loose on the air.
I heard, as passed down the stream;
The guards of the foe were in view: --
To enterprise fired by the theme,
I bade the sweet mourner adieu.
MOUNT VERNON: AN ODE. BY THE SAME.
BY broad Potowmack's azure tide,
Where Vernon's mount, in sylvan pride,
Displays its beauties far,
Great Washington, to peaceful shades,
Where no unhallowed wish invades,
Retired from fields of war.
Angels might see, with joy, the sage,
Who taught the battle where to rage,
Or squench'd its spreading flame,
On works of peace employ that hand,
Which waved the blade of high command,
And hewed the path to fame.
Let others sing his deeds in arms,
A nation saved, and conquest's charms:
Posterity shall hear,
'Twas mine, returned from Europe's courts,
To share his thoughts, partake his sports,
And sooth his partial ear.
To thee, my friend, these lays belong:
Thy happy seat inspires my song,
With gay, perennial blooms,
With fruitage fair, and cool retreats,
Whose bow'ry wilderness of sweets
The ambient air perfumes.
Here spring its earliest buds displays,
Here latest on the leafless sprays,
The plumy people sing;
The vernal shower, the ripening year,
The autumnal store, the winter dr^ar,
For thee new pleasures bring.
Here lapp'd in philosophic ease,
Within thy walks, beneath thy trees,
Amidst thine ample farms,
No vulgar converse heroes hold,
But past or future scenes unfold,
Or dwell on nature's charms.
What wondrous era have we seen,
Placed on this isthmus, half between
A rude and polished state!
We saw the war tempestuous rise,
In arms a world, in blood the skies,
In doubt and empire's fate.
The storm is calmed, seren'd the heaven,
And mildly over the climes of even,
Expands the imperial day:
"O God, the source of light supreme,
"Shed on our dusky morn a gleam,
"To guide our doubtful way!
"Restrain, dread power* our land from crimes*
"What seeks, though blessed beyond all times,
"So querulous an age?
"What (...) to freedom such disgust,
"Of (...) of anarchy the lust,
"(...) and rage?'
So spoke his country's friend, with sighs,
To find that country still despise
The legacy he gave --
And half he feared his toils were vain,
And much that man would court a chain,
And live through vice a slave.
A transient gloom overcast his mind:
Yet, still on providence reclined,
The patriot fo^d believed,
That power benign too much had done,
To leave an empire's task begun,
Imperfectly achiev'd.
Thus buoyed with hope, with virtue ble^^,
Of every human bliss possessed,
He meets the happier hours;
His skies assume a lovelier blue,
His prospects brighter rise to view,
And fairer bloom his flowers.
AN ODE. ADDRESSED TO LAURA. BY THE SAME.
OH, lovely Laura, may a youth,
Inspired by beauty, urged by truth,
Disclose the heart's alarms,
The fire in raptured breasts that glows,
The impassioned pang on love that grows,
And dare to sing thy charms!
Enough with war my lay has rung;
A softer theme awakes my tongue;
It Is beauty's force divine:
Can I resist that air, that grace,
The harmony of form and face?
For every charm is thine.
Of health, of youth the expanding f^ush,
Of virgin fear the flying blush,
With crimson stain thy cheek:
The be such nectar never sips,
As yield the rose-buds of thy lips,
When sweetly thou do speak.
It Is thine the heaviest heart to cheer,
Those accents, drank with eager ear,
So musically roll:
Where swells the breast, the snow-white skin
Scarce hides the secret thoughts within,
Nor needs disguise that soul.
With thee, of cloudness days I dream;
Thy eyes, in morning splendors, beam
So exquisitely fair --
What taste! as over thy back and breast,
In light-brown ringlets neatly dressed
Devolves a length of hair.
Unblam'd, oh, let me gaze and gaze,
While lovesick fancy fondly strays,
And feasts on many a kiss; --
For us let tides of rapture roll,
And may we mingle soul with soul,
In extacies of bliss!
THE GENIUS OF AMERICA. A SONG. Tune, -- The watery God, etc. BY THE SAME.
WHERE spirits dwell and shad'wy forms,
On Andes' cliffs mid black'ning storms*
With livid lightnings curled:
The awful genius of our clime,
In thunder raised his voice sublime,
And hushed the listening world.
"In lonely waves and wastes of earth,
"A mighty empire claims its birth,
"And heaven asserts the claim;
"The sails that hang in, yon dim sky,
"Proclaim the promised era nigh,
"Which wakes a world to fame.
"Hail ye first bounding barks that roam,
"Blue-tumbling billows topp'd with foam,
"Which keel never plough'd before!
"Here suns perform their useless round,
"Here rove the naked tribes embrown'd,
"Who feed on living gore.
"To midnight orgies, offering dire,
"The human sacrifice on fire,
"A heavenly light succeeds --
"But, lo! what horrors intervene,
"The toils severe, the carnag'd scene,
"And more than mortal deeds!
"Ye FATHERS, spread your fame afar,
"'It Is yours to still the sounds of war,
"And bid the slaughter cease;
"The peopling hamlets wide extend,
"The harvests spring, the spires ascend,
"Mid grateful songs of peace.
Shall steed to steed, and man to man,
"With discord thundering in the van,
"Again destroy the bliss?
"Enough my mystic words reveal,
"The rest the shades of night conceal,
"In fate's profound abyss."
AN EPISTLE TO DR. DWIGHT. For Dr. Dwight's letter to Col. Humphreys, see page
75.
On board the Courier de l'Europe, July 30, 1784. BY THE SAME.
FROM the wide watery waste, where naught but skies
And mingling w^^es salute the aching eyes;
Where the same moving circle bounds the view,
And paints with vap'ry tints the billows blue;
To thee, my early friend! to thee, dear Dwight!
Fond recollection turns, while thus I write;
Wh^le I reflect, no change of time or place,
The impressions of our friendship can efface;
Nor peace, nor war, though changed for us the scene,
Though mountains rise, or oceans roll between;
Too deep that sacred passion was impressed
On my young heart, too deep it marked your breast;
Your breast which asks the feelings of your friend,
What chance betides him, or what toils attend?
Then hear the muse, in sea-born numbers tell
In mind how cheerful, and in health how well;
And even that muse will deign to let you know,
What things concur to make and keep him so.
(...) go, protected by supernal care,
(...) loudless skies, and suns serenely fair;
(...) over the unruffled main the gentle gale
(...) breathes, and fills each swelling sail;
(...) of safety in the self-same hand,
(...) guides us on the ocean or the land.
Of thee, fair bark! the muse prophetic sings,
^^rope's swift Messenger! expand thy wings,
^^ar thy tall masts, extend thine ample arms,
Catch the light breeze, nor dread impending harms.
(...) often shall thou, if aught the muse avails,
(...) the broad deep with such delightful gales;
(...) often to either world announce glad news,
Of allied realms promote the friendly views;
So shall each distant age assert thy claim,
And Europe's Messenger be known to same!"
What though this plain so uniform and vast,
(...) spreads its dreary waste;
(...) though no isles, nor vales, nor hills, nor groves,
(...) the tired eye that round the horizon roves;
(...), still collected in a narrow bound,
(...) thousand little pleasures may be found.
Here we enjoy accommodations good,
(...) pleasant liquors, and well-flavor'd food,
(...) nicely fatten'd in Columbian fields,
And luscious wines, that Gallia's vintage yields,
(...) which you bards ('it was so in former days)
(...) feast your wit, and lavish all your praise.
Within our ship, well-furnish'd, roomy, clean,
(...) see the uses of each different scene.
Far in the prow, for culinary use,
Fires, not poetic, much good cheer produce;
The ovens there our daily bread afford,
And thence the viands load our plenteous board.
See various landscapes shade our dining hall,
Where mimic nature wantons round the wall,
There no vain pomp appears, there all is heat,
And there cool zephyrs fanning, as we eat,
Avert the fervors of the noontide ray,
And give the mildness of the vernal day.
See the great cabin nigh, its doors unfold,
Show fleeting forms from mirrors fixed in gold!
Over painted ceilings brighter prospects rise,
And rural scenes again delight our eyes:
There often from converse or from social sports,
We drink delight less dashed than that of courts.
But when more sober cares the hour requires,
Each to his cell of solitude retires;
His bed, his books, his paper, pen and ink,
Present the choice, to rest, to read, or think.
Yet what would all avail to prompt the smile,
Cheer the sad breast, or the dull hour beguile;
If well-bred passengers, discreet and free,
Were not at hand to mix in social glee?
Such my companions, -- such the muse shall tell,
Him first, whom once you knew in war so well,
Our Polish friend, General Kosciuszko.
whose name still sounds so (...),
To make it rhyme would puzzle any bard;
That youth, whom bays and laurels early crowned,
For virtue, science, arts, and arms, renowned.
Next him, behold, to grace our watery scene,
An honest German lifts his generous mien;
Him Carolina sends to Europe's shore,
Canals and inland waters to explore;
From thence returned, she hopes to see her tide,
In commerce rich, through ampler channels glide.
Next comes the bleak Quebec's well-natured son;
And last our naval chief, the friend of fun;
Whose plain, frank manners, formed on fickle seas,
Are cheerful still, and always aim to please:
Nor less the other chiefs their zeal display,
To make us happy as themselves are gay.
Severed from all society but this,
Half way from either world we plough the abyss:
Save the small sea-bird and the fish that flies,
On yon blue waves no object meets my eyes.
Nor has the insidious hook, with lures, beguiled
Of peopled ocean scarce a single child.
Yet luckless Dolphin, erst to Arion Ille sedet, citharamque tenet, pretiumque
vehendi Cantat, et acquoreas carmine mulcet aquas.

Ovid. Fast. 2.
true,
Naught could avail thy beauteous, transient hue;
As over the deck, in dying pang you rolled,
Wrapped in gay rain-bows and pellucid gold.
Now (...) bird, fatigued with flight
Over many a watery league, is forced to light
High on the mast, -- the bird our seamen take,
Though ^^ar'd, too tired its refuge to forsake:
Fear not sweet bird, nor judge our motives ill,
No barbarous man, now means thy blood to spill,
Or hold thee cag'd; soon as we reach the shore,
Free shall t^ou fly, and gaily sing and soar!
Another grateful sight now cheers the eye,
At first a snow-white spot in yon clear sky;
Then through the optic tube a ship appears,
And now distinct athwart the billows veers:
Daughter of ocean, made to bless mankind!
Go, range wide waters on the wings of wind;
With friendly intercourse far climes explore,
Their produce barter, and increase their store;
Never saw my eye so fair a pageant swim,
As thou appear'st, in all thy gallant trim!
Amused with trivial things, reclined at ease,
While the swift bark divides the summer seas;
Your b^rd (for past neglect to make amends)
Now writes to you, anon to other friends.
Anon the scene, in Europe's polished climes,
Will give new themes for philosophic rhymes,
Open broader fields for reason to explore,
Improvements vast of scientific lore!
Through nations blessed with peace, but strong in arms,
Refined in arts, and apt for social charms,
Your friend will stray, and strive, with studious care,
To mark whatever is useful, great, or rare;
Search the small shades of manners in their lives,
What policy prevails, how commerce thrives;
How morals form of happiness the base,
How others differ from Columbia's ra^e;
And, gleaning knowledge from the realms he roved,
Bring home a patriot heart, enlarged, improved.
A SONG. Translated from the French. BY THE SAME.
IT rains, it rains, my fair,
Come drive your white shee^ fast:
To shelter quick repair,
Haste, shepherdess, make haste.
I hear -- the water pours,
With patt'ring on the vines:
See here! see here! it lours --
See there the lightning shines.
The thunder do thou hear?
Loud roars the rushing storm:
Take (while we run, my dear)
Protection from my arm.
I see our cot, ah hold!
Mama and sister Nance,
To open our sheepfold,
Most cheerily advance.
God bless my mother dear,
My sister Nancy too!
I bring my sweetheart here,
To sleep to night with you.
Go, dry yourself, my friend,
And make yourself at home --
Sister, on her attend:
Come in, sweet lambkins, come.
Mama, let us take good care
Of all her pretty sheep;
Her little lamb we'll spare
More straw whereon to sleep.
It Is done -- now let us haste
To her; -- you here, my fair!
Undressed, oh what a waist!
My mother, look you there.
Let Us sup; come take this place,
You shall be next to me;
This pine-knot's cheerful blaze
Shall shine direct on thee.
Come taste this cream so sweet,
This syllabub so warm;
Alas! you do not eat:
You feel even yet the storm.
'Twas wrong -- I pressed too much
Your steps, when on the way:
But here, see here your couch --
There sleep till dawn of day
With gold the mountain tips: --
Good night, good night, my dove:
Now let me on your lips,
Imprint one kiss of love.
Mama and I will come,
When morn begins to shine,
To see my sweetheart home,
And ask her hand for mine.
EPITAPH On a Patient killed by a Cancer Quack.
BY DR. LEMUEL HOPKINS.
HERE lies a fool flat on his back,
The victim of a Cancer Quack;
Who lost his money and his life,
By plaster, caustic, and by knife.
The case was this -- a pimple rose,
South-east a little of his nose;
Which daily reden'd and grew bigger,
As too much drinking gave it vigor:
A score of gossips soon ensure
Full three score different modes of cure:
But yet the full-fed pimple still
Defied all petticoated skill;
When fortune led him to peruse
A hand-bill in the weekly news;
Signed by six fools of different sorts,
All cured of cancers made of warts;
Who recommend, with d^e submission,
This cancer-monger as magician;
Fear winged his flight to find the quack,
And prove his cancer-curing knack;
But on his way he found another, --
A second advertising brother:
But as much like him as an owl
Is unlike every handsome fowl;
Whose fame had raised as broad a fog,
And of the two the greater hog:
Who used a still more magic plaster,
That sweat forsooth, and cured the faster.
This doctor viewed, with moony eyes
And scowl'd up face, the pimple's size;
Then christened it in solemn answer,
And cried, "This pimple's name is CANCER."
"But courage, friend, I see you're pale,
"My sweating plasters never fail;
"I Have sweated hundreds out with ease,
"With roots as long as maple trees;
"And never failed in all my trials --
"Behold these samples here in vials!
"Preserved to show my wondrous merits,
"Just as my liver is -- in spirits.
"For twenty joes the cure is done -- "
The bargain struck, the plaster on,
Which gnawed the cancer at its leisure,
And pained his face above all measure.
But still the pimple spread the faster,
And swelled, like toad that meets disaster.
Thus soiled, the doctor gravely swore,
It was a right rose-cancer sore;
Then stuck his probe beneath the beard,
And showed them where the leaves appeared;
And raised the patient's drooping spirits,
By praising up the plaister's merits. --
Quoth he,' "The roots now scarcely stick --
"I Will fetch her out like crab or tick;
"And make it rendezvous, next trial,
"With six more plagues, in my old vial."
Then purged him pale with jalap drastic,
And next applies the infernal caustic.
But yet, this semblance bright of hell
Served but to make the patient yell;
And, gnawing on with fiery pace,
Devoured one broadside of his face --
'Courage, it is done,' the doctor cried*
And quick the incision knife applied:
That with three cuts made such a hole,
Out flew the patient's tortured soul!
Go, readers, gentle, eke and simple,
If you have wart, or corn, or pimple;
To quack infallible apply;
Here Is room enough for you to lie.
His skill triumphant still prevails,
For DEATH's a cure that never fails.
THE HYPOCRITE's HOPE. BY THE SAME.
BLESSED is the man, who from the womb.
To saintship him betakes,
And when too soon his child shall come,
A long confession makes.
When next in Broad Church-alley, he
Shall take his former place,
Relates his past iniquity,
And consequential grace.
Declares now long by Satan vexed,
From truth he did depart,
And tells the time, and tells the text,
That smote his flinty heart.
He stands in half-way-cov'nant sure;
Full fi^^ long years or more,
One foot in church's pale secure,
The other out of door.
Then ^^per grown in gifts and grace,
With every rite complies,
And deeper lengthens down his face,
And higher rolls his eyes.
He (...) like Pharisee sublime,
Two ^engthy prayers a day,
The same that he from early prime,
Had heard his father say.
Each Sunday perched on bench of pew,
To passing priest he bows,
Then loudly 'mid the quav'ring crew,
Attunes his vocal nose.
With awful look then rises slow,
And pray'rful visage sour,
More fit to fright the apostate foe,
Then seek a pard'ning power.
Then nodding hears the sermon next,
From priest haranguing loud;
And doubles down each quoted text,
From Genesis to Jude.
And when the priest holds forth address,
To old ones born anew,
With holy pride and wrinkled face,
He rises in his p^w.
Good works he cares naught about,
But faith alone will seek,
While Sunday's pieties blot out
The knaveries of the week.
He makes the poor his daily prayer,
Yet drives them from his board:
And though to his own good he swear,
Through habit breaks his word.
This man advancing fresh and fair,
Shall all his race complete;
And wave at last his hoary hair,
Arrived in Deacon's seat.
There shall he all church honors have,
By joyous brethren given --
Till priest: in funeral sermon grave,
Shall send him straight to heaven.
ON GENERAL ETHAN ALLEN. BY THE SAME.
LO Allen escaped from British jails,
His tushes broke by biting nails.
Appears in hyperborean skies,
To tell the world the bible lies.
See him on green hills north afar
Glow like a self-enkindled star,
Prepared (with mob-collecting club
Black from the forge of Beelzebub,
And grim with metaphysic scowl,
With quill just plucked from wing of owl)
As rage or reason rise or sink
To shed his blood, or shed his ink.
Behold inspired from Vermont dens,
The seer of Antichrist descends,
To feed new mobs with Hell-born manna
In Gentile lands of Susquehanna;
And teach the Pennsylvania quaker
High blasphemies against his maker.
Behold him move ye staunch divines!
His tall head bustling through the pines;
All front he seems like wall of brass,
And brays tremendous as an ass;
One hand is clench'd to batter noses,
While the other scrawls against Paul and Moses.
AN ORATION, Which might have been delivered to the Students in Anatomy, on the
late Rupture between the two Schools in this city. This Poem is ascribed to the
late Hon. Francis Hopkinson, Esquire. L. L. D. Federal Judge for the District of
Pennsylvania, etc. etc. -- The occasion of its being written, was this: A
Dispute arose between the Medical Students who had attached themselves to two
Anatomical Professors, in the city of Philadelphia. This Dispute was carried on
for a considerable time, and with great violence. Resolutions of Committees, --
Journals of Meetings, -- etc. etc. were printed; and the town was threatened
with a deluge of uninteresting publications. In this situation of affairs, Dr.
Hopkinson took up the pen; and by the well-tim'd raillery of the following
Poem, silenced the contending parties, restored peace to the Schools, and
agreeably entertained the Lovers of Poetry and Humor. -- This Poem is
reprinted from the 4to edition, published by T. Dobson and T. Lang, February
1789.

THE ARGUMENT.
ADDRESS -- the folly and danger of dissension -- the Orator enumerates the
enemies of the fraternity -- reminds them of a late unseasonable interruption
-- a night scene in the Potter's Field -- he laments the want of true zeal in
the brotherhood -- and boasts of his own -- the force of a ruling passion --
the earth considered as a great animal -- the passion of love not the same in a
true son of Esculapius as in other men -- his own amor -- a picture of his
mistress in high taste -- shows his learning in the description of her mouth,
arm and hand -- his mistress dies -- his grief -- and extraordinary consolation
-- his unparalled fidelity -- he apologizes for giving this history of his
amor -- the great difficulties Anatomists have to encounter in the present
times, arising from false delicacy, prejudice and ignorance -- a strong
instance in proof that it was not so formerly -- curious argument to prove the
inconsistency of the present opinions respecting the practice -- he mentions
many obstacles in the road to science -- and reproaches them for their
intestine broils, at a time when not only popular clamor is loud, but even the
powers of government are exerted against them -- he then encourages his
brethren with hopes of better times, founded on the establishment of the
College of Physicians -- is inspired with the idea of the future glory of that
institution -- and prophesies great things.

FRIENDS and associates! lend a patient ear,
Suspend intestine broils and reason hear.
Ye followers of F -- your wrath forbear --
Ye sons of S -- your invectives spare;
The fierce dissension your high minds pursue
Is sport for others -- ruinous to you.
Surely some fatal influenza reigns,
Some epidemic rabies turns your brains --
Is this a time for brethren to engage
In public contest and in party rage?
Fell discord triumphs in your doubtful strife
And, smiling, whets her anatomic knife;
Prepared to cut our precious limbs away
And leave the bleeding body to decay. --
Seek ye for foes! -- alas, my friends, look round,
In every street, see numerous foes abound!
Methinks I hear them cry, in varied tones,
"Give us our father's, -- brother's, -- sister's bones."
Methinks I see a mob of sailor's rise --
Revenge! -- Revenge! they cry -- and damn their eyes --
Revenge for comrade Jack, whose flesh, they say,
You minced to morsels and then threw away.
Methinks I see a black infernal train --
The genuine offspring of accursed Cain --
Fiercely on you their angry looks are bent,
They grin and gibber dangerous discontent,
And seem to say, -- "Is there not meat enough?
"Ah! massa cannibal, why eat poor CUFF?"
Even hostile watchmen stand in strong array
And over our heads their threatening staves display;
Howl hideous discord through the noon of night,
And shake their dreadful lanthorns in our sight.
Say, are not these sufficient to engage
Your high wrought souls eternal war to wage?
Combine your strength these monsters to subdue
No friends of science, and sworn foes to you;
On these, -- on these your wordy vengeance pour,
And strive our fading glory to restore.
Ah! think how, late, our mutilated rites
And midnight orgies, were by sudden frights
And loud alarms profaned -- the sacrifice,
Stretched on a board before our eager eyes,
All naked lay -- even when our chieftain stood
Like a high priest, prepared for shedding blood;
Prepared, with wondrous skill, to cut or slash
The gentle sliver or the deep drawn gash;
Prepared to plunge even elbow deep in gore
Nature and nature's secrets to explore --
Then a tumultuous cry -- a sudden fear --
Proclaimed the foe -- the enraged foe is near --
In some dark hole the hard got corse was laid,
And we, in wild confusion; fled dismayed.
Think how, like brethren, we have shared the toil,
When in the Potter's Field The Negro burial ground.
we sought for spoil;
Did midnight ghosts, and death, and horror, brave,
To delve for science in the dreary grave.
Shall I remind you of that awful night
When our compacted band maintained the fight
Against an armed host? -- fierce was the fray,
And yet we bore our sheeted prize away.
Firm on a horse's back the corse was laid,
High blowing winds the winding sheet displayed;
Swift flew the steed -- but still his burden bore --
Fear made him fleet, who never was fleet before;
Over tombs and sunken graves he cours'd around,
Nor ought respected consecrated ground.
Mean time the battle raged -- so loud the strife,
The dead were almost frightened into life;
Though not victorious, yet we scorned to yield,
Retook our prize, and left the doubtful field.
In this degenerate age, alas! how few
The paths of science with true zeal pursue?
Some trifling contest, some delusive joy,
Too often the unsteady minds of youth employ.
For me -- whom ESCULAPIUS has inspired --
I boast a soul with love of science fired;
By one great object is my heart possessed;
One ruling passion quite absorbs the rest;
In this bright point my hopes and fears unite,
And one pursuit alone can give delight.
To me things are not as to vulgar eyes,
I would all nature's works anatomize:
This world a living monster seems, to me,
Rolling and sporting in the aerial sea;
The soil encompasses her rocks and stones
As flesh in animals encircles bones.
I see vast ocean, like a heart in play,
Pant systole and diasttole every day,
And by unnumber'd venus streams supplied
Up her broad rivers force the arterial tide.
The world's great lungs, monsoons and trade-winds show
From east to west, from west to east they blow
Alternate respiration --
The hills are pimples which earth's face defile,
And burning Aetna, an eruptive boil:
On her high mountains hairy forests grow,
And downy grass o'erspreads the vales below;
From her vast body perspirations rise,
Condense in clouds and float beneath the skies.
Thus fancy, faithful servant of the heart,
Transforms all nature by her magic art.
Even mighty LOVE, whose power all power controuls,
Is not, in me, like love in other souls;
Yet I have loved -- and CUPID's subtle dart
Has through my pericardium pierced my heart.
Brown CADAVERA did my soul ensnare,
Was all my thought by night, and daily care;
I longed to clasp, in her transcendent charms,
A living skeleton within my arms.
Long, lank and lean, my CADAVERA stood,
Like the tall pine, the glory of the wood;
Ofttimes I gazed, with learned skill to trace
The sharp edged beauties of her bony face:
There rose Os frontis prominent and bold,
In deep sunk orbits two large eye balls rolled,
Beneath those eye balls, two arched bones were seen
Whereon two flabby cheeks hung loose and lean;
Between those cheeks, protuberant arose,
In form triangular, her lovely nose,
Like EGYPT's pyramid it seemed to rise,
Scorn earth, and bid defiance to the skies;
Thin were her lips, and of a sallow hue,
Her open mouth exposed her teeth to view;
Projecting strong, protuberant and wide
Stood incisores -- and on either side
The canine ranged, with many a beauteous flaw,
And last the grinders, to fill up the jaw;
All in their alveoli fixed secure,
Articulated by gomphosis sure.
Around her mouth perpetual smiles had made
Wrinkles wherein the loves and graces played;
There, stretched and rigid by continual strain,
Appeared the zygomatic muscles plain,
And broad montanus over her peeked chin
Extended, to support the heavenly grin.
In amorous dalliance often I stroak'd her arm,
Each rising muscle was a rising charm.
Over the flexores my fond fingers played,
I found instruction with delight conveyed;
There carpus, cubitus and radius too
Were plainly felt and manifest to view.
No muscles on her lovely hand were seen,
But only bones envelop'd by a skin.
Long were her fingers and her knuckles bare,
Much like the claw-foot of a walnut chair.
So plain was complex matacarpus shown,
It might be fairly counted bone by bone.
Her slender phalanxes were well defined,
And each with each by ginglymus combined.
Such were the charms that did my fancy fire,
And love -- chaste scientific love inspire.
At length my CADAVERA fell beneath
The fatal stroke of all subduing death:
Three days in grief -- three nights in tears I spent,
And sighs incessant gave my sorrows vent.
Few are the examples of a love so true --
Even from her death I consolation drew,
And in a secret hour approached her grave,
Resolved her precious corse from worms to save;
With active haste removed the incumbent clay,
Seized the rich prize and bore my love away.
Her naked charms now lay before my sight,
I gazed with rapture and supreme delight,
Nor could forbear, in ecstasy, to cry --
Beneath that shrivelled skin what treasures lie!
Then feasted to the full my amorous soul,
And skinn'd, and cut, and slashed without control.
'Twas then I saw, what long I Would wished to see,
That heart which panted often for love and me --
In detail viewed the form I once adored,
And nature's hidden mysteries explored.
Alas! too truly did the wise man say
That flesh is grass, and subject to decay:
Not so the bones; of substance firm and hard,
Long they remain the Anatomist's reward.
Wise nature, in her providential care,
Did, kindly, bones from vile corruption spare,
That sons their fathers' skeletons might have,
And heaven-born science triumph over the grave.
My true love's bones I boiled -- from fat and lean
These hands industrious scraped them fair and clean,
And every bone did to its place restore,
As Nature's hand had placed them long before:
These fingers twisted every pliant wire
With patient skill, urged on by strong desire.
Now what remains of CADAVERA's mine,
Securely hanging in a case of pine.
Ofttimes I sit and contemplate her charms,
Her nodding skull and her long dangling arms,
'Till quite inflamed with passion for the dead,
I take her beauteous skeleton to bed;
There stretched, at length, close to my faithful side
She lies all night, -- a lovely, grinning bride. --
Excuse, my friends, this detail of my love,
You must the intent, if not the tale, approve;
By facts exemplary I meant to show
To what extent a genuine zeal will go.
A mind, so fixed, will not be drawn aside
By vain dissentions or a partial pride;
But every hostile sentiment subdue,
And keep the ruling passion still in view.
False delicacy -- prejudices strong,
Which no distinctions know 'twixt right and wrong,
Against our noble science spend their rage,
And mark the ignorance of this vulgar age.
Time was, when men their living flesh would spare,
And to the knife their quivering nates bare,
That skilful surgeons TALIACOTIUS.
noses might obtain
For noses lost -- and cut and come again; --
But now the living churlishly refuse
To give their dead relations to our use;
Talk of decorum -- and a thousand whims --
Whenever we hack their wives' or daughters' limbs
And yet their tables daily they supply
With the rich fruits of sa^ mortality;
Will pick, and gut, and cook ^ ch^cken's corse,
Dissect and eat it up, without remorse;
Devouring fish, flesh, fowl, whatever comes,
Nor fear the ghosts of murdered hecatombs.
Now where is the difference? -- to the impartial eye
A leg of mutton and a human thigh
Are just the same: for surely all must own
Flesh is but flesh, and bone is only bone;
And though indeed, some flesh and bone may grow
To make a monkey -- some to make a beau,
Still the materials are the same, we know.
Nor can our anatomic knowledge trace
Internal marks distinctive of our race --
Whence, then, these loud complaints -- these hosts of foes
Combined, our useful labors to oppose?
How long shall foolish prejudices reign?
And when shall reason her just empire gain?
Ah! full of danger is the up-hill road,
That leads the youth to learning's high abode:
His way thick mists of vulgar errors blind,
And sneering satire follows close behind;
Sour envy strews the rugged path with thorns,
And lazy ignorance his labor scorns.
Is this a time, ye brethren of the knife,
For civil contest and internal strife?
When loud against ^s general clamours cry,
And persecution lift her lash on high?
When government -- that (...) headed b^^st --
Against our practice ^ears her horrid crest,
And, our ^oct^ral access to oppose,
A^ound the dead ^ penal barrier A Law past at New York, making it penal to
steal bodies from the burial ground.
throws?
To crush our schools her awful power applies,
And even ^orbids the gibbet's just supplies. The wheel-barrow law of
Pennsylvania.

Yet in this night of darkness, storms and fears,
Behold one bright benignant star The Medical College.
appears --
Long may it shine, and, ever it is course is run,
Increase, in size and splendor, to a sun! --
Methinks I see this sun of future days*
Spread far abroad his diplomatic rays --
See life and health submit to his control,
And, like a planet, death around him roll.
Methinks I see a stately fabric rise,
Reared on the skulls of these our enemies;
I see the bones of our invet'rate foes
Hang round it is walls in scientific rows.
There solemn sit the learned of the day
Dispensing death with uncontrouled sway,
And by prescription regulate with ease
The sudden crisis or the ^low disease.
Then shall physicians their millennium find,
And reign the real sov'reigns of mankind:
Then shall the face of this vile world be changed,
And nature's healthful laws all new arrang'd --
In min'ral powders all her dust shall rise,
And all her insects shall be Spanish flies:
In medicated potions streams shall flow,
Pills fall in hail-storms, and sharp salts in snow;
In every quagmire bolusses be found,
And slimy cataplasms spread the ground --
Nature herself assume the chymist's part,
And furnish poisons unsublim'd by art.
Then to our schools (...) wealth in currents flow,
Our theaters (...) want of subjects know;
Nor laws nor: (...) the Anatomist shall dread,
For graves shall freely render up their dead.
PHILOSOPHIC SOLITUDE.
BY WILLIAM LIVINGSTON, ESQUIRE. Late Governor of the State of New Jersey, etc. etc.
LET ardent heroes seek renown in arms,
Pant after fame, and rush to war's alarms;
To shining palaces let fools resort,
And dunces cringe, to be esteemed at court:
Mine be the pleasure of a rural life,
From noise remote, and ignorant of strife;
Far from the painted belle, and white-glov'd beau,
The lawless masquerade, and midnight show:
From ladies, lap-dogs, courtiers, garters, stars,
Fops, fiddlers, tyrants, emperors, and czars.
Full in the center of some shady grove,
By nature formed for solitude and love;
On banks arrayed with ever-blooming flowers,
Near beauteous landscapes, or by roseate bowers,
My neat, but simple mansion I would raise,
Unlike the sumptuous domes of modern days;
Devoid of pomp, with rural plainness formed,
With savage game, and glossy shells adorned.
No costly furniture should grace my hall;
But curling vines ascend against the wall,
Whose pliant branches should luxuriant twine,
While purple clusters swelled with future wine:
To sl^ke my thirst a liquid lapse distill
From craggy rocks, and spread a limpid rill.
Along my mansion, spiry firs should grow,
And gloomy yews extend the shady row:
The cedars flourish, and the poplars rise,
Sublimely tall, and shoot into the skies:
Among the leaves, refreshing zephyrs play,
And crouding trees exclude the noontide ray;
Whereon the birds their downy nests should form,
Securely sheltered from the battering storm;
And to melodious notes their choir apply,
Soon as Aurora blushed along the sky:
While all around the enchanting music rings,
And every vocal grove responsive sings.
Me to sequestered scenes ye muses guide,
Where nature wantons in her virgin pride;
To mossy banks, edged round with opening flowers,
Elysian fields and amaranthine bowers,
To ambrosial founts, and sleep-inspiring rills,
To herbag'd vales, gay lawns, and sunny hills.
Welcome, ye shades! all hail, ye vernal blooms!
Ye bow'ry thickets, and prophetic glooms!
Ye forests, hail! ye solitary woods!
Love-whispering groves, and silver-streaming floods:
Ye meads, that aromatic sweets exhale!
Ye birds, and all ye sylvan beauties, hail!
Oh how I long with you to spend my days,
Invoke the muse, and try the rural lays!
No trumpets there with martial clangor sound,
No prostrate heroes strew the crimson ground;
No groves of lances glitter in the air,
Nor thundering drums provoke the sanguine war:
But white-rob'd Peace, and universal Love
Smile in the field, and brighten every grove:
There all the beauties of the circling year,
In native ornamental pride appear.
Gay, rosy-bosom'd Spring, and April showers,
Wake, from the womb of earth, the rising flowers:
In deeper verdure, Summer clothes the plain,
And Autumn bends beneath the golden grain;
The trees weep amber; and the whispering gales
Breeze over the lawn, or murmur through the vales:
The flowery tribes in gay confusion bloom,
Profuse with sweets, and fragrant with perfume;
On blossoms blossoms, fruits on fruits arise,
And varied prospects glad the wandering eyes.
In these fair seats, I Would pass the joyous day,
Where meadows flourish, and where fields look gay;
From bliss to bliss with endless pleasure rove,
Seek crystal streams, or haunt the vernal grove,
Woods, fountains, lakes, the fertile fields, or shades,
Aerial mountains, or subjacent glades.
There from the polished fetters of the great,
Triumphal piles, and gilded rooms of state --
Prime ministers, and sycophantic knaves,
Ill se^ious villains, and illustrious slaves,
From all the vain formality of fools,
And odious task of arbitrary rules;
The ruffling cares, which the vexed soul annoy,
The wealth the rich possess, but not enjoy,
The visionary bliss the world can lend,
The insidious foe, and false, designing friend,
The sevenfold fury of Xantippe's soul,
And S -- 's rage, that burns without control:
I Would live retired, contented, and serene,
Forgot, unknown, unenvied, and unseen.
Yet not a real hermitage I Would choose,
Nor wish to live from all the world recluse;
But with a friend sometimes unbend the soul,
In social converse, over the sprightly bowl.
With cheerful W --, serene and wisely gay,
I Would often pass the dancing hours away:
He, skilled alike to profit and to please,
Politely talks with unaffected ease;
Sage in debate, and faithful to his trust,
Mature in science, and severely just;
Of soul diffusive, vast and unconfined,
Breathing benevolence to all mankind;
Cautious to censure, ready to commend,
A firm, unshaken, uncorrupted friend*
In early youth, fair wisdom's paths he trod,
In early youth, a minister of God,
Each pupil loved him, when at Yale he shone,
And every bleeding bosom weeps him gone.
Dear A -- too, should grace my rural seat,
Forever welcome to the green retreat:
Heaven for the cause of righteousness designed
His florid genius, and capacious mind:
Often have I heard, amidst the adorning throng,
Celestial truths devolving from his tongue:
High over the listening audience seen him stand,
Divinely speak, and graceful stretch his hand;
With such becoming grace and pompous sound,
With long-rob'd senators encircled round,
Before the Roman bar, while Rome was free,
Nor bowed to Caesar's throne the servile knee,
Immortal Tulley plead the patriot cause,
While every tongue resounded his applause.
Next round my board should candid S -- appear,
Of manners gentle, and a friend sincere,
Averse to discord, party-rage and strife,
He sails serenely down the stream of life.
With these three friends, beneath a spreading shade,
Where silver fountains murmur through the glade;
Or in cool grots, perfumed with native flowers,
In harmless mirth, I Would spend the circling hours;
Or gravely talk, or innocently sing,
Or, in harmonious concert, strike the trembling string.
Amid sequestered bowers, near gliding streams,
Druids and bards enjoyed serenest dreams.
Such was the seat where courtly Horace sung,
And his bold harp immortal Maro strung:
Where tuneful Orpheus' unresisted lay
Made rapid tigers bear their rage away:
While groves, attentive to the extatic sound,
Burst from their roots, and, raptured, danced around.
Such seats the venerable seers of old
(When blissful years in golden circles rolled)
Chose and admired: even goddesses and gods
(As poets feign) were fond of such abodes:
The imperial consort of fictitious Jove
For fount-full I Would forsook the realms above.
Often to Idalia, on a golden cloud,
Veiled in a mist of fragrance, Venus rode:
There numerous altars to the queen were reared,
And lovesick youths their amorous vows preferred,
While fair-hair'd damsels (a lascivious train)
With wanton rites adored her gentle reign.
The silver-shafted huntress of the woods,
Sought pendant shades, and bathed in cooling floods.
In palmy Delos by Scamander's side,
Or where Cajister rolled his silver tide,
Melodious Phoebus sang; the muses round
Alternate warbling to the heavenly sound.
Even the feigned monarch of heaven's bright abode,
High throned in gold, of gods the sovereign god,
Often time preferred the shade of Ida's grove
To all the ambrosial feasts, and nectar'd cups above.
Behold, the rosy-finger'd morning dawn,
In saffron robbed, and blushing over the lawn!
Reflected from the clouds, a radiant stream
Tips with etherial dew the mountain's brim.
The unfolding roses, and the opening flowers
Imbibe the dew, and strew the varied bowers,
Diffuse nectareous sweets around, and glow
With all the colors of the show'ry bow.
The industrious bees their balmy toil renew,
Buz over the field, and sip the rosy dew.
But yonder comes the illustrious god of day,
Invests the east, and gilds the etherial way;
The groves rejoice, the feathered nations sing,
Echo the mountains, and the valleys ring.
Hail, orb! arrayed with majesty and fire,
That bids each sable shade of night retire!
Fountain of light! with burning glory crowned,
Darting a deluge of effulgence round!
Waked by thy genial and prolific ray,
Nature resumes her verdure, and looks gay:
Fresh blooms the rose, the drooping plants revive,
The groves reflourish, and the forests live.
Deep in the teeming earth, the ripening ore
Confesses thy consolidating power;
Hence Labor draws her tools, and artists mould
The fusile silver and the ductile gold;
Hence war is furnished; and the regal shield
Like lightning flashes over the illumined field.
If thou so fair with delegated light,
Th^^ all heaven's splendors vanish at thy sight;
With what effulgence must the ocean glow,
From which thy borrowed beams incessant flow!
The exhaustless source whose single smile supplies
The unnumber'd orbs that gild the spangled skies!
Often would I view, in admiration lost,
Heaven's sumptuous canopy, and starry host;
With levelled tube, and astronomic eye,
Pursue the planets whirling through the sky:
Immeasurable vault! where thunders roll,
And forky lightnings flash from pole to pole.
Say, railing infidel! can thou survey
Yon globe of fire, that gives the golden day,
The harmonious structure of this vast machine,
And not confess its architect divine!
Then go, vain wretch! though deathless be thy soul,
Go, swell the riot, and exhaust the bowl;
Plunge into vice -- humanity resign --
Go fill the stie -- and bristle into swine!
None but a power omnipotent and wise
Could frame this earth, or spread the boundless skies:
He made the whole; at his omnific call,
From formless chaos rose this spacious ball,
And one Almighty God is seen in all.
By him our cup is crowned, our table spread
With luscious wine, and life-sustaining bread.
What countless wonders does the earth contain!
What countless wonders the unfathomed main!
Bedrop'd with gold, there scaly nations shine,
Haunt coral groves, or lash the foaming brine*
Jehovah's glories blaze all nature round,
In heaven, on earth, and in the deeps profound;
Ambitious of his name, the wa^hlers sing,
And praise their maker, while they hail the spring;
The zephyrs breathe it; and the thunders roar*
While surge to surge, and shore resounds to shore.
But man, endu'd with an immortal mind,
His Maker's image, and for heaven designed,
To loftier notes his raptured voice should raise,
And chaunt sublimer hymns to his Creator's praise.
When rising Phoebus ushers in the morn,
And golden beams the impurpled skies adorn:
Waked by the gentle murmur of the floods,
Or the soft music of the waving woods;
Rising from sleep with the melodious quire,
To solemn sounds I Would tune the hallowed lyre.
Thy name, O God! should tremble on my tongue,
Till every grove proved vocal to my song:
(Delightful task! with dawning light to sing
Triumphant hymns to heaven's eternal king.)
Some courteous angel should my breast inspire,
Attune my lips, and guide the warbled wire,
While sportive echoes catch the sacred sound,
Swell every note, and bear the music round;
While mazy streams meand'ring to the main,
Hang in suspense to hear the heavenly strain,
And, hushed to silence, all the feathered throng
Attentive listen to the tuneful song.
Father of light! exahustless source of good!
Supreme, eternal, self-existent God!
Before the beamy sun dispensed a ray,
Flamed in the azure vault, and gave the day;
Before the glimmering moon, with borrowed light,
Shone queen amid the silver host of night;
High in the heavens, thou reign'dst superior Lord,
By suppliant angels worshipped and adored.
With the celestial choir then let me join
In cheerful praises to the power divine.
To sing thy praise, do thou, O God! inspire
A mortal breast with more than mortal fire:
In dreadful majesty thou sit'st enthroned,
With light encircled, and with glory crowned;
Through all infinitude extends thy reign,
For thee, nor heaven, nor heaven of heavens contain;
But though thy throne is fixed above the sky,
Thy omnipresence fills immensity.
Saints, robbed in white, to thee their anthems bring,
And radiant martyrs hallelujahs sing:
Heaven's universal host their voices raise
In one eternal chorus, to thy praise;
And, round thy awful throne, with one accord,
Sing, holy, holy, holy is the Lord.
At thy creative voice, from ancient night,
Sprang smiling beauty, and yon worlds of light:
Thou spak'st -- the planetary chorus rolled,
And all the expanse was starr'd with beamy gold;
Let there be light, said God -- light instant shone,
And from the orient, burst the golden sun;
Heaven's gazing hierarchs, with glad surprise,
Saw the first morn invest the recent skies,
And strait the exulting troops thy throne surround
With thousand thousand harps of heavenly sound:
Thrones, powers, dominions, (ever shining trains!)
Shouted thy praises in triumphant strains:
Great are thy works, they sing; and, all around,
Great are thy works, the echoing heavens resound.
The effulgent sun, insufferably bright,
Is but a beam of thy overflowing light;
The tempest is thy breath: the thunder hurled,
Tremendous roars thy vengeance over the world;
Thou bow'st the heavens, the smoking mountains nod,
Rocks fall to dust, and nature owns her God;
Pale tyrants shrink, the atheist stands aghast,
And impious kings in horror breathe their last.
To this great God alternately I Would pay
The evening anthem, and the morning lay.
For sovereign gold I never would repine,
Nor wish the glittering dust of monarchs mine.
What though high columns heave into the skies,
^^y cielings shine, and vaulted arches rise?
Though fretted gold the sculptured roof adorn,
The rubies redden, and the jaspers burn!
O what, alas! avails the gay attire
To wretched man, who breathes but to expire!
Often on the vilest, riches are bestowed,
To show their meanness in the sight of God.
High from a dunghill, see a Dives rise,
And, Titan-like, insult the avenging skies:
The crowd, in adulation, calls him Lord,
By thousands courted, flattered and adored:
In riot plunged, and drunk with earthly joys,
No higher thought his groveling soul employs:
The poor he scourges with an iron rod,
And from his bosom banishes his God.
But often in height of wealth and beauty's bloom*
Deluded man is fated to the tomb!
For, lo! he sickens; swift his color flies,
And rising mists obscure his swimming eyes:
Around his bed his weeping friends bemoan,
Extort the unwilling tear, and wish him gone;
His sorrowing heir augments the ^ender shower,
Deplores his death -- yet hails the dying hour.
Ah bitter comfort! Sad relief! to die,
Though sunk in down, beneath the canopy!
His eyes no more shall see the cheerful light,
Weighed down by death in everlasting night,
And now the great, the rich, the proud, the gay
Lie breathless, cold -- unanimated clay!
He, that just now was flattered by the crowd
With high applause, and acclamations loud --
That steeled his bosom to the orphan's cries,
And drew down torrents from the widow's eyes --
Whom, like a God, the rabble did adore --
Regard him now -- and, lo! he is no more.
My eyes no dazzling vestments should behold,
With gems instarr'd, and stiff with woven gold;
But the tall ram his downy fleece afford,
To clothe, in modest garb, his frugal lord.
Thus the great Father of mankind was dressed,
When shaggy hides composed his flowing vest;
Doomed to the cumb'rous load, for his offense,
When clothes supplied the want of innocence:
But now his sons (forgetful whence they came)
Glitter in gems, and glory in their shame.
Often would I wander through the dewy field,
Where clust'ring roses balmy fragrance yield:
Or in lone grots, for contemplation made,
Converse with angels and the mighty dead;
For all around unnumber'd spirits fly,
Waft on the breeze, or walk the liquid sky,
Inspire the poet with repeated dreams,
Who gives his hallowed muse to sacred themes,
Protect the just, serene their gloomy hours,
Becalm their slumbers, and refresh their powers.
Methinks I see the immortal beings fly,
And swiftly shoot athwart the streaming sky:
Hark! a melodious voice I seem to hear,
And heavenly sounds invade my listening ear!
"Be not afraid of us, innoxious band,
"Thy cell surrounding by divine command;
"Ere while, like thee, we led our lives below,
"(Sad lives of pain, of misery, and woe!)
"Long by affliction's boisterous tempests tossed,
"We reached at length the ever blissful coast:
"Now in the embow'ring groves, and lawns above,
"We taste the raptures of immortal love,
"Attune the golden harp in roseate bowers,
"Or bind our temples with unfading flowers.
"Often on kind errands bent, we cut the air,
"To guard the righteous, heaven's peculiar care!
"Avert impending harms, their minds compose,
"Inspire gay dreams, and prompt their soft repose.
"When from thy tongue divine hosannas roll,
"And sacred raptures swell thy rising soul,
"To heaven we bear thy prayers, like rich perfumes;
"Where, by the throne, the golden censer fumes;
"And when with age thy head is silvered over,
"And, cold in death, thy bosom beats no more,
"Thy soul, exulting, shall desert its clay,
"And mount, triumphant, to eternal day."
But to improve the intellectual mind,
Reading should be to contemplation joined.
First I Would collect from the Parnassian spring*
What muses dictate, and what poets sing. --
Virgil, as prince, should wear the laureled crown,
And other bards pay homage to his throne;
The blood of heroes now effus'd so long,
Will run forever purple through his song,
See! how he mounts toward the blessed abodes,
On planets rides, and talks with demigods!
How do our ravished spirits melt away,
When in his song Sicilian shepherds play!
But what a splendour strikes the dazzled eye,
When Dido shines in awful majesty!
Embroidered purple clad the Tyrian queen,
Her motion graceful, and august her mien;
A golden zone her royal limbs embraced,
A golden quiver rattled by her waist.
See her proud steed majestically prance,
Contemn the trumpet, and deride the lance!
In crimson trappings, glorious to behold,
Confusedly gay with interwoven gold!
He champs the bit, and throws the foam around,
Impatient paws, and tea^ ^he solid ground.
How stern Aeneas thund^^ through the field!
With towering helmet, and refulgent shield!
Coursers o'erturn'd, and mighty warriors slain,
Deformed with gore, lie welt'ring on the plain,
Struck through with wounds, ill-fated chieftains lie,
Frown even in death, and threaten as they die.
Through the thick squadrons see the hero bound!
(His helmet flashes, and his arms resound!)
All grim with rage, he frowns over Turnus' head,
(Re-kindled ire! for blooming Pallas dead)
Then in his bosom plunged the shining blade --
The soul indignant sought the Stygian shade!
The far-fam'd bards that graced Britannia's isle,
Should next compose the venerable pile.
Great Milton first, for towering thought renowned,
Parent of song, and famed the world around!
His glowing breast divine Urania fired,
Or God himself the immortal bard inspired,
Borne on triumphant wings he takes his flight,
Explores all heaven, and treads the realms of light:
In martial pomp he clothes the angelic train,
While warring myriads shake the etherial plain.
First Michael stalks, high towering over the rest,
With heavenly plumage nodding on his crest;
Impenetrable arms his limbs infold,
Eternal adamant, and burning gold!
Sparkling in fiery mail, with dire delight,
Rebellious Satan animates the fight:
Armipotent they sink in rolling smoke,
All heaven resounding, to its center shook.
To crush his foes, and quell the dire alarms,
Messiah sparkled in refulgent arms:
In radiant panoply divinely bright,
His limbs incas'd, he flashed devouring light:
On burning wheels, over heaven's crystalline road
Thundered the chariot of the filial God;
The burning wheels on golden axles turned,
With flaming gems the golden axles burned.
Lo! the apostate host, with terror struck,
Roll back by millions! The empyrean shook!
Sceptres, and orbed shields, and crowns of gold,
Cherubs and seraphs in confusion rolled;
Till from his hand the triple thunder hurled,
Compelled them, headlong, to the infernal world.
Then tuneful Pope, whom all the nine inspire,
With sapphic sweetness, and pindaric fire,
Father of verse! melodious and divine!
Next peerless Milton should distinguished shine.
Smooth flow his numbers, when he paints the grove,
The enraptured virgins listening into love.
But when the night, and hoarse-resounding storm
Rush on the deep, and Neptune's face deform,
Roagh runs the verse, the son'rous numbers roar,
Like the hoarse surge that thunders on the shore.
But when he sings the exhilirated swains,
The embow'ring groves, and Windsor's blissful plains,
Our eyes are ravished with the sylvan scene,
Embroidered fields, and groves in living green:
His lays the verdure of the meads prolong,
And withered forests blossom in his song.
Thames' silver streams his flowing verse admire,
And cease to murmur while he tunes his lyre.
Next should appear great Dryden's lofty muse,
For who would Dryden's polished verse refuse?
His lips were moistened in Parnassus' spring,
And Phoebus taught his laureat son to sing.
How long did Virgil untranslated moan,
His beauties fading, and his flights unknown;
Till Dryden rose, and, in exalted strain.
Re-sang the fortune of the god-like man!
Again the Trojan prince, with dire delight,
Dreadful in arms, demands the lingering fight:
Again Camilla glows with martial sire,
Drives armies back, and makes all Troy retire.
With more than native luster, Virgil shines,
And gains sublimer heights in Dryden's lines.
The gentle Watts, who strings his silver lyre
To sacred odes, and heaven's all-ruling Sire;
Who scorns the applause of the licentious stage,
And mounts yon sparkling worlds with hallowed rage,
Compels my thoughts to wing the heavenly road,
And wafts my soul, exulting, to my God:
No fabled nine, harmonious bard! inspire
Thy raptured breast with such scraphic fire;
But prompting angels warm thy boundless rage,
Direct thy thoughts, and animate thy page.
Blessed man! for spotless sanctity revered,
Loved by the good, and by the guilty feared:
Blessed man! from gay, delusive scenes removed,
Thy Maker loving, by thy Maker loved,
To God thou tun'st thy consecrated lays,
Nor meanly blush to sing Jehovah's praise.
Oh! did, like thee, each laureled bard delight
To paint Religion in her native light,
Not then with plays the laboring press would groan,
Nor Vice defy the pulpit and the throne;
No impious rhymers charm a vicious age,
Nor prostrate Virtue (...) beneath their rage:
But themes divine in lofty numbers rise,
Fill the wide earth, and echo through the skies.
These for delight. For profit I would read
The labored volumes of the learned dead.
Sagacious Look, by Providence designed,
To exalt, instruct, and rectify the mind.
The unconquerable sage Cato.
whom virtue fired,
And from the tyrant's lawless rage retired,
When victor Caesar freed unhappy Rome
From Rompey's chains, to substitute his own.
Longinus, Livy, famed Thucydides,
Quintilian, Plato, and Demosthenes,
Persuasive Tully, and Corduba's sage, Seneca.

Who fell by Nero's unrelenting rage;
Him Socrates.
whom ungrateful Athens doomed to bleed,
Despised when living, and deplored when dead.
Raleigh I Would read with ever fresh delight,
While ages past rise present to my sight:
Ah man unblest! he foreign realms explored,
Then fell a victim to his country's sword!
Nor should great Derham pass neglected by,
Observant sage! to whose deep-piercing eye,
Nature's stupendous works expanded lie.
Nor he, Britannia, thy unmatched renown!
(Adjudg'd to wear the philosophic crown)
Who on the solar orb uplifted rode,
And scanned the unfathomable works of God!
Who bound the silver planets to their spheres,
And traced the elliptic curve of blazing stars!
Immortal Newton; whose illustrious name
Will shine on records of eternal fame.
By love directed, I would choose a wise,
To improve my bliss, and ease the load of life.
Hail, wedlock! hail, inviolable tie!
Perpetual fountain of domestic joy!
Love, friendship, honor, truth, and pure delight
Harmonious mingle in the nuptial rite.
In Eden, first the holy state began,
When perfect innocence distinguished man;
The human pair, the Almighty pontiff led,
Gay as the morning, to the bridal bed;
A dread solemnity the espousals graced,
Angels the witnesses, and God the priest!
All earth exulted on the nuptial hour,
And voluntary roses decked the bower;
The joyous birds on every blossomed spray,
Sung hymeneans to the important day,
While Philomela swelled the spousal song,
And Paradise with gratulation rung.
Relate, inspiring muse! where shall I find
A blooming virgin with an angel mind?
Unblemished as the white-rob'd virgin quire
That fed, O Rome! thy consecrated sire?
By reason awed, ambitious to be good,
Averse to vice, and zealous for her God?
Relate, in what blessed region can I find
Such bright perfections in a female mind?
What phoenix-woman breathes the vital air
So greatly good, and so divinely fair?
Sure not the gay and fashionable train,
Licentious, proud, immoral, and profane;
Who spend their golden hours in antic dress,
Malicious whispers, and inglorious ease.
Lo! round the board a shining train appears
In rosy beauty, and in prime of years!
This hates a flounce, and this a flounce approves,
This shows the trophies of her former loves;
Polly avers, that Sylvia dressed in green,
When last at church the gaudy nymph was seen;
Chloe condemns her optics; and will lay
'Twas azure satin, interstreak'd with gray;
Lucy, invested with judicial power,
Awards 'twas neither, -- and the strife is over.
Then parrots, lap dogs, monkeys, squirrels, beaux,
Fans, ribands, tuckers, patches, furbeloes,
In quick succession, through their fancies run,
And dance incessant, on the flippant tongue.
And when, fatigued with every other sport,
The belles prepare to grace the sacred court,
They marshal all their forces in array,
To kill with glances, and destroy in play.
Two skilful maids with reverential fear,
In wanton wreaths collect their silken hair;
Two paint their cheeks, and round their temples pour
The fragrant unguent, and the ambrosial shower;
One pulls the shape-creating stays; and one
Encircles round her waist the golden zone;
Not with more toil to improve immortal charms,
Strove Juno, Venus, and the queen of arms,
When Priam's son adjudg'd the golden prize,
To the resistless beauty of the skies.
At length, equipped in Love's enticing arms,
With all that glitters, and with all that charms,
The ideal goddesses to church repair,
Peep through the fan, and mutter over a prayer,
Or listen to the organ's pompous sound,
Or eye the gilded images around;
Or, deeply studied in coquettish rules,
Aim wily glances at unthinking fools;
Or show the lily hand with graceful air,
Or wound the fopling with a lock of hair:
And when the hated discipline is over,
And misses tortured with repent, no more,
They mount the pictured coach; and, to the play,
The celebrated idols hie away.
Not so the lass that should my joys improve,
With solid friendship, and connubial love:
A native bloom, with intermingled white,
Should set her features in a pleasing light;
Like Helen flushing with unrivaled charms,
When raptured Paris darted in her arms.
But what, alas! avails a ruby cheek,
A downy bosom, or a snowy neck!
Charms ill supply the want of innocence,
Nor beauty forms intrinsic excellence:
But in her breast let moral beauties shine,
Supernal grace and purity divine:
Sublime her reason, and her native wit
Unstrain'd with pedantry, and low conceit;
Her fancy lively, and her judgment free
From female prejudice and bigotry:
Averse to idol pomp, and outward show,
The flattering coxcomb, and fantastic beau.
The fop's impertinence she should despise,
Though sorely wounded by her radiant eyes;
But pay due reverence to the exalted mind,
By learning polished, and by wit refined,
Who all her virtues, without guile, commends,
And all her faults as freely reprehends.
Soft Hymen's rites her passion should approve,
And in her bosom glow the flames of love:
To me her soul, by sacred friendship, turn,
And I, for her, with equal friendship burn:
In every stage of life afford relief,
Partake my joys, and sympathize my grief;
Unshaken, walk in Virtue's peaceful road,
Nor bribe her Reason to pursue the mode;
Mild as the saint whose errors are forgiven,
Calm as a vestal, and composed as heaven.
This be the partner, this the lovely wife,
That should embellish and prolong my life,
A nymph! who might a second fall inspire,
And fill a glowing cherub with desire!
With her I Would spend the pleasurable day,
While fleeting minutes gayly danced away:
With her I Would walk, delighted, over the green,
Through every blooming mead, and rural scene;
Or sit in open fields damask'd with flowers,
Or where cool shades imbrown the noontide bowers.
Imparadis'd within my eager arms,
I Would reign the happy monarch of her charms;
Often on her panting bosom would I lay,
And, in dissolving raptures melt away;
Then lulled, by nightingales, to balmy rest,
My blooming fair should slumber at my breast.
And when decrepid age (frail mortals' doom)
Should bend my withered body to the tomb,
No warbling sirens should retard my flight
To heavenly mansions of unclouded light.
Tho Death, with his imperial horrors crowned,
Terrific grinn'd, (...) f^^midably frowned,
Offenses pardoned and ^^^mitted sin,
Should form a calm serenity within:
Blessing my natal and my mortal hour,
(My soul committed to the eternal power)
Inexorable Death should smile, for I
Who knew to live, would never fear to die.
DESCRIPTIVE LINES, Written at the request of a Friend, upon the surrrounding
Prospect from BEACON-HILL in BOSTON.
BY PHILENIA, A LADY OF BOSTON.
FAR from this spot let sportive FICTION hie,
While rapt ATTENTION lifts her searching eye,
Over CHARLESTOWN's field each hallowed view explores,
Sees the twin rivers lave the purple shores,
Where the high soil disdained the trembling flood,
And stained the white wave with Britannia's blood,
While the fierce blaze Alluding to the burning of Charlestown by the British
in 1775.
its wasting vengeance pours,
Wraps the wide domes, and climbs the ascending towers,
The crimson eye of frantic SLAUGHTER turned,
Where valor perished, and where victory mourned,
And kindred worth unboasting sorrow shed,
As deathless WARREN bowed his patriot head.
Thy Temple, Charles! a new-raised Phoenix shines,
Thy far famed bridge the sister-city joins,
Whose flame-tipt spires reflect the solar ray,
And strew with stars the azure robe of day;
Here varied MARTS one full EMPORIUM boast,
Rich with the wealth of every foreign coast;
How changed the scene, since round the dreary glade
The frowning forest bent its murky shade!
Even on this spot, with green savannas spread,
Adorned by GENIUS, and by PLENTY fed,
The hungry Savage dashed the foaming flood,
Traced the blue rock, and swept the weedy wood;
Our patient Sires the wild'ring region gain,
Bend the hard oak, the watery valley drain,
'Till down the tide the moving forest flows,
And where the desert howled, the polished City rose,
Whose crescent haven's liberal surface smiles,
Clad in the verdure of unnumber'd isles,
Where sceptered WILLIAM's massy bulwarks stand,
The guard and glory of the sceneful land.
Yon orient heights Dorchester heights, the fortifying of which by General
WASHINGTON in March 1776, compelled the British to evacuate the town.
their rifted foreheads raise,
And claim the triumph of the VICTOR's praise;
Still lives the morn, when from those armed brows,
The SONS OF FREEDOM braved their imprisoned foes;
While over the deep the giant Terror bends,
Death's lifted arm his sable dart extends,
The Dance The Ball and the Drama formed the amusements of the Garrison, during
the siege.
no more its graceful charm supplies,
No more the scenes of mimic nature rise,
Through bleeding ranks the deathful dangers roll,
And peals of ruin shake the soldier's soul;
For him no beauty decks the vernal fields,
But every breeze a more than winter yields,
Flight all his hope, and honor all his care,
The warlike Briton learns for once to fear,
To the bleak wave resigns his murmuring host,
And quits the sullen sanguinary coast.
So in the climes, where changeful seasons roll,
Ere threatening winter gains his full control,
While rustling leaves in crumbling ruin lie,
Tinged with the rainbow's variegated dye,
The feathered race the howling storm foresee,
The barren meadow, and the naked tree;
Late to those shores were all their joys confined,
Now death and hunger float in every wind,
With outstretch'd wing they skim along the main,
And quit the Terrors of an hostile plain.
Let yon VAST FANE rear its ionic side,
The boast of art, the great designer's The celebrated Architect, Mr. Harrison.
pride;
There rests in silent cells the holy dead,
There weeping SCIENCE droops her widowed head,
Since BOWDOIN sleeps, deaf to his country's praise,
Deaf to the heavenly poet's living lays.
What varied charms adorn the circling main,
The peopled isthmus, and the velvet plain!
Here ruddy HEALTH the grateful soil divides,
There generous COMMERCE cleaves the freighted tides.
How sweet the fragrance of the sylvan scene,
The rosy arbor, and the bow'ry green!
At eve to climb the mountain's pendent brow,
While at its base the boiling waters flow,
See the low sun his rubied globe display,
And lean collected on the edge of day!
From cultured dales behold the high hills rise
With piny summits, curtain'd by the skies!
Down whose green slopes, in all their pearly pride,
Through mantling flowers the glassy riv'lets glide,
While the flocks whiten through the cottag'd vale,
And notes of music fill the scented gale.
Like a new planet mid the vast serene,
Lo! rising HARVARD swells the extended scene,
Over distant regions spreads a ray divine,
Bids "other BOWDOINS other WINTHROPS shine"!
Such QUEEN OF CITIES! are thy rich domains,
And such the realm, where GODLIKE FREEDOM reigns!
ODE TO THE PRESIDENT, On his visiting the Northern States. BY THE SAME.
THE Season sheds its mildest ray,
Over the blue waves the sunbeams play,
The bending harvest gilds the plain,
The towering vessels press the main,
The ruddy ploughman quits his toil,
The pallid miser leaves his spoil,
And grateful paeans hail the festive year,
Which bids Columbia's guardian God appear.
Hence! DISAPPOINTMENT's anxious eye,
And pale AFFLICTION's lingering sigh;
Let sorrow from the brow be torn,
And every heart forget to mourn;
Let smiles of peace their charms display
To grace this joy-devoted day,
And, where that arm preserved the peopled plain,
Shall mild Contentment hold her placid reign.
Let " white robbed ch^irs" in beauty gay
With lucid flowrets strew the way,
Let Lil^chs scent the purpled lawn,
And roses emulate the dawn,
Let domes their circling honors spread,
And wreaths entwine that glorious head;
To thee, GREAT WASHINGTON, each lyre be strung,
Thy matchless deeds by every bard be sung!
When FREEDOM raised her drooping head,
Thy arm her willing heroes led,
When all her hopes, to thee resigned,
Were resting on thy god-like mind,
How did that soul, to fear unknown,
And feeling for her fate alone,
Over Danger's threatening form the faulchion wield,
And tread with dauntless step the crimson field!
Not DECIUS -- patriot dear to fame!
Not CINCINNATUS -- deathless name!
Not HE, THEMISTOCLES.
who led the Athenian band,
The savior of a bleeding land,
Could such exalted worth display,
Nor shine with such unclouded ray.
Of Age the HOPE, of Youth the LEADING STAR,
The Soul of PEACE, the CONQUERING ARM OF WAR.
INVOCATION TO HOPE. BY THE SAME.
SOOTHER of Life! by whose delusive charm
This feeling heart resists the pointed woe,
Whose magic power, with fancied joys can warm,
And wipe the tear which Anguish taught to flow;
If, through the varied griefs my Youth has known,
No charm but these could raise my votive eye;
O leave me not, now every blessing's flown,
Whilst my sad bosom heaves the lengthened sigh.
The grated prison, and the lov'd-form'd bower,
The wretch, whom Disappointment wastes away,
The frugal hut, the gilded dome of power,
Joy in thy smiles and court thy equal sway.
By thee, the friendless sufferer learns to bear;
By thee, the patient heart forgets its woe;
Thou make Misfortune's iron aspect fair,
And even the frozen cheek of Misery glow.
Leave me no more, as on that fated morn
When my rash soul the impious deed designed,
And when, unconscious of thy blessed return,
The foe Despair usurped my tortured mind.
But yet, bright Goddess! with deceptive smile,
Come, and a host of Fictions in thy train,
With dreams of peace my wearied heart beguile,
And sink in fancied bliss the real pain.
PRAYER TO PATIENCE. BY THE SAME.
GODDESS of the steady eye!
All thy Apathy impart,
From a world of woe I fly,
Take, oh take me to thy heart!
Lend me all thy healing power,
Teach me to suppress the groan,
Let me while affliction's lower,
Turn like NIOBE to stone.
Let me to the sneer of scorn,
Still return the placid smile,
Calm, -- when angry passions frown,
Silent, -- when the rude revile.
Check the Tyrant of the mind,
Source of sorrow, Foe to thee;
Who can peace, or solace find,
Racked by Sensibility!
Snatch me from her wasting sway,
Shield me with thy firmer aid,
Let me still thy voice obey,
Gentle, peace-preserving maid!
If greater pangs this bosom rend,
Than ever bosom felt before;
Further may thy sway extend,
Greater, deeper be thy power.
Be every wrong disarmed by thee,
Rob stern Oppression of his pride,
Bid Malice at thy presence flee,
Turn Envy's venomed dart aside.
Let hard Reproach soft kindness feel,
To cold Disdain be pity lent,
From Anger wrest his lifted steel,
From black Revenge his discontent.
Goddess of the tearless eye!
Yet give me thy pacific charms;
To thy calm bosom let me fly,
And find a refuge in thy arms!
LINES, Addressed to the inimitable Author of the Poems under the signature of
Della Crusca. BY THE SAME.
ACROSS the vast Atlantic tide,
Down Apalach^a's grasly side,
What echoing sounds the soul beguile,
And lend the lip of grief a smile!
It Is DELLA CRUSCA's heavenly song,
Which floats the we^^^rn shores along,
Breathing as sweet, as soft a strain,
As kindness to the ear of pain;
Splendid as noon, as morning clear,
And chaste as evening's pearly tear;
Where cold despair in music flows,
While all the FIRE OF GENIUS glows.
Still thy enchanting powers display,
Still charm me with the magic lay!
The Muses all thy soul inspire,
Apollo tunes thy matchless lyre!
O strike the lustral string again,
And over Columbia wast the strain.
Ah! would to light my clouded days,
One ray from thy unequalled blaze,
Might through my dark'ning fortunes shine,
And grace me with a note like thine!
But no, BRIGHT BARD, for thee alone
The Muses weave the laurel crown:
Never can the timid, plaintive dove,
Soar with the DAUNTLESS BIRD OF JOVE;
Nor silv'ry Hesper's dewy ray
Beam like the Golden Orb of Day.
ALFRED TO PHILENIA. This, and the three next succeeding Poems, are extracted
from the Columbian Sentinel of 1791.

MY morn of life was bright and fair,
The distant mists of gloomy Care,
By Joy's light breeze, which daily blew,
Were scattered far beyond the view.
Then blessings crowned the happy hours --
Then Pleasure strew^d my path with flowers;
Then Virtue oped an easy way,
And led my footsteps up to day.
If ever the Child of Sorrow mourned
My sympathetic bosom burned;
The highest bliss my soul could know,
Was, to relieve the pang of woe.
Such scenes my fondest feelings warmed --
Such scenes my earliest habits formed;
This dangerous race through youth I ran,
And, ruined, reached the verge of man.
Alas! sad wretch! -- I Have wept, and run
At Pity's call -- to be undone;
Beneath the flowers which strewn my way.
The thorn of keenest anguish lay;
Even in the boss of Virtue's shield,
The sting of torture lay concealed.
Ah, fatal Love! --
Now Hope has closed her sun-bright eye,
And midnight glooms my midday sky;
Despair now heaves his horrid form,
And frowns terrific in the storm;
No ray of bliss now meets my sight,
And my whole soul is wrapped in night.
Ah, sweetest Poetess! thy lay
Can charm the weightiest woes away;
The soft compassion of thy feeling breast,
Can shed a drop of balm, and lull my soul to rest.
PHILENIA TO ALFRED.
ALFRED! the heaven lent muse is thine,
Then bid impetuous sorrow cease;
And at the bright Apollo's shrine,
Recall thy exiled heart to peace.
Vain is the tear in anguish shed,
And vain the pang by passion fed,
Then to the muse thy moments give,
And for her deathless laurel live.
Never hope in careless crowds to find
A refuge for thy lonely mind,
Think not the sympathetick sigh,
The language of the moving eye,
Will over thy withering sorrows flow;
Envy will sneer, and rancour frown,
Or ignorant malice drag thee down,
And scorn to solace what it cannot know.
Yet there are some to mercy true;
And such my griefs have found,
Who over each life-destroying wound,
Shed pity's healing dew.
Such be thy favored lot, for they
Will live beyond the summer day,
Will midst the weeping autumn smile,
And even the wintry waste beguile;
Will thy sad breast from anguish free,
The friends of gentleness and thee.
But, if the slave of love thou art
Still languish and endure,
For when that strikes the feeling heart,
Like death, it has no cure.
ALFRED TO PHILENIA.
AND does the heart, by love distressed,
"Like death, admit no cure?"
Must Alfred's deeply-tortur'd breast,
"Still languish, and endure?"
Ah! for a moment stay thy doom,
Nor drive him frantic to the tomb.
Thy sweet, thy all-subduing lay,
The tempests of the soul obey --
At thy command its ragings cease --
Thou speak and every heart is peace;
While throned sublime above the storm,
Thou wear'st a radiant Seraph's form,
And, smiling over the solemn scene,
Thy asp^ct speaks a mind serene.
Know then -- over Alfred's sinking soul,
The waves of ceaseless anguish roll --
Love has assailed his yielding heart,
And pierced it with his sharpest dart;
Time's lenient hand its healing aid denies*
And every hour a heavier pang supplies.
When life's quick eddies warmed his youthful heart,
He fell a prey to soft deceptive art --
To DELIA every real charm was given,
And ALFRED loved her next to Truth and Heaven.
Unused to guile, in love with truth,
And glowing with the fire of youth,
His mind the future prospect viewed,
Where fancy every blessing showed --
The path of bliss expanded lay,
And flowers EDENIAN strewn the way,
While all around the alluring scene,
Transported Friendship smiled serene,
And Nature with endearing smile,
Spread out each gay enchanting wile,
And from the landscape scene refined,
Brought sweetest rapture to the mind.
But when this gay delusion slew,
A dreary desert oped to view;
Where naught but thorns the cheerless heath supplied,
Where Hope swift fled, and Expectation died.
But ALFRED lives amid a world of night,
Each hour beguiles him of a fresh delight;
"Chill Penury's" f^ends, with angry aspect lour
Round his sad path, and wither every flower,
No gleams of joy pierce through the increasing gloom,
And Peace eludes his grasp, and flies beyond the tomb.
Must ALFRED the^ "the slave of Love,"
"Still languish and endure?"
Can naught the torturing pangs remove
Is death the only cure?
The world has ^friends to mercy true" --
"Such ALFRED^S griefs have found,"
Who in his breast "shed pity's healing dew" --
But Friendship's pity cannot heal the wound.
PHILENIA TO ALFRED.
"PENRY," no ALFRED! it is not thine,
In thy rich Soul's exhaustless Mine
Abounds more Wealth, than GANGES golden Shores
F^er on the tawny Chiefs bestowed,
When parting (...) the sacred Flood,
The falsely, glittering, yellow Sand,
Spreads Treasure through the torrid Land,
Or though from out the burning Soil,
Drawn by the hardened Hand of Toil,
The precious sparkling Drops are placed
Round the slim Zone of Beauty's Waist,
And add new Splendor to some Monarch's Stores.
Does not the vernal Morning rise
With Radiance to thy grateful Eyes?
Does not the breezy Flow of Eve
A Transport to thy Bosom give?
And every life-dissolving Sigh,
Fill thy rapt Soul with Extacy,
When thy lost Charmer on thy Vision beams,
And feeds wild Fancy with delusive Dreams?
Ah! ALFRED, I of Griefs could speak,
'Till at soft Pity's call
The iron Tears would fall
In burning Streams down hard Oppression's Cheek.
But no! I quit the heartless Lay,
And cast the unavailing Theme away.
When wandering over the fragrant Vale,
Soft Warblings wafting through the Gale,
Does not thy Soul a Pardon find
For Words unjust, and Deeds unkind?
Do not the cruel H^rd inspire
Compassion or Disdain?
Can Scorn's cold Eye thy bosom fire.
To yield one Wrong again?
No! ALFRED, no! the MUSE is thine!
And where her Bounties flow,
All the bright beaming Virtues shine,
The warm Affections glow.
Then can that Dust poor Misers hoard,
Enrich thy wealthy Soul?
Can sordid Ore one Bliss afford?
One tyrant Pang control?
The friendless Flatt'rer's smile to prove,
To purchase venal Beauty's Eye,
To swell mad Envy's frantic Sigh,
And lose each Sympathy of Love;
Such are the Joys which Gold can give,
And such even Misers may receive,
But such can never be thine. --
The MUSE extends her open Arms,
She courts thee with unbounded Charms,
Her Pencil paints each glowing Scene,
Her Music floats along the Green,
By her the laureled Virtues live,
She bids degraded Vice, the Blush of Conscience give.
Science is here is, and every Art divine.
Then like PHILENIA quit the Herd,
Where Mercy is unknown:
And be thy votive Prayer preferred,
At great APOLLO's Throne.
Sweet Solitude, kind Nurse of Song,
Allures me from the joyless Throng,
Spreads her reposing Breast to me,
And bids my tuneless Harp waft long Adieus to cities and to thee.
POEM, Written in Boston, at the commencement of the late Revolution.
BY JAMES ALLEN, OF BOSTON.
FROM realms of bondage and a tyrant's reign,
Our godlike fathers bore no slavish chain;
To Pharaoh's face the inspired patriarchs stood,
To seal their virtue, with a martyr's blood:
But lives so precious, such a sacred seed,
The source of empires, heaven's high will decreed:
He snatched the saints from Pharaoh's impious hand;
And bade his chosen seek this distant land:
Then to these climes the illustrious exiles sped,
'Twas freedom prompted, and the Godhead led.
Eternal woods the virgin soil defaced,
A dreary desert, and an howling waste;
A haunt of tribes no pity taught to spare,
And they opposed them with remorseless war,
But heaven's right arm led forth the faithful trait.
The guardian Godhead swept the insidious plain,
Till the scoured thicket amicable stood,
Nor dastard ambush trench'd the dusky wood:
Our sires then earned, no more, precarious bread,
Nor midst alarms their frugal meals were spread;
Fair boding hopes inured their hands to toil,
And patriot virtue nursed the thriving soil;
Nor scarce two ages have their periods run,
Since over their culture smiled the genial sun;
And now what states extend their fair domains
Over fleecy mountains and luxuriant plains!
Where happy millions their own fields possess,
No tyrant awes them, and no lords oppress;
The hand of rule, divine discretion guides,
And white-robed virtue over her paths presides,
Each polic'd order venerates the laws,
And each, ingenuous, speaks in freedom's cause;
The Spartan spirit, nor the Roman name,
The patriot's pride, shall rival these in fame;
Here all the sweets that social life can know,
From the full font of civil sapience flow;
Here golden Ceres clothes the autumnal plain,
And art's fair empress holds her new domain;
Here angel science spreads her lucid wing,
And hark, how sweet the newborn Muses sing!
Here generous commerce spreads her liberal hand,
And scatters foreign blessings round the land.
Shall meagre Mammon, or proud lust of sway,
Reverse these scenes? Will heaven permit the day?
Shall in this era all our hopes expire,
And weeping freedom from her fanes retire?
Here, shall the tyrant still our peace pursue,
From the pained eye-brow drink the vital dew?
Nor nature's barrier wards, our fathers' foe,
Seas roll in vain, and boundless oceans flow?
Stay, Pharaoh, The King of Great Britain.
stay: that impious hand forbear,
Nor tempt the genius of our souls too far;
How often, ungracious, in thy thankless stead,
Mid scenes of death, our generous youth have bled!
When the proud Gaul thy mightiest powers repelled,
And drove thy legions, trembling, from the field,
We rent the laurel from the victor's brow,
And round thy temples taught the wreath to grow. The taking of Louisbourg in
the year 1755, by General Pepperell.

Say, when thy slaughter^d bands the desert died,
Where lone Ohio rolls her gloomy tide,
Whose dreary banks their wasting bones inshrine,
What arm avenged them? thankless! was it thine? The same year the King's
troops were surprised near the banks of the Ohio; when our illustrious General
Washington covered the retreat, and saved the destruction of the whole army. A
body of the French was repulsed at an assault of the provincial lines at the
westward, their General taken prisoner, and their whole army compelled to fly
back to Canada.

But generous valor scorns a boasting word,
And conscious virtue reaps her own reward:
Yet conscious virtue bids thee now to speak,
Though guilty blushes kindle over thy cheek:
If wasting wars and painful toils at length,
Had drained our veins, and withered all our strength,
How could thou, cruel, form the vile design,
And round our neck the wreath of bondage twine?
And if some lingering spirit roused to strife,
Bid ruffian murder drink the dregs of life?
Shall future ages ever forget the deed?
And shall not, for this, impious Britain bleed?
When comes the period, heaven predestines must,
When Europe's glories shall be whelmed in dust,
When our proud fleets the naval wreath shall wear,
And o'^r her empires hurl the bolts of war,
Unnerv'd by fate, the boldest heart shall fail,
And, mid their guards, auxiliar kings grow pale;
In vain shall Britain lift her suppliant eye,
An alien'd offspring feels no filial tie,
Her tears in vain shall bathe the soldiers' feet,
Remember, ingrate, Boston's crimsoned street; The Massacre of the 5th of March
1770.

Whole hecatombs of lives the deed shall pay,
And purge the murders of that guilty day. The Poet seems to have been very
prophetic in this beautiful passage.

But why to future periods look so far,
What for^e ever faced us, that we feared to dare?
Then can thou think, even on this early day,
Proud force shall bend us to a tyrant's sway?
A foreign foe opposed our sword in vain, The extirpation of the Neutrals from
Nova Scotia.

And thine own troops we have rallied on the plain. The Provincials covered the
retreat from the French lines at Ticonderega, when the British General,
Abercrombie, was defeated by the Marquis Montcalm, in 1758.

If then our lives your lawless sword invade,
Think thou, enslaved, we'll kiss the pointed blade?
Nay, let experience speak, be this the test, --
It Is from experience that we reason best, --
When first the mandate showed the shameless plan,
To rank our race beneath the class of man,
Low as the brute to sink the human line,
Our toil our portion, and the harvest thine,
Modest but firm, we plead the sacred cause,
On nature bas'd, and sanction'd by the laws;
But your deaf ear the conscious plea denied,
Some demon counseled, and the sword reply^d;
Your navy then our haven covered over,
And armed battalions trespassed on our shore,
Through the prime streets, they marched in war's array:
At noon's full blaze, and in the face of day:
With dumb contempt we passed the servile show,
While scorn's proud spirit scowl'd on every brow;
Day after day successive wrongs we bore,
Till patience, wearied, could support no more,
Till slaughtered lives our native streets profaned,
And thy slaves' hand our hallowed crimson stained;
No sudden rage the ruffian soldier tore,
Or drenched the pavements with his vital gore,
Deliberate thought did all our souls compose,
Till, veiled in glooms, the lowery morning rose;
No mob then furious urged the impassioned fray,
Nor clamorous tumults dinn'd the solemn day;
In full convene the city Town-meeting at Faneuil-Hall.
senate sat,
Our fathers' spirit ruled the firm debate:
The freeborn soul no reptile tyrant checks,
It Is heaven that dictates when the people speaks;
Loud from their tongues the awful mandate broke,
And thus, inspired, the sacred senate spoke;
Ye miscreant troops, be gone! our presence fly;
S^ay, if ye dare, but if ye dare, ye die!
Ah, too severe, the fearful chief The infamous Governor Hutchinson.
replies,
Permit one half, the other, instant, flies.
No parle, avaunt, or by our fathers' shades,
Your reeking lives shall glut our vengeful blades.
Ere morning's light, begone, -- or else we swear,
Each slaughtered corse shall feed the birds of air!
Ere morning's light had streaked the skies with red,
The chieftain yielded, and the soldier fled.
It Is thus experience speaks -- the test forbear,
Nor show these states your feeble front of war.
But still your navies lord it over the main, --
Their keels are natives of our o^ken plain;
Even the proud mast that bears your flag on high,
"Grow on our soil, and ripened in our sky:
"Know then thyself, presume not us to scan,
Your power precarious, and your isle a span.
Yet could our wrongs in just oblivion sleep,
And on each neck revived affection weep,
The brave are generous, and the good forgive*
Then say you have wronged us, and our parent live; Her tyrants were too
self-conceited, and too obstinate, to take the advice of men of the best sense
and understanding. The consequence has been the establishment of liberty and
universal commerce in America.

But face not fate, oppose not heaven's decree,
Let not that curse our mother light on thee.
AN INTENDED INSCRIPTION, Written for the Monument on Beacon-Hill, in Boston,
and addressed to the Passenger. BY THE SAME.
WHERE stretched your sail, beneath what foreign sky
Did lovlier landscapes ever charm your eye?
Could fancy's fairy pencil, Stranger! say,
Even dipped in dreams, a nobler scene portray?
Behold yon vales, whose skirts elude your view,
And mountains fading to aerial blue!
Along their bow'ry shades how healthy toil
Alternate sports, or tends the mellow soil.
See rural towns mid groves and gardens rise,
And eastward, -- where the stretching ocean lies,
Lo! our fair capital sublimes the scene,
New Albion's pride, and ocean's future queen;
How over the tradeful port august she smiles,
Her sea-like haven boasts an hundred isles,
Whence hardy commerce swells the lofty sails
Over arctic seas, and mocks the polar gales,
Thence tides of wealth the wafting breezes bring,
And hence even culture feels its vital spring.
These scenes our Sires from rugged nature wrought,
Since -- what dire wars their patriot race have fought!
Witness yon tracts, where first the Briton bled,
Driven by our youth redoubted PIERCY fled:
There BREED ascends, and BUNKER's bleeding steeps,
Still over whose brow abortive Victory weeps;
What Trophies since! the gaze of after times,
Reared Freedom's empire over our happy climes!
But hence* fond Stranger, take a nobler view,
See yon shorn elm, The st^m^ of Liberty-Tree.
whence all these glories grew.
Here, where the armed foe presumptious trod,
Trampled our shrines, and even mouthed our GOD,
His vengeful hand, deep as the parent-root,
Lopt each grown branch, and every suckling shoot;
Because beneath her consecrated shade
Our earliest vows to LIBERTY were paid.
High from her Altar blew the heaven-caught fire,
While all our wealth o'erhung the kindling pyre.
How at the deed the Nations stood aghast,
As on the pile our plighted lives we cast!
O! if an alien from our fair domains,
The blood of Britain, hapless, taint your veins,
Pace over that hallowed ground with awful tread,
And tears, atoning, over yon relick shed;
But if, American! your lineage springs,
From Sires, who scorn the pedigree of kings,
A Georgian born you breathe the tepid air,
Or on the breezy banks of Delaware,
Or hardy Hampshire claim your haughty birth,
Revere yon root, and kiss its nurt'ring earth:
(...) its fiber fed by flowing springs,
W^^nce rose our empire over the thrones of kings:
Even now descend, adore the dear remain,
Where first reared Liberty's illumined fane,
There all her race, while time's revolve shall come,
As pilgrims flock to MECCA's idol'd tomb.
ELEGIAC ODE, Sacred to the Memory of General GREEN.
BY GEORGE RICHARDS, OF BOSTON.
SAY, shall the bards of ancient Greece and Rome,
In all the pathos of impassioned woe,
Mourn with their country, at the hero's tomb,
And fire a world to emulation's glow?
Shall weeping muses quit Pierian groves,
To deck the sod, where rest the good, the brave;
And shall the warrior, whom an empire loves
Repose, unsung, unhonor'd in the grave?
Forbid it, heaven! Columbia claims the song:
Touched with her griefs, I sweep the plaintive lyre,
To her, to Green, immortal strains belong:
An angel's pencil, and a seraph's fire.
Whilst sacred Truth, from realms of light divine,
Shall pour the tide of intellectual day,
And lead my footsteps to the hero's shrine,
Where patriots guard, and freemen watch the clay.
When first Britannia bathed her sword in gore,
His soul, indignant, spurned the peaceful shade;
Instant he armed, to brave the Lion's roar,
And the keen terrors of the Highland blade.
Prompt at his call, to hostile fields he led
The hardy yeomen of his native isle; General GREEN commanded the troops
raised by the State of Rhode Island, the first campaign of the late war.

True sons of liberty; whom virtue bred,
Strong for the labors of Herculean toil.
Mild of access, in him, no little pride
Obscured the greatness of a noble mind;
He felt for all; the soldier at his side
Brought down the sweetest "milk of hum^n kind."
For council honored, in the camp beloved,
Sagacious, cool, amid the storm serene;
Heroes revered, applauding States approved,
And Albion trembled at the name of GREEN.
Often have his limbs the frozen earth compressed,
Whilst round his head the watery torrent poured;
Thick clouds the curtains to his couch of rest,
Where the bleak wind and midnight hail-storm roared.
And often, advancing with the solar ray,
His banners flamed to meet the lightning's glare,
In torrid realms of more than burning day;
Sad haunts of death, and plagues, and putrid air.
There hallowed truths, inscribed on glory's roll,
Written in blood on honor's purple vest,
Shall gallant warriors, born of kindred soul,
With conscious pride, and martial zeal attest.
Illustrious men! ye nerv'd his mighty hand,
To crush the savage on the warlike plain;
When to the south he wheeled his conquering band,
And broke the iron of oppression's chain.
Around the shores which Hudson's billows lave,
His laurel wreaths shall ever verdant bloom;
And Trenton's cypress shade the hero's grave,
Whilst pensive Princeton mourns his early tomb.
August abodes! ye heard the trumpet's sound;
Which bade his columns range, his squadrons form;
Ye saw his coursers snuff the embattled ground,
And Green, triumphant, rule the vengeful storm.
Arrayed in tears and garb of sable hue,
See Brandywine the chieftain's hearse attend;
And Germantown At Germantown, Monmouth, and in South Carolina, Genesis GREEN was
honored with distinguished command.
lament -- and Monmouth, robbed in yew,
And Ashley's waters wail their god-like friend.
Immortal grounds! the theme of every age,
Your meanest dust shall speak the hero's praise;
Here bolted vengeance burst with tenfold rage,
And there he drove the lightning's rapid blaze.
Nor less illustrious are the banks of D^n,
Or Guilford's fields, where feats of bold emprise,
Proclaim the genius of the mat^^^ess man:
Though all the regions, marked by azure skies,
Ye saw his arms the vollied thunders deal.
Which checked Cornwallis in his mid career;
With Tarleton's sword, and Rawdon's murderous steel,
And savage Balfour pal'd with guilty fear.
Illustrious spots of earth's high favored mould!
What, tho no clarions swell to dire alarms,
And no proud chief, in pomp of burnished gold,
Leads on his troops in the bright glow of arms;
Yet shall the veteran there recount the tale
Of armies raised, unclothed, unfed, unpaid,
Who stood the summer's heat, the winter's gale,
Nor turned their bosoms from the tyrant's blade.
Such were the men, who owned the power of GREEN,
When the shrill music, lengthening down the line,
Urged rank on rank, to try the dubious scene,
And combat hosts, by d^spots thought divine.
Thrice honored chief! the work of death is past,
Thy task completed, smiling peace descends,
Hushed is the din, and mute the trumpet's blast,
And ardent warrior's greet as ancient friends.
Mature in life, with endless honor crowned,
Too bright for earth, and fit for purer skies,
Celestial bards his mighty deeds resound,
Whilst thus, aloud, a prince of angels cries.
"At God's decree, by heaven's high throne, I swear,
"It Is done! it is done! his time shall be no more*
"Thou king of death descend, on wings of air,
"And wast the hero to his native shore."
The obedient monarch cleft the etherial way, General GREEN died of the Coup
de Soleil, or Stroke of the Sun.

His golden darts were tipp'd with sacred fire,
He rode the chariot of eternal day,
And, fleet as lightning, passed the applauding choir.
His radiant form the hero kenn'd afar,
Resolved in death to boast supernal fame,
He mounted swift, lashed on the burning car,
And tower'd sublime in robes of solar flame.
According spirits tuned the song of love,
From heavenly harps was heard triumphant praise,
Which breathed thrice welcome to the climes above.
In the mild music of harmonious lays.
A pause ensued; the melting lyre was still,
And this the voice which trumpets rolled around.
"Go, fix the hero's throne on glory's hill,
"And be the chief by mightiest warriors crowned."
The laurel wreath was borne in Warren's hand,
The great Montgomery throned the immortal GREEN,
The gentle Mercer joined the festive band,
And gallant Laurens graced the glorious scene.
Uncounted veterans thronged the blessed abodes;
Loud swelled the notes to extacy divine;
And Spartan heroes, next in rank to Gods,
Proclaimed, with Wol^e, the palm of merit thine.
THE COUNTRY SCHOOL. This Poem is extracted from the New Hampshire Spy, where
it is introduced by the following note: -- "Mr. Osborne, The following may fill
a corner of your Spy, if there is any thing original, natural or just, in thus
sketching out a picture of a common Town School, where there are frequently
such vast numbers of every age, size and sex sent together, as to create
perpetual confusion, distract an illiterate master, and frustrate the noble
design of sending them."

PUT to the door -- the school's begun --
Stand in your places every one, --
Attend, --
Read in the bible, -- tell the place, --
" Job twentieth and the seventeenth varse --
Caleb, begin. And -- he -- shall -- suck --
Sir, -- Moses got a pin and stuck --
Silence, -- stop Caleb -- Moses! here!
What Is this complaint? I didn't, Sir, --
Hold up your hand, -- What is it a pin?
O dear, I will not do so agin.
Read on. The increase of his h -- h -- horse --
Hold: H, O, U, S, E, spells house.
Sir, what is this word? for I cannot tell it.
Cannot you indeed! Why spell it. Spell it.
Begin yourself, I say. Who, I?
Yes, try. Sure you can spell it. Try.
Go, take your seats and primers, go,
You sha'n't abuse the bible so.
Will pray Sir Master mend my pen?
Say, Master, that is enough. -- Here Ben,
Is this your copy? Cannot you tell?
Set all your letters parallel.
I Have done my sum -- it is just a groat --
Let Us see it. -- Master, m' I g' out?
Yes, -- bring some wood in -- What Is that noise?
It is not I, Sir, it is them boys. --
Come Billy, read -- What Is that? That Is A --
Sir, Jim has snatched my rule away --
Return it, James. -- Here, rule with this --
Billy, read on, -- That Is crooked S.
Read in the spelling-book -- Begin --
The boys are out -- Then call them in --
My nose bleeds, may not I get some ice,
And hold it in my breeches? -- Yes.
John, keep your seat. My sum is more --
Then do it again -- Divide by four,
By twelve, and twenty -- Mind the rule.
Now speak, Manassah, and spell tool.
I cannot -- Well try -- T, W, L.
Not washed your hands yet, boody, ha?
You had your orders yesterday.
Give me the ferrule, hold your hand.
Oh! Oh! There, -- mind my next command.
The grammar read. Tell where the place is.
C sounds like K in cat and cases.
My book is torn. The next. -- Here not --
E final makes it long -- say note.
What are the stops and marks, Susannah?
Small points, Sir. -- And how many, Hannah?
Four, Sir. How many, George? You look:
Here Is more than fifty in my book.
How Is this? Just come, Sam? Why I Have been --
Who knocks? I don't know, Sir. Come in.
"Your most obedient, Sir?" And yours.
Sit down, Sir. Sam, put to the doors.
What do you bring to tell that is new!
"Nothing, that is either strange or true.
"What a prodigious school! I Am sure
"You Have got a hundred here, or more.
"A word, Sir, if you please." I will --
You girls, till I come in be still.
"Come, we can dance to night -- so you
"Dismiss your brain distracting crew,
"And come -- For all the girls are there.
"We'll have a fiddle and a player."
Well, mind and have the sleigh-bells sent,
I Will soon dismiss my regiment.
Silence! The second class must read.
As quick as possible -- proceed.
Not found your book yet? Stand -- be fixed --
The next read, stop -- the next -- the next.
You need not read again, it is well.
Come Tom and Dick, choose sides to spell.
Will this word do? Yes, Tom spell dunce.
Sit still there all you little ones^
I Have got a word, Well, name it. Gizzard.
You spe^l it Sampson. -- G, I, Z.
Spell conscience, Jack. K, O, N,
S, H, U, N, T, S. -- Well done!
Put out the next -- Mine is folks.
Tim, spell it -- P, H, O, U, X.
O shocking! Have you all tried? No.
Say Master, but no matter, go --
Lay by your books -- and you, Josiah,
Help Jed to make the morning fire.
THE SPEECH OF HESPER. This Poem forms part of a series of publications, in the
Connecticut Magazine, for the years 1786 and 1787, -- under the title of
"American Antiquities;" of which it makes the tenth number, and is called an
"Extract from the Anarchiad, book xxiv," -- being prefaced by the following
lines, viz. -- "At the op^ning of this book, and previous to the great and
final conflict, which, by what is legible at the close of the Poem, appears to
establish the Anarch in his dominion of the new world, Hesper, with a
solicitude and energy becoming his high station, and the importance of the
subject, makes his last solemn address to his principal counselors and sages,
whom he had convened at Philadelphia."

YE sires of nations, called in high debate,
From kindred realms, to save the sinking state,
A boundless sway on one broad base to rear --
My voice pate^n^d claims your listening ear;
Over the wide clime my fostering cares extend,
Your guardian genius and your deathless friend.
When splendid victory on her trophy'd car,
Swept from these shores the last remains of war,
Bade each glad state, that boasts Columbia's name,
Exult in freedom and ascend to fame,
To bliss unbounded stretch their ardent eyes,
And wealth and empire from their labor rise,
My raptured sons beheld the discord cease,
And soothed their sorrows in the songs of peace.
Shall these bright scenes, with happiest omens born,
Fade like the fleeting visions of the morn?
Shall this fair fabric from its base be hurled
And whelm in dust the glories of the world?
Will ye, who saw the heavens tempestuous lower,
Who felt the arm of irritated power,
Whose souls distending with the wasting flood,
Prepared the firm foundations, built in blood,
By discord siez'd, will ye desert the plan?
The unfinished Babel of the bliss of man?
Go search the field of death, where heroes, lost
In graves obscure, can tell what freedom cost.
Though conquest smiled; there slain amid the crowd,
And plunged promiscuous with no winding shroud,
No friendly hand their gory wounds to lave,
The thousands moulder in a common grave.
Not so thy son, oh Laurens! gasping lies,
Too daring youth, war's latest sacrifice;
His snow-white bosom heaves with writhing pain,
The purple drops his snow-white bosom stain;
His cheek of rose is wan* a deadly hue
Sits on his face, that chills with lucid dew. --
There Warren, glorious with expiring breath,
A comely corse, that smiles in ghastly death:
See Mercer bleed -- and over yon wintry wall,
Mid heaps of slain, see great Montgomery fall!
Behold those veterans worn with want and care,
Their sinews sti^^en'd, silvered over their hair,
Weak in their steps of age, they move forlorn,
Their toils forgotten by the sons of scorn;
This hateful truth still aggravates their pain,
In vain they conquered and they bled in vain.
Go then, ye remnants of inglorious wars,
Disown your marks of merit, hide your scars,
Of lust, of power, of titled pride accused,
Steal to your graves dishonored and abused.
For see proud Faction waves her flaming brand,
And discord riots over the ungrateful land;
Lo, to the north a wild adventurous crew
In desperate mobs the savage state renew;
Each felon chief his maddening thousands draws,
And claims bold license from the bond of laws;
In other States the chosen sires of shame,
Stamp their vile knaveries with a legal name;
In honor's seat the sons of meanness swarm,
And senates base the work of mobs perform,
To wealth, to power the foes of union rise,
While foes deride you and while friends despise.
Stand forth, ye traitors, at your country's bar,
Inglorious authors of intestine war;
What countless mischiefs from their labors rise!
Pens dipped in gall and lips inspired with lies!
Ye sires of ruin, prime detested cause
Of bankrupt faith, annihilated laws,
Of selfish systems, jealous, local schemes,
And union'd empire lost in empty dreams,
Your names ex^anding with your growing crime
Shall float disgustful down the stream of time,
Each future age applaud the avenging song,
And outrag'd nature vindicate the wrong.
Yes there are men, who, touched with heavenly fire,
Beyond the con^ines of these climes aspire,
Beyond the praises of a transient age,
To live immortal in the patriot page;
Who greatly dare, though warring worlds oppose,
To pour just vengeance on their country's foes.
And lo! the etherial worlds assert your cause,
Celestial aid the voice of virtue draws;
The curtains blue of yon expansion rend,
From opening skies heroic shades descend.
See, robbed in light, the forms of heaven appear,
The warrior spirits of your friends are near;
Each on his steed of fire (his quiver stored
With shafts of vengeance) grasps his flaming sword,
The burning blade waves high, and, dipped in blood,
Hurls plagues and death on discord's faithless brood.
Yet what the hope? the dreams of Congress sade,
The federal union sinks in endless shade,
Each feeble call, that warns the realms around,
Seems the faint echo of a dying sound,
Each requisition wastes in fleeting air,
And not one state regards ^he powerless prayer.
Ye wanton States, by h^^ven's best blessings cursed,
^^ng on the lap of softening luxury ^urst,
What fickle frenzy raves, what visions strange?
Inspire your bosoms with the lust of change?
And frames the wish to fly from fancied ill,
And yield your freedom to a monarch's will?
Go, view the lands to lawless power a prey,
Where tyrants govern with unbounded sway;
See the long pomp in gorgeous state displayed,
The tinsel^d guards, the squadron'd horse parade;
See heralds gay with emblems on their vest,
In tiss^^d robes tall beauteous pages ^^est;
Where, moves the pageant, throng unn^mber'd slaves,
Lords, Dukes, and ^^^nces, titulary knaves
Con^us'dly shine, the purple gemm'd with stars,
Sceptres, and globes, and crowns, and ruby'd cars,
On gilded orbs the thundering chariots rolled,
Steeds snorting fire, and champing bitts of gold,
Prance to the trumpet's voice -- while each assumes
A loftier gait, and lifts his neck of plumes.
High on the moving throne, and near the van,
The tyrant rides, the chosen scourge of man;
Clarions, and slutes, and drums, his way prepare,
And shouting millions rend the conscious air;
Millions whose ceaseless toils the pomp sustain,
Whose hour of stupid joy repays an age of pain.
From years of darkness springs the regal line,
Hereditary kings by right divine;
It Is theirs to riot on all nature's spoils,
For them with pangs unblest the peasant toils,
For them the earth prolific teems with grain,
Theirs, the dread labors of the devious main,
Annual for them the wasted land renews
The gifts oppressive, and extorted dues,
For them, when slaughter spreads the gory plains,
The lifeblood gushes from a thousand veins,
While the dull herd, of earth-born pomp afraid,
Adore the power that coward meanness made.
Let Poland tell what woe returning springs,
Where right elective yields the crown to kings!
War guides the choice -- each candidate abhorred
Founds his firm title on the wasting sword,
Wades to the throne amid the sanguine flood,
And dips his purple in a nation's blood.
Behold, where Venice rears her sea-girt towers,
Over the vile crowd proud oligarchy lowers;
While each Aristocrate affects a throne,
Beneath a thousand kings the poor plebeians groan.
Nor less abhorred the certain woe that waits
The giddy rage of democratic states;
Whose pop'lar breath, high-blown in r^stless tide,
No laws can temper and no reason guide;
An equal sway their mind indignant spurns,
To wanton change the bliss of freedom turns,
Led by wild demagogues the factious crowd,
Mean, fierce, imperious, insolent and loud,
Nor fame nor wealth nor power nor system draws,
They see no object and perceive no cause,
But feel by turns, in one disasterous hour,
The extremes of license and the extremes of power.
What madness prompts, or what ill-omen'd fates,
Your realm to parcel into petty states?
Shall lordly Hudson part contending powers?
And broad Potowmac lave two hostile shores?
Must Allegany^s sacred summits bear
The impious bulwarks of perpetual war?
His hundred streams receive your heroes slain?
And bear your sons inglorious to the main?
Will states cement by feebler bonds allied?
Or join more closely as they more divide?
Will this vain scheme bid restless factions cease?
Check foreign wars or fix internal peace?
Call public credit from her grave to rise?
Or gain in grandeur what they loose in size?
In this weak realm can countless kingdoms start
Strong with new force in each divided part?
While empire's head dissected into four
Gains life by severance of diminished power?
So when the philosophic hand divides
The full grown polypus in genial tides,
Each severed part, informed with latent life,
Acquires new vigor from the friendly knife,
Over peopled sands the puny insects creep,
Till the next wave absorbs them in the deep.
What then remains? must pilgrim Freedom fly
From these loved regions to her native sky?
When the fair fugitive the orient chaced,
She fixed her seat beyond the watery waste;
Her docile sons (enough of power resigned,
And natural rights in social leagues combined)
In virtue firm, though jealous in her cause,
Gave senates force and energy to laws,
From ancient habit local powers obey,
Yet feel no reverence for one general sway,
For breach of faith no keen compulsion feel,
And find no interest in the foederal weal.
But know, ye favored race, one potent head,
Must rule your states, and strike your foes with dread,
The finance regulate, the trade control,
Live through the empire, and accord the whole.
Ere death invades, and night's deep curtain falls,
Through ruined realms the voice of Union calls;
Loud as the trump of heaven through darkness roars,
When gyral gusts entomb Caribbean towers,
When nature trembles through the deeps convulst,
And ocean foams from craggy cliffs repulst,
On you she calls! attend the warning cry,
"YE LIVE UNITED, OR DIVIDED DIE."
From the New Haven Gazette, and Connecticut Magazine, for 1788. This Poem was
originally printed in the abovementioned Paper, February 21st, 1788, in rather
an incorrect manner. It is now offered to the public, with the amendment of the
errors reprehensible at its first appearance.
TO THE PRINTER.
THE distress which the inhabitants of Guinea experience at the loss of their
children, which are stolen from them by the persons employed in the barbarous
traffic of human flesh, is, perhaps, more thoroughly felt than described. But,
as it is a subject to which ^^ery person has not attended, the Author of the
follow (...) hopes that, possibly, he may excite some attention, (while he
obtains indulgence) to an attempt to represent the anguish of a mother, whose
son and daughter were taken from her by a Ship's Crew, belonging to a Country
where the GOD of Justice and Mercy is owned and worshipped.

"HELP! oh, help! thou GOD of Christians!
"Save a mother from despair!
"Cruel white-men steal my children!
"GOD of Christians, hear my prayer!
"From my arms by force they are rended,
"Sailors drag them to the sea;
"Yonder ship, at anchor riding,
"Swift will carry them away.
"There my son lies, stripped, and bleeding;
"Fast, with thongs, his hands are bound.
"See, the tyrants, how they scourge him!
"See his sides a reeking wound!
"See his little sister by him;
"Quaking, trembling, how she lies!
"Drops of blood her face besprinkle;
"Tears of anguish fill her eyes.
"Now they tear her brother from her;
"Down, below the deck, he is thrown;
"Stiff with beating, through fear silent,
"Save a single, death-like, groan.
"Hear the little creature begging!" --
'Take me, white-men, for your own!
'Spare! oh, spare my darling brother!
'He's my mother's only son.
'See, upon the shore she is raving:
'Down she falls upon the sands:
'Now, she tears her flesh with madness;
'Now, she prays with lifted hands.
'I am young, and strong, and hardy;
'He's a sick, and feeble boy;
'Take me, whip me, chain me, starve me,
'All my life I Will toil with joy.
'Christians! who is the GOD you worship?
"Is he cruel, fierce, or good?
'Does he take delight in mercy?
'Or in spilling human blood?
'Ah! my poor distracted mother!
'Hear her scream upon the shore.' --
Down the savage Captain struck her,
Lifeless on the vessel's floor.
Up his sails he quickly hoisted,
To the ocean bent his way;
Headlong plunged the raving mother,
From a high rock, in the sea.
NEW YEAR's WISH. First published in No. 85, of the Gazette of the United
States; and originally addressed, by the author, to a circle of his female
friends.

BY DR. --.
TO you, my young friends, while I write,
Kind wishes spontaneous arise;
And does ought my rude passions excite,
They are hushed by benevolent sighs.
A muse, in the form of a Dove,
Hovers round, and dispels every fear;
She bids me each talent improve
To hail you a HAPPY NEW YEAR!
Her mandates I cheerful obey,
As her smiles I would strive to procure;
For the lines that my wishes convey,
May her favors in future secure.
On you, my young friends, may she smile,
That your verse may with melody flow;
And may joy all your sorrows beguile,
Nor an hour be reserved for woe.
When WINTER shall sternly appear,
And Nature in gloom be arrayed;
When the Mariner shudders through fear,
Lest his bark should by winds be betrayed;
Then, in safety, well sheltered from snow,
May you all, putting sorrow aside,
In domestic tranquillity know
All the joys of a social fireside.
When SPRING in young beauty shall smile,
And charm following charm shall unfold;
In rapture beholding the while,
May your portion be pleasures untold.
May each songster that chirps on the spray,
May each floweret that blows in the field,
For you be more cheerful and gay,
For you its choice fragrances yield.
When SUMMER shall sultry advance,
And flocks from their sports shall retire;
May each youth, who declines the light dance,
Your charms, and your virtues admire.
May the grape-vine form Arbors of ease,
While the eglantine skirts them around;
And then may the fresh balmy breeze
Waft perfumes from each neighboring ground.
When AUTUMN his treasures shall bring,
When each fruit tree shall bend with its load;
May your hearts ever gratefully sing,
The hand that such blessings bestowed.
Thus sweetly shall time roll away,
Nor shall you once wish it in haste;
And the YEAR that commences today,
Far happier shall be than the past.
Then, when WINTERS and SPRINGS shall decay,
When SUMMERS and AUTUMNS are over,
And PHOEBUS, the Prince of the day,
Shall wake the glad Seasons no more:
To you, each forgeting her mirth,
May beauty immortal be given;
May you change the faint joys of this earth,
For transports uncloying in heaven.
From a Gentleman, to a Lady, who had presented him with a CAKE HEART. BY THE
SAME.
WITH eager haste I homeward flew
My precious gift to unfold;
I saw, and at the flattering view,
My transports thus I told.
Thou beauteous semblance of the heart
That warms Lucinda's breast,
Come, and each gentle joy impart
As to my soul you are pressed.
But still, tho chaste delight full often
To my fond heart you give,
Yet thou, say what I will, no soft
Impression can receive.
O had Lucinda, lovely fair,
Deigned but her own to have given,
The gift I Would cherish with that care
As if 'twere sent from heaven.
In my own bosom it should lie,
By no rude passion tossed;
And, hushed to love, it should supply
The place of mine that is lost.
From the American Magazine, for May 1788. UTRUM HORUM MAVIS, ELIGE.
LET sage discretion the gay world despise;
Let dull philosophers over lamps grow wise,
Like bees their summer providently waste,
And hoard that treasure which they never shall taste;
Let statesmen court the bubble of applause,
And staring cry for sumptuary laws;
Let peevish prelates in devotion kneel,
And curse that pleasure which they try to feel;
Life is a blessing, use it as you can,
And the best purpose of that blessing scan.
All human reason is no more than this,
To guide our footsteps in the realms of bliss;
While, as in drinking, so in life, the will
Must bound our joy, and dictate what to fill. --
Live freely then; for if thy life offend
It Is never too late to alter and amend:
But should you hesitate the season's lost,
As backward fruits are subject to the frost.
Then, if true spirit every hope inflame,
Mark well the lesson of my proffered fame.
First trace the limits of thy destined sphere:
Here rest thy wisdom, thine ambition here.
It Is not each clown that triumphs, though he dare
Aspire to charm and captivate the fair;
It Is not each witling, who the ape displays,
That strikes our fancy, or provokes our praise:
But would you sin, be sinful with a grace --
Inaptitude can even vice debase.
Search then your genius, every bent survey,
And where she prompts be ready to obey.
See through this crowd where brilliant prospects rise
The chase how luring, and how rare the prize!
The paths of pleasure to no bounds confined,
As in their shape, are various in their kind.
Fix then thy province, make thy talents good,
And be a fop, a gentleman, or blood.
Happy the first, who studious to dispense
With all the cumberous pedantry of sense,
Knows no ambition but the pride of dress,
And for that toy can every wish suppress:
Whose natal bounties, like the fly's, consist
In two short words, to flutter and exist.
If to such fame thine emulation turn,
Hear his pursuits, and from example learn.
-- 'Till ten the morn is squandered in his bed;
One precious hour's devoted to his head;
Another's finished ere, his dress complete
From top to toe be critically neat;
Then he struts forth to greet his kindred beaux,
And urge some tardy tradesman for his clothes;
Or mid the town to saunter and to stare,
And kill an hour or two he knows not where.
In the noon's bustle, vacant and serene,
He deals in bows, his business to be seen:
Perhaps united to some fair he meets,
From shop to shop pursues her through the streets;
For the last fashions stimulate her pride,
And on the modes he is zealous to decide.
Next his soiled charms he hastens to repair,
To give a finer polish to his hair,
His every grace with every art entwine,
And form his looks more strikingly divine;
Till the last, noblest pastime of the day,
To his bright zenith summons him away.
There, in the circle of some coterie,
Roused by the exhilirating fumes of tea,
View him, triumphant, with unrivaled fame,
Attract each ogle, and each breast inflame;
To every sense a magic thrill impart,
And steal through all the mazes of the heart.
Next let us view the Gentleman at ease,
Too rich to toil, too indolent to please;
Whose days, unharrass'd by desire or woe,
In one smooth stream uninterrupted flow;
Born to no end, for no one purpose fit,
A load of vanity, a grain of wit,
Who, far removed from every wordly strife,
Lives for himself, and sleeps away his life.
If to the third thy happier choice incline,
And thy warm genius as a Blood would shine,
Be the first caution, in thy bold career,
To shun low comrades, and a vulgar sphere: --
The great unpunished, from their rank, offend;
But humbler culprits with the laws contend. --
Then if some revel, or a midnight joke,
Insult our slumbers, or the watch provoke,
Thy looks can wrest stern justice from the scale,
Suspend her frowns, and snatch thee from a jail.
Let dauntless spirit animate thy soul,
No fears restrain thee, and no threats control;
Whether, in hunting, at an arm's expense,
You dash a furious courser over a sense;
Or, at the bottle, be thy matchless boast,
To sit the longest, and to drink the most:
So shall thy fame to wondrous heights ascend;
And every rake shall hail thee as a friend.
But, if thy soul such base ambition spurn,
And in thy breast a purer spirit burn,
Leave such poor laurels to the brows of Youth;
And place thy zeal in wisdom and in truth.
Then, in thy way, tho mean temptation rise,
The task discourage, or the world despise,
Proceed --
Until the triumph of thy worth record
That virtue is the surest, best reward.
The Fop, whose merits on his charms ^^^p^nd,
May gain a mistress, but will lose a friend;
The Blood will tell thee, ere he quit the stage,
That joy of youth's the misery of age;
And the deluded Idler, with remorse,
Will own a blessing what he feared a curse;
But he whose wisdom, such desires withstood,
Unites his pleasure with his greatest good,
Knows not misfortune, tho a fair one frown,
His wealth escape him, and his friends disown;
But, firm in what he is, in what he may be, blessed,
Feels an unvaried sunshine in his breast.
ELLA. A NORWEGIAN TALE.
BY WILLIAM DUNLAP.
History says that SIVARD, King of Sweden, entered Norway with a numerous army,
and committed the greatest enormities, but was at last overthrown, his Army
routed, and himself slain by one of those women whom he had brutally abused.

BETWEEN Norwegian hills, wide spreads a plain,
By Nature formed for sport;
The vet'ran warrior here, and hardy swain,
To annual games resort.
High over their heads was hung the hoary brow,
Which cast an ample shade;
From thence these words majestic seemed to flow --
"Fierce foes your sports invade!"
They upward gaze -- a warrior struck their sight;
He bore aloft his lance,
All sheathed in arms, insufferably bright,
Where beamy splendours dance.
The western sun beam round his helmet flies,
He more than man appears;
And more than mortal seemed to sound the voice
That rang upon their ears.
"Ye sons of Norway! hearken to my tale,
"Your rural games oh cease;
"Sivard is marching through Dulvellon's vale,
"Break off the sports of peace!
"The bloody Sivard leads his conquering Swedes,
"He riots in our shame;
"The man, the matron, and the infant bleeds --
"Norway is but a name!
"The husband sees -- curse on the tyrant's lust --
"He sees his beauteous bride --
"Her virtue, worth and honor in the dust --
"Oh where is Norway's pride!
"Rouse! rouse Norwegians! seize your arms amain,
"Let helms o'ershade the brow;
"Let Us meet these Swedish demons on the plain,
"And lay their triumphs low.
"Oh had you seen what these poor eyes have seen!
'Twas Sivard did the deed --
"Our hoary monarch, and our helpless queen,
"I -- yes, I saw them bleed.
"Their daughter Ella -- no, I will not tell!
"Norwegians never enquire --
"Never hear it -- what the royal maid besel;
"I see your souls on fire.
"Oh seize your swords, your spears, your helms and shields!
"Oh vindicate your fame!
"Sivard and Sweden glare on Norway's fields;
"Remember Norway's name."
He said, tears flow apace -- fierce glow the swains,
Rage fills each honest breast;
In Swedish blood, to wipe away their stains
Was every thought addressed.
Then red hair'd Rollo, fierce advancing cried
"Whoever thou art, come down!
"We live on hills, to every toil we are tried,
"And war is all our own.
"Let Sivard come, we'll meet the tyrant here.
"But Stranger come thou down."
He came; old Athold gazed with look severe; --
He gazed -- but ceased to frown.
"Or Athold has forgot his monarch's face,
"Or sure thou art his son!
"Eric, of mighty Norway's royal race!" --
Full quick the tidings run.
With shouts they press to see the beauteous chief;
The aged kiss his hand!
On either side fast rolled the marks of grief,
Then Athold spoke the band --
"Ye sons of Norway, to your homes repair,
"There seize the sword and shield,
"And ere the morning's purple streaks the air,
"Meet Eric in the field.
"Oh Prince! do you with aged Athold go,
"And take refreshing sleep;
"Athold will sing, and sooth the rising woe,
"Or, -- break his harp and weep." --
'Twas night -- in Athold's hall each took his place;
Of other times he sung;
Fast streamed the tears adown the hero's face
And groans responsive rung.
Bright came the morn! and bright in battered arms
The rustic vet'rans came;
And many a youth, untried in rough alarms,
Now hoped a patriot's name.
They heard from far the hum of Sivard's host;
Young Eric struck his shield;
Then high in air his heavy spear he tossed,
And blazed along the field.
Next aged Athold followed; Rollo strong;
Black Calmar lifts his mace;
Culullin, Marco, Streno, rush along,
And all the rugged race.
Fierce came the Swede, in strength of numbers proud,
She scorned his feeble foe;
But soon the voice of battle roared aloud,
And many a Swede lay low.
Strong Rollo struck the towering Olaus dead,
Full fifteen bled beside.
Old Athold cleft the brave Adolphus' head,
In all his youthful pride.
But Eric! Eric! ranged the field around,
On Sivard still he cried:
The gasping Swedes lay heaped upon the ground --
Sivard! the hills replied.
In fury Sivard seized his shining shield,
His mail, his helm and spear;
He mounts his car, he thunders over the field;
And Norway knows to fear.
Great Rollo falls beneath his dreadful arm,
His ste^ds are stained with blood;
Young Eric smiled to hear the loud alarm,
And flew to stop the flood.
He raged, he foamed, -- fierce flew the thirsty spear,
Down fell the foremost steed:
Astonished Sivard felt unusual fear --
"Tyrant, you are doomed to bleed!"
Up sprung the youth -- deep griding fell the sword
Sunk in the Tyrant's brow;
Fast fly the Swedes, and leave their hated lord,
His towering pride laid low.
Now Norway's sons their great deliverer hail,
But lo! he bleeds! he falls!
Old Athold strips the helm and beamy mail,
And on his Gods he calls.
He lifts the helm, and down the snowy neck
Fast falls the silky hair --
"And could those limbs, the conquering Sivard check
Oh Power of great despair! -- "
Life ebbs apace -- she lifts her languid head,
She strives her hand to wave,
Confessed to all, the beauteous Ella said --
"Thanks, thanks companions brave."
"Freedom rewards you -- naught can Ella give
"Low, low, poor Ella lies;
"Sivard is dead! and Ella would not live."
She bleeds, she faints, she dies.
EULOGIUM ON RUM.
BY J. SMITH.
ARISE! ye pimpled, tippling race, arise!
From every town and village tavern, come!
Show your red noses, and overflowing eyes
And help your poet chant the praise of Rum.
The cordial drop, the morning dram, I sing.
The midday toddy, and the evening sling.
Hail, mighty Rum! and by this general name
I call each species -- whisky, gin, or brandy:
(The kinds are various -- but the effects the same;
And so I choose a name that is short and handy;
For, reader, know, it takes a deal of time,
To make a crooked word lie smooth in rhyme.)
Hail, mighty Rum! thy song-inspiring merit
Is known to many a bard in these our days:
Apollo's drink, they find, is void of spirit --
Mere chicken-broth -- insipid as their lays:
And, pleased, they would give a riv'let -- aye a sea
Of tuneful water, for one quart of thee!
Hail, mighty Rum! how wondrous is thy power!
Unwarm'd by thee, how would our spirits fail,
When dark December comes, with aspect four,
And, sharp as razor, blows the northern gale!
And yet thour't grateful in that sultry day,
When raging Sirius darts his fervid ray.
Hail, mighty Rum! to thee the wretched fly:
And find a sweet oblivion of their woes;
Locked in thy arms, as in the grave, they lie --
Forget their kindred -- and forgive their foes.
And Lethe's stream, (so much extolled by some,
In ancient times) I shrewdly guess, was Rum.
Hail, mighty Rum! what can thy power withstand!
Even lordly Reason flies thy dreadful face:
And Health, and Joy, and all the lovely band
Of social Virtues, shun thy dwelling place:
(For in whatever breast it rears its throne,
Like Turkish monarchs, Rum must rule alone.)
When our bold fathers crossed the Atlantic wave,
And here arrived -- a weak defenseless band --
Pray* what became of all the tribes so brave --
The savage owners of this happy land?
Were they sent headlong to the realms below,
"By doom of battle?" friend, This alludes only to Jersey, Pennsylvania. etc.
I answer no.
Our fathers were too wise to think of war;
They knew the woodlands were not quickly past:
They might have met with many an ugly scar --
Lost many a foretop -- and been beat at last.
But Rum, assisted by his son, Disease,
Performed the business with surprising ease.
And would our western brethren be less proud, or,
In other words, throw by their gun and drum --
For ducks and squirrels, save their lead and powder,
And send the tawny rogues some pipes of rum --
I dare predict, they all would gladly suck it;
And every mother's son soon kick the bucket.
But lo! the ingratitude of Adam's race!
Though all these clever things to Rum we owe --
Gallons of ink are squirted in his face;
And his bruised back is banged with many a blow;
Some hounds of note have rung his funeral knell,
And every puppy joins the general yell.
So have I seen (the simile is fine --
And wonderfully pat -- though rather old)
When rising Phoebus shot his rays benign,
A flock of sheep come skipping from the fold;
Some restless sheep cries baa: and all the throng,
Ewes, rams, lambs, wethers, bellowing pour along,
But fear not, Rum, though fiercely they assail,
And none but I, the bard, thy cause defend,
Think not thy foes -- though numerous -- shall prevail,
Thy power diminish, or thy being end:
Though spurned from table, and the public eye,
In the snug closet safely shall thou lie.
And often, when Sol's proud chariot quits the sky,
And humbler Cynthia mounts her one-horse chair,
To that snug closet shall thy vot'ry fly;
And, rapt in darkness, keep his orgies there;
Lift the full bottle, joyous, to his head,
Then, great as Caesar, reel sublime to bed.
Burlington, Dec. 7 th, 1789.
THE COUNTRY MEETING. Or friends' place of worship.

BY T. C. JAMES.
OF war's tremendous deeds, the din of arms,
And acts by Fame renowned, fain would I sing,
But that ambition never my bosom warms,
Nor would Calliope her succor bring
To bard that soars with too adventurous wing.
O Shenstone! sweetest child of fancy fair,
Dart one fond ray, and guide the weakest quill,
That ever rashly claimed thy guardian care,
To point the high path up the slippery hill,
Where thou thy lyre do touch with still improving skill.
Themes that have never been polished into rhyme,
Would a faint pencil in this verse pourtray,
If in the fond attempt to gain on time,
No taunting critic meet me on my way,
And with these accents rude my heart dismay:
'Vain youth, forbear, by desperate folly moved,
'Of poetasters the mean herd to swell;
'But mark his strain whom laurell'd Phoebus loved,
'What Horace, tuneful bard, has sung so well,
'How Daedalus's son, bold artist, headlong fell.'
View yonder ancient dome with trees beset,
From which no lofty spire does proudly rise,
Nor hence each week, when congregation's met,
Are studied hymns ever winged unto the skies,
Nor does amen from parish clerk arise.
Even music's lulling charms beseems wrong
To those who did this modest temple rear;
For all, who to those lonely confines throng,
Worship in guise of solemn silent prayer;
Nor can they think that words their sinful deeds repair.
No pulpit here does grace the naked wall,
Nor does the sculptor his gay art express:
For thus they teach: 'Religion does not call
'For the vain ornaments of splendid dress,
'Nor will meek heaven superfluous grandeur bless.'
And wrong they hold it, that the flock should pay
For truths which ought to flow without control,
Free as the silver dew, or light of day,
To beam mild virtue on the expanding soul,
And spread celestial sparks, free gift, from pole to pole.
But see, over yonder field, the elder train
Of village dames their little infants bring,
Who else might loiter on the grassy plain,
And wet their new clothes in yon bubbling spring,
Which would their parents' minds with sorrow sting.
The sportive urchins often will skip away,
To chase the partridge from the neighboring bush:
And often, with balls of well-attemper'd clay,
Will from its covert fright the trembling thrush,
Nor mind the matron's careful voice, which would them hush.
Down the slop'd hill the gayer tribe descend,
On neighing steeds, that champ the steeled bit,
Strait to the fane their pompous way they tend;
There 'midst their peers in goodly order sit,
Young swains for strength renowned, and maids for wit:
Such strength as at the mill-door often is seen
When Colin lifts the sack of mighty weight;
Such wit as sports in gambols over the green,
And would the ear of nicer townsman grate:
He Would call it shocking stuff, and rude, unseemly prate.
Yet Humor her abode will deign to fix
Amidst the lively rustics of the place,
And with the village hinds will often mix,
Giving to every feat a festive grace,
And spreading cheerfulness over every face.
Let the polite, the polished, blame their joys,
Whom Nature, unconstrained, can never charm:
This is the life which ennui never cloys,
Nor ever can fell Ambition work it harm,
Blowing with hideous blast its poisonous alarm.
See yonder youth on prancing bay steed ride,
While satisfaction on his broad front beams;
And view his gentle charmer by his side,
For whom he wishes, and of whom he dreams;
Of heavenly form and mind to him she seems.
For her each evening anxiously he culls,
Of wild flowers fair, a nosegay scented sweet:
For her the chestnut drops its prickly hulls,
And the wood pigeon yields its sav'ry meat,
With thousand tempting gifts which verse cannot repeat.
And now through folding doors, full wide displayed,
The assembly's grave and pious numbers throng,
While well each noisy buzzing murmur's stayed,
With the loose prattling of each infant tongue;
For often confusion has from childhood sprung.
See the wise elder's venerable grace,
Mark with what slow-paced dignity he moves;
See every little eye hangs on his face,
And over all his features fondly roves,
For he the junior train affectionately loves.
The village teacher sits with looks profound,
And marks the entering throng, with eye askance;
If, as he careful views the dome around,
He should on careless pupil's visage chance,
He sends him straight a play-forbidding glance.
Of looks like these he has a plenteous store,
To fright his students from each frolic mood:
And well they watch to see his aspect lour,
Trying each art to avert the baleful wood,
By sitting wondrous still, and seeming even as good.
Silence with Sleep his empire now divides,
While some on this, and some on that side nod;
The ploughman still his steers and ploughshare guides,
And breaks in pleasing dreams the fancied sod;
While the school-mistress wields the birchen rod.
Others, more wakeful, plan their future deeds,
While on increase of wealth their wishes stray:
The farmer thus in rapture counts his steeds,
And deals to each his part of winter's hay,
Till spring renews the grass, and gives returning May.
Where will not thirst of treacherous gold approach,
Since here, even here, it holds its wide domain!
From the warm ^it who rolls in gilded coach,
To the dull carter, whistling over the plain,
Does Plutus, god of shining lucre, reign.
Happy, thrice happy are the instructed few,
On whom fell Want never lays her harpy claws,
But, far retired from 'midst the toiling crew,
Live in observance of wise Nature's laws,
And learn from her to trace the great Eternal Cause.
WRITTEN AT SEA, IN A HEAVY GALE.
BY CAPT. PHILIP FRENEAU.
HAPPY the man who, safe on shore,
Now trims, at home, his evening fire;
Unmoved he hears the tempest roar,
That on the tufted groves expire;
Alas! on us they doubly fall,
Our feeble bark must bear them all.
Now to their haunts the birds retreat,
The squirrel seeks his hollow tree,
Wolves in their shaded caverns meet,
All, all are blessed but wretched we --
For, doomed a stranger to repose,
No rest the unsettled ocean knows.
Whilst over the dark abyss we roam,
Perhaps whatever the pilots say,
We saw the sun's descending gloom,
No more to see the rising ray;
But buried low, by far too deep,
On coral beds unpitied sleep!
But what a strange uncoasted strand
Is that where death permits no day,
No charts we have to mark that land,
No compass to direct the way!
What pilot shall explore that realm,
What new Columbus take the helm!
While death and darkness both surround,
And tempests rage with lawless power,
Of friendship's voice I hear no sound,
No comfort in this dreadful hour --
What friendship can in tempests be,
What comforts on this angry sea!
The barque accustomed to obey,
No more the trembling pilots guide,
Alone she gropes her trackless way,
While mountains burst on every side.
Thus skill and science both must fall,
And ruin is the lot of all.
TO ELLA. This, and the succeeding Poems, signed BIRTHA, are extracted from the
Gazette of the United States; where they form part of a poetical
Correspondence, carried on under the signatures of ELLA and BIRTHA. We have
selected the following Poems as being most correct, and most worthy of
preservation; especially as they are now offered to the public with the
author's corrections.

AH! vainly Ella, do I hear
Thy lute complain, in notes so clear,
As would sedu^e an angel's ear;
That bids me ch^ck the song of praise,
And give to other themes, my lays.
To fierce disease and grief a prey,
In pain I pass the lingering day.
No more I raise the sprightly strain,
Or warble the melodious song,
That filled the breast with envied pain,
And could the joys of life prolong.
Now, when the glowing orb of day,
Has sunk beneath the western wave;
With melancholy heart I stray
To hear the stream his border lave.
Or like some pilgrim press the yielding grass,
And wet my sandals with the nightly dew,
A sprig of laurel breaking as I pass,
To thee I say the honoring branch is due.
My dangerous course along the vale I take,
Beneath the hanging rock, that seems to shake
With every blast, and threatens on my head
Its crushing weight to roll;
But my undaunted soul,
Enjoys the scene, nor feels the chill of terror spread.
Now, near a cavern dark, and wild,
With folded arms I stand,
Like melancholy's gloomy child;
I heave the swelling sigh;
Upon the passing gale;
While from my ever-streaming eye;
Adown my cheeks, so wan and pale,
The tears incessant drop upon my hand.
There I hear the moping owl,
His dismal whoopings roll,
Upon the heavy ear of night,
In sounds that would thy soul affright.
But oh! my bursting heart!
So tortured by the fang of grief,
In other scenes would seek relief:
On fancy's rapid wing I Would dart
Where Horror with his staring eye,
And upright hair,
Sits gazing on the fiery sky,
When sulphurous lightnings fly,
And swell the soul to wild despair.
Where the vexed wave with mad'ning roar,
Rolls thundering on the craggy shore,
And aims with every dreadful shock,
To burst apart the flinty rock;
When still like wretched man! in vain
He strives his purpose to obtain;
Mad to despair, he flies again
And clamours to his parent main.
BIRTHA.
MAY 21, 1791.
TO ELLA.
HARK! while I sound my trembling shell,
And bid the nymph, sweet Echo tell;
Where on her velvet couch she lies,
Hid from the gairish burning skies;
How the soul-enlivening sound
Of thy enchanting lyre,
Was borne on Ether's waves around,
From each soft-speaking wire.
'Twas when beside the wizard stream,
I saw the sun's last golden beam,
With yellow tip the aspiring heads,
Of time-contending oaks, the king of shades!
I saw the night flies buzzing round,
I heard the beetle's humming sound:
My soul to sober thought inclined,
Thus ran the current of my mind.
No longer now my cheeks disclose,
The beauty of the budding rose;
No longer, as in former days,
I joy, the sprightly laugh to raise.
O! then each lovely, summer's night,
'Twas my enraptured soul's delight,
To tread the lonely silent vale,
And "drink the spirit of the gale:"
Or when the cloudless moon on high,
Beamed forth her radiance from the sky:
To wander over the airy hill,
Where pattering falls the lucid rill;
And see the wild flowers shining bright,
Crowned with the tears of weeping night.
But O! the wondrous change!
Now, it delights me not to range,
The fields and valleys, bright and gay,
With beauties of the laughing May.
When the shrill spirits of the coming storm,
Their shrieks of terror pour along the wind;
And fiercer raging all the grove deform,
The branches tear, and shatter down the rind:
When heaven's bright fires descending from on high,
Flash awful day along the gloomy sky;
And from their dwellings the hoarse thunders roar,
And dusky torrents down the valleys pour:
It Is then my soul enjoys the dreadful hour,
And bows, my God! in reverence to thy power.
'Twas thus I mused, when borne along the air,
Thy heavenly notes came trembling on my ear;
Sweet as the gentlest showers
Of spring, descending on the flowers,
When murmuring Zephyr sinks to rest,
Soft-sighing on the lily's breast.
Ah! would thou with thy arm sustain
My wearied form, and soothe my pain?
And would thou all the lingering Eve,
With thy soft sounds my soul relieve?
And have thou learned the healing charm,
The power to bid the tyrant Sickness fly?
O! hither come, extend thy potent arm,
And bid the beam of Hope stand sparkling in my eye!
Ah! now, even now, this very hour,
I confess thy magic power!
Charmed with thy notes divine,
No more my troubled soul,
Over scenes of horror loves to brood,
No more my freezing blood,
In lazy tides does roll,
Bright in my eye the tears of rapture shine,
Through all my nerves I feel a tremor run,
Now cold as Zembla's snow, now fervid as the sun.
O! may thy generous sympathising heart,
Never feel the anguish of affliction's dart;
May streams of earthly treasure on thee flow,
That thou, the pure celestial joy may know,
To bid the beggar smile, and cheer his house of woe.
BIRTHA.
JUNE 4, 1791.
TO ELLA.
AGAIN thy sweetly warbled strain,
Thou leader of the choral train;
Again thy sweeping harp I hear,
That long has charmed my ravished ear.
New vigor to my soul thy words impart,
With softer pleasures touch thy wounded heart*
The moral lore that flows along thy line,
Might well befit a PLINY to rehearse;
The bold descriptive beauties of thy Verse,
Would bright on TITIAN's glowing canvas shine.
When closed the blazing eye of day,
And on my downy couch I lay,
Deep musing on thy moral lore;
The God of Sleep around me threw
His mantle dipped in slumbrous dew;
And thus arose my fervent prayer --
O! thou from whom creation sprung!
O! send from thy bright realms above,
Some saint to cheer me with thy love,
And bid me raise the rapturous song --
For I have heard thy spirits who on high
Possess the plains of yon cerulean sky;
Have often, in pity to the mortal race,
Descending closed them in their pure embrace;
And whispering soothing music to their breast,
Charmed all the tempests of the soul to rest --
Scarce had the words escaped my moving tongue,
Yet on my lips the trembling accents hung;
When lo! a form descending from on high,
On silver plumes through yonder orient sky:
Wide flows in circling locks her golden hair,
And plays with every eddying of the air.
Her robes of filmy texture white as snow,
Around her form in graceful foldings flow.
Her bright blue eyes beam forth a gentle light,
And fix and charm at once the gazer's sight.
When near she moved I saw bewitching grace,
And heavenly beauty lighten up her face.
Now by my side upon the earth she stood,
Her quickened glance warmed all my chilly blood.
High waving in the air a sky-blue wand,
She bade me follow to yon lofty land;
The path she led, with joyous heart I flew,
'Till near the high and verdant hill I drew;
Then turning round she took my trembling hand,
And waved again her bright cerulean wand:
Soft as the sound of some angelic lute,
Sweet as the breath of Orpheus' mellow flute.
Her words in rapturous warblings poured along,
And thrilled my trembling soul with heavenly song.
Behold! she said, that lovely country round,
With nature's richest gifts and beauty crowned;
There purest joy flows through the circling year,
The happy people know no pain, nor fear;
Their queen I am, from realms of light I came,
Fair virtue's offspring, blue-eyed Hope my name."
She ceased; then rose before my ravished sight,
Enchanting scenes in nature's beauty bright;
Here spreads a wide and ever verdant plain,
And waves the yellow life-supporting grain:
There grandly rise the proud aspiring hills,
Between whose rocky chinks slide down the rills.
Here in majestic beauty towering high,
Shoot verdant groves toward the cloudless sky;
The feathered warblers hop from spray to spray,
And hold their tuneful strife till closing day;
Then pours the plaintive Nightingale her notes,
And all night long her melting music floats --
Along the walks of those ever blooming bowers,
Forever spring new crops of fragrant flowers.
The pristine colors of the sun are seen
With countless changes waving over the green --
Rich sculptured figures formed of blazing gold,
Attract the eye, and firm the senses hold --
Here Dove-like Innocence, engaged in play,
With frolic lambs prolongs the happy day;
There Charity throws forth her copious store,
Till the glad suppliants cease to ask for more:
Here, with celestial glory in her eye,
Mild Faith with firmness gazes on the sky,
And Adoration pours her song of praise,
While tears of rapture wander down her face.
There over white curling lakes the nodding trees,
Wave slowly to the gentle passing breeze;
And wildly-grand around deep rocky caves
Return the Echo of the dashing waves.
Here crystal mountains shooting to the sky,
With the bright sun in splendour seem to vie;
Where rise the rugged rocks an awful height!
The sheeting torrent holds my wandering sight:
From steep to steep down dash with thundering roar
The mad'ning waves, and foam along the shore.
"Lo said the maid there bursting from the ground,
A bubbling fountain casts its waters round;
And see behind, where opens yonder bower,
The virtuous souls enjoy the rapturous hour:
There many a harp, and many a breathing flute
Is heard; responding sounds the silver lute;
Whilst ravished with the melody of sound
The vocal chorus pour their songs around.
Thus all the blessed their happy days employ,
And each contributes to the other's joy;
Their grateful incense rises up to heaven,
And for their praise a double joy is given:
Know thou, she said, whoever pursues the path
That leads to Virtue and unwavering Faith,
Shall hail me Queen! and where they dwell shall rise
A scene like this, enchanting to their eyes;
The spheres shall warble music in their ear,
And all creation harmony appear."
Now ceased her voice, she clapped her silver wings,
And rising to the sky through Either sings.
BIRTHA.
JULY 2, 1791.
THE Lord of light has journey'd down the sky,
And bathed his coursers in the foaming wave;
The twinkling star of Even too, hastes to lave
Her silver form, and vanish from my eye.
Now dusky twilight flings her sombre shade,
Over the bright beauties of the silent vale;
The aspin trembles not, the verdant blade
No longer nodding answers to the gale.
Come sweet Reflection! hither pensive maid!
Direct thy wandering steps, and on this stone,
Worn by no traveller's feet, with moss o'ergrown,
Repose with me in solitude's deep shade.
Then shall I know the height of human bliss,
And taste the joy of other worlds in this.
BIRTHA.
MAY 25th, 1791.
END OF SELECTED POETRY.
ORIGINAL POETRY.
AN ELEGY, WRITTEN IN FEBRUARY 1791.
BY MR. RICHARD ALSOP.
DARK is the hour and lone, over icy plains
The wandering meteors gleam a deadly light;
Wild howls the blast amid descending rains,
And forms funereal flit along the night.
Retired from scenes where Pleasure's airy wand
Gilds the light moments with delusive joy,
Where Mirth ex^lting leads her festive band,
Far other scene^ my pensive soul employ.
The clouds of death that gloom the baleful year,
The days of joy, alas, so lately fled!
While Friendship bids its sympathetic tear
Stream in remembrance of the much-loved dead.
My friend, but now, of every bliss possessed
That love connubial can on man bestow,
When mutual wishes warm the mutual breast;
Behold the prey of life consuming woe.
Of late, how fair the beauteous prospect showed,
How lovely glittering in the morning's eye;
But long ere noon, like April's painted cloud,
Or hues that tinge the summer's evening sky,
The fairy hopes that raptured Fancy drew,
The dream of future bliss that shone so bright,
On Fate's swift pinions vanished from the view,
And sunk in shadows of eternal night. --
What notes of woe in mournful cadence swell
Along the Western breeze from climes afar,
Mixed with the dying groan, the savage yell,
And all the horrid dissonance of war!
And lo! mid gliding specter dimly seen,
Pale as the mists that Autumn's car surround,
A form superior lifts his pensive mien,
While on his bosom glares the shadowy wound.
"Behold," he cries, "the band who lately bled,
"Mid western wilds in glorious conflict slain;
"While recreant troops in pale confusion fled,
"Ignobly left unburied on the plain." --
Far opes the view, sublime in savage pride
A wild unbounded frowns on Fancy's eye;
Tall rise the trees, and over savannahs wide
The rank grass trembles to the breeze on nigh.
With torrent sweep, amid a night of woods
Where scarce the sun a livid glimmering lends,
A blood-stained river rolls his foaming floods,
And over the plains in wild meanders bends.
Lo! this the scene where War, with bloody hand,
Waved his red standard over the carnag'd ground;
Where wild-eyed Horror led the tawny band,
And fell the brave with dear-bought laurels crown'
Here, grim with gore, beneath the inclement sky,
Smote by the parching ray and driving rain,
The mangled forms of breathless warriors lie,
All pale extended on the lonely plain.
In slaughtered heaps, around promiscuous cast,
Mid savage chiefs Columbia's sons are spread,
While, breathed from polar snows, the northern blast
Shakes its cold pinions over the unburied dead.
For them no more shall morning gild the sky,
No more shall May unveil her radiant charms,
No more shall Joy illume the sparkling eye,
Or Glory's voice excite the soul to arms.
Near yon gray rock by withering leaves concealed,
Amyntor lies, benevolent and brave;
Whose duteous hand a father's age upheld,
And smoothed his dreary passage to the grave.
Not far, a corse distinguished over the rest,
Of noble stature and heroic mien;
Deep opes the wound that g^^'d his manly breast,
And his pale features wear a smile serene.
Too well alas! that much loved form I know,
Those features pale with gory dust overspread,
Over whom has Friendship mourned in bitterest woe,
For whom Affection's tenderest tears are shed.
Still, still in Fancy's view recurs the day
When war's black demons poured their hideous yell,
When left exposed to savage rage a prey,
Thy gallant band beside their leader f^ll.
Oppressed with toil, while countless foes surround,
Thy arm, thy voice, the fainting troop inspired;
And even when sinking with the deadly wound,
Thy latest breath their martial ardor fired.
Lamented Hero, far from weeping friends!
No funeral honors to thy corse were paid,
And no memorial over thy grave extends
To mark the lonely spot where low you are laid.
Yet what avails to please the senseless clay,
"The trophied tomb," the monumental bust,
Or recks the spirit mid the realms of day,
The empty rites attendant on its dust.
A fairer wreath shall friendship's hand bestow,
A fairer tribute shall thy shade receive,
Than all the idle pageantry of woe,
Than all its pompous monuments can give.
Long, long shall Memory's ardent eye recall
Thy worth, thy milder virtues to her view;
Thy Country long lament her hero's fall,
And over thee Fame her brightest laurels strew.
Over the lone spot where rests thy mouldering form,
Shall opening spring her mildest breezes wave;
And Flora's hand with every fragrant charm
Deck the soft turf that forms thy verdant grove.
There the Wild-Rose in earliest pride shall bloom,
There the Magnolia's gorgeous flowers unfold,
The purple Violet shed its sweet perfume,
And beauteous Meadia wave her plumes of gold.
Rest much-loved Chief with thy J^r -- a blessed,
Amid yon realms of light, yon seats of joy,
Where hushed is sorrow in perpetual rest,
And pleasure smiles unconscious of alloy.
From that calm shore with pitying eye survey
The varying schemes of man, the busy strife,
The vain pursuits that fill his "little day,"
And toss with ceaseless storms the sea of life.
While seraphs, bending from their thrones of gold,
With songs of triumph hymn thy soul to peace;
And to thy raptured eye, with smiles, unsold
The happy mansions of eternal bliss.
VERSIFICATION OF A PASSAGE FROM THE FIFTH BOOK OF OSSIAN'S TEMORA. BY THE SAME.
THE hosts like two black ridges stood,
On either side wild Lubar's stream;
Here Foldath frowned a darkened cloud,
There Fillan shone a brightening beam.
Their long spears glittering in the wave,
Each hero poured his voice afar;
Gaul struck the shield, the signal gave,
At once both armies plunged in war.
Steel poured its flashing gleam on steel;
The fields two rushing torrents glow,
That whitening foam, in mingled swell,
Over the dark rock's projecting brow.
He comes, with fame immortal crowned,
His faulchion lays the heroes low;
Death rides the shadowy blasts around;
Thy paths O Fillan warriors strew!
Between two rocks in fissures rent,
Brave Rothmar stood, the warrior's pride;
Two aged oaks, that winds had bent,
Their branches spread on either side.
Silent he shades his friends in flight,
While his dark eyes on Fillan roll;
Fingal beheld the approaching fight,
And all the father filled his soul.
As falls the stone of Loda, hurled
From trembling Drumanard's high cliff,
When angry spirits rock the world;
So Rothmar fell, blue-shielded chief.
Young Culmin's friend'y steps are near,
His eye the bursting tear overflows;
Wrathful he cuts the empty air,
Ere yet with Fillan's mix his blows.
He first with Rothmar bent the bow,
Along his own blue-winding streams;
And marked the dwelling of the roe,
As shone the fern with morning beam^.
"Why Youth would thou provoke the might
Of that bright beam, that wasting fire?
Unequal were your sires in fight;
Retire, Culalluins's son retire!"
Lone in her hall, his mother casts
Her eyes over Strutha's winding streams;
Wrapped in a whirlwind's eddying blasts,
Her son's thin spectre faintly gleams.
His dogs stand howling on the plain,
Red his suspended shield with gore;
"And is my fair-hair'd hero slain?
Pale does he lie on Ullin's shore?"
As pierced in secret lies a hind,
Panting her wonted streams beside;
The hunter views her feet of wind;
Culalluin's son thus Fillan eyed.
In a small stream his hair is rolled,
His blood slow wanders over his shield;
Still grasps his hand, with dying hold,
The sword that failed in danger's field.
"You Are fallen ere thy fame was known,"
Said Fillan, musing over the slain;
"Elate, in hopes of thy renown,
Thy father sent thee to the plain.
Perhaps, his streams gray bending over,
His dim eyes seek thee on the heath;
In vain, -- for ah! returns no more,
His son extended pale in death."
Wide over the heath, in terror lost,
The flight of Erin Fillan poured;
But, man on man, falls Morven's host,
Before the rage of Foldath's sword.
Undaunted, Dermid meets his course;
The sons of Cona wake the fight;
But cleft his shield, by Foldath's force,
And far is spread his people's flight.
The exulting foe with haughty boast, --
"Go Malthos, go to Erin's lord;
And bid him guard blue ocean's coast,
Lest Morven's king escape my sword.
For cold must Fingal lie in gore,
Near some low fen his tomb shall rise
Without a song, while hovering over,
Half hid in mist, his spirit flies."
In darkening doubt stood Malthos bold,
He knew the boaster's heart of pride;
Around his gloomy eyes he rolled,
And plunged in war with sullen stride.
In Clono's narrow vale, two trees
Dark-bending over the rolling flood,
Shook their broad branches to the breeze;
There Duthno's son in silence stood.
The blood is streaming from his thigh;
A rock sustains his ashen spear;
His bossy shield lies broken nigh;
"Why Dermid, why that bursting tear?"
"I hear the battle roar afar,
Alone my people on the plain;
No shield is mine to stem the war,
And weak and slow my steps of pain.
Shall Foldath then prevail in fight?
Ere that in death shall Dermid lie;
Again stern chief I Will prove thy might,
Again thy fiercest rage defy."
He seized his spear the strife to join,
When Morni's son before him stood;
"Stay Dermid stay, no shield is thine,
Thy trembling steps are marked with blood."
"Chief of Strumon give thy shield,
Often has it stemmed the battle's force;
This arm may yet sustain the field,
May yet repel yon boaster's course.
Behold that stone, with moss overspread,
Where spires the waving grass so high;
There low a kindred chief is laid --
And there in night let Dermid lie."
Slowly he rose the hill's tall brow,
And viewed the troubled field of death;
The gleaming ranks of fight below,
Disjoined, and broken over the heath.
As fires at distance, seem by night
Now lost in smoke, in darkness drowned,
Now rear on high their streams of light,
As cease or blow the winds around;
So met the battle from afar
Broad-shielded Dermid's eager eye.
Amidst the varying scene of war
The chief of Morna towers on high;
Like some black ship, in lofty pride,
Dark rider of the billowy plain;
Wide sporting over the echoing tide,
When winter rules the stormy main.
Dermid with rage beheld his course,
He rushed to meet the gloomy foe;
But fails the wounded hero's force,
And tears of pride his eyes overflow.
He sounded thrice his bossy shield,
And thrice on Foldath called aloud;
Foldath with joy the chief beheld,
And lifted high his spear of blood.
As some vast rock whose rugged side
Is marked with streams of many a storm;
So looked, with wandering blood bedyed
The gloomy chief of Morna's form.
Each host, appalled, in terror flies,
From the contending fierce of Kings.
At once their gleaming points arise,
With speed of lightning Fillan springs.
The haughty foe, with trembling, viewed,
That dazzling beam of early fame;
That swift, as issuing from a cloud,
To save the wounded hero came.
In sounding strife as on the gale
Two broad-wing'd eagles fierce contend;
So, on Moilena's far-spread vale,
The chiefs in gloomy battle bend.
Low on his shield is Foldath laid,
Pierced by the youthful hero's spear;
Nor over the fallen Fillan staid,
But onward rolled the storm of war.
Malthos beheld the warrior low,
Low laid on Lubar's winding shore;
His bosom melts in generous woe,
And hatred fills his soul no more.
He seemed a rock, down whose gray sides
The desert waters trickling stray;
When slow the sailing mist divides,
And gives its blasted trees to day.
Thus to the dying chief he said, --
"Say shall thy mossy stone ascend,
Where Ullin's dark-green hills are spread,
Or Morna's woody vales extend?
There, where the sun looks forth serene,
On blue Dalrutho's bordering glades;
Fair Dardulena's steps are seen,
Thy daughter, pride of Erin's maids."
"Rememberest thou," the chief replied,
"The maid, because no son is mine,
To roll the battle's deathful tide,
And in revenge in arms to shine?
I am revenged, for not in vain
Has shone the lightning of my spear.
Amidst the tombs ot those I Have slain
My narrow house, O Malthos! rear.
Often shall I leave my airy fold,
To hail the spot where low they lie;
When, spread around me, I behold,
The rank grass of their graves on high."
His spirit rushed on eddying winds,
And came to Dardulena's dream;
As, wearied with the chase of hinds,
She slept by blue Dulrutho's stream.
Her bow unstrung is near her placed,
The breezes fold her raven hair;
Each charm of youthful beauty graced
The love of chiefs, the blue-eyed fair.
From the dark skirts of Morna's wood,
Her father's ghost, pale bending, gleam'd;
At times his bloody form he showed,
Then hid in shrouding vapors seemed.
She rose in tears, her soul divined
The chief in death was lowly laid;
To her a beam of light he shined.
When folded in his darkest shade.
HABAKKUK, CHAP. III. BY THE SAME.
THE Lord of Hosts from Teman came,
From Paran's mount the Almighty God, --
The heavens his glory wide proclaim,
And bent the earth beneath his nod.
As light his awful brightness showed, --
There was the hiding of his power;
On burning coals Jehovah trod,
Dire moved the pestilence before.
He stood, and measured earth and air,
He looked, apart the nations fled,
The eternal mountains scattered were,
And hills perpetual bowed the head.
I saw when Midian's curtains shook,
I saw pale Cushan's tents in woe;
Say, did the streams thy wrath provoke?
Against them did thine anger glow?
Did ever the deep his God displease,
That on thy horses thou did ride?
Thy path was through the troubled seas,
In heaps rolled back the astonished tide.
The mountains saw, they trembling shook,
The overflowing waters passed by,
The mighty deep in horror spoke,
And lifted up his hands on high.
The rolling stars their courses stayed,
The sun and moon stood still in fear;
Before thine arrows blaze they fled,
Before the lightning of thy spear.
With rivers did thou cleave the earth,
And naked made thy dreadful bow;
Thou marched in indignation forth,
And laid in dust the heathen low:
Thou wentest forth on Israel's side,
To save from death thy chosen race;
Thy sword has smote the heathen's pride,
And everlasting are thy ways.
Although the fig tree shall not shoot,
Nor grape the withering vine shall yield,
The olive shall withhold her fruit,
And blasted be the herbag'd field;
Though in the fold the flock shall die,
And in the stall no herd shall be,
Yet on the Lord will I rely,
Yet, O my God! will joy in thee.
RUNIC POETRY. TWILIGHT OF THE GODS; OR DESTRUCTION OF THE WORLD. FROM THE
EDDA, A SYSTEM OF ANCIENT SCANDINAVIAN MYTHOLOGY. BY THE SAME.
A TIME shall come, a barbarous time,
Dark shadowed over with every crime,
When ties of kin shall cease to bind,
In love's soft bands, the human mind:
When sons their fathers' blood shall pour,
And brother blush with brother's gore:
When, lost to every tender care,
Not one his dearest friend shall spare;
And man, oppressed with bitterest woes,
Wish the sad scene of life to close.
Winter, clad in wild array,
Then shall hold his direst sway;
The sun withdraw his golden light,
And veil the world in darkest night;
The winds with wildest rage contend;
The snow in ceaseless storms descend;
The earth in icy fetters bound;
And desolation glare around.
Uncherish'd by one genial ray,
Three such winters pass away.
Portents dire shall then succeed;
The Monsters from their chains be freed:
Dreadful, in his fiery car,
Giant Rymer Rymer -- One of those Giants who, according to the Edda, are in
continual enmity with the Gods, and shall, in cooperation with the Evil Genii,
eventually overpower them.
rush to war;
The Serpent The Great Serpent -- or Serpent of Midgard, is said to have been
cast by the Gods into the ocean; where he soon became of such an enormous size
as to encircle the earth. -- Midgard -- the Residence, or Fortress of the
Deities. --
roll his hideous train
Deep beneath the billowy main,
Whose lifted waters, wildly swelled,
Wide over the earth shall be impelled;
In thousands men resign their breath,
And throng the gloomy courts of death;
His prey the screaming eagle seek,
And tear the dead with gory beak;
The Earth in dread convul^ions heave;
Its wonted course the river leave;
The tottering mountain headlong borne,
From its deep base resistless torn;
Rent from their roots, whole forests fall;
And one vast ruin spread over all.
Floating on the whelming tides,
Fate's black Ship The Ship of the Gods, or of Fate, in which the Host of the
Evil Genii, etc. arrives.
in triumph rides;
Perfidious Look Look, -- the Evil Being: in the highest degree malicious and
deceitful.
directs her course,
Leader of the giant force.
Fenris Fenris, -- or the Wolf, -- of all the others a monster most dreaded by
the Gods; who by stratagem confined him with a magic chain; which he breaks at
the dissolution of nature.
bursts his iron chain;
Naught his fury can restrain;
His nostrils sparkling flames expire;
His eye balls flash terrific fire;
Urged by rage, by vengeance driven,
He rends the beauteous sun from heaven:
The Serpent floods of venom pours
Over the wide sea and circling shores;
Rocks rush on rocks, together hurled;
Destruction triumphs over the world;
From the torn concave of the sky,
The affrighted stars confusedly fly;
The vaults of heaven in sunder rend;
The Evil Genii swift ascend;
Poured from the south, in terrors dire,
Before them moves the Prince of Fire,
Surtur Surtur, -- the destroying Principle; supposed to reside in the South,
in the flaming Gulf of Muspelsheim; leader of the Evil Genii, who are to
destroy the Universe by Fire.
the Black, in flames arrayed --
Shines like the sun his waving blade,
The sign of death; with him their might
The Serpent, Fenris, Look, unite;
Succeeds a death-determined host,
The hideous Giants of the Frost.
His crooked trumpet Heimdall Heimdall, -- the Sentinel of Heaven.
takes,
With potent breath the blast awakes;
Far heard through heaven's remotest bound,
Pours the shrill clangor of the sound;
Loud crows (...) Cock, the bird divine,
Whose crests in golden glory shine;
Hoarse from beneath, with dismal cries,
The Herald black of death replies;
Trembles the sacred Ash The Sacred Ash of Ydrasil, under which the Council of
the Deities is held.
with dread,
And groaning shakes its lofty head;
All nature's filled with wild affright;
The Gods, convened, prepare for fight.
A midday sun is Odin Odin, the first and most powerful of all the Gods.
bold,
Far beaming in his arms of gold;
Against the Wolf Fenris.
he bends his course,
And Frey Frey, -- a Deity represented as clothed in white; and supposed to
preside over the productions of the earth.
encounters Surturs's force.
The enormous serpent Thor Thor, -- the first of the sons of Odin, and
strongest of the Gods; who presides over the thunder; and whose office it is to
protect the injured and oppressed.
assails;
The God's resistless might prevails;
But short his joy, he sinks in death,
From the Monster's venomed breath.
By each others falchions slain,
Look and Heimdall press the plain.
The snow-white God "The snow-white God," -- Frey.
resigns his life,
By Surtur slain in furious strife.
Rushing from the dark abodes,
Death denouncing to the Gods,
Hideous howls the Dog of night;
He meets with Tyr Tyr, -- a Deity answering to the Roman Mars.
in mortal fight;
Long the contest fierce they wage,
And victims fall of mutual rage.
Goddess, The Goddess Friga, or Freya, -- the Mother of Odin.
weep! thy cares are vain --
Odin falls, by Fenris slain.
Swift to vengeance Vidar Vidar, a Son of Odin.
flies;
By his hand the monster dies:
Wild Destruction, hovering over,
Waves her banner dipped in gore;
O'erpower'd the h^avenly legions fall,
And Death's dark billows close on all.
The gloomy Prince, "The gloomy Prince:" -- Surtur. --
with conquest crowned,
Dreadful scatters flames around;
In one wide conflagration driven,
The raging fires ascend to heaven;
Sinks the world to ruin's power,
And time itself exists no more.
Bursting from existence' grave,
Over the bosom of the wave.
Lo! a newborn World unroll'd,
Far more beauteous than the old,
Smiles adorned with loveliest green;
Spring unfading decks the scene;
The eagles, soaring mid the breeze,
Their fishy prey on mountains seize;
The earth her fruits spontaneous yields;
Rich harvests glad the uncultured fields;
Unknown to grief, to torturing pain,
There eternal pleasures reign.
Then, from seats of orient light,
In divinest glories bright,
Comes forth the great, the all-powerful One, This Being is entirely distinct
from Odin, and the other Gods of the Scandinavian Mythology; who had their
birth soon after the creation of the World, and who perish with it.

Incommunicate, alone, --
Who was ere Time began his race,
Or being filled the vast of space;
And, unchangable, supreme,
Through endless ages is the same.
There a Palace glows, more bright
Than the sun's meridian light,
Where the virtuous shall reside;
And, as pleasure rolls its tide
Undebased by pain's alloy,
Know an eternity of joy.
EXTRACT FROM THE CONQUEST OF SCANDINAVIA; BEING THE INTRODUCTION OF THE FOURTH
BOOK. BY THE SAME.
ODIN having defeated the Scandinavians in several great battles, WOLDOMIR, the
druidical sovereign of Scandinavia, reduced to the utmost distress, obtains the
assistance of GRYMER, Prince of the Saraceni, -- a Scythian Tribe, -- the
hereditary foe of ODIN; and having assembled his forces on an extensive plain,
near the banks of a river, prepares to attack the Enemy, who are encamped on
the opposite shore. -- The present Book commences with the Night preceding the
engagement.

NOW Night, in clouds involved, her mantle drew,
And deepest darkness veiled the etherial blue;
Dire heard afar, with wild and hollow roar,
Hoarse groaned the woods along the rocky shore;
Loaded with vapors dank and drizzling rains,
The chill North-east shrill whistled over the plains;
Pale shone the phantom fires, whose boding light
In tenfold horror vests the storms of night;
And, wildly yelling through the dreary shade,
Shrieked the sad specter of the unburied dead;
Involved in anxious cares, and gloomy thought,
When Mondak's Grymer.
Son the tent ot Ulfo sought.
Ulfo the old, renowned for magic lore,
From Volga's flood to cold Kamschatka's shore;
Amid the gloom of Scythian forests bred,
Where Altai lifts on high his wintry head;
Among a savage race, rapacious, rude,
Wild as the storms that toss the Caspian flood,
As thunder dreadful, bursting from the cloud,
When Night over Altai hangs her sable shroud.
Olaf his sire, in fields of death renowned,
As chief in war, the stern barbarians owned,
Sprung from that race accursed, whose demon sway
The hoary Giants of the Frost obey,
The same stern soul which marked his sires of yore,
The same fell hate to Woden's laws he bore,
The same inspired the son, whose rebel pride
The God derided, and his power defied.
In nature versed, to him each plant was known
That blooms mid Scythia's snows, or Afric's torrid zone;
Each secret power that earth's dark bosom hides,
That rules in ocean, or in air presides.
To him had Grymer sent, over realms afar,
With costly gifts, to win him to the war,
When first imperial Woldomir implored,
In Scandinavia's aid, the hero's sword;
Nor less impelled by envious hate, he came,
Of Odin's glory and of Woden's name.
Intent to solve the dark decrees of fate,
In deep enquiry fixed, the Wizard sat;
When, Grymer entering, from his seat he pressed,
With eager haste, and thus the Chief addressed.
"Say, at this hour, when over the dreary plains,
In all her horrors, Night funereal reigns;
While shrieks of terror on the blast arise,
And the black tempest howls along the skies;
At this untimely hour, what potent cause
Forth from his tent the Prince of Scythia draws?"
"O Sire of magic!" thus the Prince replied, --
"My Shield in battle, and my counsels' guide,
Full well to thee is known what weight of care
Hangs on the vast uncertainty of war;
What anxious fears a leader's peace annoy,
Possess his soul, and every thought employ.
The chief who hopes in glory's walks to shine,
And round his brows the palms of conquest twine,
When war's dark tempest spreads its horrors round,
Not in the bowers of thoughtless Ease is found;
Not on the lap of Sloth reclines his head,
By proud Presumption's flattering glare misled; --
Which often the vainly confident betrays,
And lights to ruin with its phantom blaze; --
But, when the hour of battle hovers near,
Neglects no caution, though he knows no fear.
By cares like these impelled, I hither come,
Of rest neglectful, mid the dreary gloom;
While, wide around, the camp in silence lies,
And slumber seals the wearied soldier's eyes:
For lo! to morrow wakes the rage of fight,
When morning opes the golden gates of light;
To morrow gives my eager arm to dare
This scourge of Scandia's realms, this pest of war;
Gives me, perchance, that first of joys to know,
The joy of vengeance on a hated foe.
For that fell hate, which steeled our sires of yore,
Which dyed so often in blood jaxartes' shore,
That hate my breast with all its rage inspires,
Sublimed, by rival love, to fiercer fires.
Yes! still revenge has set that day aside,
When, scorned my passion, and my suit denied,
Hermanric's daughter gave her heaven of charms,
Detested thought! to Odin's happy arms.
But though my soul delights where Danger rears
His awful crest, amid the strife of spears,
And glows with transport in the fierce alarms,
The shock of battles, and the din of arms;
Though, in comparison, the foe are lost
Mid the vast numbers of our warlike host;
Yet not, in vain security, reclined,
The events of battle fill my anxious mind.
Perchance the Gods, too partial to the foe,
Our strength may wither, and our hopes o'erthrow;
For Odin long has proved their guardian care,
By Woden shielded in the storms of war;
And still the favoring God his aid affords,
And bears him harmless mid descending swords.
How often has Scandia mourned her heroes' doom,
Swept, by that arm, in thousands, to the tomb!
Before his might her hosts have shrunk away,
Like mountain snows before the vernal ray.
Then let the all-conquering force of spells be tried,
And range the Powers of magic on our side;
Bid panic terror hover over their fight,
Chill the pale foe, and turn their steps to flight;
So may thy friend a double triumph prove,
And, with a nation's wrongs, avenge his slighted love."
The monarch ceased, -- the words the wizard took,
While sarcasm smiled contemptuous in his look.
"Dread'st thou that feeble race? Can Grymer's soul
Thus bend to phantom terror's vile control?
Do thoughts like those which little minds debase,
Become the leader of a warlike race?
Thy mighty Woden, and his Gods, at most,
A narrow sway, and power precarious boast.
In time's first dayspring, when as yet the earth
Knew not its place, nor ocean rolled to birth;
Alone one torpid, vast abyss, was seen,
Unclothed with form, undeck'd with cheerful green;
Ere man the breath of first existence drew;
Those sons of Bore the mighty Ymir slew,
By fraud his race confined, usurped the sway
Over the blue mansions of unclouded day.
Yet still in fear their ill-got rule they hold,
Still dread the day, when vengeance uncontrolled
Shall burst its chains, and, in destruction hurled,
A fiery deluge wrap the sinking world.
Then go, and Valhall's feeble Gods despise,
For Powers more mighty in thy aid shall rise; --
Those Powers who over the gloom of night preside,
Live in the storm, and on "the whirlwind ride;" --
Shall whelm in dust the foes presumptuous boast,
And roll dark ruin over their prostrate host."
The Wizard ceased -- with brightening hopes inspired,
The Scythian monarch to his tent retired.
Forth from his camp the dire (...) strayed,
Mid the weird horrors of the mid^ight shade,
Till a lone dell his wandering footsteps found,
Fenced with rough cliffs, with mournful cypress crown'
There stayed his course: with stern, terrific look,
Thrice waved on high, his magic wand he shook;
And thrice he raised the wild funereal yell
That calls the spirits from the abyss of hell.
When, shrilly answering to the yell afar.
Borne on the winds, three female forms appear;
Dire as the hag who, mid the dreams of night,
Pursues the fever'd hectic's trembling flight.
With gestures strange, approach the haggard band,
And nigh the wizard take their silent stand.
Near, in a rock, adown whose rugged side
The lonely waters of the desert glide,
O'ergrown with brambles, opened an ample cave,
Drear as the gloomy mansions of the grave.
Within, the screech-owl made her mournful home,
And birds obscene that hover round the tomb;
Dark, from the moss-grown top, together clung,
Ill-omen'd bats, in torpid clusters, hung;
And over the bottom, with dank leaves bestrow'd,
Crept the black adder, and the bloated toad.
Thither the magic throng repaired, to form
Their spells obscure, and weave the unhallowed charm.
Muttering dire words, thrice strode the wizard round;
Thrice, with his potent wand, he smote the ground;
Deep groans ensued; on wings of circling flame,
Slow-rising from beneath, a Cauldron came;
Blue gleam'd the fires amid the shades of night,
And over the cavern shot a livid light.
Now opened a horrid scene: all black with blood,
The infernal band, prepared for slaughter, stood.
Two beauteous babes, by griffons borne away,
While locked in sleep the hapless mothers lay,
Whose smiles the frozen breast to love might warm,
And even the unsparing wolf to pity charm,
The hags unveiled; and sportive as they played,
Deep in their hearts embrued the murderous blade;
Their dying pangs with smile malignant viewed,
And life's last ebbings in the sanguine flood.
Now, mixed with various herbs of magic power,
In the dark cauldron glows the purple gore:
The Nightshade dire, whose baleful branches wave,
In glooms of horror, over the murderer's grave;
The Manchineel, alluring to the eye,
Where, veiled in beauty, deadliest poisons lie;
The far-sam'd Indian Herb, of power to move
The foes of nature to unite in love,
The serpent race to infant mildness charm,
And the fierce tiger of his rage disarm, --
Known to the tribes that range the trackless wood
Where mad Antonio heaves the headlong flood; --
The BAROMETZ, Tartarian Lamb: -- A plant found in Tartary and the northern
parts of China: It is covered with a very beautiful kind of furze or wool, of a
bright yellow, and in its form has some resemblance to a LAMB, appearing to
stand upon four legs, from so many roots to which it is attached. It is said to
be of a nature so destructive to every other species of vegetables, that none
will live within its vicinity.
Monster plant that blasts Tartaria's heath;
And Upas fatal as the stroke of death:
Boiled the black mass, the associate fiends advance,
And round the Cauldron form the magic dance.
Three times around, in mystic maze they trod,
With hideous gesture, and terrific nod;
While Runic rhymes, and words that freeze the soul,
From their blue lips, in tones of horror, roll.
The wizard raised his voice, the cavern round,
Wild-shuddering, trembled at the fearful sound;
In mute attention stood the haggard throng,
As thus he woke the incantatory song.
From the dreary realms below,
From the dark domains of fear,
From the ghastly seats of woe,
Hear! tremendous Hela, hear!
I.
Dreadful Power! whose awful form
Blackens in the midnight storm;
Glares athwart the lurid skies,
While the sheeted lightening flies;
When the thunder awful roars;
When the earthquake rocks the shores;
Mounted on the wings of air,
Thou rul'st the elemental war.
When Famine brings her sickly train;
When Battle strews the carnag'd plain;
When Pestilence her venomed wand
Waves over the desolated land;
Rush the ocean's whelming tides
Over the foundering vessel's sides;
Then ascends thy voice on high;
Then is heard thy funeral cry;
Then, in horror, do thou rise
On the expiring wretch's eyes.
From the dreary realms below,
From the dark domains of fear,
From the ghastly feats of woe,
Hear! tremendous Hela, hear!
II.
Goddess! whose terrific sway
Nastrande's realms of guilt obey;
Where, amid impervious gloom,
Sullen frowns the serpent Dome;
Rolled beneath the envenomed tide,
Where the sons of sorrow 'bide;
Thee, the mighty Demon host;
Thee, the Giants of the Frost;
Thee, the Genii tribes adore;
Fenris owns thy sovereign power:
And the imperial Prince of Fire,
Surtur, trembles at thine ire.
Thine, the victor's pride to mar;
Thine, to turn the scale of war;
Chiefs and princes at thy call,
From their spheres of glory fall;
Empires are in ruin hurled;
Desolation blasts the world.
From the dreary realms below
From the dark domains of fear,
From the ghastly seats of woe,
Hear! tremendous Hela, hear!
III.
Queen of terror, queen of death!
Thee, we summon from beneath.
From the deep infernal shade;
From the mansion of the dead;
Nieslehm's black, funereal dome;
Hither rise, and hither come!
By the potent Runic rhyme,
Awful, mystic, and sublime;
By the streams that roar below;
By the fable fount of woe;
By the burning gulf of pain,
Muspell's home, and Surtur's reign;
By the Day when, over the world,
Wild confusion shall be hurled,
Rymer mount his fiery car,
Giants, Genii, rush to war,
To vengeance move the Prince of Fire,
And heaven, and earth, in flames expire!
From the dreary realms below,
From the dark domains of fear,
From the ghastly seats of woe,
Hear! tremendous Hela! hear.
He ceased -- the flames withdrew their magic light,
And, clothed in deeper horrors, frowned the night.
At once, an awful stillness paused around,
Hushed were the winds, and mute the tempest's sound,
One deep, portentous, calm over nature spread,
Nor even the aspin's restless foliage played; --
Such the dire calm that glooms Carribean shores
Ere, roused to rage, the fell Tornado roars: --
Not long, for lo! from central earth released,
Shrill through the cavern sighed an hollow blast;
Wild wails of woe, with shrieks of terror joined,
In deathful murmurs groan along the wind;
Peal following peal, hoarse bursts the thunder round;
Redoubling echoes swell the dreadful sound;
Flash the blue lightnings in continual blaze;
One sheet of fire the kindling gloom displays;
And over the vault, with pale, sulphurous ray,
Pour all the horrors of infernal day.
Now heaved the vale around, the cavern'd rock,
The earth, deep trembling, to its center shook,
Wide yawn'd the rending floor, and gave to sight
A chasm tremendous as the gates of night.
Slow from the gulf, mid lightnings faintly seen,
Rose the dread form of Death's terrific Queen;
Of wolfish aspect, and with eyes of flame,
Black Jarnvid's Witch, her fell attendant, came;
Than whom, no monster roams the dark abodes,
More feared by friends, more hated by the Gods.
More frightful, more deformed, than Fancy's power
Pourtrays the demon of the midnight hour,
In hideous majesty, of various hue,
Part sallow pale, and part a livid blue,
A form gigantic, awful Hela frowned;
Her towering head with sable serpents crowned;
Around her waist, in many a volume rolled,
A crimson adder wreathed his poisonous fold;
And over her face, beyond description dread,
A sulphury mist its shrouding mantle spread.
Her voice, the groan of war, the shriek of woe
When sinks the city whelmed in gulphs below,
In tones of thunder, over the cavern broke,
And nature shudder'd as the Demon spoke.
"Presumptuous mortal! that, with mystic strain,
Do summon Hela from the realms of pain,
What cause thus prompts thee rashly to invade
The deep repose of death's eternal shade?
What, from the abodes of never-ending night,
Calls me, reluctant, to the climes of light?"
"Empress supreme! whose wide-extended sway
All nature owns, and earth and hell obey;
The solemn call no trivial wish inspires;
No common cause thy potent aid requires;
The dooms of empires on the issue wait,
And doubtful tremble in the scale of fate.
The glow of morn, on yon extended heath,
Will light the nations to the strife of death.
There Saracinia's sons their force unite
With Scandia's monarch, Woldomir, in fight;
By strength combined, proud Odin to overwhelm,
The fierce invader of the Scandian realm;
By Woden favored with peculiar grace;
Friend of the gods, and odious to thy race.
Then, in the impending fight, thy succor lend,
And over our host thy arm of strength extend;
The hostile bands, protected by thy foes,
With dangers circle, and with ruin close;
With wild dismay their shrinking ranks pervade;
Whelm their pale numbers in the eternal shade;
And wing, with certain aim, the missive dart,
Or point the faulchion, to the leader's heart."
Thus Ulfo spoke -- and Hela thus returned.
"Know, while in primal night creation mourned,
The eternal cause, the great, all-ruling mind,
The various term of human life assigned;
Irrevocably firm, the fixed intent
No power can vary, and no chance prevent.
Marked, by the fates, for years of bloody strife,
Rolls the long flood of Odin's varied life;
Nor is it ours the stern decree to thwart
By open violence, or by covert art*
Yet still the power is left us to annoy,
Whom rigid heaven denies us to destroy;
And, tho of life secure, the hostile chief,
The wretched victim of severest grief,
Shall mourn his arms disgraced, on yonder plain,
His laurels blasted, and his heroes slain."
She ceased; -- in thunder vanishing from view,
The fiends, the cauldron, and the hags withdrew.
Back to the camp the Inchanter sped his way,
Ere, over the east, arose the first faint glimpse of day.
ODE TO CONSCIENCE.
BY THEODORE DWIGHT, ESQUIRE.
HAIL Conscience, faithful inmate of the breast!
Thy smiles can charm to sweetest rest,
Thy frowns can wake the keenest woe,
Without thy aid even heaven would grow
A cheerless void of deep distress,
And angels want the power to bless.
When great Jehovah's voice creation formed,
When worlds unnumber'd sprang to instant birth;
When morning stars to ecstacy were warmed,
And man stood ruler of the boundless earth,
Thou in the realms of light and love,
Did dwell embossom'd with the Etherial Dove.
"Where Guilt shall dare extend her reign,
"And Satan stretch his dark domain,
"There let the tides of horror roll,
"And torture rend the sinking soul."
The GODHEAD spoke, -- Creation round,
Deep trembled to its utmost bound.
Hail mighty Conscience! hail!
When the black deed of guilt is done,
Thou make the quivering wretch turn pale,
And startle at the sun.
When Murder fearless of thy power,
Lifts up the fateful knife,
And in the dark and midnight hour,
Destroys the guiltless life;
High swells thy awful voice:
Awaking at the fearful sound,
The fiends of vengeance gather round;
The villain starts at every noise,
His soul, to judgment summoned, shakes,
His frame convulsed with horror, quakes*
'Till urged to fate by all-resistless fear,
He owns his crime, and dies the victim of despair.
When the quick tide of life swells high,
And Pleasure hourly wantons nigh,
The Skeptic braves thy stern command,
Nor dreads thy executing hand.
But when the powers of life decay,
And sickening nature wastes away,
When Age brings on a lengthening train
Of weakness, dire disease, and pain,
When Death uplifts its horrid form,
And Justice wakes the avenging storm;
Torn with distracting doubts and fears,
Thy terrors thunder in his ears;
Pale specter haunt the shades of night,
Deep blushes meet the morning light, --
Above he sees the tempest lower,
And floods of wrath around him pour, --
Wide yawns beneath the world of woe,
Where waves of burning vengeance flow.
Impelled by conscious guilt he strives to fly,
Far from the light of God's all-searching eye,
And plunging headlong in the midnight shade,
Calls rocks and hills to shield his guilty head;
'Till robbed of Hope, -- life's latest stay, -- Despair
Breathes the faint wishes of unutter'd prayer:
In dread suspense, his last sad refuge fled,
His schemes all frustrate, his delusions dead,
Heaven shut from view, annihilation vain,
He shrinks from life, and flies to endless pain.
Not such thy lot, O man Mr. ADDISON.
divine!
Peace on the bed of death was thine.
Calm with a retrospective view,
Thy mind looked past existence through;
In bright, and regular array,
And blazing on the face of day,
The deeds of virtue stood;
Conscience beheld them as they shone,
Approved and hailed her darling son,
And God pronounced them good.
And when the messenger of death,
Received thy faint expiring breath,
Soft slumbering on the bed of peace,
Thy voice bade every sorrow cease,
While to the world's astonished eye,
Thou shew'd'st with what repose a virtuous man can die.
Hail Conscience! hail the good man's friend!
Thy smiles through life his steps attend;
And on his dread departing day,
Impart a sweet, and gladsome ray,
To cheer his soul, to sooth his dying breath,
To light his pathway through the vale of death,
And open his prospect to awaiting Skies,
Where Faith looks forward with prophetic eyes,
And sees unmoved the moon in bloo^ expire,
The sun in darkness, and the earth on fire,
Stars, planets, systems, into ruin hurled,
And the last trumpet rend a guilty world.
COLOLOO, -- AN INDIAN TALE, Thrown into English Verse.
BY WILLIAM DUNLAP.
COLWALL! the Women cry;
Colwall! the dales resound,
Colwall, the hills reply,
And hollow caves rebound.
Wild shrieks through thickets ring,
Fast flies the dark-brown night:
"Come ye Warriors bring
The Captive taken in fight.
Draw tight the cutting bands!
Bring matches blazing blue!
Now! now! the victim stands
To mighty Colwall due."
With scorn the Captive smiled,
With scorn he eyed the throng,
Then thus his pain beguiled,
With high exulting song.
SONG.
And are these all the means ye know
To give a warrior pain?
Oh give your fires a fiercer glow;
Remember Colwall slain.
My father gloried in his son.
My warriors came from fight,
None staid behind; the scalps we won
Declared our matchless might.
Who has not heard Cololoo's fame?
My nation well ye know, --
And dreadful is the Tiger's name,
And feared by every foe.
Pain does not lie so near the skin,
More burning pine-knots bring!
Cololoo's all at peace within, --
And Logan's fame he will sing.
RECITAL.
Then whilst from every limb the red streams gush,
And round him glows the fire;
Whilst thorns and nails transfix the quivering flesh,
The death song rises higher. --
SONG.
Aged Logan led the fight,
Logan's fame is ever new, --
Logan seized a treacherous White,
His murdered Children rush to view:
"Curses blast thee! pale-faced Savage,
Ruin seize thy ruthless kind,
Trained to rapine, skilled to ravage,
Gain, the God that grasps thy mind.
Now ye red men take your fill,
Give the scalping knife its due,
The red right arm is bare to kill, --
This my children, this to you."
Reeking from the white man's brain,
Lo! he lifts the scalp on high;
"Logan does not wish thee pain,
Fly to death's dark caverns, fly!
See they come! they come to meet us!
Raise the yell that makes them quake,
Say, -- shall puny white men beat us?
Men that every blast can shake?
Men that fear the rushing rain,
Men that fear the clouded sky,
Men that shrink and howl at pain,
Nor know to triumph when they die.
Now ye Tiger tribe be brave,
Think that Logan sees the fight;
Scalps on scalps adorn my cave,
Glad'ning to my children's sight.
Sulfurous smokes obscure the view,
War! the hills and ^ales ^^ply*
Now ye red men, ^ow be (...)!
Ye know to fight! ye dare to die!"
Hand to hand the Warriors ru^^,
Shouts and yells in echos die;
Tom'hawks cleave, and bay'nets ^^sh, --
They fly! they fly! the white (...) fly!
One brave band alone remains,
One alone of all that band,
Every shot and blow sustains
Red like ours his heavy hand.
See they sink, -- he is left alone, --
Still our Warriors stain the f^^lds;
See! he falls, but fighting on
Sits, and still his sword he wields.
Logan seized the brave man's arm,
Lo^ging, looked upon his face;
Logan will not do thee harm,
Though thou art of faithless race.
Logan's sons had been like thee, --
White men shot them from the bush;
The brave shall not be harmed by me, --
He Is dead, -- he is flown, -- and all is hush. --
None thy beauteous corse shall wound;
None thy hairy scalp shall tear;
Thou shall sleep with warriors round,
Thou the dead-mens, feast shall share.
Seize the scalps, and count the slain;
White-men, weep your brothers' woes!
Ease our dying chiefs from pain: --
White-men learn to fear your foes!
So, Logan triumphed over the foe;
Logan's fame was fairly won:
So, Logan laid the white-men low, --
-- But set is Logan's sun. --
Why bring ye not the heated stone
To sear and seam my manly breast?
Why sure the torture is not done!
Such pain Cololoo bears in jest.
RECITAL.
Round his head Idiego hurled
His hatchet keen and good;
Whizzing, fierce the weapon whirled,
And quiver'd in the wood.
Reldor then with sullen stride,
His knife was in his hand,
Advanced, and thus aloud he cried, --
And cut the twisted band.
Reldor takes thee for his son,
Colwall in battle slain,
In many a fight his fame he won,
Nor shrunk from death or pain. --
Silent now the warrior train
Bear the blood-stained chief, --
No more they weep for Colwall slain, --
No more is known of grief. --
ODE TO TIME. This Poem was originally published, in an imperfect state, in No.
20 of the 3d volume of the Gazette of the United States, for July 6th, 1791,
with its present signature. The great alterations which it has since undergone,
and the many important additions now made to it, form a sufficient excuse for
the conduct of the Editors in placing it among the Original Poems.

FULL often the Painter's pencil, often the Bard,
On canvas, or on Fancy's airy scene,
Has shown thee laughable, with grisly beard
Stiff-starting from a peaked chin;
A few white hairs thin-scatter'd round thy head,
Thine eyes turned gray with age;
Thy nose quite shrivelled, like a pointed hook,
Thy visage bearing all a wrinkled wizard look:
Bent down and crooked was thy form,
And tottering on thy weak, lank legs,
Like some slim weed amid the shaking storm:
Thy blood, poor miserable dregs
Of life, crept through each wind-puff'd vein,
Which seemed as though 'twould burst with every strain:
Thy long and dangling arms a scythe sustain,
To top off men as they cut down their grain:
Most laughable indeed! thus to deform
A God in power first, as first in form!
But look ye painters! hear ye bards this truth!
His face shall ever bloom unfading youth.
Bright golden locks adorn his head,
Majestic beauty seems his form;
Wherever he steps, his awful tread
Sounds like the thunder of the storm.
Imperial Rome! once mistress of the world!
Who reared her palaces, her towers on high,
Bade her tall obelisks assail the sky!
In ruin lies, by his strong arm of power hurled.
Some broken arch, or nodding tower,
Falls prone to earth each passing hour;
And often the wary traveller hears the sound
Of some lofty column broke,
By TIME's rudely shattering stroke,
When down it comes loud-crashing on the ground,
And hills and vales, the horrid roars rebound.
Behold yon figure starting on the sight!
His awful brow around,
With palm and laurel bound;
His forceful eye with genius bright,
Seems now in Fancy's view to roll,
And speak the bloody Caesar's warlike soul!
But Caesar! thou art gone!
And TIME shall bid thy statue follow soon.
The spacious Forum where great Tully's voice,
A clear and swelling torrent poured along,
'Till the tumultuous faction checked their murmuring noise,
And mute -- with dumb attention hark -- as to the song
Of Orpheus, did fierce Cerberus of old,
When he with music's tongue his tender story told;
Touched by TIME's destructive, potent wand,
Lies in ruins mouldering on the land.
From Rome the Muse now turns her eagle-eye,
To where the sun burns in the western sky,
Where Niagara loud and strong,
His deep majestic torrent rolls along:
From many a noble stream and (...) ^upplied
The rushing tide,
With rapid force* most awful roars;
While echo swells the solemn sound upon his solitary shores*
But lo! the boiling flood checked by a rocky mound,
It madly foams, and whirling round,
In one stupendous sheet,
From the dizy awful height,
Fierce rushing, headlong thunders to the ground.
The trembling groves, and caves around,
For many a league the dreadful shout resound --
And while the bellowing flood midst craggy rocks below
Boils into foam, above the heaven-depicted bow
In rapture holds the wondering traveller's eye,
And all his senses thrill with heavenly extacy.
But hold my Muse! repress thy airy flight,
Nor give thy quick'ned soul to sweet delight;
For even those haughty rocks, that rear on high
Their shaggy heads, and rend the vaulted sky
With their loud-roaring sounds sublime,
Shall bow beneath the shattering hand of TIME.
Yet waft away! oh! dissipate thy fears,
For now through the deep gloom of future years,
A beauteous scene beneath the western skies,
Resplendent bursts upon my ravished eyes.
Where through uncultur'd wilds Ohio rolls,
And hears the ravenous wolf's terrific howls;
Or sees upon his shores at midnight hour,
The cruel savage exercise his power;
Sees him with a demoniack's joy elate,
Commit the hapless victim to his fate,
And while with grinning rage, the blazing wood
He quenches in the Prisoner's hissing blood,
Hears the shrill shrieks that pierce the distant air,
And freeze the heart of pity with despair:
There TIME's command shall bid those horrors cease,
And wild Ohio smile with scenes of peace.
Where beasts of prey prowl over the desert ground,
Some future youths shall listen to the sound
Of wisdom, flowing from the Sage's tongue,
In tones attractive as the voice of song.
Then shall fair temples, villas, cities rise,
To beam new splendour on the natives' eyes;
The heaven-taught Painter, Sculptor, and the Bard
Shall there in future ages seek reward;
The voice of music warble through the air,
And all the glorious arts of peace appear.
But now again, the Muse prophetic, sighs,
While scenes of future desolation rise.
She sees her City, fair Columbia's pride,
A heap of ruins spreading far and wide:
She sees her streets once beauteous to behold,
Partition'd off, the shepherd flocks to fold;
The crumbling bricks, and separated stone,
By pale-green moss, and scattering fern o'ergrown.
The wiley fox from broken arches peeps,
Through the deserted dome the weasle creeps,
The owl sits whooping on the temple door,
While hops the squalid toad along the floor;
The hissings of the deadly snake she hears,
The warning rattle, trembles in her ears.
Begone delusive fancy! may thy wand
No more deform the beauty of our land!
Be unprophetic all thy gloomy views,
The airy offspring of the weeping Muse --
But all too true alas! thy words may prove,
When TIME's destructive power shall over their beauties move!
Ere thrice ten times the God of day,
Has drove his flaming, annual Car,
Adown the rosy west;
My slender frame of clay,
With TIMe and fierce disease at war
May moulder into dust:
These grief-strung nerves of mine may cease to mov^
In sad vibrations to the voice of Love;
With many a hapless Bard whose tender breast
Now knows no more the goading thrust
Of pride, or penury his nerves of feeling tear.
But hold! ah hold thy lifted hand!
Nor lowly bow,
Beneath thy awful blow
The Father of Columbia's favored land:
Oh spare! the glorious Patriot spare!
Nor give the stroke of fate,
Until his equal shall appear
To fill with equal dignity the lofty chair of state.
BIRTHA.
Philadelphia, July 1791.
AN ODE, ADDRESSED TO MISS ****.
BY THE LATE REV. JOSEPH HOW, OF BOSTON.
NEVER did parting Youth feel more
Than I, fair Maid, when from the shore
Thy vessel sailed away;
And can not then my prayers prevail,
Nor love, nor vows, nor tears, avail,
Nor aught procure thy stay?
Was it for this that I so long
Listened, to Fortune's siren song
Listened with rapturous joy?
Did she, for this, inspire my heart,
With hopes that we should never part,
And thus these hopes destroy?
Amid the much-admiring crowd,
While thus I sighed my griefs aloud,
I scarce refrained to speak;
Shame held my tongue, while from my eye
The pearly drops, full plenteously,
Stole trickling down my cheek.
Thus, near fair Tibur's silver flood,
The Roman Bard, gay Horace, stood,
And saw Galatea sail;
And thrice he warned her, over, and over,
And told the fates Europa bore,
In hopes he might avail.
In hopes he might avail to move
The fixed purpose of his love,
From such a dangerous choice.
But all in vain, like me, he tried,
Galatea still did firm abide,
Deaf to his moving voice.
"Then go, if naught," the Bard rejoined, --
"Can move the purpose of thy mind,
"Go, and may blessings follow thee;
"Let every gentle gale attend,
"Let every wave thy voyage befriend,
"But think, ah think! of me."
Nor less to heaven did I prefer,
For thy dear sake, my pious prayer.
O winds, O waves, agree!
Winds gently blow, waves softly flow,
Ship move with care, for thou do bear
The better part of me.
And think, and think, I also said --
On all the vows which we have made,
On all those charming scenes,
Which once, with glee, we passed away,
Pleased in each other, night and day,
Nor envied kings and queens.
MESSAGE OF MORDECAI TO ESTHER. FROM A MANUSCRIPT POEM. BOOK II, -- THE
CONCLUSION.
BY TIMOTHY DWIGHT, D. D.
THOU know, O Esther! from thy infant years,
To rear thy form, to nurse thy opening mind,
To teach thee every virtue, every truth,
To form thee finished, lovely, great, and wise,
Was all my care supreme. Friendless, alone,
An orphan scarcely budded, well thou know
I found thee; as a darling flower (the rose,
That blooms in Sharon, or at Hermon's foot
The lilly of the vale) from midst the wild,
With every care removed thee to my field,
And saw thee rise, and bloom, and send abroad
A fragrance, richer than the Arabian gale.
Why all adorned with beauty's living bloom,
In form as some young Virtue of the skies,
Of tincture died in health's immortal stream,
Of eye resplendent, as the morning sun
Looks through the cloud's fair opening, and of grace,
Where heaven was pleased to move in mortal guise;
Why formed with soul, superior to thy kind,
With thoughts expanding through the world's wide round,
And pinioned to the skies; with hardy mind,
Patient and daring, as the hero stands
Upon the deadly and fierce flaming breach,
Serene while Death walks onward; yet more soft
Than the pleased infant smiles the savage dumb;
Why all accomplished, and why angel all,
I pondered long, and now from Heaven I learn.
This mighty hour the Eye Omniscient marked,
While fair, beneath his forming hand, uprose
Thy varied excellence. For this Heaven gave
Thy virtue, gift supreme, that virtue crowned
With wisdom's power; that wisdoms clothed divine
With beauty's angel form; that form around
Diffused the light of Heaven; and all adorned
With grace and sweetness, dignity and love.
On that proud day, when, from an hundred realms
Summoned, came many a lord, and chief, and king,
Magnificent, to grace the monarch's feast,
And all the pomp of Persia round him spread;
When Vashti's insolence, beyond all thought,
Her presence to the illustrious train refused;
When, taught by Memucan he wisely bade
The haughty fair one wear the crown no more;
Even then a field I saw, by Heaven outspread,
To give thy virtue scope, and rich reward.
Pondering, I brought thee to the eunuchs' Prince;
Amazed, amid all Persia's beauteous maids,
Thee, thee alone he gazed. Convinced, I knew
The crown reserved for thee. With no surprise,
I saw thee lifted to the world's great throne:
'Twas thus the Skies decreed. But, O blessed fair!
Not for thyself the Heavens thy beauty gave,
Thy grace, thy wisdom; nor, for thee alone,
Did Mordecai uprear thy precious bloom.
Heaven's gifts are virtue's aids; for virtue used,
Are used aright; or else are given in vain.
On thy great power to bless, all Israel build^
A solemn claim. A voice, as thunder loud,
Awful, majestic, from thy nation sounds,
And bids thee rise to save. Their cause thou know
The cause of heaven. In them religion lives;
From them Messiah springs, by whose blessed hand
All nations good, and life* and glory gain.
The world's great happiness on their suspend.
Creation's end, and Providence' great scope.
Go then, thy nation save. Should every ill,
Even death, betide; yet what is life, or death,
When Israel calls, when God demands our life.
And know, O fair! if thou thy voice withhold,
Yet to the ruling Heavens, whose piercing eye
All mortal things surveys, ten thousand paths,
From danger's deepest caves, lead up to day:
Paths, though by man unseen, yet strait, and plain,
To God's all-piercing view. Through Death's dark vale,
Such paths shall Israel guide to life and peace.
Then from the skies indignant, while thy race
To peace and joy ascend, thy fairest day
Of duty, glory, lost, thy soul shall feel
The piercing anguish of a wounded heart,
And waste with keen remorse, and sad despair.
Thus wrote the feeling Prince. Awhile, in deep
And solemn contemplation sat the fair,
Pondering the forceful message. Roused at length
From off the sofa, all that softly sweet,
Angelic smile her face forsook; her eye,
Kindling with sacred fire, shot forth a ray
Of sunbright glory; high her bosom rose;
Her pulse beat high, and loftily she walked
The spacious room. Surpised, her virgins stood,
While thus her faithful Hatach she addressed.
Go tell illustrious Mordecai, my soul
Is warmed to this great deed. His daughter's heart
Shuns not for Israel, or for Heaven, to die.
Undone by me, no duty shall demand
Another's bosom; lost by me, no hour
Of real glory shall another ^rown
With fame, and life divine. Let Isra^l's (...),
Through Shushan's walls, with prayers, and tears, and fasts,
Implore the Skies; and tho no bright'ning hope
Presents the king complacent; yet, to morrow,
My feet shall tempt the court of gloomy danger,
And if my life's exacted, let me die.
END OF BOOK II.
ESTHER AND MORDECAI. BOOK III. -- (The Beginning.)
FROM midst a shining cloud, whose borders fair
A golden light upturn'd, looked forth the sun.
As clear, as bright, uprose the Persian Queen,
In all the pride of beauty. Robbed in pomp
Of Asian splendour, forth she slowly moved,
Attended by a royal train, that gave
New glory to the Fair. Strait to the throne
L. 3. Up rose the sun and up rose Emily. CHAUCER.
Of sovereign majesty she bent her way*
Before her opened wide the ivory gates,
On golden hinges turning; where, in purple
And gems, and gold, attired, with pomp supreme,
With por^ a^gust, and aspect sternly dread,
She saw the Monarch throned. Full on his eye
She dawned in all her beauty, robbed in white
With silver intertwin'd, and flowers of gold.
Around her diadem, mid rows of pearls,
Twinkled unnumber'd stars. Two cupids fair
Beside her walked in blooming innocence:
And two her train supported. From their hands,
Flowers sell, and fragrance, that the palace wide
Breathed living odours. Soft and sweet the air,
The lovely Queen assumed; her large, black eyes,
Mildly refulgent, shone, two morning stars;
While over her cheek, with lambent beauty, played
Colors, which neither flowers, nor gems, nor clouds,
Nor rainbows ever shed. Full on the King
She cast a sweet, and soul-explaining smile
Of soft complacence; such as angels show,
To greet their fellows, when, from errand high
Returned, they meet the sovereign euge blessed
The Monarch gazed; and, though his heart was fixed
In all the sternness of Asiatic state;
Yet in the beams of beauty, soul inspired,
His softening bosom melted. Fairer far
He viewed her, than when brought to bless his arms
With virgin innocence. As in calm skies,
'Twixt two fair pl^^ets, walks in pride divine
The ascending Moon, over all the the immense of heaven
Reigning sole queen, and with enchantment sweet
Softening the world to silence. With mild eye,
She looks her empire round, and sees the stars
With joy before her hide their little lamps,
And plains, and groves, and mountains in the beam,
Shadowy, ascend and brighten. Fair she smiles,
And triumphs in her beauty; while the bard
Eyes the bright queen, and wakes a thousand dreams,
And thinks her empress of the realms above.
So rose in all her bloom the wondrous Fair,
And so the Monarch gazed. Spontaneous moved
His arm unbidden, and to greet the Queen,
Reached forth the golden scepter. As the Fair,
Advancing, touched its starry point, he cried,
O Queen, what wishes in thy bosom rise?
What prayer begins thy voice? Even to the half
Of Persia's vast domain, that prayer is given. --
END OF VOL. I.
LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS.
THIS List is incomplete; several of the Subscription Papers not being
seasonably returned to the Editors. This they regret the more, as they are well
assured of there being one Pa^er, in Philadelphia, which contains the names of
more than Thirty Encouragers of this Undertaking.

N. B. Where the Editors have been unable to learn the address of a Subscriber,
the Name is printed without any addition.

MR. Joseph Adams, Litchfield. Thomas Allen, Bookseller, New York, 6. Richard
Alsop, Middletown. Mr. Gilbert Aspinwall, New York. Jonas Addoms, M. D.
New York. John Allen* Esquire, Litchfield. Thomas Amory, Boston. Jonathan
Amory, jun. do. Aaron Austin, Esquire, New-Hartford.
B
Rev. Azel Backus, Bethlem. Gideon Ball, Catskill. Joseph Barrel Esquire,
Boston. Augustus Bates, Delaware. Major Ezekiel P. Belden, Wethersfield, 2.
Samuel Bettle, jun. Philadelphia. Uriel Blaau, Catskill. Jacobus Bogardus, do.
Jeremiah Boon, Philadelphia. Walter ^owne, New York. Col. Aner Bradley,
Watertown. Mr. James Brace, Litchfield. Elisha Bridgeman, West-Hampton. Mrs.
Mary Bringhurst, Philadelphia. Edward Bringhurst, do. Joseph Bringhurst, jun.
do. 6. Charles B. Brown, Esquire, do. Mrs. Broom, New-^ork. William Brown,
Esquire, Guilford. Doctor William Buel, Sheffield. James Burges, Washington.
C.
Aaron Case, Kent. Doctor Jesse Carrington, Goshen. Mrs. Betsey Chester,
Wethersfield. Thomas Chester, Esquire, do. John Church, Hudson. John Clark,
New York. Doctor James Cogswell, do. Doctor Mason F. Cogswell, Hartfo^d Mr.
James Cole, Catskill. Mr. Norman Collins, Harwinton. Arnold Colt, Esquire,
Wilkes-barre, 6. Miss H. Copperthwaite, Philadelphia. Vicompte de Cornillon,
Hartford. Mr. Daniel Cotton, jun. New York, 2. Mr. Elias Cowles, Litchfield.
Doctor Thomas O'H. Croswell, Catsskill. Mr. Younglove Cutler, Watertown.
D.
David Daggett, Esquire, New Haven. Samuel W. Dana, Esquire, Middletown. Hon.
James Davenport, Stamford. John Davenport, Esquire, do. James Davidson,
Kenebec, 2. Jonathan Davis, do. Hon. Thomas Dawes, jun. Boston. Doctor William
De Wese, Philadelphia. John Doan, Catskill. Elijah Doty, do. Mr. William
Dunlap, New York. Theodore Dwight, Esquire, Hartford. Miss Sally Dwight,
Northampton. Mr. Nathaniel Dwight, Hartford.
E.
William Edmond, Esquire, Newtown. Mr. William Edwards, Northampton. William
Ely, Esquire, Springfield. Noah Everest, Catskill.
F.
Michael C. Fisher, New Jersey. Rev. Ebenezer Fitch, Williamstown. Rev. Abel
Flint, Hartford. J. A. Fonda, Manor of Livingston. Abraham Franklin, New York.
G.
Rev. John S. Gardener, Boston, 3. Hon. Ezekial Gilbert, Hudson. Angelica
Gilbert, do. Ashley Gilbert, Catskill. Mr. Asa Gillet, Litchfield. Mr. Judson
Gitteau, do. Mr. Chauncey Gleason, Simsbury. Chauncey Goodrich, Esquire,
Hartford, 3. Elihu C. Goodrich, Esquire, Claverack. Mr. Thomas C. Green,
Bookseller, New London, 6.
H.
Hon. Nathan Hale, Esquire, Canaan. Samuel Haight, Catskill. Jared Harrison,
Watertown. Reuben Heart, Stockbridge. Rev. Reuben Hitchcock, Sunbury, (Georgia.)
Mr. Roger Hitchcock, Litchfield. Mr. Elnathan Holly, do. Ph. L. Hoffman, Manor
of Livingston, 2. Thomas H. Hooker, Catskill. Samuel M. Hopkins, Esquire,
Goshen. Benjamin Horner, jun. Philadelphia. Hez. L. Hosmer, Esquire, Hudson, 2.
Titus Hotchkiss, Watertown.
J.
Isaac Jackson, Philadelphia, 2. William Jackson, Wethersfield. Ammiel Jenkins,
Hudson. William Johnson, Esquire, New York.
K.
Ephraim Kirby, Esquire, Litchfield. William Kellogg, Cornwall.
L.
Benjamin Lane, Manor of Livingston. Mr. Lyman Law, New London. David Lawrence,
Hudson. Mr. Samuel Lawrence, Hartford. George R. Lawton, Philadelphia. S.
Lawton, do. Oliver Lazier, Catskill. Doctor Michael Leib, Philadelphia, 12. Mr.
Elisha Lewis, Hartford. John Livingston, Manor. Abner Lord, Lyme. John H.
Lothrop, Esquire, Hartford.
M.
David Manwarring, jun. New London. Mr. Elisha Mason, Litchfield. Nicholas ^.
Masters, Esquire, New-Milford. Mr. Samuel McNeil, Litchfield. Mr. Donald G.
Mitchell, do. Simeon Mitchell, Washington. John Montgomery, ^arpersfie^d.
Benjamin Moore D. D. New York. William Moore, do. Benjamin J. Moore, do.
Anthony S. Morris, Philadelphia, 2. James Morris, do. Perez Morton, Esquire,
Boston, 2. Jon. Ogden Mosely, Esquire, East Haddam, 6. M. Muller, Boston, 2.
Thomas Mumford, Esquire, New York.
O.
Andrew Onderdonk, New York.
P.
David Parmele, Esquire, Haddam. Christopher Paterson, New London. Miss ^ucy W.
Pain, Philadelphia. Miss Sarah Pemb^rton, do. Mr. David Pierpont, Litchfield.
John Pinkerton, Jun. Philadelphia. Timothy Pitkin, Jun. Esquire Farmington. M.
Samuel W. Pomeroy, Boston. Cath. Powell, do.
R.
Sampson Rea, Philadelphia. Tapping Reeve, Esquire, Litchfield, 3. James
Rivington, New York. Mr. Moses Rogers, do. Stephen P. ^oss, Kent. Mr. John
Royse, Hartford.
S.
Major Moses Seymour, Litchfield. Capt. Samuel ^eymour, do. Mr. Dudley
Saltonstall, do. Doctor Daniel Sheldon, do. Mr. ^amuel Sheldon, do. Reuben
Smith, Esquire, do. Miss Mary S. Smith, do. Mr. James Stone, do. Mr. Samuel
Shethar, do. Mr. Ledyard Seymour, Hartford. Mr. Jonathan Scott, Watertown.
Aaron Smith, Esquire, Watertown. John C. Smith, Esquire, Sharon. Mr. Thomas B.
Saltonstall, New London. Capt Levi Stone, Kenderhook. James S. Smith, Red-Hook.
Elnathan Smith, Jun. Esquire, Berlin. William Pit Smith, M. D. New York.
Elijah Steel, Jun. Cornwall. Elisha Stevens, Waterbury. Mr. Ashbel Stoddard,
Printer, Hudson, 6. Doctor Joseph Strong, Middletown. Zephaniah Swift, Esquire,
Windham.
T.
Miss Sally Talman, Philadelphia. Peter Bodine Ten Broeck, Claverack. John C.
Ten Broeck, Hudson. Nathaniel Terry, Esquire, Enfield. Peter Thompson, jun.
Philadelphia. John Titus, New York. Mrs. Dolly P. Todd, Philadelphia. Doctor
Eli Todd, Farmington. John Townsend, New-^ork. Hon. Uriah Tracy, Litchfield.
John Trumbull, Esquire, Hartford. Mr. Tudor, Boston.
U.
Townsend Underhill, New York. Union Library Society, Wethersfield.
V.
Hezekiah Van Ordon, Catskill.
W.
George Warren, Windslow. Mr. Elijah Waterman, New Haven. General Samuel B.
Webb, Claverack. Mr. Joseph Webb, Wethersfield. Doctor James Wells, Berlin.
William W. Wetmore, Catskill. Levi Wheaton, Hudson. Roger Whittlesey, Esquire,
Southington. William W. Wilkins, Esquire, Philadelphia, Rev. Joshua Williams,
Harwinton. John Williams, Esquire, Wethersfield, Ezekiel Williams, Esquire, do.
Mr. Ezekiel Williams, Jun. Hartford. Mr. Solomon Williams, Lebanon. Frederick
Wolcott, Esquire, Litchfield. Mr. William W. Woolsey, New York, 2. Lieut.
Samuel Woodruff, Litchfield. Messrs. Charles R. and George Webster, Albany, 12.
Litchfield, June 1793.
ERRATA.
In the Selected Poetry.
Page 4th, line 5th, for avails, read "avail." 25th, 3d, of the poem, dele the
last s in 'Patmos's.' 28th, 17th, for cheerful, read "cheering." 55th, 7th,
from the bottom, for and, read "an." 62nd, 1st, for Or, read "On." 8th, for and
child, read "and the child." 64th, last, for plains, read "plain" 71st, 4th,
for Muses, read "Nurses." 122nd, 21st, read "I heard as I passed, etc." 123d,
9th, for squench'd, read "quenched." 124th, 18th, for and, read "an." 147th,
11th, for venus, read "venous." 202nd, 25th, for There, read "These." 207th,
22nd, for boody, read "booby." 230th, 2nd, for She, read "He." 246th, 4th, for
closed, read "clasped."
In the Original Poetry.
Page 267th, line 5th, for expire, read "exspire." 275th, 9th, for words, read
"word." 292nd, 16th, for top, read "lop."
The Reader is requested to correct the foregoing Errors, before reading the
Poems.


