AN ELEGY ON THE DEATH OF THE REV. MR. JOHN WESLEY, Who departed this Life
MARCH 2, 1791, in the Eighty-Eighth Year of his Age.

The Memory of the Just is blessed. BY ELHANAN WINCHESTER.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOHNSTON and JUSTICE, AT FRANKLIN'S HEAD, NO. 41,
CHESNUT-STREET. M.DCC.XCII.

AN ELEGY, etc.
AWAKE, my muse, and seek great WESLEY fled!
This righteous man is numbered with the dead.
How sad and awful is the parting stroke,
Which has the long subsisting union broke!
WESLEY is set, that bright that shining star,
Which often conducted strangers from afar,
To come by faith, and taste their Savior's grace,
And humbly bow their souls before his face.
How long he labored in the gospel field!
While hundred thousand souls his Mission sealed:
Who heard the gospel from his willing tongue,
Upon his lips with fixed attention hung:
Heard for their lives, and fled from wrath to come
And found in Jesu's arms a welcome home.
What regularity his life displayed!
By rule he lived; his mind on God was stayed.
Jesus he loved, his Gospel he pursued,
And wished, like him, to be divinely good;
His temper cultivated in his breast,
He learnt of him, and found the promised rest;
Thought, spoke, and acted like his Lord divine,
And in the sight of men his light did shine.
His works of love, known only to the Lord,
Insure for him a rich, a large reward:
Ten thousand acts of generous kindness shown,
Have gained him honor, glory, and renown.
Many have done great things, and are approved,
But he excelled them all, for much he loved.
Long did he move in Wisdom's pleasant ways;
He loved and sought her in his youthful days:
And to his latest years advancing still
In that blessed way that leads to Zion's hill,
He gained at last the bright, the glorious prize,
The tree of life, which grows in Paradise.
His life was dedicated to the Lord;
And more than sixty years he preached his word:
Some millions heard his ready tongue proclaim
The wonders of the great Redeemer's name.
The universal Savior he confessed,
And sought to bring mankind to taste his rest.
Proclaimed abroad "He tasted death for all;"
And that his grace extensive, as the fall,
Is freely given to every willing mind,
Who seek their Savior and their God to find:
That none were reprobated by decree,
But that God's saving grace for all is free.
He taught mankind their hopes of heaven to place
Upon the Savior's merits, and his grace,
Proclaimed Repentance, Faith, Hope, Joy, and Love:
Taught men the way that leads to God above:
Five words well understood will show the way,
Repent, Believe, Hope, Love, and then Obey.
This was the glorious doctrine which he brought,
This to the human race he freely taught;
And this to many thousand souls was blessed,
Brought weary wand'rers unto Christ for rest.
How vast, and, oh! how regular his plan,
For God's great glory, and the good of man!
How wide, and yet how powerful was his sphere!
He shed his influence far, as well as near.
His sermons and his number rous writings shined,
With heavenly light, a blessing to mankind.
His active soul flew swiftly to perform
His Father's will, his heart was always warm.
With God like Enoch he did spend his days:
Good works his business; preaching, prayer and praise
These were his choicest pleasures ever high:
He wished in Jesu's cause to live and die.
The greatest ardour of his active mind
Was to proclaim the Gospel to mankind;
And make the Savior's name and nature known
To all whom he had purchased for his own.
He joy'd to see the blood-bought human race
Partakers of the Savior's love and grace:
He loved to see them walk in Wisdom's ways,
Hold fast the truth and joyful end their days.
He sought by every method in his power
To spread the sacred Gospel more and more,
To turn the souls of men from death and sin,
And make them feel a Heaven begun within.
He wished to see our Jesus rule and reign,
In every heart, that sin might all be slain:
That every soul might full salvation know,
And thus enjoy a Heaven begun below.
How did he pray, and thirst, and pant, and long,
That Jesus might be praised by every tongue:
That all the world might taste redeeming love;
And be prepared for Heavens bright courts above.
And wheresoever he beheld a sign
That any heart was touched with power divine,
It gave him joy beyond what harvest yields,
When plenteous crops are gathered from the fields
But hence my Muse: Come take a lofty flight,
Pursue this holy man to realms of light:
Behold him introduced to Heaven's high King?
Hark! how the Heavenly arches loudly ring.
He comes, the faithful persevering man!
Whose life was governed by his Savior's plan!
Who thought, spoke, acted, like his glorious Lord,
He comes to taste a part of his reward!
Behold his happy spirit swiftly rise!
To Heaven he lifts his joyful wondering eyes!
Conveyed by angels swifter far than light,
The Heavenly city soon appears in sight.
The shining gates of pearl are opened wide,
And holy angels are his guard and guide.
How swift he marches on! fresh glory sees;
And traverses the sacred plain with ease.
But who is that stands waiting at the gate?
To bid him welcome in? What heavenly state
Attends that glorious person? O it is he;
My Lord, the glorious man that died for me;
He comes to welcome in his servant, John!
He takes him by the hand, and says, WELL DONE.
"Well done thou good and faithful servant, come,
"Partake of glory, Heaven is now thy home.
"Thou shall obtain the plaudit of thy God,
"And in his temple have thy fixed abode.
"As thou have faithfully his will obeyed,
"So shall thou be a greater Ruler made:
"Far greater honor I Will on thee bestow
"Than ever was enjoyed by kings below.
"Thy works of love were great, and not in vain,
"And from my hand thou shall the prize obtain.
"With me thou shall descend, and with me share
"The kingdom, scepter, and a crown shall wear.
"Mean time, inherit now a glorious rest,
"And be with thousands of thy children blessed."
As thus the Savior spoke, his servant bowed
Adoring low before him; while aloud,
All heaven resounded with the Savior's praise,
Who takes such pleasure worms of earth to raise
To highest glories in the realms above;
He honors them who show, that "God is love,"
But while my muse beholds this heavenly scene,
Who can inform me what those triumphs mean?
Such crowds of shining spirits fly to meet,
This venerable man, and loudly greet,
And bid him welcome to the bliss divine:
Pray who are these, that in such glory shine?
These, says my kind instructor, are the bands
By him reclaimed from sin, from Satan's hands,
Prepared for glory by his doctrine clear,
Went home before him, shout him welcome here.
See Fletcher, holy man, whose zeal and love,
Was so esteemed by all the hosts above;
Whose labor, faith, and patience to the last
Held out, till fears and dangers all were past.
See how he shines in glory ever bright,
And how he hails his friend to realms of light!
FLETCHER; that favorite of God and man,
How clearly he beheld Salvation's plan;
Saw through the parts, beheld the glorious whole;
Explored the gospel, with capacious soul!
Saw farther than he has in words expressed,
But souls akin to his, can guess the rest.
His spirit, soul, and heart, were filled with love,
Love drew him on, and made him swiftly move.
While life immortal all his powers inspired,
Sweetly he went to Christ as he desired.
His last day's labor in the house of God,
Pushed on his eager soul to its abode.
With what immortal pleasure did he rise
To join the happy millions in the skies!
Now he with rapture sees his ancient friend,
Come to possess those joys that never end.
His brother CHARLES, his fellow lab'rer dear,
With joy receives him, bids him welcome here.
He sweetly sang on earth, now sings above,
And shouts the Savior's universal love.
How noble were his strains! how unconfined!
Vast was the scene which opened to his mind!
His thoughts were boundless love, his voice was praise;
He lived to God, and joyful closed his days.
His sweet composures cannot be forgot,
His name, his memory shall never rot.
The immortal God his numbers did inspire,
They glowed with more than bare poetic fire.
The love of jesus was his darling theme,
Who shed his blood for all, died to redeem
The race of men, without excepting one,
Who were by sin, and by the Fall undone.
Nor can I here omit that herald bright,
Who preached the Gospel with unrivaled might;
WHITEFIELD, a name to many thousands dear;
Who sat with great delight his voice to hear,
Who like an Angel seemed through heaven to fly,
Proclaiming, "Fear the God who made the sky,
"The earth and seas, and water fountains deep;
"Worship JEHOVAH, his commandments keep."
But Jesus was his most enlivening theme;
How shone his face whenever he spoke of him?
So glorious were his talents, all confessed
That as a speaker he excelled the best.
No less than thirteen times he crossed the main;
The love of Jesus did his soul constrain,
In Europe and America to preach,
That sinners he might call, warn, and beseech;
And pray them to be reconciled to God,
Through Jesus Christ, and his attoning blood.
How ardently he labored for mankind,
That peace and pardon they through Christ might find!
And spent his precious life in acts of love,
Till Jesus called his soul to dwell above.
There universal love fills all his sight,
He swims in the broad ocean with delight;
He sees what once he hardly dared to scan,
That God is loving unto every man.
His soul was fitted for the realms of day,
And holy tempers in his heart bore sway,
And therefore upward did his spirit rise,
To meet his glorious Lord in Paradise.
He knows his ancient friend and brother's face,
And bids him welcome to that blessed place:
Where all disputes are over, wranglings past.
But perfect peace and pleasures always last.
United now, each other they embrace,
Redeemed alike by Jesus, saved through grace:
They view with pleasing eyes the numerous train
Of blood-bought souls, for whom the Lamb was slain
Who first by them alarmed, have sought and found.
Through Jesus Christ, free grace and love abound.
And having persever'd in holiness,
Have entered Heaven, and glory now possess.
Hundreds of shining heralds, who proclaimed
The Gospel, where the Savior scarce was named,
Who first invited home by WESLEY'S tongue,
Felt Jesu's power, and joined the happy throng:
Published salvation to their fellow men,
Called and invited them, and called again:
At length their Savior called their spirits home
To dwell with him, where troubles never come.
Now they rejoice, to see their leader rise,
And take possession of the heavenly prize.
While hundred thousands' turned from sinful ways,
Lived holy lives, triumphing closed their days,
Now hail their first instructor to that shore
Where sin and sorrow, pain and death's no more.
Oh, what amazing pleasures now he feels,
To view such multitudes of heavenly seals!
Souls that were given him for his joyful crown,
Procure him from his Lord the best renown.
For whosoever wins souls is wise,
(Souls are those treasures we should highly prize.)
And such as men to righteousness shall turn,
Shall shine like stars, those lamps of Heaven that bur
Many has WESLEY turned to righteousness,
And therefore, he this honor shall possess.
Nor him alone, for Christ, the living Lord,
Will give to all his faithful ones reward.
And we that labor in our little sphere,
If we are faithful in his service here,
Shall gain the plaudit of our Lord divine,
And in his heavenly kingdom ever shine.
But as this man of God did honor him,
Who shed his blood, all sinners to redeem,
So Jesus gave him favor and success,
And wond rouily his ministry did bless.
Long did JEHOVAH lengthen out his time,
And long his faculties remained in prime:
His influence vast continued all his days,
And great designs fulfilled to Jesu's praise,
He labored to the last with ardent pain,
And sought the wand ring souls of men to gain.
But just one week before his dying day,
With love and fervor he did preach and pray,
"Seek ye JEHOVAH while he may be found,
"Call on his name, while mercy does abound;
"O put not off, until another day,
"Now while he is near at hand, arise and pray.
"Now let the wicked man forsake his crimes,
"And to our God JEHOVAH turn betimes.
"And let the unrighteous man his thoughts forsake:
"His evil tempers, and to prayer betake:
"Then God his grace and mercy will bestow,
"Their sins forgive, and save their souls from woe."
The point he labored long with earnestness,
And on his hearers did repentance press.
Thus nobly closed his public labors then,
Finished his work on earth. Now gone from men,
He walks with Jesus, sees him as he is,
High in salvation, and the Climes of Bliss.
In Heaven is joy, fullness of joy in store,
At God's right hand are pleasures evermore.
And what from mortal eyes must be concealed,
Is to the heirs of glory there revealed.
Freedom from sin and sorrow, guilt and pain,
And every evil inclination slain;
Beholding Jesus Christ with open face,
Resting for ever in his loved embrace:
Being conformed to him in perfect love;
And joined to all the heavenly hosts above;
Praising the name of God in loudest strains,
Adoring Christ, who high in glory reigns;
If this is Heaven and this their blessed employ,
Who dwell in Jesu's presence, sure it is joy,
Lord let us enter there when life is past,
And, taste those joys which shall for ever last.
FINIS.

