LETTERS FROM FRANCE.

LETTERS FROM FRANCE: CONTAINING MANY NEW ANECDOTES RELATIVE TO THE FRENCH
REVOLUTION, AND THE PRESENT STATE OF FRENCH MANNERS.

BY HELEN MARIA WILLIAMS.

VOL. II.

BOSTON: PRINTED FOR THOMAS AND ANDREWS, DAVID WEST, AND E. LARKIN, ^UN.

M.DCC.XCII.

LETTERS FROM FRANCE.
LETTER I.
I AGAIN take up the pen to write to you at the Chateau of Mons. du F --, from
which place I last year sent you the history of his misfortunes; those
misfortunes which have led me to love, as well as admire, the revolution. For
you know we are so framed that, while we contemplate the deliverance of
millions with a sublime emotion of wonder and exultation, the tears of
tenderness, the throbbings of sympathy, are reserved for the moment when we
select one happy family from the great national groupe, and when, amidst the
loud acclamations of an innumerable multitude, we can distinguish the soothing
sounds of domestic felicity. I have beheld with awful astonishment the sun of
liberty spreading its broad blaze over the French hemisphere; but I have traced
with inexpressible delight that benignant beam which has chased every cloud of
calamity from the dwelling of Mons. du F --.

It seems the recompense of my French patriotism that I have on several
occasions had the good fortune to witness those scenes of general felicity, in
which it requires but common sensibility to partake. I went to Rouen the very
day before the King accepted the constitution. When the courier arrived with
this intelligence, the cannons were immediately fired, the bells of all the
churches rung, and the people displayed their joy by crowding the streets with
bon^ires, at the distance of every eight or ten yards. I observed some of the
people, who were too poor to contribute a portion of wood, bring for their
offering, a part of an old bedstead, a leg of a broken chair, etc. to feed the
flame.

Strangers stopped, and congratulated one another in the streets, which
re^ounded with cries of exultation, among which the sounds of Long live the
King of the French.
"Vive le Roi des Franetc;cedil;ois," were almost lost amidst those of Long
live the nation. It is the nation that triumphs. It is the constitution that
triumphs.
"Vive la nation." "C'est la nation qui triomphe. C'est la constitution qui
triomphe."

In the afternoon Te Deum was sung in the cathedral. The eight hundred electors
of the department, who were at that time assembled at Rouen, walked in
procession, attended by all the officers of the administration, and several
battalions of the national guard. An immense multitude filled every part of the
cathedral; the sounds of the organ and the drums, the voices of the choir, and
the acclamations of the people, were mingled together, and rolled through the
long aisies of the building. It was impossible to witness this religious
solemnity, and reflect on the greatness of the occasion which had called so
immense a multitude together, that of having completed the glorious work of a
free government, without catching the enthusiasm which beat high in every bosom.

Indeed living in France at present, appears to me somewhat like living in a
region of romance. Events the most astonishing and mavelous are here the
occurrences of the day, and every newspaper is filled with articles of
intelligence that will form a new era in the history of mankind. The sentiments
of the people also are elevated far above the pitch of common life. All the
motives which most powerfully stimulate the mind in its ordinary state, seem
repressed in consideration of the public good, and every selfish interest is
sacrificed with fond alacrity at the altar of the country. For my part, while I
contemplate these things, I sometimes think that the age of chivalry, instead
of being past for ever, is just returned; not indeed in its erroneous notions
of loyalty, honor, and gallantry, which are as little The order of the day.
"(...) l'ordre du jour," as its dwarfs, giants, and imprisoned damsels; but in
its noble contempt of sordid cares, its spirit of unsullied generosity, and its
heroic zeal for the happiness of others.

The completion of the new government has been celebrated by general
demonstrations of joy throughout the whole kingdom; and thus begins, under the
auspices of liberty, the constitutional reign of Lewis the Sixteenth.

It is said that the Abbe Maury, who left France as soon as the constitution
was accepted, is going to Rome, and that the pope intends to give him a
cardinal's hat, in recompense for the obstinate battle he has so long fought
against reason and philosophy. The patriots declare that the pope by so doing
will prove that he has more power than the whole National Assembly, For ^e will
make the Abbe Maury redden.
"car il fera rougir l' Abbe Maury."

LETTER II.
WE left our friends in Normandy a fortnight ago, and have pitched our tent at
Orleans. Our journey furnished many agreeable subjects of reflection to my
mind, which you well know has strongly caught the contagion of French
patriotism.

On the windows of every inn at which we stopped, we saw the little lamps still
fixed, which had been lighted at the fetes given in every town upon the
completion of the constitution. In all the villages through which we passed, I
read, inscribed in great characters, Liberty or dea^^..
"La liberte, ou la mort." In several places I heard that the workmen had
contributed so many days labor toward the expense of sending men to the
frontiers. In short, wherever we journeyed, liberty seemed to have run like
electric fire along the country, and pervaded every object in its passage. Do
you think all the Austrians of the earth will subdue this people? Oh no:
nothing is more true than, that a people are free whenever with one unanimous
sublime sentiment they determine to be so. By the way, I have heard Homer
laughed at by some critics, for making an army of thirty thousand men repeat at
the same time the same sentiment; yet something of this ^ort actually happened
at the taking of the Bastile. The cannon^ers called out to the people to
retire; For, said they, you will perish in vain.
"Car, disoientils, vous perirez inutilement." The people, as if animated by
one soul, instantly replied -- No, no, it will not be in vain; we will fill up
the ditch with our dead bodies.
"Non, non, ce ne ser^ pas inutilement; nous re^^^lirons le fosse de nos
cadavres."

When we drew near O^leans, we saw the country, as far as the eye could reach,
covered with grapes, and men, women, and children, employed in gathering the
vintage. This scene gave me a new image of plenty, a new aspect of the riches
of nature, which it was impossible to contemplate without the most pleasing
emotion. But a description of the vintage will perhaps read better in verse,
than prose: and I shall therefore send you a copy of a rhyming letter which I
have written to my friend Dr. Moore on this subject. Adieu.

To Dr. MOORE, in answer to a Poetical Epistle written by him, in Wales, to
HELEN MARIA WILLIAMS.
WHILE in long exile far from you I roam
To sooth my heart with images of home,
For me, my friend, with rich poetic grace,
The landscapes of my native isle you trace;
Her cultured meadows, and her lavish shades,
Her winding rivers, and her verdant glades;
Far, as where frowning on the flood below,
The rough Welsh mountain lifts its craggy brow;
Where nature throws aside her softer charms,
And with sublimer views the bosom warms.
Meanwhile, my steps have strayed where Autumn yields
A purple harvest on the sunny fields;
Where, bending with their luscious weight, recline
The loaded branches of the clust'ring vine;
There, on the Loire's sweet banks, a joyful band
Culled the rich produce of the fruitful land;
The youthful peasant, and the village maid,
And feeble age and childhood lent their aid.
The labors of the morning done, they haste
Where the light dinner in the field is placed;
Around the soup of herbs a circle make,
And all from one vast dish at once partake:
The vintage-baskets serve, reversed, for chairs,
And the gay meal is crowned with tuneless airs;
For each in turn must sing with all his might;
And some their carols pour in nature's spite.
Delightful land! Ah, now with general voice
Thy village sons and daughters may rejoice.
Thy happy peasant, now no more a slave,
Forbad to taste one good that nature gave,
Views with the anguish of indignant pain
The bounteous harvest spread for him in vain.
Oppression's cruel hand shall dare no more
To seize with iron gripe his scanty store;
And from his famished infants wring those spoils,
The hard-earn'd produce of his useful toils:
For now on Gallia's plain the peasant knows
Those equal rights impartial Heaven bestows.
He now, by freedom's ray illumined, taught
Some self-respect, some energy of thought,
Discerns the blessings that to all belong,
And lives to guard his humble shed from wrong.
Auspicious Liberty! in vain thy foes
Deride thy ardour, and thy force oppose;
In vain refuse to mark thy spreading light,
While, like the mole, they hide their heads in night;
Or hope their eloquence with taper-ray
Can dim the blaze of philosophic day;
Those reasoners who pretend that each abuse,
Sanction'd by precedent, has some blessed use.
Does then some chemic power to time belong,
Extracting, by some process, right from wrong?
Must feudal governments for ever last?
Those Gothic piles, the work of ages past;
Nor may obtrusive reason boldly scan,
Far less reform the rude misshapen plan;
The winding labyrinths, the hostile towers,
Whence danger threatens, and where horror low'^^*
The jealous drawbridge, and the moat profound,
The lonely dungeon in the cavern'd ground;
The sullen dome above those central caves,
Where lives one tyrant, and a host of slaves?
Ah, Freedom, on this renovated shore,
That fabric frights the moral world no more!
Shook to its basis, by thy powerful spell,
Its triple walls in ma^^y fragments fell:
While, rising from the hideous wreck, appears
The temple thy firm arm sublimely rears;
Of fair proportions, and of simple grace,
A mansion worthy of the human race.
For me, the witness of those scenes, whose birth
Forms a new era in the storied earth;
Often while with glowing breast those scenes I view,
They lead, ah friend beloved, my thoughts to you!
Ah, still each fine emotion they impart,
With your idea mingles in my heart;
You, whose warm bosom, whose expanded mind,
Have sha^'^ this glorious triumph of mankind;
You, whom I often have heard, with generous zeal,
With all that truth can urge, or pity feel,
Refute the pompous argument that tried
The common cause of millions to deride;
With reason's force the plausive sophist hit,
Or dart on fully the quick flash of wit.
Too swift, my friend, the moments winged their ^light,
That gave at once instruction and delight;
That ever from your ample stores of thought
To my small stock some new accession brought.
How often remembrance, while this bosom bleeds,
My pensive fancy to your dwelling leads;
Where, ^ound your cheerful hearth, I weeping trace
The social circle, and my vacant place!
When to that dwelling friendship's tie endears,
When shall I hasten with the "joy of tears?"
That joy whose keen sensations swells to pain,
And strives to utter what it feels, in vain.

LETTER III.
ORLEANS is a very ancient town, built, or rather rebuilt, by the Emperor
Aurelian, upon the ruins of another town, called Genabiam. It takes its present
name of Orleans, or the golden city, from the Emperor Aurelian. This town is
large and handsome. The principal street, which extends the whole length of the
town, is regularly built, and is clean, cheerful, and well lighted every night,
by lamps hung across it. Here is a noble cathedral of exquisite workmanship,
and of which the first stone was laid by Henry the Fourth; a circumstance which
makes me contemplate the building with additional pleasure. Henry the Fourth
is, you know, the only hero, ancient or modern, of whom I am at all enam^ured;
and my admiration of him has been lately considerably increased by the perusal
of a charming little book, entitled, The Love of Henry the Fourth for Literature
"De l'Amour de Henrl quatre pour ^es Lettres." -- There was but this wanting
to complete my enthusiasm for Henry the Fourth. I should find it difficult,
indeed, to avoid loving a hero who united a taste for letters with all the
great, and all the amiable qualities. A little incident which I have just
heard, is one proof, among many others, of the love and veneration in which his
memory has long been held in France. -- Ten years before the revolution, a
gentleman walking along the Pont Neuf, was accosted by a beggar, who implored
his charity. In the name of God! -- of the Holy Virgin!
"Au nom de Dieu! Monsieur," said the beggar -- "de la Saint Vierge!" -- The
gentleman walked on: the beggar called upon ^alf ^he saints in the callendar;
the gentleman remained inexorable. At length they passed the statue of Henry
the Fourth In the name of Henry the Fourth, Sir. In the name of Henry the
Fourth! Here is a louis, my friend.
"A^ nom de H^nri quatre! Monsieur," said the beggar. "Au nom de H^nri quatre!"
repeated the gentleman, starting from his reverie: "voici un l^ui^, mon ami."
-- But I must lead you from the Pont Neuf to a magnificent bridge built within
these few years, at Orleans, across the river Lo^^e. This river, which, in
general, glides slowly and gently along its beautiful banks, sometimes
receiving in its bosom the torrents which fall from the mountains of Auvergne,
assumes a very different character, overflows its banks, bears away bridges in
its course, spreads itself over the adjacent country, and not only fills the
streets in the lower part of the town of Orleans, but even the houses; and the
poor people who inhabit them have been sometimes obliged to save themselves in
their garrets, and receive provisions brought to them in boats, and handed up
to them upon the point of pikes. Usually, however, in order to prevent these
evils, whenever the Loire begins to rise, a courier is dispatched to give
notice of its approach. The courier, in general, gallops faster than the river,
and by this means the people are prepared for its reception.

We have lodgings in the Place du Martroy, in a spacious handsome house which
formerly belonged to Mons. d'Orleans, and where the archives of his family were
deposited. But having lost since the revolution, the extensive domains which he
possessed round this town, his seignorial rights over the forests of Orleans, a
forest of fifty miles in extent, he has thought proper to sell this house, in
consequence of which we are extremely well lodged. Do not, however, be
surprised if I am not very methodical in the details I shall send you, and if
you should find my ideas somewhat more indistinct than usual; for I assure you
the things I hear and see, from the window at which I am writing, are
sufficient to confuse a stronger head than mine. You shall judge. Before our
windows, which overlook the Place du Matroy* there are at this moment two
musicians mounted on chairs; one plays on the violin, while the other sings a
very merry patriotic song, and the people join in chorus. At a little distance
there arrived half an hour ago a mountebank, preceded by a trumpet, a drum, and
a French-horn. He is now haranguing an immense crowd who surround his
cabriolet, with a degree of impetuosity, and a violence of gesticulation, which
belong only to a Frenchman. He is at some distance from the window, so that I
lose much of his eloquence; but I have seen him display a fine chapelet, which
he declares was given to him by the empress of all the Russias; and I have
heard him boast the efficacious qualities of a certain precious pill, of which
he is in possession, and which, he says, cures All deseases, and a great many
others.
" toutes les maladies, et plusieurs autres." To resist a pill of such
extraordinary virtue is impossible: the poor people lift up their hands; he
feels their pulses, orders for every complaint a box of pills, and receives the
little paper money, called bons, in return. Not far from the mountebank is a
man with a puppet-show, in which, for one liard, many surprising things are to
be seen. You shall see, gentlemen -- you shall see the ^itting of the
constitution! Here is the king in his chair of state.
"Vous allez voir, messieurs," says he in a voice which makes itself heard in
spite of the music, the chorus and the mountebank; "Vous allez voir (...)
seance de la constitution! Voici le roi dans son fauteuil; voici" -- But he is
interrupted by the beating of a drum, which calls the crowd to a little stage,
where a man and a woman are going to act a comedy. Near the comedians is a
fortune tellers, who, placing one end of a long pipe at the ear of those who
wish to learn their destiny, and putting the other end into his own mouth,
explains, in a voice only heard by the person concerned, the book of fate,
reveals the secrets of futurity, and lavishes wealth and prosperity at the
moderate price of deux sous. -- Pleasure and business are united on the Place
du Matroy; for not only does it present fine ^ights, and resound with patriotic
songs, but there, by way of interlude, the corn-market is held: gowns,
petticoats, sweetmeats, grapes, and Bastilles of sugar are also sold in little
booths erected for that purpose, and which somewhat disfigure the square. But
the French are an amiable, accommodating people, and permit many things of this
kind which would not be suffered in England. When I was at the National
Assembly, I remarked that the passages on each side were filled with little
shops, where books, paper, etc. are sold. I believe, if this (...) ^ttempted in
the avenues to the House of Co^^^ons, our honorable senators would very soon
order the passages, as they sometimes do the gallery, to be cleared. But let us
return for a moment to the Place du Martroy, where at present the people leave
the musicians, the mountebank, the puppet-show man, the comedians, and the
fortune tellers, and fly to meet the brave protectors of their country. The
volunteers of the department are just arrived in their way to the frontiers,
and are to be lodged in the houses of their fellow-citizens, by whom they are
received with all the enthusiasim of patriotism. Several peasants too old to
fight for their country have offered to assist in maintaining, by the sweat of
their brow, the wives and children of those who are gone to the frontiers.

The French revolution is not only sublime in a general view, but is often
beautiful when considered in detail. Its history abounds with circumstances
that would embellish the page of the Greek or Roman annals. But the old remark,
that no man is a hero to his valet de chamber, may be applied to great events,
as well as great characters. The French revolution is viewed too near to excite
the same veneration in the present age which it will probably awaken in the
minds of posterity. It wants that mellowed tint which is produced by time.
Succeeding generations will perhaps associate the Tennis-court of Ver^ailles,
and the Champ de Mars, with the Forum and the Capitol. For the prejudices which
now obscure the revolution are mortal, and will die with the present race, and
posterity will view it through a clear medium. Posterity will not demand,
contrary to what appears the law of our nature, "universal good," unmixed with
"partial evil;" but will contemplate the revolution in the same manner as we
gaze at a sublime landscape, of which the general effect is great and noble,
and where some little points of asperity, some minute deformities, are lost in
the overwhelming majesty of the whole.

LETTER IV.
IT is at present what is called the bell air in France, to take a journey to
Brussels. The people of distinction go to show their importance, and people of
no distinction go in imitation of others. A young Frenchman, the son of a
person who was formerly in power, went lately to join the emigrants, and was
much astonished, upon his arrival at Brussels, to find, that, instead of being
well received, the aristocrates were inclined to put him to death. The reason
of this was, that they recollected he had, some years before the revolution, on
a particular occasion, espoused the interests of the people. You must examine
yourself carefully before you go to Brussels, if in some moment of your life
you have felt any love for your fellow-citizens, or performed a good action.
"I^ faut bien s'examiner," said the gentleman who related this circumstance,
"avaunt d'aller a Bruxelles, si dans quelque moment de la vie, on a senti de
l'amour pour ses concitoyens, ou fait une belle action." I received a letter a
few days ago from a friend of mine at Paris, which mentions the departure of a
pretty young woman for Germany, with whom I had a slight acquaintance. Her own
titles to nobility were very new, and very inconsiderable; but she was
acquainted with some women of high tank who had fled to Germany. She came to a
relation's house, one morning, at the hour of breakfast, and, almost breathless
with agitation, told her that she was instantly going to leave France. "I
know," said she, "that my movements are watched; but I have taken every
possible precaution for my own safety, and intend to travel through by-roads."
"My dear cousin," replied her relation, "what a wild plan is this* -- Why will
you leave us? Be assured you are in perfect safety -- nobody thinks of you."
Ah! I beg your pardon -- they have their eyes upon me.
"Ah! je vous demand pardon," replied the young woman; "on a des yeux sur
moi." "Well," said her cousin, "if you are absolutely determined to go, at
least stay and breakfast with me; here is some caffe a la creme." "Ah, my dear
cousin," replied the young woman, in a most pathetic accent, "du caffe a la
creme! -- I dare not taste it upon any account -- If madame la duchess de --,
or madame la comtesse, were to hear of it, they would never forgive me -- they
know that caff^eacute; a la creme does me harm; and they interest themselves so
much in my health, that they have strictly forbidden my tasting it."

Though the great mass of the French nation, sufficiently enlightened to
discern their real interests, cherish with fond enthusiasm the blessings of
liberty, it is not surprising that a revolution, which has leve^led every
distinction that vanity loves to create; exposed the folly of every prejudice
that pride had inculcated, and that servility had learned to revere; and which
has made a step toward perfection so rapid, so astonishing in the progress of
human reason -- it is not surprising that such a revolution should have many
enemies among that class of persons whose vanity, ambition, or interest, are
affected by the suppression of those abuses and errors, from which they enjoyed
the most partial advantages. Some excuse may, perhaps, be found in the weakness
of human nature, and the prejudices of education, for the aristocracy of Mons.
d'Artois, or Mons. de Conde. But the aristocracy to which common sense can give
no quarter, is that which you sometimes find in the persons of the bon,
ci-devant tiers etat; that class which by the revolution is raised from
contempt and degradation, into importance and respect.

A beautiful young woman, formerly a duchess, with whom I was in company at
Paris, told me she had remarked, that even the seasons were changed since the
revolution, and that the climate of France had become stormy and disagreeable.
I could only smile at her folly, and pity it. But when the wife of a merchant,
or shopkeeper, talks in the same style, you feel provoked, instead of diverted,
by her absurdity.

The bishop of Orleans, who is descended from the ancient nobility of France,
has distinguished himself by his patriotism; but there are at Orleans a hundred
and fifty chanoines, who are far from being patriots. These chanoines enjoyed
each two or three thousand livres a year for chanting Latin hymns in the
cathedral. The cathedral being now transformed into a parish church, these
hymns are no longer sung; and the chanoines are reduced to live upon half their
former income. These hundred and fifty chanoines had certainly a hundred and
fifty cooks, and these cooks probably have families. The chanoines and the
cooks have both lost their places, and consequently they and their families are
aristocrates.

By the way, I have found out that an aristocrate always begins a political
conversation by assuring you that he is not an aristocrate. He will tell you,
"that there certainly were intolerable abuses in the old government, and that
no person wished more sincerely than himself to see those abuses reformed.
But," he will add, "to take away the king's power, to deprive the nobility of
their privileges, and the clergy of their revenues, is pushing things to an
extremity, at which every honest mind shudders. If the National Assembly had
made a reform without injuring these orders of the state, they would have been
applauded by the whole world." This reminds me of a passage in Mons.
Beaumarchais' comedy of the Follies of a day. "I was told," says Figaro, on the
subject of writing a book, "that if I took care to say nothing of politics,
nothing of morality, of governments, of the clergy, or of persons in power, and
then submitted my book to the inspection of the keeper of the seals, and
obtained an 'approbation,' and 'privilege,' I might, after using these
precautions, write with the most perfect freedom."

An old Frenchman, past threescore years and ten, was asked lately how he liked
the revolution. The revolution ruins, me, and kills me, but it makes me live.
"La revolution," said he, "me ruin, et me tue, mais elle me fait vivre."

The volunteers left Orleans this morning, in order to proceed to the
frontiers. They were drawn up on the Place du Martroy, and, after
affectionately embracing their friends, and wiping away a few tears, which
probably the recollection of home excited, they ordered, by way of cordial, the
reviving air of ^a ira, and marched off, singing in chorus.

LETTER V.
THE principal article of commerce at Orleans, is that of re^ining sugar. We
went yesterday to see the process. In one stage of its progress the sugar is
clarified with the blood of oxen: it is poured into vessels of an immense size,
and appears a liquid of a deep red. I own those frightful reservoirs struck my
imagination as if stained with the blood of Africans.

The long train of calamities which are the portion of that unhappy race,
crowded in sad succession upon my mind, and I observed, with a degree of horror
which I could not repress, the process of a luxury obtained for the inhabitants
of one part of the globe, by the wrongs, the agonies, the despair of the
inhabitants of another part. -- Alas! why is there so much more misery in this
world than benevolence can cure? Why, in the public discussions in France and
in England, on the Slave Trade, are the possibilities of gain and loss
calculated with such nice precision? Why are crimes and injustice, desolation
and death, treated in a style so very mercantile that humanity listens in
despair to their deliberations?

From thence we went to see a very considerable manufactory for spinning
cotton, which has been established here by an English gentleman, to whom we are
obliged for that cordial hospitality, which is the ancient and honorable
characteristic of our country, and which is so peculiarly grateful to the heart
when received in a land of strangers.

This manufacture, while it displays the wonderful power of mechanism, gives
occasion also to the exercise of humanity, by employing not only a great number
of men, but fourteen hundred women and children.

The gentleman to whom the manufacture belongs, related to me the following
circumstance: -- He happened to be in the National Assembly at Versailles, when
the king declared that he would give orders for disbanding the army which
surrounded Paris, and would himself come to the Maison de Ville, in compliance
with the wishes of his people. Mr. F --, after taking a copy of the king's
harangue with his pencil, immediately mounted his horse, and galloped to Paris,
in order to carry this intelligence. At the Pont Neuf he was stopped, the
bridle of his horse seized, and the people wanted to take him to la Maison de
Ville. He told them that he was an Englishman, the friend of liberty, and had
galloped all the way from Versailles, in order to bring them good news.

The people conducted him to the Palais Royal, and there he dismounted. A table
was placed in the court of the Palais Royal, upon which he stood, and read over
and over again the king's harrangue. After having remained there a considerable
time, he went into a coffee-house of the Palais Royal to refresh himself, and
then enquired for his horse. The horse was not to be found. Mr. F -- left a
note at the coffee-house, entreating that the person who had taken care of the
Englishman's horse, while he was reading the king's speech, in the Palais
Royal, would deliver him to the master of the coffee-house.

A few days after, an answer was sent to Mr. F --, informing him, that the
English horse had gone back to Versailles, in order to conduct the king to
Paris; and was again gone to the country upon business of importance to the
nation, but that whenever he returned he should be sent to his master.

The horse accordingly arrived, but not without having suffered a little for
his services to the state; and, though he was ever after particularly cherished
by Mr. F --, he died in the second year of French liberty; and I have some
thoughts of writing his epitaph.

Nothing, it is said, could exceed the astonishment and consternation of the
French court, when the intelligence that the Bastille was taken reached
Versailles. This event appeared so incredible that the courtiers could scarcely
persuade themselves it was true. That the people should have the insolence to
complain because they were threatened with famine -- that, when the government
had drawn an army to the gates of Paris in order to enforce submission, the
Parisians should dare to rise into tumult -- were things sufficiently
extraordinary -- but that they should, almost in the view of that army, take
the Bastille appeared to the court of Versailles as miraculous as if the course
of nature had been changed, and the order of the universe broken.

I lately heard an account of a conversation which passed at Versailles, on the
morning of the 14th of July, 1789, and which proves how little the court were
prepared for the memorable event of that immortal day.

A French gentleman, remarkable for his taciturnity and sang-froid, things that
seldom enter into the composition of a Frenchman, had occasion to go from Paris
to Versailles on that morning, in order to have a conference with the minister
upon some private business. He found two of the ministers together; and when
the particular object of his visit was discussed, one of the ministers said to
him with a careless air, "Well, sir, are there still tumults at Paris?"

"The people talk of going to the garde-de meubles," replied the gentleman.

"The garde-de-meubles!" repeated the minister: "what, the king's
garde-de-meubles?"

"Yes, and they have already been at the Hotel des Invalides."

"And for what purpose?" said the minister with increasing surprise.

"They seized upon all the arms," resumed the gentleman, preserving his usual
sang-froid; "and if a man has too fusees, he gives one to his neighbor."

"Well," said the minister, shrugging up his shoulders, "and what did they do
next?"

"Why, I believe," said the gentleman, "they then went to the district."

"The district!" exclaimed the minister: "pray what is the district?"

"An invention of yesterday," replied the gentleman: "the people have also
another invention of the same date, I believe, which they call a permanent
committee, and they have now got cannon."

Cannon!" repeated the minister; "and pray what do they propose to do with
cannon?"

"Why, they talk of taking the Bastille."

"Very good! -- excellent!" said the minister, bursting into a violent fit of
laughter: "this is really a pleasant conceit enough. And pray who is at the
head of this rabble?"

"I really do not know," said the gentleman coldly: "but all the people in
Paris seem to be of the same mind."

"Well," said the minister, turning to his colleague, "I think we had better
not mention these disagreeable matters to the king."

Notwithstanding this precaution however, the king a few hours after was let
into the whole secret.

LETTER VI.
THE statue of the celebrated Jeanne d'Arc, the maid of Orleans, is erected in
the principal street of the town. Wherever I travel in France, it seems as if I
were haunted by this Jeanne d'Arc. I left her lately at Rouen, and here I find
her at Orleans; and in both places I fancy she looks at me with an air of
reproach. This monument, erected at Orleans, in honor of her exploits, by
Charles the Seventh, is a striking testimony of the barbarous state of the arts
at that period. The Virgin Mary is placed in the middle of the monument,
holding a dead Christ on her knees: on one side is Charles the Seventh
kneeling, and on the other the Maid of Orleans in the same attitude. Their
figures are so rude, misshapen, and gro^esque, that it requires some
deliberation to determine which is Charles the Seventh, and which is the Maid
of Orleans.

Every year on the eighth of May, the day on which Jeanne d'Arc chased the
English, and raised the siege of Orleans, there is a solemn procession in this
town, in commemoration of that event. The bishop, attended by all the clergy,
the magistrates, and the troops, walk in procession to the cathedral. The
principal figure in this procession is a young boy, dressed in a fantastic
manner, who is the representative of the Maid of Orleans. Prayers of
thanksgiving for the deliverance of the town are said at the cathedral, after
which a sermon is preached, wherein the magnanimous virtues of Jeanne d'Arc are
celebrated; and, by way of giving relief to the picture, the preacher never
^ails to paint in the darkest colors the crimes of the English, and their
detestable cruelty toward this ^eroi^e, to whom, as Mr. Hum^ the historian
justly remarks, the more generous superstition of the ancients would have
erected altars. When the guilt of our nation has been made sufficiently
manifest, the sermon concludes, a hymn is sung, and the day ends with a public
entertainment. But I must not neglect to mention a charming institution
established by Mons. d'Orleans in honor of Jeanne d'Arc. The cures of Orleans
each choose from their respective parishes, the young girl whom they consider
as the most amiable, and most modest, the most virtuous. Among these girls she
who is most distinguished for those qualities which are the best ornament of
her sex, is married this day to the lover of her choice, with a portion of
fifteen hundred livres, bestowed by Mons. d' Orleans. Is it possible, do you
think, to make a more amiable use of fifteen hundred livres, than thus to
render them the means of conferring happiness on love and virtue?

A hat which belonged to the Maid of Orleans is still religiously kept in a
convent in this place. How Jeanne d' Arc's hat got into this convent, I know
not; for, when I asked to see it, I was told that no woman could be admitted
within those walls. Perhaps the reverend fathers relaxed from the usual
severity of their order infavour of so extraordinary a woman as Jeanne d'Arc:
but the rest of her sex must not expect the same indulgence, and I shall
certainly leave Orleans without having seen the hat.

LETTER VII.
THE wife of Jean Jaques Rousseau is a native of Orleans, where her family now
live. This woman, though certainly no congenial spirit with Jean Jaques, has, I
am told, caught from him much elevation of sentiment, and pride, of
independence. You can, in short, perceive that she has been the companion of a
great man. I heard lately an incident characteristic enough of Rousseau. At a
friend's house, at dinner, he praised the wine: his friend sent him fifty
bottles. Rousseau felt himself offended; but as the present was offered by an
old friend, he determined to accept ten bottles, and returned forty. A short
time after he invited his friend and his family to supper. When they arrived
they found Rousseau very busy turning the spit. "How extraordinary is it,"
exclaimed his friend, "to see the first genius of Europe employed in turning a
spit!" "Why," answered Rousseau, with great simplicity and sang-froid, "if I
were not to turn the spit, you would certainly lose your supper: my wife is
gone to buy a sallad, and the spit must be turned." At supper Rousseau
produced, for the first time, the wine which his friend had sent him: but no
sooner had he tasted it, than he suddenly put the glass from his lips,
exclaiming with the most violent emotion, that it was not the same wine he had
drank at his friend's house who he perceived had a design to poison him. In
vain his friend protested his innocence: Rousseau's imagination, once possessed
by this idea, -- displaced the mirth; broke the good Meeting with most admired
disorder. SHAKSPEARE. His friend was immediately obliged to retire, and they
never met again.

You, who are an admirer of Rousseau, will be pleased to hear of a tribute of
enthusiasm paid to his memory lately by two of our countrymen. These young
Englishmen went to visit the tomb of this lover of nature, which is placed in a
beautiful little island on the est^te of Mons. Girardin. Not long before their
arrival, some profane mortal had dared to insult the sacred ashes of Jean
Jaques: and Mons. Girardin, filled with indignation at this atrocious conduct,
had given orders, that no person, without a particular admission from himself,
should henceforth be permitted to visit the island. In vain our young
Englishmen made protestations of their profound veneration for Rousseau; in
vain they implored Monsieur Girardin's boatman to conduct them across the
stream. The boatman, surly as Charon himself, adhered inflexibly to the orders
of his master. The young Englishmen, finding him inexorable, threw off their
clothes, jumped into the stream, and swam to the island. -- The gentleman who
related to me this circumstance, told me, that he and a friend had visited
together this island, and, kneeling at the tomb of Rousseau, had burnt a book,
published a short time after his death by Diderot, in which he had treated the
memory of Rousseau with the most cruel indignity: and this he had done from a
very unworthy motive. He had heard that the Confessions of Rousseau were going
to be published; and concluding that he should be ill treated in those
Confessions, on account of his quarrel with Rousseau, he determined to be
beforehand in abuse. But when the Confessions were published, it was found that
the feeling heart of Jean Jaques could not detach itself from his former
friend, who had always continued to possess a place in his affections. -- Mons.
Girardin was absent from home, when the sacrifice of Diderot's book was offered
at Rousseau's tomb. When he returned, his boatman told him, that during his
absence two gentlemen had performed some witchcraft or other at the tomb; that
he had observed them at a little distance; that they had struck a stone,
brought out a flame, and kept it burning an extraordinary length of time. Mons.
Girardin enquired into the meaning of these mysterious rites, and received an
account of the sacrifice.

The celebrated opera-dancer, Mademoiselle Theodore, whose talents I am told
are not confined to superior excellence in dancing, had an enthusiastic
admiration of Rousseau. She always carried a volume of his works in her pocket
to the rehearsals at the opera, and used to read in the pa^ses of the dance.
One day having heard that Rousseau was in want of a cook, she dressed herself
in a coarse stuff gown, a colored apron, and a cloth cap, and went in this
disguise to offer him her services.

After Rousseau's death, Mademoiselle Theodore made a pilgrimage to his grave;
and there, in the true spirit of enthusiastic homage, cutting off one of the
long tress^s of her ^ine hair, she hung it as an offering upon his tomb.

LETTER VIII.
A BLACKSMITH came to our lodgings this morning to mend the lock of a door. I
asked him if he would not willingly leave his trade to fight for the liberty of
his country. Yes, madam, we must fight for liberty, because if one is killed,
it is the affair of a moment; instead of ^at, being a ^lave, you are w^ary all
your life.
"O^i, madame," said he, "il fa^t comba^^re pour la liberte, parceque si on est
tue, c'est l'a^^a^re d'un instant, et c'est fini; au lieu qu'etant esclave on
s'ennuye toute sa vie."

This is market day at Orleans, and I have just been standing with a little
circle of country people, who, after the business of the market was done,
ranged themselves round an old woman, who had the advantage over the rest of
the group^, of having attained the accomplishment of reading. She read to them
a newspaper, to which the audience listened with such eager attention, as
reminded me of that animated picture of our divine poet, when he describes -- a
smith,
The whilst his iron did on the anvil cool,
With open mouth swallowing a taylor's news.


The old woman received a liard for her trouble from each of her auditors, and
they are now discussing the conduct of their legislators, and arranging the
fabric of their new government, with that noble freedom of debate which gives
An hour's importance to the poor man's heart.

One subject of complaint among the aristocrates is, that, since the
revolution, they are obliged to drive through the streets with caution: the
life of a citizen is now considered as of some value, and the poor people on
foot cannot be trampled upon, by the horses of the rich people in carriages,
with the same impunity as formerly. It is so inconvenient, when I go to the
country in my carriage; the people will not get out of the way as they used to
do -- they are really become intolerably insolent -- you are obliged to take
such care not to run over ^h^m, (...) that costs so much time.
"C'est si incommode," said an aristocrate to me lately, "quand je vais dans ma
voiture en compagne; le people ne se range pas comme autrefois -- ces gens-la
^ont d'une insolence incroyable -- on est oblige de prendre bien guard de ne
les pas ecraser, et cela demand du tems." Madame de Pompadour, mistress to
Lewis XV. who always traveled with great expedition, was passing through
Orleans, when her coachman drove over a poor woman, whom age and infirmity
prevented from getting time enough out of the way, and she was killed upon the
spot. The coachman stopped the carriage, and the servants told their mistress
that the poor woman was killed. Well, here is something to bury her -- go on,
coachman.
"Eh bien," said she, with the most perfect sang-froid, and flinging a louis
d'or ^ut of the window, "voila de quoi la fair enterrer; allez, cocher." Is it
possible to hear of every feeling of humanity being thus insulted, without a
degree of indignation which can only be soothed by the reflection that such
monstrous evils exist no longer? Is it possible to hear this incident without
rejoicing, that a system of government which led to such depravation of mind is
laid in ruins? For my part, I confess myself so hardened a patriot, that I
rejoice to see the lower order of people in this country have lost somewhat of
that too obsequious politeness for which they were once distinguished; and that
whenever they find themselves in the slightest degree offended, they assume a
tone of manly independence. While we were walking yesterday along the very
square where the poor old woman was killed, I heard a day-labourer say, in an
angry tone of voice, to a gentleman, by whom he thought himself ill-treated,
Sir, we are equals -- I am a citizen, sir, as well as another.
"Monsieur, ^ous ^ommes egaux -- je suis citoyen, monsieur, tout comme un
autre." Some of our company were shocked at his insolence, while I,
recollecting the poor old woman, could not help repeating to myself, Ah! my
friend, never forget that you are a citizen as well as another.
"Ah! monami, n'oubliez jamais que vous etes citoyen tout comme un autre."

A number of poor people in Orleans gain their livelihood by conveying goods in
little carts from the quay to the houses of the merchants. This little cart
forms the stock in trade of a poor family, together with an ass, who is an
animal that can accommodate himself to a slight dinner, without complaining.
The ass is placed between the shafts; on one side is the master of the cart, on
the other his wife: and all their children, to whatever number they amount,
ranged in front, and holding a long cord, which is tied to the cart, assist in
drawing it along.

I never see these little family processions with out a melancholy emotion. It
seems to me a hard lot, to be forced to gain scanty bread by dragging along
this wretched cart from morning till night. But, fortunately, the poor people
themselves are of a different opinion: I perceive no marks of sadness on their
countenances; and when the cart returns empty, and allows them a little respite
from labor, I frequently hear them singing etc;cedil;a ira, with all the
exultation of true patriots.

The blessings of the revolution have reached even their little shed. If they
are poor, they know they cannot be oppressed; and feel, no doubt, with
conscious pride and pleasure, that they also are now "citoyens, As well as
another.
tout comme un autre."

Two gentlemen were conversing together this morning upon public affairs. After
discussing many political points, one of them said to the other, whom he
perceived to be a little violent in his sentiments, But after all, we must have
some moderation. -- They speak so much of moderation -- Faith, sir, the
Bastille was not taken with lemonade.
"Mais apres tout, il faut de la moderation."

"On parle tant de la moderation," answered the democrate, in the most angry
tone in the world: "ma foi, monsieur, on n'a pas pris la Bastille avec de la
limonade."

LETTER IX.
I HAVE been to visit a chateau about a league from Orleans; part of which was
built by the celebrated Lord Bolingbroke, and in which he passed some years of
his exile, with his wife, the niece of Madame de Maintenon. Before the windows
of the chateau rises a beautiful small river, called le Loiret, which, after a
winding course of three leagues, through a charming country, falls into the
Loire. The grounds of this chateau are in some parts formed into long alleys,
shaded by venerable trees, in others spread into lawns, through which the clear
Loiret pursues its way. Lord Bolingbroke probably found this retirement well
adapted for philosophical contemplation, and bad there sufficient leisure to
Expatiate free on all this scene of man,
A mighty maze, but not without a plan.
In this retreat he wrote the Patriot King. A company of French and English
were dining with Lord Bolingbroke at this place, when the news arrived of the
death of the Duke of Marlborough, his ancient enemy. Some of the company had
servility enough to attempt paying their court to Lord Bolingbroke, by
mentioning some circumstances to the disadvantage of the Duke of Marlborough.
At length a Frenchman, who was present, asked Lord Bolingbroke his opinion of
him. "Sir," said he, "Marlborough was so great a man that I have forgot all his
faults." -- The Loiret deserves to be considered as a sort of classical river:
for, if a famous English philosopher had his dwelling at its source, a far more
amiable French philosopher lived some time at the mouth of this little stream:
a philosopher, of whom not only his own country, but human nature may be proud;
and whose writings tend to awaken the purest affections, the most soothing
emotions, of the human heart. This writer was Fenelon, the mild, the persuasive
preacher of virtue. I have read Gresset's charming poem of Ver-Vert, with
particular pleasure, on the banks of that river, which his hero in evil hour
failed down; when the nuns of Nantes, hearing of his renown, write -- a la
superieure,
Pour la prier que l'oiseau plein d'attraits
Soit pour un tems amene par la Loire,
Et que, conduit au rivage Nautais,
Lui-meme il puisse y jouir de sa gloire,
Et se preter a de tendres ^ouhai^s.
The happy playful irony of this poem is perhaps unrivalled, except by Pope's
Rape of the Lock, which, to all the sprightly graces, the agreeable raillery of
Ver-Vert, adds the charm of the most enchanting poetic machinery.

Every Sunday evening during the month of October, as soon as it is dark, four
men, dressed in black, walk through the town of Orleans, and at the corner of
every street ring a loud heavy bell, which sends forth a most dismal sound;
after which they call upon the people to remember the dead, and pray for the
repose of their souls. Nothing can be more gloomy than this superstitious
ceremony, which lasts till after All Saints day, when a solemn service for the
dead is performed in all the Roman Catholic churches.

LETTER X.
WHEN a French girl is intended for the wife of a merchant, she is carefully
instructed in the arithmetic, after she leaves the convent, where she is
usually taught little more than to count her beads. After she is married she
acts as her husband's first clerk, and passes the whole day in his
counting house. Some advantages arise from this practice; since a French woman,
if her husband dies, is capable of carrying on his business 'till her children
are of a proper age to succeed to it; and in the mean time she knows exactly
the state of his affairs. Whereas, the wife of an English merchant, sometimes
from being entirely ignorant of his real situation, indulges herself in a mode
of living which hastens on his ruin, and receives like a thunder-stroke the
intelligence that her riches were a dream, and that her husband is a bankrupt.

I am told that commerce was never so flourishing in France as it has been for
a year past, not only in the capital, but throughout the whole kingdom. The
advantages which some have been enabled to gain from the paper money has led
them to extraordinary enterprise, and the loss which others have sustained has
produced extraordinary industry and activity. Commerce has benefited in both
cases. If the gold of France has vanished with the noblesse, it is not of gold
only that that class of persons have disburthened their country. They have also
carried away with them that immense load of prejudices which has so long
oppressed this nation, and which, by connecting degradation and contempt with
commerce, deprived the country of the best use and improvement of its riches.
If the French money has "made unto itself wings and fled away," so also has the
corvee, the gabelle, the arbitrary impositions, the seig^orial rights, the
enormous taxes which the poor paid to the rich, and which produced famine,
where nature had scattered plenty: while they have left behind them the
blessings of liberty, equal taxation, mild laws, trial by jury, the spirit of
commerce. Paper money, when the crisis of the revolution is past, will, by a
process only known to free states, be transformed into pure gold.

I have been at la Maison de Ville, in which house died Francis the Second, the
husband of Mary Queen of Scots. He came to Orleans with Mary, to meet the
States General; was suddenly taken ill while he was at mass, and died
immediately.

The name of Mary Stuart is placed in the list of French female poets.
Unfortunate Mary! When she wrote her poetic farewell to this country, Adieu,
plaisant pays de France, etc. she seems to have felt a sad presage of her
future calamities; those calamities which make me forget every weakness of
Mary, and every great quality of Elizabeth; qualities over which the fate of
Mary has surely cast an everlasting shade.

At the Maison de Ville we saw a picture of J^anne d'Arc, painted two hundred
years ago. The countenance is uncommonly beautiful. It seems that nature, while
she bestowed on the Maid of Orleans the heroic qualities of the other sex, did
not deny her the soft attractions of her own.

There is also at the Maison de Ville the picture of Doctor Petit, who is a
native of this place, and has acquired a very high reputation, and an ample
fortune as a Physician at Paris. He has lately built a handsome house at
Orleans, for the purpose of furnishing advice and medicines gratis to the poor;
and, with additional benevolence, to defend their little property from
injustice, he has appointed lawyers who have a salary allowed them for pleading
the cause of the indigent.

This public benefactor to his native city is the son of a tailor; and, in
order to show that he was superior to the prejudices which so long enslaved his
country, he appointed the oldest tailor at Orleans in indigent circumstances to
take care of this new institution.

Doctor Petit I suppose felt, that, having arrived at eminence by the path of
all others the most honorable, that of distinguished talents, he might be
allowed to recollect, without blushing, the roture of his birth. Perhaps he
thinks on this subject as Boileau did when he wrote -- -- Fussiez vous issus
d'^ercule en droite ligne,
Si vous ne fai^es voir qu'une bassesse indigne,
Ce long amas d'^^eux que vous diffamez tous,
Sont autant de ^^^oins qui parlent contre vous.


The late king of Prussia was told by one of his courtiers, that two ladies of
high rank had a dispute about precedence, which was become so serious that it
was necessary for his majesty to interpose his authority in deciding the
question. Well -- give the precedence to the greatest fool.
"Eh bien!" said Frede^^c, "qu on done le pas a la plus folle."

LETTER XI.
THERE is an university at Orleans, founded by Philippe le Bell, in 1312. If one
can forgive a tyrant who pursued his own aggrandizement, sometimes by the most
perfidious policy, sometimes by the most cruel oppressions, and who first
changed offenses against the king, which until his reign were only considered
as crimes of felony, into crimes of high treason, it must be in consideration
of his having, in that barbarous age, done something for the cause of
literature. In this instance it appears that he did not reason with his usual
subtilty; since the progress of literature is very unfavourable to the
interests of tyranny. What example so memorable, and so recent, of this truth,
as the event of the French revolution? That glorious event which will probably
in its consequences change the face of this earth, and will be marked in the
page of history as that luminous point of human annals, from which a better
order of things is seen to arise: and this event has surely been the work of
literature, of philosophy, of the enlarging views of mankind. Liberty springs
as naturally from knowledge, as light from the sun; and the liberty which the
French have acquired, and are determined to maintain, appears to be the
deliberate, the noble, the august choice of reason. It has no resemblance to
those fiery meteors which sometimes throw a transitory flash across that
darknnss which they have not sufficient power to dispel: it is the sublime
effect of truth visiting the land, like the dayspring from on high, and, with
a similiar kind of influence over the moral world, warming the heart, in
proportion as it enlightens the understanding.

The French, in forming their new constitution, have made an experiment in
politics, and why should they be censured for so doing? While philosophy
teaches the general utility of experimental science, who will be bold enough to
assert, that the science of government alone has attained perfection, and is
incapable of improvement? Who will say to the human understanding, on this one
point only, thus far shall thou go, and no farther? If the progression of
reason in the art of government is forbidden, how miserable are the prospects
of the human race! for small indeed is the portion of political happiness
hitherto obtained by mankind.

But why do I attempt to justify the conduct of the French, when you know we
have all heard that they have been guilty of the most fatal errors? They have
shown some disposition to reform the papal hierarchy, and to separate the
artificial splendor of church establishments from the pure beams of that light
which comes from above. They have invaded the grand monuments of the dead, and
thrown open the melancholy tomos of the living. They have led beauty from the
solitary cell, where its charms might have bloomed in security, and have
exposed those dangerous attractions to the love and admiration of society. They
have drawn forth coins and medals, paintings and statues, from those venerable
repositories where they had long lain buried with their past possessors. Their
sacrilegious hands have disturbed the learned dust of libraries stored with
theological controversies, and which displayed perhaps the weakness, as well as
the strength of the human mind: and, instead of employing the mason, and the
carpenter, in repairing the ravages of time on Gothic edifices, they have
erected obelisks to a pagan divinity, not to be found in the monkish calendar,
and degraded at Rome every since the days of the ancient republic. But let us
turn from the enumeration of their transgressions against that code of
respectable prejudices, stamped with the authority of past age^, and which in
the opinion of some people ought to be deemed no less irreversible than the
decrees of the Medes and Persians.

I shall finish my letter with the remark of a lady formerly noble, with whom I
was lately in company. Some person happened to mention the philosophers of
France; Ah! do not talk any more of those wretches of philosophers; it is they
who have occasioned all our misfortunes by their impertinent writing.
"Ah!" said ^he, with great warmth, "n'en parlez plus de^ces gueux de
philosophes; ce sont e^x qui ont cau^^ tous nos mallieurs avec leurs ecrits
impertinens.

LETTER XII.
WE left Orleans the beginning of December, and are come to pas^ the winter at
Paris. Such of our acquaintances as are aristocrates tell us how much we ought
to lament the evil destiny which has led us to Paris at present; that the town
has lost all its former eclat; that all the good company are at Coblent^; that
the splendid equipages are laid aside; that the public walks, where formerly
none but persons comme il faut were suffered to enter, are now filled with
people whom nobody knows; and that, upon the whole, we may consider ourselves
as most unfortunate travelers, who have come to see the Paris at a time when
there is nothing to be seen.

Notwithstanding this obliging pity of some of my acquaintances, I am rather
disposed to congratulate myself that I have missed the ^ine equipages, the
laced liveries, and the good company at Coblentz; while I have an opportunity
of observing the effects of a revolution, so noble in its design, so
astonishing in the sudden change produced in the sentiments of a whole nation,
rising from the servility of abject servitude, to such an exalted spirit of
freedom, that the contemplation inspires unwearied admiration and wonder.

I believe that the former magnificence of Paris, when its public places and
public walks were crowded with persons distinguished by stars and ribbons,
would have conveyed sensations very different, and far less delightful to my
heart than those which I have felt amidst rejoicing multitudes, who had no
other claim to distinction than virtue and patriotism, and no other decoration
than the national cockade.

I have sometimes recollected, on those occasions, the fine lines of Addison.

" Oh, Liberty, thou goddess heavenly bright,
" Profuse of bliss, and pregnant with delight!
" Eternal pleasures in thy presence reign,
" And smiling Plenty leads thy wanton train;
" Eased of her load, Subjection grows more light,
" And Poverty looks cheerful in they ^ight;
" Thou make the gloomy face of nature gay,
" Giv'st beauty to the sun, and pleasu^^ to the day."
I ever witness these scenes of general ^elicity without indulging the hope
that a period is approaching more favorable than any former period, to the
general happiness of the human race; when the crooked subtleness of politi^s
and the open violations of justice will alike pass away, and what has hitherto
been considered as the fond speculation of the philosopher, the golden dream of
the moralist, will become historical fact; when we shall no longer trace in the
annals of history a sanguinary list of crimes; when ambition, deprived of all
power of doing evil, will only be left the ability to do good, and be forbidden
any longer to cover the earth with desolation; and when no path to glory will
be le^t, but from the cultivation of human happiness.

Do not imagine, however, that the emigrants have l^^t nothing behind them but
public spirit and public virtue; and that all splendor, taste, and gaiety have
fled with them to Coblentz. There are at present no less than twenty theaters
at Paris, which are well filled every nig^t; and at most of which you see
charming acting. The grace, the sprightliness, the naivete, the easy natural
movements of their comic actors fa^ surpass any thing our London theaters can
boast. Let us resign to the French the palm of comedy, since the laurels of
tragedy are all our own. -- There is but one Siddons, one transcendant genius,
who has every passion of the human heart at her command, and the sublime graces
of whose performance it is impossible not to feel, but no less impossible to
describe.

" Gestures, that marks with force, and feeling fraught,
" A scene in silence, and a will in thought;
" All perishable, like the electric fire,
" But strike the eye, and as they strike expire;
" Incense too pure a bodied frame to bear,
" Its fragrance charms the sense, and melts in air."
Mademoiselle Clairon, the celebrated French tragic actress, not contented with
the ^ame she had acquired, once attempted contrary to the advice of her
friends, to act the part of Merope, in Voltaire's tragedy; a part which Madame
Dusmenil, the rival of Mademoiselle Clairon, had acted with extraordinary
success. A friend of Mademoiselle Clairon's, who ^upped with her after the
performance, said to her, "You have very fine tragic powers, but you must
absolutely renounce the part of Merope; for there Madame Dusmenil is far
superior to you." Ah, yes! the wretch -- she has had a child!
"Ah oui!" said Mademoiselle Clairon, heaving a deep sigh, "^a miserable! --
elle a eu un enfant!

Is it a proof of the superior refinement of the French, that they are fonder
of theatrical amusements than the English? Or does it arise from that love of
gaiety and pleasure, which is so much more prevalent in the French than the
English character? A London tradesman, when the business of the day is over,
sits down contentedly with his wife and children, and reads the newspaper. But
a bourgeois at Paris usually concludes the day at one of the spectacles, and
this without injuring his circumstances; as a taste for th^se amusements being
universal at Paris, there are spectacles adapted to every purse, and pleasure
may be had at a very cheap rate.

There are coffee-houses on the Boulevards, where the people, while they drink
their wine, lemonde, or orgeat, are entertained with a play gratis. Women, as
well as men, are admitted to these coffee-houses; for the English idea of
finding ease, comfort, or festivity, in societies where women are excluded,
never enters into the imagination of a Frenchman.

Not that the same gallantry, the same constant attention to women now prevails
which existed before the revolution. -- Like Moliere's Doctor, "on a change
tout cela." The men, engrossed by political concerns which involve the fate of
their country, and on which their own lives and fortunes depend, have no longer
leisure or inclination to devote as much time as they did formerly to the
women; and I think the French ladies stand a fair chance of being soon almost
as much neglected as the English. Not only the age of chivalry, ^^t the age of
petits ^^a^tres is past.

The greatest simplicity in dress is observed, and is sometimes carried even to
negligence. Every man seems at pains to show that he has wasted as few moments
as it was possible at his toilette, and that his mind is bent on higher cares
than the embellishment of his person. I am that this revolution in dress and
manners, this subversion of the ancient laws of etiquette, has excited such a
degree of surprise and wonder in the king's attendants at the Tuilleries, that,
notwithstanding this is the fourth year of French liberty, those gentlemen have
not yet got the better of their astonishment. Nothing, it is said, can exceed
the minute curiosity, and the expressive looks, shrugs, and gestures, with
which they examine the dress of the members of the National Assembly, when sent
on deputations to the king. It is known that these gentlemen in waiting, having
no idea of dignity, unaccounted with a sword and bag, were disposed to treat
the deputations from the National Assembly with contempt, till Mirabeau took
the trouble to give them a lesson on that subject.

He was sent at the head of a deputation of the National Assembly to the king.
The attendants, instead of going to inform his majesty, that they desired an
audience, kept them waiting in the antichamber. M^rabeau, however, did not wait
long. He rose from his seat, and with that commanding aspect and emphatic tone
which belonged to him, walking up to a ci-devant duke, he said, Sir, I order
you to go and inform the king, that the representatives of the French nation
are here.
"Monsieur, je vous or done d'aller dire au Roi que les representans de la
nation Franetc;cedil;aise sont ici." He was obeyed without one moment's
hesitation.

But to return to the theaters. The little comic pieces which are acted at the
petits spectacles at Paris are far superior to our London after pieces, which
in general are full of coarse, broad humor, much more calculated to exci^e
disgust than laughter.

Even Harlequin, at Paris, instead of confining himself, as he does at London,
to manual wit, and feats of activity, assumes a character of naivete diverting
enough. In this stlye is the account he gives to a friend of his having fallen
in love: I am eve^ half married. -- But how? -- Why I am ready,' and there is
nothing wanting but the consent of the young lady.
"Et meme," adds he, "je s^is moitie marie." "Mais comment?" Replies his friend.

"Ce que je le veux bien," says Harlequin, "et il ne manque que le consentment
de la demoiselle."

The opera at Paris infinitely surpasses, in the splendor of its decorations,
the illusion of the machinery, and the charm of the dancing, the opera at
London. But you know I am no enthusiastic admirer of this fashionable
amusement. I always find at an opera such an air of burlesque, something so
artificial, nature and simplicity so completely banished, that, notwithstanding
I love music passionately, I cannot help sometimes feeling that the music at an
opera "plays round the head, but comes not to the heart." And I am inclined to
think with Lord Chesterfield, that, in order to be pleased with that
entertainment, you ought to leave your understanding with your half-guinea at
the door.

LETTER XIII.
WE have been to see the magnificent Palais de Bourbon. This immense pile of
building, with its numerous and spacious courts, now deserted, solitary, and
silent, affords ample room for moralizing. The petit Palais in which the Prince
de Conde usually lived, and where ^e frequently entertained select parties of
his friends, is fitted up with a degree of beauty, taste, and elegance, of
which you can form no idea from any royal dwelling you have seen in England.

The Abbe de Mably, however, seems of opinion that, while our cottages are
snug, warm, and comfortable, we have no reason to blush that the French bear
away the palm from us in point of palaces. I have just read the Abbe de Mably's
book, entitled, "Des Droits et des Devoirs du Citoyen," a work written several
years ago, and in which the progress of the public mind in France, and the
steps which led to the French revolution, are traced with so much simplicity,
clearness, energy, and truth, that it seems rather the history of what has
passed, than a prophecy of what was then to come.

When the Bastille was taken, this book, together with a large edition of
another work of the Abbe de Mably's, entitled, "Des Observations sur (...)
Histoire de France," were found in an apartment appropriated to the purpose of
containing such books as were judged improper for the eye of the public; and it
is certain that the writings of the Abbe de Mably are sufficiently
philosophical to have deserved, under the reign of despotism, being made
prisoners of state.

We have also been to visit Rincy and Mouceaux, two houses belonging to the
Duke of Orleans. Mouceaux is the most singular and enchanting spot I ever saw.
You are led through long magnificent galleries, ^urnished with the most happy
union of simplicity and elegance, and lighted by a thousand lamps, to a
hothouse formed into serpentine walks, where, in the middle of winter, and at a
time when the ground was covered with snow, an infinite variety of flowers
diffused the most delicious fragrance. The air was of the temperature of
spring, a cascade falls over rocks with the most soothing murmurs, and this
delightful spot leads to the dining apartment, from which you enjoy the
beauties and fragrance of this elysian walk, where the charms of nature and the
embellishments of art are blended together in a manner which I imagined was
only to be found in the palaces of sylphs and fairies; personages, who, you
know, are supposed to have a great deal more facility in raising splendid
palaces than we mere mortals.

Rincy is a noble mansion, where Mons. d'Orleans, who has lived much in
England, has united with the taste and grandeur of a French palace, the
comforts and accommodations of an English house.

The grounds of Rincy are laid out in the English taste, are very beautiful,
and of considerable extent. We dined with an English gentleman in the service
of Mons. d'Orleans, and who lives in a charming house in his park.

In the morning we hunted a boar. This was the first time in my life I had ever
been at a chase, and I find it an amusement so little suited to my taste, that
I shall certainly never try it again. We rode in phaetons up and down the
alleys of the woods, in search of this wretched animal, who at last yielded
himself up to the dogs, and had his life spared to another day. I believe a
French hunt is as little suited to the taste of an English fox-hunter, as it is
to mine, but for a very different reason: here are neither enclosures to pass,
nor six-barred gates to leap; there is neither danger to encounter, nor glory
to be gained; and too small a chance of a broken neck to interest the passions
of an English 'squire.

Since the revolution, such quantities of game have been destroyed, that this
English gentleman has thought proper to preserve a number of the wild
inhabitants of the forests from the general slaughter, by confining them in
separate paddocks, where boars, hares, etc. are regularly fed: but I do not
believe their good fare reconciles them to the loss of their liberty. I have no
doubt they would prefer jour maigre, together with the unconfined range of the
woods, to any fete within the paddock.

The English gentleman with whom we dined at Rincy, showed me a little
engraving of the descent of Messrs. Charles and Robert from their balloon.
These aerial adventurers were followed on horseback by Mons. d'Orleans, and a
great number of persons, among whom was this Englishman.

The balloon descended after a course of thirty miles; and the Englishman,
getting the start of the other horseman, seized a cord of the balloon as it
descended, and then springing to embrace Mons. Charles, reminded him, that he
was the first to meet him. But being obliged to express this sentiment in
French, he could find in the agitation of the moment no other words than, I am
Charles the first.
"Moi Charles premier." The French company were amused with the expr^ssion, and
soon after an engraving appeared of the descent of the balloon, the train of
gentlemen on horseback, the Englishman holding the cord, and these words below
the print, "Moi Charles premier."

While the French princes are employing their revenues in training soldiers for
the purpose of deluging their native country with blood, Mons. d'Orleans is
spending a considerable part of his revenue in paying workmen who are making
improvements at Rincy. Mons. d'Orleans has many enemies, who tell you that his
patriotism is all affectation. However, since it has been uniform and constant,
from the first period of the revolution, I know not on what grounds this
conjecture is founded: but this at least is certain, that it would save this
nation many millions, and too probably a great profusion of blood, if the other
French princes had distinguished themselves by the same kind of affectation.

With regard to the family of Mons. d'Orleans, whom, in consequence of my
acquaintance with Madame de Sillery, I have the honor of knowing a little, I
am firmly persuaded, from my own observations, that their patriotism is pure,
warm, and dis^interested. They are too amiable for disguise, and the genuine
feelings of their minds are easily discerned. "I am accused," says Madame de
Sillery, in her last interesting publication, "of having taught the princes
under my care to love the revolution: whereas their love of the revolution is
but the natural, the necessary effect of those principles which I had long ago
inculcated in their minds."

To young persons who had been instructed that the chief privilege arising from
their high rank, was that of affording them opportunities of more extensive
benevolence; who had learned "the luxury of doing good," and imbibed the
principles of general philanthropy toward the human race -- to such young
persons it was an easy task to make some sacrifices to the happiness of
millions, and to love the revolution of their country.

LETTER XIV.
I WENT on Christmas day to hear high mass at the magnificent church of Notre
Dame, where the colors are now displayed which used to float on the towers of
the Bastille, before that gloomy fortress was taken.

Mass was performed by the archbishop of Paris, with great solemnity and
devotion. Some parts of the music were fine, and I felt my mind raised and
affected by it.

I often recollected, in the course of the day, with a tender and melancholy
emotion, my distance from England, where that day is passed in a manner far
more interesting than in France. With us, you know, it is spent in the bosom of
your family, or consecrated to the friends and connections you love most, while
formal visitors are excluded. This is not the case in France^: the theaters are
crowded with company, and the day passes in the usual amusements.

The last evening of the old year we went, about eight o'clock, to the Palais
Royal, where the walks were filled with people, and most of the shops
illuminated, particularly the confectioners, which in every part of Paris are
splendidly lighted up on this evening, and make a more agreeable appearance
than our pastry-cooks shops on Twelfth-night in London; where the sight of so
much plum-cake as is then displayed becomes rather oppressive after ten years
of age. The confectioners shops here are filled with ornamented glass boxes for
sweetmeats, and a variety of pretty trinkets, which people buy, and present to
their friends at this season.

A gentleman who called here this morning, told me an anecdote, which I shall
relate to you. -- A friend of his, formerly one of the guard du corpse, and who
very narrowly escaped from the fury of the people on the 6th of October, 1789,
came a few days ago to Paris, and immediately sent for a hair-dresser. The
officer, while he was dressing, told the man, that he thought he remembered his
face. "Yes, sir, said the hair-dresser; "and I recollect you perfectly -- you
were in the guard du corpse; I saw you on the sixth of October." Faith, I
escaped very narrowly; I was very near being hanged. -- Yes, indeed, sir, and I
held the lord.
"Ma ^oi," said the officer, "j'ai echappe bell; j'etais been pres d'etre
pendu." "Ou^ vraimen^, monsieur, replied the hair-dresser, "et moi j'ai tenu la
cord,"

I observe with pleasure a proof which the Parisians give of that general
veneration for genius, which prevails in this city, by calling several of the
streets of Paris after the names of celebrated men. Here is the quay of
Voltaire, the street of Jean Jaques Rousseau, the street of Mirabeau, and,
since the death of the Abbe Cerutti, a man of letters, and a patriot, the
people have made the ci-devant street of Artois drop its aristocratical
pretensions, and ass^me the name of Cerutti.

Why is no street, or square, in London named after Pope, Milton, or, to rise
to the highest climax of human genius, after Shakspeare? We seem to have a
strange dread to England of indulging any kind of enthusiasm, however laudable.
We are very apt to wrap up our feelings in the unrelenting severity of wisdom
on occasions when it would be far more amiable to give way to the impulse of
the heart. You will see Frenchmen ba^^ed in tears at a tragedy. An Englishman
has quite as much sensibility to a generous or tender sentiment; but he thinks
it would be unmanly to weep; and, though perhaps half choked with emotion, he
scorns to be overcome, contrives to gain the victory over his feelings, and
throws into his countenance as much apathy as he can well wish.

We have also such a profound dread of ridicule in England; we are so afraid of
one another, that, instead of going into company with the hope of pleasing, we
only entertain the humble desire of escaping censure. A French society, with a
happy mixture of enthusiasm and nonchalance, ventures on a thousand traits of
sentiment, and sprightly sallies, which make the hours pass away agreeably; but
which an English company would not hazard for the world; but -- do a wilful
stillness entertain,
With purpose to be dressed in an opinion
Of wisdom, gravity, profound conceit;
-- I do know of those,
That therefore only are reputed wise,
For saying nothing. --
And yet I can find no other reason for the English going into company with
their minds in complete armor, and their understanding always in a posture of
defense, except, that an Englishman cannot bear to be laughed at, and that a
Frenchman can; for I do not believe there is more good nature in France than in
England. Writing upon this subject recals powerfully to my heart the idea of
those friends with whom I passed most of my time in London; of that society
which absence can only serve to endear, by convincing me that its loss is
irreparable.

I have heard a gentleman allege, that French and English conversation
amounted to the same thing; for, said he, The English say nothing, and the
French say nothings.
"Les Anglais ne di^ent rien, et les Franetc;cedil;ais di^ent des riens."

There are no talents which I feel more disposed to envy than those of wit and
eloquence in conversation; than the power of giving it a fresh ^low when it
grows languid; when, to use the beautiful image of Mrs. Piozzi, "the little
stream of prattles ceases to murmur for want of a few pebbles to break its
course." A propos of eloquence -- One evening at Streatham Park, some person
asked Doctor Johnson, how he would choose to distribute the great offices of
state which were at that time vacant, amongst the literary ladies of his
acquaintance. "M^s. Carter," said he, "shall be appointed Lord High Chancellor
of England." "And what place will you give to the lady of this house?" somebody
inquired. "We will give her," answered Johnson, "a seat in the House of
Commons, and she will rise of herself."

LETTER XV.
THERE were some commotions lately at Paris, on account of an attempt to
monopolize sugar, which was already sold at an enormous price, and which the
poor of Paris, who live as much upon coffee as the poor of London do upon tea,
considered as one of the necessaries of life. For three nights the guards were
trebled, and the town was lighted up for greater security. In a few days the
commotion was entirely appeased, which I own had never given me the smallest
alarm; for I always consider myself in perfect safety at Paris under the
protection of the national guard, which the Parisians call, with truth, la
^auve-garde de la ville. The national guards are so much respected by the
people, that they find it easy to enforce obedience, and they generally make
the wisest and most temperate use of their power.

I have been several times at the National Assembly. The debates in this second
legislature are less interesting than those of the Constituent Assembly, where
almost at every ^itting some pillar of the ancient system was thrown down, and
some part of the new fabric rose majestically from its ruins. Neither does this
assembly display the same blaze of talents which astonished and dazzled in the
former. She can boast of no Mirabeau, no transcendent genius -- on the ample
pinion,
That the Theban eagle bear,
Sailing with supreme dominion
Through the azure depths of air --
Yet will she soar, and keep her equal way
-- how far above the great!
And one may apply to the genius of this assembly what I lately read in a
little collection of French letters, where the writer, speaking of the talents
for poetry which prevail so generally in the southern provinces of France, the
country of the Troubadours, says, "Nobody has immense riches of genius in this
country; but easy, even affluent fortunes are very common; and the sum of
poetical wealth is upon the whole far more considerable than if a great deal
were accumulated upon one head."

There is a sufficient stock of ability in the National Assembly, animated as
it is by the most important and exalted objects. A member of the National
Assembly knows that he is pleading not merely the cause of the people of
France. He is speaking at the tribune of Europe, and he is pleading the cause
of all the people of the earth. For it is now too late for the lovers of
arbitrary power to consider the French revolution in the light in which they
once affected to consider it. The time long ago is past, for terming that event
an affair of accident, and the triumph of the rabble, which is found to have
originated in the unanimous will of a great and enlightened nation, and has
taught mankind a lesson, which perhaps the whole human race will be proud to
learn.

I heard the decree passed in the National Assembly for confiscating the
estates of the emigrants. They, and their chie^s the French princes, will
probably soon tire the short-lived pity of foreign courts, and will be doomed
to wander over Europe, as the adherents of the house of Stuart have done, poor,
wretched, and abandoned. Yet how different the situation of the Scotch and
French fugitives! How different the situation of the descendants of James the
Second, and that of Lewis the Sixteenth! What are the misfortunes of Lewis the
Sixteenth? He has been deprived of despotic power. What (...) his present
situation? He is called by the consent of a free people to the crown of the
greatest nation in Europe. The French emigrants are not, therefore, influenced
by the same generous motives which led the adherents of the house of S^uart to
take up arms, which could be no other than a disinterested attachment to that
family, in defense of which they risked their lives and fortunes. The French
emigrants, on the contrary, would deluge their native country with blood,
sooner than renounce titles that were vain, and privileges that were odious.

LETTER XVI.
I HAVE been at the Jacobins, that society which has acted a part so
distinguished in the French revolution, and in which every political question
of importance is debated before it is brought forward in the National Assembly.
The Jacobins have too much influence in the new system of French politics not
to have many enemies. By those persons every crime, every enormity is
attributed to this society; which, it is asserted, has not only the fate of
France, but the fate of Europe in its hands. If the Emperor of Germany is
hostile to the French nation, it is the fault of the Jacobins. Leopold felt the
most tender and paternal interest in the prosperity of the new constitution;
but he was forced to make a declaration of war against that formidable, that
atrocious sect. To the Jacobins is owing every outrage committed by popular
fury, and every treasonable design conceived by the aristocratic factions. The
Jacobins are the contrivers of all disorder, the levellers of all distinctions,
and the enemies of all subordination. It is their intention to overturn the
present system of government, and divide the French empire into eighty-three
republics, governed by Jacobins.

Such is the cry, not merely of those who have the courage to profess
themselves of the artistocratic party, but also of those, who, however they may
regret the subversion of the old government, have sagacity enough to perceive
that, like the age of chivalry, it is past for ever, and therefore prudently
determine to attempt its restoration no more. The ancient system of abuses they
find must be renounced, and therefore they limit their ambition to the
conversation of as many errors, as many prejudices as possible. These persons
talk to you of their profound respect for the new constitution, which they
accuse the Jacobins of wishing to subvert. I believe, indeed, that if there are
some points of the constitution which the Jacobins disapprove, they are those
very points which these persons would bind on their posterity for ever. Even
among the patriots there are many who think that, the constitution being now
established, the deliberations of the Jacobins are no longer necessary, and who
also think that that society leans too much toward republicanism.

There are in France several different sects of patriots; but the two leading
parties and those who are reproachfully termed by each other, enrages and
moderes; and the great features of difference between these parties seem to be
that the erages place the declaration of rights above the constitution, while
the moderes place the constitution above the declaration of rights. Each party
is as dogmatical as the former doctors of the Sorbonne. But a Frenchman never
disputes with calmness on any subject: it were therefore unreasonable to expect
he should throw aside the natural impetuosity of his character, on the very
points most likely to call it forth.

This accounts, in some measure, for the violent tumults which sometimes arise
in the National Assembly; while in our House of Commons debates are carried on
with the most perfect good order and tranquillity. Another reason, however, may
be assigned for this, besides the difference of national character. In the
House of Commons our great orators may be as eloquent as they will; they may do
honor to our nation, and to the age in which they live, by the energy, the
sublimity of their talents; but every body knows that their eloquence does not
influence even one solitary vote; and before a debate begins, all the world is
well apprised how the business will end.

This is not the case in the National Assembly. There, arguments and votes have
still a connection with each other; and therefore every point is discussed with
vehemence. -- But to return to the Jacobins -- If they have many enemies, the
party of their friends is far more numerous. Those persons declare that they
never enter the hall of the Jacobins without respect, because they consider it
as the cradle and the sanctuary of French liberty. They are convinced that
those watchful, vigilant, jealous, noisy Jacobins are its best guardians; and
that but for the extensive influence which they have acquired, in consequence
of their correspondence with the other partriotic societies, established in
every part of the kingdom, with whom they constantly maintain a chain of
connection, the infant liberty of France would have been crushed in its birth
by its numerous and formidable enemies. The friends of the Jacobins believe
that they are very far from intending to overthrow the present system, whatever
speculative opinions some of the members of that society may have on the
subject of government: but that, if the Jacobins should find that corruption is
suffered to taint the purity of the new constitution and impede its march -- if
it should be found that the first National Assembly, after having formed that
constitution upon the great and everlasting basis of the rights of man, and of
which the Abbe Sieyes has the glory of having laid the cornerstone in drawing
up the declaration of those rights -- if it should be found that that assembly,
after sustaining a long and laborious struggle, at length wearied of the
conflict, should suffer the beautiful work they had created to be deformed in
the revision of it -- if it should be found that the constitution, in its
present state, is like an ill-constructed carriage, and that it is in the powof
the drivers to put some secret clogs upon the wheels, and prevent its going
forward, while the patriots in vain lash up the horses -- then, it is said, the
Jacobins will warn the people of the threatened danger, with that bold, that
ardent eloquence which belongs to the apostles of liberty.

I was at the Jacobins when the English, French, and American colors, fastened
together with bands of laurel and national ribbon, were placed in the hall. As
soon as the colors appeared, the hall re^ounded with the acclamations of more
than two thousand persons who were present, and who immediately rose from their
seats; the men waved their hats in the air, and from every quarter were
re-echoed the cries of Long live liberty -- Long live England -- Long live
France -- Long live the nations that are free!
"vive la liberte -- Vive l'Angleterre -- Vive la France -- Vivent les nations
libres!" At the sight of those banners, so often the symbo^s of war, of
desolation, of horror, now become the pledges of peace, of good will, of union
between the nations, every heart seemed animated with a sacred enthusiasm,
every bosom throbbed with sympathy, and every eye was ^elted with tears. The
colors were fixed in the hall, and it was proposed by some of the members, and
ordered by the society, that the busts of Price, Franklin, Algernon Sidney,
Jean Jaques Rousseau, and the Abbe de Mably, should be placed beneath the
banners of the three nations.

The names of Milton, of Lock, and of Hambden, re-echoed through the hall,
where it was proposed that their busts should also in a short time be placed. I
heard with exultation the well-known names of these celebrated persons, and
recollected with pride that I had the honor of belonging to the same country.
Surely that nation which produced the writings of Milton and of Lock, which
gave birth to Sidney and Hambden, in ages when the rest of Europe were slaves,
has a claim to the everlasting gratitude and admiration of mankind.

In this enlightened period of the world more perfect systems of legislation
may perhaps be formed than England can boast. Her Magna Charta was obtained not
in the illumination of the eighteenth, but in the Gothic darkness of the
twelfth century. She can never be deprived of the most glorious pre-eminence
among the children of freedom; she, who cherished in her bosom the noble
sentiments of liberty, when the nations around her were sunk in the most abject
servitude. If those nations now find the path of freedom, it is by pursuing the
track which England first explored.

The example of the revolution in America is supposed to have had considerable
influence on the French nation: and from whom did the Americans imbibe their
love of freedom? They loved it because they were of English race, and had
studied the writings of English philosophers, and the examples of English
patriots.

May England rectify the abuses and corruptions which have crept into her
government by wise and temperate reformation -- may she avoid those storms and
convulsions which are only necessary to purify the moral, as well as the
physical world, from any mighty and fatal contagion. While France has been
obliged to correct her government by holding in one hand her philosophic
declaration of rights, and grasping her unsheathed sword in the other -- may
England effect the same august purpose with no other arms than those of reason
-- may she, without interrupting her national prosperity, employ the most
effectual means of securing its continuance -- may she direct that full tide of
wealth which rolls through the land, to visit it in more equal streams; and may
there be "no leading into captivity, and no complaining in her streets!"

LETTER XVII.
THE first National Assembly, amidst the greatness and extent of its labors,
was obliged to leave to a succeding assembly the task of instituting a plan of
public education; a task which will soon occupy the present legislature, and
will alone serve to immortalize it, if well performed.

It is said, that Monsieur Condorcet, a member of the present National
Assembly, is at present employed on this object; and there can be no doubt that
he will execute the work he has undertaken with that philosophical spirit, and
that extensive knowledge, which he possesses in so conspicuous and eminent a
degree.

How many soothing, how many comprehensive and sublime ideas does this plan of
public education include! There is something infinitely agreeable and
delightful to the imagination in the anticipation of that progress which the
rising generation in this country may make in reason, in philosophy, in virtue,
and in happiness; and the improvement of the rising generation cannot but be
highly interesting to the friends of the French revolution, since it seems
peculiarly for them that that revolution has been made. They will best enjoy
the benefits resulting from it. The present patriots of France may be said
figuratively, as well as literally, to be placed in a field of battle, they
have long-rooted prejudices to conquer; they have ancient errors to subdue;
which perhaps are more difficult to be vanquished than the combined forces of
Germany and of Prussia. In the august career of liberty, these patriots are
encompassed with dangers, and beset with snares; and if they are now enabled to
keep the field against those who were formerly their tyrants, it is by the
determined, the unremitting contest they maintain with vice, venality, and
corruption. But through the clouds and storms which now obscure the French
horizon, it is easy to discern the clear, the bright perspective which unfolds
itself to the rising race. We see that the blessings of enlightened freedom
await them, and we rejoice that a suitable education will qualify them to enjoy
their distinguished lot; that they will be made worthy of their high destiny,
and fit guardians of that better order of things which they will be called upon
to maintain.

Mirabeau had drawn out a plan of public instruction, which he meant to present
to the National Assembly; and he intended, when this question was discussed, to
propose at the same time the abolition of the literary academies, or rather
corporations of Paris, which he considered as incompatible with the spirit of a
free constitution, and as injuring instead of serving the cause of letters.

Mons. Chamfort, a member of the French academy, had, at Mirabeau's desire,
written a discourse on the subject of that academy, which the death of Mirabeau
prevented his reading at the ritbune of the National Assembly. It is a fact
well known in France, that Mirabeau eagerly ^ought and accepted the assistance
of such men as as he thought were capable of furnishing him with ideas worthy
of his own high reputation. -- There was certainly a want of delicacy in thus
wearing, without scruple, as he frequently did, those laurels which were the
right of another. But since he could reconcile himself to borrowed applause, he
was peculiarly fortunate in having Mons. Chamfort for his friend, who, with a
^^nd well qualified to lend ideas to Mirabeau, unites a degree of reserve and
delicacy, which led him to resign with readiness those claims to ^ame which
Mirabeau, without hesitation, made his own. Mons. Chamfort is well known at
Paris, not only as a man of the first literary talents, and as possessing the
most brilliant powers of conversation, but is also distinguished for having
^elt and professed the most ardent love of liberty, many years before the
revolution had brought principles of that kind into fashion. -- What has made
this circumstance well remembered, is, that the society in which this gentleman
constantly avowed these sentiments, was that of the Prince of Conde; on whom it
reflects some honor, that he had sufficient taste to court Mons. Chamfort's
society, and sufficient understanding to pardon the independence of his spirit.

In the discourse which Mons. Chamfort ga^^ to Mirabeau upon the French
academy, (...) paints with admirable acuteness, with all the force of genius,
and all the wit of irony, ^he littleness, the inutility, the absurdities, and
above all the abject spirit which has prevailed in that society: but there is
one passage in this discourse upon "the prize of virtue," established in the
French academy, which is in my opinion a model of fine writing, and I cannot
resist transcribing part of it.

And not to mention that public advertisement, (...) periodical annunciation of
a prize of virtue for the following year, I read the terms of the institution,
and I see this prize is destined for the virtues of such as are of the indigent
class of citizens. What! has then the class of the opulent yielded the palm of
virtue to the poor? No assuredly. That class pre^^nds ^like with the other to
the display of virtue. But the rich will not accept the prize. No; the prize is
gold, and the rich would consider themselves (...) by receiving it. I
understand them; there is (...); and they dis^ain to take it. The rich leave it
to the poor. Do you then mean to pay, or to honor virtue? You surely neither
pretend nor hope she can he paid. You mean then to honor her. It is well. Do
not then begin by degrading her, in placing riches above indigent virtue. O^,
(...) on of every moral idea, (...) from that excess of corruption which it is
calculated to increase! mark the abyss from which we are delivered. Yell me in
what corporation, in (...) society a gentleman would have been admitted who had
accepted the prize of virtue, bestowed by a public assembly! there existed then
amongst us even a roture in virtue. Take back that gold which cannot recompense
a noble action of the rich. Render to virtue sufficient homage to believe that
she alone can also recompense the poor, who, with an opulent conscience, can,
as well as the rich, place a good action between Heaven and his own mind.
Legislators, do not decree (...) divinity of gold, in giving it as a salary for
th^se sublime cautions, th^se noble sacrifices which seem to place man in
communion with his eternal Author. Your decree will be annulled -- it is
already annul^ed in the (...) of the poor -- yes, of the poor, in that moment
when he (...) himself by a generous action. Nothing is more general than the
sentiment which attests this truth. Ah, have you not seen in those disasters,
th^se evils which claim immediate succor -- have you not seen the poor, when
at the risk of life by some great act of courage he has saved one of his
fellow creatures, I mean the rich, the opulent, the happy, for the poor
considers such as his fellow creatures in the moment when they require his
succor -- have you not seen that when, in the first effusions of gratitude for
his preservation, the rich has presented his benefactor with gold -- have you
never observed that indigent, that friendless, for^orn son of poverty draw
back, and bl^^^? An hour before he would have implored your charity. Whence
then arises this generous emotion of the mind? It is that you profane his
virtue, ungrateful as you are! you corrupt your gratitude. He has performed a
good action -- he has enriched himself, and you treat him as if he were poor!
instead of the divine satisfaction of having satisfied the most noble
propensity of the soul, you substitute the idea of his material wants. You
snatch him from heaven, where he felt that he had some interest, to earth,
where he knows that he has none!

Oh, human nature, thus do they honor thee! -- when virtue lifts thee to thy
most sublime elevation, they bring thee gold, they offer thee an alms!


"Et d*abord, lai^^ant a part cette a^^iche, ce concours periodique, ce
programme d'un prix de virtue pour ^annce proch^^ne, je lis les terms de la
fondation, et je vois ce prix destine aux vertus des citoyens dans la class
indigente. Quoi done? Qu'est-ce a dire? La class opulente a-t-elle relegue la
virtue dans la class des pauvres? Non sans doubt. Elle pretend bien, comme
l'autre, pouvoir fair eclater des vertus. Elle ne veut done pas du prix? Non
certes. -- Ce prix est de l'or; le rich en l'acceptant se croirait avili.
J'entends; il n'y en a point assez; il ne le prendrait pas. Le rich l'ose
dire, et pourquoi ne le prendrait-il pas? Le pauvre le prend bien! payez-vous
la virtue? Ou bien l'honorez-vous? Vous ne la payez pas; ce n'est ni votre
pretention, ni votre esperance. Vous l'honorez done! eh bien! commencez par ne
pas l'avilir enmettant la richesse au-dessus de la virtue indigente. (...)
renversement de toutes les idees morales, ne de l'exces de la corruption
public, et ^^it pour l'accroitre encore! men^urons de l'oeil l'abym^ don't
nous ^ortons: dans quel corpse, dans quelle compagnie eut-il ete admis, le
cidevant gentilhomme qui eut acc^pt^ le prix de virtue dans une assemblee
public? Il y avoit parmi nous la roture de la virtue! retirez done votre or,
qui ne peut recompenser une belle action du rich. Rendez a la virtue cet
hommage de croire que le pauvre a ussi peut etre pay par elle; qu'il a, comme
le rich, une conscience opulente et solvable; qu'enfin il peut, comme le
rich, placer une bonne action enter le ciel et lui. Legislateurs, ne ^'ecretez
pas la divinite de l'or, en le donnant pour salaire a ces mouvements sublimes,
a ces grands ^acrifices, qui semblent mettre l'homme en commerce avec son
eternel Auteur. Il serait annulle votre decret, il l'est d'avance dans l'ame ou
pauvre -- oui, du pauv^e, au moment ou il vient de s'honorer par un act
genereux. Il est commun, il est par-tout le sentiment qui atteste cette verite.
Eh! n'avez vous pas vu dans ces desastres qui provoquent le s^^ours general --
n'avezvous pas vu quelqu'un de ces pauvres, lorsqu'an risque de ses jours et
par un grand act de courage, il a fauve l'un de ses semblables, je veux dire,
le rich, l'opulent, l'heureux, car il les prend pour ses semblables, des qu'il
faut les secourir; lorsqu'apres le peril et dans le rest des effusions de sa
reconnaissance, le rich fauve present de l'or a son bienfaiteur, a cet
indigent, a cet homme denue; regardez celui-ci, comme il s'indigne, il recule,
il s'etonne, il rougit -- une heure auparavant il eut mendie. D'^u lui vient ce
noble mouvement? C'est que vous profanez son bienfait, ingrat que vous ^tes!
vous corrompez votre reconnaissance. Il a fait du bien, il vient de s'enrichir,
et vous le traitez en pauvre! Au plaisir celeste d'avoir satisfait le plus beau
besoin de son ame, vous substituez la pensee d'un besoin materiel; vous le
ramenez du ciel, ou il est quelque chose, sur la terre, ou il n'est rien. O
nature hum^ine! voila comme on t'honore! Quand la virtue t'eleve a ta plus
grande hauteur, c'est de l'or qu'on vient t'offrir, c'est l'au moan qu'on te
present!"

You will be disposed to believe, from the above specimen, that in France
talents and patriotism are, as I have often told you, in strict alliance.

LETTER XVIII.
THE Prince de Piemont conversing lately upon the commotions which agitate
Europe at present, ended by saying, In short, those who wish to reign must make
baste.
"Ensin, il faut que ce^x qui veulent regner se depechent." The minds of men,
roused and animated by the most important and extraordinary movements, do,
indeed, seem to lose sight a little of "that divinity that hedges in a king."

I am not, however, always occupied by these vast political discussions, but
spend a part of every day at the Lycee, a charming institution, where learning
seems stripped of its thorns and decorated with flowers, and where the gay and
social Parisians cultivate science and the belles lettres, amidst the pleasures
and attractions of society; while in England, where the art of being happy is
certainly far less understood than in France, when we wish to acquire
knowledge, we shut ourselves up for that purpose in sober meditation, and
serious solitude. Perhaps, indeed, the knowledge gained by solitary study may
be the most profound; but the knowledge acquired in society leaves on the mind,
the most agreeable impression.

The Lycee was formed in 1785, under the auspices of Monsieur the king's
brother, and Monsieur d'Artois, and was soon resorted to not only by men of
letters, but by the most fashionable persons of both sexes. Lectures are given
at the Lycee by the most celebrated professors at Paris, on natural philosophy,
chemistry, natural history, botany, history, and belles lettres; and the Greek,
Italian, French and English languages are taught.

The Lycee drooped a little at the period of the revolution. In the violent
convulsion o^ that moment, literature and arts were forgotten. But the Lycee
soon revived; and though its former patrons are now at Coblentz, preparing an
attempt, of which the lessons of history they received at the Lycee might have
taught them the solly and impracticability, that of enslaving a people who are
determined to be free; this institution is rising every day into higher
celebrity from the eminent abilities of some of the professors. Of their
knowledge in the different sciences they teach, I, in my ignorance, am little
qualified to judge. But I can feel the charms of eloquence, and therefore find
that chemistry, when taught by Mons. Fourcroy, is the most engaging, the most
enchanting science in the world.

Mons. Garat, member of the first National Assembly, gives us lectures on Roman
history, no less interesting than philosophical, and frequently makes such
sublime applications to the revolution of France as call from my eyes the tears
of delight and admiration.

Sometimes our studies are accompanied by ^ine music; and sometimes the Abbe de
Lille, the first French poet, recites his harmonious verses.

Upon the whole, the pleasures of the Lycee are perfectly congenial to my
taste; and it is to me by far the most agreeable of all the various resources
which this great capital affords. I regret we have no such institution in
London. What a relief would some people ^^nd in being able to escape, for an
hour, from those everlasting evenings which are devoted to the dull vacuity of
fashionable conversation, or the ^ad repetitions of card assemblies, and to
store the famished mind with a little stock of thought and sentiment, in such a
society as the Lycee!

I am surprised to meet there with so few of my countrymen. Such of them as
come to Paris in order to acquire the French language, would find at the Lycee
not only the advantages of instruction, but of conversation; since the
gentlemen form a sort of club every evening, when the journals of the ^^y are
read, and its politics discussed.

The Abbe Sicard has at different times explained to us, at the Lycee, the
manner in which he instructs his deaf and dumb pupils, some (...) whom always
accompany him. Nor can you imagine any thing more affecting than the sight of
these unhappy young persons, condemned by nature to lose all that gives li^e
its dearest value, the enjoyments of society, and to find "reason at one
entrance quite shut out." But the melancholy which these reflections inspire is
soothed, by observing that the pupils of the Abbe Sicard have not been left in
this wretched condition. The Abbe showed us with admirable ingenuity, and with
that enthusiasm which it is so natural for a benevolent mind to feel in the
exercise of its powers, by what gradations ^e had led these children, whom he
said, when first put under his care, he considered in the ^ight of young
savages brought from a remote country, and entirely ignorant of his language,
from the knowledge of sensible objects, to moral and intellectual ideas.

One of his pupils, a young man about eighteen years of age, who accompanied
him, appears to possess considerable talents, and answered some abstruse
questions which were put to him by some of the company, with wonderful
acuteness. He is the eldest of a family of five children at Bourdeaux, who are
all deaf and dumb. Some time ago it was proposed to send for his sister to
Paris, and place her also under the Abbe Sicard's care. The young man, who
possesses uncommon sensibility, was in transports of joy at the thoughts of
seeing his sister. In the ^ulness of his heart, he immediately wrote a long
account of her talents and good qualities, and ended in these works: (...)
"Et elle ne rit jamais sans necessite." Is there not a great deal included in
this original kind of eulogium?

I find little leisure for reading amidst the hurry of Paris; but I have
contrived to snatch sufficient time for the perusal of a charming little book
which was published some years ago at Paris, entitled Joseph, written in
imitation or the Death of Abel by G^sner. This story of Joseph is painted with
the most touching simplicity, and embellished with all the graces of poetical
language. Some of the most agreeable hours I have spent at Paris have been
passed in the society of the another of this work, Mons. (...) a Prussian
gentleman, who to superior talents and learning unites the most amiable
manners. He has also published a French translation of Homer, with which the
late King of Prussia was so much pleased, that he used to say it had taught him
to admire the old Grecian bard, for whom before he had felt little veneration.
In general, the applause which a king bestows on a literary performance, may be
thought of less value in the republic of letters, than the approbation of some
heads not encircled with a crown: but the honor arising from the praises of a
poet and philosopher like Frederic the Second, is entirely independent of his
royal station.

LETTER XIX.
YOU have heard no doubt that we have had a fete at Paris, on account of the
arrival of the soldiers de Chateau-Vieux: but to give you an idea of all the
disturbance, animosity, quarrels, and contention, which preceded this civic
fete, would be somewhat difficult. For a fortnight before it took place the
whole town of Paris was thrown into the most violent agitation. The approaching
war seemed forgotten. Francis might threaten, and Prussia might arm; but all
consideration of foreign affairs was laid aside, and the soldiers of
Chateau-Vieux solely occupied the public attention. This Swiss regiment, called
the Chateau-Vieux, was one of those regiments which were encamped in the Champ
de Mars before the revolution, and which were destined to massacre the
Parisians, dissolve the states general, and lay waste the city of Paris. But
the soldiers of Chateau-Vieux disdained to act the part which had been assigned
them in this bloody tragedy: they refused to become the assassins of the
Parisians, and declared to their officers their resolution to break their arms
in pieces, sooner than employ them against the citizens. That soldiers should
dare before they drew their swords to deliberate whether the cause was just --
that when the word of command for murder was given, they should refuse to obey,
because murder is a crime -- was an example of morality, which, if it became
contagious, would, it was immediately felt, prove absolutely destructive to the
good old cause of arbitrary power; and it was resolved to punish the soldiers
of Chateau-Vieux for having dared to reason, when fighting was the only thing
for which they had received orders.

The regiment of Chateau-Vieux was sent to Nancy in that division which Bouille
commanded, and there Bouille, who had already formed his plan of trealon,
attempted to light up the flames of civil war. He led the national guards,
collected in haste from the neighboring municipalities, against the citizens
of Nancy. The soldiers of Chateau-Vieux defended th^se citizens; both parties
were in the most fatal error; a profusion of blood was shed; and Bouille on
this occasion acted a fit prelude to that design of betraying his country which
he had formed at the very moment when he accepted the command of the
considerable force, and had sworn fidelity to the new government. Compared to
the baseness of such conduct, the bold open defiance of the party at Coblentz
has something in it manly and honorable.

The day after the action at Nancy, when the streets were strewed with dead
bodies, among which were two hundred soldiers of Chateau-Vieux, Bouille
assembled a council of war, which condemned twenty-two soldiers of this
regiment to be hanged, and one to be broke upon the wheel. The last words of
this victim were, Bouille will soon be found to be a traitor -- Lon^ live the
nation!
"Bientot Bouille sera reconnu pour un traitre -- Vive la nation!" -- and his
eyes closed themselves in death.

A few of the unfortunate soldiers of Chateau-Vieux still survived, and
forty-two of them were condemned to the galleys, two of whom died on the seats
to which they were chained. Forty still survived, and the National Assembly
passed a decree for their deliverance. This decree remained long unsanctioned;
but, in the mean time, the soldiers of Chateau-Vieux received from the patriots
of Breast, all the support and consolation which their situation admitted. The
ladies of Breast visited the galley where they were chained, and shed tears upon
their ^etters, while the patriots of Paris wearied the ministers with
applications in their behalf, and the decree at length received the royal
assent. The soldiers of Chateau-Vieux left Breast and came to Paris, in order to
offer the tribute of their gratitude at the bar of the National Assembly, and
to declare that the only use they desired to make of the liberty to which they
were restored, was that of shedding the last drop of their blood for the French
nation.

On their way from Breast to Paris, they were received in every town through
which they passed with the most cordial welcome. They were considered as the
victims of the common cause; fetes were prepared for their reception; and
blessings were poured forth upon the National Assembly for having restored them
to liberty.

The people of Paris feeling the same impressions, determined also to prepare a
fete for their reception. The citizens made a voluntary contribution for this
purpose, and the plan of a very magnificent procession was formed. But here the
tale of discord begins. The enemies of the public peace saw in this projected
fete an opportunity of fomenting disorder and troubles, too favorable to be
lost. Reports were rapidly circulated through Paris, that this triumphal entry
of the soldiers of Chateau-Vieux was intended as an insult to the national
guard, who had fought against them. Placards on this subject were pasted up in
every street, hand-bills were distributed, incendiary pamphlets were published,
the minds of the people became inflamed: it was asserted that the fete would
end in a massacre -- in short, every thing was asserted that passion and
party-rage could suggest.

The citizens, however, had gone too far to recede: the fete took place, and
was the more singular and interesting from being stripped of much of its
intended splendor. No person was suffered to carry arms, and the soldiers of
Chateau-Vieux, instead of mounting a triumphal car which had been prepared for
them, were mixed undi^^^^guished with the crowd. The fete, however,
notwithstanding the gloomy augurs which had preceded it, passed without the
smallest disorder.

The people, who were assembled to the number of between three and four hundred
thousand, formed their own police: and, finding some difficulty at setting out
in marshalling the procession, every one being ambitious to have a place near
the triumphal car of liberty, a gardener picked a wheat-ear, with which the
people consented to regulate the order of the march, and wherever the wheat-ear
was carried, immediately ranged themselves in good order.

Thus marshalled by a wheat-ear, instead of being kept in their places as
formerly by the point of bayonets, the people, whom their enemies had accused
of the most dark and atrocious designs, advanced toward the Champ de Mars,
indulging themselves in all the enthusiasm of simple and affectionate joy. They
danced, they sung hymns to liberty, they filled the air with cries of, Vive la
nation!

We saw the procession from the apartments of Mons. De^ormeaux, in the Palais
de Bourbon. This gentleman, who is a man of letters, was many years librarian
to the Prince de Conde; but, instead of following that prince to Coblentz, he
has chosen to share the fortunes of his country. We have received from him all
those polite attentions for which the French have so long been distinguished,
and which I hope they will never lose; for why, in acquiring the great, should
they renounce the amiable qualities? -- But to return to the fete. The people
do not always reason very logically; and therefore, instead of concluding, as
they ought to have done, that since the aristocrates of the Palais de Bourbon
were fled, those who remained behind were probably good patriots, their
conclusions took quite another turn. They could associate no ideas of
patriotism with the Palais de Bourbon, and accused us of aristocracy as they
approached. But they did not remain long in this error. They soon perceived
that we were entirely disposed to sympathize in their festivity, and also that
part of the company were English women: while the gentlemen from our windows
repeatedly called out in as loud voices as they could. "Vive la nation!" the
people answered by crying, "Vivent les Anglaises!"

I have just heard an interesting circumstance relating to a soldier of
Chateau-Vieux, who is now come to Paris in order to meet his old comrades. This
young man was of the number of those whom the council of war at Nancy had
condemned to die. He had gained the affections of a girl who was an inhabitant
of Nancy. With that anguish of heart which those who have loved can perhaps
conceive, and which to those who have not it were vain to describe, this
unhappy girl saw her lover led to execution. The gloomy procession passed by
the house in which she lived; and in the confusion, the tumult, and disorder
occasioned by the number of soldiers who were led together to execution, and by
the rage, the despair, the violnt emotions which agitated the spectators, this
girl contrived to snatch her lover from the fate that threatened him, and
concealed him in a garret of the house she inhabited. How she effected this, it
is difficult to imagine: but you are not ignorant that love is fertile in
expedients; and however it happened, the fact certain. In this garret the young
man lived concealed from every eye but that of his mistress, and sustained by
the food which she purchased with the labor of her hands and which she brought
to him in secret. You will imagine the pleasure with which she toiled to supply
the wants of her lover, and the tears of tenderness and gratitude with which he
bathed the hand that ministered to his necessities. At the end of two months his
father, a rich farmer in one of the Swiss cantons, uncertain of the fate of his
only child, and unable to endure any longer the agonies of suspense, arrived at
Nancy in search of his son. In vain he sought him, in vain he questioned every
person he met concerning him; no tidings, no traces of him were to be sound.
The wretched parent wandered up and down the streets of Nancy in despair. At
length he was told that there was a young person in the town to whom his son
had been much attached; and he was directed to the house where the young man
lay concealed. The girl, when questioned about her lover, at first suspected
some treachery* and denied having any knowledge of what had befallen him. But
she soon perceived in the tears which streamed plentifully down the old man's
cheeks, in the agony which seemed to be bending his gray hairs to the grave,
the genuine feelings of nature. She wept with him, and at length told him, that
if he would call the following day, she would perhaps have it in her power to
give him some tidings of his son. The old man departed: the girl flew to her
lover, to whom she described his figure, and the young man recognized the image
of his father. The next day when the old man returned, the girl led him in
silence to the chamber where his son was concealed. You will imagine better
than I can paint the scene that followed -- The young soldier, after weeping a
long while on his father's neck, told him, in a voice interrupted by sobs, what
he owed to the generous attachment of his mistress; and the father, with a
thousand blessings, and the assurance o^ an ample provision, joined their hands
together.

LETTER XX.
THE aristocrates talk much of the inconstancy and volatile disposition of
their countrymen, and endeavor to persuade you that the French have taken up
the cause of freedom with the same sort of fondness with which they have taken
up many other fashions which are now cast off, and in^inuate, that liberty and
equality will not long remain The order of the day.
a l'ordre du jour.

I believe the persons who think in this manner will find themselves deceived.
What the orator terms, in his beautiful language, "the Corinthian capital of
polished society," is fallen for ever in this country, and the period is
arrived which Shakspeare wished for when he exclaims -- Let none presume
To wear an undeserved dignity.
Oh, that est^^es, degrees, and offices,
Were not derived corruptly; that clear honor
Were purchased by the merit of the wearer!


You have heard, no doubt, of the appointment which has lately been made of
patriotic ministers, all of whom belong to that society against which the house
of Austria is going to open a campaign. It is to be hoped that, under the
auspices of this Jacobin ministry, the affairs of the state will be conducted
with more energy, unanimity, and order, than they have hitherto been. For
though the French have not yet engaged in foreign war, hostilities have long
ago commenced between the executive and legislative powers, and a warm fire has
been kept up on both sides. The union which these two powers formed together
when the king signed the constitution, has gone on as many modern marriages do,
in quarrels and contention, and might perhaps have ended in a divorce, but for
the salutary intervention of this new ministry, which possesses the confidence
of the people.

The courtiers, however, look with no favorable eye upon the new ministers* A
gentleman of my acquaintance went to the Tuille^^es yesterday morning, when an
attendant called him aside, and told him that one of the ministers had that
moment left the king; "and I have such a circumstance to relate," added he,
shrugging up his shoulders, "as will no doubt astonish you." The gentleman, who
is an enthusiastic patriot, immediately took alarm. He concluded that some
fresh calamity had taken place; that some new combination of foreign powers was
formed against the liberty of France; and inquired with the utmost earnestness
what had happened. Would you believe that the minister was even without buckles!
"Imaginez-vous," resumed the attendant, "que le ministre n'avoit pas (...) ne
de boucles!

All, however, that can be expected from ministers without buckles, I have no
doubt the present ministry will perform. One very important task which it has
to execute is that of finding a remedy for the internal troubles excited by
such of the priests as have refused to take the oath of fidelity to the new
government. There is, indeed, little religion in France; but there is still a
sufficient degree of superstition and ignorance in some of the provinces, to
give the priests a very dangerous influence.

A gentleman who traveled last autumn as far as the foot of the Pyrenees,
asked a peasant of that country, whom he met in his walk, how he like the
revolution? I do not love it, ^ir; I am an aristocrate. They have destroyed our
religion, and the power of our holy father the pope.
"Je ne l'aime pas, monsieur," said the peasant; "je suis aristocrate, moi. On
a detruit la religion, et le pouvoir de notre saint pere le pape." The
gentleman, after reasoning with him a little, ended by saying, You do not love
the revolution, my friend, and yet it has been made for you. You have just
gathered in your harvest without paying the tithe to your priests. -- Ah, ^ir,
we like the revolution for that.
"Vous n'aimez pas la revolution, mon ami, et cependant elle a ete faite pour
vous autres: vous venez de fair la moisson ^ans payer la dixme a vos p^etres."
"Ah, monsieur," answered the peasant with quickness, "nous aimons la revolution
pour ca."

"There is one thing," said a shopkeeper's wife to me lately, "which hinders me
from being a good patriot. I know you are free in England, but then you are
heretics; and I am afraid the very same thing will happen in France: I reason.
"moi je raisonne."

The majority of the French nation, however, reason too, and with such success,
that I believe superstition will soon be banished from this country. Knowledge
is diffusing itself over the land with an irresistible progress; the liberal
opinions of philosophy, liberty, and truth, are every where bursting forth like
the fresh leaves of spring; and the period is hastening near when, like the
flowers of summer, these opinions will be full-blown.

LETTER XXI.
A FRIEND of mine, who is lately gone to Toulouse, has sent me from thence an
account of some circumstances which happened not long ago in that part of
France, and which she says are still much the subject of conversation. I shall
transcribe this narative, which I believe will interest you. Perhaps a
novel-writer, by the aid of a little additional misery, and by giving the
circumstances which actually happened a heightened color -- by taking his
pallet, and dashing with the full glow of red what nature had only tinged with
pale violet, might almost spin a volume from these materials. Yet, after all,
nothing is so affecting as simplicity, and nothing so forcible as truth. I
shall therefore send you the story exactly as I received it; and in such parts
of it as want interest, I beg you will recollect that you are not reading a
tale of fiction; and that in real life incidents are not always placed as they
are in novels, so as to produce stage effect. In some parts of the narrative
you will meet with a little romance; but perhaps you will wonder that you meet
with no more; since the scene is not in the cold philosophic climate of
England, but in the warm regions of the south of France, where the imagination
is elevated, where the passions acquire extraordinary energy, and where the
fire of poetry flashed from the harps of the Troubadours amidst the sullen
gloom of the Gothic ages.

A young Frenchman, whose usual residence was at Paris, having traveled as far
as Toulouse the year before the revolution, was invited by a party of his
friends to accompany them to Bareges, where some of them were going in pursuit
of amusement, and others in search of health from the medicinal springs which
rise so plentifully, both in hot and cold streams, among the Pyrenean mountains.

This young Parisian, who had some taste for the sublime scenery of nature,
felt that it would be luxury to leave a little longer the regular walks which
art has planted in the Tuilleries, and the trim gardens and jets-d'eaux she has
formed at Versailles; to wander amongst those piles of mountains which
overehang each other, and listen to the torrents which fall down them with loud
and irresistible impetuosity. Rich in her weeping country's spoils, Versailles
May boast a thousand fountains, that can cast
The tortured waters to the distant heavens:
Yet let me choose some pine-topp'd precipice
Abrupt and shaggy, whence a foaming stream,
Like Anio, tumbling roars. --
What powerful sensations does the first view of such a scene produce; -- we
seem to begin a new existence -- every former impression is for a while erased
from the memory, and the mind feels enwrapped and lost in the strong emotions
of awe, astonishment, and admiration.

Bareges was crowded, as it usually is in the season, not only with French
company, but also with strangers, who travel from other countries, in order to
use its celebrated baths. The company amused themselves, as they generally do
at water-drinking places, by sauntering, lounging, cards, lotteries,
jeux-d'esprit, and scandal.

Bareges is a very expensive place. Even moderate accommodations must be
purchased at a high rate; and provisions, as well as lodgings, are sometimes
obtained with difficulty. Bareges is therefore seldom resorted to by any but
people of considerable fortune, who can afford to level the obstacles which
mountains interpose to their conveniences and comforts, by the all-subduing
force of gold.

Among a number of persons of rank and fortune, there was however one family at
Bareges in a different situation. This family consisted of an elderly infirm
French officer, who had long been afflicted with the palsy, and his daughter a
young woman about nineteen years of age. Their appearance and mode of living
seemed to indicate, that, though in search of relief this old officer had
journeyed to Bareges, he had in so doing far exceeded the bounds of economy
which his circumstances prescribed, and was forced to deny himself every
accommodation his infirmities could spare. He lived in the most retired manner,
in the worst lodging at Bareges; and, while the other ladies were dressed in a
style of expensive variety and profusion, his daughter wore only a plain linen
gown, which, though always perfectly clean, was coarse; and her dark hair was
left unpowdered and without any ornament whatever. Fortunately for Madelaine
however (for that was her name) her person was calculated to make her coarse
gown appear to the best advantage; and though she was not very beautiful, her
countenance had an expression of sweetness which answered the end of beauty by
exciting love and admiration.

The company at Bareges soon became acquainted with each other, and the ladies
always took notice of Madelaine when they met her in their walks, which however
did not happen very often, for her father was frequently unable to go out. When
he did, he was supported on one side by Madelaine, and on the other by his
servant. It was impossible to see with insensibility the attention which this
interesting young woman paid her father, whom she never quitted one moment. It
was remarked with what careful tenderness she used to lead him along the
streets of Bareges, walking the slowest pace she could, and watching his steps
as he moved feebly on. And when he was not able to venture out, she was seen at
the window of their little parlour reading in order to entertain him. Her looks
and manner announced that her disposition was naturally sprightly, and that she
would have been gay, if her father had not been sick. But all the cheerfulness
she could assume while he suffered, was exerted to amuse him, and shorten the
tedious hours of languor and debility.

Though Madelaine was handsome, the obscurity and seclusion in which she lived
preserved her from the envy of the women. They knew well enough that the
gentleman at Bareges were for the most part men of the world, who, though they
may admire beauty, and approve of virtue, are never so far the dupes of any
tender of moral sentiment as to let it interfere either with their vanity,
their ambition, or their interest. Although the French revolution had not yet
happened, these ladies were aware that, with respect to marriage, the age of
calculators was already come, and therefore no rival was to be feared in
Madelaine. The ladies joined with the men in admiring the graces of her person,
and the amiable qualities which her conduct displayed. Madelaine in short
became the object of general esteem.

Auguste, for so I shall call our young Parisian, who has lost his title since
the laws of equality have be^^ established in his country -- Auguste spoke l^^
of Madelaine than the other gentlemen at Bareges; but it was perhaps because he
thought of her more. Sometimes in his solitary morning rambles he used to make
comparisons between her and the Parisian ladies among whom he had passed the
winter, and the comparison generally ended with a deep sigh. The scene of these
meditations was certainly much in Madelaine's favor. Perhaps at Paris or
Versailles, Auguste might have been dazzled by the polished graces of a fine
lady rouged, powdered, persumed, and equipped for conquest. These artificial
attractions might perhaps have accorded well enough with clipped trees and
angular walks. But Madelaine's simple manners, Madelaine's natural smiles and
unstudied blushes were far more in unison with the Pyrenean mountains.

One evening, when Auguste was walking in the town of Bareges with some ladies,
he saw Madelaine at a little distance assisting with great difficulty to
support her father, who appeared to be seized with a fit. Auguste darted like
an arrow toward the spot, and held up the officer till he found himself
somewhat recovered; and then Auguste, with a sort of gentle violence, obliged
Madelaine, who was pale and trembling, to let go her father's arm, and suffer
him to assist the servant in leading him home, which was but a few steps
farther. Auguste entered the house, where he remained till the old officer was
a little revived; and, after prevailing upon Madelaine to take a few hartshorn
drops, he retired.

The next morning he felt that common civility required he should pay the old
officer a visit, and learn how he had passed the night. It happened that
Madelaine had the very same idea. "Surely," thought she, "it will be very
strange if this young man, who was so kind, so careful of my father, and who
made me take some hartshorn drops, should neglect to call and enquire after
us." This idea had come across her mind several times; and she was meditating
upon it at her father's bedside, when Auguste was announced.

The old officer, who had all the finished politeness of his country and his
profession, received him in the most courteous manner; and, though he spoke
with some difficulty, yet he was profuse in acknowledgments for the service
Auguste had rendered him. Madelaine's thanks were few and simply expressed; but
the tone in which they were uttered was such that Auguste felt he could have
sacrificed his life to have deserved them.

The old officer still continued sick, and therefore Auguste still considered
it as an indispensible mark of attention to go every day, and learn the state
of his health. He also began to feel that these visits became every day more
necessary to his own happiness. That happiness was indeed embittered by many
painful reflections He well knew that to obtain his father the Count de -- 's
consent to marry Madelaine, was as impossible as it was for himself to conqu^^
the passion she had inspired. He knew exactly the order in which his father's
enquiries would run on this subject. He was aware that there were two
interrogatories to be answered. The first was -- "How many thousand livres has
she a year?" And the second -- "Is she noble?" And nothing could be more
embarrassing than that the enquiry concerning fortune would, he was sure, come
first; since that was the only article which could not be answered in a
satisfactory manner; for to Madelaine's family no objection could have been
made. By the way, though the former nobility of France would not absolutely
contaminate the pure streams of noble blood by an union with the daughter of a
roturier, they had always sufficient generosity to abate some generations of
nobility in favor of a proper equivalent in wealth.

Auguste, while he was convinced of the impossibility of obtaining his father's
consent to his marriage, did not pay Madelaine one visit the less from that
consideration; and when the usual hour of his visit arrived, he often suddenly
broke a chain of admirable reasoning on the imprudence of his attachment, in
order to hasten to the dwelling of her he loved. In a short time he ceased all
kind of reasoning on the subject, and abandoned his heart without reserve to
the most violent and unconquerable passion.

Auguste made a declaration to the old officer of the sentiment which his
daughter had inspired. The old gentleman mentioned it to Madelaine, and she
only answered by tears of which he perfectly understood the meaning. When
Auguste explained his situation with respect to his father, the officer desired
him to think of his daughter no more. Auguste felt that he might as well have
desired him to cease to breathe. He continued his visits, and the officer was
soon reduced to that state of languor and debility which left him neither the
power nor the wish to forbid them. His complaints increased every day, and were
attended with many alarming symptoms. The season for the waters of Bareges was
now past, and all the company left the place, except the old officer, who was
too weak to be removed, and Auguste, who, while Madelaine remained, had no
power to tear himself from the spot. In a few weeks the old officer felt that
his dying hour was near. Auguste knelt with Madelaine at his bedside -- her
voice was suffocated by tears; and Auguste had scarcely power to articulate in
broken accents that he would devote his life to the happiness of Madelaine. The
old officer fixed his eyes with a look of tender anxiety upon his daughter, and
soon after expired. Madelaine mourned for her father with uncontrouled
affliction, nor could all the attentions of her lover dispel that anguish with
which her affectionate heart lamented the loss of her parent.

The winter being far advanced, she proposed to defer her journey to the
distant province where she and her father had lived, until spring, and to place
herself in the mean time in a convent not far from Bareges. Auguste exerted all
the eloquence of love to induce her to consent immediately to a private
marriage. She hesitated at this proposal; and while they were conversing
together on the subject, the door of the room in which they were sitting was
suddenly thrown open, and Auguste saw his father the Count de -- enter. He had
heard of the attachment which detained his son at Bareges, and had hastened to
tear him from the spot before it was too late. He upbraided his son with great
bitterness, and began also to upbraid Madelaine: but there was something in her
looks, her silence, and her tears, which stifled the terms of haughty reproach
in which he was prepared to address her; and ordering his son to leave the
room, he desired to speak to her alone. After explaining to her the absolute
impossibility of her being ever united to her son, and his determination to
disinherit him, and leave his whole fortune to his second son, if Auguste
should persist in his attachment to her -- after endeavoring to awaken her
pride and her generosity, he desired to know where she proposed going. She told
him her intention of placing herself immediately in the convent of --. He
approved of this design, and left her to go to his son. No sooner was the door
of the room shut, than Madelaine gave way to those tears which she had scarcely
been able to restrain while the Count was speaking. She had never felt so
sensibly her orphan condition as at this moment; and the dear remembrance of
her fond father was mingled with the agony of disappointed love.

Meantime the Count de -- declared to his son, that his only chance of ever
obtaining his mistress depended on his absolute unconditional submission to his
commands, and that he must instantly attend him to Paris. Auguste eagerly
enquired what was to become of Madelaine; and his father told him that she had
determined to take refuge in the convent of --. Auguste absolutely refused to
depart till he was allowed an interview with Madelaine. The Count was obliged
to consent; but before he suffered them to meet, he obtained a promise from
Madelaine not to mention to her lover any particulars of the conversation which
had passed between her and the Count.

Auguste, in this last interview with Madelaine, atoned for the cruel disdain
of his father, by the most solemn and passionate assurances of fidelity, not to
be shaken by time or circumstance; and then, after attempting to leave the room
several times, and returning a^ often, he at length tore himself away.
Madelaine, when she saw him depart, felt that every earthly hope had vanished
with him.

She set out early the next morning for the convent of --; but not till after
she had sat for some time weeping in the chair which Auguste used to occupy.

Madelaine passed the remaining part of the winter in the convent of --, during
which period she received frequent letters from Auguste; and when spring
arrived he conjured her, instead of removing to her own province, to remain a
little longer in her present situation; and flattered her with hopes of being
able ere long to fulfill those engagements upon which all his happiness depended.

In the summer of this year an event took place which will render that summer
for ever memorable. The French nation, too enlightened to bear any longer those
monstrous oppressions which ignorance of its just rights alone had tolerated,
shook off its ^etters, and the revolution was accomplished.

Madelaine was a firm friend to the revolution, which she was told had made
every Frenchman free. "And if every Frenchman is free," thought Madelaine
"surely every Frenchman may marry the woman he loves." It appeared to
Madelaine, that, putting all political considerations, points upon which she
had not much meditated, out of the question, obtaining liberty of choice in
marriage was alone well worth the troubles of a revolution; and she was as warm
a patriot from this single idea, as if she had studied the declaration of
rights made by the Constituent Assembly, in all its extent and consequences.

The Count de --, who was informed of the correspondence between the two
lovers, and who saw little hopes of his son's subduing a passion which this
intercourse of letters served to cherish, contrived means to have Auguste's
letters intercepted at the convent. In vain Madelaine inquired with all the
anxiety of tenderness for letters. In vain she counted the hours till the
return of the post-days. Post after post arrived, and brought no tidings of
Auguste. Three months passed in the cruel torments of anxiety and suspense, and
were at length succeeded by despair. Madelaine believed she was forgotten --
forgotten by Auguste! -- She consulted her own heart, and it seemed to her
impossible; yet, after a silence of three months, she could doubt no longer.

Poor Madelaine now recollected with anguish, instead of pleasure, that all
Frenchmen were ^ree. She would have found some sad consolation in believing
that all Frenchmen were slaves. It would have been some alleviation of her
sorrows if Auguste had been forced to abandon her; and she fancied she could
have borne to lose him, if she had been sure that he still loved her -- it was
losing him by his own fault that filled her heart with pangs almost
insupportable.

The little pittance which Madelaine, after paying her father's debts, had left
for her own support, was insufficient to defray her expenses as a pensioner in
the convent. She had already, by her sweetness and gentleness, gained the
affections of some of the nuns, to whom she was also attached, and who
incessantly conjured her to take the veil. "And why," she sometimes exclaimed,
"why should I hesitate any longer in so doing? Since Auguste is lost, what have
I to regret in renouncing the world? What sacrifice do I make? What happiness
do I resign?"

Madelaine had no ties to the world, of which she knew but little: but to
separate herself irrecoverably, and for ever, from him to whom her soul was
devoted -- to see him, to hear his voice no more -- to take vows which would
make it even a crime to think of him -- to banish him even from her thoughts --
alas! Madelaine felt like Eloisa -- All is not Heaven's while Abelard has part,
Still rebel nature holds out half my heart!
Sometimes too the idea occurred that Auguste might love her still -- "And am I
then," thought Madelaine, "going to reduce myself to a state in which I shall
be forced to wish he were unfaithful, in order to save me from the agonies of
remorse!" -- She put off her thoughts of entering on her novitiate for some
weeks longer -- no letters arrived, and again her resolution to take the veil
returned. "Why," cried she, "why should I still continue to lament that
inconstant lover who thinks of me no more? Alas, alas, did he not see the
anguish of my soul at parting with him? -- Does he not know the deserted
situation in which I am left? -- Oh, yes! he knows I have no other refuge, no
other resource than taking the veil -- no doubt he wishes to hear I have done
so -- he will find in my renunciation of the world some excuse for his
infidelity -- Oh, heavens! will Auguste hear then that I am separated from him
for ever without one sigh? -- Ah, why need I deliberate any longer? -- My
trials will soon be past -- I feel that my heart will break -- yes, death will
come to my relief -- and in heaven I shall find my father!"

Madelaine at length determined to join the holy sisterhood of the convent. The
white veil for her novitiate was prepared. The day was fixed, when, prostrate
with her face toward the earth, and with flowers scattered over her, and a
part of her long tresses cut off, she was to enter upon that solemn trial
preparatory to her eternal renunciation of the world -- of Auguste!

A few days before that which was appointed for the ceremony, Madelaine was
called to the parlour, where she found her lover, with some of the municipal
officers of the town, wearing their national scarfs.

Madelaine, at the sight of Auguste, with difficulty reached a chair, in which
she fell back senseless; while Auguste could not forbear uttering some
imprecations against the iron grate by which they were separated, and which
prevented him from flying to her assistance. He, however, procured help, and
Madelaine recovered.

One of the municipal officers then informed her, that they had received the
day before a decree of the National Assembly, forbidding any nuns to be
professed. He added, that the municipality had already given information of
this new law to the abbess, who had consented to allow Madelaine to leave the
convent immediately. As he pronounced these last words, Madelaine looked at her
lover. Auguste hastened to explain to her that his uncle, who loved him and
pitied his sufferings, had at length made a will, leaving him his fortune upon
condition that his father consented to his marriage with Madelaine.

When her lover and the municipal officers departed, Madelaine retired to her
apartment, to give way to those delicious tears which were poured from a heart
overflowing with wonder, thankfulness, and joy. When her first emotions had
subsided, she began to pack up her little wardrobe in preparation for leaving
the convent on the following day. "I always loved the revolution," thought
Madelaine, as she laid aside the white gown in which she was to be married the
next morning; "and this last de^ree is surely of all others the best and wisest
-- but if it had come too late!" -- At this idea Madelaine took up the veil for
her novitiate, which lay upon her table, and bathed it with a flood of tears.

The next morning Auguste and Madelaine were married in the parish church of
--, and immediately after the ceremony set out for Paris, where they now live,
and are, I am told, two of the happiest people and the best patriots in France.

LETTER XXII.
A Cure of my acquaintance is just going to be married. He has had a literary
dispute with the bishop of his diocese, on the right of the clergy to marry.
The cure insists that it is the natural right of every man to take unto himself
a wife, if he thinks proper to run that risk; and he confessed to me yesterday,
that, though he felt not the smallest inclination to enter into the marriage
state, but on the contrary preferred a single life, he had resolved upon
matrimony merely to show Mons. l'Eveque, that a priest might take that measure
if he pleased. I know some married people both in France and and England, who
would perhaps think this is carrying the desire of triumph in argument rather
too great a length; and who would, I believe, counsel the cure to yield this
polemic victory, sooner than purchase it with a wife into the bargain. But my
friend the cure is so amiable, that I am persuaded he will make an excellent
husband, and will be happy in spite of the bishop.

I go frequently to a spacious church which the French protestants have lately
purchased, called St. Thomas de Louvre, where divine worship is performed every
Sunday, and where the sacrament was last week administered. The idea that in
the bosom of that city, even on the very spot which a few ages past was stained
by the most cruel persecution of the protestants, we were now publicly
exercising the most solemn rite of our religion, in the presence of a
considerable number of Roman Catholics, who witnessed that sacred ceremony with
the most respectful silence and attention -- this reflection, joined to the
tender recollection of my own country, to which I was led by hearing the
service performed for the first time in a foreign country, and in a foreign
language; and to that retrospect of past life which naturally arises in a mind
of any sensibility, when it renews this sacred engagement with the great Author
of its existence -- all these different impressions crowded upon my heart, my
eyes were filled with tears, and I never felt my mind more touched and elevated
by devotion. Monsieur Mar^n, the French protestant minister, preaches with the
most persuasive eloquence. I wish our English clergy would sometimes address
their discourses to the feelings, as well as to the understanding. It is not
the reasoning but the sentimental part of religion that softens every evil to
which humanity is subject, that sooths the troubled spirit, that heals the
broken heart.

LETTER XXIII.
I WRITE to you from Montreuil sur Mer, where I shall pass two or three weeks
in my way to England. We left Paris the latter end of April, and ^ound the
country covered with that first fresh tint of spring which is so lovely, but so
transient. The trees were white with blossoms; and nature, full of youth, hope,
and joy, wore the aspect of all others the most enchanting to the eye, and the
most soothing to the imagination. Yet the contemplation of returning spring
naturally leads the mind to recall the springs that are past, and to take a
retrospect of life: and those in whom such a retrospect excites no melancholy
reflections must surely be either peculiarly fortunate, or peculiarly
insensible.

But, at the same time, we find in the lovely images which spring presents, a
cure for those gloomy reflections which the return of that season has perhaps
awakened. For while we see nothing around us but images of beauty and delight,
"while nothing strikes the eye but sights of bliss," the darker shades of care
and sorrow vanish, and leave only that gentle and tender melancholy which it is
luxury to indulge -- "that sadness of the countenance by which the heart is
made better."

My mother found herself, one evening during our journey, so much fatigued,
that, instead of being able to reach Amiens, where we intended to sleep that
night, we were obliged to stop at a very small village some leagues distant.
The landlord of the little inn where we alighted, received us with an air of
conscious dignity and self importance which but ill accorded with the
appearance of his dwelling. We enquired if he could furnish us with beds: he
seemed offended at the question, as implying in it some doubt, and answered
with impatience, To be sure, madam, as well as in the town.
"Mais, madame, comme a la ville." -- We ^ound, however, that the walls of the
rooms where people were lodged "comme a la ville," were of bare brick. "What is
the name of this place? said I to a ruddy-cheeked servant-girl who waited upon
us." This is Ser^eaux, madam, to ^bey you.
"Madame," said she, "c'est Ser^eaux, pour pous obeir.".

The master of the inn having got the better of the ill-humour our first
enquiries had occasioned, assured us we should have an excellent supper, and
that he understood the art of cookery perfectly, having assisted some years in
the kitchen of Madame la Princess de Monaco. He by no means over-rated his
talents; the supper was extremely well dressed. When we has supped, the told us
that we might consider ourselves as in perfect safety under his roof; "for I,
ladies," added he, in an elevated accent, "am the mayor of the village, and
have two national guards every night at my door. I saved the chateau of a
person who was very odious to his peasants, from being burnt, by haranguing the
people, and convincing them of the enormity of the action; and my
fellow-citizens, in gratitude for my services on that occasion, unanimously
chose me for their mayor."

I congratulated Mons. Le Maire on the happy effects of his eloquence, and he
immediately stepped out of the room, and returned with a national scarf in his
hand, and a fierce grenadier's cap, which had been presented to him as trophies
of his patriotism. I enquired how many national guards there were in the
village. "No less than eighty men," said ^e; "and I am their "colonel." The
honors, dignities, and high offices, civil and military, of our landlord, now
crowded so thick upon us, that we could scarcely reconcile ourselves to the
trouble we gave him of bringing little moveable frames, for mattresses, into
the room where we had supped, and which the chief magistrate arranged with
admirable dexterity. Next morning we found he had thrown aside his white
jacket, and was arrayed in the national uniform. When we recollected that our
v^alcutlets had been dressed by a colonel, and our mattresses arranged by a
mayor, we felt ourselves somewhat in the situation of Don Quixote when queens
saddled his horse, and duchesses held his bridle. We made very low curtsies to
our host at parting, which he returned by clapping his hand on his military
cap. -- Apropos of traveling -- a French gentleman of my acquaintance told me,
that he was once going in his cabriolet from Paris to Calais, when he was
accosted by a man who was walking along the road, and who begged the favor of
him to let him put his great coat, which he ^ound very heavy, into the
carriage. "With all my heart," said the gentleman; "but if we should not be
traveling to the same place, how will you get your coat?" "Monsieur," answered
the man with gr^^t naivete, I shall be in it.
"je serai dedans." The gentleman immediately took him into his carriage.

Montreuil is an old melancholy looking town, with no trade, and few
inhabitants. Some families of little noblesse who resided in this place, have
thought proper to prove their nobility by a trip to Coblentz. Their houses are
left deserted; grass grows in the streets: and I expect to see the ^ox which
Ossian mentions, looking out of the window.

Here are a great number of very ancient Gothic edifices; and one of them, near
which we are lodged, affords me frequent subject of meditation. This is the
Hotel-Dieu. In every town of France you find one of those hospitals called
Hotel-Dieu, where the sick are attended by an order of nuns, who take vows to
devote their lives to that purpose. The most perfect cleanliness and order
reigns in these houses. But how great are the sacrifices made, from a principle
of piety, by these nuns, many of whom are in the very bloom of youth! to devote
life to the most disgusting occupations -- to breathe only the air of contagion
-- to watch in sad succession every sixth or eighth night, through the long
years of life, in the chambers of disease -- to dress wounds -- to perform for
strangers those offices at which nature most recoils, and which we can scarcely
fulfill without reluctance, even for those to whom our souls are bound by the
strongest ties of duty and affection -- to bear with unwearied patience the
never-ceasing groans of those that suffer -- to administer, with that unfailing
tenderness which long habit has not blunted, the remedies prescribed -- to live
amongst the dying -- these surely are sacrifices which nothing but a sentiment
of religion could inspire -- Surely it may be said of such persons, "Ye are not
of this world!"

When we turn our thoughts from such a scene as this, to that unfeeling
indifference which prevails in the world -- its selfish pursuit of its own
interest -- its eager search of its own gratifications -- its coldness to the
pains of others -- its vanities -- its littleness -- its luxuries -- we find it
at a distance so remote from such virtue, that the nuns of the Hotels-Dieu
appear like beings elevated above our pity, and only call forth admiration.

On Sunday last, after vespers, the tree of liberty was planted, with great
rejoicings, in the middle of the square in which we live. A flag, from which
streamed the national colors, was ^^^^ened to the highest branches, crowned
with a bonnet rouge. When this cherished tree was firmly rooted in the earth
amidst the acclamations of the multitude, an officer of the national ^uard
mounted on a chair beneath the shade of (...), and read a paper of instruction
to the people, who formed a circle round him, and listened with the most
respectful attention. After descanting upon the blessings of the constitution,
the orator enforced the necessity of the most absolute submission to the laws.
-- The tree of liberty, with its green branches, and waving streamers; the
orator placed under its shade; and the circle which surrounded him, formed
altogether a most picturesque groupe. -- There was something in the scene which
gave me an idea of the simplicity of ancient times. As soon as the harangue was
ended, a gun was fired; and ^^ira, the beloved signal of gaiety, and
accompaniment of joy, was immediately played, while the people danced with all
their hearts and ^^uls.

We have had, indeed, no less than two trees of liberty planted in the square:
for the little boys of the town anticipated the ceremony by planting a young
tree, of which they had got possession the day before it took place. This young
tree had also a bonnet rouge, made of paper, and colors composed of the same
materials. It was not indeed very steadily seated in the earth, and might with
propriety have been called Awavering liberty.
une liberte chancelante: but the winds did not visit it too roughly, and it
kept its station. A national guard of citizens, from six to twelve years of
age, was mounted near the tree, armed, in case of an attack, with wooden
fusees. As we passed this formidable band, the captain demanded a few sous to
buy a drum For the nation.
pour la nation. We have too much friendship for the French nation to refuse so
moderate a Patriotic gift.
don patriotique, and we produced some national coins. The little groupe, by
way of thanking us, cried over and over again, to the echoes of the hills, Long
live the nation.
"Vive, vive la nation!"

The French boys, with that spirit of imitation which belongs to children, have
no amusements, no pastimes, that have not a reference to liberty. They imbibe
these national lessons with great avidity; and I am apt to believe that, if the
enemies of freedom could annihilate the present race of Frenchmen, the rising
generation would, ten or twenty years hence, throw aside their wooden fusees
for more terrible weapons, and act over again, in the sight of their
oppressors, the martial exercises of their childhood.

LETTER XXIV.
I HAVE nothing to relate but what is melancholy and painful. The repulse which
the French have met with at Tournay was trifling; and were it not, a defeat is
the common chance of war, and would he an evil light indeed compared to the
disgrace, the shocking criminality which has attended it. A ^ew days before I
left Paris, the war with Germany was declared. The French, long insulted by the
court of Vienna, rejoiced that the moment to assert the injured honor of a
great and gallant nation was at length arrived. They saw before them, in long
and radiant perspective, city after city yielding to the arms of men who,
renouncing all views of extending the French empire, only armed themselves in
defense of their just rights, and who felt that Thrice is be armed that has
his quarrel just.


Forced to engage in a war against the tyrants of the earth, the French had
declared (to translate the words of Mons. Condorcet, in his sublime declaration
made in the name of the National Assembly) "that the soldiers would conduct
themselves in a foreign territory as they would have conducted themselves on
the territory of France, had they been there forced to engage in combat; that
even the accidental evils which the French troops might occasion to the people
of those foreign territories, should be repaired; that to repulse violence, to
resist oppression, to forget injuries that were past, to receive enemies
reconciled, or disarmed, as brothers -- such were the sentiments which the
nation would find in the souls of Frenchmen, and such was the war which they
declared against their enemies."

Thus had the French nation prepared every generous mind to espouse its cause.
No sooner was it made known that the armies on the frontiers stood in need of
recruits, than the young men in every province of France enlisted themselves
with an ardour which only the sacred sentiment of liberty could have inspired.

No sooner was the war declared, than the bar of the National Assembly was
every day crowded with citizens, who according to their ability contributed,
with fond enthusiasm, their mite toward the support of the common cause.

Little, indeed, did the people dream of defeat, but far less of dishonor.
They murder men; it is the melancholy privilege of kings: but they cannot
murder honor.
"On tue les hommes; c'est le triste apenage du metier des rois: mais on ne tue
pas l'honneur;" that victim must be offered by ourselves. Let us not, however,
include the whole French nation in the disgrace of a few. The general gloom,
indignation and horror, produced by the assassinations at Lisle prove that the
French feel with the keenest sensibility the dishonor incurred by such
atrocious conduct.

I am persuaded they will wipe away, by the performance of the most noble and
heroic actions, the stain which has been cast upon the French arms. If you had
an opportunity of knowing as well as I do, the generous, the sublime sacrifices
which are made by individuals in the common cause -- if you knew the energy of
that public spirit, the force of that public virtue which the events of this
great revolution are calculated not merely to display, but to create, and call
forth -- if you knew the inflexible purpose of the patriots of France, To live
free, or di^.
"de vivre libres ou mourir" -- you would, I believe, be convinced, as I am,
that they can never be subdued; and that, in defiance of the house of Austria*
and all the other despotic houses of Europe, " It will proceed.
etc;cedil;a ira."

"Il faut, said a French gentleman with whom I was talking on this subject, "
"We must have some (...)."
il faut quelques victoires roturieres."

Let us also remember that the great cause of liberty remains uncontaminated by
the assassinations at Lisle. Though fanatical bigots, in the rage of
superstitious cruelty, have dragged their victims to the stake, would it be
rational to extend our abhorrence of such actions to Christianity itself? -- to
that benevolent religion which inculcates universal charity, love, and good
will toward men, and choose the comfortless, the sullen indifference of
atheism.

And shall we, because the fanatics of liberty have committed some detestable
crimes, conclude that liberty is an evil, and prefer the gloomy tranquillity of
despotism? If the blessings of freedom have sometimes been abused, it is
because they are not yet well understood. Those occasional evils which have
happened in the infant state of liberty, are but the effects of despotism. Men
have been long treated with inhumanity, therefore they are ferocious. They have
often been betrayed, therefore they are suspicious. They have once been slaves,
and therefore they are tyrants. They have been used to a state of warfare, and
are not yet accustomed to universal benevolence. They have long been ignorant,
and have not yet attained sufficient knowledge. They have been condemned to
darkness, and their eyes are dazzled by light. The French have thrown aside the
ritual of despotism; but they have not all had time to learn the liturgy of
that new constitution which is laid upon the altar of their country. But the
genuine principles of enlightened freedom will soon be better comprehended, and
may perhaps at no distant period be adopted by all the nations of Europe.
Liberty may bring "her sons from afar, and her daughters from the ends of the
earth."

The oppressions which mankind have suffered in every age, and almost in every
country, will lead them to form more perfect systems of legislation than if
they had suffered less; and they will only have to regret that their happiness
has been purchased by the misery or pad ages.

Then will the reign of humanity, of order, and ^^peace begin; the gates of
Janus will be for ever closed; liberty will extend her benign influence over
the nations, and "ye shall know her by her fruits."


