AN INAUGURAL DISSERTATION, ON THE CHEMICAL AND MEDICAL PROPERTIES OF THE
PERSIMMON TREE, AND THE ANALYSIS of ASTRINGENT VEGETABLES; SUBMITTED TO THE
EXAMINATION OF THE REVD. JOHN EWING, S. T. P. PROVOST; THE TRUSTEES AND MEDICAL
PROFESSORS, OF THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA; FOR THE DEGREE OF DOCTOR OF
MEDICINE.

BY JAMES WOODHOUSE, A M.

Honorary member of the American and Philadelphia Medical Societies.

Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
And waste its sweetness on the desert air.
GRAY. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY WILLIAM WOODHOUSE.

TO BENJAMIN RUSH, M. D. PROFESSOR OF THE INSTITUTES, AND OF CLINICAL MEDICINE,
IN THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA, etc.

This DISSERTATION Is DEDICATED, AS A GRATEFUL TRIBUTE OF RESPECT, FROM HIS
AFFECTIONATE PUPIL, THE AUTHOR.

To Mr. JAMES WOODHOUSE.
My dear friend,
I beg you would permit me, to make use of a small part of a page, of your
intended inaugural publication, on the PERSIMMON TREE, and the Analysis of
astringent vegetables, as the vehicle of my acknowledgements, of the great
pleasure I derived, from witnessing the zeal and industry, with which you
conducted the experiments and studies, that have led you to the valuable
discoveries, contained in your dissertation.

I hope your success, in those experiments, will animate you to direct your
inquiries into other branches of Chemistry and Medicine, and that your eminence
and usefulness in life, may be equal to the ability and integrity with which
you have discharged your duty to your

affectionate Preceptor, BENJAMIN RUSH.
May 3rd. 1792.
INTRODUCTION.
THERE are three things, says a celebrated writer, which are sufficient to
render the best discourse, insiped and uninteresting; the difficulty of the
subject, the necessity of saying something, and the anxiety of saying it well.

Called before the tribunal of the public, under these circumstances, I feel
the force of this observation in a peculiar manner.

I have chosen the Persimmon tree for an inaugural dissertation, on the one
hand, merely to avoid a threadbare worn out subject, and on the other, that I
might have an opportunity of saying something on a tree, of which, little more
is known than the name.

The indulgent reader will make every possible allowance, especially when he
considers, that this thesis is the production of one, who is as yet, a Tyro in
Chemistry.

HISTORY OF THE PERSIMMON TREE, etc.
LINNAEUS has placed the Persimmon tree, among the Polygamia Dioecia, and
describes it in the following manner in his Genera Plantarum.

The Hermaphrodite female.
The Calyx is a perianthium of one leaf, four-cleft, large, obtuse and
permanent.

The Corolla is composed of one petal, pitcher-shape, larger and four-cleft;
the divisions acute and spreading.

The Filaments are eight, bristly, short and lightly inserted in the
receptacle. The Antherae are oblong and effaete.

The Germen is roundish. The Style one, half four-cleft, permanent and longer
than the stamina. The Stigmas are obtuse and two-cleft.

The Pericarpium is a globous berry, large, eight-cell'd, and sitting on the
large spreading calyx.

The Seeds are solitary, roundish, compressed, and very hard.

The Male in distinct plants.
The Calyx is a perianthium of one leaf, four-cleft, acute, erect and small.

The Corolla consists of one petal, pitcher-shape, coriaceous, four cornered
and four-cleft: the divisions roundish and revolute.

The Filaments are eight, very short and inserted in the receptacle. The
Antherae are double, long and acute; the interior shortest.

The Pistillum is the rudiment of a germen.

The species with us but one.

The DIOSPYROS VIRGINIANA, American Prune, Date Plum or Persimmon tree, is of a
rapid growth, rises from fourteen to twenty five feet in height, and bears
fruit in a few years after it is planted.

It grows in Pennsylvania, New Jersey, New York, Maryland, Virginia, North
Carolina, South Carolina and Georgia, in moist clayey ground, in swamps, and
along the banks of rivers.

A number of short branches are sent out from the body of the tree, garnished
with entire, oblong, pointed leaves; the blossoms are produced in April,
growing along the sides of the branches, on very short footstalk, making but
little appearance, and are succeeded by large globular or oblong fruit, of
different sizes on different trees Marshall's Arbustum Americanum, and
Catesby's history of Carolina, vol. 2 nd.
.

The wood of the tree has a firm, close grain, burns well, and its ashes yield
a large proportion of salts. The bark of the tree possesses a considerable
degree of astringency, the leaves more than the bark, the bark more than the
heart of the tree, and the unripe fruit is one of the most powerful
astringents, in the vegetable kingdom.

The trunk of the tree does not exceed ten feet, the fruit contains four flat
stones, which when split in two, Mr. Catesby says, exhibits the tree in embryo,
with its stem or trunk, and two folia seminalia in a more conspicuous manner,
than in any other seed he has ever met with.

A fine transparent gum, of a light brown color, insipid to the taste, readily
soluble in water, exudes from the body of the tree.

A premium of twenty pounds sterling, was offered by a society in London, for
the promotion of arts and manufactures, for a quantity of this gum, not less
than fifty pounds, and a premium of ten pounds, for the next greatest quantity,
not less than twenty five pounds.

The expressed juice of the unripe fruit, being a substance of a singular
nature, was subjected to the following experiments.

EXPERIMENT I.
Distilled in a retort with a gentle heat, a quantity of water, of a
disagreeable smell, came over into the receiver, which did not precipitate the
liver of sulphur, had no effect on the solutions of iron, and did not change
the blue color of vegetable substances. The fire being raised, I obtained an
acid of a light yellow color, which precipitated corrosive sublimate of an
orange color, green vitriol black, liver of sulphur white, and changed the
tincture of litmus to a bright red. A black friable matter remained in the
retort, which possessed the properties of the acid in a small degree, and when
burned to ashes in the open air, gave the earth of alum.

EXPERIMENT II.
One drop of the unripe juice, dropped in a gallon of rain water, in which one
grain of green vitriol was dissolved* produced a purple color in the liquor.

EXPERIMENT III.
Iron filings digested in the unripe juice, was changed to the consistence of a
paste, upon approaching a candle to the mouth of the ma^rass, in which the
experiment was made, a loud explosion took place.

EXPERIMENT IV.
Mixed with common spirit, it forms a jelly, with the spirit of sal ammoniac, it
forms a coagulum of the consistence of soft soap.

EXPERIMENT V.
Inspissated in the sun, it yields a large quantity of a brown, transparent,
astringent gummy substance, of which common spirit dissolves a larger quantity,
than spirit of wine, or the vegetable oils. Pure Ether has no action upon it.
Spirit of wine extracts the virtues of that part, which is insoluble in water.

EXPERIMENT VI
The insoluble part of this substance, suspended in water, appears like a
jelly, collected, dried and distilled, it yields water, acid, oil and fixed air.

EXPERIMENT VII.
The soluble and insoluble parts, separately boiled in the nitrous acid, yields
long prismatic chrystals, which possess the same properties, as the acid
obtained from saccharine substances, and which has improperly been named the
acid of sugar.

EXPERIMENT VIII.
A quantity of the black (...) matter, precipitated from green vitriol, by the
astringent juice, was collected, dried, and found to possess the following
properties.

It undergoes no alteration from being exposed to the action of the air, for
twelve months. Exposed to a bright red heat, it does not inflame, but burns
like the calces of metals, and is reduced to its metallic form. Digested in a
solution, of the mild or caustic vegetable alkali, or the mild and caustic
volatile alkali, it tinges the liquor of a dirty brown color, which mixed with
a solution of green vitriol, precipitates the iron, of a brown or purple color.

EXPERIMENT IX.
The unripe juice, spread with a feather, over an ancient decayed writing,
restored the legibility of the letters, which instantly appeared of a deep
black color.

EXPERIMENT X.
The vegetable and volatile alkalies, added to the unripe juice, formed a
coagulum, which being several times washed in warm water, did not taste
astringent; was insoluble in water and spirit of wine, but readily dissolved,
in weak vitriolic acid.

EXPERIMENT XI.
The vegetable and volatile alkalies, were added to the unripe juice, diluted
with water, and the mixture filtered: upon adding the vitriolic acid, in small
quantities, to the filtered liquor, a precipitate took place, which remained
suspended in the liquor; upon increasing the quantity of acid, the precipitate
was redissolved with effervescence. The precipitate collected and dried, was
not liquefiable by heat, was insoluble in water, but dissolved in spirit of
wine.

EXPERIMENT XII.
The vegetable and volatile alkalies, added to the unripe juice, diluted with
water, and the mixture filtered, and added to a solution of corrosive
sublimate, green vitriol, and muriated barytes, precipitated the iron, the
ponderous earth, and the mercury, entangled in the resin, which could be seen
in the fluid in large transparent globules.

EXPERIMENT XIII.
An aqueous solution of Persimmon gum, and an acid solution of green vitriol,
being mixed together, were transparent, upon adding the vegetable alkali, a
black precipitate took place, which was instantly redissolved, by adding a
greater quantity of the alkali, the precipitate remained suspended in the
liquor; still continuing to increase the quantity of alkali, the black color of
the precipitate was changed to a dirty brown.

The same effect was produced, when volatile alkali, magnesia, lime, or the
earth of alum, were used instead of the vegetable alkali.

EXPERIMENT XIV.
The precipitate of muriated barytes, in the twelfth experiment, was collected
by filtering the mother water, when added to a solution of green vitriol, the
iron was precipitated black. Upon adding the vitriolic acid, to the filtered
liquor, no precipitate took place.

EXPERIMENT XV.
The coagulum formed by the vegetable alkali, and unripe juice, being several
times washed in water, was dissolved in the vitriolic acid, to which a small
quantity of the vegetable alkali was added, to favor the chrystallization. The
solution, by spontaneous evaporation in the open air, gave chrystals of alum,
acid of sugar, and vitriolated tartar.

EXPERIMENT XVI.
The chrystals of alum were collected, and dissolved in water, the vegetable
and volatile alkalies, lime water, magnesia, ponderous (...) and a solution of
borax precipitated its base.

EXPERIMENT XVII.
The earth obtained from alum, by the vegetable alkali, was dissolved in the
acid distilled from the Persimmon, and being evaporated, afforded a powerful
astringent gummy mass.

The five last of these experiments, have been repeated with galls and other
astringents, with nearly the same result. In some, as in sumach, the acid is
contained in a much larger proportion, than the resin, or earth of alum. The
son of Professor Tromsdorf, it is said, has extracted, a true tartar from the
berries of this vegetable, Keir's Chemical Dictionary, article, vegetable acids.
I think he has been mistaken, for a precipitate takes place, upon the addition
of an alkali, and the berries always blacken a solution of vitriol.

To succeed in precipitating the alum, formed by adding the vitriolic acid, to
the earth precipitated from vegetable astringents, with a solution of borax,
great accuracy is necessary. It must contain a certain proportion of acid, or
the precipitate will not take place. This observation, I thought necessary, for
the failure of the experiment, though fallacious, might be offered as an
objection to the theory I have laid down.

REMARKS ON THE EXPERIMENTS.
From the first of these experiments, it appears, that the juice of the
Persimmon, contains the same acid, as all astringent vegetables; and from the
second, we find it may be employed, as a nice test, for detecting the presence
of iron, in mineral waters. In the third, it decomposed the iron, separating
its principle of inflammability. In the fifth, we find a large quantity, of a
transparent, brown, astringent gummy substance produced, which from some of the
succeeding experiments, appears to be a gum-resin, with a proportion of
excrementitious matter. The resin is a mild substance, generally containing a
small proportion of the acid, and may be separated from the gum, by
precipitating the basis of the astringent, by the vegetable or volatile alkali,
filtering the solution, and adding the marine or vitriolic acids. The gum is
composed of the gallic acid, and the astringent basis, which is earth of alum.

The property of forming a saline gum, with the earth of alum, is not peculiar
to the gallic acid. The distilled acid of sugar, according to Schrickel, and
the acid of tartar, have the same effect on that earth. Keir's Chemical
Dictionary, article, acid of tartar and sugar.
A gum resin appears to exist in almost every vegetable, which has the property
of striking black, with the solutions of iron, differing in the degree of
solubility, in different menstrua, and in the proportion of gum and resin. It
constitutes the astringent and bitter quality in peruvian bark, it may be
extracted from the leaves and bark of the Persimmon, galls yield it to a watery
menstruum, in the proportion of four drachms to the ounce, and it may be
obtained, in considerable quantities, from the common pig-nut.

Morveau supposes the acid in astringents, is formed of this resin and pure
air. The twelfth experiment clearly confutes this opinion, for the resin is
there seen, in large transparent globules, when the iron, the ponderous earth,
and the mercury were precipitated by the acid.

To succeed in this experiment, with galls, and other astringents, it is
necessary to have a strong infusion of them, for it does not take place, after
the resin has been extracted by one or two infusions, although the astringency
remains.

The precipitate formed, by adding the alkalies, to vegetable astringents, has
been mistaken by some authors for the astringent principle. In Keir's chemical
Dictionary, and in the last edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica, a number
of observations* may be seen, relating to this principle. It is there said,
when redissolved in water, it blackened a solution of vitriol but faintly, and
in no other manner, that what arose, from a small quantity of acid remaining,
which is proved it contains by distilling it. The author of these observations
has been mistaken, and it is not a difficult matter, to point out in what
manner he has been deceived. The astringent taste arose from a quantity of
acid, which he acknowledges it contains; its solubility in water, arose from
the same cause, for after it is several times washed, and the water filtered,
it does not blacken a solution of vitriol, but when diffused in water, and
added to a solution of that salt, the color is immediately changed, for its
solubility in water, like alum and the calcareous phosphat of urine, is owing
to a superabundant acid.

When spread with a feather, over an ancient, decayed writing* it restored the
legibility of the letters. Various methods have been recommended, by different
authors, for this purpose; among others, the distilled liquor of galls, in
Caneparius's collection de atramentis, and the phlogisticated alkali, by Dr.
Blagden, in the Philosophical transactions, for the year 1787. The unripe juice
of the Persimmon, possesses two advantages over these fluids; it is a more
powerful test for detecting the presence of iron, and forms a gummy resinous
coat over the letters, defending them for ever, against the action of air and
moisture.

The matter formed by the junction of the astringent juice and steel filings,
and the precipitated faecul^r green vitriol, possess the same properties.

The twelfth, and following experiments, naturally lead us to say a few (...)
on the changes which take place, in the precipitates of iron, by the vegetable
astringents.

On this subject, Messieurs Macquer, Monnet, Gianotti and the academicians of
Dijon, have been particularly engaged. The two former, and the greater part of
chemists, consider the precipitate of ink, to be united with a principle in the
gall-nut, in an oily state. Mr. Gianotti thought, that the iron was united with
the astringent principle; and that it was in the state of a neutral salt. The
gentlemen of the academy of Dijon, suppose the astringents direct their action
to the vitriolic acid, and precipitate the iron pure.

My experiments have induced me, to draw a different conclusion, from those
gentlemen. I have clearly proved, that a neutral salt exists readily formed in
astringent vegetables, composed of a peculiar acid and the earth of alum,
independent of a resin, which most of them contain.

In the making of ink then, a double elective attraction takes place; the
gallic acid unites with the iron of the green vitriol, while the vitriolic acid
unites with the earth of alum. In an acid solution of green vitriol, no
precipitate happens, because the vitriolic acid dissolves the iron, as fast as
it is precipitated; but, if a sufficient quantity of an alkali is added, to
saturate the vitriolic acid, the precipitate remains suspended in the liquor;
still continue to add the alkali, and you saturate both the gallic and
vitriolic (...) the iron is precipitated, of a dirty brown color.

This theory (...) out the necessity of having a vitriol, exactly saturated
with acid, in the making of ink; the propriety of adding a small quantity of
the vegetable alkali or steel filings, to the common ink powder of the shops,
and the improper practice which some people have, of using vinegar as a
menstruum, to extract its virtues.

It shows the propriety of Mr. Clegg's proposal, for employing the vegetable
alkali, as a substitute for verdigrise in the black dye, for which he received
a silver medal and ten guineas, from a society instituted in London, for the
encouragement of arts and manufactures, in the year 1783.

It accounts for the phenomenon, which happened in a number of experiments,
made by Drs. Skeete and Irwin, in which magnesia, lime, chalk and the alkalies
were triturated with peruvian bark, and added to a solution of green vitriol;
and which Irwin accounted for, by supposing the presence of fixed air.

The fallacy, of triturating astringent gum resins, with different substances,
and adding them to a solution of green vitriol, and making the intensity of the
color struck, a proof of the strength of the solvent power, is here pointed out.

It explains the reason, why in the precipitates of iron by the nut-gall, the
coalition of particles is successive, and remains suspended in the fluid, and
why in the uva ursi, the pig-nut, and the Persimmon, they concrete together, in
large particles, and fall to the bottom of the vessel. In the first case, the
resin being contained in a small quantity, and united to a portion of the acid,
is readily soluble in water; in the second case, the resin is contained in a
large proportion, and is insoluble in water.

It likewise explains to us the cause of the increased blackness of ink, in the
common practice which school boys have of adding chalk, lime, etc. to that
fluid.

The doctrine of astringents, serves as a key to many of the experiments of Dr.
Percival, and accounts for the manner in which acids neutralize astringents; by
destroying the affinity between the gallic acid, and the earth of alum.

In short, it simplifies the Materia Medica, it is an interesting addition to
chemistry, and in future it is probable, the whole catalogue of astringents
will yield to one or two of the most powerful, and the author queries, whether
even the peruvian bark, will not give place, to the more powerful combination,
of galls and gentian, or the Persimmon and centaury.

The acid of galls, forming an ink with green vitriol, may be offered as an
objection to this theory, and it may be asked, why does not the vitriolic acid,
in this case, dissolve the iron? The answer to this question is easy, the
vitriolic acid is too weak to act on the iron, and an ink made in this manner,
though at first of a deep black color, yet is not durable.

PHARMACEUTICAL TREATMENT OF THE PERSIMMON.
The unripe fruit is to be gathered, in the month of August or September, split
into pieces, dried in the sun, and reduced to an impalpable powder. The juice
may be obtained by pressure, in an apparatus suited to the purpose, mixed with
equal quantities of water, and kept in vessels closely stopped. After the juice
has been obtained, the part which remains may be dried, and used in the same
manner, as the unripe fruit.

To obtain the gum resin, we inspissate the unripe juice in the sun, in wooden,
or earthen vessels. The gum, if not thoroughly dried, cannot be pulverized, is
malleable, and cannot be made into pills. When well dried, it is as brittle as
glass, and may be used in powder, in pills, or in tincture. The best menstruum,
to extract its virtues, is common spirit.

OF THE USE OF THE PERSIMMON IN MEDICINE.
IN THE INTERMITTING FEVER.
Without entering into a disquisition, concerning the proximate cause, of an
intermitting fever, suffice it to say, simple astringents, or astringents
combined with bitters, are the remedies generally used, in the cure of the
disease.

Galls, gum kinoe, oak bark, and the roots of caryophillata have all been
employed with success.

About the beginning of this century, says Dr. Cullen, the galls had get a
reputation for the cure of intermittents; and it was pointed out as a proper
object of attention to the Academy of Sciences, who accordingly appointed Mr.
Poupart to inquire into the matter. His report amounts to this, that in many
cases the galls cured the intermittents; but that they failed also in many
cases, in which the peruvian bark proved successful.

This, with due deference to superior authority, cannot invalidate the efficacy
of astringents, in intermitting fevers. How often does the bark succeed, when
mixed with wine, or when joined with aromatics, or saline stimulants, when bark
itself had no effect? How frequently does it succeed after bleeding, when
pounds of it had been taken before to no purpose? How often do mild bitters
succeed, when the whole catalogue of the more powerful, have been employed with
no advantage? Those who doubt these facts, we would refer to Hoffman, Home,
Webster, Hunter, Langrish, Rush and Gardener.

Dr. McCausland, when stationed at Niagara, cured three hundred intermittents,
by tartar emetic alone Medical Commentaries vol. 8.
. Dr. Heberden informed Sir George Baker, that with two drachms of the powder
of myrrh, he relieved a patient from an ague, which resisted the power of the
bark, though taken in very large quantities Transactions of the College of
Physicians of London, vol. 3.
. Dr. Petrie in a letter to the same, says, that the powder of bay leaves, were
efficacious in many cases of an intermittent, in which the peruvian bark,
produced not the least effect Ibid.
A very striking instance of the efficacy of mild bitters, over the more
powerful, happened in an obstinate intermittent, which broke out at the
Illionois, in which pounds of the bark were administered with no good effect;
when recourse was had to the bark of the willow tree, which subdued the disease
in every instance. These medicines possess no specific power, the bark or any
other astringent and bitter, given in small doses, or after proper evacuations,
would have been equally efficacious. The reason the bark failed -- the reason
it still continues to fail in many cases, is, that it is not accommodated to
the state of excitability of the system. This GRAND PRINCIPLE, THIS SUBLIME and
LUMINOUS TRUTH, enables us not only to account for the failure of the bark, but
for the contradictory reports, given of the same remedy by different
practitioners. Diseases may be cured in both ways, but the one is like sailing
by the tedious and uncertain direction of the stars; the other, by the unerring
guide of the compass.




The general effects of astringents, are to increase the force of cohesion of
the human body, to diminish irritability, to diminish the capacity of the
containing vessels, and to increase the tonic powers of the system Duncan's
Therapeutics.
.

From this general view it is evident, in what manner they are adapted to the
cure of intermittents. Their tonic power may be increased, by joining them with
simple bitters, or with bitters and aromatics. In time of war, from principles
of economy, or from necessity, we may be forced to dispense with peruvian
bark; in these circumstances, the powder of the Persimmon combined with
centaury, or with calamus aromaticus, will answer every purpose of the above
remedy.

The active principles of the bark, consist in a gum and resin, or in an
astringent and bitter; in the combination above mentioned, these principles are
united; those who object to it as being inferior in virtue, to that made in the
laboratory of nature, might as well object to a combination of vitriolic acid
and mineral alkali, being inferior as a purge to Glauber's salt.

The bark of the tree, has been used with success in this disease; and it was
once said* the peruvian bark was obtained, from the Persimmon tree of New Spain
Lawson's natural history of North Carolina.
.

IN THE PILES.
When the hemorrhoidal flux verges to excess, or when it depends upon a
prolapsus any, astringents both internally and externally, may be properly and
safely employed. Cullen's first lines.


There are three methods of using the Persimmon in this disease; the simple
juice may be applied to the part affected, or it may be mixed with eight times
its quantity of hogs lard, or an ointment may be made of the juice, hogs lard,
sugar of lead and opium. The second application is not only the most elegant,
but the most useful, as it is free from all particles, which from their
mechanical stimulus are apt to irritate. Experience has ascertained this
composition, to be as useful as any, in the cure of the disease.

IN THE MENORRHAGIA, OR IMMODERATE FLOW OF THE MENSES.
When this disease depends upon a laxity of the uterine vessels, tonics and
astringents, are the remedies particularly indicated. The pulvis chalybis and
peruvian bark, are the preparations generally employed. Alum when given alone,
or joined with the bark, has been frequently used with success; and if we may
reason from analogy, the Persimmon, as containing a salt of greater
astringency, would be equally useful.

IN THE LEUCORRHEA.
The Leucorrhea, Fluor Albus or Whites, as depending upon the same cause, as
the Hemorrhagia Uteri, is to be cured in the same manner, with less reserve
however in the use of astringents.

IN THE DYSENTERY.
In the latter end of the Dysentery, or in the Diarrhaea, which succeeds this
disease, the ripe fruit dried, or the powder of the unripe fruit, or the bark
of the root of the tree, have been employed with success, when other remedies
failed.

The Indians make a paste, of the ripe fruit, which they bake into loaves, of
the thickness of a man's finger, and of the consistence of a dried pear, which
they use as a sovereign remedy in this disease. Charlevoix, page 223. vol. 2
nd. He speaks of the Persimmon tree, by the name of Piakimine, which it is
called in the Indian language.


The revd. Dr. Wilson, of Lewis-town in the state of Delaware, says, the bark
of the root of the tree, when given in wine is a specific.

IN THE DIARRHAEA.
When this disease depends upon an increased excitability of the intestines
from debility, the Persimmon is equally useful as in the Dysentery.

DIABETES.
We have the authority of Dr. Mead for using alum in this disease, although we
are told by Dr. Cullen, the serum aluminosum has been given without success.
Probably, by not being administered in sufficient quantities, and not continued
for a sufficient length of time. We are guided by the light of analogy, when we
would recommend a trial of one of the most powerful of the vegetable
astringents in this disease.

IN THE GONORRHAEA.
The Gonorrhaea consists in an excess, or deficiency of action, in the
secretory vessels of the glands of the urethra. The increased secretion of
mucus is the effect, not the cause of the disease.

This theory accounts for the various success attending the use of different
injections, since first introduced into practice.

In the asthenic gonorrhaea, the Persimmon juice diluted with water, makes a
valuable injection.

Some practitioners have attempted to abolish the use of these applications,
and the shortness of time they remain in the urethra, has been offered as an
argument against their use. Would not a bougie, made by inspissating the unripe
juice on a composition of oil, wax and resin, rolled to the size of the
urethra, and wore as bougies generally are, obviate this objection?

IN THE CYNANCHE TONSILLARIS.
Alum combined with oak bark, Dr. Cullen says, is a useful gargle in the
Cynanche Tonsillaris, and may be used in cases of spongy swelled gums and loose
teeth, from scurvy and other causes. The juice of the Persimmon, being of equal
efficacy with these remedies in other diseases, must be equally so in this.

IN THE GRAVEL.
The action of astringents, in relieving the symptoms which attend the presence
of a stone in the urinary passages, is a subject which has puzzled the
ingenuity of ancient, as well as modern physicians. Dr. Cullen supposes they
act, by absorbing the acid in the stomach, this great man, has the modesty to
offer this opinion, only as a conjecture; he is induced to think so, from the
medicines which are the most powerful in relieving the symptoms of a calculus,
being a variety of alkalines.

In opposition to this it may be said, the urine always contains a
superabundant acid, which keeps the calcareous matter dissolved; consequently,
whatever tends to rid the urine, of this excess of acid, favors the deposition
of the calcareous matter. It may likewise be said, the astringent matter enters
the course (...) circulation, and dissolves the stone.

Another objection to the opinion of Dr. Cullen, is, that all stones taken from
the bladder, are not composed of the same principles; some containing an acid,
others being evaporable by heat, while others are converted into quick lime.
Percival's Essays vol. 1. And Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh
vol. 3.


To ascertain whether the astringent matter, was taken into the course of
circulation, or into the bladder unaltered, I swallowed six ounces of a strong
infusion of the Persimmon gum diluted with half a pint of water; and after
frequent micturition at different intervals, could not discover it in the urine
by the addition of green vitriol.

At the same time I opened a vein in the arm, and could not discover it in the
serum, by the same test.

To see the effect of a concentrated astringent, on the calculus, I put one
scruple of a stone taken from the bladder of a horse, reduced into an
impalpable powder, into Persimmon juice, one scruple into water, and another
into recent urine, and after the mixtures had stood twenty four hours, I
filtered the water, and having dried the powder, of each mixture separately,
found it had lost none of its weight.

In this disease the Persimmon may be used in powder, in pills, or infusion.

IN CHRONIC ULCERS.
The ripe fruit applied to an old malignant ulcer, has been found to be an
efficacious remedy, and is said to cause exquisite pain. Lawson's natural
history of North Carolina.


The efficacy probably arises, from its antiseptic quality, and from the
inflammation which it excites.

To produce an action different from the morbid one, which prevails in ulcers,
by the exhibition, or abstraction of stimulants, appears from many striking
facts, to be the indication to be answered.

Boerhaave, before he began the study of Physic, cured an ulcer on his leg by
the application of salt and urine, which resisted the remedies of the most
celebrated Physicians, for five years. Johnson's life of Boerhaave.


I have seen bleeding and a low diet cure, or at least, put a venereal ulcer of
the leg in a proper disposition to heal, which baffled the power of mercury,
bark, wine, wort, generous diet, and many other famous tonics and stimulants.
Sir John Pringle, mentions a fact nearly similar to this. Diseases of the army.


OF THE USE OF THE PERSIMMON IN THE ARTS.
IN THE TANNING OF LEATHER.
The greater the quantity of resin contained in any vegetable astringent, the
greater the ease with which leather may be impregnated with it, and its greater
degree of insolubility in water afterward, so much the more valuable is it, in
this important branch of manufactures.

The use of tanning, says Dr. Macbride, is to prevent the leather from rotting,
and to render it impervious to water. Any astringent vegetable substance, is
powerful enough to accomplish the first purpose, but to render the leather
impervious to water, requires one containing a large proportion of gummy
resinous matter.

The superiority of oak bark over other astringents, is owing to this property.
The famous essence of this substance, is no more than an extract made by
infusion, and was first proposed as a substitute for oak bark, in a memoir
delivered to the Bath Society, in the year 1773.

The unripe juice of the Persimmon, provided it could be obtained in sufficient
quantities, and for a price which would not greatly enhance the value of
leather, must be preferable to oak bark, for reasons evident to every chemical
mind.

Allowing every tree to produce four bushels of fruit, though Mr. Bartram says,
he has seen some which produce six, and suppose three hundred of these trees
cultivated; the quantity of gum resin which would be produced, would be 1800
pounds, as I have ascertained by experiment, computing six pounds to a tree.
The quantity of juice would be several hundred gallons, which might be kept in
barrels 'till wanted for use.

North Carolina is the only state, in which the Persimmon is cultivated; it is
a common practice there to ingraft it on the apple, by which means the rapidity
of its growth is greatly increased.

When we oppose the cleanliness of the process, if the Persimmon could be used,
the strength of the astringent, the small number of hands required, the small
capital to begin and little labor requisite to carry on the business, the
trifling piece of ground which a tanyard would occupy, the value of the leather
and shortness of time necessary to finish it: to the large capital at present
required, the number of hands employed, the quantity of labor, the immense
loads of bark, the annual expense of a horse and price of instruments to grind
it, and to the length of time necessary to finish the leather, we may conclude,
the experiment is well worthy the attention of some philosophical tanner.

AS AN INGREDIENT IN THE BLACK DYE.
The black dye in common use, is no more than an ink, made by adding a
vegetable astringent to a solution of green vitriol, although realgar, antimony,
litharge, arsenic, orpiment and other substances have been added to the
ingredients.

In the Swedish transactions for the year 1753, a fine black is said to be
dyed, with the leaves of the uva ursi, the black matter concretes together in
large particles, which is supposed to be of great advantage to the black dye,
as the largeness of the coloring particles, which concrete in the pores of the
cloth, may render them more fixed, consequently, less of the coloring matter
is wasted in the liquor. To this cause, says Dr. Lewis, may be attributed a
quality of the uva ursi dye, mentioned by the Swedish author, that the cloth is
cleaner, than after the other black dies, or requires less washing to free it
from the loose color.

The juice of the Persimmon, precipitates iron in the same manner as the uva
ursi, in large particles, which fall to the bottom of the vessel. I have dyed
silk with an ink made of this substance, which was as black, and bore washing
as well, as that dyed with galls, logwood, and fifty other ingredients.

It is astonishing to think, an exorbitant price is still paid for galls and
logwood, when bushels of a substitute superior to either, may be had for the
trouble of carrying them away.

IN THE MAKING OF INK.
The great defect in an ink, made from the juice of the Persimmon, is, that the
precipitated iron, concretes together in large particles, and falls to the
bottom of the vessel; this takes place in a greater or less degree, in every
precipitate of iron, by a vegetable astringent. In some inks this circumstance
may be prevented by the addition of gum arabic, and the coloring matter kept
suspended in the fluid; I have attempted it in vain, in ink made from the
Persimmon, the letters always appearing as if written with charcoal diffused in
water. An ink has likewise been made from the precipitated iron mixed with
water, and kept suspended by the addition of gum arabic; when made in this
manner, though it is durable, yet the letters may be washed off from the paper as
easily as if written with any black powder diffused in water.

In the latter end of October, and in November, the astringent gum of the
Persimmon, is converted into a sweet nutritious substance, which remains on the
trees 'till January, and serves as food to squirrels, rabbits, racoons, and
other animals.

The manner in which this change is produced, would lead to an inquiry, as
curious as it would be useful. It appears to be a process, analogous to a
mortification in the extremities of the human body, and brought on by the same
cause. An extinction of life, from a languid circulation, caused by the
bebilitating power of cold. In what manner this quality acts, in producing a
decomposition, is difficult to determine: the constituent principles appear not
to be changed, they are only modified; the gum resin is principally composed of
acid, oil, earth and water: the ripe fruit contains the same principles, and
even when changed into a vinous liquor and distilled, the composition is still
acid, oil, and water The composition of spirit of wine, is a subject which has
engaged the attention of many celebrated Chemists, among whom Cartheuser,
Macquer, Stahl, Boerhaave and Bucquet stand foremost. The two former, consider
it as a compound of phlogiston and water, while the latter, think it is
composed, of acid, water, and an attenuated oil. Perhaps a gleam of light may
be thrown upon the subject, when we observe, that spirit of wine may be
produced from animal, as well as vegetable substances. A fact not noticed in
systems of Chemistry!

The Tartars prepare a wine, called Koumiss, from the milk of Mares, Camels,
Ewes, and Reindeer, which is partly of an animal nature, and another called
Airn, from the milk of Cows. Tooke's history of Russia, and Transactions of the
Royal Society of Edinburgh, vol. 1.
They likewise produce an inebriating liquor, from fish and water, putrefying
in holes dug in the earth. Macbride's Essays.
The Chinese prepare a wine from Lamb, and produce a strong spirit from the
flesh of Sheep. Encyclopaedia Britannica, article China.
The Swedes distill a low priced brandy, from rye and large black ants, found in
small round holes, at the bottom of the Fir Tree. Consett's tour through Sweden.


The ants yield to a chemical analysis, acid, oil, and resin. These facts in my
opinion, not only throw light on the composition of spirit of wine, but are an
interesting addition to our stock of knowledge, on putrefaction and
fermentation.


. Here we must rest satisfied with the fact, for it is not the business of
Chemistry, to wander in the boundless regions of conjecture. Perhaps some
future experiments, may throw light on this mysterious process, which at
present only proves, that nature herself is a great Chemist.

TO MAKE SPIRIT OF THE PERSIMMON.
For this purpose, a certain quantity of water is to be added to the Persimmon
when ripe, and the whole put into a proper vessel to which a certain quantity
of yeast is to be added, to promote a fermentation. Every bushel of fruit
treated in this manner, will yield one gallon of spirit, of an agreeable
flavor. If beer is prefered to spirit, the fruit is boiled in water, which is
afterward strained, and set to ferment; hops are then added to prevent the
fermentation from proceeding too far, and it is bottled for use.

Those who would wish to collect large quantities of the fruit for
distillation, may consult a memoir published by Mr. Bartram, in the first
volume of the American Philosophical Transactions.

TO MAKE PERSIMMON BREAD.
When freed from the stones, they are to be mixed with flour as potatoes
generally are and baked in the same manner. Bread when made in this way, is not
only very nutritious, but has the advantage of economy to recommend it.

FINIS

