AN ORATION, DELIVERED AT ELIZABETH-TOWN, NEW JERSEY. AGREEABLY TO A RESOLUTION
OF THE STATE SOCIETY OF CINCINNATI, ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, M. DCC. XCIII. BEING
THE SEVENTEENTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE INDEPENDENCE OF AMERICA.

BY ELIAS BOUDINOT, L. L. D.

Deus enim, qui homines generat et inspirat, omnes equos, id est pares, esse
voluit: eandem conditionem vivendi omnibus posuit. Omnes ad sapientiam genuit:
omnibus immortalitatem spopondit. Nemo apud Deum Servus est, nemo Dominus.
LACTANT. Lib. 5. Cap. 14. Fol. 501. ELIZABETH-TOWN: PRINTED BY SHEPARD KOLLOCK,
AT HIS PRINTING-OFFICE AND BOOK-STORE, 1793.

ELIZABETH TOWN, JULY 4. 1793.
AT a Meeting of the Society of the Cincinnati of the State of New Jersey --
"On Motion, Resolved, that the thanks of this Society be given to the Honorable
Elias Boudinot, Esquire Doctor of Laws, for his excellent and well-adapted Oration,
delivered this day in celebration of the Anniversary of the Independence of the
United States of America, and that he be desired to furnish the Society with a
copy thereof, to be deposited in their archives."

The above is a true Copy, taken from the Minutes of the Society, certified by
JAMES F. ARMSTRONG, SEC'Y.

To GEORGE WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
SIR,
THE great respect due to your public character, as the first servant of a
Nation of Freemen, greatly heightened by a knowledge of the amiableness of your
deportment in private life, have been additional arguments with me to dedicate
an Oration to you, which, however inadequate to the purpose, was designed to
promote a reverence for that happy revolution, in which divine Providence has
been pleased to make you so peculiar an instrument.

A frequent recurrence to the first principles of our constitution, and from
thence to inculcate the necessity of a free, firm, and energetic government, in
which Liberty shall rise superior to licentiousness, and obedience to the Laws
become the best evidence of attachment to the Independence of our common
Country, cannot but meet with your approbation.

This is the great object designed by instituting the Anniversary of the Fourth
of July, one thousand seven hundred and seventy-six, as a Festival, to be
sacredly observed by every true American. This is the Day, chosen by the
Defenders of our Country, your friends and companions in arms, to meet together
and rejoice in the recollection of past labors, while they receive the glorious
reward of their services, by looking forward to the increasing prosperity of
the union, secured by their united exertions.

It arose from a desire, that this Jubilee might be improved, to continue those
principles to posterity, which led them to arm in defense of their most
invaluable privileges, that the Society in this State instituted an Oration on
this Anniversary, to commemorate the successful result of their sufferings, and
to perpetuate a constitution founded on the Rights of Men, as Men and Citizens.

You, Sir, as their Head, must enjoy, in a very peculiar manner, the
contemplation of these blessings, and to you every attempt in this important
service will be most properly dedicated.

Long may you personally experience their benign effects -- Long may you live
to testify, by a successful practice, the truth of the theory established by
your struggles in the cause of universal Liberty.

I have the honor to be, with every proper expression of respect and esteem,

Sir, Your affectionate Friend and Fellow Citizen, THE ORATOR.
Elizabeth Town, July 4, 1793.
AN ORATION.
Gentlemen, Brethren, and Fellow Citizens --
HAVING devoutly paid the sacrifice of prayer and praise to that almighty
Being, by whose favor and mercy this day is peculiarly dedicated to the
commemoration of events which fill our minds with joy and gladness, it now
becomes me, in obedience to the resolutions of our Society, to aim at a further
improvement of this Festival, by leading your reflections to the contemplation
of those special privileges which attend the happy and important situation you
now enjoy among the Nations of the Earth.

Is there any necessity, Fellow Citizens, to spend your time in attempting to
convince you of the policy and propriety of setting apart this Anniversary for
the purpose of remembering, with gratitude, the unexampled event of our
political salvation?

The cordial testimony you have borne to this institution, for seventeen years
past, supercedes the necessity of an attempt of this kind; and, indeed, if this
had been the first instance of our commemorating the Day, the practice of all
nations, and of all ages, would have given a sanction to the measure.

The history of the world, as well sacred as profane, bears witness to the use
and importance of setting apart a day as a memorial of great events, whether of
a religious or political nature.

No sooner had the great Creator of the heavens and the earth finished his
almighty work, and pronounced all very good, but he set apart (not an
anniversary, or one day in a year, but) one day in seven, for the commemoration
of his inimitable power in producing all things out of nothing.

The deliverance of the children of Israel from a state of bondage to a
unreasonable tyrant, was perpetuated by the eating of the Paschal Lamb, and
enjoining it on their posterity, as an annual festival for ever, with a
remember this day, in which ye came out of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

The resurrection of the Savior of mankind is commemorated by keeping the
first day of the week, not only as a certain memorial of his first coming in a
state of humiliation, but the positive evidence of his future coming in glory.

Let us then, my Friends and Fellow Citizens, unite all our endeavors this day,
to remember, with reverential gratitude to our supreme Benefactor, all the
wonderful things he has done for us, in our miraculous deliverance from a
second Egypt -- another house of bondage. And thou shall show thy son on this
day, saying, this day is kept as a day of joy and gladness, because of the
great things the Lord has done for us, when we were delivered from the
threatening power of an invading foe. And it shall be a sign unto thee, upon
thine hand, and for a memorial between thine eyes, that the law of the Lord may
be in thy mouth, for with a strong hand have thou been delivered from thine
enemies: Thou shall therefore keep this ordinance, in its season, from year to
year, for ever.

When great events are to be produced in this our world, great exertions
generally become necessary; men are therefore usually raised up, with talents
and powers peculiarly adapted to the purposes intended by Providence, who
often, by their disinterested services and extreme sufferings, become the
wonder, as well as the examples of their generation.

The obligations of mankind to these worthy characters increase in proportion
to the importance of the blessings purchased by their labors.

It is not then an unreasonable expectation which, I well know, generally
prevails, that this day should be usually devoted to the perpetuating and
respectfully remembering the dignified characters of those great men, with whom
it has been our honor to claim the intimate connection of Fellow Citizens --
Men who have purchased our present joyful circumstances at the invaluable price
of their blood.

But you must also acknowledge with me, that this subject has been so fully
considered, and so ably handled, by those eloquent and enlightened men who have
gone before me in this honorable path, that had their superior abilities fallen
to my lot, I could do but little more than repeat the substance of their
observations and vary their language.

Forgive me, ye spirits of my worthy, departed Fellow Citizens! Patriots of the
first magnitude, whose integrity no subtle arts of bribery and corruption could
successfully assail; and whose fortitude and perseverance no difficulties or
dangers could intimidate! Whose labors and sufferings in the common cause of
our country -- whose exploits in the field, and wisdom in the cabinet, I have
often been witness to, during a cruel and distressing war! -- Forgive, O
Warren! Montgomery! and all the nameless heroes of your illustrious group!
Forgive, that I omit, on the present occasion, to follow the steps of those
compatriots who have preceded me, but had rather spend this sacred hour in
contemplating those great purpose which animated your souls in the severe
conflict, and for which you fought and bled!

Were you present to direct this day's meditations, would you not point to your
scarred limbs and bleeding breasts, and loudly call upon us to reward your
toils and sufferings, by forcibly inculcating and improving those patriotic
principles and practices which led you to those noble achievements that
secured the blessings we now enjoy?

Yes, ye martyrs to liberty! Ye band of heroes! Ye once worthy compatriots and
fellow citizens! we will obey your friendly suggestion, and greatly prize that
freedom and independence, purchased by your united exertions, as the most
invaluable gem of our earthly crown!

The late revolution, my respected audience, in which we this day rejoice, is
big with events that are daily unfolding themselves, and pressing in thick
succession, to the astonishment of a wondering world!

It has been marked with the certain characteristic of a divine overruling
hand, in that it was brought about and perfected against all human reasoning,
and apparently against all human hope; and that in the very moment of time when
all Europe seemed ready to be plunged into commotion and distress.

Divine Providence, throughout the government of this world, appears to have
impressed many great events with the undoubted evidence of his own almighty
arm. He puts down kingdoms, and he sets up whom he pleases, and it has
been literally verified in us, that "no King prevails by the power of his own
strength".

The first great principle established and secured by our revolution, and which
since seems to be pervading all the nations of the earth; and which should be
most zealously and carefully improved and gloried in by us, is the rational
equality and rights of men, as men and citizens.

I do not mean to hold up the absurd idea charged upon us, by the enemies of
this valuable principle, and which contains in it, inevitable destruction to
every government, "that all men are equal, as to acquired or adventitious
rights." Men must and do continually differ in their genius, knowledge,
industry, integrity, and activity.

Their natural and moral characters -- their virtues and vices -- their
abilities, natural and acquired -- together with favorable opportunities for
exertion, will always make men different among themselves, and of course,
create a preeminency and superiority one over another. But the equality and
rights of men here contemplated, are natural, essential, and unalienable; such
as the security of life, liberty, and property. These should be the firm
foundation of every good government, as they will apply to all nations, at all
times, and may properly be called a universa law. It is apparent that every man
is born with the same right to improve the talent committed to him, for the use
and benefit of society, and to be respected accordingly.

We are all the workmanship of the same divine hand. With our Creator,
abstractly considered, there are neither kings nor subjects -- masters nor
servants, otherwise than stewards of his appointment, to serve each other
according to our different opportunities and abilities, and of course
accountable for the manner in which we perform our duty -- he is no respecter
of persons -- he beholds all with an equal eye, and although "order is heaven's
first law," and he has made it essential to good government and necessary for
the welfare of every community, that there should be distinctions among members
of the same society, yet this difference is originally designed for the
service, benefit, and best good of the whole, and not for their oppression or
destruction. Lactantius, lib. 5. cap. 14, fol. 501, speaking of the universal
equality of mankind, says -- Equitatem dico -- se cum ceteris coequandi, quam
Cicero aequabilitatem voceat -- Deus enim qui homines generat and inspirat
omnes oequos, id est; pares esse voluit: eandem conditionem vivendi omnibus
posuit -- Omnes ad sapientiam genuit: omnious immortalitatem spopondit -- Nemo
apud Deum servus est, nemo Dominus.


It is our duty then, as a people acting on principles of universal
application, to convince mankind of the truth and practicability of them, by
carrying them into actual exercise, for the happiness of our fellow men,
without suffering them to be perverted to oppression or licentiousness.

The eyes of the nations of the earth are fast opening, and the inhabitants of
this globe, notwithstanding it is 3000 years since the promulgation of that
invaluable precept "thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself," are but just
beginning to discover their brotherhood to each other, and that all men,
however different with regard to nation or color, have an essential interest
in each others welfare.

Let it then be our peculiar, constant care, and vigilant attention, to
inculcate this sacred principle, and to hand it down to posterity, improved by
every generous and liberal practice, that while we are rejoicing in our own
political and religious privileges, we may with pleasure, contemplate the happy
period, when all the nations of the earth shall join in the triumph of this
day, and one universal anthem of praise, shall arise to the universal creator,
in return for the general joy.

Another essential ingredient in the happiness we enjoy as a nation, and which
arises from the principles of our revolution, is the right that every people
have to govern themselves in such manner as they judge best calculated for the
common benefit.

It is a principle interwoven with our constitution, and not one of the least
blessings purchased by that glorious struggle, to the commemoration of which
this day is specially devoted, that every man has a natural right to be
governed by laws of his own making, either in person or by his representative;
and that no authority ought justly to be exercised over him, that is not
derived from the people, of whom he is one.

This, fellow citizens! is a most important practical principle, first carried
into complete execution by the United States of America.

I tremble for the event, while I glory in the subject.

To you, ye citizens of America! do the inhabitants of the earth, look with
eager attention, for the success of a measure on which their happiness and
prosperity so manifestly depend.

To use the words of a famous foreigner "You are become the hope of human
nature, and ought to become its great example. The assylum opened in your land
for the oppressed of all nations, must console the earth."

On your virtue, patriotism, integrity, and submission to the laws of your own
making, and the government of your own choice; do the hopes of men rest with
prayers and supplications for a happy issue.

Be not therefore careless, indolent, or inattentive in the exercise of any
right of citizenship. Let no duty however small, or seemingly of little
importance, be neglected by you.

Ever keep in mind that it is parts that form the whole, and fractions
constitute the unit. Good government generally begins in the family, and if the
moral character of a people once degenerate, their political character must
soon follow.

A friendly consideration of our fellow citizens, who by our free choice become
the public servants, and manage the affairs of our common country, is but a
reasonable return for their diligence and care in our service.

The most enlighted and zealous of our public servants, can do little without
the exertions of private citizens to perfect what they do but form, as it were
in embryo. The highest officers of our government, are but the first servants
of the people, and always in their power; they have therefore a just claim to a
fair and candid experiment of the plans they form, and the laws they enact for
the public weal. Too much should not be expected from them; they are but men,
and of like passions, and of like infirmities with ourselves; they are liable
to err, though exercising the purest motives and best abilities required for
the purpose.

Times and circumstances may change, and accidents intervene to disappoint the
wisest measures. Mistaken and wicked men (who cannot live but in troubled
waters) are often laboring with indefatigable zeal, which sometimes prove but
too successful, to sour our minds, and derange the best formed systems.
Plausible pretensions, and censorious insinuations are always at hand to
transfer the deadly poison of jealousy, by which the best citizens may for a
time be deceived.

These considerations should lead to an attentive solicitude to keep the pure
unadulterated principles of our constitution always in view; to be religiously
careful in our choice of all public officers; and as they are again in our
power at very short periods, lend not too easily a patient ear to every
invidious insinuation or improbable story, but prudently mark the effects of
their public measures, and judge of the tree by its fruits.

I do not wish to discourage a constant and lively attention to the conduct of
our rulers. A prudent suspicion of public measures is a great security to a
republican government; but a line should be drawn between a careful and
critical examination into the principles and effects of regular systems, after
a fair and candid trial, and a captious, discontented and censorious temper,
which leads to find fault with every proposition in which we have not an
immediate hand; and raise obstacles to rational plans of government without
waiting a fair experiment. It is generally characteristic of this disposition,
to find fault without proposing a better plan for consideration.

We should not forget that our country is large, and our fellow citizens of
different manners, interests and habits. That our laws to be right, must be
equal and general; of course, the differing interests must be combined, and
brotherly conciliation and forbearance continually exercised, if we will judge
with propriety of those measures that respect a nation at large.

While we thus enjoy, as a community, the blessings of the social compact in
its purity, and are all endeavoring to secure the invaluable privileges,
purchased by the blood of thousands of our brethren, who fell in the dreadful
conflict; let us also be careful to encourage and promote a liberality and
benevolence of mind, toward those whom they have left behind, and whose
unhappy fate it has been to bear a heavier proportion of the expensive
purchase, in the loss of husbands, parents or children, perhaps their only
support and hope in life.

Mankind, considered as brethren, should be dear to each other; but Fellow
Citizens, who have together braved the common danger -- who have fought side by
side -- who have mingled their blood together, as it were in one rich stream --
who have labored and toiled with united efforts to accomplish the same glorious
end, must surely be more than brethren -- it is a union cemented by blood.

I can no longer deny myself the felicity, my beloved Friends and Fellow
Citizens, members of a Society founded in these humane and benevolent
principles, of addressing myself more particularly to you, on a DAY which, in
so peculiar a manner, shines with increasing luster on you, refreshing and
brightening your hard-earned laurels, by renewing the honorable reward of your
laborious services, in the gratitude of your rejoicing fellow citizens.

Methinks I behold you on the victorious Banks of Hudson, bowed down with the
fatigues of an active campaign, and the sufferings of an inclement winter,
receiving the welcome news of approaching peace, and your country's political
salvation, with all that joy of heart and serenity of mind, that became
citizens, who flew to their arms, merely at their country's call, in a time of
common danger.

The war-worn soldiers, reduced to the calamities of a seven year's arduous
service, now solemnly pause and reflect on the peculiarity of their critical
situation. The ravages of war had been extended through a country dearer to
them than life, and thereby prevented that ample provision in service, or
reasonable recompense on their return to private life, that prudence required
and gratitude powerfully dictated.

They thought that the distresses of the army had before been brought to a
point, -- That they had borne all that men could bear; their property expended
-- their private resources at an end -- their friends wearied out and disgusted
with incessant applications. But another trial, severer than all, still awaits
them: They are now to be disbanded, and a separation to take place, more
distressing than every former scene! Till now the severe conflict was unseen,
or unattended to. Poverty, and the gratitude of their country, are their only
reward.

True, they are to return to their friends and fellow-citizens with blessings
on their heads. The general liberty and independence are now secured -- but yet
want and dire distress stare many in the face. They are to return to wives and
children, long used to dependence on the cold hand of charity, in hopes of a
sure support from the success of the common cause, when their husband, father
or child returned glorious from the field of conquest. Alas! these flattering
hopes now are no more.

Their country's exhausted treasury, cannot yield them even the hard earned
pittance of a soldier's pay. Being urged on one hand by the subtle poison of
inflammatory, violent and artful addresses, under the specious mark of
pretended friendship (the last expiring effort of a conquered foe.) -- Warned
on the other hand by the experience, wisdom and rational conduct of their
beloved Commander, their father and long tried friend -- they solemnly
deliberate --

Some guardian angel, perhaps the happy genius of America, ever attendant on
the object of her care, raises the drooping head, wipes the indignant falling
tear from the hardy soldier's eye, and suggests the happy expedient!

Brotherly affection produces brotherly relief -- the victorious bands unite
together -- they despise the infamous idea -- they refuse to listen to the
Siren's song -- they form the social tie -- they cast in the remaining fragment
of their scanty pay, and instead of seizing their arms, and demanding their
right by menace and violence, they refuse to lessen the dignity, or fully the
glory they had hitherto maintained. They, determine to give one more proof of
unexampled patriotism and patient virtue, rising superior to the pressure of
their complicated sufferings, and thereby afford an occasion to posterity to
say, had that day been wanting, the world had not seen the last stage of
political perfection, to which human nature is capable of attaining.

The glorious certainty of peace, purchased by their sufferings and
perseverance, now rouses the patriotic fire. They again rejoice in the event;
they unite in a firm indissoluble bond, gratefully to commemorate the event,
which gave independence to America -- to inculcate to latest ages, the duty of
laying down in peace, arms assumed for public defense in war -- to continue
their mutual friendship, which commenced under the pressure of common danger,
and to effectuate every act of beneficence, dictated by a spirit of brotherly
kindness to any of their number and their families, who might unfortunately be
under the necessity of receiving them, and by this unanimous act, establish
this sacred truth, that the glory of soldiers cannot be completed without
acting well the part of citizens.

This, gentlemen, is your origin as a Society -- the source from whence you
sprang, and this day we are carrying on the work first began in these social
principles.

With a heart filled with unfeigned gratitude to the Author of all our mercies,
and overflowing with the most affectionate friendship toward you; suffer me to
congratulate on you this seventeenth Anniversary of our happy Independence. --
Long! long! even to the remotest ages, may the citizens of this rising empire
enjoy the triumph of this day, may they never forget the invaluable price which
it cost, as well as the great purposes for which it was instituted, and may a
frequent recurrence to the first principles of our constitution, on this
anniversary, be a constant source of security and permanence to the rising
fabric! May the rights of men and the purity of a free, energetic and
independent government, be continually cherished and promoted by every Son of
Cincinnatus! May the remembrance of those worthy heroes, once our beloved
companions, whose lives they did not hold dear, when required for their
country's safety, animate us to preserve inviolate, what they purchased at so
high a rate! May we, by the uniform conduct of good citizens, and generous
faithful friends, show ourselves worthy of such valuable connections!

Long, long may you live to enjoy the reward of your labors, in the exercise of
the duties of this honorable anniversary; and after a long life of services to
your country, usefulness to your society, and happiness to yourselves, may you
leave your generation in the full enjoyment of peace and a sound constitution,
justified by experience, for the example of which, nations yet unborn shall
rise up and call you blessed!

And now my respected audience, we appeal to your candor and generosity; you
have heard our origin -- you have known our conduct -- our society is designed
for the benefit and happiness of mankind -- we have no secrets -- we claim no
separate privileges -- we ask no independent immunities -- we are embarked in
one common cause with you -- we glory in one perfect political equality, all we
wish for is the pleasure, of renewing ancient friendships -- of the mutual
remembrance of past labors and sufferings -- the liberal exercise of that
celestial principle charity, and one common interest with you, in the security
of our liberty, property and independence.

We profess to be a band of brethren, united to our fellow citizens by every
tie of interest, gratitude and love. Let us then go hand in hand with you, in
looking forward to the happy state of our country, during a long succession of
ages yet to come.

We are encouraged in this animating hope, by the numerous advantages arising
to us, in a peculiar manner, from the happy revolution we commemorate this day;
they are conspicuous in every quarter to which the view can be directed.

If we turn our attention to the strong hope of every community, the rising
generation, the world has yet enjoyed nothing equal to their advantages and
future prospects.

The road to honors, riches, usefulness and same, in this happy country, is
open equally to all. The equality of citizens in its true sense, must raise the
most lively hopes, prompt the noblest exertions, and secure a certainty of
success to all, who shall excel in the service of their country, without
respect of persons.

The meanest citizen of America, educates his beloved child with a well founded
hope, that if he should become equal to the task, he may rationally aspire to
the command of our armies, a place in the cabinet, or even to the filling of
the presidental chair; He stands on equal ground, in regard to the first honors
of the state, with the richest of his fellow citizens.

The child of the poorest laborer, by enjoying the means of education (afforded
in almost every corner of this happy land) is trained up for, and is encouraged
to look forward to a share in the legislation of the union, or of a particular
state, with as much confidence as the noblest subject of an established
monarchy.

This is a peculiar happiness of our highly favored republic, among the nations
of the earth, proceeding from the successful revolution in which we this day
rejoice.

Suffer me, ye fair daughters of New Jersey! to call on you also, in a special
manner, to add your invigorating smiles to the mirth and festivity of this day.
Our happiness can be but half completed, if you refuse to crown the whole with
your kind approbation.

Have you not at all times, and do you not still contitinue to participate
deeply in the multiplied blessings of our common country. Raised from the
humiliating state of your sex in most other countries, you also breathe the
sacred air of Freedom, and nobly unite your exertions for the general good.

The Rights of Women are no longer strange sounds to an American ear; they are
now heard as familiar terms in every part of the United States; and I devoutly
hope that the day is not far distant when we shall find them dignifying, in a
distinguishing code, the jurisprudence of the several States in the Union.

But in your domestic character, do you not also enjoy the most delightful
contemplations, arising from the Revolution of Seventeen Hundred and
Seventy-six?

Can you look on the children of your tenderest care, and reflect on the
cheerful prospects opening upon them through life, without feeling the most
lively emotions of gratitude, for the inestimable privileges conferred on the
Citizens of America? -- Are not your resolutions strengthened, and your
endeavors redoubled, to furnish them with every qualification, both mental and
personal, for the future service of a country thus rendered dear to you?

But your share of the joy of this Day does not rise from a single source: --
To whom are we more indebted for the origin of our present happiness, than to
your delicate and discerning sex. In vain did Columbus, our great founder and
discoverer, after settling the principles of his sound philosophy, apply to the
wise men of his country -- In vain did he solicit, in strains of the most
suppliant humiliation, the different thrones of Europe, where Kings considered
themselves as God's Vicegerents here below: Despised by the ignorant -- by the
malevolent -- contemned by the great -- laughed at by pretended philosophers --
and trifled with by the arrogance of ministers, and their hirelings; all his
hopes, and those of a New World, had at last sunk (...) despair, and we, this
Day, might have mingled our fate with the slaves of the Old World, had not the
penetrating wisdom, and persevering magnanimity of the fair; but undaunted
Isabella, the ornament of your sex, and the jealousy of ours, saved this
Western World from the oblivion of more than five thousand years. Did the
employ the excess of useless treasures, in this happy adventure? -- No! --
After the refusal of her husband -- despising the appendages of brilliant
royalty, when compared with the general good of Mankind, her enlarged mind,
incapable of being confined by the shackles of the age, found a resource in her
costly Jewels, which she freely offered as a pledge, to accomplish the glorious
discovery of the Fourth Quarter of the Globe!

To your Sex, then, Ladies, are we obliged to yield the Palm -- had this great
Event depended altogether on our Sex, it is not easy to guess what our United
Fate had been at this moment, Instead of our present agreeable employment, we
might have been Hewers of Wood, and Drawers of Water to some mighty PHARAOH,
whose tender mercies would have been cruelty. Your right then, my Fair
Auditory, to a large portion of the general joy, must be acknowledged to be of
a superior kind.

Do you, my worthy Fellow Citizens, of every description, wish for more lasting
matter of pleasure and satisfaction in contemplating the great events brought
to your minds this Day? -- Extend, then, your views to a distant period of
future time. Look forward a few years, and behold our extended forests (now a
pathless wilderness) converted into fruitful fields and busy towns. Take into
view the pleasing shores of our immense lakes, united to the Atlantic States,
by a thousand winding canals, and beautified with rising cities, crowded with
innumerable, peaceful fleets, transporting the rich produce from one coast to
another.

Add to all this, what must most pleased every humane and benevolent mind, the
ample provision thus made by the God of all Flesh, for the reception of the
Nations of the Earth, flying from the Tyranny and Oppression of the Despots of
the Old World, It is worthy the attention of every serious mind, who carefully
traces the secret (...) or divine Providence, that if the late Revolution had
not taken place, and America (...) still continued under the dominion of Great
Britain, the unhappy sufferers in the cause of Freedom, both in Europe and the
West Indies, would not now have (...) globe, to which they could, with
propriety and safety, have retired, in case of a future of their exertions in
favor in Universal Liberty. Neither can any European nation afford so complete
an asylum, as the United States, for the opposition, in case they should
finally be driven from a country, which might conceive itself essentially
injured by their hostile conduct, in the day of her distress.
and say, if the prophecies of ancient times are not hastening to a fulfillment,
when this wilderness shall blossom as a rose -- the Heathen be given to the
Great Redeemer as his inheritance, and these uttermost pa^^s of the earth for
his possession.

Who knows but the country for which we have fought and bled, may hereafter
become a theater of greater events than yet have been known to mankind.

May these invigorating prospects lead us to the exercise of every virtue,
religious, moral, and political. May we be roused to a circumspect conduct --
to an exact obedience to the laws of our own making -- to the preservation of
the spirit and principles of our truly invaluable, constitution -- to respect
and attention to magistrates of our own choice; and, finally, by our example as
well as precept, add to the real happiness of our fellow men, and the
particular glory of our common country.

And may these great principles, in the end, become instrumental in bringing
about that happy state of the world, when, from every human breast, joined by
the grand chorus of the skies, shall arise with the profoundest reverence, that
divinely celestial anthem of universal praise, -- Glory to God in the highest
-- Peace on earth -- Good will toward men.

SONG -- To follow the PRAYER.
TUNE -- "RULE BRITANNIA,"etc.
WHEN exiled Freedom, force'd to roam,
Sought refuge on Columbia's shores,
The lovely wanderer found a home,
And this the DAY that made HER ours.
Hail Columbia! Columbia hail! to THEE
The praise is due, that MAN IS FREE!
In her defense, the patriot crowd,
Rushed to the field, and frowned on Death:
They sealed her triumphs with their blood,
And hailed her with their dying breath.
Hail Columbia, etc.
'Twas not Columbia's cause alone;
At stake, the Rights of Mankind lay:
That cause, shall distant Nations own,
And hail, with joy, this festive DAY!
Hail Columbia, etc.
It Is the World's Day Star, and shall last
Till Slav'ry's Shadows be withdrawn:
And lo! that night is almost past,
And Europe's Day begins to dawn.
Hail Columbia, etc.
How bright will be its noontide ray!
When Universal Freedom reigns,
When not a Despot clouds the day,
And not a Slave on earth remains!
Hail Columbia, etc.
Mankind shall never THIS DAY forget,
Its BRAVE DEFENDERS' worth shall own;
Shall love the Memory of FAYETTE,
And shout the Name of WASHINGTON!
Hail Columbia, etc.
To conclude the Service.
TO THE TUNE OF DORCHESTER'S MARCH.
AT length War's sanguine scenes are over,
Her dire alarms are heard no more:
Sweet PEACE descends with balmy wings
And heaven-born INDEPENDENCE brings;
While FREEDOM comes with all her train
To bless COLUMBIA'S happy plain.
Hail! Heaven descended Guests, all hail!
Peace, Independence, Freedom, hail!
Ruler of Kings! Thy mandate shook
The fated Monarch's throne, and took
The brightest jewel from his crown,
When Britain sunk beneath thy frown.
Thy wisdom the rude Statesman taught,
And by thy aid the Soldier fought.
Hail, Sovereign Wisdom! Goodness, hail!
Peace, Independence, Freedom, hail!
Oh shed thy powerful influence down,
Form the NEW STATES to high renown;
Let Justice lift alost her hand,
And purest Virtue fill the land.
Let Men thy power with fear adore,
Till suns and moons revolve no more.
Hail, train of Heaven! bright mantled, hail!
Peace, Independence, Freedom, hail!
Public devotion! Glorious flame,
That gave to Rome immortal fame!
Religion chief! Angelic maid!
In every heart, thy empire spread,
Oh! hither come, our breasts inspire,
And fill us with thy sacred fire.
Hail, pure ethereal graces, hail!
Peace, Independence, Freedom, hail!
Her darling SON! Columbia's boast!
Envy and dread of Albion's host!
Circled with honor's endless wreaths --
At last his patriot falchion sheaths.
Celestial troops, now bending low,
Crown the Deliv'rer bind his brow.
Hail, Washington! Deliv'rer, hail!
Peace, Independence, Freedom, hail!
Now let the loud, shrill clarion play
Triumphant peals, proclaim the DAY!
And joyful voices rend the sky,
With glory be to GOD on high!
Good will and peace on earth to MEN,
While angels sound the loud AMEN.
Hallelujah! Hallelujah! etc.
FINIS.

