Published by Isaiah Thomas 1793.

Hermit.


Beauties of the Muses. OR, SELECT SENTIMENTAL POEMS AND ELEGIES, VIZ. I. THE
HERMIT. By Dr. PARNELL. II. ELEGY IN A CHURCH YARD. By Mr. Gray. III. THE
TRAVELLER. By Dr. GOLDSMITH. IV. DEATH. A POEM. By Dr. PORTEUS. V. DESERTED
VILLAGE. By Dr. GOLDSMITH. VI. HERMIT OF THE DALE. By Ditto. VII. FUTURITY.
Extract from Dr. DODD.


TO WAKE THE SOUL --
-- TO MEND THE HEART.
Illustrated with beautiful Engravings.

Printed at Worcester, BY ISAIAH THOMAS. Sold at his Bookstore in WORCESTER; by
said THOMAS, and ANDREWS, in BOSTON; and by said THOMAS, and CARLISLE, in
WALPOLE, Newhampshire. MDCCXCIII.

Preface.
THE sentiment and beauty, contained in the Poetry of this Collection, being so
universally admired, that, at the request of a number of friends, the Editor
has been induced to lay them before the public, in one Volume.

The owner of this little work, will find it no disgraceful companion: And the
merit of the authors of the several pieces contained in it, is such, as to
claim a place in the best libraries.

Worcester, 1793.
Contents.
1. THE Hermit. By Dr. Parnell. Page. 5 2. Elegy; written in a Country Church
Yard. By Mr. Gray. Page. 35 The Epitaph. Page. 47 3. The Traveller; or a
Prospect of Society. By Dr. Goldsmith. Page. 51 4. Death. A Poem. By Dr.
Porteus. Page. 93 5. The Deserted Village. By Dr. Goldsmith. Page. 127 6.
Hermit of the Dale. A Ballad, from the Vicar of Wakefield. Page. 171 7.
Futurity. By Dr. Dodd. Page. 185
THE HERMIT. [By Dr. PARNELL.]

THE HERMIT.
-- I may assert eternal Providence,
And justify the ways of God to man.
MILTON.
FAR in a wild, unknown to public view,
From youth to age a reverend Hermit grew;
The moss his bed -- the cave his humble cell,
His food the fruits, his drink the crystal well.
Remote from man, with God he passed his days,
Prayer all his business, all his pleasure praise.
A life so sacred, such serene repose,
Seemed heaven itself, till one suggestion rose;
That vice should triumph, virtue vice obey;
This sprung some doubt of Providence's sway.
His hopes no more a certain prospect boast,
And all the tenor of his soul is lost.
So when a smooth expanse receives impressed
Calm Nature's image on its watery breast,
Down bend the banks, the trees impending grow,
And skies beneath with answering colors glow.
But if a stone the gentle sea divide,
Swift ruffling circles curl on every side;
And glimmering fragments of a broken sun;
Banks, trees, and skies in thick disorder run.
To clear this doubt, to know the world by sight,
To find if books or swains report it right,
(For yet by swains alone the world he knew,
Whose feet came wandering over the nightly dew)
He quits his cell; the pilgrim's staff he bore,
And fixed the scallop in his hat before;
Then with the sun a rising journey went,
Sedate to think, and watching each event.
The morn was wasted in the pathless grass,
And long and lonesome was the wild to pass:
But when the southern sun had warmed the day,
A youth came posting over a crossing way;
His raiment decent, his complexion fair,
And soft in graceful ringlets waved his hair.
Then near approaching, Father, hail! he cried;
And hail, my son! the reverend sire replied;
Words followed words, from question answer flowed,
And talk of various kinds deceived the road;
Till each with other pleased, and loath to part,
While in their age they differ, join in heart.
Thus stands an aged elm in ivy bound,
Thus youthful ivy clasps an elm around. --
But here the youth enjoined the eager sire,
Who into hidden truths did much inquire,
If he would in silence each event behold,
He would to him some wondrous things unfold.
Now sunk the sun -- closing hour of day
Came onward, mantled over with sober gray;
Nature in silence bid the world repose;
When near the road a stately palace rose:
There by the moon, through ranks of trees they pass,
Whose verdure crowned their sloping sides of grass.
It chanced, the noble master of the dome
Still made his house the wandering stranger's home.
Yet still his kindness, from a thirst of praise,
Proved the vain flourish of expensive ease.
The pair arrive, the livery'd servants wait;
Their lord receives them at the pompous gate;
The table groans with costly piles of food,
And all is more than hospitably good.
Then led to rest, the day's long toil they drown,
Deep sunk in sleep, and silk, and heaps of down.
At length it is morn* and at the dawn of day
Along the wide canals the zephyrs play;
Fresh over the gay parterres the breezes creep,
And shake the neighboring wood to banish sleep.
Up rise the guests, obedient to the call;
An early banquet decked the splendid hall;
Rich, luscious wine a golden goblet graced,
Which the kind master forced his guests to taste:
Then pleased and thankful from the porch they go,
And, but the landlord, none had cause of woe;
His cup was vanished; for in secret guise
The younger guest purloin'd the glittering prize.
Now on they pass -- when far upon the road,
The wealthy spoil the wily partner showed.
As one who spies a serpent in his way
Glist'ning and basking in the summer ray,
Disordered stops, to shun the danger near,
Then walks with faintness on, and looks with fear:
So seemed the sire, he walked with trembling heart:
And much he wished, but durst not ask to part: On account of the promise at
first setting out.

Murmuring, he lifts his eyes, and thinks it hard,
That generous actions meet a base reward.
While thus they pass, the sun his glory shrouds,
The changing skies hang out their sable clouds;
A sound in air presaged approaching rain,
And beasts to coverts scud across the plain.
Warned by the signs, the wandering pair retreat,
To seek for shelter at a neighboring seat:
'Twas built with turrets on a rising ground,
And strong, and large, and unimprov'd around:
Its owner's temper, timorous and severe,
Unkind and griping, caused a desert there.
As near the miser's heavy door they drew,
Fierce rising gusts with sudden fury blew;
The nimble lightning mixed with showers began,
And over their heads loud rolling thunder ran.
Here long they knock, but knock or call in vain,
Driven by the wind, and battered by the rain.
At length some pity warmed the master's breast:
('It Was then his threshold first received a guest.)
Slow creaking turns the door with jealous care,
And half he welcomes in the shivering pair;
One frugal faggot lights the naked walls,
And Nature's fervor through their limbs recals:
Bread of the coarsest sort, with meagre wine,
Each hardly granted, served them both to dine;
And when the tempest first appeared to cease,
A ready warning bid them part in peace.
With still remark the pondering Hermit viewed,
In one so rich, a life so poor and rude;
And, Why should such, within himself he cried,
Lock the lost wealth a thousand want beside?
But what new marks of wonder soon took place
In every setting feature of his face!
When, from his vest, the young companion bore
That cup the generous landlord owned before;
And paid profusely, with the precious bowl,
The stinted kindness of his churlish soul:
Just sunk to earth, the miser in surprise,
Received the glittering gift with startled eyes;
But 'ere he could recover from his fright,
The generous guests had traveled from his sight.
Now the brisk clouds in airy tumults fly,
The sun emerging opes an azure sky;
A fresher green the fragrant leaves display,
And glittering as they tremble, cheer the day,
While hence they walk, the pilgrim's bosom wrought
With all the travail of uncertain thought;
His partner's acts without their cause appear, To steal the cup from the
generous man, and give it to a wretch that would scarce admit them within his
gate.

'Twas there a vice, but seemed a madness here.
Detesting that, and pitying this, he goes,
Lost and confounded with the various shows.
Now Night's dim shades again involve the sky,
Again the wand'rers want a place to lie,
Again they search, and find a mansion nigh.
The soil improved around, the mansion neat,
And neither poorly low, nor idly great:
It seemed to speak its master's turn of mind,
Content, and not for praise but virtue, kind.
Hither the walkers turn their weary feet,
Then bless the mansion, and the master greet;
Their greeting fair, bestowed with modest guise,
The courteous master hears, and thus replies:
Without a vain, without a grudging heart,
To him who gives us all, I yield a part:
From him you come, from him accept it here,
A frank and sober, more than costly cheer.
He spoke, and bid the welcome table spread,
Then talked of virtue till the time of bed;
When the grave household round the hall repair,
Warned by a bell, and close the hour with prayer.
At length the world, renewed by calm repose,
Was strong for toil, the dapple morn arose;
Before the pilgrims part, the younger crept
Near the closed cradle, where an infant slept,
And writhed his neck; the landlord's little pride,
O strange return! grew black, and gasp'd, and died.
Horror of horrors! What! his only son?
How looked our Hermit when the fact was done?
Not hell, though hell's black jaws in sunder part,
And breathe blue fire, could more assail his heart.
Confused and struck with silence at the deed,
He flies -- but trembling, fails to fly with speed.
His steps the youth pursues; the country lay
Perplexed with roads, a servant showed the way;
A river crossed the path; the passage over
Was nice to find, the servant went before;
Long arms of oak an open bridge supplied,
And deep the waves beneath them bending glide:
The youth, who seemed to watch a time to sin.
Approached the careless guide, and thrust him in:
Plunging he falls, and rising lifts his head,
Then flashing turns, and sinks among the dead.
Wild sparkling rage inflames the Hermit's eyes,
He bursts the bands of fear, and madly cries,
Detested wretch! -- But scarce his speech began
When the strange partner seemed no longer man;
His youthful face grew more serenely sweet,
His robes turned white, and flowed about his feet:
Fair rounds of radiant points invest his hair;
Celestial odours breathe through purpled air;
And wings, whose colors glittered like the day,
Wide at his back the dazzling plumes display.
The form etherial bursts upon his sight,
And moves in all the majesty of light.
Though loud at first the pilgrim's passion grew;
Sudden he gazed, and wist not what to do:
Surprise in secret chains his words suspends,
And in a calm his settling temper ends.
But silence here the beauteous angel broke,
The voice of music ravished as he spoke.
Thy prayer, thy praise, thy life to vice unknown,
In sweet memorial rise before the throne;
These charms success in our bright region find,
And force an angel down to calm thy mind;
For this commissioned, I forsook the sky;
Nay, cease to kneel -- thy fellow servant, I.
Then know the truth of government divine,
And let the scruples be no longer thine.
The master justly claims that world he made;
In this the right of Providence is laid;
Its sacred majesty through all depends,
On using second means Second means -- God often appoints wicked and abandoned
wretches to be his instruments of justice upon others, for some ends tending to
public good, though unperceived by human eyes.
to work his ends:
It Is thus, withdrawn in state from human eye,
The power exerts its attributes on high:
Your actions uses, nor controls your will,
And bids the doubting sons of men be still.
What strange events can strike with more surprise
Than those which lately struck thy wandering eyes?
Yet taught by these, confess the Almighty just,
And, where you cannot unriddle, learn to trust!
The great vain man, who fared on costly food,
Whose life was too luxurious to be good:
Who made his ivory stands with goblets shine,
And forced his guests to morning draughts of wine,
Has with the cup, the graceless custom lost,
And still he welcomes, but with less of cost.
The mean suspicious wretch, whose bolted door
Never moved in pity to the wandering poor;
With him I left the cup, to teach his mind
That heaven can bless, if mortals will be kind;
Conscious of wanting worth, he views the bowl,
And feels compassion touch his grateful soul.
Thus artists melt the sullen oar of lead,
With heaping coals of fire upon its head;
In the kind warmth the metal learns to glow,
And loose from dross the silver runs below.
Long had our pious friend in virtue trod,
But now the child half weaned his soul from God;
Child of his age Child of his age -- A child born to him when in years, on
which he doated too fondly.
, for him he lived in pain,
And measured back his steps to earth again.
To what excesses had his dotage run!
But God, to save the father, took the son.
To all but thee, in fits he seemed to go,
And 'twas my ministry to deal the blow.
The poor fond parent, humbled in the dust,
Now owns in tears the punishment was just.
But how had all his fortune felt a wreck,
Had the false servant sped in safety back?
This very night, by secret plot contrived,
Of life and wealth his master he would deprived;
Had he in this conspiracy prevailed,
What funds of charity would then have failed?
Thus heaven instructs thy mind: this trial over,
Depart in peace, resign, and sin no more.
On sounding pinions here the youth withdrew,
The sage stood wondering as the seraph flew.
Thus looked Elisha, when to mount on high,
His master took the chariot of the sky:
The fiery pomp ascending, left the view;
The prophet gazed, and wished to follow too.
The bending Hermit here a prayer begun,
"Lord! as in heaven, on earth thy will be done."
Then gladly turning, sought his ancient place,
And spent a life of piety and peace.
AN ELEGY WRITTEN IN A COUNTRY CHURCH YARD. [By Mr. GRAY.]

Gray's Elegy.


AN ELEGY. WRITTEN IN A COUNTRY CHURCH YARD.
THE curfew tolls the knell of parting day,
The lowing herd winds slowly over the lea,
The ploughman homeward plods his weary way,
And leaves the world to darkness and to me.
Now fades the glimmering landscape on the sight,
And all the air a solemn stillness holds,
Save where the beetle wheels his drony flight,
And drowsy tinklings lull the distant folds:
Save that, from yonder ivy mantled tower,
The moping owl does to the moon complain
Of such, as, wandering near her secret bower,
Molest her ancient, solitary reign.
Beneath those rugged elms, that yew tree's shade,
Where heaves the turf in many a mouldering heap,
Each in his narrow cell for ever laid,
The rude forefathers of the hamlet sleep.
The breezy call of incense breathing morn,
The swallow, twitt'ring from the straw built shed,
The cock's shrill clarion, or the echoing horn,
No more shall rouse them from their lowly bed.
For them no more the blazing hearth shall burn,
Or busy housewife ply her evening care:
Nor children run to lisp their fire's return,
Or climb his knees the envied kiss to share.
Often did the harvest to their sickle yield;
Their furrow often the stubborn glebe has broke:
How jocund did they drive their teams a field!
How bowed the woods beneath their sturdy stroke!
Let not ambition mock their useful toil,
Their homely joys, and destiny obscure;
Nor grandeur hear with a disdainful smile
The short and simple annals of the poor.
The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power,
And all that beauty, all that wealth ever gave,
Await alike, the inevitable hour;
The paths of glory lead but to the grave.
Nor you, ye proud, impute to these the fault,
If memory over their tomb no trophies raise,
Where through the long drawn aisle and fretted vault
The pealing anthem swells the note of praise.
Can storied urn, or animated bust,
Back to its mansion call the fleeting breath?
Can honor's voice provoke the silent dust,
Or flattery sooth the dull cold ear of death?
Perhaps in this neglected spot is laid
Some heart once pregnant with celestial fire:
Hands that the rod of empire might have swayed,
Or waked to ecstacy the living lyre.
But knowledge to their eyes her ample page,
Rich with the spoils of Time, did never unrol;
Chill penury repressed their noble rage,
And froze the genial current of the soul.
Full many a gem, of purest ray serene,
The dark unfathomed caves of ocean bear;
(...) Their lot forbade: Nor circumscribed alone
Their growing virtues, but their crimes confined;
Forbade to wade through slaughter to a throne,
And shut the gates of mercy on mankind:
The struggling pangs of conscious truth to hide,
To quench the blushes of ingenuous shame,
Or heap the shrine of luxury and pride
With incense kindled at the muses' flame.
Far from the madding crowd's ignoble strife
Their sober wishes never learned to stray;
Along the cool sequestered vale of life
They kept the noiseless tenor of their way.
Yet even these bones from insult to protect,
Some frail memorial still erected nigh,
With uncouth rhymes and shapeless sculpture decked,
Implores the passing tribute of a sigh.
Their name, their years, spelt by the unlettered muse,
The place of fame and elegy supply:
And many a holy text around she strews,
That teach the rustic moralist to die.
For who, to dumb forgetfulness a prey,
This pleasing anxious being ever resigned,
Left the warm precincts of the cheerful day,
Nor cast one longing, lingering look behind?
On some fond breast the parting soul relies,
Some pious drops the closing eye requires:
Even from the tomb the voice of Nature cries;
Even in our ashes live their wonted fires.
For thee, who, mindful of the unhonour'd dead,
Do in these lines their artless tale relate;
If, chance, by lonely contemplation led,
Some kindred spirit shall inquire thy fate.
Happily some hoary headed swain may say,
"Often have we seen him, at the peep of dawn,
Brushing, with hasty steps, the dews away,
To meet the sun upon the upland lawn.
There at the foot of yonder nodding beech,
That wreathes its old fantastic roots so high,
His listless length at noon tide would he stretch,
And pore upon the brook that bubbles by.
Hard by yon wood, now smiling, as in scorn,
Mutt'ring his wayward fancies, he would rove;
Now drooping, woeful wan, like one forlorn,
Or crazed with care, or crossed in hopeless love.
One morn I missed him on the 'custom'd hill,
Along the heath, and near his favorite tree:
Another came; nor yet beside the rill,
Nor up the lawn, nor at the wood, was he.
The next, with dirges due, in sad array,
Slow through the church yard path we saw him borne:
Approach and read, for thou can read the lay
Engraved on the stone beneath yon aged thorn."
EPITAPH.
Here rests his head upon the lap of earth,
A youth to fortune and to fame unknown;
Fair Science frowned not on his humble birth,
And Melancholy marked him for her own.
Large was his bounty, and his soul sincere;
Heaven did a recompense as largely send:
He gave to Misery all he had -- a tear;
He gained from heaven ('it was all he wished) a friend.
No farther seek his merits to disclose,
Or draw his frailties from their dread abode,
(There they alike in trembling hope repose)
The bosom of his father and his God.
THE TRAVELLER: OR, A PROSPECT of SOCIETY. [By Dr. GOLDSMITH.]

To Men of other minds my fancy flies,
Embosom'd in the deep where Holland lies.


THE TRAVELLER: OR, A PROSPECT of SOCIETY.
REMOTE, unfriended, melancholy, slow,
Or by the lazy Scheld, or wandering Po;
Or onward, where the rude Carinthian boor
Against the houseless stranger shuts the door;
Or where Campania's plain forsaken lies,
A weary waste expanding to the skies;
Wherever I roam, whatever realms to see,
My heart, untravell'd, fondly turns to thee;
Still to my brother turns with ceaseless pain,
And drags, at each remove, a lengthning chain.
Eternal blessings crown my earliest friend,
And round his dwelling guardian saints attend;
Blessed be that spot where cheerful guests retire,
To pause from toil, and trim their evening fire;
Blessed that abode where want and pain repair,
And every stranger finds a ready chair:
Blessed be those feasts, with simple plenty crowned,
Where all the ruddy family around
Laugh at the jests, or pranks that never fail,
Or sigh with pity at some mournful tale;
Or press the bashful stranger to his food,
And learn the luxury of doing good!
But me, not destined such delights to share,
My prime of life in wandering spent, and care:
Impelled, with steps unceasing, to pursue
Some fleeting good that mocks me with the view;
That, like the circle bounding earth and skies,
Allures from far, yet as I follow, flies;
My fortune leads to traverse realms alone,
And find no spot of all the world my own.
Even now, where Alpine solitudes ascend,
I sit me down a pensive hour to spend:
And placed on high, above the storm's career,
Look downward where an hundred realms appear;
Lakes, forests, cities, plains, extending wide,
The pomp of kings, the shepherd's humbler pride.
When thus Creation's charms around combine,
Amidst the store should thankless pride repine?
Say, Should the philosophic mind disdain
That good which makes each humbler bosom vain?
Let school taught pride dissemble all it can*
These little things are great to little man;
And wiser he, whose sympathetick mind
Exults in all the good of all mankind.
Ye glittering towns, with wealth and splendor crowned;
Ye fields, where summer spreads profusion round;
Ye lakes, whose vessels catch the busy gale;
Ye bending swains, that dress the flowery vale,
For me your tributary stores combine:
Creation's heir! the world, the world is mine!
As some lone miser, visiting his store,
Bends at his treasure, counts, recounts it over;
Hoards after hoards his rising raptures fill,
Yet still he sighs, for hoards are wanting still:
Thus to my breast alternate passions rise,
Pleased with each good that heaven to man supplies;
Yet often a sigh prevails, and sorrows fall
To see the hoard of human bliss so small;
And often I wish, amidst the scene, to find
Some spot to real happiness consigned;
Where my worn soul, each wandering hope at rest,
May gather bliss to see my fellows blessed.
But where to find that happiest spot below,
Who can direct, when all pretend to know?
The shudd'ring tenant of the frigid zone
Boldly proclaims that happiest spot his own;
Extols the treasures of his stormy seas,
And his long nights of revelry and ease:
The naked negro, panting at the line,
Boasts of his golden sands and palmy wine;
Basks in the glare, or stems the tepid wave,
And thanks his gods for all the good they gave.
Such is the patriot's boast, wherever we roam;
His first, best country ever is at home.
And yet, perhaps, if countries we compare,
And estimate the blessings which they share,
Though patriots flatter, still shall wisdom find
An equal portion dealt to all mankind;
As different good, by art or nature given,
To different nations, makes their blessings even.
Nature, a mother kind alike to all,
Still grants her bliss at labor's earnest call;
With food as well the peasant is supplied
On Idra's cliffs as Arno's shelvy side;
And though the rocky crested summits frown,
These rocks by custom turn to beds of down.
From art more various are the blessings sent;
Wealth, commerce, honor, liberty, content.
Yet these each other's power so strong contest,
That either seems destructive of the rest.
Where wealth and freedom reign, contentment fails;
And honor sinks where commerce long prevails.
Hence every state, to one loved blessing prone,
Conforms and models life to that alone.
Each to the favorite happiness attends,
And spurns the plan that aims at other ends;
Till carried to excess in each domain,
This favorite good begets peculiar pain.
But let us try these truths with closer eyes,
And trace them through the prospect as it lies:
Here, for a while, my proper cares resigned,
Here let me sit in sorrow for mankind;
Like you neglected shrub at random cast,
That shades the steep, and sighs at every blast.
Far to the right, where Appennine ascends,
Bright as the summer, Italy extends
Its uplands sloping deck the mountain's side,
Woods over woods in gay theatrick pride;
While often some temple's mouldering tops between,
With venerable grandeur mark the scene.
Could Nature's bounty satisfy the breast,
The sons of Italy were surely blessed.
Whatever fruits in different climes are found,
That proudly rise, or humbly court the ground;
Whatever blooms in torrid tracts appear,
Whose bright succession decks the varied year;
Whatever sweets salute the northern sky
With vernal leaves, that blossom but to die --
These, here disporting, own the kindred soil,
Nor ask luxuriance from the planter's toil;
While sea born gales their gelid wings expand,
To winnow fragrance round the smiling land.
But small the bliss that sense alone bestows;
And sensual bliss is all the nation knows.
In florid beauty groves and fields appear,
Man seems the only growth that dwindles here.
Contrasted faults through all his manners reign:
Though poor, luxurious; though submissive, vain;
Though grave, yet trifling; zealous, yet untrue;
And even in penance planning sins anew.
All evils here contaminate the mind,
That opulence departed leaves behind;
For wealth was theirs, not far removed the date,
When commerce proudly flourished through the state:
At her command the palace learned to rise,
Again the long fallen column sought the skies;
The canvas glowed beyond even Nature warm;
The pregnant quarry teemed with human form;
Till, more unsteady than the southern gale,
Commerce on other shores displayed her sail;
While naught remained of all that riches gave,
But towns unmann'd, and lords without a slave:
And late the nation found, with fruitless skill,
Its former strength was but plethorick ill.
Yet still the loss of wealth is here supplied
By arts, the splendid wrecks of former pride;
From these the feeble heart and long fallen mind
An easy compensation seem to find.
Here may be seen, in bloodless pomp arrayed
The pasteboard triumph and the cavalcade;
Processions formed for piety and love,
A mistress or a saint in every grove.
By sports like these are all their cares beguiled;
The sports of children satisfy the child:
Each nobler aim, represt by long control,
Now sinks at last, or feebly man's the soul;
While low delights, succeeding fast behind,
In happier meanness occupy the mind:
As in those domes, where Caesar's once bore sway,
Defaced by time, and tottering in decay,
There in the ruin, heedless of the dead,
The shelter seeking peasant builds his shed;
And, wondering man could want the larger pile,
Exults, and owns his cottage with a smile.
My soul, turn from them -- turn we to survey
Where rougher climes a nobler race display;
Where the bleak Swiss their stormy mansions tread,
And force a churlish soil for scanty bread:
No product here the barren hills afford,
But man and steel, the soldier and his sword.
No vernal blooms their torpid rocks array,
But winter lingering chills the lap of May;
No zephyr fondly sues the mountain's breast,
But meteors glare, and stormy glooms invest.
Yet still, even here Content can spread a charm,
Redress the clime, and all its rage disarm.
Though poor the peasant's hut, his feast though small,
He sees his little lot the lot of all;
Sees no contiguous palace rear its head,
To shame the meanness of his humble shed;
No costly lord the sumptuous banquet deal,
To make him loathe his vegetable meal;
But calm, and bred in ignorance and toil,
Each wish contracting, fits him to the soil.
Cheerful at morn he wakes from short repose,
Breathes the keen air, and carols as he goes;
With patient angle trolls the finny deep,
Or drives his venurous ploughshare to the steep;
Or seeks the den where snow tracks mark the way,
And drags the struggling savage into day,
At night returning, every labor sped,
He sits him down the monarch of a shed;
Smiles by his cheerful fire, and round surveys
His children's looks, that brighten at the blaze;
While his loved partner, boastful of her hoard,
Displays her cleanly platter on the board:
And happily too some pilgrim thither led,
With many a tale repays the nightly bed.
Thus every good his native wilds impart,
Imprints the patriot passion on his heart;
And even those ills that round his mansion rise,
Enhance the bliss his scanty fund supplies.
Dear is that shed to which his soul conforms,
And dear that hill which lifts him to the storms;
And as a child, when scaring sounds molest,
Clings close and closer to the mother's breast,
So the loud torrent, and the whirlwind's roar,
But bind him to his native mountains more.
Such are the charms to barren states assigned;
Their wants but few, their wishes all confined.
Yet let them only share the praises due;
If few their wants, their pleasures are but few:
For every want that stimulates the breast,
Becomes a source of pleasure when redrest.
When from such lands each pleasing science flies,
That first excites desire, and then supplies;
Unknown to them, when sensual pleasures cloy,
To fill the languid pause with finer joy;
Unknown those powers that raise the soul to flame,
Catch every nerve, and vibrate through the frame.
Their level life is but a mouldering sire,
Unquench'd by want, unfann'd by strong desire;
Unfit for raptures; or, if raptures cheer
On some high festival of once a year,
In wild excess the vulgar breast takes sire,
Till, buried in debauch, the bliss expire.
But not their joys alone thus coarsely flow;
Their morals, like their pleasures, are but low:
For, as refinement stops, from sire to son,
Unaltered, unimprov'd, the manners run;
And love's and friendship's finely pointed dart
Falls blunted from each indurated heart.
Some sterner virtues over the mountain's breast
May sit, like falcons cowering on the nest;
But all the gentler morals, such as play
Through life's more cultured walks, and charm the way,
These far dispersed, on timorous pinions fly,
To sport and flutter in a kinder sky.
To kinder skies, where gentler manners reign,
I turn -- and France displays her bright domain.
Gay sprightly land of mirth and social ease,
Pleased with thyself, whom all the world can please,
How often have I led thy sportive choir
With tuneless pipe, beside the murmuring Loire!
Where shading elms along the margin grew,
And, freshen'd from the wave, the zephyr flew;
And happily, though my harsh touch, falt'ring still,
But mocked all tune, and marred the dancer's skill,
Yet would the village praise my wondrous power,
And dance, forgetful of the noon tide hour!
Alike all ages. Dames of ancient days
Have led their children through the mirthful maze;
And the gay grandsire, skilled in gestick lore,
Has frisk'd beneath the burden of threescore.
So blessed a life these thoughtless realms display,
Thus idly busy rolls their world away:
Theirs are those arts that mind to mind endear;
For honor forms the social temper here.
Honor, that praise which real merit gains,
Or even imaginary worth obtains,
Here passes current; paid from hand to hand,
It shifts in splendid traffic round the land:
From courts to camps, to cottages it strays,
And all are taught an avarice of praise:
They please, are pleased, they give to get esteem,
Till, seeming blessed, they grow to what they seem.
But while this softer art their bliss supplies,
It gives their follies also room to rise,
For praise too dearly loved, or warmly sought,
Enfeebles all internal strength of thought;
And the weak soul, within itself unblest,
Leans for all pleasure on another's breast.
Hence ostentation here, with tawdry art,
Pants for the vulgar praise which fools impart:
Here vanity assumes her pert grimace,
And trims her robes of frize with copper lace;
Here beggar pride defrauds her daily cheer.
To boast one splendid banquet once a year;
The mind still turns where shifting fashion draws,
Nor weighs the solid worth of self applause.
To men of other minds my fancy flies,
Embosom'd in the deep where Holland lies.
Methinks her patient sons before me stand,
Where the broad ocean leans against the land;
And, sedulous to stop the coming tide,
Lift the tall rampire's artificial pride.
Onward methinks, and diligently slow,
The firm connected bulwark seems to grow;
Spreads its long arms amidst the watery roar,
Scoops out an empire, and usurps the shore,
While the pent ocean, rising over the pile,
Sees an amphibious world beneath him smile;
The slow canal, the yellow blossomed vale,
The willow tufted bank, the gliding sail,
The crowded mart, the cultivated plain,
A new creation, rescued from his reign.
Thus, while around the wave subjected soil
Impels the native to repeated toil,
Industrious habits in each bosom reign,
And industry begets a love of gain.
Hence all the good from opulence that springs,
With all those ills superfluous treasure brings,
Are here displayed. Their much loved wealth imparts
Convenience, plenty, elegance, and arts;
But view them closer, craft and fraud appear;
Even Liberty itself is bartered here;
At gold's superior charms all freedom flies;
The needy sell it, and the rich man buys;
A land of tyrants, and a den of slaves!
Here wretches seek dishonorable graves,
And calmly bent, to servitude conform;
Dull as their lakes that slumber in the storm.
Heavens! how unlike their Belgic sires of old!
Rough, poor, content, ungovernably bold;
War in each breast, and freedom on each brow;
How much unlike the sons of Britain now!
Fired at the sound, my Genius spreads her wing,
And flies where Britain courts the western spring;
Where lawns extend that scorn Arcadian pride,
And brighter streams than famed Hydaspes glide:
There all around the gentlest breezes stray;
There gentle music melts on every spray;
Creation's mildest charms are there combined;
Extremes are only in the master's mind!
Stern over each bosom Reason holds her state,
With daring aims irregularly great:
Pride in their port, defiance in their eye,
I see the lords of human kind pass by;
Intent on high designs, a thoughtful band,
By forms unfashion'd, fresh from Nature's hand;
Fierce in their native hardiness of soul,
True to imagined right, above control,
While even the peasant boasts these RIGHTS to scan,
And learns to venerate himself as MAN.
Thine, Freedom, thine the blessings pictured here;
Thine are those charms that dazzle and endear;
Too blessed indeed were such without alloy,
But fostered even by Freedom ills annoy:
That independence Britons prize too high,
Keeps man from man, and breaks the social tie;
The self dependent lordlings stand alone:
All claims that bind and sweeten life unknown;
Here, by the bonds of Nature feebly held,
Minds combat minds, repelling and repelled.
Ferments arise, imprisoned factions roar,
Repressed Ambition struggles round her shore,
Till, over wrought, the general system feels
Its motions stop, or phrensy fire the wheels.
Nor this the worst. As Nature's ties decay,
As duty, love, and honor fail to sway,
Fictitious bonds, the bonds of wealth and law,
Still gather strength and force unwilling awe.
Hence all obedience bows to these alone,
And talent sinks, and merit weeps unknown;
Till time may come, when, stripped of all her charms,
The land of scholars and the nurse of arms,
Where noble stems transmit the patriot flame,
Where kings have toiled, and poets wrote for fame,
One sink of level avarice shall lie,
And scholars, soldiers, kings, unhonour'd die.
Yet think not, thus when Freedom's ills I state,
I mean to flatter kings, or court the great;
Ye powers of truth, that bid my soul aspire,
Far from my bosom drive the low desire!
And thou, fair Freedom, taught alike to feel
The rabble's rage, and tyrant's angry steel;
Thou transitory flower, alike undone
By proud Contempt, or Favour's fost'ring sun,
Still may thy blooms the changeful clime endure,
I only would repress them to secure:
For just experience tells, in every soil,
That those who think must govern those who toil;
And all that Freedom's highest aims can reach,
Is but to lay proportioned loads on each.
Hence, should one order disproportioned grow,
Its double weight must ruin all below.
O then, how blind to all that truth requires,
Who think it freedom when a part aspires!
Calm is my soul, nor apt to rise in arms,
Except when fast approaching danger warms:
But when contending chiefs blockade the throne,
Contracting regal power to stretch their own;
When I behold a factious band agree
To call it freedom when themselves are free;
Each wanton judge new penal statutes draw,
Laws grind the poor, and rich men rule the law;
The wealth of climes, where savage nations roam,
Pillaged from slaves, to purchase slaves at home;
Fear, pity, justice, indignation start,
Tear off reserve, and bear my swelling heart;
Till, half a patriot, half a coward grown,
I fly from petty tyrants to the throne.
Yes, brother, curse with me that baleful hour,
When first Ambition struck at regal power;
And, thus polluting honor in its source,
Gave wealth to sway the mind with double force.
Have we not seen, round Britain's peopled shore,
Her useful sons exchanged for useless ore?
Seen all her triumphs but destruction haste,
Like flaring tapers, bright'ning as they waste;
Seen Opulence, her grandeur to maintain,
Lead stern Depopulation in her train,
And over fields, where scattered hamlets rose,
In barren, solitary pomp repose?
Have we not seen, at Pleasure's lordly call,
The smiling long frequented village fall?
Beheld the duteous son, the sire decayed,
The modest matron, and the blushing maid,
Forced from their homes, a melancholy train,
To traverse climes beyond the western main;
Where wild Oswego spreads her swamps around,
And Niagara stuns with thundering sound!
Even now, perhaps, as there some pilgrim strays
Through tangled forests, and through dangerous ways;
Where beasts with man divided empire claim,
And the brown Indian marks with murderous aim;
There, while above the giddy tempest flies,
And all around distressful yells arise,
The pensive exile, bending with his woe,
To stop too fearful, and too faint to go,
Casts a long look where England's glories shine,
And bids his bosom sympathize with mine.
Vain, very vain* my weary search, to find
That bliss which only centres in the mind!
Why have I strayed from pleasure and repose,
To seek a good each government bestows?
In every government though terrors reign,
Though tyrant kings or tyrant laws restrain,
How small, of all that human hearts endure,
That part which laws or kings can cause or cure!
Still to ourselves in every place consigned,
Our own felicity we make or find:
With secret course, which no loud storms annoy,
Glides the smooth current of domestic joy.
The lifted ax, the agonizing wheel,
Luke's iron crown, and Damien's bed of steel,
To men remote from power but rarely known,
Leave reason, faith, and conscience, all our own.
DEATH. A POEM. [By Dr. PORTEUS, Bishop of London.]

Friend to the Wretch whom every Friend forsakes.


DEATH. A POEM.
FRIEND to the wretch whom every friend forsakes,
I woo thee, Death! In fancy's fairy paths
Let the gay songster rove, and gently trill
The strain of empty joy. Life and its joys
I leave to those that prize them. At this hour,
This solemn hour, when silence rules the world,
And wearied nature makes a general pause!
Wrapped in Night's sable robe, through cloisters drear,
And charnels pale, tenanted by a throng
Of meagre phantoms shooting cross my path
With silent glance, I seek the shadowy vale
Of Death. Deep in a murky cave's recess,
Lav'd by Oblivion's listless stream, and fenced
By shelving rocks, and intermingled horrors
Of yew and cypress shade, from all intrusion
Of busy noontide beam, the Monarch sits
In unsubstantial majesty enthorn'd.
At his right hand, nearest himself in place
And frightfulness of form, his parent Sin,
With fatal industry and cruel care,
Busies herself in pointing all his stings,
And tipping every shaft with venom drawn
From her infernal store: around him, ranged
In terrible array, and mixture strange
Of uncouth shapes, stand his dread ministers.
Foremost Old Age, his natural ally
And firmest friend: next him diseases thick,
A motly train; Fever, with cheek of fire;
Consumption wan; Palsy, half warm with life,
And half a clay clod lump; joint torturing Gout,
And ever gnawing Rheum; Convulsion wild;
Swollen Dropsy; panting Asthma; Appoplex
Full gorged. There too the Pestilence that walks
In darkness, and the Sickness that destroys
At broad noonday. These, and a thousand more,
Horrid to tell, attentive wait; and when,
By Heaven's command, Death waves his ebon wand,
Sudden rush forth to execute his purpose,
And scatter desolation over the earth.
Ill fated man, for whom such various forms
Of misery wait, and mark their future prey!
Ah! why, allrighteous Father, did thou make
This creature Man? Why wake the inconscious dust
To life and wretchedness? O better far
Still had he slept in uncreated night,
If this the lot of being! Was it for this
Thy breath divine kindled within his breast
The vital flame? For this was thy fair image
Stamped on his soul in godlike lineaments?
For this dominion given him absolute
Over all thy works, only that he might reign
Supreme in woe? From the blessed source of Good
Could Pain and Death proceed? Could such foul ills
Fall from fair Mercy's hands? Far be the thought,
The impious thought! God never made a creature
But what was good. He made a living Soul;
The wretched Mortal was the work of Man.
Forth from his Maker's hands he sprung to life,
Fresh with immortal bloom; no pain he knew,
No fear of change, no check to his desires,
Save one command: that one command, which stood
'Twixt him and Death, the test of his obedience,
Urged on by wanton curiosity,
He broke. There in one moment was undone
The fairest of God's works. The same rash hand,
That plucked in evil hour the fatal fruit,
Unbarr'd the gates of Hell, and let loose Sin
And Death, and all the family of Pain,
To prey upon mankind. Young Nature saw
The monstrous crew, and shook through all her frame.
Then fled her newborn luster, then began
Heaven's cheerful face to lower; then vapors chok'd
The troubled air, and formed a veil of clouds
To hide the willing Sun. The earth, convulsed
With painful throes, threw forth a bristly crop
Of thorns and briars! and insect, bird, and beast,
That wont before with admiration fond
To gaze at Man, and fearless crowd around him,
Now fled before his face, shunning in in haste
The infection of his misery. He alone,
Who justly might, the offended Lord of Man,
Turned not away his face; he, full of pity,
Forsook not in this uttermost distress
His best loved work. That comfort still remained,
That best, that greatest comfort in affliction,
The countenance of God; and through the gloom
Shot forth some kindly gleams, to cheer and warm
The offender's sinking soul. Hope, sent from Heaven,
Uprais'd his drooping head, and showed afar
A happier scene of things; the promised Seed
Trampling upon the Serpent's humbled crest,
Death of his sting disarmed; and the dark grave,
Made pervious to the realms of endless day,
No more the limit but the gate of life.
Cheered with the view, Man went to till the ground,
From whence he rose; sentenced indeed to toil
As to a punishment, yet, even in wrath,
So merciful is Heaven, this toil became
The solace of his woes, the sweet employ
Of many a livelong hour, and surest guard
Against Disease and Death. Death though denounced,
Was yet a distant ill, by feeble arm
Of Age, his sole support, led slowly on.
Not then, as since, the short lived son's of men
Flocked to his realms in countless multitudes;
Scarce in the course of twice five hundred years
One solitary ghost went shivering down
To his unpeopled shore. In sober state,
Through the sequestered vale of rural life,
The venerable Patriarch guileless held
The tenor of his way; Labor prepared
His simple fare, and Temperance ruled his board.
Tired with his daily toil, at early eve
He sunk to sudden rest; gentle and pure
As breath of evening zephyr, and as sweet,
Were all his slumbers; with the Sun he rose,
Alert and vigorous as he, to run
His destined course. -- Thus nerv'd with giant strength,
He stemmed the tide of time, and stood the shock
Of ages rolling harmless over his head.
At life's meridian point arrived, he stood,
And, looking round, saw all the valley filled
With nations from his loins; full well content
To leave his race thus scattered over the earth,
Along the gentle slope of life's decline
He bent his gradual way, till full of years,
He dropped like mellow fruit into his grave.
Such in the infancy of time was Man;
So calm was life, so impotent was Death!
O had he but preserved these few remains,
The shattered fragments of lost happiness,
Snatched by the hand of Heaven from the sad wreck
Of innocence primeval, still had he lived
In ruin great; though fallen, yet not forlorn;
Though mortal, yet not every where beset
With Death in every shape! But he, impatient
To be completely wretched, hastes to fill up
The measure of his woes. -- 'Twas Man himself
Brought Death into the world; and Man himself
Gave keenness to his darts, quickened his pace,
And multiplied destruction on mankind.
First Envy, eldest born of Hell, embrued
Her hands in blood, and taught the Sons of Men
To make a death which Nature never made,
And God abhorred; with violence rude to break
The thread of life ere half its length was run,
And rob a wretched brother of his being.
With joy Ambition saw, and soon improved
The execrable deed. 'Twas not enough
By subtle fraud to snatch a single life:
Puny impiety! whole kingdoms fell
To sat the lust of power: More horrid still,
The foulest stain and scandal of our nature
Became its boast. One Murder made a Villain,
Millions a Hero. Princes were priviledg'd
To kill; and numbers sanctified the crime.
Ah! Why will Kings forget that they are Men?
And Men that they are brethren? Why delight
In human sacrifice? Why burst the ties
Of Nature, that should knit their souls together
In one soft bond of amity and love?
Yet still they breathe destruction, still go on
In humanly ingenious to find out
New pains for life, new terrors for the grave,
Artificers of Death! Still Monarchs dream
Of universal empire growing up
From universal ruin. Blast the design,
Great God of Hosts, nor let thy creatures fall
Unpitied victims at Ambition's shrine!
Yet say, should Tyrants learn at last to feel,
And the loud din of battle cease to bray;
Should dove eyed Peace over all the earth extend
Her olive branch, and give the world repose,
Would Death be foiled? Would health, and strength, and youth,
Defy his power? Has he no arts in store,
No other shafts, save those of war? Alas!
Even in the smile of Peace, that smile which sheds
A heavenly sunshine over the soul, there basks
That serpent Luxury. War its thousands slays,
Peace its ten thousands. In the embattled plain
Though Death exults, and claps his raven wings,
Yet reigns he not even there so absolute,
So merciless, as in yon frantic scenes
Of midnight revel and tumultuous mirth;
Where in the intoxicating draught concealed,
Or couched beneath the glance of lawless Love,
He snares the simple youth, who, naught suspecting,
Means to be blessed -- but finds himself undone.
Down the smooth stream of life the stripling darts,
Gay as the morn; bright glows the vernal sky,
Hope swells his sails, and passion steers his course.
Safe glides his little bark along the shore
Where Virtue takes her stand; but if too far
He launches forth beyond Discretion's mark,
Sudden the tempest scowls, the surges roar,
Blot his fair day, and plunge him in the deep.
O sad but sure mischance! O happier far
To lie like gallant How 'midst Indian wilds
A breathless corse, cut off by savage hands
In earliest prime, a generous sacrifice
To Freedom's holy cause, than so to fall,
Torn immature from life's meridian joys,
A prey to Vice, Intemp'rance, and Disease.
Yet die even thus, thus rather perish still,
Ye Sons of Pleasure, by the Almighty strick'n,
Than ever dare, though often, alas! ye dare,
To lift against yourselves the murderous steel,
To wrest from God's own hand the sword of Justice,
And be your own avengers! Hold, rash man,
Though with anticipating speed thou'st ranged
Through every region of delight, nor left
One joy to gild the evening of thy days;
Though life seem one uncomfortable void,
Guilt at thy heels, before thy face Despair;
Yet gay this scene, and light this load of woe,
Compared with thy hereafter. Think, O think,
And ere thou plunge into the vast abyss,
Pause on the verge a while, look down and see
Thy future mansion. Why that start of horror?
From thy slack hand why drops the uplifted steel?
Did thou not think such vengeance must await
The wretch, that, with his crimes all fresh about him,
Rushes irreverent, unprepared, uncalled,
Into his Maker's presence, throwing back
With insolent disdain his choicest gift?
Live then, while Heaven in pity lends thee life,
And think it all too short to wash away,
By penitential tears and deep contrition,
The scarlet of thy crimes. So shall thou find
Rest to thy soul; so unappall'd shall meet
Death when he comes; not wantonly invite
His lingering stroke. Be it thy sole concern
With innocence to live, with patience wait
The appointed hour; too soon that hour will come,
Though Nature run her course. But Nature's God,
If need require, by thousand various ways,
Without thy aid, can shorten that short span,
And quench the lamp of life. Oh, when he comes,
Roused by the cry of wickedness extreme
To Heaven ascending from some guilty land,
Now ripe for vengeance; when he comes arrayed
In all the terrors of almighty wrath,
Forth from his bosom plucks his lingering arm,
And on the miscreants pours destruction down,
Who can abide his coming? Who can bear
His whole displeasure? In no common form
Death then appears, but starting into size
Enormous, measures with gigantick stride
The astonished earth, and from his looks throws round
Unutterable horror and dismay.
All Nature lends her aid. Each element
Arms in his cause. Open fly the doors of heaven;
The fountains of the deep their barriers break;
Above, below, the rival torrents pour,
And drown creation; or in floods of fire
Descends a livid cataract, and consumes
An impious race. Sometimes, when all seems peace,
Wakes the grim whirlwind, and with rude embrace*
Sweeps nations to their grave, or in the deep
Whelms the proud wooden world; full many a youth
Floats on his watery bier, or lies unwept
On some sad desert shore! At dead of night,
In sullen silence stalks forth Pestilence:
Contagion, close behind, taints all her steps
With poisonous dew; no smiting hand is seen,
No sound is heard* but soon her secret path
Is marked with desolation; heaps on heaps
Promiscuous drop. No friend, no refuge, near;
All, all is false and treacherous around;
All that they touch, or taste, or breathe, is Death.
But ah! what means that ruinous roar? Why fail
These tottering feet? Earth to its center feels
The Godhead's power, and trembling at his touch
Through all its pillars, and in every pore,
Hurls to the ground, with one convulsive heave,
Precipitating domes, and towns, and towers,
The work of ages. Crushed beneath the weight
Of general devastation, millions find
One common grave; not even a widow left
To wail her sons: the house, that should protect,
Entombs its master; and the faithless plain,
If there he flies for help, with sudden yawn
Starts from beneath him. Shield me, gracious Heaven,
O snatch me from destruction! If this globe,
This solid globe, which thine own hand has made
So firm and sure, if this my steps betray;
If my own mother Earth, from whence I sprung,
Rise up with rage unnatural to devour
Her wretched offspring, Whither shall I fly?
Where look for succor? Where, but up to thee,
Almighty Father? Save, O save, thy suppliant
From horrors such as these! At thy good time
Let Death approach; I reck not. --
Let him but come
In genuine form, not with thy vengeance armed,
Too much for man to bear! O rather lend
Thy kindly aid to mitigate his stroke;
And at that hour, when all aghast I stand
A trembling candidate for thy compassion,
On this world's brink, and look into the next;
When my soul, starting from the dark unknown,
Casts back a wishful look, and fondly clings
To her frail prop, unwilling to be wrench'd
From this fair scene, from all her custom'd joys,
And all the lovely relatives of life;
Then shed thy comforts over me, then put on
The gentlest of thy looks. Let no dark crimes,
In all their hideous forms then starting up,
Plant themselves round my couch in grim array,
And stab my bleeding heart with two-edged torture,
Sense of past guilt, and dread of future woe.
Far be the ghastly crew! And in their stead
Let cheerful Memory, from her purest cells,
Lead forth a goodly train of Virtues fair,
Cherished in earliest youth, now paying back
With tenfold usury the pious care,
And pouring over my wounds the heavenly balm
Of conscious innocence. But chiefly Thou,
Whom soft eyed Pity once led down from Heaven
To bleed for man, to teach him how to live,
And, oh! still harder lesson! how to die;
Disdain not Thou to smooth the restless bed
Of sickness and of pain. Forgive the tear
That feeble Nature drops, calm all her fears,
Wake all her hopes, and animate her faith,
Till my rapt soul, anticipating Heaven,
Bursts from the thraldom of incumb'ring clay,
And on the wing of ecstasy upborne,
Springs into Liberty, and Light, and Life.
THE DESERTED VILLAGE. [By Dr. GOLDSMITH.]

Publlished by Isaiah Thomas 1793

Sweet Auburn! lovliest Village of the plain.


THE DESERTED VILLAGE.
SWEET Auburn! lovliest village of the plain,
Where health and plenty cheered the laboring swain,
Where smiling spring its earliest visit paid,
And parting summer's lingering blooms delayed;
Dear lovely bowers of innocence and ease,
Seats of my youth, when every sport could please,
How often have I loiter'd over thy green,
Where humble happiness endeared each scene!
How often have I paused on every charm,
The sheltered cot, the cultivated farm,
The never failing brook, the busy mill,
The decent church, that topp'd the neighboring hill,
The hawthorn bush, with seats beneath the shade,
For talking age and whispering lovers made!
How often have I blessed the coming day,
When toil remitting lent its turn to play.
And all the village train from labor free,
Led up their sports beneath the spreading tree,
While many a pastime circle in the shade,
The young contending as the old surveyed;
And many a gambol frolick'd over the ground,
And sleights of art and seats of strength went round!
And still as each repeated pleasure tired,
Succeeding sports the mirthful band inspired;
The dancing pair that simply sought renown,
By holding out to tire each other down;
The swain mistrustless of his smutted face,
While secret laughter titter'd round the place;
The bashful virgin's side long looks of love,
The matron's glance that would those looks reprove --
These were thy charms, sweet village! sports like these,
With sweet succession, taught even toil to please;
These round thy bowers their cheerful influence shed;
These were thy charms -- But all these charms are fled.
Sweet smiling village, loveliest of the lawn,
Thy sports are fled, and all thy charms withdrawn;
Amidst thy bowers the tyrant's hand is seen,
And desolation saddens all thy green:
One only master grasps the whole domain,
And half a tillage stints thy smiling plain:
No more thy glassy brook reflects the day.
But, chok'd with sedges, works its weedy way;
Along thy glades, a solitary guest,
The hollow sounding bittern guards its nest;
Amidst thy desert walks the lapwing slies,
And tires their echoes with unvaried cries.
Sunk are thy bowers in shapeless ruin all,
And the long grass o'rtops the mouldring wall;
And, trembling, shrinking from the spoiler's hand,
Far, far away thy children leave the land.
Ill fares the land, to hastening ills a prey,
Where wealth accumulates and men decay:
Princes and Lords may flourish, or may fade;
A breath can make them, as a breath has made:
But a bold peasantry, their country's pride,
When once destroyed, can never be supplied.
A time there was, ere England's griefs began,
When every rood of ground maintained its man;
For him light labor spread her wholesome store;
Just gave what life required, but gave no more:
His best companions, innocence and health;
And his best riches, ignorance of wealth.
But times are altered: trade's unfeeling train
Usurp the land, and dispossess the swain;
Along the lawn, where scattered hamlets rose,
Unwieldy wealth and cumb'rous pomp repose;
And every want to luxury allied,
And every pang that folly pays to pride.
Those gentle hours that plenty bade to bloom,
Those calm desires that asked but little room,
Those healthful sports that graced the peaceful scene,
Lived in each look, and brightened all the green;
These far departing, seek a kinder shore;
And rural mirth and manners are no more.
Sweet Auburn! parent of the blissful hour,
Thy glades forlorn confess the tyrant's power.
Here, as I take my solitary rounds,
Amidst thy tangling walks and ruined grounds,
And many a year elapsed, return to view
Where once the cottage stood, the hawthorn grew,
Remembrance wakes with all her busy train,
Swells at my breast, and turns the past to pain.
In all my wand'rings round this world of care,
In all my griefs -- and God has given my share --
I still had hopes, my latest hours to crown,
Amidst these humble bowers to lay me down;
To husband out life's taper at the close,
And keep the flame from wasting by repose:
I still had hopes, for pride attends us still,
Amidst the swains to show my book learned skill;
Around my fire an evening group to draw,
And tell of all I felt, and all I saw;
And, as a hare, whom hounds and horns pursue,
Pants to the place from whence at first he flew,
I still had hopes, my long vexations past,
Here to return -- and die at home at last.
O blessed retirement, friend to life's decline,
Retreat from care, that never must be mine,
How blessed is he who crowns, in shades like these,
A youth of labor with an age of ease!
Who quits a world where strong temptations try,
And, since it is hard to combat, learns to fly!
For him no wretches, born to work and weep,
Explore the mine, or tempt the dangerous deep!
No surly porter stands in guilty state,
To spurn imploring famine from the gate;
But on he moves to meet his latter end,
Angels around befriending virtue's friend;
Sinks to the grave with unperceived decay,
While resignation gently slopes the way;
And, all his prospects bright'ning to the last,
His heaven commences ere the world be past!
Sweet was the sound, when often, at ev'ning's close,
Up yonder hill the village murmur rose;
There as I passed, with careless steps and slow,
The mingling notes came softened from below;
The swain responsive as the milk maid sung,
The sober herd that lowed to meet their young;
The noisy geese that gabbled over the pool,
The playful children just let loose from school,
The watch dog's voice that bay'd the whispering wind,
And the loud laugh that spoke the vacant mind;
These all in sweet confusion sought the shade,
And filled each pause the nightingale had made.
But now the sounds of population fail,
No cheerful murmurs fluctuate in the gale,
No busy steps the grass grown footway tread,
But all the bloomy flush of life is fled!
All but yon widowed solitary thing,
That feebly bends beside the plashy spring;
She, wretched matron, forced, in age, for bread,
To strip the brook with mantling cresses spread,
To pick her wint'ry faggot from the thorn,
To seek her nightly shed, and weep till morn;
She only left, of all the harmless train,
The sad historian of the pensive plain.
Near yonder copse, where once the garden smiled,
And still where many a garden flower grows wild,
There, where a few torn shrubs the place disclose,
The village preacher's modest mansion rose.
A man he was to all the country dear,
And passing rich, with forty pounds a year!
Remote from towns, he ran his godly race,
Nor ever had changed, nor wished to change his place;
Unskilful he to fawn, or seek for power,
By doctrines fashioned to the varying hour;
Far other aims his heart had learned to prize;
More bent to raise the wretched than to rise.
His house was known to all the vagrant train;
He chid their wand'rings, but relieved their pain.
The long remembered beggar was his guest,
Whose beard, descending, swept his aged breast;
The ruined spendthrift, now no longer proud,
Claimed kindred there, and had his claims allowed;
The broken soldier, kindly bade to stay,
Sat by his fire, and talked the night away;
Wept over his wounds, or tales of sorrow done,
Shouldered his crutch, and showed how fields were won.
Pleased with his guests, the good man learned to glow,
And quite forget their vices in their woe;
Careless their merits or their faults to scan;
His pity gave ere charity began.
Thus to relieve the wrethched was his pride,
And even his failings leaned to Virtue's side;
But in his duty prompt, at every call,
He watched and wept -- he prayed -- and felt for all.
And, as a bird each fond endearment tries,
To tempt her new fledged offspring to the skies,
He tried each art, reproved each dull delay,
Allured to brighter worlds, and led the way.
Beside the bed, where parting life was laid,
And sorrow, guilt, and pain, by turns dismayed,
The reverend champion stood. At his control
Despair and anguish fled the struggling soul;
Comfort came down, the trembling wretch to raise,
And his last falt'ring accents whispered praise.
At church, with meek, and unaffected grace,
His looks adorned the venerable place;
Truth from his lips prevailed with double sway,
And fools who came to scoff, remained to pray.
The service past, around the pious man,
With ready zeal, each honest rustic ran;
Even children followed with endearing wile,
And plucked his gown, to share the good man's smile.
His ready smile a parent's warmth expressed;
Their welfare pleased him, and their cares distressed;
To them his heart, his love, his griefs were given;
But all his serious thoughts had rest in heaven.
As some tall cliff that lists its awful form,
Swells from the vale, and midway leaves the storm,
Though round its breast the rolling clouds are spread,
Eternal sunshine settles on its head.
Beside yon straggling sense that skirts the way,
With blossom furze unprofitably gay,
There in his noisy mansion skilled to to rule,
The village master taught his little school:
A man severe he was, and stern to view;
I knew him well, and every truant knew;
Well had the boding tremblers learned to trace
The day's disasters in his morning face;
Full well they laughed, with counterfeited glee,
At all his jokes; for many a joke had he;
Full well the busy whisper, circling round,
Conveyed the dismal tidings when he frowned;
Yet he was kind, or, if severe in aught,
The love he bore to learning was in fault.
The village all declared how much he knew;
'Twas certain he could write and cipher too;
Lands he could measure, times and tides presage,
And even the story ran that he could gauge:
In arguing too, the parson owned his skill;
For even though vanquished, he could argue still;
While words of learned length, and thundering sound,
Amazed the gazing rusticks ranged around.
And still they gazed, and still the wonder grew,
That one small head could carry all he knew.
But past is all his fame. The very spot,
Where many a time he triumphed, is forgot.
Near yonder thorn that lifts its head on high,
Where once the signpost caught the passing eye,
Low lies that house where nut brown draughts inspired,
Where gray beard mirth and smiling toil retired;
Where village statesmen talked with looks profound;
And news much older than their ale went round;
Imagination fondly stoops to trace
The parlour splendours of that festive place;
The white washed wall, the nicely sanded floor;
The varnished clock that click'd behind the door;
The chest, contrived a double debt to pay,
A bed by night, a chest of draw'rs by day;
The pictures placed for ornament and use;
The twelve good rules, the royal game of goose;
The hearth, except when winter chilled the day,
With aspen bows, and flowers, and sennel gay;
While broken tea cups wisely kept for show,
Ranged over the chimney, glisten'd in a row.
Vain transitory splendor! Could not all
Reprieve the tottering mansion from its fall?
Obscure it sinks, nor shall it more impart
An hour's importance to the poor man's heart;
Thither no more the peasant shall repair
To sweet oblivion of his daily care;
To more the farmer's news, the barber's tale,
No more the woodman's ballad shall prevail;
No more the smith his dusky brow shall clear,
Relax his ponderous strength, and lean to hear;
The host himself no longer shall be found
Careful to see the mantling bliss go round;
Nor the coy maid, half willing to be pressed,
Shall kiss the cup to pass it to the rest.
Yes: let the rich deride, the proud disdain,
These simple blessings of the lowly train:
To me more dear, congenial to my heart,
One native charm, than all the gloss of art;
Spontaneous joys, where nature has its play,
The soul adopts, and owns their firstborn sway;
Lightly they frolic over the vacant mind,
Unenvied, unmolested, unconfined:
But the long pomp, the midnight masquerade,
With all the freaks of wanton wealth arrayed,
In these, ere triflers half their wish obtain,
The toiling pleasure sickens into pain;
And, even while fashion's brightest arts decoy.
The heart, distrusting* asks if this be joy.
Ye friends to truth, ye statesmen who survey
The rich man's joys increase, the poor's decay,
It Is yours to judge how wide the limits stand
Between a splendid and a happy land.
Proud swells the tide with loads of freighted ore,
And shouting folly hails them from her shore;
Hoards, even beyond the miser's wish, abound;
And rich men flock from all the world around.
Yet count our gains: this wealth is but a name
That leaves our useful product still the same.
Not so the loss. The man of wealth and pride
Takes up a space that many poor supplied;
Space for his lake, his park's extended bounds;
Space for his horses, equipage, and hounds:
The robe that wraps his limbs in silken sloth,
Has robbed the neighboring fields of half their growth;
His seat, where solitary sports are seen,
Indignant spurns the cottage from the green;
Around the world each needful product flies,
For all the luxuries the world supplies.
While thus the land, adorned for pleasure all,
In barren splendor feebly waits the fall.
As some fair female, unadorned and plain,
Secure to please while youth confirms her reign,
Slights every borrowed charm that dress supplies,
Nor shares with art the triumph of her eyes;
But when those charms are past, for charms are frail,
When time advances, and when lovers fail,
She then shines forth, solicitous to bless,
In all the glaring impotence of dress.
Thus fares the land, by luxury betrayed,
In nature's simplest charms at first arrayed,
But verging to decline, its splendours rise,
Its vistas strike, its palaces surprise;
While, scourged by famine from the smiling land,
The mournful peasant leads his humble band;
And while he sinks, without one arm to save,
The country blooms -- a garden and a grave.
Where then, ah! where shall poverty reside,
To 'scape the pressure of contiguous pride!
If to some common's fenceless limits strayed.
He drives his flock to pick the scanty blade,
Those senceless (...) the sons of wealth divide,
And even the bare worn common is denied.
If to the city sped -- What waits him there?
To see profusion that he must not share;
To see ten thousand baneful arts combined
To pamper luxury, and thin mankind;
To see each joy the sons of pleasure know,
Extorted from his fellow creature's woe.
Here, while the courtier glitters in brocade,
There the pale artist plies the sickly trade;
Here, while the proud their long drawn pomps display,
There the black gibbet glooms beside the way.
The dome where Pleasure holds her midnight reign,
Here, richly decked, admits the gorgeous train;
Tumultuous grandeur crowds the blazing square,
The rattling chariots clash, the torches glare.
Sure, scenes like these no troubles ever annoy!
Sure, these denote one universal joy!
Are these thy serious thoughts? -- Ah, turn thine eyes
Where the poor houseless shivering female lies!
She once, perhaps, in village plenty blessed,
Has wept at tales of innocence distressed;
Her modest looks the cottage might adorn,
Sweet as the primrose peeps beneath the thorn;
Now lost to all; her friends, her virtue fled,
Near her betrayer's doors she lays her head,
And, pinched with cold, and shrinking from the shower,
With heavy heart deplores that luckless hour,
When idly first, ambitious of the town,
She left her wheel and robes of country brown!
Do thine, sweet Auburn, thine, the loveliest train,
Do thy fair tribes participate her pain?
Even now, perhaps, by cold and hunger led,
At proud men's doors they ask a little bread!
Ah, no. To distant climes, a dreary scene,
Where half the unequal world intrudes between,
Through torrid tracts with fainting steps they go,
Where wild Altama murmurs to their woe.
Far different there from all that charmed before,
The various terrors of that horrid shore;
Those blazing suns, that dart a downward ray,
And fiercely shed intolerable day;
Those matted woods where birds forget to sing,
But silent bats in drowsy clusters cling;
Those poisonous fields with rank luxuriance crowned,
Where the dark scorpion gathers death around;
Where at each step the stranger fears to wake
The rattling terrors of the vengeful snake;
Where crouching tigers wait their hapless prey,
And savage men, more murderous still than they;
While often in whirls the mad tornado flies,
Mingling the ravaged landscape with the skies.
Far different these from every former scene,
The cooling brook, the grassy vested green,
The breezy covert of the warbling grove,
That only sheltered thefts of harmless love.
Good Heaven! what sorrows gloom'd that parting day,
That called them from their native walks away;
When the poor exiles, every pleasure past,
Hung round the bowers, and fondly looked their last!
And took a long farewell, and wished in vain
For seats like these beyond the western main,
And shudd'ring still to face the distant deep,
Returned and wept, and still returned to weep!
The good old fire the first prepared to go
To new found worlds, and wept for others woe,
But for himself, in conscious virtue brave,
He only wished for worlds beyond the grave.
His lovely daughter, lovelier in her tears,
The fond companion of his hapless years,
Silent went next, neglectful of her charms,
And left a lover's for her father's arms.
With louder plaints the mother spoke her woes,
And blessed the cot where every pleasure rose;
And kissed her thoughtless babes with many a tear,
And clasped them close in sorrow doubly dear;
Whilst her fond husband strove to lend relief,
In all the silent manliness of grief.
O Luxury! thou cursed by Heaven's decree,
How ill exchanged are things like these for thee!
How do thy potions, with insidious joy,
Diffuse their pleasures only to destroy!
Kingdoms by thee, to sickly greatness grown,
Boast of a florid vigor not their own.
At every draught more large and large they grow,
A bloated mass of rank unweildy woe;
Till sapp'd their strength, and every part unsound,
Down, down they sink, and spread a ruin round.
Even now the devastation is begun,
And half the business of destruction done;
Even now, methinks, as pond'ring here I stand,
I see the rural virtues leave the land.
Down where yon anch'ring vessel spreads the sail
That idly waiting flaps with every gale,
Downward they move, a melancholy band,
Pass from the shore, and darken all the strand.
Contented toil, and hospitable care,
And kind connubial tenderness are there;
And piety, with wishes placed above,
And steady loyalty, and faithful love.
And thou sweet Poetry, thou lovliest maid,
Still first to fly where sensual joys invade;
Unfit in these degenerate times of shame
To catch the heart, or strike for honest fame;
Dear charming nymph, neglected and decry'd,
My shame in crowds, my solitary pride;
Thou, source of all my bliss, and all my woe,
Thou found it me poor at first, and keep'st me so;
Thou guide, by which the nobler arts excel,
Thou source of every virtue, fare thee well;
Farewell, and O! wherever thy voice be tried,
On Torrio's cliffs, or Pambamarca's side,
Whether where equinoxial fervours glow,
Or winter wraps the polar world in snow,
Still let thy voice, prevailing over time,
Redress the rigours of the inclement clime;
Aid slighted truth with thy persuasive strain;
Teach erring man to spurn the rage of gain;
Teach him, that states of native strength possessed,
Though very poor, may still be very blessed;
That trade's proud empire hastes to swift decay,
As ocean sweeps the labored mole away;
While self dependent power can time defy,
As rocks resist the billows and the sky.
HERMIT OF THE DALE. A BALLAD. [From the VICAR of WAKEFIELD.]

HERMIT OF THE DALE.
A BLLLAD.
"TURN, gentle hermit of the dale,
And guide my lonely way,
To where yon taper cheers the vale,
With hospitable ray.
For here forlorn and lost I tread,
With fainting steps and slow;
Where wilds immeasurably spread,
Seem lengthening as I go."
"Forbear, my son," the hermit cries,
"To tempt the dangerous gloom;
For yonder phantom only flies
To lure thee to thy doom.
Here to the houseless child of want,
My door is open still;
And though my portion is but scant,
I give it with good will.
Then turn to night, and freely share
Whatever my cell bestows;
My rushy couch and frugal fare,
My blessing and repose.
No flocks that range the valley free,
To slaughter I condemn:
Taught by that power that pities me,
I learn to pity them.
But from the mountain's grassy side,
A guiltless feast I bring;
A scrip with herbs and fruits supplied,
And water from the spring.
Then, pilgrim, turn, thy cares forego;
For earth born cares are wrong:
Man wants but little here below,
Nor wants that little long."
Soft as the dew from heaven descends,
His gentle accents fell;
The grateful stranger lowly bends,
And follows to the cell.
Far sheltered in a glade obscure
The modest mansion lay;
A refuge to the neighboring poor,
And strangers led astray.
No stores beneath its humble thatch
Required a master's care;
The door just opening with a latch,
Received the harmless pair.
And now when worldly crowds retire
To revels or to rest,
The hermit trimmed his little fire,
And cheered his pensive guest:
And spread his vegetable store,
And gaily pressed, and smiled;
And skilled in legendary lore,
The lingering hours beguiled.
Around in sympathetick mirth
Its tricks the kitten tries,
The cricket chirrups in the hearth;
The crackling faggot flies.
But nothing could a charm impart
To soothe the stranger's woe;
For grief was heavy at his heart,
And tears began to flow.
His rising cares the hermit spied,
With answering care oppressed:
"And whence, unhappy youth," he cried,
"The sorrows of thy breast?
From better habitations spurned,
Reluctant do thou rove:
Or grieve for friendship unreturn'd,
Or unregarded love?
Alas! the joys that fortune brings,
Are trifling and decay;
And those who prize the paltry things,
More trifling still than they.
And what is friendship -- but a name,
A charm that lulls to sleep;
A shade that follows wealth and fame,
But leaves the wretch to weep?
And love is still an emptier sound,
The haughty fair one's jest:
On earth unseen, or only found
To warm the turtle's nest.
For shame, fond youth, thy sorrows hush,
And spurn the sex," he said:
But while he spoke, a rising blush
The bashful guest betrayed.
He sees unnumber'd beauties rise,
Expanding to the view;
Like clouds that deck the morning skies,
As bright, as transient too.
Her looks, her lips, her panting breast,
Alternate spread alarms:
The lovely stranger stands confessed
A maid in all her charms.
And, "Ah! forgive a stranger rude,
A wretch forlorn," she cried;
"Whose feet unhallowed thus intrude
Where heaven and you reside.
But let a maid thy pity snare,
Whom love has taught to stray;
Who seeks for rest, but finds despair
Companion of her way.
My father lived beside the Tyne,
A wealthy lord was he;
And all his wealth was marked as mine
He had but only me.
To win me, from his tender arms,
Unnumber'd suitors came;
Who praised me for imputed charms,
And felt, or feigned a flame.
Each morn the gay fantastic crowd
With richest proffers strove:
Among the rest young Edwin bowed,
But never talked of love.
In humble, simplest habit clad,
No wealth nor power had he;
A constant heart was all he had,
But that was all to me.
The blossom opening to the day;
The dews of heaven refined,
Could naught of purity display
To emulate his mind.
The dew, the blossom on the tree,
With charms inconstant shine;
Their charms were his, but woe to me,
Their constancy was mine.
For still I tried each fickle art,
Importunate and vain;
And, while his passion touched my heart,
I triumphed in his pain.
'Till quite dejected with my scorn,
He left me to my pride;
And sought a solitude forlorn,
In secret, where he died.
But mine the sorrow, mine the fault,
And well my life shall pay;
I Will seek the solitude he sought,
And stretch me where he lay.
And, there forlorn despairing hid,
I Will lay me down and die:
'Twas so for me that Edwin did,
And so for him will I."
"Thou shall not thus," the hermit cried,
And clasped her to his breast:
The wondering fair one turned to chide;
'Twas Edwin's self that pressed.
"Turn Angelina, ever dear,
My charmer, turn to see
Thy own, thy long lost Edwin here,
Restored to love and thee.
Thus let me hold thee to my heart,
And every care resign:
And shall we never, never part,
O thou -- my all that is mine.
No, never, from this hour to part,
We'll live and love so true;
The sigh that rends thy constant heart,
Shall break thy Edwin's too."
Born 29 May 1789


Published by Isaiah Thomas 1793.

FUTURITY. EXTRACTED FROM THE CELEBRATED DODD's THOUGHTS IN PRISON.

FUTURITY.
[Mr. Dodd was an eminent Minister of the Gospel in England, but not taking
that care of his worldly affairs which was necessary, he involved himself in
debt, and to extricate himself therefrom, he committed a forgery, for which he
was executed in June 1777. 30,000 persons signed a petition to the King, to
save his life; but it was ineffectual.

-- DREAD GOD
Of justice and of mercy! Will Thou too,
In fearful Indignation on my soul,
My anguish'd soul, the door of pity close,
And shut me from Thee ever? -- Lo! in dust,
Humiliant, prostrate, weeping before thy throne --
Before thy cross, Oh dying friend of man,
Friend of repentant sinners, I confess,
And mourn my deep transgressions; as the sand
Innumerous, as the glowing crimson red:
With every aggravation, every guilt
Accumulate and burdened! Against light,
Against love and clearest knowledge perpetrate!
Stamped with Ingratitude's most odious stain;
Ingratitude to THEE; whose favoring love
Had blessed me, had distinguished me with grace,
With goodness far beyond my wish or worth!
Ingratitude to man; whose partial ear
Attended to my doctrine with delight;
And from my zeal conspicuous justly claimed
Conspicuous example! -- Lord, I sink
Overwhelmed with self conviction, with dismay,
With anguish and confusion past compare!
And could I weep whole seas of briny tears
In painful penitence; could I deplore
From my heart's aching fountain, drop by drop,
My crimes and follies; my deep grief and shame,
For vile dishonor on thy gospel brought;
For vile discredit to my order done;
For deep offense against my country's laws;
For deep offense to piety and man;
A patriarchal age would be too short
To speak my sorrows, and lament my sins;
Chief, as I am, of sinners! Guiltier far
Than he, who, falling, at the cock's shrill call
Rose, and repented weeping: Guiltier far --
I dare not say, than Judas; for my heart
Has ever loved -- could never have betrayed.
Oh never, never, Thee, dear Lord! to death;
Though cruelly, unkindly and unwise,
That heart has sacrificed its truth and peace,
-- For what a shameful, what a paltry price! --
To sin, detested sin; and done thee wrong,
Oh blessed source of all its good, its hope!
For, though thus sunk, thus sinful, sorrowing thus,
It dare not, cannot Judas' crime commit,
Last crime -- and of thy mercy, Lord, despair!
But, conscious of its guilt; contrite and plunged
In lowest selfabjection, in the depths
Of sad compunction, of repentance due
And undissembled, to thy cross it cleaves,
And cries for -- ardent cries for mercy, Lord!
Mercy, its only refuge! Mercy, CHRIST!
By the red drops that in the garden gushed
'Midst thy soul's anguish from Thee! By the drops
That down thy precious temples, from the crown
Of agony distilled! By those that flowed
From thy pierced hands, and blessed feet so free;
By all thy blood, thy sufferings and thy death,
Mercy, Oh mercy, JESUS! Mercy, Thou.
Who erst on David, with a clement eye.
When mourning at thy footstool, deign'dst to look!
Thou, who the adulterous Magdalen forgav'st
When in the winning garb of penitence
Contrite she knelt, and with her flowing tears
Washed lowly thy loved feet! Nor thou the thief,
Even in the last, the bitterest hour of pain,
Refusedst, gracious! Nor will thou refuse
My humble supplication! nor reject
My broken, bleeding heart, thus offered up
On true contrition's altar; while through Thee,
Only through Thee acceptance do I hope,
Thou bleeding love! consummate advocate,
Prevailing intercessor, great high priest,
Almighty sufferer! Oh look pitying down!
On thy sufficient merits I depend;
From thy unbounded mercies I implore
The look of pardon, and the voice of grace --
Grace, grace! -- Victorious conqueror over sin,
Over death, over hell, for me, for all mankind;
For grace I plead: Repentant at thy feet
I throw myself, unworthy, lost, undone;
Trusting my soul, and all its dear concerns,
With filial resignation, to thy will:
Grace -- still on grace my whole reliance built!
Glory to grace triumphant! -- And to THEE,
Dispenser bounteous of that sovereign grace!
JESUS, thou king of glory! at thy call
I come obedient: Lo, the future world
Expands its views transporting! Lord, I come;
And in that world eternal trust to 'plaud,
With all redemption's sons, thy glorious grace!
Then farewell, Oh my friends! light over my grave
The green sod lay, and dew it with the tear
Of memory affectionate! And you
-- The curtain dropped decisive -- Oh my foes,
Your rancour drop; and, candid, as I am,
Speak of me, hapless! Then you will speak of one,
Whose bosom beat at pity's gentlest touch
From earliest infancy: Whose boyish mind
In acts humane and tender ever joy'd;
And who -- that temper by his inmost sense
Approved and cultivate with constant care --
Melted through life at sorrow's plaintive tale;
And urged, compassionate with pleasure ran
To soothe the sufferer, and relieve the woe --
Of one, who, though to humble fortune bred,
With splendid generosity's bright form
Too ardently enamored, turned his sight
Deluded, from frugality's just care,
And parsimony needful! -- ONE, who scorned
Mean love of gold, yet to that power -- his scorn
Retorting vengeful -- a marked victim fell! --
Of one, who, unsuspecting, and ill formed
For the world's subtleties, his bare breast bore
Unguarded, open; and, ingenuous, thought
All men ingenuous, frank and open too! --
Of one, who, warm with human passions, soft
To tenderest impressions, frequent rushed
Precipitate into the tangling maze
Of error; -- instant to each fault alive,
Who, in his little journey through the world --
Misled, deluded often, mistook his way;
Met with bad roads and robbers, for his steps
Insidious lurking: And, by cunning craft
Of fellow travelers sometimes deceived,
Severely felt of cruelty and scorn,
Of envy, malice, and of ill report,
The heavy hand oppressive -- One, who brought
-- From ignorance, from indiscretion blind --
Ills numerous on his head; but never aimed,
Nor wished an ill or injury to man!
Injured, with cheerful readiness forgave;
Nor for a moment in his happy heart
Harbored of malice or revenge a thought:
Still glad and blessed to avenge his foes' despite
By deeds of love benevolent! -- Of one --
Oh painful contradiction! Who in GOD,
In duty, placed the summit of his joy;
Yet left that GOD, that blissful duty left,
Preposterous, vile deserter! and received
A just return -- "desertion from his GOD,
And consequential plunge into the depth
Of all his present -- of all human woe!"
Then hear his sufferings! Hear, if found too faint
His feeble song to win attention, hear,
And heed his dying counsel! Cautious, shun
The rocks on which he split. Cleave close to God,
Your father, sure protector, and defense:
Forsake not his loved service; and your cause
Be sure He Will never forsake. Initiated once,
Happy and prosperous, in Religion's course,
Oh persevere unfainting! Nor to vice
Or tempting folly slightest parley give:
Their black tents never enter: On the watch
Continue unremitting, nor ever slack
The necessary guard. Trivial neglects,
Smallest beginnings, to the wakeful foe
Open the door of danger; -- and down sinks,
Through the minutest leak once sprung, the ship
In gayest and most gallant tackle trim.
By small neglects he fell! --
Oh could ye rise,
Blessed Ministers of peace, by his sad fall;
Gather increase of caution and of zeal;
And, seeing on what slippery edge ye stand,
Of foul and fatal lapse take the more heed; --
With deeper thankfulness he would bow the knee,
While thus his fate productive proved of good
To you, of truth blessed heralds! whom he views
With heart felt anguish scandalized, impugn'd
By his atrocious follies: But for that
Not honored less, or honorable, if roused,
Even by his errors, wisely you maintain
Your high profession's dignity; and look
With single eye intent on the great work
Thrice holy, of your calling; happiest work
Of mortals here, "Salvation of men's souls."
Oh envied pastor, who thus occupied
Looks down on low preferment's distant views
Contemptible; nor ever his plotting mind
To little, mean servilities enslaves;
Forgetting duty's exercise sublime,
And his attachments heavenly! Who nor joins
In frivolous converse on the rise of this,
Nor prospects flattering of that worldly clerk;
Strange inconsistency! marching aloft
With step superior and ambition's paw
To dignity's wished summit! -- Nor allows
Envious, or spreads malicious the low tales
Diminishing of brethren, who by zeal,
Or eminence of merit in the cause,
The common cause of Christ, distinguished shine:
Of futile politics and party rage,
Who, heedless, ever for the powers that be
In meek sincerity implores; and lives
Only to spread around the good, the peace,
The truth, the happiness, his open heart
Innocuous possesses, as the gift
Of him, the GOD of peace he serves and loves!
Much envied pastor! Ah, ye men of GOD,
Who crowd the levee, theater, or court;
Foremost in each amusement's idle walk,
Of vice and vanity the sportive scorn,
The vaunted pillars; -- ah, that ye were all
Such happy, envied pastors! How mankind
With eyes of reverence would devoutly look,
How would yourselves with eyes of pleasure look,
On characters so uniform! while now,
What view is found less pleasing to the sight!
Nor wonderful, my aged friends! For none
Can inward look complacent, where a void
Presents its desolations drear and dark.
Hence it is you turn, incapable to bear
Reflection's just resentment, your lulled minds
To infantine amusements; and employ
The hours -- short hours, indulgent heaven affords
For purposes most solemn -- in the toil
Of busy trifling; of diversions poor,
Which irritate as often as amuse,
Passions most low and sordid! With due shame,
With sorrow I regret -- Oh pardon me
This mighty wrong; -- that frequent by your side
Silent I Have sat, and with a pitying eye
Your follies marked, and unadmonish'd left,
Though tenderly lamenting! Yet, at last,
-- If happily not too late my friendly call
Strike on dead ears, Oh profit by that call!
And, to the grave approaching, its alarms
Weigh with me all considerate! Brief Time
Advances quick in tread; few hours and dark
Remain: Those hours in frivolous employ
Waste not impertinent; they never return!
Nor deem it dullness to stand still and pause,
When dread eternity has claim so high.
Oh be those claims fulfilled!
Nor, my Young Friends,
Whom life's gay sunshine warms with laughing joy,
Pass you those claims unheeding! -- In the bud
Of earliest rose often have I sorrowing seen
The canker worm lurk blighting; often, ere noon,
The tulip have beheld drop its proud head,
In eminent beauty opened to the morn!
In Youth, in beauty, in life's outward charms
Boast not self flattering; virtue has a grace,
Religion has a power, which will preserve
Immortal your true excellence! Oh give
Early and happy your young hearts to GOD!
And GOD will smile in countless blessings on you!
Nor, captivate by fashion's idle glare,
And the world's shows delusive, dance the maze,
The same dull round, fatiguing and fatigued;
Till, discontented, down in folly's seat,
And disappointment's, worthless, toiled, you sink,
Despising and despised! your gentle hearts
To kind impressions yet susceptible,
Will amiably hear a friend's advice;
And if, perchance, amidst the giddy whirl
Of circling folly, his unheeded tongue
Has whispered vanity, or not announc'd
Truth's salutary dictates to your ears --
Forgive the injury, my friends beloved;
And see me now, solicitous to atone
That, and each fault, each error; with full eyes
Entreating you, by all your hopes and fears,
By all your dear anxieties, by all
You hold in life most precious, to attend,
To listen to his lore! to seek for bliss
In GOD, in piety! in hearts devote
To duty and to heaven! And seeking thus,
The treasure is your own. Angels on earth,
Thus pure and good, soon will ye mount, and live
Eternal angels with your Father GOD!
Of admonition due, just self contempt,
And frank expostulation's honest charge,
The needful debt thus paid; haste thou, my song,
As hastes my life -- brief shadow -- to its close!
Then farewell, Oh my friends, most valued! Bound
By consanguinity's endearing tie,
Or friendship's noble service, manly love,
And generous obligations! See, in all
-- And spare the tear of pity -- heaven's high will
Ordaining wise and good. I see, I own
His dispensation, howsoever harsh,
To my hard heart, to my rebellious soul
Needful and salutary! His dread rod
Paternal, lo* I kiss! And to the stroke
Severe, submissive, thankfully resign!
It weans me from the world; it proves how vain,
How poor the life of erring man! -- has taught,
Experimentally has taught, to look
With scorn, with triumph upon death; -- to wish
The moment come! -- Oh were that moment come,
When, launched from all that is sinful here below,
Securely I shall sail along the tide
Of glorious eternity! My friends,
Beloved and honored, Oh that we were launched,
And sailing happy there, where shortly all
Must one day sail! Oh that in peaceful port
We all were landed! all together safe
In everlasting amity and love,
With GOD, our GOD; our pilot through the storms
Of this life's sea! -- But, why the frivolous wish?
Set a few suns -- a few more days decline;
And I shall meet you -- oh the gladsome hour!
Meet you in glory -- nor with flowing tears
Afflicted drop my pen, and sigh -- Adieu!
FINIS

