TRAVELS THROUGH AMERICA. A POEM.

By MICHAEL FOREST.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOHNSTON and JUSTICE, AT FRANKLIN'S HEAD, NO. 41,
CHESNUT-STREET. M.DCC.XCIII.

PREFACE.
WHEN I began the following Poem, my intention was only to commemorate (for my
own private satisfaction) the different scenes and places which I beheld in my
travels through America; but, after finishing it, I began to think it might be
entertaining to the public; and at the request of some gentlemen to whom I have
shown the manuscript, have agreed to publish it. With respect to the poem in
general, I shall only inform the reader, that I have frequently used the
present tense instead of the past, in order to keep the action the more alive.
The verses introduced into the latter end of the poem, and the separate pieces
added to it, were inserted in hopes of rendering the whole the more
entertaining.

Michael Forest.

THE CONTENTS.
VOYAGE from Ireland to Newfoundland -- Description of Newfoundland -- Voyage
from Newfoundland to Boston -- Address to Columbia to the Bostonians, and to
Bunker's Hill -- Voyage from Boston to Baltimore -- Observations on passing
Brandiwine going to Philadelphia -- A view of a youth swimming in the river
Schuylkill and sporting on its margin -- Description of Philadelphia -- A
fraternal scene -- A moral deduced from the fraternal scene -- Battle of the
kegs in Philadelphia -- Sailing from Philadelphia to Pordentown in a Stage Boat
-- Philosophical contemplation with respect to human happiness -- View of
Burlington and Bristol -- A delicate view of a young lady bathing in a sylvan
pool -- Rolanda in the grove, a rural scene -- Moral from the distress of
Rolanda -- Address to Rolanda's inconstant swain -- The approach of Winter -- A
Winter storm -- The approach of Spring -- A view of the solar system on a sine
summer night -- Rural observations -- Battle of Trenton -- Praise of General
Washington -- Daphne and Strephon, a rural scene -- Voyage to Charleston, South
Carolina -- Description of Charleston and the ladies of Carolina -- Verses to a
Carolina lady -- Siege of Charleston -- Address to Fortime -- Verses addressed
to a young Gentleman at the Charleston College-Academy -- Aspecimen of
unlimited sublime poetry -- Man shall be free, a new song.

Travels Through America.
MY native home, and dear companions all,
Juvenile pleasures and the evening ball,
The prancing steed, and the quick-scenting hound,
I bade adieu, and thus began my round.
From fair Hibernia's healthy, verdant plain,
With Captain Stone, I rushed into the main.
At the age of seventeen and nine months more,
I bade adieu unto my native shore.
I soon beheld the lofty billows roll,
And lightning flash, while thunder shook the pole;
Our vessel tossed through the stormy main;
Then often I wished to be at home again.
Alas! how vain my fruitless wishes were,
'Midst seas of trouble, far from parent's care;
Where thunders clash'd, and seas rolled mountain high,
Which made me heave 'till I thought I should die.
Now Aeolus ceases -- Neptune rules alone --
The sky is clear -- the sea is all in foam;
Boreas shuts his magazine of storms;
The glass goes round, and we sing Wars-alarms.
Thus passed the time for half a day or more,
'Till, loud on deck, we heard the trumpet roar,
' All hands aloft -- loosen every sail'
The wind then blowing a delightful gale.
All-hands arose and lent a willing hand;
And now we steer, due-west, for Newfoundland.
Six weeks elapsed, ere we reached the Banks,
Where the rude sailors show their active pranks.
Here each youngster had to pay a fine,
As seamen do when first they cross the Line:
A rastic youth who did not soon agree
To pay his bottle, was immediately
To the yard-arm hois'd, with rapid motion;
Thence headlong plunged down into the ocean!
Thus passed the time, while we were on the banks;
The youngsters suffered by the sailor's pranks,
'Till from mast-head, we heard one loudly call,
"A fleet ahead!" which roused us one and all.
But lo! from deck, we soon did plainly see,
That such huge vessels never crossed the sea!
"Islands of Ice" the Captain loudly cries:
" About ship, Ho! Ere I be taken a prize
"By these huge monsters, tyrants of the main,
"Whose touch is Death, I Will even go back again,"
The man of war Our Convoy.
now fired a signal gun,
And steered due south 'till setting of the sun,
When from aloft a sailor gladly spied
The distant shore, and "Land oho!" he cried.
Seven long weeks (I thought them full a score)
We plowed the deep before we came on shore.
I soon forgot my troubles on the main,
And with surprise gazed on the woody plane Newfoundland.
.
Nor Cows, nor Horses here attract the eye;
Nor verdant fields of Barley, Wheat, or Rye;
Nor meadows green, nor gentle-gliding stream;
Nor rural pleasures here are ever seen.
Nor does the huntsman ever wind his horn,
And give his game a timely loud alarm;
Nor do we hear the music of the groves,
The woodland Thrushes, nor the Turtle-Doves;
Nor purling stream, nor the loud water-fall,
Are ever heard in Newfoundland at all.
Nor do sweet odours float and scent the air;
Nor primrose flowers deck the virgin's hair;
Nor ought to please the palate have I found,
In all my travels through this desert ground.
Nor is the air agreeable to the touch;
But, here, perhaps, you will think I say too much,
As it is healthy -- that I don't deny;
But the cold winters cause many to die:
Once I myself beheld a dismal sight,
A man found frozen, in the dead of night,
Within a small mile of his native home,
On the white path extended stiff alone!
A place of worship here is scarcely found,
But W -- s, Gin and Grog, swarm the country round.
Whoever drinks the most indecent toast,
Believe me, sir, of him they think the most. --
A land displeasing to each virtuous mind,
My muse abhors and gladly leaves behind:
For FREE COLUMBIA next I Will sound the lyre,
Where Freedoms cause poetic thoughts inspire.
Once more I ventured on the stormy main,
And four long weeks I plowed the sea again,
Ere I arrived at the blessed land,
Where PEACE and FREEDOM now do wave the wand.
My former sufferings, through the Atlantic wide,
Were but pleasures compared to Fundy's A stormy Bay between Halifax and
New Hampshire.
tide;
For, here the sea rolls roaring mountain-high;
And bursts of thunder rend the encumbered sky!
Quick-lightnings flash, and light the stormy main,
As if the gods were fighting for domain!
Neptune his bursting billows rolls so high,
That all on board conjecture they must die.
A sudden surge throws us on our beam-end;
We now prepare to meet our fatal end!
But lo! she rights, and stems the stormy wave!
And now, once more, we hope our lives to save.
Now Boreas, with a brisk and pleasant gale,
Triumphant rides, and fills each spreading sail;
The waves subside -- we with mutual ardour,
Sail S. West, 'till we make Boston harbor --
HAIL COLUMBIA! and thy martial sons,
Who dared oppose, with undisciplined guns,
The British troops, though long inured to arms,
And rush to battle from your peaceful farms!
Often have I wished to join you in the toil,
Of gaining FREEDOM for your native soil.
Delightful task! though it was laborious,
To conquer tyrants and reign victorious;
To save a nation from base tyranny,
And to gain freedom for posterity!
BOSTONIANS, HAIL! your valor will resound
Through foreign climes, and through this country round;
Posterity on marble will inscribe,
An Era new! from your throwing in the tide,
The tea on which England laid a duty,
In hopes to get, by clandestine booty,
An immense sum of money, to defray
The D' -- I knows what, from North America.
Let Briton know that all her pomp was vain,
And that Americans would Death sustain,
Ere they would submit to bear the British yoke,
Which, they well knew, their liberty would choke.
HAIL BUNKER's HILL! thou once a bloody plain,
Posterity will sing each hero's fame,
Who on thee bled, and died full of gore;
Fought for COLUMBIA 'till they were no more.
BOSTONIANS will on thee, on future days,
Fire thirteen guns and celebrate their praise;
The tuneful choir will join their lively song;
The groves and woodlands echo to the throng,
An Era new! -- an Era new'll resound,
From woods, and rocks, and heroes under ground!
Five days have I, with busy eye, surveyed
This martial town, renowned for its trade,
And now, more south, the country to explore,
With Captain Pillsb'ry sailed for Baltimore.
With pleasure I, for three weeks and a day,
Surveyed the coast thence to Chesepeak-Bay;
Nor blustering storms, nor billows loud do roar,
But ocean smiles along this blissful shore.
The woodland pine, in sign of freedom, waves
Its lofty head, and thus old England braves;
The woods and groves now echo to the main,
An Era new! Columbia's born again!
Then Neptune answers from his oozy bed,
An Era new! the British troops have fled --
Now up the Chesepeak we quickly sailed,
And at Annapolis ourselves regaled;
The rural prospects thence along the shore,
Are highly pleasing up to Baltimore,
Which town improves like Rome in days of yore.
Early next day, I did a seat engage
To Philadelphia in the flying stage;
My muse was mute till we reached Brandiwine,
Whose bloody plain did rouse the sacred nine!
Hail purling stream, Brandiwine Creek.
once tinctured with the gore
Of heroes brave, who for Columbia bore
The pangs of death, on yon polluted plain,
To free their country from the tyrants reign!
You lofty pine beheld young heroes fall,
Who in obedience to their country's call,
Left rural sports, and love's encircling arms,
When Columbia called her injured sons TO ARMS!
Resound ye groves, resound each hero's name,
Echoes convey to foreign climes their fame,
Who fought for freedom on yon bloody field,
And dared to die, ere they would to Britain yield! --
Once more, I quit the muses warbling lyre;
But soon again am roused by yonder spire, Christ church's steeple Philadelphia.

Whose lofty top, over the woodland, I see
Erected to a very high degree.
I now behold Schuylkill's silver stream,
Whose verdant banks would grace a poet's theme;
Here the brave youth, to cool his ardent blood,
Plunges headlong into the circling flood;
With lusty sinews, thence to yonder shore,
He works his way, nor dreads the waves no more.
Behold him now, frisking about the plain,
Void of those robes which Eden did disdain;
And now, quick-stepping to the waterside,
Headlong again, he dives into the tide.
Behold the prancing steed, with nostrils wide,
Snuffing the surge, and snorting through the tide;
The active boy fast holding by his mane,
Now sinking low, now rising high again;
His mighty heart, braced by the cooling flood,
Bounds fearless on, until he tips the mud;
Then, to the shore, the boy directs the steed,
And gladly boasts of his heroic deed.
Hail nymphs and swains, sporting along the shore,
Now from the flood to you my muses soar;
Sport on ye swains, these happy hours enjoy;
Nor let old age innocent mirth destroy.
When nature prompts the sprightly youth to play,
Her sacred callings let him quick obey;
For she, unerring calls for naught in vain,
But always is, and ever will be the same.
I must not omit yon sequestered shade,
Where rural lovers sing their serenade,
When all is mute, save the purling stream,
Which joins harmoniously their warbling theme.
Hail PHILADELPHIA! I now behold
Thy regularity, as I Have been told;
But more majestical thou do appear,
More grand, more regular, and far more clear,
Than my ideas were of thy grand form,
Or even now my pen can well inform:
Governor PENN first its plan begun,
In imitation of old Babylon.
The streets are wide, and in a line direct;
The angles right where they do intersect;
The footway paved nicely with bricks and tiles,
From north to south, nearly two English miles;
And from both rivers Schuylkill, and Delaware.
to the center street,
Named, first, second, and so on till they meet;
That half alone joining the Delaware,
Is built out nearly to the center square;
The buildings show no great variety,
But the most pleasing regularity;
Void of extremes, the houses friendly join,
Nor cottage low, nor palace, rouse the nine,
To sound the warbling lyre. Upon the whole,
From the Arctic, to the Antarctic pole,
View all the cities round this flying ball,
Their commerce, shape, and regulations all;
Compare their climates, and situation,
Their buildings, cleanness, and navigation.
Then judge impartially, and you will find
That Philadelphia most will please your mind --
Here I resided more than half a year,
During which time I Have shed many a tear,
For an only brother, who, as I Have heard,
Was nightly slain, and at St. John's interred.
Often have I to the lonely fields retired,
To pay a tribute nature often required.
The gloomy rocks, and desolates unknown,
Have often heard my solitary moan.
Nor purling streams no more divert my mind,
Nor woodland music floating in the wind;
Pensive I pass the heavy hours away;
Nor pleasure find in either night or day --
As sadly musing on the dire event,
Which caused my grief, with body downward bent,
A walked the streets, careless whither I strayed,
A lady's servant called to me and said,
"Please to walk in -- here is a gentleman
Who wishes much to see you" -- in I ran --
Amazed and speechless, as some statues stand,
I stood and gazed, nor words could I command!
Such pleasing raptures filled my glowing breast,
As cannot well by language be expressed --
The stranger rose, and tears of joy we shed --
It was my brother, who, I thought, was dead.
But seeing him in visions often by night,
I feared some phantom now deceived my sight;
Fond nature ceased -- and now, with language meek,
And trembling voice, I thus to him did speak:
Do I dream, or did the heavenly powers,
To 'bate my grief, restore thy vital powers?
My dearest brother! art thou still alive?
Ah! how did thou the mortal blow survive?
He now informed me of the false report,
And down we sat and drank a bottle of port.
Ravished with joy, I seize the flowing bowl,
And in it drown the sorrows of my soul.
Ye good distressed, learn from this to endure
Those earthly troubles which ye cannot cure;
And doubt not but the great, almighty Jove,
Will in due time your troubles all remove.
Some you may see who suffer to the end;
But can you tell to what their suffirings tend?
Or can you prove them useless to that whole,
'Whose body Nature is, and God the soul?'
If not, believe, the universal cause,
Constantly acts by wise, unerring laws.
In the small circle of your transient years,
You often will meet with troubles, sorrows, fears;
For these are passions, natural to man,
You may depress, but, shun them, never can:
Oh, let not these prevent your being wise,
And the great end, Eternal Bliss, to prize!
For know, fond man, thou soon wilt reach the goal,
Thy race will end, and thy immortal soul,
To realms unknown to human passions fly,
Where it will never, never, never die! --
O! how important is this truth divine!
O, may it ring through every earthly clime!
May all our actions ever please the Lord;
And may our souls enjoy his blessed reward! --
Delaware's tide does next attract my song,
While, on the shore, methinks I see a throng
Of British soldiers, officers and flags,
Preparing to engage the floating kegs Those kegs were, sall of powder and
combuslibles, sent down the river Delaware, on float, by the Americans, in
order to set sire to the British shipping at Philadelphia.
.
Sure such a battle never was known before,
As floating kegs, against the British corpse!
Descend ye nine, and strike each warbling string,
Let groves and woodlands, rocks and mountains, sing
This glorious battle 'twixt the British troops,
And a few floating kegs with wooden hoops!
Which side conquered I Will not pretend to say;
But report says that Britons ran away!
Others, in favor of the British, swear,
They did the rebel kegs to pieces tear;
And do maintain, they stood their ground till night,
Briskly engaged in the busy sight;
But that at length, for want of something t'eat,
They were, by hunger forced to retreat --
One truth is clear, their cannons roared all day,
But, what exploits they have done, I cannot say;
Let others praise those men of sterling courage,
Whose groat a day will searcely buy them porridge!
I now did leave this city of renown,
And in a stage-boat sailed for Bordentown;
The wind was fair -- passengers all merry;
Fore and aft passed porter, punch and sherry.
Thus as we sailed merrily along,
One of the ladies sang a lover's song;
The phrase was simple, and the subject plain;
It was Amanda and her rural swain.
Her charming voice excelled (I don't say wrong)
The warbling numbers of Italian song.
When she began, methought the atmosphere
Did ring with sounds seraphic in mine ear.
I gazed and listened -- wished -- and gazed again --
Hoped -- feared and doubted -- sighed, but all in vain.
What else had followed, I must not reveal;
It is most prudent folly to conceal.
The verdant shores afford a pleasing sight,
To all who do in rural scenes delight.
On the green margin of this silver stream,
The rural swains and rural nymphs are seen,
Frisking about, void of affectation;
Ruled by nature, more than education.
Thrice happy they who thus can spend their days,
In scenes of pleasure, not in search of praise;
Contented with what Providence has given
They fill their happy circle marked by heaven;
Strangers to all the busy scenes of life,
To liberal arts and domestic strife;
And more contented in their narrow sphere,
Than the rich monarch is in his, or peer.
What though the cause of things to them 's unknown,
And all those mountains said to be 'n the moon?
What though they never through optic tube, by nights,
Viewed Jupiter and his four satellites?
What though Saturn's ring be to them unknown,
And the volcanoes Hershel saw'n the moon?
Or, what if they never plowed the stormy main,
In search of knowledge, or in search of gain?
Nay, what if they have never seen the town,
Grand buildings, shipping, or a silken gown?
Contentment still is theirs -- and that is more
To be esteemed, than Mexican ore.
Let others, through long optic tubes descry
The course of planets through the aerial sky;
And determine all their revolutions,
When direct, when retrogade their motions;
And labor to explain the cause of this,
By experiments, or hypothesis --
I say let others, for to spread their fame,
Thus spend their days to gain a learned name;
And when they have done the utmost in their power,
Let them reflect only a single hour,
On all their labors, how they have spent their days;
Wasted their health in hopes of gaining praise;
Then turn their thoughts to those nymphs and swains,
Fondly sporting along yon verdant plains;
And, if they can, let them deny this hint,
The less man knows, the greater his content!
What cares yon swain if Mars were headlong hurled
Into the sun, or against some other world?
Or if great Jupiter was whirled and tossed
From his bright orb, and in oblivion lost?
Or, what cares he, if Aetna's blazing bowl,
Spouted its wild fire to the southern pole?
Or if the demons of the ocean rise,
And toss the foaming billows to the skies;
Then hurl poor sailors against a savage shore,
Where they are never, never, heard of more?
Contented still, the swain would frisk along,
Sport with his nymph, and sing his rural song;
Nor feel a blow from the hand of heaven,
Before it was absolutely given.
But the Astronomer, with busy eye,
Would view with terror, the injured sky,
And fear the earth, now rolling in her sphere,
Would meet her doom before another year;
Perhaps conjecture, as she is next to Mars,
She Would next be hurled into some of the stars;
Knowing that scripture says, 'At the last day,
Earth will be burnt, the elements melt away.'
Thus discontent would arise from knowledge,
And pleasures dwell in a country cottage. --
Thus was I musing on the former hint,
"The less man knows the greater his content,"
When Burlington appeared full in sight,
A prospect which I viewed with great delight.
My mose would fain remain here pretty long,
It does afford such subjects for a song:
The gliding stream, and the sequestered grove;
The verdant landscape, and the grazing drove;
The fishes sporting in their element;
Now springing from it, and in their descent,
Lashing the water sidelong as they fall,
Are subjects pleasing to the muses all:
The pleasant prospect of this silver stream,
And vessels sailing, all should swell my theme;
But the fair wind wafts us so quick along,
That Bristol next attracts my humble song.
This town, though small, is pleasant to the eye,
This I observed as we glided by,
And built upon a pleasant spot of land,
Which rises gradually from the strand.
To BORDENTOWN, soft numbers to diffuse
'Midst vernal shades, now hastes my panting muse.
With equal wing, our vessel sails along,
The town appears, and now the decks we throng.
"Down mainsail ho!" the captain loudly cries,
"Stand by to haul the Jibb down, d -- n your eyes --
Let go the hallyards -- see the anchor clear --
Haul down the Jibb, d -- n her, she will not wear --
Let go the anchor -- get the boat on shore --
D -- n your eyes, be guick, you son of a w -- e."
This language was displeasing to the fair;
For we all know that ladies cannot bear
To hear a sailor madly curse and swear.
They call him wicked, vulgar, and so forth,
Because they know not his intrinsic worth.
Oh, erring reason, mixed with erring pride,
The man who labors for their good, to chide!
But, I haste on shore 'midst the sylvan groves
And curling fountains, where Vallonia roves. --
Ye sacred nine, on speedy wing descend,
And thou, Vallonia, all thy graces lend;
Assist me, while I sing 'midst rural shades,
And purling streams, ere nature's beauty fades.
'Twas now that season of the circling year,
When burning Sol in Cancer did appear;
As I sat musing on a pleasant hill,
Pleased with the music of a purling rill,
Which ran beneath through a sequestered vale,
And seemed to tell some fond, endearing tale;
A tale more soft than lovers can invent,
Whenever they seek for reason to repent:
While thus I sat, breathing ambrosial air,
I saw a damsel, slender, tall, and fair,
With modest steps, approaching to the stream;
More like a goddess than a Grecian queen.
A milk white dress she wore, a silken gown,
And to her waist her hair hung flowing down;
A branch of laurel in her hand she bore;
And with quick ^^^ces sidelong viewed the shore.
She now arrived at her sylvan pool,
And quick disrobed, her lovely limbs to cool.
Meanwhile she fearful glances cast around,
And trembling viewed the inverted blue profound.
But when the falling lawn exposed the fair,
No longer then, no longer could I bear
The sole-distracting view -- I trembling strove,
For to retire into the silent grove;
But, oh! I strove in vain -- What shall be done?
'Twas now precisely setting of the sun;
And the full moon, majestically bright,
Shone through the woods, and seemed to hail the night;
But, far less fair, her splendent face did seem,
Than this fair maid half-shaded in the stream.
Now struggling nature fain would have her way;
But sacred honor will not her obey;
Alternate passions quickly rise and fall;
Oh! wretched me! why came I here at all;
Bear me, ye gods, from this distracting sight;
Or quickly shade me with the veil of night!
And thou, O moon, shed not thy borrowed rays,
That I no longer on this scene may gaze!
Lo, now, with fearful eye, she looked around,
As if surprised with some distant found;
With hasty steps then trembling gained the shore,
Afraid, methought, to stay one moment more:
With modest mien, she quickly did array,
In careless haste, and nimbly stepped away.
No longer to the hill was I confined,
I now could go where ever I had a mind.
Night coming on, I left this beauteous hill.
And bade Vallonia name this purling rill,
The haunt of rural maids -- and that ere long,
In yonder grove, once more, she would hear my song.
Now bright Virgo receives the solar ball,
From Leo's claws, into her maiden hall;
And mlder rays shine through the atmosphere,
Which add new beauty to the circling year.
As Chanticleer joyfully hailed the morn,
The howling hounds and the echoing horn,
From their soft slumber roused the tuneful train;
Which filled the groves with their melodious strain;
Pleased with their notes, I slowly to'rds the grove,
Over dewy lawns, with careless steps did rove;
When, at some distance, to my great surprise,
A youthful damsel sat before mine eyes.
Amazed at this quite unexpected sight,
I quickly stopped, and viewed her with delight.
Half afraid to approach her sylvan bower,
I stood aloof a quarter of an hour;
At length, resolved for to hail the maid,
I gently walked to her sylvan shade;
And with modest mien, and a loving air,
Held her white hand, and thus addressed the fair:
Be not amazed, fair, angelic maid,
My wandering steps have led me to thy shade,
Not to deprive thee of thy rural bliss,
But Oh! my fair, this milk-white hand to kiss.
"Alas!" she said, and trembled as she spoke,
"Some other person best would suit your joke:
Too late, alas! too late, I Have learned to know,
By sad experience, what young men can do." --
Now sobbing sighs prevented her to speak;
And the big tears rolled quickly down her cheek.
Again I spoke: Fair damsel have I caused
Thy sudden grief? -- and for an answer pans'd.
"No sir," she said, with still more trembling voice,
"But woe is me since I approved his Her inconstant swain.
choice;
"He from my arms far, alas! is fled,
"And I, forlorn, must live in yonder shed.
"My aged parents both do me disown,
"Because I loved -- loved alas! too soon --
"How often has he, under this shady bower,
"To me declared, a minute seemed an hour,
"While he was absent from his heart's delight,
"Or when ROLANDA Her own name.
did not bless his sight.
"And, ah! how often have I heard him say,
"His fondness for me never would decay;
"But he is false, and I am left forlorn --
"Oh! would to God I never had been born." --
O, cease fair maid, cease thy pathetic strain;
Perhaps thy lover may return again;
Or, should he not, pray think of him no more,
And a truer swain soon will you adore.
She rose, and to her sylvan shed did go;
And there she sang the story of her woe --
Nor turtle dove after losing its mate,
Nor woodland thrush, bemoaning her sad fate,
When the rude schoolboy robbed her of her young,
A more pathetic strain had ever sung:
The tuneful songsters jointly sing her tale,
'Till songs of sorrow echo through the vale! --
Ye blooming fair, ye strangers yet to man,
Ah! learn in time your lover's mind to scan;
Ere you permit the freedom of a kiss,
Or something else, which some think not amiss,
Let sacred wedlock join you to your swain;
For without this, your love may be in vain.
That words prove not the heart to be sincere,
The sobbing sigh, and the big rolling tear,
Of poor ROLANDA, plainly do declare,
Who was not of deceitful man aware.
Ah! poor hapless maid, in vain did I try
To cheer thy mind, or stop the heavy sigh
Which swelled thy loving breast -- Adieu poor maid!
Heaven preserve thee in thy sylvan shade!
But ere I enter the sequestered grove,
I do invoke the great, almighty Jove,
To grant me patience to address the swain,
Who thus has caused ROLANDA to complain.
O, faithless swain, who thus deceived thy love,
Do thou not know there is a power above,
Who may for vengeance throw the fatal shaft,
And in a moment thee to JUDGMENT waft?
Oh! think how awful to be headlong hurled,
From the imperial throne, to the nether world;
With flaming vengeance, mid the dread abyss,
Where Satan's legions all do howl and hiss!
There, shrieking to dwell, midst infernal cries,
In burning flames, where the worm never dies!
Oh! think of this, and shun the wrath of Jove,
Whose thundering bolts, methinks, about thee rove,
Half determined for to strike thee dead,
If thou do (...) Rolanda quickly wed.
I conveyed these lines to ROLANDA's swain;
And then returned to the grove again.
Now Ceres spreads her mantle all around,
And with her bounty covers over the ground;
In autumn's lap, she leaves her golden store,
With busy man, and thinks of it no more:
The bending trees discharge their heavy load,
And Boreas whistles from his bleak abode.
All the tuneful reluctant quit the grove,
And each in search of winter quarters rove;
Quick to'rds the south to meet the genial ray,
On hasty pinions, some do bend their way;
Others, less knowing, or as fate designed,
In hollow trees, seek shelter from the wind;
'Till the genial ray, and the smiling spring,
Dispel the gloom, and call them forth to sing.
Now in the north, I saw a tempest rise,
With threatening aspect, grumbling through the skies;
Still opening wider, and disgorging fire,
With hideous roar, and aspect yet more dire;
The trembling cattle quick for shelter ran,
Into the houses of their guardian, man.
More hideous still, the swelling gloom appears;
And louder yet, the thunder fills our ears;
Earth trembles under its tremendous sound,
And gloomy darkness covers all around!
Now, in the Zenith, bursts the mighty roar
Of clashing elements; and then does pour,
Through stormy blazes down, the rapid rain,
Till ruddy torrents rush into the main!
Thus having spent its blaze and thundering shafts,
BOREAS more south the growling remnant wafts.
The sturdy Oak, and the proud, lofty Pine,
Yield to his blast, and to'rds the south recline.
The purling stream which glided from the well,
Is now imprisoned in an icy cell.
The verdant lawn is covered over with white;
And grazing cattle shudder at the sight;
A snowy mantle lastly hides the plain;
And Boreas whistles over his bleak domain:
All nature trembles at his piercing sound;
And gloomy winter draws his curtain round! --
Let not frail man now blame the power divine,
Whose wisdom through his various works does shine;
For, even now, when winter's piercing cold,
Makes nature shrink to'rds her primeval mould,
A renovating power runs through the whole,
From Cancer's claws, to the frore arctic pole:
The storms of winter shortly will be over,
And all the tuneful hail the Spring once more.
As a sprightly youth, after nightly rest,
Wakes in the morning with new vigor blessed;
With cheerful aspect, nimbly treads the plam,
As he pursues the round of day again;
Or, as the Sun, after a tedious night
Of darkness spent, hails the morning bright,
And all around us spreads the welcome day,
Dispels the gloom, and drives each mist away;
So will the Spring from her cold slumber rise,
And with new beauty ravish all our eyes.
While thus I spoke, bright Sol in full career,
Came rolling on and finished the year.
The sturdy Ram Constellation Aries.
looks back, but dares not face
His blazing aspect, nor obstruct his race.
The headstrong Bull Constel. Taurus.
now hears him rolling near,
And roars aloud to hail the blazing sphere!
Over his wide back, Sol rolls his fi'ry wheels,
Nor dares bright Taurus even spurn his heels.
The lovely Twins Constel. Gemini.
now feel the genial ray;
And all the tuneful hail the blooming may.
Meanwhile the shepherd haunts the shady grove
And purling stream, loud-singing to his drove.
All nature smiles with us in northern clime,
While all decays on the other side the line;
So wills the Lord, whose all-directing hand,
Rolls worlds and seasons round at his command!
Often on these blissful nights, for to descry
The course of planets through the aerial sky,
Or the spotted disk of Luna t'explore,
To lofty turrets the optic tube I bore.
Thence viewed Mercury, next the solar ball,
But seldom seen his body is so small,
In torrid circle, round the lamp of day,
Quickly flying in his annual way.
And next him, Venus, the bright evening star,
But more remote from Sol's celestial car,
Reflecting copiously her borrowed light,
Ere Luna rose, bright ruler of the night.
And then proud Mars, the ruddy god of war,
High in the zenith, in his fi'ry car;
Fierce-driving round the distant solar sphere;
Yet ends not soon the circle of his year:
Being more remote than we are from the sun,
He takes more time his yearly course to run.
Next I beheld that great and thundering god,
(Who, the heathens say, could shake with his nod,
The Earth's foundation, and celestial pole;
Nay, what is more, annihilate the whole!)
Great Jupiter, just rising in the East,
Whose body does twelve hundred times at least,
In magnitude, exceed this flying ball,
Which we inhabit and the WORLD do call;
But when compared with that, how very small!
With cloudy belts, this celestial sphere,
Through optic tube, tight-girded does appear;
And round it move in sacred, mystic dance,
Four smaller spheres, which often are seen to glance
From the opake side of this once rev'renc'd Jove,
And over his pallid disk in order move;
Meanwhile the whole move laboring round the Sun,
And thirty thousand miles an hour do run!
What rapid motion! yet, how long his year! --
Eleven of our's and ten months, very near!
Nor will his tedious year you more amaze,
Than, will, the shortness of his fleeting days,
Which scarce are five hours long: for in that time,
Revolves half round, his majesty sublime.
Lastly, Saturn, remotest of the whole,
Whose torrid zone is colder than our pole.
Sublimest planet seen through optic glass,
Whose body does six hundred times surpass,
In magnitude, this terrestrial ball,
Invites my muse into his frozen hall.
What a vast distance from the solar rays
(O, who can tell, Almighty God, thy ways!)
Is this huge orb compared with Mercury!
How torrid this, how frigid that must be,
Which, though so large, from Earth we scarcely see!
Five moons in order round his body dance,
As if to guard him against the quick advance
Of blazing comets, in their full career,
Which else, perchance, would crush that noble sphere.
These moons, on him, reflect the rays of light.
As on the Earth, does Luna, queen of night.
Nor does he solely trust his flying guard,
A rampart huge, some say of matter hard,
We see all round him, to our great surprise,
Built twenty-nine thousand miles in the skies!
This, all astronomers do call his ring;
But, of its use, I cannot truly sing.
Whether 'twas made in order to supply
That distant planet, in that frigid sky,
With heat by reflex beams; (Hypothesis
If you will allow, this reason's not amiss.)
Or whether it be not a satellite,
Whose rapid motion, to our feeble sight,
Makes an apparent ring (which is not more,
To me, improbable than that before)
Is yet unknown to man -- nor need we try,
Its sacred use, or substance to descry.
Thus surrounded on his aerial car,
Through optic tube, I viewed this distant star;
Though quick his motion, yet so long his race,
That thirty years but show his annual face! --
Return my wandering muse, nor seek to climb
Beyond the bounds of knowledge -- Orbs sublime,
Beyond this system, lead the muse astray;
Approach not therefore even the milky-way.
Obeying quick, my muse on speedy wing,
Flies headlong down, once more on Earth to sing.
Ye verdant scenes, well-pleased I quit the skies,
And, 'midst you rove, to ease my wandering eyes,
With you I find more happiness by far,
Than when I rode on Sol's celestial car;
Or sailed through ether on poetic wing,
And saw the planets make their yearly ring.
With you my muse, though of a wandering mind,
Could always sing, nor think herself confined.
Bright Sol now through the lovely Twins had ran,
And his flow course through Cancer just began;
I bade adieu to rural pleasures all,
And rode to Trenton's academic hall --
Ye curling fountains, and harmonious vales,
Fost ring breezes, and aromatic gales,
Verdant lawns, and woodland towering groves,
Tuneful songsters, and all ye grazing droves,
Shepherds and swains, and thou sweet-blooming spring,
Whose cheerful aspect makes all nature sing,
Reluctantly from you my muses part,
To touch a theme less pleasing to the heart,
The roaring peals of War! Hail, Trenton, hail!
To thee my muse quick-rushes from the vale.
Nor learned halls, nor gentle-gliding stream,
Nor ought but War, now swells my roving theme:
Methinks I see illustrious Washington,
Roused by the bloody plain of Lexington,
Fearless and brave, with martial sounds advance,
While trembling Hessians run, a crazy dance,
To seek for refuge, howling through the town,
Closely pursued by freemen of renown.
Into steep sellers, ovens, and hogsties,
They headlong tumble, groaning fearful cries.
Meanwhile their drums as timid beat to-arms,
With broken sound; not sound of War's Alarms.
Now the loud-roaring cannons rend the sky,
'Till bleeding Hessians "QUARTERS!" loudly cry,
And strike the British colors to the ground,
While shrieks of mercy echo all around! --
But hark! -- brave Washington loudly cries:
" Spare, spare the sword! nor slay these Hessian flies;
Only deprive the insects of their stings;
I Will send them where they cannot use their wings."
Thus have nine hundred men, inured to arms,
To martial sounds, and roaring wars alarms,
In wild confusion, laid down all their guns,
To Washington and Columbia's darling sons.
I Would not pass over his immortal name,
Without attempting for to sing his fame;
But my infant muse, and imperfect lays,
Can ill express the Heroes matchless praise.
Then let some Shakespeare strike the founding lyre,
Or some brave Milton, with poetic fire,
And soar aloft with some new strain sublime,
Beyond the reach of each dull-creeping rhyme;
From high Olympus, let the gods descend,
And to this poet their assistance lend;
While he, in strains heroic, sings the fame
Of Washington, and gilds his noble name.
O, let the sacred nine their aid diffuse,
In strains sublime, to inspire his chanting muse:
And may his song the sleeping echoes raise,
From their soft slumber to resound his praise;
'Till his glorious theme reaches every soul,
From the arctic, to the antarctic pole!
But if a genius with such matchless strain,
Cannot be found to sing our hero's fame,
The Sons of Freedom will, I hope, excuse
This imperfect strain, from a willing muse:
Come then, ye sacred nine, inspire my song
With phrase sublime, and gliding numbers strong;
Heroic measure, teach me to command,
And justly praise, the glory of this land,
GEORGE WASHINGTON! who, though advanced in years,
Disdained subjection to bold British peers;
But, when Columbia loudly called him forth,
Displayed at once, his galantry and worth;
Of her landforces, took the chief command,
And wisely ruled them with his martial hand;
Checked England's pride -- broke her despotic band --
And gained Freedom for his native land! --
O, could I sing, his conduct through the whole,
His feeling heart and sympathetic soul;
His love of Freedom, and his martial skill;
His pride to conquer, and dislike to kill;
His perseverance in his country's cause,
To banish tyrants and despotic laws;
And, in a word, his patriotic zeal
For his native land, and the public weal;
My glorious theme should then, on golden wing,
Through foreign climes, and distant nations ring!
But to do this requires a wiser hand,
And higher strains than I can now command.
O, may no trifling bard, with creeping lays,
Ever attempt to sing his matchless praise;
But may some Milton, full of lyric sound,
Whose matchless strain whole nations will astound,
To sing his praises, speedily be found!
Now rural songs invite my roving theme,
To the green margin of yon purling stream,
Where the young student, to unbend his mind,
Leaps lively round, and quaffs the evening wind.
Bright sol was sinking through the western grove,
The shepherd homeward singing to his drove,
Bissected Luna (may I use the phrase?)
Was just emerging from the solar rays;
The tuneful songsters all had quit their strain,
When Daphne thus to Strephon did complain:
"Oh, my Strephon, to you alone I Will tell,
The mournful tale, what late to me befell --
But, do not startle at the tragic sound,
Nor let my tears your manly sense astound --
Last night as we, well pleased, did walk along
This verdant lawn, and sang a mutual soug,
Our voice was heard by some designing clown,
Who, with the news, ran quickly into town;
And told my parents, a malicious tale,
That he had seen us in yon lonesome vale." --
She could no more -- her sobbing sighs expressed,
With flowing tears, to Strephon all the rest.
Then fired with noble ardour, thus the youth,
With manly voice exclaimed: "O, sacred truth!
Thou only know, how falsely w're accused;
And the just Gods how Daphne's been ill-us'd!
But, cease my Daphne, cease to shed those tears;
And know, thy Strephon soon will end thy fears:
Ere tomorrow's sun sinks beneath the plain,
By all the Gods! I Will end a life of pain,
Or he shall die who dared defile thy name!"
"Not so my Strephon," Daphne gently cried,
"The gods are witness that we are belied. --
Why would thou then venture to end thy days,
To be avenged of what a blackguard says?
Our mutual bliss depends not on his fall,
But on ourselves, and the great God of all." --
Thus Daphne spoke to appease her lovers heart;
And thus again young Strephon did impart:
My life, my Daphne, my all that I prize,
Can, then; thy Strephon stop those heavy sighs?
Say, does our future happiness depend
On nuptial bands which naught but death can rend?
If so, let Hymen, ere the approach of day,
With torches bright, through the high milky-way
Descend, and wave his ever-binding wand
Over both our heads and tie the nuptial band:
O, speak my Daphne, let me know your mind,
Or if you fault with my proposals find.
The charming Daphne blushed a silent hint,
Which from the fair sex always means consent.
This happy pair are strangers now to strife,
And bless the day they became man and wife.
To rural scenes once more I bid adieu,
The southern states and martial plains to view;
And down the Delaware's majestic tide,
With sails all full, harmoniously we ride.
Now round Henlopen with a pleasant gale,
For Carolina, south, we brisky sail;
On Hatteras our bark was nearly stranded,
But scapeing safe in Charleston we landed.
On a peninsula of sandy lands,
Between two rivers, this proud city stands;
Rich in her commerce, prodigal of wealth,
Gay in appearance, but no friend to health.
In summer scorching with the solar rays,
Each blooming beauty rapidly decays;
The sprightly youth and the more active man,
Forget their springs, and court the ladies fan.
And ah, how many in the prime of life,
Are snatched from father, brother, sister, wife!
How many orphan children here are left,
By cruel death, of every friend bereft! --
But lo, I see a superstructure rise,
Magnificently grand it meets the skies;
An asylum for the distressed young,
TO improve their minds and cultivate their tongue;
To screen the helpless orphan from all harm,
From summer heat and the cold winter storm.
This pride of Carolina Orphan house.
will command,
The free donation from the generous hand,
While there is a helpless orphan in the land.
This sickly clime (if I may speak the truth)
Can scarcely rear a likely, active youth;
And if you travel Carolina round,
Where wealth and luxury so much abound,
A rosy cheek is scarcely to be found!
But yet the fair possess those other charms,
Which please the lover and his bosom warms;
A graceful marriage and genteel attire;
A modest mien that sets his soul on fire;
Accomplished manners and education,
With the art of pleasing in conversation;
They feel compassion for a lovers flame;
But interest -- interest, is their ruling aim!
Here let me show how once I felt those charms,
And wished a fair Car'linean in my arms.
To Miss --, in 1790.
I.
Begin my mournful muse, begin and sing,
Till plaintive murmurs echo through the grove;
Let hills and dales with these sad numbers ring.
Ah! woe is me who cannot cease to love!
II.
Adieu, my fair, for evermore adieu!
May ruling angels ever be your guide!
O, may the man you bless but love as true
As he whose hand you lately have denied.
III.
No more I with your milk-white hand shall play,
Nor gently press thee to my ardent breast;
No more enjoy the pleasures of a day;
Denied thy sight -- I am deprived of rest.
IV.
No joyful bell on Sundays will I hear,
Nor watch to see my fairest walk along;
No more to church accompany my dear,
Nor hear the pleasing accents of her tongue.
V.
Ah, did they know who spread the false report,
How much they have added to a lover's pain;
Or did they feel the anguish I support,
They would not add more fuel to my flame.
VI.
I Will go and seek some solitary grove,
Where purling streams murmur through the vale;
There, with Vallonia, pensively I Will rove,
And to the weeping willows tell my tale.
VII.
In vain I try my matchless love to tame,
Or seek for pleasures with another fair:
In vain, alas! to check my growing flame,
Or stop the headlong torrent of despair!
VIII.
Some distant clime erelong I will explore,
Nor dread the billows of the foaming main;
O, then, adieu! -- Adieu for evermore! --
I never will see thy angel-face again.
IX.
When I am plowing through the stormy deep,
Many a league from this your native shore;
Should you till then these pensive verses keep,
Believe them true, but never read them more:
X.
Lest they should chance to swell your loving breast,
Or cause the sympathetic tear to flow;
Which could not ease your swain, though much distressed,
For naught but thee or death will end his woe?
So much for Love, which is my favorite strain,
Now on, my muse, and view the martial plain.
Redoubts and ramparts in a chain I see,
Across the neck from Cooper to Ashly; The names of the rivers between which
Charleston is built.

These martial bulwarks all are tumbling down,
That were erected to defend (...).
Methinks I now hear Clinton's The British General.
(...) roar,
And see his forces spread from shore to shore;
Threatmening fi'ry vengeance to the town,
Unless fair Freedom's colors were pulled down!
Heroic Lincoln The American General.
would not deign to yield,
But bravely strove to force them from the field:
His cannons poured their roaring vengeance out,
On Clinton's troops, from each half-man'd redoubt.
Mean while the British bombs came flaming down,
Disgorging fire and slaughter through the town!
The siege continued thus for thirty days,
During which time the town seemed in a blaze;
At length, o'erpower'd by superior numbers,
The gallant Lincoln reluctantly surrenders!
This warlike hero, stranger to all fear,
Over freedom's cause now shed a martial tear;
Seeing Columbia's colors were pull d down,
And Clinton reign triumphant over the town.
The God of War saw Lincoln's cause was glorious,
And in due time made Freedom's Sons victorious!
ADDRESS TO FORTUNE. (Supposed to have been written by an Old Bachelor.)
O, cruel Fortune, say, what have I done,
That I must lie these wintry nights alone?
Tell me, blind goddess, I conjure thee tell,
How long must I endure this second hell?
Why am I thus debarred the joys of life,
The fond embraces of a loving wife?
Why doomed to pass the prime of life alone,
Till all the joys of youthful days are flown?
The beast that proudly treads the desert ground,
And all those creatures which we see around,
Follow Nature with unremitted sway,
And the Almighty's prime command Increase and multiply.
obey.
Why art thou, goddess, to a beast more kind,
Than to us Old Bachelors
nuisance of the human kind?
O that the mighty ruler of the skies,
Would hear my prayer and open thy slumbering eyes;
That thou might see the hardships we endure,
And bless us with a seasonable cure;
A fond, indulgent, lovely, youthful wife,
To smooth the rugged paths of human life.
VERSES ADDRESSED To a Young Gentleman at the Charleston College-Academy, in
1790.
If thou the paths of science would explore,
And store with knowledge pure thy youthful mind,
Let thy ambition beyond trifles soar,
And scorn to be by others left behind.
And when thy bosom glows with strong desire
TO excel in knowledge and to spread thy fame,
Let no illusion check the sacred fire,
Nor blast the glory of thy rising name.
But let fair science ever be thy guide,
And future bards will sing thy learned name;
For, trust the muse, the lofty steps of pride,
With little knowledge, never will spread thy same.
A SPECIMEN OF UNLIMITED SUBLIME POETRY.
With man my strain begins,
And of his mental powers divine,
My rhymeless muse will sing.
Speak ye adepts in knowledge,
Say, whence these roving thoughts
Which waft the mind to distant climes,
New regions to explore?
Whence this thirst for knowledge,
Which, after traversing this flying ball,
Springs aloft, circles round the sun,
Views all the planets in their airy course,
And marks their revolutions?
Then traces comets in their full career,
Through frigid regions so remote,
That our blazing sun,
Viewed thence through optic tube,
Would twinkle as a star!
While musing thus I write,
The muses waft me from those earthly climes,
Space immense t'explore.
Aloft I soar with more than eagle-speed,
Laboring through the blue abyss,
Till the terraqueous globe,
Like Luna bright,
With borrowed light,
Slowly moving in her airy course,
Gibbous I view below!
Farther still,
On imagination's airy wing I soar.
I now behold the little earth,
With pallid face,
Decreasing fast,
Amid the fixed stars:
Lo, while I speak, she disappears!
Still I pursue the fleeting thought,
And view the sun with twinkling light,
As small as Aldebaran.
The frigid comets,
In their aphelion slowly creeping,
Where no genial ray has ever reached,
I now behold!
Farther still I fly,
Through regions bright and worlds unknown,
Till Sol I see no more!
I Am now encircled with a dozen suns,
All pouring their resplendent rays
In torrent streams around!
Still on I rush;
Nor is my thirst for knowledge now less keen.
Scarcely a thought of the earthly ball,
(I Am so far gone through boundless space)
Has place now in my mind.
Stars which from those suns never were seen,
Millions of miles I Have left behind,
In my aerial flight!
Still new systems open to my view,
And thousands disappear!
Meanwhile I fly as swift as thought can ride,
Now sinking low,
Now rising high,
And circling round ten thousand flying spheres,
I still rush on and leave them all behind!
Numbers fail t'express,
The regions I have now explored.
Still on I fly,
Resolved to pierce the vast abyss
Unto its utmost bounds,
And see the end of the stupendous whole!
But I Am still encircled with those glorious orbs,
Dispersed widely through the blue profound!
Can thought go farther than I now have gone?
Yes, farther still, the human mind can soar.
Then let me fly as swift as light can glance,
With quickening speed through those bright orbs,
Till Chaos, Darkness, or unbounded void,
Stops my bold career; --
Hark! -- Hark! --
Methinks a voice than human more,
From God's celestial throne,
Loudly thus proclaims:
'Too aspiring man! check thy airy flight,
And hear the voice of heaven:
The thought that flies as quick as light,
Might pierce the vast abyss,
Till time should be no more,
And never reach its bounds!' --
This astounds my senses!
Where am I? -- Whence came I?
I Am lost in infinite perfection,
And still unsatisfied!
Now like a comet in its frore aphelion,
Imagination moves:
First, slowly creeping through the wide abyss,
She seeks the path which led her hence;
Now stands amazed, in contemplation lost,
And views the immense profound!
On speedy wing she now recoils,
Laboring through millions of flying spheres,
Returning whence she soared.
And as the comets when they 'proach the sun,
With quickening motions move;
So flies my mind through those bright orbs,
To find at last,
This little spot,
Whence the muses made me soar aloft,
To view celestial scenes. --
Thus imagination on her airy wing,
Has led me on through boundless space,
From these diurnal scenes.
And now those orbs sublime,
She fain would trace through ages back,
And see them spring from Chaos!
Nor would she then rest satisfied;
The cause that made them spring,
And gave them motion,
Next she fain would know;
And how this cause, eternal and alone,
Could be without beginning!
There Is th'astounding thought!
Here again I stand amazed,
In admiration lost,
Nor can I trace the eternal cause,
From which all nature sprang,
To its beginning. --
Say then ye wiser heads,
Why does the human mind aspire to know,
Things beyond her sphere,
The greatness, essence, and primeval state
Of the stupendous whole?
If naught immortald welt within my frame,
I, like the brute creation, then could rest,
When the calls of nature were supplied.
But this I cannot do; and hence conclude,
Something immortal in me dwells,
Which thus aspires to view the perfect whole!
But what this something is, he only knows
Whose works no thought can bound;
Whose beginning we cannot trace;
Whose immensity we cannot conceive;
Who rules the amazing whole;
Who sits on heaven's high throne,
Jehovah, Jove and Lord,
Eternal, and alone!
Man shall be Free.
A NEW SONG.
Written February 25, 1793. AIR -- God save great Washington.
I.
Goddess of liberty,
Friend of equality,
Let man be free;
Fame, let thy trumpet sound,
Through the whole world around!
Let heaven and earth resound,
Man shall be Free!
II.
Liberty wave thy wand,
Over every foreign land,
Till man is free.
Tyrants no more shall say,
Mankind shall us obey,
France showed them Gallic play,
And she is free!
III.
Downfall to monarchy,
And aristocracy;
We will be free!
Repeat it over and over;
Let every voice encore;
Despots shall rule no more;
Man shall be Free!

