AN ORATION Delivered at LENOX, the 4th July, 1793, the Anniversary of American
Independence.

By ELISHA LEE, Esquire.

STOCKBRIDGE: Printed by LORING ANDREWS. M, D, CCXCIII.

-- APOLOGY --
IT was not the intention of the Author to submit the following pages to the
public, through the medium of the Press. A very shor^ time intervened, from
the notice given him by the Committee appointed to mak^ arrangements for the
celebration of the Anniversary of American Independ^ence, of their choice of
the person to deliver a public Address on the occasion to the day on which he
was to meet his fellow citizens, for that purpose -- The critic will make
allowance for ideas thus has^^^y arrang^d, while the ex^ercise of the candor
of a very respectable list of (...), at whose (...) request the work has been
committed to the Pr^ss, (...) with (...) doubted.

RESPECTED FRIENDS AND FELLOW CITIZENS,
AGREEABLY to arrangements made on the last anniversary, by a committee of
patriotic gentlemen, we are now c^nvened to celebrate the auspicious day that
gave b^rth to the liberty of Amer^ca. Seventeen years have this day elapsed
since the declaration of her INDEPENDENCE.

From the multiplicity of objects, which, upon this interesting occasion, force
themselves upon the imagination, what choice for your en^^rtainment shall be
made by the speaker? Shall he trace the more hidden and remote, or point out
the immediate causes of the event, which we celebrate? Shall he pronounce a
panegyric upon the ardent and heroic spirit of our countrymen, who were the
immediate actors? Shall he recapitulate the consequences which have resulted
from the revolu^^on, or, with a prophetic enthusiasm, anticipate those which
yet may ensue in the future happiness of our country?

When I look around upon an audience so numerous and respectable (...) when I
consider the novelty of my own situation, and the arduous task assigned me, I
feel a diffidence, which I cannot conceal. When I re^flect that the
INDEPENDENCE of America has annually been the ^^eme of the learned orator, and
experienced Statesman, shall I not de^^^^ir of furnishing any thing, either new
or entertaining? But I am re^^eved from this embarrassment, by a reliance on
the candor of the au^^tory, who will reflect that the performance is designed
for their grati^^cation: I am encouraged by a belief that the emancipation of
our country, and the freedom of man, will never be too often the subjects of
popular applause, nor ever bec^^e uninteresting to the PATRIOT and
PHILANTHROPHIST.

If we consider the (...) to the establishment of American INDEPEND^^^^ (...)
not overlook the character of our ancestors, or the (...) their emigration from
Europe. The rage for (...) the reign of the first JAMES, resulting from his
bigoted att^^hment to the hierarchy, and the penal laws made against
non-conformists, were the immediate causes of the first settlements in America.
Men, whose minds had but just been libe^rated from the shackles of the Papal
tyranny, and whose hearts were impressed with the awful dignity and sublime
simplicity of the sacre^ writings, (not long before committed to their hands,)
were fired wit^ indignation at such severe restraints. Unable to escape the
l^sh of the penal laws, and ardently desirous of establishing a pure church,
the^ formed the adventurous project of withdrawing from their native coun^try,
and of settling in the wilds of America.

Perhaps there is no passion, which rouses the human mind to such (...) height
of magnanimity and heroism, as the indignation, which religio^^ enthusiasm
feels, under the scourge of oppression.

The love of religious and civil LIBERTY is intimately, and necessaril^ allied:
Our ancestors, who first settled in America, keenly felt their united force;
and, during the progress of their arduous undertaking^ stood in need of all
their inspiration.

The very great equality in the circumstances of the first emigrant^ and the
natural independence inspired by a situation at the distance o^ three thousand
miles from the pa^ent country, were favorable to civi^ liberty. The same
period, too, which, during half a century, saw a vio^lent contest between the
rights of the people and the prerogatives of the Crown, furnished new
emigrations to America. These consisted o^ men, who were universally the
partisans of LIBERTY.

The forms of government which were established by the colonists were in a high
degree democratical. A division of the legislative pow^ers, in imita^ion of the
British Constitution, was very generally and judi^ciously retained. At the same
time an hereditary order of nobility, an^ the unequal, unnatural, and absurd
arrangements for the election of the members of the British House of Commons
were, from obvious causes with equal propriety discarded.

In addition to the circumstances already mentioned, calculated, w^ may
observe, to inspire our ancestors with rational ideas of Liberty, an^ preparing
the way to INDEPENDENCE, some of their civil institutions (...) covered the
highest wisdom, and conduced directly to the same illustriou^ event. As a proof
of the justice of this remark, need I mention the parceling the country into
small towns and districts; giving to the inh^^bitants of each corporate powers
and privileges; obliging them to est^^blish and support SCHOOLS for the
education of youth, and to settle and maintain teachers of morality and
religion? These institutions, which obtained more especially in New England,
diffused among the whole body of the people, a greater degree of useful, moral
and political knowledge than, perhaps, ever before existed among the people of
any other coun^ry.

The war, which broke out in the year 1755, and which was compromised by the
treaty of Paris hastened on this gl^rious EVENT. During that war, the principal
seat of which was in America, the number and ex^rtions of the colonial troops
gave the parent country an exalted opinion of our wealth, population and
resources. The conduct of that war, under the auspices of the immortal CHATHAM,
was the most glorious in the British annals; but its conclusion left the nation
emcumbered with an immense addition to her debt. Hence originated the system of
American taxation -- To carry this system into execution, there ensued a black
catalogue of oppressive measures, taken up injudiciously and upon slight
consideration, la^d aside upon the appearance of opposition, capriciously
reassumed, and eventually, with a fatal blindness and obstinacy, pursued, from
the era of the Stamp Act to the final di^u^ion of the empire.

Upon this occasion, and before the gentlemen who are now present, a
ju^^ification of the opposi^ion of America to that iniquitous system, would be
unn^cessary, pe^haps impert^nent -- The claim on the part of Great Britain of a
parliamentary power to levy taxes without the consent of the Colonies, and to
bind them in all ^ases whatever, was a palpable deviation from every principle
of reason and justice, and a pointed violation of the chartered rights of the
Colonists, and of the spirit of the British consti^uti^n (...). To have made
such claim* required the unprincipled wantonness of power, to have acquiesced
in it, the baseness and timidity of slaves. These belonged not to Americans.
They opposed every appearance of the exercise of that claim, with a firmness
and unanimity, which n^thing but the most enlightened attention to their
rights, and a sacred regard for their prese^vation, could have ensured.

More than eighteen years have now circled through the heavens, since the blood
of brethren was first spilt in the guilty contest that ensued; since ^ate
withdrew the gilded curtain from the villain despotism, and pointed the
indignation of astonished man against the author of his political misery! --
Upon thy clouded b^ow, O LEXINGTON, on that eventful day, hovered the G^NIUS of
EMPIRE, and the DESTINY of MAN! The remembrance of that day, when thy green
bosom was sprinkled with the blo^d of thy sons, is like the shock of the
lightning, like the inspiration of a divinity!

The commencement of hostilities animated the freemen of America, with one
soul. Whilst imagination fails in the attempt to paint that ard^r of
enthusiasm, which from Saint-Croix to St. Mary, agitated the bosom of America;
PHILOSOPHY will forever, with exultation, recollect the dignifi^d proceedings
of the American CON^^ESS, and with a sacred pride, hold them up, for the
imitation of future ages -- So great fortitude in the midst of dangers, such
cool and temperate fi^mness in the m^st alarming and tumultuous periods, such
candor and sob^iety triumphing over the phrenzy of passion, in no deliberative
bodies, of other ages or countries, were before ever exhibited!

The situation of America, from the commencement of hostilities to the public
declaration of INDEPENDENCE, was a solecism in the history of political
revolutions. The whole continent rung with the din of arms hostile to the
invading troops; but the people had not yet contemplated the idea of a
separation from Great Britain. The Congress pursued the most spirited measures
for the prosecution of a defensive war; and yet they presented to his British
Majesty a humble and loyal petition for the redress of grievances.

This petition, to the perpetual disgrace of British politics and humanity, was
treated with indignity. Contracts were entered into for (...) hire of German
mercenaries. Measures the most irritating and alarming were adopted by the
British administration. The consequence was such as might reasonably have been
expected; the eyes of America were opened to see the natural issue of such a
contest, and the dream of rec^nciliation was dispelled. The idea of petitioning
with one hand, whilst the o^^er brandished the sword of defiance, was finally
di^carded. The propriety also of streng^hening the cause of America, with
foreign alliances, early occurred To negocia^e these with any probability of
success, required a renunciation on the part of America of all political
connection with Great Britain.

The ERA had now arrived, for the establishment of the EMPIRE of LIBERTY, in
the NEW WORLD.

The GENERAL CONGRESS, on the ever memorable fourth of July, in the year 1776,
"appealing to the SUPREME JUDGE of the world for the rectitude of their
intentions, solemnly published and declared that the United Colonies were, and
of right ought to be, free and INDEPENDENT STATES; and that they were absolved
from all allegiance to the British Crown. And for the support of this
declaration, with a firm reliance upon the protection of Divine Providence,
they mutually pledged to each other their lives, their fortunes, and their
sacred honor."

The remembrance of that august transaction we now celebrate. This day, this
glorious day, by the united voice of the millions of America, is dedicated to
the exultations of PATRIOTISM, the triumphs of LIBERTY, and to gratitude to
HEAVEN!

The sacred " pledge" of American " honor" was not forfeited; her "reliance
upon the protection of Divine Providence," was not in vain; and the Supreme
Judge of the world, to whom she had appealed, justifi^d "the rectitude of her
intentions," by accomplishing, after an eight years war, the object for which
she had fought!

The most illustrious actors on that theater of honor, have survived the storm
of war; they enjoy the rewards of patriotism, in the highest offices of the
government; they still continue to bless their country. -- Whilst the names of
WASHINGTON, ADAMS, and HAMILTON, give a luster and dignity to virtue; dear to
America, and forever sacred be the memory of THOSE, who fought and bled in so
righteous a cause.

Are not the spirits of MERCER, MONTGOMERY, and WARREN, from the regions of
immortality, looking down, with the sublimest transport, on the present
felicities of their country? Do I not hear a celestial choir chanting that
consolatary Ode "It Is delightful, it is honorable, to die for our country." Horace.
Others, who lived to see the cause of Liberty crowned with glorious success,
have since taken the highest stand in the TEMPLE of FAME. There a splendid
wreath of military honor encircles the brow of GREEN; and SCIENCE, rejoicing in
the acquisitions of her empire, and HUMANITY, brightening with new irradiations
of benevolence, minister to the immortal spirit of FRANKLIN.

The magnitude of the American revolution, and the consequent happiness of our
country, deserve our attention -- America, from a state of undefined dependence
on Great Britain, has assumed an illustrious rank among the nations of the
Earth. Her trade, no longer the monopoly of a single foreign nation, has
extended itself to every quarter of the globe. Mercantile enterprise, no longer
restricted, has penetrated the remotest regions. The Baltic and the
Mediterranean, the Brazils and the Bay o^ Hudson, China and the Indies, the
immense Eastern and Pacific Oceans, are witnesses of our commerce.

Whilst our citizens have enriched themselves, by their commercial industry,
the means have been furnished, by the most imperceptible species of taxation,
to establish funds adequate to all the objects of national justice and policy.
The permanent resources of our country, constituting the common stock of the
happiness and enjoyments of our citizens, in their hands rema^n untouched:
These await her call, if any great occasion should render them necessary.

America, from her fortunate situation, and from the mild spirit of the
government, is a stranger to that system of war and taxes, of ambition and
misery, which is the scourge of Europe, and which subjects to the extremest
wretchedness nine tenths of her inhabitants:

Where "one man,
Compounded and made up like other men
Of elements tumultuous, in whom lust
And folly, in as ample measures meet,
As in the bosoms of the slaves he rules,
Becomes a despot absolute, and boasts
Himself the only freeman of his land;
And when he pleases, and on whom he wills,
Makes war, with any, or with no pretense
Of provocation given, or wrong sustained;
Forces the beggarly last doit, by means
That his own humor dictates, from the clutch
Of poverty, that thus he may procure
His thousands, weary of penurious life,
A splendid opportunity to die!" Cooper's Poems.

To a system so replete with debasement and misery, may America forever
continue a stranger!

The increase of our population, and the extension of our settlements, have
been still more considerable than the growth of our commerce. The circumstances
relative to this subject, which will not fail to astonish posterity, can
neither pass unnoticed, or unadmired by the present ge^eration. History
furnishes us with nothing similar to the amazing oc^urrences which in this
regard are taking place in America. That a ^ountry of such extent as the United
States, should, in a period little ^onger than a century and an half, be
converted from a wilderness co^ered with forests, into the busy haunts of men,
is a spectacle never before presented to human observation. The enquirers into
the ancient ^opulation of Europe, have doubted whether the number of her
inhabit^nts have greatly increased within the last two thousand years. The
small ^epublics of Greece were founded many ages before the time of Solon and
Lycurgus; Italy also saw a long period intervene between the build^ng of Rome
and the establishment of the consular power: And yet ^any cen^uries elapsed
after the times last mentioned, before those mi^ute regions became generally
occupied by the genuine Greeks and Romans. In America, since the commencement
of the wa^, a million souls ^ave been added to our population; within the same
period a country ^s extensive as the Island of Great Britain has been covered
with people! The eastern counties of our own Commonwealth, the northern
counties of New Hampshire, Pennsylvania, and Vermont, the western districts ^f
New York, and the back country of the Southern States, will amply ^rove the
truth ^f this remark.

Within the last eighteen years the GENIUS of CULTIVATION ^as explored his way
over the appallachian hills, descended into the fer^^le regions on the Ohio and
Mississipi, and conducted to the bosom of that delightful wilderness more than
SEVENTY THOUSAND inhabitants -- In consequence of the American Revolution,
political knowledge has emerged from her state of pupilage, and directed her
attention to its most deserving object, the equal happiness of all men.

The doctrine of an equality of rights, as founded in nature and the reason of
things, has been vindicated. The system of representative ^overnments, ground^d
on the choice of the people, as the legitimate source of authority, has
extended itself, and been more firmly establish^ed. The right of a people to
alter the forms of their governments, o^ to establish new ones, whenever it
becomes necessary to their politic^^ happiness, has received the fortunate
^anction of American experience.

The animating principles of civil Liberty have not been confined (...)
America. The FIRE that was kindled here, and which spread its sal^^tary light
over the NEW-WORLD, has beamed its rays on the EAST^ERN HEMISPHERE, and burns
in Europe. During the last ag^ a spark was struck out by the collision of the
Parliaments and Clergy (...) France: This had not become extinct at the period
of the America^ war. The French troops, who fought in America, returned to
Europ^ the advocates of freedom. PHILOSOPHY too raised her piercin^ voice, and
despotism trembled for his fate. A new order of things com^menced in France,
and we have seen the immense fabrics of religio^^ superstition and civil
tyranny, swept away with the besom of destruction.

Whilst the enlightened sons of FREEDOM, and the children (...) BENEVOLENCE
have compassionated the groans of their oppresse^ brethren, whilst with
transport they have seen the debasing corruptions (...) the old world shirink
at the regenerating touch of LIBERTY, and a ne^ vista opening into future
times, for the happiness of men; Ah! (...) h^ve their souls been sickened with
the sad reverse! How weeps HU^MANITY the outrages she endures!

O, LOUIS! thou mildest monarch of a race of Kings, the SWOR^ which thou
heldest out for the defense of American Liberty, has pier^^ed thy generous
heart! LIBERTY is wounded by the atrocity of the unworthy fate -- INDIGNANT
JUSTICE has flown from the unha^^ow^ed scene -- and anarchy and assassination
are prowling over thy tomb!

The flame of Liberty, which in America was mild and benign, i^ France has
become a Volcano of fire, that threatens to bury in one pr^^miscuous ruin the
monuments of despotism, and all the works of civiliz^^tion.

In America, justice, moderation, order and religion disdained not (...) follow
in the train of Liberty: in France -- But perhaps I am entering (...) dangerous
ground: Perhaps a revolution from the ext^emes of Arbitra^^ Power, to the fair
midway region of temperate LIBERTY, without vibration toward Anarchy and
Licentiousness is imp^ssible. Whilst (...) our speculations are confounded
amidst the contradictory variety of European information, there is perhaps but
one point at which it is safe to rest. If the renovation of France be the
design of heaven, it will not ultimately be defeated, neither by the crimes of
the daemoniacs of Paris, nor by the efforts of a confederacy, the most
extensive and formidable, that ever astonished mankind.

Whilst Europe is involved in the horrors and devastations of war, AMERICA is
reposing in the calm sunshine of PEACE; her prosperity, the envy, and her
GOVERNMENT the ambition, of the eastern world. To trace the vestiges of so
unparralleled a progress in the career of glory and happiness, is beyond the
scope of the present address. A single ^ketch is all that can be expected.

The dissolution of the Colonial governments, at the time of the declaration of
Independence, was followed by the establishment of Constitutions chosen by the
citizens of the respective Colonies -- Each Colony became an independent
republic -- To combine these in one general union, articles of confederation
were adopted -- By virtue of these articles, the federal representatives were
invested with little more than a mere nominal power, or the authority of
recommendation -- The pressure of the war, and the enthusiasm of Liberty,
produced a patriotism and unanimity which superseded the necessity of energetic
laws, and concealed the weakness of the Federal Government. Upon the conclusion
of the war, the debility of this system became palpable.

America was threatened with a universal disorganization. The dissentions and
jealousies, the interested politics, and wild anarchy of the Grecian Republics,
were about to be repeated on the great theater of America. In this gloomy
eclipse of the hopes of our country, a light sprung up from the midst of
darkness. The CONSTITUTION of the United States was formed by a Convention of
the most illustrious characters, and adopted by the citizens of the respective
states. To this source, we trace the present happiness of America. This event
forms another glorious ERA, in the history of our country. The leading
speculations of gloomy politicians, on this subject, have been convicted of
sophistry, by the irresistible light of truth and experience -- Under the
AUSPICIOUS ADMINISTRATION of this CONSTITUTION, have we not seen the
accomplishment of all the great ^bj^ct^, for which it was designed? Have we not
seen a more perfect union formed, justice established, domestic tranquillity
ensured, and the general welfare (...) promoted?

YES! all America, in the particulars I have men^ioned, realizes the most
important blessings -- Disorder and confusion have fled beyond the Atlantic
Ocean -- The demon insurrection, divested of his savage nature, has assumed
the mild virtues of humanity, and become a pa^tiz^n of ORDER -- PUBLIC CREDIT
has obtained a glorious resurrection; and the hearts of the war-worn soldier,
and of the destitute widow and orphan, have been made to sing for joy.

An Eulogy upon the FISCAL ARRANGEMENTS, and other great and wise measures of
the Congress, since the adoption of the CONSTITUTION, is superfluous; -- Their
highest praise is written in the most SPLENDID CHARACTERS, on the WHOLE FACE of
our country; it is painted in the most amiable colors, on the HAPPINESS and
PROSPERITY of all our citizens!

Yes, my respected auditors, amidst the convulsions and miseries of Europe,
every true friend of America finds new motives of attachment to his country --
Where shall we find a region blessed with so great natural advantages? Where
shall we discover so much useful knowledge and information so equally, so
universally diffused, amongst all classes of the people? look through every
quarter of the globe, examine the history of all past ages, where shall we find
an example of equal happiness and prosperity enjoyed by any other people on the
earth?

Whilst the face of our country, under the improving hand of agriculture,
brightens with smiles, and the wilderness blossoms like the rose; whilst
industry is sure of the reward of opulence, and enterprise opens a thousand
avenues to wealth; whilst the hearts of all our citizens are filled with food
and gladness, and the cherub health, with that rosy bloom which "Nature's fair
and cunning hand laid on" Shakespeare.
Gives the highest relish to every enjoyment; have we not reason to love our
country?

Whilst the fabric of our government unites with the bl^ssings of LIBERTY, the
dignity of ORDER, and the energy of POWER; whilst impartial justice administers
the laws, in protecting innocence, and guarding the acquisitions of industry;
whilst the rights of nature are secured from the ravages of anarchy and the
grasp of oppression; have we not reason to venerate that government?

YES, my fellow citizens, we LOVE our COUNTRY; we GLORY in her CONSTITUTION;
and we HONOR her illustrious ADMINISTRATORS!

Let haggard envy calumniate those virtues which she cannot imitate: Let
anarchy, under the semblance of PATRIOTISM, bellow his apprehensions of the
dangers of L^BERTY, whilst he conceals a poignard to stab her to the heart: We
know their false and hollow voice; their malice shall not disturb our
tranquillity: We respect those VIRTUES which have dignified our COUNTRY*

Whilst, on this occasion, we celebrate the commencement of AMERICAN LIBERTY,
to secure the perpetuity of HER reign, let us rally around the standards of
order, stability, and obedience to the laws. Let PEACE and GOOD WILL toward
men be the scope of HER ambition, and the badge of HER distinction, and we may
hope that her EMPIRE will be IMMORTAL*

THE END.

