LAWS AND REGULATIONS OF THE MASSACHUSETTS SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING AGRICULTURE.

CONTAINING, The NAMES of its present OFFICERS and MEMBERS, LIST of PREMIUMS,
etc.

WITH Some interesting EXTRACTS from FOREIGN and DOMESTIC PUBLICATIONS.

BY THE TRUSTEES.

PRINTED AT BOSTON, BY ISAIAH THOMAS AND EBENEZER T. ANDREWS, FAUST's STATUE,
No. 45, NEWBURY STREET. MDCCXCIII.

TO THE PUBLIC.
THE imperfect state of husbandry in general, in this c^untry, is too well
known to require any discussion. This circumstance suggested the origin of the
Massachusetts Society for promoting Agriculture.

The farmers of this state, are equal, and perhaps superior, in their knowledge
of agriculture, to their fellow citizens in any part of the Union; but we must
acknowledge, that the science and practice of husbandry in some foreign
countries, are far superior to our seize. One great object of this
Society will be* to obtain and publish an account of the improvements of other
countries, and to procure models of machines in which they excel. It will
attend to whatever relates to rural affairs, and especially to promote an
increase of the products of our lands, such as the improvements of soil by
tillage, manures, clearing, and draining* the cultivation of such grasses, and
other articles, as may be most advantageous to the farmer, and of course to all
classes of people, and such as are best adapted to our soil and climate; the
most profitable kinds of seed, with the time and manner of sowing and
cultivating them; the best method of propagating and preserving fruit trees
from insects, particularly from the canker worm; also, the best method of
increasing forest trees. The feeding and management of neat cattle and sheep,
and the best method of making and preserving butter and cheese.

To encourage the utmost attention to these objects, the Society will, from
time to time, offer such premiums as their funds will admit. They consider
agriculture in its various branches and connexious as highly interesting to all
mankind. The wealth and importance of the community, is so intimately connected
with, and dependent on the extent and success of agriculture, that every one
who is desirous of advancing the happiness, prosperity, and dignity of his
country, its commerce, and convenient subsistence of individuals, will lend his
aid to this most useful institution.

The members of this Society have no other interest, than the benefit of the
human species at large. They consider themselves members in common, of the
great family, and expect no other advantage than the satisfaction of being
beneficial to themselves, with the rest of the community.

They therefore, in consequence of the charge they have taken on themselves,
call in the most earnest manner, on every practical farmer, to send to either
of the Secretaries in Boston, all the information which he possesses on any
subject connected with agriculture. The Society wish to obtain the modes of
practice in different parts of this country, but particularly of this state,
that they may publish the same; that one part may be benefited by the
improvements of the other. There are many persons in every community, who make
improvements that perish with the possessor, merely for want of some place
where they may be perpetuated. The Society will feel obliged to every person
for their attention and communications, even if they possess nothing more than
is generally understood. Every correspondent has a right to withhold his name,
but if the names should appear, which the Society would prefer, and the
communications contain nothing extraordinary, they may be assured of the
gratitude as well as candor of the Society.

All persons elected honorary members, in whatever state or country, have a
right to be present at the semiannual meetings, in April and October, and are
invited to assist, by their communications to the Trustees, in advancing
husbandry.

This publication is designed to inform the members, who have not attended the
meetings, of the nature of the institution and regulations, and the public of
the general views of the Society, and to make the particular objects of
premiums, that have been already determined on, more universally known.

The Society call on every person, who feels inclined to suggest any other
objects for pecuniary rewards, to communicate them without reserve, to either
of the Secretaries, and as soon as their funds will admit, particular attention
will be paid to such communications.

LAWS AND REGULATIONS, etc.
ACT OF INCORPORATION.
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS. In the the year of our Lord, one thousand seven
hundred and ninety two.
An Act to incorporate and establish a Society by the name of the MASSACHUSETTS
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING AGRICULTURE.
WHEREAS very great and important advantages may arise to the community, from
instituting a Society for the purpose of promoting Agriculture, and diverse
persons having petitioned to this court to be incorporated into a Society for
that laudable purpose.

Be it therefore enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General
Court assembled, and by the authority of the same, That the said petitioners,
viz. Samuel Adams, John Avery, jun. Joseph Barrel, Martin Brimmer, Charles
Bulfinch, John Codman, Edward Cutts, Aaron Dexter, Thomas Durfee, Moses Gill,
Christopher Gore, Benjamin Guild, Stephen Higginson, Henry Hill, Samuel Holten,
Benjamin Lincoln, John Lowell, Jonathan Mason, Jonathan Mason, jun. Azor Orne,
Samuel Philips, Thomas Russel, Samuel Salisbury, David Sears, James Sullivan,
Cotton Tufts, Charles Vaughan, and Thomas Winthrop, together with such others
who shall become members thereof, be, and they are hereby incorporated into,
and made a body politic and corporate forever, by the name of the Massachusetts
Society for promoting Agriculture.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the said
corporation be, and are hereby declared and made capable in law of having,
holding, purchasing and taking in fee simple, or any less estate, by gift,
grant, devise, or otherwise, any lands, tenements, or other estate, real and
personal; provided that the annual income of the said real and personal estate,
shall not exceed the sum of ten thousand pounds, and also to sell, alien,
devise, or dispose of the same estate, real and personal, not using the same in
trade or commerce.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the said
corporation shall have full power and authority to make, have, and use a common
seal, and the same to break, alter, and renew at pleasure; that it shall be
capable in law to sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, answer and be
answered unto, defend and be defended, in all courts of record, or other courts
or places whatsoever, in all actions real and personal and mixed, and to do and
execute all and singular other matters and things, that to them shall, and may
appertain to do.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the said
corporation may make, establish and put in execution, such laws and regulations
as may be necessary to the government of said corporation, provided the same
shall in no case be repugnant to the laws and constitution of this state. --
And for the well governing of the said corporation, and the ordering their
affairs, they shall have such officers as they shall hereafter from time to
time elect and appoint; and such officers as shall be designated by the laws
and regulations of the said corporation for the purpose, shall be capable of
exercising such power for the well governing and ordering the affairs of the
said corporation, and calling and holding such occasional meetings for that
purpose, as shall be fixed and determined by the said laws and regulations.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the end and design
of the institution of the said Society is for the purpose of promoting useful
improvements in Agriculture.

And be it further enacted, That the place of holding the first meeting of the
said Society, shall be in the town of Boston, and that Samuel Adams, Esquire. be,
and he hereby is, authorized and empowered, to fix the time for holding the
said meeting, and to notify the same to the members of the said Society, by
causing the same to be published in one of the Boston newspapers, fourteen days
before the time fixed on for holding the said meeting.

In the HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES, March 7th, 1792. This Bill having had three
several readings, passed to be enacted. DAVID COBB, SPEAKER.
In SENATE, March 7th, 1792. This Bill having had two several readings, passed
to be enacted. SAMUEL PHILLIPS, PRESIDENT.
Approved, JOHN HANCOCK.
True Copy, Attest, JOHN AVERY, JUN. SECRETARY.

RULES AND REGULATIONS.
ARTICLE I.

THAT there shall be a President, two Vice Presidents, a Recording Secretary,
Corresponding Secretary, and Treasurer, who shall be Trustees ex officio; in
addition to these, six other Trustees shall be chosen from the members at
large, all of whom shall continue in office until others are elected in their
stead.

II. ALL officers, as well as new members, shall be elected by ballot. The
election shall be determined by a majority of votes.

III. THERE shall be two stated meetings of the Society annually, viz. on the
first Wednesdays in April and October, the same to be held at 11 o'clock, A. M.
at such place as the Trustees shall appoint, of which they shall give notice in
one of the Boston newspapers, at least three weeks previous to said meeting.

IV. THERE shall be an annual choice of officers, viz. at the stated meeting in
April, in the choice of whom, twenty members shall be necessary to make a
quorum; in the transaction of other business, thirteen may make a quorum.

V. IF at any meeting of the Society or of the Trustees, the President and Vice
Presidents should be absent, the members present may appoint one from among
them to preside at such meeting.

VI. THE President (or in case of his absence) either of the Vice Presidents,
with the advice of the Trustees, may call a special meeting of the Society; or
whenever written application, with reasons assigned therefore, shall be made by
any twelve members of the Society, to the President and Trustees, they shall
call such meeting.

VII. THE meetings of the Trustees shall be held at such time and place, as
they shall from time to time agree upon, seven of whom, with the presiding
members, shall make a quorum for doing of business, except in the case of
election of members.

VIII. THE Trustees shall regulate all the concerns of the Society during the
intervals of its meetings, propose such objects of improvement to the attention
of the public, publish such communications, and offer premiums in such form
and value as they shall think proper, provided the premiums offered do not
exceed the funds of the Society; and shall lay before the Society at each of
its meetings, a statement of their proceedings, and of the communications made
to them.

IX. THE candidate for election shall ^i^st be proposed by a member of the
Society, and on being balloted for, if the number of votes in favor of such
candidate shall amount to a majority of the members present, such person shall
be considered as duly elected.

X. THE Recording Secretary shall take minutes of all the votes and proceedings
of the Society, and of the Trustees, and enter them in separate books, and
shall record all such ^ommunications as the Trustees may direct.

XI. THE Corresponding Secretary shall write all letters relating to the
business of the Society, and answer all such letters to the Society, as the
Trustees shall direct.

XII. THE Treasurer shall receive all moneys due or payable to the Society, and
all donations that may be made to it, for which he shall give duplicate
receipts, one of which shall be lodged with the Recording Secretary, and make a
fair record thereof, and from time to time, pay out such moneys that may be in
the Treasury, as he shall have orders for from the Trustees, and shall
annually, and whenever thereto required, render a fair account of all his
receipts and payments, to the Society or a committee thereof. The Treasurer's
accounts shall be kept in dollars and cents, and he shall give bonds for the
faithful discharge of his duty, in such sums as the Trustees shall direct, and
with such sureties.

XIII. A COMMITTEE shall be chosen annually to audit the Treasurer's accounts,
viz. at October meeting, and to report thereon, at the next April meeting, and
the same being accepted, shall be entered by the Recording Secretary in his
books.

XIV. IN case of the death, resignation, incapacity, or removal out of the
state of either of the Secretaries or of the Treasurer, the Trustees shall take
charge of the official books, papers, and effects belonging to the office that
may be vacated, and give receipts for the same, which books, papers, etc. they
may deliver to some person, whom they may appoint to fill up the office until
the next meeting of the Society, at which time there shall be a new choice.

XV. The present members of the Society, and such as may be elected previous to
April meeting, 1793, shall for the present year severally pay into the hands of
the Treasurer two dollars, for raising a fund for carrying into execution the
designs of the institution; and thence afterward two dollars annually shall be
paid by each member, until otherwise ordered by the Society; the second year to
be considered as commencing on the first Wednesday in April, 1793.

XVI. A COMMITTEE shall be raised from time to time, severally to solicit and
receive subscriptions for raising of a fund, for encouraging the noblest of
pursuits, the agriculture of our country, the same to be sacredly appropriated
to that purpose.

OFFICERS OF THE SOCIETY.
HON. THOMAS RUSSELL, Esquire. President. HON. JOHN LOWELL, Esquire. First Vice
President. HON. MOSES GILL, Esquire. Second Vice President. JOHN AVERY, JUN. Esquire
Recording Secretary. OLIVER SMITH, Esquire. Corresponding Secretary. AARON DEXTER,
M. D. Treasurer. Trustees.
HON. JAMES BOWDOIN, Esquire. MARTIN BRIMMER, Esquire. LOAMMI BALDWIN, Esquire. CHRISTOPHER
GORE, Esquire. CHARLES VAUGHAN, Esquire. SAMUEL PARKER, D. D.

THE ADDRESS OF THE TRUSTEES.
THE Trustees have agreed to meet once in each month, free of any expense to
the Society, for the purpose of receiving communications and promoting the
purposes of the institution.

It is greatly to be desired that the community at large, and especially the
members of the Society, would engage earnestly in this business, would aid its
funds, and make communication of any discoveries they may deem useful, with
freedom. The officers of the Society pledge themselves to pay every attention
in their power to the great end intended.

Among other measures, they recommend that the members in different parts of
the state would meet at stated times, in places convenient to themselves, and
invite the aid of others, who are desirous of forwarding improvements in
agriculture; and that they would from time to time, transmit to the Trustees,
or any officer of the Society, any information they may think useful.

LIST OF PREMIUMS.
1. TO the person who shall, on or before the first day of July, 1795, give a
sati^factory natural history of the canker worm, through all its
transformations; at what depth in the ground, at what distance from the tree,
and at what time they cover themselves; at what season, and in what form they
rise from the ground; on what part of the tree they generally deposit their
eggs, and at what time the eggs become worms; a premium of 50 dollars, or a
piece of plate of that value, or the Society's gold medal, The Trustees,
expecting that many persons will engage in agricultural experiments, and become
entitled to premiums, who would be more grati^^ed, by the most honorable
testimony of their merit in the power of the ^^ciety to con^er, than by
pecuniary rewards, have voted, that a medal of ^old, equal to three guineas
weight, emblematically engraved, called the (...) gold medal^ be given to them.
at the ^ption of the author. If more than one satisfactory history should be
given before the first of July, 1795, that first received by the Trustees will
be entitled to the premium.

2. A premium of 100 dollars, to the person who shall, on or before the first
day of July, 1796, discover an effectual, and the cheapest method of destroying
the canker worm, and give evidence thereof to the satisfaction of the Trustees.

3. For the greatest quantity and best quality of compost manure, made in one
year, with the smallest expense, and from a farm of the fewest acr^s under
culture, and from materials common to most farms, provided that the quantity is
not less than two hundred tons, to be accompanied with a description of the
ba^n yard, or place where made, and the mode of making the manure, a premium of
50 dollars, or the gold medal.

4. And for the next greatest quantity, not less than one hundred tons, 30
dollars; claims to be presented previous to the first day of May, 1795.

5. To the person who shall discover a species of marl, good as a manure, in
sufficient quantity to become useful as such, and exhibit a specimen of the
same to the Trustees; for the best specimen and largest quantity discovered, 50
dollars, or a gold medal, at the option of the claimant; claims to be presented
on or before the first of May, 1791.

6. To the person who shall give the most satisfactory evidence of the best
kind of wheat, for this climate, and the best mode of cultivating the same, by
actual experiment, on not less than one acre of ground, the gold medal; claims
to be presented on or before the first of October, 1796.

7. For the largest quantity of fat beef, fed upon the fewest acres of ground,
the quantity not b^ing less than 80 hundred weight, a premium of 50 dollars, or
the Society's medal; and for the next largest quantity, not less than 40
hundred weight, 25 dollars, or a silver medal. A particular description of the
size of the enclosures, must accompany the claim, with a particular description
also of the mode of fattening; claims to be made previous to the first of
October, 1795.

8. To the person who shall give the best account, from actual experiments, of
the best vegetable food, beside hay, that shall increase the milk of cows and
ewes, during the month of February, March, and April, the gold ^^dal; claims to
be presented previous to the first of May, 1795.

9. For the largest quantity and best quality of wool, that shall be sheared in
the same year, from the smallest number of sheep, not less than one score, 50
dollars, o^ the gold medal.

10. To the person who shall within the term, of three years, cut, clear, and
bring into grass, the greatest number of acres of ^ild land, not less than 20
acres; the same to be kept clear from brush, to be well fenced and set off in
proper divisions, 50 dollars; claims to be presented on or before the first day
of October, 1796.

11. To the ^erson who shall produce to the Society, from actual experiments,
the best and most expeditious method of bringing wild land to a state of
improvement, and at the least expense, for mowing or pasturing, 50 dollars, or
a gold medal; claims to be made on or before the first of October, 1796.

12. To the person who shall produce to the Society the best and most
expeditious mode of destroying brush, without ploughing, 25 dollars; claims to
be presented previous to the first of October, 1795.

13. To the person who shall produce the best and most expeditious method of
making maple sugar, the manner of collecting the juice, with the least injury
to the trees, boiling, clarifying, and completely granulating the same, to be
accompanied with a particular description of the size and different kinds of
vessels used, the expense and number of persons required to manage them, a
premium of 70 dollars, or the gold medal.

14. It is required that the communications for which the above premiums are
offered, be accompanied with proper certificates from the selectmen,
magistrates, or clergymen of the vicinity, or other vouchers to the
satisfaction of the Trustees; that they be delivered in without names, or any
intimation to whom they belong; that they be severally marked in such manner as
each claimant shall think fit; the claimant sending also a paper sealed up,
having on the outside a corresponding mark, and on the inside his name and
address.

By ORDER of the TRUSTEES. OLIVER SMITH, Cor. Sec.
May, 1793.
COMMITTEE TO RECEIVE SUBSCRIPTIONS.
THE Society have appointed a committee to solicit subscriptions, to raise a
fund, to be distributed in premiums for the encouragement of useful discoveries
and improvements, viz. THOMAS RUSSELL, Boston. JOHN LOWELL, Roxbury. MOSES
GILL, Princeton. AZOR ORNE, Marblehead. COTTON TUFTS, Weymouth. SAMUEL
PHILLIPS, Andover. JAMES WARREN, Plymouth. THOMSON J. SKINNER, Williamstown.
TIMOTHY NEWHALL, St^rbridge. WILLIAM BAYLIES, Dighton. LOAMMI BALDWIN, Woburn.
JUSTIN ELY, West Springfield. LEVI LINCOLN, Worcester. CHALLES VAUGHAN, Boston.
DAVID SEARS, Do.


NAMES OF THE MEMBERS.
HON. Samuel Adams, Esquire. Hon. John Adams, Esquire. John Avery, jun. Esquire. Hon.
Fisher Ames, Esquire. Nathaniel Appleton, Esquire. Dr. Nathaniel W. Appleton, John
Andrews, Esquire. Joseph Allen, Esquire. Caleb Ammidown, Esquire. Jonathan Adams. William
Bodman, Esquire. Joseph Barrel, Esquire. Martin Brimmer, Esquire. Charles Bulfinch, Esquire.
Loammi Baldwin, Esquire. Thomas Brattle, Esquire. Samuel Breck, Esquire. James Bowdoin,
Esquire. Dr. William Baylies, Hon. Eleazer Brooks, Esquire. John Brooks, Esquire. Hon. John
Bacon, Esquire. Benjamin Beals, Esquire. Moses Black, Samuel Bass, Esquire. Hon. Samuel
Baker, Esquire. Hon. Ebenezer Bridge, Esquire. Samuel Blodget, Esquire. William Billings,
Esquire. Daniel Bigelow, Esquire. Hezekiah Bissett, Esquire. -- honorary. Rev. Manasseth
Cutler, John Codman, Esquire. Hon. Edward Cu^^s, Esquire. Hon. George Cabot, Esquire.
Andrew C^aigue, Hon. Richard Cranch, Esquire. Samuel Carry, Esquire. Samuel Chandler,
Thomas Cushing, Esquire. Hon. Daniel Coney, Esquire. Genesis John Cutler, Esquire. Hon. Thomas
Dursee, Dr. Aaron Dexter, Hon. Francis Dana, Esquire. Rev. Samuel Dean, Elias H.
Derby, Esquire. Dr. Samuel Danforth, Hon. Samuel Dexter, Esquire. Seth Davenport, Hon.
Samuel Dexter, jun. Esquire. Col. Thomas Denney* Justin Ely, Esquire. Hon. Timothy
Edwards, Esquire. George Erving, Esquire. -- honorary. Bossenger Foster, Hon. Samuel
Fowler, Esquire. Dwight Foster, Esquire. Samuel Flagg, Esquire. Simon Frye, Esquire. Hon. Moses
Gill, Esquire. Christopher Gore, Esquire. Hon. Nathaniel Gorham, Esquire. Hon. Elbridge
Gerry, Esquire. David S. Greenough, Esquire. Stephen Higginson, Esquire. Hon. Samuel
Holten, Esquire. Henry Hill, Esquire. William Hull, Esquire. ^ohn Hicks, Rev. John Homer,
Hon. William Heath, Esquire. Dr. Ebenezer Hunt, Samuel Henshaw, Esquire. His Excellency
John Hancock, Esquire. Hon. Daniel Howard, Esquire. Thomas Hale, Esquire. Artemas How, Hon.
Joseph Hosmer, Esquire. Hon. Jonathan Jackson, Esquire. Charles Jarvis, Esquire. Leonard
Jarvis, Esquire. John C. Jones, Esquire. John Jenks, Col. Joseph Jones* Benjamin
Joslyn, Esquire. Thomas Ives, Esquire. Israel Jones, Esquire. Nathan Jones, Esquire. Danforth
Keves, Esquire. Martin Kingsley, Esquire. Hon. Benjamin Lincoln* Esquire. Hon. John Lowell,
Esquire. Levi Lincoln, Esquire. Capt. George Lane, Thomas Legate, Esquire. Joseph Lee, Esquire.
Thomas Lee, Esquire. John Lucas, Esquire. Hon. George Leonard, Esquire. Solomon Lovell,
Esquire. Theodore Lyman, Esquire. Dr. Le^tsom -- honorary. Lazarus Le Barron, Hon.
Samuel Lyman, Esquire. William R. Lee, Esquire. John Mears, Nehemiah Munroe, Jonathan
Mason, Esquire. Jonathan Mason, jun. Esquire. Abner Morgan, Esquire. Hon. Elisha May, Esquire.
John Mycall, Esquire. William Martyn, Esquire. Col. John Morgan -- honorary. Rev. Dr.
David McClintock -- hon* Pliny Merrick, Esquire. Hon. Timothy Newell, Esquire. Dr.
George O^good, Hon. Azor Orne, Esquire. Col. Samuel Ogden -- ho^orary. Hon. Samuel
Phillips, Esquire. Hon. Robert Treat Pain, Esquire. Charles Phelps, Esquire. Archilaus
Putnam, Esquire. Rev. Dr. Samuel Parker, Rev. Phillips Payson, Capt. William
Putnam, William Dandridge Peck, Hon. John Pitts, Esquire. Samuel Pitts, Thomas
Palmer, Esquire. -- honorary. Col. Andrew Peter's, Timothy Pickering, Esquire. --
honorary. Hon. John Pickering, Esquire. Ebenezer Pierce, Esquire. Nathaniel Pain, Esquire.
Joseph Russell, jun. John Read, Esquire. Nathaniel Russell, Hon. Thomas Russell,
Esquire. Edward H. Robbins, Esquire. Benjamin Read, Esquire. Moses Cheney Read, Esquire. Samuel
Salisbury, David Sears, Hon. James Sullivan, Esquire. Hon. Increase Sumner, Esquire.
Dr. Oliver Smith, Jonathan Simpson, Hon. John Sprague, Esquire. Hon. Theodore
Sedgwick, Esquire. Hon. Caleb Strong, Esquire. Hon. William Seaver, Esquire. Capt. Isaac
Smith, Hon. David Sewall, Esquire. Hon. William Sheppard, Esquire. Hon. Thompson J.
Skinner, Esquire. Samuel Sewall, Esquire. Rev. Charles Stearns, Ephraim Spring, Josiah
Stearns, Esquire. Hon. Sime^n Strong, Esquire. David Smead, Esquire. James Sprout, Esquire.
Hon. C^tton Tufts, Esquire. Israel Thorndike, Esquire. Dudley Atkins Tyng, Esquire.
Nathaniel Tracey, Esquire. Salem Town, Esquire. Bezaleel Tafts, Esquire. Isaiah Thomas,
Esquire. Charles Vaughan, Esquire. Henry Van Schaack, Esquire. Hon. J. B. Varnum, Esquire.
Capt. Phineas Upham, Parker Varnum, Esquire. Benjamin Upton, Esquire. Hon. Oliver
Wendell, Esquire. David Wood, Esquire. James Winthrop, Esquire. William Winthrop, Esquire.
Thomas Winthrop, Hon. James Warren, Esquire. Joseph Ward, Esquire. Capt. Ebenezer
Wales, Dr. John Warren, Dr. Thomas Williams, Henry H. Williams, William
Wetmore, Esquire. Hon. Jonathan Warner, Esquire. Samuel Waldo, Marston Watson, Esquire. Dr.
Benjamin Waterhouse, Ebenezer Waters, Arthur Young, Esquire. -- honorary. William
Young.
The following Gentlemen have been added to the Committee for receiving
Subscriptions, viz.
Hon. DAVID SEWALL, Esquire. York. EL^^S HASKET DERBEY, Esquire. Salem. SAMUEL HENSHAW,
Esquire. Northampton. DUDLEY ATKINS TYNG, Esquire. Tyngsborough. HENRY VAN SCHAACK,
Esquire. Pittsfield. SAMUEL WALDO, Portland. Rev. JONATHAN HOMER, Newtown.
On the MANAGEMENT of the DAIRY, particularly with respect to the MAKING and
CURING of BUTTER. By J. ANDERSON, L. L. D. F. R. S. etc.
[Extracted from the sixth article in the fifth volume of the Letters and
Papers of the Bath Agricultural Society.]
WHEN a dairy is established, the undertaker ought to be fully acquainted with
every circumstance respecting the manufacture both of butter and cheese; here
it is only proposed to treat of the manufacture of butter. The first thing is
to choose cows of a proper sort; among this class of animals it is found by
experience, that some kinds give milk of a thicker consistence and richer
quality than others. In judging of the value of a cow, it ought rather to be
the quantity and the quality of the cream produced from the milk in a given
time, than the quantity of the milk itself; this is a circumstance of more
importance than is generally imagined. The small cows of the Alde^ney breed
afford the richest milk hitherto known; but individual cows in every country,
may be found, by a careful selection, that afford much richer milk than others;
these therefore ought to be searched for with care, and their breed reared with
attention, as being peculiarly valuable. In comparing the milk of two cows, to
judge of their respective qualities, particular attention must be paid to the
time that has elapsed since their calving. To make the cows give abundance of
milk, and of a good quality, they must at all times have plenty of food. --
Grass is the best food yet known for this purpose, and that kind which springs
up spontaneously on rich dry soils, is the best of all. If the cows are so much
incommoded by the heat as to be prevented from eating through the day, they
ought to be taken into cool shades for protection; where, after allowing them a
proper time to ruminate, they should be supplied with abundance of green food,
fresh cut for the purpose, and given them by hand frequently, fresh and fresh
in small quantities, so as to induce them to eat it with pleasure.

Cows, if abundantly fed, should be milked three times a day during the whole
of the summer season, in the morning early, at noon, and in the evening just
before night fall. If cows are milked only twice in twenty four hours, while
they have abundance of succulent food, they will yield a much smaller quantity
of milk in the same time, than if they be milked three times. Some attentive
observers I have met with, think a cow in these circumstances, will give nearly
as much milk at each time, if milked three times, as if they were milked only
twice. In the choice of persons for milking the cows, great caution should be
employed, for if all the milk be not thoroughly drawn from a cow when she is
milked, a diminution of the quantity gradually takes place, and in a short time
the cow becomes dry. In the management of a dairy, the following peculiarities
respecting milk, ought very particularly to be attended to; some of them are,
no doubt, known in part to attentive housewives, but they have never been
considered of so much importance as they deserve.

APHORISM I.
OF the milk that is drawn from any cow at one time, that which comes off at
the first is always thinner, and of a much worse quality, than that which comes
afterward, and the richness goes on, continually increasing to the very last
drop that can be drawn from the udder at that time.

Few persons are ignorant that milk which is taken from the cow last of all at
milking, which in this country is called stroakings, (here strippings) is
richer than the rest of the milk; but fewer still are aware of the greatness of
the disproportion between the quality of the first and the last drawn milk from
the same cow at one milking -- from several accurate and important experiments
it appears, that the person who, by bad milking of his cows, looses but half a
pint of the last milk that might be obtained, looses in fact, about as much
cream as would be afforded by six or eight pints at the beginning, and looses
besides, that part of the cream, which alone can give richness and high flavor
to his butter.

APHORISM II.
IF milk be put in a dish and allowed to stand till it throws up cream, that
portion which rises first to the surface is richer in quality and greater in
quantity than what rises in a second equal portion of time, and the cream that
rises in the second interval of time is greater in quantity and richer in
quality than what rises in a third equal space of time, and so on, the cream
decreases in quantity and declines in quality continually, as long as any rises
to the surface.

APHORISM III.
THICK milk always throws up a smaller proportion of the cream it actually
contains to the surface, than milk that is thinner, but that cream is of a
richer quality; and if water be added to that thick milk, it will afford a
considerably greater quantity of cream than it would have done if allowed to
remain pure; but its quality is at the same time greatly debased.

APHORISM IV.
MILK, which is put into a bucket or other proper vessel^ and carried in it to
any considerable distance, so as to be much agitated, and in part cooled before
it be put into the milk pans to settle for cream, never throws up so much nor
so rich cream as if the same milk had been put into the milk pans directly
after it was milked.



In this case, it is believed that the loss of cream will be in proportion* to
the time that has elapsed and the agitation it has sustained after having been
drawn from the cow.

From the above facts the following corollaries seem to be clearly deducible.

1. It is of importance, that the cows should be always milked as near the
dairy as possible, and it must be of great advantage in a dairy farm, to have
the principal grass fields as near the dairy as possible.

2. The practice of putting the milk of all the cows of a large dairy into one
vessel, as it is milked, there to remain till the whole milking be finished,
before any part of it be put into milk pans, seems to be highly injudicious,
not only on account of the loss that is sustained by agitation and cooling, but
also, as it prevents the owner of the dairy from distinguishing the good from
the bad cows milk; a better practice therefore, would be, to have the milk
drawn from each cow separately, put into the creaming pans as soon as it is
milked, without being mixed with any other. -- Thus would the careful farmer be
able, on all occasions, to observe the particular quality of each individual
cow's milk, as well as its quantity, and to know with precision, which of his
cows it was his interest to dispose of, and which he ought to keep and breed
from.

3. If it be intended to make butter of a very fine quality, it would be
advisable in all cases to keep the milk, that is first drawn, separate from
that which comes last, as it is obvious, that if this be not done, the quality
of the butter will be greatly debased, without much augmenting its quantity. It
is also obvious that the quality of the butter will be improved in proportion
to the smallness of the proportion of the last drawn milk that is retained, so
that those who wish to be singularly nice in this respect will only re^ain a
very small proportion of the last drawn milk.

4. If the quality of the butter be the chief object attended to, it will be
necessary not only to separate the first from the last drawn milk, but also to
take nothing but the cream that is first separated from the best milk, as it is
this first rising cream alone that is of the prime quality; the remainder of
the milk, which will be still sweet, may be either employed for the purpose of
making sweet milk cheeses, or it may be allowed to stand to throw up cream for
making butter of an inferior quality.

5. From the above facts, we learn that butter of the very best possible
quality can only be obtained from a dairy of considerable extent when
judiciously managed.

6. From these premises, we are led to draw a conclusion different from the
opinion that is commonly entertained on this subject, viz. -- That it seems
probable that the very best butter can only be with economy made in those
dairies where the manufacture of cheese is the principal object.

As but few persons would be willing to purchase the very best butter at a
price to indemnify the farmer for his trouble, I am satisfied from experience
and attentive observation, that if in general about the first drawn half of the
milk be separated at each milking, and the remainder only be set up for
producing cream, and if that milk be allowed to stand to throw up the whole of
its cream, even till it begins sensibly to taste sourish, and if that cream be
afterward carefully managed, the butter thus obtained will be of a quality
greatly superior to what can usually be obtained at market, and its quantity
not considerably less than if the whole of the milk had been treated alike.

No dairy can be managed with profit, unless a place properly adapted for
keeping the milk, and for carrying on the different operations of the dairy, be
first provided. The author here gives a very particular description of the best
contrived milk house or dairy.
-- The necessary requisites of a good milk house are, that it be cool in
summer, and warm in the winter, so as to preserve a temperature nearly the same
throughout the whole year, and that it be dry, so as to admit of being kept
clean and sweet at all times.

From the trials I have made, I have reason to believe that when the heat is
from fifty to fifty five degrees on Farenheit's thermometer, the sepa^ation of
the cream from the milk, which is the most important operation of the dairy,
goes forward with the greatest regularity. When the heat exceeds sixty degrees,
the operations become difficult and dangerous, and when it falls below the
fortieth degree, they can scarcely be carried forward with any degre^ of
economy, or propriety.

In winter, should the cold become too great, it might be occasionally
dispelled, by placing a barrel full of hot water closely bunged up, upon the
table, to remain till cooled. This I prefer to any kind of chaffing dish with
burning embers.

The utensils of the dairy, must in general be made of wood. As the acid of
milk readily dissolves lead, with which the common earthen vessels are glazed,
such vessels should be banished from the dairy.

The creaming dishes (for so I call the vessels in which the milk is placed for
throwing up the cream) when properly cleaned, sweet and cool, are to be filled
with the milk as soon after it is drawn from the cow as possible, having been
first strained carefully through a close strainer.

These dishes should never exceed three inches in depth, whatever be their
other dimensions. As soon as they are filled, they are to be placed on the
shelves in the milk house, perfectly undisturbed, till it be judged expedient
to separate the cream from them.

In a moderately warm temperature of the (...), if very fine butter be
intended, it should not be allowed to stand more than six or eight hours; for
ordinary good butter, it may safely stand ten or twelve, or more.

It is of great importance to the success of the dairy, that the skimming be
well performed, for if any part of the cream be left, the quantity of the
butter will be diminished; and if any part of the milk be taken, its quality
will be debased. The cream should be separated from the edges of the dish, by
means o^ an ivory bladed knife, then carefully drawn toward one side by a
skimming dish, and then taken off with great nicety.


When the cream is obtained, it ought immediately to be put into a vessel by
itself, there to be kept till a proper quantity be collected for being made
into butter. And no vessel can be better adapted to that purpose than a firm
neat made wooden barrel, in size proportioned to the dairy, open at one end,
with a lid exactly fitted to close it. In the under part of this vessel, close
to the bottom, should be placed a cock and spigot, for drawing off any thin
serous part of the milk that may chance to be there generated; for if this is
allowed to remain, it injures the cream, and greatly diminishes the richness of
the quality of the butter; the inside of the opening should be covered with a
bit of gauze netting, to keep back the cream while the serum is allowed to
pass, and the barrel should be inclined a little forward, to allow the whole to
run off.

The separation of butter from cream, only takes place after the cream has
attained a certain degree of acidity. The judicious farmer will therefore allow
his cream to remain in the vessel until it has acquired that proper degree of
acidity that fits it for being made into butter with great ease, by a very
moderate degree of agitation, and by which process only, very fine butter ever
can be obtained. How long cream may be thus kept in our climate, without
rendering the butter made from it of a bad quality, I cannot say; but it may be
kept good for a much longer time than is generally suspected, even a great many
weeks. -- It is certain that cream which has been kept three or four days in
summer is in an excellent condition for being made into butter; from three days
to seven, may in general be found to be the best time for keeping cream before
churning.

I prefer the old fashioned upright churn, having a long handle, with a foot to
it perforated with holes, as it admits of being better cleaned, and of having
the butter more easily separated from the milk than any others.

Where the cream has been duly prepared, the process of butter making is very
easy; there is however more nicety r^quired than most persons seem to be aware
of; a few hasty, irregular strokes, may render the butter of scarcely any
value, which, but for this circumstance, would have been of the finest quality.
The butter when made, must be immediately separated from the milk, and being
put into a clean dish, the inside of which, if of wood, should be well rubbed
with common salt. The butter should be pressed and worked with a flat wooden
ladle, having a short handle, so as to force out all the milk that was lodged
in the cavities of the mass. The beating up of the butter by the hand is an
indelicate and barbarous practice. If the milk be not entirely taken away, the
butter will infallibly spoil in a short time, and if it be much washed, it will
become tough and gluey. Some persons employ cold water in this operation; but
this practice is not only useless, but also pernicious, because the quality of
the butter is thus debased in an astonishing manner. In every part of the
foregoing process it is of the utmost importance, that the vessels and every
thing else about the dairy, be kept perfectly sweet and clean.

Wooden vessels are the most proper for containing salted butter. Oak is the
best wood for the bottom and s^aves. Broad split hoops are to be preferred to
all others.

Iron hoops should be rejected, as the rust of them will in time sink through
the wood, and injure the color of the butter. To season a new vessel for the
reception of salted butter, requires great care: It should be filled frequently
with scalding water, allowing it to remain till it slowly cools. After the
butter has been cleaned from the milk, as before directed, it is ready for
being salted. Let the vessel be rendered as clean and as sweet as possible, and
be rubbed all over in the inside with common salt; and let a little melted
butter be run into the cavity between the bottom and the sides at their
joining, so as to fill it, and make it every where flush with the bottom and
sides: It is then fit to receive the butter. Common salt is almost the only
substance hitherto employed for preserving butter. I have found by experience
that the following composition is in many respects preferable to it, as it not
only preserves the butter more effectually from any ^aint of rancidity, but
makes it look better and taste sweeter and more marrowy, than if the same
butter had been cured with common salt alone. The composition is as follows*

Take of sugar one part, of (...) (s^lt petre) one part, and of the best
Spanish great salt, two parts; beat the whole into a fine powder, mix them well
together, and put them by for use.

Of this composition, one ounce should be put to every sixteen ounces of
butter: Mix this salt thoroughly with the butter; as soon as it has been freed
from the milk, and put it, without loss of time, into the vessel prepared to
receive it, pressing it so close as to have no air holes, or any kind of
cavities within it; smooth the surface, and if you expect it will be more than
two days before you add more, cover it close up with a piece of clean linen,
and over that a piece of fine linen that has been dipped in melted butter, that
is exactly fitted to the edges of the vessel all round, so as to exclude the
air as much as possible, without the assistance of any watery brine. When more
butter is to be added, remove the coverings, and let the butter be applied
close above the former, pressing it down, and smoothing it as before, and so on
till the vessel is full. When full, let the two covers be spread over it with
the greatest care, and let a little melted butter be poured all round the
edges, so as to fill up every cranny, and effectually exclude the air. A little
salt may then be strewed over the whole, and the cover firmly fixed down, to
remain closely shut till opened for use. If this be carefully done, the butter
may be kept perfectly sound in this climate for many years. The Epping butter
is called the best in England. The farmers make use of a very innocent
coloring matter for their winter and early spring butter, which is the juice
of carrots. They take clean and fresh carrots, and grate them fine, and squeeze
out the juice through a coarse cloth, and mix it with their cream. This gives
their butter as fine an appearance as the best June butter, without
communicating any taste or flavor.


It must be remarked that butter cured in this manner, does not taste well till
it has stood at least a fortnight after being salted. After that period is
elapsed, it eats with a rich marrowy taste that no other butter ever acquires.
Butter thus cured, will go well to the East or West Indies.

Butter, in its natural state, contains a considerable proportion of mucous
matter, which is more highly putrescible than the pure oily parts of the
butter. When it is intended to be exposed to the heat of warm climates, it
ought to be freed from that mucilage before it be cured and packed up To do
this, let it be put into a vessel of a proper shape, which should be immersed
in another containing water. Let the water be gradually heated till the butter
be thoroughly melted: Let it continue in that state for some time, and allow it
to settle: The mucous part will fall to the bottom, and the pure oil swim at
top. When it cools, it becomes opaque and paler than the original butter, and
of a firmer consistence. When this refined butter is become a little stiff, and
while it is still somewhat soft, the pure part should be separated from the
dregs, and then salted and packed up in the same way as is before directed.

Those who wish to see the subject more fully treated, are referred to the
original.

An ACCOUNT of the MANNER of MAKING CHEESE in ENGLAND.
[By Mr. TWAMLEY.]
IN this second great object of the dairy, the same precaution as with regard
to the butter, is necessary, viz. The cows ought not to be driven violently
before milking, and every utensil must be kept equally clean.

The most common defects of cheese are, its appearing, when cut, full of small
holes, called eyes; its puffing up, cracking, and pouring out a quantity of
thin whey; becoming afterward rotten and full of maggots in those places where
the whey appeared. All these difficulties proceed from a substance called slip
curd, a kind of half coagulum, incapable of a thorough union with the true
curd, and which, when broken into small bits, produces eyes, but if in larger
pieces, occasions those rents and cracks in the cheese already mentioned; for
though this kind of curd retains its coagulated nature for some time, it
always, sooner or later, dissolves into a serous liquor. This kind of curd may
be produced by using the milk too hot, by bad runnet, or by not allowing the
curd a proper time to form. The first may be remedied by the use of cold water.
The second, by good runnet, a knowledge of which can only be acquired by long
practice. The only rule that can be given for its preparation is, to take out
the stomach of a calf, rince it in cold water, and rub it well with salt and
dry it. It may be used immediately on drying, though it is considered best
after it is a year old. The best method of making the runnet is, to take one
gallon of pure spring water and boil it; then make it into brine with cl^an
salt, sufficiently strong to bear an egg; let it cool to about blood heat, Two
of the skins (or what are commonly in this country called runnet bags) must be
put into the brine, either cut in pieces, or whole, as is most convenient; they
must steep twenty four hours; after which, it is fit for use. About a tea cup
of a middling size, of the liquor, will be sufficient for the milk of ten cows.

In making cheese, supposing the runnet of a good quality, the following
particulars must be observed.

1. The proper degree of heat: This ought to be what is called milk warm, which
is considerably below the warmth of milk taken from the cow. If too hot, it may
be reduced by cold water, without any injury to the cheese.

2. The time allowed for the runnet to take effect: This ought never to be less
than one hour and a half.

3. After having the curd firmly formed at the bottom of the tub, the whey must
be taken away, and the curd must stand to drain one quarter of an hour.

If any pieces of slip curd are found swimming in the whey, they should be
poured off with it, rather than be admitted into the cheese. Some dairy women
allow their curd to stand two hours, to obtain a firmness that will require no
breaking; but the best method is to break it thoroughly, for the cheese is less
apt to be hard.

4. The best method to prevent cheese from heaving, is to avoid making the
runnet too strong, to take care that it be very clean, and by no means the
least tainted, to be certain the curd is fully formed, which is known by the
blue color of the whey, and by no means to stir it till the air has had time
to escape.

5. The best method to prevent the cracking of cheeses, is to salt them in the
milk, or after the cheese is formed, which may be done with much more certainty
than in the curd, which is a bad method.

6. Dry cracks in cheese are frequently produced by keeping curd from one meal
to another, by which means the first becomes too dry and hard, ever, without
great attention, to mix intimately with the second.

7. Curdly, or what is commonly called wrinkle coated cheese, is always caused
by sour milk. Cheese made of cold milk is apt to be hard and fly before the
knife. If the weather is cold, cheese should be kept warm, particularly when
first made.

8. Slip coat, or soft cheese, is made entirely of slip curd, and will dissolve
into a kind of creamy liquor, which is sufficient proof of the nature of this
kind of curd, as already mentioned. It is generally computed, that as much milk
is required to make one pound of butter, as two pounds of cheese.

It is remarked by dealers in cheese, as well as other persons, that much the
greatest part of the people that eat cheese have no idea how it is produced.
They finding the best cheese of a yellow color, naturally conclude that cheese
of a pale color must be made of inferior or skimmed milk, whereas the color
is artificial. The principal ingredient used for coloring cheese is the best
Spanish annatto (or what is commonly called in this country, otter) which gives
cheese the beautiful color of the best spring butter, without injuring the
taste or quality in any degree. The best method of using it is, to take a piece
and dip it into a bowl of milk, and wash off from the piece sufficient to give
the milk a deep color. Then mix the colored milk with the milk prepared for
the cheese, before either runnet, or salt is put in. If enough annatto has been
used, the whole milk will have a pale orange color, which will be much
increased after the cheese is made.

June, 1793. To the CORRESPONDING SECRETARY of the MASSACHUSETTS AGRICULTURAL
SOCIETY.
SIR,
THE following observations were drawn up at the request of a gentleman for his
own use. If the Agricultural Society should think that the contents afford any
useful hints, I shall be gratified with having contributed something toward
the improvement of one branch of that art, which is the most independent and
one of the most honorable pursuits of man.

I do not send it to you from an opinion that I have the best ^nformation upon
the subject, but that, by a communication of each ones experience, impro^ement
goes forward with rapidity.

I am, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, ALE^^^.

To Mr. --
SIR,
AGREEABLE to your request, I have collected the following observations upon
the method of making cheese. They are what arose during an experience of but
two years. The intention was to have reduced this useful part of rural economy
to a regular system, which in this country is left to the operation of chance.
This sheet contains but little originality in the principles of this art; they
were taken from treatises written in England. If any merit is due, it is for
the attention with which these observations were pursued, to ascertain the
essential parts of these treatises. This art appears so simple, that every
country woman would be offended at being thought ig^^^ant of it; yet a few
rules may be collected that require (...) observed with almost a chemical
exactness. They know that runnet will make a curd: A piece is therefore cut off
at hazard and thrown into the milk. If too small a piece is put in, the curd
comes very imperfectly, producing what is called slip curd. This is very soft,
and the curd thus made, is what is most frequently sold for cream cheese. In
breaking up the curd, or pressing, this is chiefly squeezed out. That which
remains is one cause of eyes in cheese. The fattest part of the milk is most
difficult to coagulate, and it is found, that adding more runnet will not
perfect the curd, when in this state; the cheese is of course impoverished,
when the curd comes imperfectly. But the most frequent error is putting too
much runnet, which inevitably gives the cheese a strong pungent taste and
smell. It occasions that puffing in cheese which is called hove cheese, and
being pierced with a knife, will emit a very fetid smell. It is a degree of
putrefaction arising from a fermentation caused by the runnet; a sufficient
evidence that the cheese can never be good, and is invariably full of eyes.
Another cause of bad cheese is bad runnet; and whoever has seen many of our
country kitchens, will wonder that they ever have good cheese, owing to the
very filthy manner of keeping the skins, being either impregnated with smoke,
or tainted with flies, and exposed to every disagreeable effluvia that may
surround it. To obviate these difficulties, the following is the manner that
the runnet was prepared in my dairy. Take the skin, or runnet bag, as soon as
the calf i^ killed; let it be carefully cleaned by hand without touching water;
let it then be put into a brine so strong that it will dissolve no more salt;
of this brine three pints will suffice for a skin; let it be steeped in it 36
hours or thereabouts; it may then be taken out of the liquor, put into clean
bottles and corked; it will keep a year, perhaps longer; the skin may then be
drawn over a bow, salted and dried as usual; in two or three months, if your
liquor should fail you, it may be steeped again. It is said to acquire new
strength, but not so much as at first; perhaps the virtue is not wholly
extracted by the first steeping, and that it will not yield it all to three
pints of water. This second operation will, however, answer as good a purpose
as the first, using two or three skins instead of one. Let one general
observation be made, that throughout the whole business of darying, the
greatest attention must be paid to the cleanliness and sweetness of the vessels
used, and in the dairy room; and in some instances it may not be unnecessary to
recommend it to the da^^y woman in her own person. In cheese of one meal, the
milk should be kept as near as possible to its natural heat, till the runnet is
put in. I find three tea spoons full to a gallon of milk to be the average
quantity requi^ed to coagulate it; but this liquor should always be tried, to
ascertain its strength. The object is to find the smallest quantity that will
bring the curd properly, as more than that will injure the cheese. You will
perceive that it is convenient to make a large quantity of this liquor at a
time, or making it at different times in the spring, when you begin to make
cheese, which is seldom till all the calves are killed, let it be mixed and
then tried, after which there is no trouble with the runnet; and you may be
certain that whatever other defect the cheese may have, it will not be strong,
or hove; this is solely owing to the too great quantity or bad quality of the
runnet. My cheese tub being made of the same diametre at the top and bottom, I
found its contents in gallons, and made a guaging rod, marking on the depth of
the tub, and then subdividing that depth by the number of gallons the tub
contained. By putting the rod into the tub, was readily seen the gallons of
milk in it. The tub itself might be thus graduated; when you would make
servants follow rules, it is necessary that they should be attended with as
little trouble as possible. Having put in the runnet, the milk should not be
suffered to cool too soon, as the curd should be sensibly warm when broke up
and put into a hoop, otherwise the cheese will be in flakes when cut, the curd
not uniting when cold. The curd must not be disturbed in the tub, till it
cleaves from the sides and begins to settle. It may then be cut through
chequerwise and suffered to settle still more; with a proper temperature of air
it will begin to settle in half an hour from the time of settling the milk;
cold weather retards it and may defeat it; if the curd is too long in coming,
the cream begins to rise and is lost to the cheese; it should therefore be
guarded against. There rises upon the whey, when the curd sett^es, a thin skim,
which should be carefully removed before the curd is taken out, lest it should
mix with the curd. As it is of a more fixed nature than the whey, it will not
all squeeze out, nor will it blend with the curd, and where a particle remains
there will be an eye. The curd, being well drained of the whey, by breaking it
up fine by hand, is to be salted. This is an important part, and of which I am
not so well informed as I wish to be. The success of experiments with salt can
only be determined by the taste, and this cannot always be done, when the
cheese is sold. Salt differs greatly in strength and quality, as is well known
to fishermen and packers of beef. In Ireland the beef is first strongly rubbed
with blond salt, which is mild and penetrating. It is then passed to another
hand, who uses a mixture of blond and bay salt, which is harsh and drying,
hardening the provisions. From this consideration of the different effects of
salt, it may be concluded that bay salt is not adapted to cheese. I also took
bay salt and dissolved it, and then boiled it down; the objectionable parts fly
off; and the more violent the ebullition, the finer will be the grain, which
indicates its strength, the large grain being the strongest. I liked the salt
thus obtained, the grain being as fine as well ground meal. Some of my best
cheeses were made with this salt, and the quantity used was one tea cup heaped,
to six gallons of milk. This proportion is liable to error, as milk will yield
more or less curd according to the season or quality of the grass; and let it
be remembered that cows should never be drove hard, especially just before
milking. If the common blond salt is used, it should be reduced finer by
pounding, that it may more intimately blend with the curd. -- The curd being
prepared for the press, it appears to me proper that every heterogeneous
substance should immediately be pressed out. For this purpose my first press
was powerful, being a lever eight feet long, one and fixed by a pin between two
stumps set in a bench; near these stumps, was placed the cheese; the other end
of the lever was loaded with about two hundred weight of stones; at the other
end of the bench were fixed two stumps higher than those first mentioned, which
are about six inches higher under the lever than the cheese hoops; the other
stumps have a cross piece on the top to rest another lever, which is booked to
the end of the first to raise it. The cheese being tended as usual in this
press, where it remained twenty four hours, was moved to another bench
containing four divisions, being each separate presses of no more weight than
was immediately laid upon them, about two hundred weight. The cheese when taken
from the first press, was put into press at one end of this second bench, and
remained in each twenty four hours, moving along every day till arrived at the
other end. I suppose three days pressing on this second bench, sufficient for a
cheese of twenty five pounds. It was then carried to the cheese room. Screw
presses are objectionable, as the pressure does not follow the cheese as it
settles. My farm house was fortunately shaded by trees; but the better to guard
against the sun, I had Venetian shades made for the windows, of clapboards
painted green, which were cheap and handsome. I also had made slender frames,
over which catgut was stretched of a texture fine enough to prevent the
entrance of flies. When the windows were opened these frames were put in. The
cheese room should be exposed on every side except the south, and one or more
windows in each side. Attention is much required to regulate the temperature of
the air; strong wind admitted will dry the cheese too fast, and make it crack;
to prevent this, it is customary with us, to rub the cheese with butter; in
England they wash it with the new whey, and no butter is used; this last method
I did not try. In hot sultry weather cheese will spread. This should be
prevented by bandages of tow cloth, or by putting them into cheese hoops. The
expense of this extraordinary number of hoops is not great: One cheese saved,
will pay for ten hoops, and they last many years. They will seldom spread after
they have been made a month. In wet weather it is advisable to burn a little
charcoal in the chimney of the cheese room. The quantity of green cheese
obtained from milk, was from twenty three pounds to twenty five pounds, from
twenty gallons. I have got twenty seven and three quarters from eighteen
gallons. They seldom lost in drying more than two and a half pounds, in a
cheese of twenty five pounds weighed green from the press. If it is required to
have the cheese of a Gloucester color, take Spanish anatto, rub a lump in a
saucer with milk; a little experience will teach the quantity necessary for a
cheese; then mix it with the rest of the milk, when it is set for cheese. One
ounce will color four or five hundred pounds, and it is bought of the
apotheca^ies. It is perfectly innocent, and I thought that the cheese colored
with it, was higher flavoured: This might have been owing to other causes. To
have a good dai^y, it must be a particular business, and not attended only at
convenient intervals from other work, as a secondary object, nor should a drop
of cream be taken from milk appropriated for cheese. This must be inviolably
observed. I think that large cheeses generally prove better than small ones;
and for this reason should not wish to make a c^^ese less than twenty five
pounds. But if the number of cows is not sufficient to make a cheese of one
meal, the old milk should be very well mixed with the cream that has risen, and
then put into a large brass kettle to warm over coals free from smoke, the milk
being frequently stirred to prevent the bottom of the milk becoming too hot
before the top is sufficiently warmed, which will be the case without
attention. It should be brought as near as possible to its natural heat. To
save trouble our women heat a part very hot, then mix it with the cold; but I
have no doubt that this injures the cheese. Putting the milk into deep vessels,
and covering them in a damp situation, will prevent the cream from rising so
much as it otherwise would.

[From LETTERS and PAPERS on AGRICULTURE, published at HALLIFAX.]
To the SECRETARY of the AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY, at HALIFAX.
THE intention of the Society being so obviously of the first importance to
this country, I am induced to request that the following observations may be
communicated to the next meeting.

Every day's experience evinces that our soil is good, yet, such is the
coldness of the climate, that when land has been improved three or four years
without manure, it grows mossy, and afterward produces but little: There are
few coun^ri^s, therefore, where the article of manure can be more pro^itably
attended to, because, when well prepared, it not only replenishes the earth
with food for vegetables, but by its warmth counterbalances the coldness of the
climate. As what has been written on this subject is in the hands of but few, I
have endeavored to bring together the opinions of the most modern authors,
which from my own experience I can recommend to the practice of the farmers in
this country, remarking at the same time, upon the improper use which too many
make of their dung. Lime, Marl, Plaster of Paris, etc. etc. are good, and some
of them perhaps the best of manures: But it is not in every one's power to
procure them, especially in such quantities as are necessary for the farmer:
But a COMPOST is within the reach of every person, and almost in any
quantities, and which no prudent person, upon knowing its usefulness, will ever
be without.

There is perhaps no one practice in husbandry more injudicious than that of
taking new dung from the yard, in the spring, and using it as a manure for
potatoes, spread over the ground; or in any other way whatever, as it
introduces grass, weeds, and noxious plants, which more than balances any
little benefit that it can possibly do as a manure when used in that unprepared
state.

When new dung lies in large heaps it soon grows very hot, and a violent putrid
fermentation comes on, which melts the whole into one common mass, reversing
what took place in vegetation, bringing that matter which has been the
substance of former vegetables into such a state, that it will become the food
for succeeding vegetables: But when it is put in small quantities in the hills
of potatoes, or spread on the ground and plowed in, even if it had begun to
grow hot and ferment, it will immediately be cooled by the surrounding earth.
In order to keep alive that heat which is necessary for its putrefaction, or
rotting, it must be kept in large heaps. Let any one spread new dung over the
ground, and in a week's time, if the weather is dry, (...) ^ill look little
better than dry straw; he will now find it has lost more than half its weight,
and with that a large proportion of its real riches. In this state I have often
found it in hills of potatoes in a dry season, where it manifestly did more
hurt than good, by keeping the roots from the moist earth: If after this it
rots, yet it never can recover that which it has lost by its rich moisture
being rarefied and evaporated by the sun. It should therefore be suffered to
lie in some convenient place in a body together; by which means its moisture is
preserved, a suitable degree of heat generated, and a universal putrefaction
takes place, turning every part of it into proper manure or food for
vegetables: For in its crude state it can scarcely be called a manure, but only
something of which a manure may be made, because there is no part of it but
what must be dissolved by putrefaction before it can yield much vegetable food;
hence it comes to pass that if the season proves wet soon after it is used, it
does some good, as it affords a little nourishment by being putrified from the
wetness of the season; but should the season prove dry, no putrefaction can
take place, so, that of course, it affords no nourishment to vegetables, but
does real hurt by keeping the ground too open and hollow in the hills where it
is put. Yard dung, then, should never be used 'till it has been in a proper
situation for fermentation and putrefaction, one year at least; by this means
the seeds of grass, weeds, or noxious plants, will mostly perish, and the dung
by its putrefaction, be stored with great quantities of proper food for
vegetables, possessing those qualities which tend to meliorate and enrich the
land. To accomplish this plan in the spring, it should be put into the place
where it is intended the general compost heap should be made. For this purpose
a hollow place should be chosen; and if it cannot otherwise be had, it should
be dug large enough to hold the quantity of manure intended to be made. I^ a
place can be taken so situated as to receive the wash of the dwelling house,
cow yard, hog sty, etc. so much the better. It must be clayed all over its
bottom and sides. Drains must be cut from the lowest part of the cow yard, and
hog sty, into the place prepared to receive the compost, so that whatsoever is
washed out of them by ^ains may be carried directly into the compost heap. All
kinds of weeds from the sides of fields, where they often do much hurt, by
shading and drawing the nourishment from plants that grow near them, may be
pulled and thrown in: And in hoeing where the land is weedy, small children
might often be employed to good advantage in gathering up the weeds after the
hoers, and throwing them in heaps; by which they would be prevented from taking
root again, the land would lie clean, and cart loads might in that ^ay be
gathered. Sprouts also pulled from the stubs in new ground, when they are in a
succulent state, before they grow woody or hard (which by the way is the best
time to sp^^ut new ground) may be thrown in heaps and carted in: Rock weed,
kelp, and all sorts of sea weed or grass, may be carried in great quantities,
where they can be had; garbage of fish, hair, blood, bones, woolen rags* oyster
shells, muscles, and every kind of animal substance, are excellent, and capable
of making more than four times their own weight of good manure; ashes, such as
are made by burning bushes, may all be throw^ in, and it is better to gather
some of the earth with them, than to leave any of the ashes, as the top of the
earth in those places is often almost as much impregnated with salts as the
ashes themselves; ashes that have been leeched are also good^ the dung in the
cow yard should be removed every morning into a heap by the side of the yard;
by this means the yard is kept clean, and the dung is kept from drying, and as
often as there is enough may be carted to the general heap. If the farmer has
not the convenience of a hog pasture, but is obliged to keep his hogs in a sty,
he will find it for his interest to throw in great quantities of green weeds,
grass, etc. as it will save more costly feeding, and in this case the sty
should be often cleared and its contents carried to the general heap. To a
compost heap, made of such materials, considerable earth may be added; but then
it should be well chosen; any place where the wash of a road or street is
brought to settle, is excellent, and mud may often be taken from settling
places in a road, and dry earth put in its place, to the great advantage both
of the road and him who takes it; half a hundred loads of good loam, and even
more, where there is a large yard and many cattle, may be carried into a
cow-yard in the spring of the year, and be wholly carried into the compost heap
by the fall, taking off the top at several different times. In Holland and some
parts of Germany, they are at great pains to save the urine of their cattle for
manure, and find it of considerable consequence; by the above method it is all
effectually preserved, which, together with the hot steam and perspiration of
their bodies, whilst lying upon the loam, so far enrich it as to render it a
very valuable addition to the compost heap. The compost should be turned up
from the bottom once or twice in a summer, which will greatly forward its
fermentation and putrefaction; and toward the fall, when the seeds of weeds
and grass begin to be ripe, it is best to move the compost all to one end, that
such rubbish as abounds with ripe seeds, may be put by itself and lie round to
another year. At the fall, when the crops come in, considerable addition may be
made by carrying in all the vines, stalks, etc. of every kind of vegetable from
the garden; also, potatoe tops and turnip tops, if not wanted for cattle; these
last make a manure of a very excellent kind. All the chaff from the several
kinds of grain that may be ^aised -- every kind of damaged or rotten straw or
hay, or old stack bottoms, etc. may come in, in the course of the year, with
every thing that is capable of a quick putrefaction.

Such as can afford it, will find their account in having a shed built over
their compost heap, yet it must be open and exposed to the air on all sides,
for by such exposure not only the putrid fermentation will be forwarded, but
much will be drawn from the air, especially if there be any ashes in the heap,
which will greatly increase the richness of the compost; yet a covering at the
top will be very necessary, otherwise the rains will not only greatly check the
fermentation, by too often cooling it; but will probably, when they come
plentif^^^y, cause it to overflow its banks, and carry off the rich juices of
the compost; also, without such a shed it might sustain damage by having its
most subtle and volatile parts evaporated by the sun. I have indeed seen
compost heaps, without clay at the bottom, or a shed at the top; but, that much
is lost from such a heap by all its washing^ in the course of the year, is too
manifest to need any thing said upon it. It is true, that in this way of
putting all his new dung into the compost heap, the farmer must go a year
without manure, if he has not that which is old and good by him; but when once
he has his compost heap fit for use, after that he has his manure as regularly
every year, as those who follow ^he pernicious practice of wa^^ing their new
dung, (I can call it nothing better, for it often does hurt); and he who
follows the above method, or something like it, will soon find that from one
acre of land, well manured, he can raise more than he can from two without
manure, so that one half his labor will be saved; the labor and pains that he
has been at in making manure, will be returned with ample increase into his
barn and stores, and his farm at the same time increasing in riches.

Those who have a good stock of cattle, hogs, etc. may, in some such way as the
above; increase their manure to almost any quantity they shall need: And such
as have no cattle (and there are doubtless some such among our new settlers)
may, in the above way, make considerable manure in the course of the year, from
the wash of the house only; and such manure is good, and will produce
cucumbers, peace, beans, etc. quicker than good yard dung. To conclude, the more
any one attends to the affair of manuring his farm, the easier and more
elegantly it will support him; whilst, without that, upon such land and in such
a climate as we have in this country, an industrious man may, after a course of
years, find that all his labor has been in vain.

Feb. 20, 1790. A FARMER.

EXPERIMENTS to determine whether it is best to plant LARGE or SMALL CUTTINGS
of POTATOES.
[By the Rev. Mr. COCHRAN.]
IN the Nova Scotia Magazine Vol. I. page 454*
for December, 1789. there appeared some extracts from an Essay on Potatoes,
published among the Papers of the Bat^ Agricultural Society, for 1^88. In these
a prodigious difference is noticed, between the produce from large cuttings and
that from small, in favor of large ones, as nine to one.

That a considerable difference of produce might escape the observation of mere
practical farmers, who seldom make comparative experiments, is readily to be
supposed, and that, therefore, it might still be a disputed point amongst them,
whether large or small cuttings are m^st profitable, as the author who relates
those experiments asserts it is, and as we know it to be here. But we can
hardly suppose that any farmer, who should see one acre in his neighbor's
field produce as much as nine in his own, would continue inattentive to the
advantage of using larger seed.

In the extracts, where this amazing disproportion of produce is mentioned, it
is not stated what proportion the cutting^ (...) the one and in the other case,
bore to each other* (...) there was a greater difference than betwe^^ (...)
which are commonly used here. However, if the (...) by planting small cuttings
should only be one half, or even one fourth part of that mentioned above* ^^ill
it would be an object highly deserving the attention of farmers. I thought,
therefore, it might not be a useless experiment, to try two or three different
sizes of cuttings, near to those usually planted in this neighborhood, and to
mark the difference of produce, if any.

For this purpose, in the second week of June last, I took an equal number of
cuttings, of three different sizes; the largest (No. 1.) were somewhat larger
than those usually planted here. The second size, which I shall call No. 2, was
less than one half of No. 1. The third size (No. 3.) was about one third of No.
2. The cuttings of each size were weighed, and the weight noted at the (...) of
planting, but the memorandum has been mislaid. However, although I cannot
recollect the absolute weight, I am certain the proportion to ea^h other was,
very nearly, as above.


I planted 100 hills with each size, four cuttings in each hill. The land,
manure, and cultivation as nearly alike as I could make them.

From the first appearance of the plants, a striking difference* in favor of
the largest size, was observable. Many of the hills from No. 1, had ten,
twelve, or fourteen stalks, strong and healthy. Those from No. 2, much fewer
and weaker. Those from No. 3, in many instances had not more than ^our (...),
and those (...) ^eeble. The difference though still (...) per^^p^ible, was not
so great (...) the summer, as at the beginning.

In the begi^ning of November they were all taken ^p, and the produce weighed.

No. 1, produced 280lbs. No. 2, 249 No. 3, 168
The medium ^^ight of a bushel, upon several trials, was found (...). Therefore
the produce of No. 1, was something above four bushels and a half; and the
difference between No. 1, and No. 3, nearly two bushels. This is very
considerable. If an acre planted with cuttings such as No* 1, would produce two
hundred bushels, by planting such as No. 3, the farmer will loose 80 bushels.
In four acres the loss will be 320 bushels; in eight acres, which many farmers
plant in a season, it will be 640 bushels!

I am inform^d, that some farmers in the province plant only the (...) of their
potatoes, and give the ^est to their cattle or hogs. With these the loss must
be still greater.

[From LETTERS and PAPERS on AGRICULTURE, published at HALIFAX.]
On the UTILITY of INTRODUCING the GENERAL CULTIVATION of RED CLOVER in this
Province.
[By WILLIAM COTTNAM TONGUE, Esquire.]
AMONGST all the late improvements in the agriculture of Great Britain, which
have brought the science so near to perfection in that country, the
introduction of red clover may be ranked as one of the principal and most
important; the use of this valuable crop, and turnips, has nearly banished the
practice of employing unprofitable fallows as a preparation for crops of grain*
The farmers of Great Britain use clover not only as the herbage for laying
their lands down to meadow, but also as a part of their arable system;
experience teaching them, that the cultivation of it, is one of the best
courses that can be pursued for preparing land for the raising wheat.

The introduction and general use of this crop, would, I am convinced, be
equally beneficial to this country; to the circumstances of which it appears
every way perfectly adapted.

It is a position, which I conceive will be universally assented to, that this
province can never become rich or flourishing, until its inhabitants can
accomplish the raising of their own br^ad corn; and to this great object, the
views of all, who wish the prosperity of the country, and particularly those
who are employe^ in cultivating its lands, should be invariably directed.

The causes of the present deficiency are not to be sought in the climate and
soil of the country, but may be easily discovered in the injudicious and
improper management of the inhabitants. The reason that more wheat is not
raised in this province, is, that more land is not prepared for that grain; and
it is a fact well known to those who are acquainted with the general practice,
that much wheat is sown without any previous preparation of the land; the crops
being such as might be expected from such management.

The complaints made against this country, as unfavourable for wheat, are
founded in ignorance or prejudice; the crops of that grain in many parts of it
palpably contradicting such assertions, as does the judgment of men, who have
had experience in agriculture in other countries as well as this. The chief
real natural disavantage that the province labors under, is, the shortness of
the season for performing the several works of agriculture; this circumstance
may forbid the use of that extensive tillage which is practiced under more
favorable climates, but does by no means (...) to prevent every farmer from
raising his own (...) a surplus for sale; the aggregate of which surplus (...)
a fund not only for the supply of those who are not employed in the cultivation
of lands, but also for exportation, which I cannot relinquish the hope of
seeing take place from this country.

As the shortness of our season may prevent us from availing ourselves of many
modes of preparing our lands, which are practiced under different climates, we
should unquestionably be more attentive to the use of those which are
peculiarly adapted to our own; and the cultivation of clover appears to me one
of the most important of these, not at present in use.

We cannot advantageously cultivate turnips (one of the great ground works of
modern husbandry in England) to any considerable extent, because our climate
will not allow of our feeding them through the winter, and the labor of
getting them up and storing them, would make them too expensive; but no such
objection lies to the use of clover, which may without loss of time, or
additional expense (except the seed) follow ou^ hoeing crops with the wheat,
which usually succeeds them, and would by lying two years in the ground,
prepare it in the most perfect manner for another crop of that grain, producing
in the mean time most beneficial returns for the land it occupies. By the usual
mode of management, wheat is procured but once, after a perfect manuring with
potatoes, or other hoed crop^ (unless by the execrable method of sowing it two
seasons successively) it being usually followed by two crops of oats, which
divest the soil o^ all its richness; the land is then turned out to grass,
producing little or nothing but weeds until time has restored it to fertility,
being unfit for the production of wheat, without another manuring, or laying a
great length of time in pasture; whereas, by sowing clover seed with the wheat,
following a hoed crop, the land is made to produce two valuable crops of hay
and grass, and is rendered in the highest degree fit for the reception of
wheat; for let the ground be in any degree rich, on which clover is sown, the
deep penetrating r^ots and long shadowy tops of this plant are sure to increase
its richness, and bring it to that mellow state, so favorable to the growth of
that grain.

On the whole, I most earnestly recommend to my brother farmers the use of this
plant, the cultivation of which will so much increase the quantity of their
wheat lands.

The great obstacle to the adoption of it, is the cost of seed (if purchased);
and many have been de^erred from raising it by the difficulties they have
experienced in attempting to get it cleaned from the husk; but the first
objection may be obviated by purchasing but a small quantity of the best
English seed, for a stock to raise more from; and the difficulty of cleansing
seed may be removed by attending to the following circumstance, which is, that
in raising clover, to ripen seed, it is necessary to ^eed down, or mow the
first growth in the spring (which tends wholly to (...), leaves and chaff), not
letting it grow up till near midsummer; by this means the stalks will be short
and thick, will have few leaves on them, and will be covered with large heads
well filled with seed, which parts easily from the husk.

A member of this society (Mr. Burton) who first mentioned this circumstance to
me, has raised as fine clover seed in this way as any imported from England,
and will doubtless communicate to any person, desirous of information, the
methods he took to clean it.

A NEW METHOD of CULTIVATING and PREPARING HEMP.
[By the ABBE BRALLE.]
Printed in England, by order of the Lords of the Committee of Council for
Trade and Foreign Plantations.
IT is sufficiently known, that land intended for a crop of hemp must be well
manured, well ploughed, cleansed, and gotten fine; and the season being
arrived; which varies much according to the soil, weather, and convenience of
the cultivator, extending from the 25th March to the 15th June; sow the hemp
seed, which ought always to be new seed, thin, not exceeding two bushels to an
acre, and if you have the advantage of a drill plough, still less will do.
After the land is sown, go through the whole with a shovel, and with it make
little paths at seven feet distance from each other, the length way of your
piece, so that at the proper season you may ^each the female hemp, which you
will have occasion to pull out, without ^rampling on the male, which must stand
at l^ast a month longer to ripen its seed. The female hemp, (which is that
which bears only flowers and no seed) is known to be ripe by the flowers
fading, the sarina foecundas falling, and some of the stems turning yellow. You
must then draw out carefully the whole of the female hemp, breaking as little
as possible the stems of that which you take, or that which you leave.

Immediately as it is gathered, take it in as large handfuls as you can, and
either cutting the roots off, or leaving them on, as you like best (I prefer
cutting them off) hold the root end uppermost, and with a wooden sword dress
off the flowers and leaves, which you leave in the field, since they assist in
manuring; pick out any weeds or spoilt plants; put twelve handfuls, or gripes,
together to make a bundle; then lay the bundles in water; it is much the best
to be a running and clear water, and if shaded and overhung with trees the
better; lay poles, or planks, or whatever else you have that is suitable,
across a large number together, so as to keep them at least two inches
under-water. Take particular notice which you lay in first, and how you lay the
bundles, in order that you may be able to get them out again successively as
they were laid in, without breaking or tangling. At the end of six days, visit
the hemp, and see whether the reed will draw out from some of the bundles. The
time required for soaking depends very much on the nature of the hemp, the
weather, and of the water it is soaked in -- from six days to nine, or even to
eleven. It is a trouble that is not ill bestowed to sort the hemp for soaking,
if it is of unequal sizes, the slenderest generally requiring most soaking.

When you find any quantity sufficiently soaked, take it with care, putting the
hands under it to prevent breakage, and transport it to a trough or to a table;
for there are two methods of working it. If you work it in a trough, you must
be provided with one somewhat longer than any hemp that you mean to work in it
-- twelve, or fourteen inches deep, and of what width you think proper
according to the number of persons you employ at it, as one, two, or four. To
this trough must be fitted two pieces of plank, of about a foot length, but of
such width as to stretch over a bundle of the hemp as it lies open in the
water: These planks must be set on one side with teeth of brass wire, and when
the hemp is ready for draw^ing, must be laid on it as it lies in the water, to
keep it straight and immerged.

If you work the hemp on a table, you must, before taking it out of the water,
open a little the bundles, and rub the stems between your hands to get off what
you can of the slime, and to loosen the rind. You must likewise push the bundle
along in the water, with the loose end foremost, to loosen the ^ind at that end
where the operation is to be begun. If you do not thus rub and scour your hemp
in the water where you soak it, you must do it in the trough. But in either
case you must be careful to keep an even and steady hand to avoid breaking the
reed, which, as many times as it happens, renders the operation of getting the
reeds out tedious. If it is wrought on the table, the bundle must be frequently
though slightly wetted. If any suitable method could be taken to make water
drip gently on it, it would be best. A plank must be laid on the bundle to keep
it steady.

All matters being properly disposed, either on the table or in the trough, you
must begin at the root end to push back a little of the rind from the stem;
then taking hold of one stem at a time, and rather near the outside than the
middle of the bundle, keep your hand and the reed under water (if you work in a
trough) and draw it out from the bundle as strait as possible, you will find it
come out as clean as a sword from its scabbard. As you proceed, you may take
two, afterward four, up to six or more reeds at a time, which will draw out
still more easily. When you have drawn out all the reeds that you can find at
the root end, lift up the spiked plank which was at the upper end, leaving on
that which was in the middle, and draw out such pieces of reed as you may find
at the upper end, and which have remained after drawing out what you could at
the root end, because they were broken. Lastly, take off the plank which lay on
the middle, and take out all the relics of reed you can perceive. If ^our hemp
was in good condition for drawing, you will find all your reeds perfectly clean
on the floor, and the rind, which is the hemp, lying in strait threads, in the
water or on the table.

You will perceive that among the hemp there is a great quantity of gum left,
looking like a jelly; this you will wash out as if you were washing any long
strait piece of cloth, observing not to displace, or twist the threads, which
would thwart the future operation of dressing, or heckling. The finer and
whiter you desire the hemp to be, the more waters you will run it through,
squeezing it out at each time of washing; but I think it always right at the
last to run it through a water in which a small quantity of soft soap has been
beat up, after the rate of an ounce of soft soap to three pounds of the hemp
when dry. Do not squeeze it out from this soap water, but hang it to drain, and
when a little stiffened, open a little the bundle, and lay it to dry on a grass
plat, or floor; the former is preferable. This soap water is not absolutely
necessary, but is certainly of great use for softening the hemp, and rendering
it pleasant and easy to dress; but may be dispensed with where it is very
inconvenient, and where the hemp is intended for coarse purposes. It is obvious
that all these operations would be carried on to the most advantage near to
some running stream, or large lake, if it be a standing water, on account of
the great use that is made of that element, and to save a great deal of the
trouble of transportation.

When thus dried, the hemp is proper either for dressing, or storing; if the
latter, particular care must be taken that it be thoroughly dry, it will
otherwise heat and spoil. As the hemp peculiarly intended to be hitherto spoken
of is the female, or flower bearing hemp, which is intended for fine uses, it
is to be observed that it must be worked with heckles, or hatchels, such as are
used for flax dressing, and may be brought to an extreme fineness; and the
sho^ts, having no pieces of straw, or reed among them, may be carded and spun,
and brought into use for all the same purposes as cotton, and the same methods
used for bleaching and softening. It is likewise requisite to work this hemp as
soon as pulled, without which the greatest softness and whiteness cannot be
obtained; and as this sort generally falls ripe between h^y time and harvest,
when the weather is warm and fine, and the ^omen most at liberty, it will be a
suitable occasion to draw and cleanse the hemp -- the dressing may be reserved
for winter.

I now proceed to speak of the male hemp, which being a more considerable crop,
cannot all be worked as fast as it is pulled or cut. It is known to be ripe
enough by the stems becoming pale; for if you stay till the tuft containing the
seed appears ripe, or the stem turns brown, the hemp will be in a great measure
spoiled. When it is come to a proper maturity, you must get a good number of
hands, so as to expedite the business, because such as remains standing after
it is ripe, will have its rind fixed to the reed, the gum turned hard and dark
colored, and the whole operation of drawing becomes difficult, troublesome,
and ungrateful. The leaves are to be stripped off with a wooden sword, in the
same manner as those of the female hemp, as are likewise the se^d, the branches
which grow laterally, and even the tuft bearing seed at the top: But if this
latter should not come off clean, it must be chopped off with an iron instrument.
All this must be done over a cloth, or on a spot of ground in the field, well
levelled and smoothed, to avoid losing any of the seed. And it is proposed, and
said to be successful, to leave the seed abroad, covered with the leaves and
chaff strewed on the land. This certainly saves trouble, and is practiced in
many parts, but seems to me slovenly, and I would rather take it home to a
barn; but I would certainly burn all the roots, and such parts as are too hard
to rot easily, and strew the ashes as well as the leaves, and such other parts
as will easily rot, upon the ground, as these matters are reckoned to go half
way toward manuring the land for next year's crop. The male hemp, thus stripped
of leaves and seed, will generally dry for storing in twenty four hours; but at
any rate must not be left long abroad, but rather taken into sheds to dry,
which, when thus stripped, it will speedily do. Sun and rain would soon spoil it.
That which can be wrought green must be treated as before set forth for the
female hemp; and it is obvious that it is a great advantage to work it in this
manner, rather than to dry and store it, which causes much trouble and expense
and produces less and worse hemp; but where the crop is considerable, and the
hands few, it is unavoidable. If, however, much rain comes, it is impracticable
to dry it for storing without spoiling, as every year's experience shows in the
present received method; whereas the working the hemp green entirely avoids
this disadvantage and inconveniency, and the hands engaged may continue their
employment under the shelter of trees, or of a temporary shed made of a few
rough poles and hurdles, covered with straw, reeds, etc.

All the same procedure is to be used with the male, as with the female hemp,
as to drawing, scouring, etc. but as the reeds of it are less brittle, and the
rind coarser, it requires more soaking, but is easier to draw, and produces
much more and stronger hemp. What is stored must, when wanted to be wrought, be
soaked, peeled, washed, and in general treated as before said. In cold weather
it takes long soaking.

Detached Observations on Hemp.
IT is capable of being cultivated on all kinds of land; the poorer land
producing the hemp finer in quality, though smaller in quantity, and the
rankest land producing strong and long, though coarse; and this sort being the
easiest to draw and work in the new mode, the quantity of manure requisite in
the first instance is not above half of that for wheat, and the subsequent
years, not above half that half, and the hemp still improving in quality. All
the work in the new method, not excepting the dressing, is fitter for women
than men, and may be practiced advantageously by every cottager.

No bleaching is wanted for the linen made of hemp prepared in the new method;
and it is certain, that if the hemp be fine, well managed, and dressed with the
finest flax hackle, it may supersede almost all the uses of flax, which flax is
a more uncertain and less abundant crop, requires more culture and better land,
which it exhausts; whereas hemp grounds increase in goodness. If the male hemp
intended for cords has been treated with little attention, and but little
scoured, or bleached, the shorts which come from it in dressing may be scoured
over again, to render them more useable. The hackle, and even the hemp itself,
may be a little oiled in the dressing, which will much facilitate that
business, and instead of fouling, will rather assist in bleaching the threads,
when they come to be washed.

Both the dressing and spinning of hemp are best carried on in a damp place.
Hemp is naturally inclined to twist too much in spinning.

The greatest injury that can befall hemp, is that of sun baking. But after all,
the greatest injuries that can be done to hemp, the new operation may be
performed on it; though with little success, yet sufficient to render it better
than that which is procured by any other operation, whereof I have, at this
moment, the proof under my eye. The greatest whiteness can never be procured
but by working it green. If stored, the greener it is got in, the whiter it
will be. The more the color is changed, the worse will be the color of the
thread.

Fifteen pounds of male hemp may be gotten off in a day, by one person; only
seven pounds, of female. It is necessary to pick the hemp plants over at
several different periods, in order to avoid having any bad stems among the
good, which might spoil a whole parcel, especially if intended for fine linen.

There is great reason, from a slight attempt that has been made, to think that
a dye might be procured from the water in which the hemp is scoured, after that
it is gotten off from the reed.

It is likewise thought that an instrument may be imagined for drawing the
reeds from the threads or rind, or else the rind or threads from the reed, more
expeditiously. A few bundles have been cleaned with a common rake.

In France it is common, at the time of pulling the female hemp, to scatter
turnip seeds in among the stems of the male hemp, which are left standing, and
these turnips frequently produce a good deal of feed for sheep or cattle after
the male hemp is taken off. It is obvious that whatever has this effect, has,
besides the benefit of supporting the stock of a farm, that of aiding to manure
the hemp grounds, especially if it be sheep that are fed on it; therefore if
this method fails, it would be prudent, immediately as the hemp is off the
ground, to plow it up, and sow turnips, cole seed, rye, or any other thing
proper for sheep feed, which can be gotten off early in the next spring, so as
to be able to till the land well in time for receiving the hemp seed.

It is less an injury to the hemp to pull the plants before they are ripe
enough, than to leave them too long standing. It is a less injury, in soaking
the hemp, to leave it too long in the water than to take it out before it is
sufficiently soaked.

The more the hemp is cleansed after getting off the reed, the finer it
becomes, and the finer dressing it requires: Nothing but experience can mark
the degrees.

The most advantageous time to begin the culture of hemp on any land, is
immediately after a crop of turnip^; exactly the same as if you were about to
sow barley.

The coarsest black soap, which costs in France only three pence per pound,
will suffice for making the suds through which the hemp should pass.

It is asserted, from experience, that putting the clusters containing the hemp
seeds to sweat and heat, causes many of the seeds to come to perfection, which,
in the common method, would wither and become dead; and that it of course
improves both the quantity and quality.

An improved METHOD of PRESERVING the FINE FLAVOR of BUTTER, and of PREVENTING
its GROWING RANCID.
Communicated to the "Burlington Society for the promoting Agriculture and
Domestic Manufactures," by their PRESIDENT, and ordered to be published. From
the American (...). Vol. VIII. Page 172.
TO a peck of fine salt add one ounce of crude sal ammoniac, and two ounces of
saltpetre, both finely powdered: Mix them very well with the fine salt: With
this salt, work your butter, until the butter milk be entirely extracted. Then
pack it in wooden firkins, salting it with the same mixed salt, to such a
degree as to be palatable, when eaten with bread, and no salter. The mixture is
stronger than fine salt: Of consequence something less is required.

By order of the Society, W. COXE, JUN. SEC'RY.

DIRECTIONS for the MANUFACTURING SUGAR from the MAPLE TREE.
[From the AMERICAN MUSEUM.]
IF the sap is drawn into wooden vessels, care should be taken that they are
made of such wood as will not give the liquor a bad taste. Some maple sugar has
a disagreeable taste, occasioned, as I have been informed, by the sap having
been put into trays made of the white walnut. If the moulds are made of wood,
they also should be made of some kind of tree that will give no taste. The
greatest part of the maple sugar I have seen, has too small a grain; which is
owing to two causes; one is, the makers of it do not use lime or lie, or any
thing else, to make it granulate; the other is, that they boil the sugar too
much. -- The quantity of lime necessary to answer the purpose, I cannot exactly
ascertain; but I suppose a heaped spoonful of slacked lime would be sufficient
for about six gallons of sap. A judicious person after a few trials, would be
able to fix the due proportion. It may, however, be proper to mention, that if
the quantity of lime is too small, the sugar will not be sufficiently grained;
if too much, it will give the sugar a reddish cast. I have before observed,
that the sugar should not be boiled so much as has been the common practice.
That, from which runs about one sixth of its weight in melasses, in twenty four
hours after it is put to drain, I think, has been boiled properly; perhaps, in
three or four weeks afterward, it will ^un the like quantity of melasses,
making the whole of the running about one third the weight of the green sugar.
It is probable that those who have been accustomed to high boiling, in order to
get as much sugar as possible in the first process, will not approve of this
method, but perhaps may be better reconciled to it, when they are informed,
that if they boil this melasses or syrup with strong lime water, one third of
the latter to two thirds of the melasses, there is reason to expect it will
make good sugar, although not equal to the first sort.

I shall now proceed to give some directions for the making of maple sugar: --
Let all the sap that has been collected in one day, be boiled the day
following, lest it should ferment, in which case the sugar would be less in
quantity, and worse in quality. To carry on the business to the greatest
advantage, there should be three kettles of different dimensions. These kettles
should be fixed in a row, the smallest at one end, the middle sized next, and
the largest at the other end. -- When there is a quantity of sap collected, put
as much in the largest kettle as can be conveniently boiled in it; then throw
in as much lime or lie as may be deemed necessary to make the liquor granulate.
Keep a moderate fire for some time, and as the scum rises, take it off with a
skimmer; after the liquor is pretty clear, increase the fire and boil it
briskly, 'till so much is ^vaporated, as that which remains may be boiled in
the middle kettle; Some liquor should be left in the large kettle, if an iron
one, otherwise (...) its splitting, upon putting in cold liquor.
into which the liquor must be strained through a blanket; under this kettle,
keep a good fire, and take off the scum as it rises. As soon as the liquor is
taken from the large, and put into the middle kettle, fresh sap must be put
into the former, and treated as before directed, and so on, till all the sap is
boiled.

When the liquor is sufficiently evaporated in the middle kettle, to admit i^s
being boiled in the smallest, it must he put into the last, where it must be
boiled, until it gets to a proper consistency to make sugar. When the liquor is
taken from the middle kettle into the smallest, the former must be supplied, as
is before directed, from the largest, with fresh sap. The liquor, in the small
kettle, must be boiled briskly, until it gets pretty thick, when the fire
should be lessened, to prevent its burning. When the liquor rises in the
kettle, a piece of butter or fat, the size of a hazle nut, may be thrown in; if
this quantity does not make it boil fl^t, more should be added, until it
answers the purpose, and this must be repeated as often as the liquor rises.
When it is boiled enough, which may be known by the manner Dip a stick into the
liquor, apply the thumb to it, and take part of what adheres to the stick, then
draw it two or three times between the thumb and finger.
of its roping between the thumb and finger, it must be put into a cooler or
tub, when the small kettle must be supplied with liquor from the middle sized
one, that, with more from the largest, and the large one with fresh sap, as is
before directed. When one third of the sap, that has been collected, is boiled
and put into the cooler, it must be stirred briskly about with a stirring stick
(which may be made like a small paddle) until it grains, when it may be lest
(if the business has been well done) until another third of the liquor is
boiled, and put into the cooler: It must be then moved about with the stirring
stick, until it is well mixed together -- when the remainder of the liquor is
boiled and put into the cooler, it must again be moved about with the stirring
stick, until the whole is well mixed, when it must be put into moulds; earthen
would be best; but wooden moulds may be made to answer the purpose, by nailing
or pinning four boards together, ^o shaped as to make the mould one inch
diameter at the bottom, and ten or twelve inches at the top; the length may be
two feet, or two feet and an half -- these moulds must be closely stopped at
the small ends, with old coarse linen, or some such thing, and set up with
something to stay them; the sugar must then be taken from the cooler, and
poured into the moulds -- next morning the stoppers must be taken out, and the
moulds be put on troughs, or some vessel to drain their melasses. In the
evening, the loaves must be pierced at the small ends, to make them run their
syrup freely -- this may be done by driving a wooden pin, (shaped like a
marling spike) three or four inches up the loaf; after which they must be lest
to drain their melasses, which will be done in a shorter or longer time,
according as the sugar has been boiled.

No part of the business requires greater attention than granulating or
graining the sugar in the cooler, and afterward frequently observing the state
it is in -- if too thick, it may be remedied by boiling the remaining liquor
lower, than that which was boiled before -- if too thin, by stirring the cooler
again, and boiling the remainder of the liquor higher, or more.

A SUGAR BOILER.
Philadelphia, August 21, 1789. The making of sugar is quite common and easy
with a single kettle of any size.




