THE WORLD from the best Authorities
map of the world

THE AMERICAN UNIVERSAL GEOGRAPHY, OR, A VIEW OF THE PRESENT STATE OF ALL THE
Empires, Kingdoms, States, and Republics IN THE KNOWN WORLD, AND OF THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA IN PARTICULAR.

IN TWO PARTS.

The FIRST PART

Treats of Astronomical Geography, and other useful preliminaries to the study
of Geography, in an enlarged and improved Introduction -- of the WESTERN, or
AMERICAN CONTINENT -- of its Discovery -- its Aboriginal Inhabitants, and
whence they came -- its Divisions -- but more particularly of the United States
of America, generally and individually -- of their Situation, Dimensions, Civil
Divisions, Rivers, Lakes, Climate, Mountains, Soil, Produce, Natural History,
Commerce, Manufactures, Population, Character, Curiosities, Springs, Mines and
Minerals, Military Strength, Constitutions, Islands, History of the War, and
the succeeding Events. -- With a View of the British, Spanish, French,
Portuguese, and other Dominions, on the Continent, and in the West Indies.

The SECOND PART

Describes at large, and from the latest and best Authorities, the Present
State, in respect to the above mentioned Particulars, of the EASTERN CONTINENT
-- and its Islands -- as divided into EUROPE, ASIA, and AFRICA -- and
subdivided into Empires, Kingdoms, and Republics.

TO WHICH ARE ADDED,

An improved CATALOGUE of NAMES of PLACES, and their GEOGRAPHICAL SITUATION,
alphabetically arranged -- an enlarged CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE of REMARKABLE
EVENTS, from the Creation to the present Time -- and a LIST of Ancient and
Modern Learned and Eminent MEN, in AMERICA, as well as EUROPE.

The whole comprehending a complete and improved SYSTEM of MODERN GEOGRAPHY.
Calculated for AMERICANS.

Illustrated with MAPS of the Countries described.

BY JEDIDIAH MORSE

Published according to Act of Congress.

PART I

Being a New Edition of the AMERICAN GEOGRAPHY corrected and greatly enlarged.

PRINTED AT BOSTON.

BY ISAIAH THOMAS AND EBENEZER T. ANDREWS.

Sold at their Bookstore, Faust's Statue, No. 45, Newbury Street, by said
THOMAS, in WORCESTER; by BERRY, ROGERS and BERRY, in NEWYORK; by H. and P.
RICE, in PHILADELPHIA; and by W. P. YOUNG, in CHARLESTON.

MDCCXCIII.

PREFACE To the AMERICAN GEOGRAPHY, published in 1789.
So imperfect are all the accounts of America hitherto published, even by those
who once exclusively possessed the best means of information, that from them
very little knowledge of this country can be acquired. Europeans have been the
sole writers of American Geography, and have too often suffered fancy to supply
the place of facts, and thus have led their readers into errors, while they
professed to aim at removing their ignorance. But since the United States have
become an independent nation, and have risen into Empire, it would be
reproachful for them to suffer this ignorance to continue; and the rest of the
world have a right n^^ to expect authentic information. To furnish this has
been the design of the author of the following work; but he does not pretend
that this design is completed, nor will the judicious and candid expect it,
when they consider that he has trodden, comparatively, an unbeaten path -- that
he has had to collect a vast variety of materials -- that these have been
widely scattered -- and that he could derive but little assistance from books
already published. Four years have been employed in this work, during which
period the Author has visited the several States in the Union, and maintained
an extensive correspondence with m^n of Science; and in every instance has
endeavored to derive his information from the most authentic sources; he has
also submitted his manuscripts to the inspection of Gentlemen in the States
which they particularly described, for their correction. It is possible,
notwithstanding, and indeed very probable, that inaccuracies may have crept in;
but he hopes there are none of any great importance, and that such as may be
observed, will not be made the subject of severe censure, but ascribed to some
pardonable cause. He flatters himself, however, that the work now offered to
the public, will be found to be as accurate, complete and impartial as the
present state of American Geography and History could furnish. After all, like
the nation of which it treats, it is but an infant, and as such solicits the
f^stering care of the country it describes; it will grow and improve as the
nation advances toward maturity, and the Author will gratefully acknowledge
every friendly communication which will ^end to make it perfect.

In the prosecution of the work, he has aimed at utility rather than
originality; and of course, when he has met with publications suited to his
purpose, he has made a free use of them; and he thinks it proper here to
observe, that, to avoid unnecessary trouble, he has frequently used the words
as well as the ideas of the writers, although the reader has not been
particularly apprized of it.

For the Author distinctly to acknowledge the obligations he is under to many
citizens of these States, as well as to some foreigners of distinction, among
us, would swell this preface to an improper length: He cannot forbear, however,
to express his peculiar obligation to EBENEZER HAZARD, Esquire Postmaster General
of the United States, for permission of free access to his very large and
valuable Collection of papers, These papers have since been published in two
quarto volumes -- Printed by Thomas D^bson, Philadelphia, 1792.
from which he has derived much of his historical information. This collection
has been made with unwearied care and minute exactness; and the papers, which
are of unquestionable authenticity, are the best and most complete depositum of
facts relating to the history of America, from its first settlement, that is to
be found in the United States. The Author's acknowledgments are likewise
especially due to Capt. THOMAS HUTCHINS, Geographer General of the United
States, for his particular friendship and assistance.

It is to be regretted, that so few maps could be introduced into the work; but
the Author hopes to be enabled to increase the number in future Editions. They
have been increased, the reader will find, from two to eleven.


Every citizen of the United States ought to be thoroughly acquainted with the
Geography of his own country, and to have some idea, at least, of the other
parts of the world; but as many of them cannot afford time and expense
necessary to acquire a complete knowledge of the several parts of the Globe,
this book offers them such information as their situation in life may require;
and while it is calculated early to impress the minds of American Youth with an
idea of the superior importance of their own country, as well as to attach them
to its interests, it furnishes a simplified account of other countries,
calculated for their juvenile capacities, and to serve as an introduction to
their future improvement in Geography.

CHARLESTOWN, (Massachusetts) March 12, 1789.
PREFACE TO THE AMERICAN UNIVERSAL GEOGRAPHY.
THE following work may be considered, in some respects, as a Second Edition of
the AMERICAN GEOGRAPHY, published by the Author in 1789; although it is so far
renovated, and so much improved and enlarged that it was thought proper to give
it a new title, corresponding to its more extensive design. The Author's
principal reason for deviating from his original plan of confining his work
chiefly to the United States of America, was that he might furnish his fellow
citizens, especially the youth of his country, with a general system of
Geography, more complete, and better adapted to afford them useful information,
than those systems which have hitherto been in use among us, which were
compiled in Europe, and calculated particularly for Europeans.

Guthrie's Geographical Grammar stands highest in the estimation of the public
of any work of the kind, and has had a very extensive sale in America. But this
work, meritorious as it really is, has two capital faults, as it respects this
country. -- The first is, its deficiency and falsity in describing the United
States. It is not to be supposed that European Geographers should be as well
acquainted with America as with their own country. -- Accordingly we find that
their accounts of the United States are not only very concise, but very
inaccurate. To attempt to give American youth a knowledge of their own country
from these imperfect and erroneous sketches, would be as fruitless as absurd --
it would be to instill into the minds of Americans, British ideas of America,
which are far from being favorable or just. -- The second fault of Guthrie's
Grammar, as it applies to America, is its unwieldy and disproportionate account
of Great Britain, which occupies nearly one third part of a book which
professes to give us a complete Geographical description of the world. To the
inhabitants of Great Britain such a minute detail of particulars may be
entertaining and useful; but Americans ought to know their own country better
than any other.

To Guthrie's Grammar, in common with others, it has also been objected, that
too great a part has been occupied with history. Particular histories of
kingdoms and nations, in detail, it is conceived do not belong to a treatise on
Geography. They must be either too concise to be of much use, or swell the
volume to too expensive a size. No person will have recourse to a system of
Geography, with a view to acquaint himself with the History of any country. By
expunging from Guthrie's Grammar this and other superfluous matters, its size
may, with advantage, be lessened one third, which would give room for much
recent and useful information respecting the Eastern Continent, without
increasing the expense. It has been the Author's aim to avail himself of this
advantage in perfecting his work, by introducing no more history than what was
thought necessary to give the reader an idea of the countries described, and by
expunging what was judged of no importance to Americans, and giving in its room
such information from the best Geographical writers, and the latest and most
celebrated travelers and navigators, as will be both pleasing and useful; and
he cannot but entertain a hope, that the American reader will find in the
Second Part of this work, a better account of the Eastern Continent in general,
than is contained in Guthrie's Grammar.

Before the Revolution, Americans seldom pretended to write or to think for
themselves. We humbly received from Great Britain our laws, our manners, our
books, and our modes of thinking; and our youth were educated as the subjects
of the British king, not as the citizens of a free and independent republic. It
is not easy at once to break off old habits either of thinking or acting.
Accustomed, as we have been, to appreciate British literature and manufactures,
it has been natural, in the comparison, to undervalue our own. It has been for
the interest of Great Britain, and of British subjects who have emigrated and
settled among us, to cherish these sentiments. Hence our own productions, of
books as well as other articles, have been discouraged, and those of Great
Britain promoted. To import from Europe all their literary works, and their
mechanical, nautical and Geographical improvements and discoveries, is highly
useful and proper -- But to pretend any longer to receive the knowledge of the
Geography and internal state of our own country, from a kingdom three thousand
miles distant from us -- to depend on foreigners, partial to a proverb to their
own country, for an account of the divisions, rivers, productions,
manufactures, navigation, commerce, literature, improvements, etc. of the
American States, would certainly be a disgraceful blot upon our literary and
national character. Indeed, the propriety of importing any of our school books
from Great Britain, unless they are previously modified and adapted to the
genius of our republican government, is very questionable; as we otherwise run
the hazard of having our children imbibe from them the monarchical ideas, and
national prejudices of the English.

The Science of Geography, like many other Sciences, is not stationary. So
rapid are the improvements made in it by travelers and navigators -- so fast
do alterations and revolutions succeed each other, that it is not an easy
matter for a Geographer to keep pace with them. What is this year a
geographical truth, may the next year be a geographical error, and require
correction. The astonishing progress of things in the United States since the
year 1789, will readily suggest to the reader the reason of the many
alterations and additions in this Second Edition of the American Geography, as
contained in the First Part of the following work.

The Author does not forget here very gratefully to acknowledge his great
obligations to several of the gentlemen who sustain some of the highest offices
in the general government, and to many gentlemen of respectability in the
several states, for their very liberal and valuable communications, which have
contributed not a little to render the work accurate and useful. He hopes that
such use has been made of their friendly assistance, as will induce them to
continue it, and to afford in future every information, and every hint, which
may tend to render the work more perfect.

CHARLESTOWN, ( Massachusetts) May 1, 1793.
CONTENTS OF PART I.
INTRODUCTION
Of Astronomy, as connected with, and introductory to the Science of Geography,
17 Of the several Astronomical Systems of the World, 18 Table of the Diameters,
Periods, etc. of the several Planets, 20 Of Comets, ibid. Of Fixed Stars, 21 Of
Geography, its Rise and Progress, 24 Figure, Magnitude and Motion of the Earth,
29 Doctrine of the Sphere, 32 Table of Countries and remarkable Places situated
in the respective Climates north of the Equator, etc. etc. 36 Table showing the
Number of Miles contained in a Degree of Longitude, etc. 37 Methods of finding
the Latitudes and Longitudes of Places from Celestial Observations, 38 Of the
Globes, and their Use, 40 Problems solved on the Celestial Globe, 46 Manner in
which different Nations reckon Time, 48 Geographical Theorems, or Propositions,
ibid. Of Maps and their Use, 50 General Observations concerning Heat and Cold,
51 Temperature of different Places, according to their Latitudes, 54 Theory of
the Winds, 55 Theory of the Tides, 57 Length of Miles in different Countries,
59 Natural Divisions of the Earth, ibid. Account of the Gregorian, or New
Style, 60 Table, exhibiting the Superficial Contents of the whole Globe in
Square Miles, etc. etc. 61
AMERICA.
History of its Discovery, 63 General Description of America, in which the
Questions, when, whence, and by whom was America first peopled, are discussed
-- Account of the Indians -- New Discoveries on the Northwest Coast, etc. 71
NORTH AMERICA.
Summary Account of its Discovery and Settlement, in Chronological Order, 107
Boundaries, Extent, Bays, Sounds, Straits and Islands, 119 Divisions of North
America, 120 Table of the different Countries, Provinces and States of North
America -- to whom belonging -- Chief Towns, and Number of Inhabitants, 121
DANISH AMERICA.
Greenland, 121 Boundaries and Extent, Face of the Country, Population, etc.
etc. 128
BRITISH AMERICA.
New Britain, 130 Upper and Lower Canada, 135 Island of Cape Breton, 139 Nova
Scotia, 141 Island of St. John's, 145 Newfoundland, 146
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
General Description of the United States, including a History of the late War,
and many other useful and entertaining Matters, 147
GRAND DIVISIONS OF THE UNITED STATES. 309
First Grand Division, or Northern or Eastern States.
New England, 310 Vermont, 322 New Hampshire, 329 District of Main, 345
Massachusetts, 353 Rhode Island, 381 Connecticut, 392
Second Grand Division, or Middle States. 416
New York, 417 New Jersey, 452 Pennsylvania, 469 Delaware, 503 Territory North
West of the Ohio, 509
Third Grand Division, or Southern States. 519
Maryland, 520 Virginia, 532 Indiana, 561 Kentucky, 562 North Carolina, 569
Territory South of Ohio, 584 South Carolina, 593 Georgia, 610
Spanish Dominions in North America. 625
East and West Florida, 627 Louisiana, 633 Mexico, or New Spain, 642
SOUTH AMERICA.
Spanish Dominions in South America.
Torra Firma, or Castile del O^^, 643 Peru, 645 Ch^li, 650 Paragua, or La
Plata, 652
Portuguese America.
Brazil, 654
French America,
Cayenne, 657
Dutch America.
Surrinam, or Dutch Guiana, 658
Aboriginal America, or that Part which the Indians possess.
Amazonia, 66^ Patagonia, 664
WEST INDIA ISLANDS.
General description of them, 666
British West Indies.
Jamaica, 669 Barbados, 672 St. Christopher's, 673 Antigua, 674 Grenada, and
the Grenadines, ibid. Dominica, ibid. St. Vincent, 675 Nevis, and Mont^errat,
ibid. Barbuda, ibid. Anguilla, ibid. Bermudas, or Sommers' Islands, ibid.
Lacay's, or Bahama Islands, 677 Falkland Islands, ibid.
Spanish West Indies.
Cuba, 678 Hispaniola, or St. Domingo, ibid. Porto Rico, 683 Trinidad, ibid.
Margaretta, 684 Juan Fernandes, ibid.
French West Indies.
Martinico, 685 Gaudalupe, ibid. St. Lucia, ibid. Tobago, ibid.
Dutch West Indies.
St. Eustatius, or Eustatia, 686 Curassou, 687
Danish West Indies.
St. Thomas, 688 St. Croix, or Santa Cruz, ibid.
New Discoveries.
Northern Archipelago, 690 The Pelew Islands, 691 The Marquesas Islands, 692
Ingraham's Islands, ibid. Otaheite* or King George's Island, ibid. Society
Islands, 693 The Friendly Islands, 694 New Zealand, 695
CONTENTS OF PART II.
EUROPE.
GENERAL Remarks, 1 Public Revenue and Land Forces of the Principal States in
Europe, 3 Naval Forces of the different Powers, 4 Grand Divisions, Situation,
Boundaries, etc. of Europe, 5 Denmark, 7 East and West Greenland, Iceland, and
the Islands in the Atlantic Ocean, ibid. Norway, 14 Denmark Proper, or Jutland,
21 Lapland, 30 Sweden, 35 Muscovy, or the Russian Empire in Europe and Asia, 49
The British Empire, 73 England, 75 Scotland, 125 Ireland, 149 Isle of Man, 185
Isle of Wight, 186 Scilly Isles, 187 Jersey, Guernsey, etc. 188 Germany, 189
Prussia, 205 Austria, 213 Bohemia, 219 Hungary, 220 Transylvania, Hungary,
Sclavonia, etc. 224 Poland, 227 Switzerland, 241 Netherlands, 249 France, 269
Spain, 317 Portugal, 339 Italy, 346 Turkey in Europe, 375
ASIA.
Its Situation, Boundaries, Grand Divisions, and History, 384 Turkey in Asia,
387 Tartary in Asia, 403 China, 411 Indostan, Hindoostan, or India on this side
the Ganges, 425 India beyond the Ganges, 450 Persia, 457 Arabia, 466 Indian and
Oriental Islands, 475
AFRICA.
Situation, Boundary, Grand Divisions, etc. 485 Egypt, 489 The States of
Barbary, 497 Africa, from the Tropic of Cancer to the Cape of Good Hope, 506
African Islands, 516 New Discoveries, [524] A new Geographical Table,
containing the Names and Situations of all the chief Places in the known World,
521 An improved Chronological Table of Remarkable Events, Discoveries and
Inventions, from the Creation to the present Time, 533 List of Ancient and
Modern Learned and Ingenious Men, in America, as well as Europe, 548
DIRECTIONS to the BOOKBINDER for PLACING the MAPS, etc.
PART I.
1 World to face Title Page, Page 2 Artificial Sphere, etc. to face 32 3
Northern and Middle States do. 309 4 District of Maine do. 345 5 Map of
Pennsylvania do. 469 6 Map of Virginia, North Carolina, etc. do. 532 7 South
America do. 642 8 West Indies do. 666
PART II.
1 Europe to face Page 1 2 Asia do. 384 3 Africa do. 485
INTRODUCTION.
Of ASTRONOMY, as connected with, and Introductory to, the SCIENCE of GEOGRAPHY.
THE earth is now universally considered as a Planet, and, in company with six
other bodies, of a similar nature, revolves round the Sun as its center. Some
acquaintance with the motions, times, distances, and magnitudes of these
heavenly bodies, is necessary in order to a complete knowledge of Geography.
The science which treats of the planets and other heavenly bodies, is called
Astronomy. Hence the propriety of introducing this work with a short account of
that science.

Astronomy was first attended to by the shepherds, on the beautiful plains of
Egypt and Babylon. Their employment led them to contemplate the stars. While
their flocks, in the silence of the evening, were enjoying sweet repose, the
spangled sky naturally invited the attention of the shepherds. The observation
of the heavenly bodies afforded them amusement, and at the same time assisted
them in traveling in the night. A star guided the shepherds to the manger
where our blessed Savior was born. By the aid of a lively imagination, they
distributed the stars into a number of constellations or companies, to which
they gave the name of the animals which they represented.

The Sun, the most glorious of the heavenly luminaries, is the fountain of heat
and light to the planets which revolve round it. The paths which the planets
describe in their revolutions are called their orbits. The number of planets in
the Solar System is seven; whose names, according to their nearness to the sun,
are Mercury, Venus, the Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn and the new planet
Herschel. The two first of these, because they move within the orbit of the
earth, are called inferior, or rather interior planets -- the four last,
because they move without the earth's orbit, are called superior, or more
properly exterior planets.

To express another distinction, these seven planets, are called primary
planets, in reference to fourteen other bodies, which are called secondary
planets, moons or satellites, which revolve round their respective primaries
from west to east, and at the same time move with them round the Sun. The earth
has one satellite or moon, which performs its revolution in 29d. 12h. 44m. at
the distance of about 60 semidiameters of the earth, or 239,100 miles, and is
carried with the earth round the sun, once in a year. Jupiter has four moons;
Saturn has seven The celebrated Dr. Herschel has lately discovered two other
Satellites belonging to Saturn, so that his whole number, before supposed to be
only five, is seven. The seventh is nearest to the planet, and the sixth next.
The syderial revolution of the former he supposes to be completed in about
twenty two hours and an half, th^^ of the latter in about one day and nine
hours.
and is also encompassed with a broad ring. The diameter of the ring, is, to
the diameter of Saturn, as 9 to 4; and the space between the body of Saturn and
the ring, is equal to the breadth of the ring. Herschel This planet was
discovered by William Herschel, L. L. D. E. R. S. in 1782. In a paper which Dr.
Herschel communicated to the Royal Society in London, in 1783, giving an
account of the elements of this new planet, and its two satellites, he
observes, that one of these satellites revolves in about nine days, the other
in about thirteen and an half. The planet moves at about double the distance of
Saturn. The quantity of matter is seventeen times greater than the quantity of
matter in the earth; its magnitude about (...) times greater; its density about
4 times less; and the power of gravity on its surface makes a heavy body fall
18 feet in a second. The Dr. for the purpose of making greater discoveries in
the heavens, has constructed a grand reflecting telescope, forty feet long, and
of such diameter as that it is easy to walk through it. [ Dr. Price's letter to
Dr. S^^^es* (...).


has two moons, one of which revolves in about nine, the other in about
thirteen and an half days.

Of the several ASTRONOMICAL SYSTEMS of the WORLD.
BY the word system is meant an hypothesis or supposition of a certain order
and arrangement of the several parts of the universe, by which the astronomers
explain all the phenomina or appearances of the heavenly bodies, their motions,
changes, etc. The most famous systems, or hypotheses, are the Ptolemaic, the
Tychonic, or Brahean, and the Pythagorean, or Copernican System.

THE PTOLEMAIC SYSTEM.
This system, so called from Claudius Ptolemeus, a celebrated astronomer of
Pelu^ium, in Egypt, who adopted and defended the prevailing system of that age,
supposes the earth immoveably fixed, in the center of the universe; and that
the moon, the planets, and the stars, all move round it from east to west, once
in twenty four hours, in the following order: The Moon, Mercury, Venus, the
Sun, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn and the fixed stars. These were all supposed to be
fixed in separate crystaline spheres, and to be included in another, called the
Primum Mobile, which gives motion to all the rest.

This system owed its origin to the sensible appearances of the celestial
motions. It was taken for granted, that the motions those bodies appeared to
possess, were real; and not dreaming of any motion in the earth, nor being
acquainted with the distinctions between absolute, relative, or apparent
motion, the philosophers were incapable of forming adequate ideas of these
particulars, and thence reduced to the necessity of being misled by their own
senses, for want of that assistance which after ages produced. It is easy to
observe, they had no notion of any other system but our own, nor of any other
world but the earth on which we live. They were persuaded that all things were
made for the use of man; that all the stars were contained in one concave
sphere, consequently, at an equal distance from the earth; and that the Primum
Mobile was circumscribed by the empyrean heaven, of a cubic form, which they
supposed to be the blissful abode of departed spirits. But modern observations
and discoveries have sufficiently shown the absurdities of this system, so that
it is now abandoned by all the learned, and hardly ever mentioned but to be
exploded. Even in the infancy of astronomy, it was found insufficient to
account for all the motions of the heavenly bodies, without having recourse to
such absurd suppositions, that a novice in literature would be ashamed to
propose.

THE BRAHEAN SYSTEM.
Tycho Brahe, a nobleman of Denmark, and one of the most eminent astronomers of
his time, proposed another system to account for the motion of the heavenly
bodies. Unwilling to admit of the motion of the earth, and convinced that the
Ptolemaic hypothesis could not be true, he contrived another, different from
any thing before offered to the world. In this hypothesis, the earth is
supposed to be at rest in the center of the universe, and the sun, together
with the planets and fixed stars, to revolve about the earth in twenty four
hours; and at the same time all the planets, except the moon, revolve about the
sun. But this was even more absurd than that of Ptolemy, and it acordingly was
soon exploded.

THE COPERNICAN, or TRUE SOLAR SYSTEM.
Copernicus, the author of this system, was born at Thorn, in Royal Prussia, in
1473. This hypothesis, which is now universally adopted by all the learned in
Europe, supposes the sun to be in the center of the system, and that all the
planets move round him in the order we have already mentioned. These, together
with the comets, form the constituent parts of the Solar System. See Plate,
where this is represented, and by which an adequate idea of the whole may be
easily obtained.

But it must be observed, that, though the orbits of the planets are circles in
the scheme, they are not really so, but ellipses, and the sun placed in one of
the focus's. All the planets have one common focus, in which the sun is placed.
This supposition readily solves all the appearances observable in the motion of
the planets, and also agrees with the strictest philosophical and mathematical
reasoning.

All the planets, in their revolutions, are sometimes nearer to, and sometimes
farther from, the Sun; a consequence of that luminary's not being placed in the
center of each orbit, and their being ellipses. Hence, also, we see the reason
why the planets move faster as they approach nearer to the sun, and slower as
they recede from the sun.

If a right line, called by some the vector radius, be drawn from the sun
through any planet, and supposed to revolve round the sun with the planet, this
line will describe, or pass over every part of the plane of the orbit; so that
the vector radius may be said to describe the area of the orbit.

In the solar system are observed two principal laws which regulate the motions
of all the planets. These laws are the following:

1. "The planets describe equal areas in equal times." That is, the vector
radius, in equal portions of time, describes equal areas or portions of the
space contained within the planet's orbit.

2. "The squares of the periodical times of the planets are as the cubes of
their mean distances from the sun." That is, as the square of the time which
any planet takes to describe its orbit, is to the square of the time taken by
any other planet to run through its orbit; so is the cube of the mean distance
of the former from the sun, to the cube of the mean distance of the latter from
the sun.

These are the two famous laws of Kepler, a great astronomer, who flourished
about the beginning of the seventeenth century, and who deduced them from a
multitude of observations; but the first who demonstrated these laws, was the
great Sir Isaac Newton.

By the second law, the relative distances of the planets from the sun are
known; and were the real distance of any one of them determined, the absolute
distances of all the others would be obtained. By the transit of Venus, over
the sun in 1761, we now know the real distances of the planets from the sun
much better than before: These, together with the other necessary particulars
for forming a competent idea of the solar system, are exhibited in the
following table.

A TABLE of the Diameters, Periods, etc. of the several Planets in the Solar
System.
Names of the planets. Diameters in English Miles. Mean distances from the sun.
Annual periods round the sun. Diurnal rotation on its axis. Hourly motion in
its orbit. Hourly motion of its equator. Inclination of axis to orbit. d. h. m.
Sun ^90,000 y. d. h. 25 6 0 3,818 8 0 Mercury 3,000 36,841,468 0 87 23 unknown
109,699 unknown unknown Venus 9,330 68,^91,4^6 0 224 17 24 8 0 80,299 43 75 0
Earth 7,970 95,173,000 1 0 0 1 0 0 68,243 1,042 23 29 Moon 2,180 ditto. 1 0 0
29 12 44 22,2^0 9 2 ^' Mars 5,400 145,014,148 1 321 17 0 24 40 55,287 556 0 0
Jupiter 94,000 494,990,976 11 314 18 0 9 56 29,083 25,920 0 0 Saturn 78,000
907,956,130 29 176 15 unknown 22,101 unknown unknown According to Dr. Herschel,
it is about 80 times larger than the earth, which would make its diameter
637,600 miles.
Herschel 637,600 1^00,000,000 82 34 0 unknown unknown ditto. ditto.

By the above Table, a competent idea of the Solar System may be obtained.

The COMETS.
Besides the planets and stars mentioned above, we perceive, in ^he expanse of
the universe, many other bodies belonging to the system of the sun, that seem
to have much more irregular motions. These are the comets, that, descending
from the far distant parts of the system with great rapidity, surprise us with
the singular appearance of a train, or tail, which accompanies them; become
visible to us in the lower parts of their orbits, and, after a short stay, go
off again to vast distances, and disappear.

They are large opaque bodies, which move in all possible directions. Some
revolve from west to east; some from east to west; others from south to north,
or from north to south. Their orbits have very different inclinations to the
ecliptic. Some have conjectured, that the comets were intended by the all wise
Creator, to connect systems, and that each of their several orbits includes the
sun, and one of the fixed stars. The figures of the comets are very different.
Some of them emit beams on all sides like hair, and are called hairy comets,
others have a long, fiery, transparent tail projecting from the part which is
opposite to the sun. Their magnitudes also are different. Some appear no bigger
than stars of the first magnitude; others larger than the moon.

Though some of the ancients had more just notions of these bodies, yet the
opinion having prevailed, that they were only meteors generated in the air,
like those we see in it every night, and in a few ^^^ments vanishing, no care
was taken to observe or record their phenomena accurately, till of late. Hence
this part of astronomy is very imperfect. The general doctrine is, that they
are solid, compact bodies, like other planets, and regulated by the same laws
of gravity, (...) as to describe equal areas in equal times by radii drawn from
the common center. They move about the sun, in very eccentric ellipses, and are
of much greater density than the earth; for some of them are heated in every
period to such a degree as would vitrify or dissipate any substance known to
us. Sir Isaac Newton computed the heat of the comet that appeared in the year
1680, when nearest the sun, to be 2000 times hotter than red hot iron, and that
being thus heated, it must retain its heat till it comes round again, although
its period should be more than 20,000 years; and it is computed to be only 575.
The number of comets belonging to our system is unknown. All those which have
been observed have moved through the etherial regions, and the orbit of the
planets, without suffering the least sensible resistance in their motions,
which sufficiently proves that the planets do not move in solid orbs. Of all
the comets, the periods of three only are known with any degree of certainty,
being found to return at intervals of 75,129, and 575 years; and of these, that
which appeared in 1680, is the most remarkable. This comet, at its greatest
distance, is about 11 thousand 200 millions of miles from the sun, while its
least distance from the center of the sun, is about 490 thousand miles; within
less than one third part of the sun's semidiameter from his surface. In that
part of his orbit, which is nearest to the sun, it flies with the amazing
volocity of 880,000 miles in an hour; or above 244 miles in a second: a
velocity much greater than any we are acquainted with, that of light excepted;
and the sun, as seen from it, appears 100 degrees in breadth, consequently
40,000 times as large as he appears to us. The astonishing distance that this
comet runs out into empty space, naturally suggests to our imagination, the
vast distance between our sun and the nearest of the fixed stars, of whose
attractions all the comets must keep clear, to return periodically and go round
the sun. Dr. Halley, to whom every part of astronomy, but this in a particular
manner is highly indebted, has joined his labors to those of the great Sir
Isaac Newton, on this subject. Our earth was out of the way, when this comet
last passed near her orbit: But it requires a more perfect knowledge of the
motion of the comet, to be able to judge if it will always pass by us with so
little effect; for it may be here observed, that the comet, in one part of his
orbit, approaches very near to the orbit of our earth: So that in some
revolutions, it may approach near enough to have very considerable if not fatal
effects upon it.

Of the FIXED STARS.
The fixed stars, though they do not constitute a part of the solar system,
must be considered here, as they are of infinite use in the practice of
geography. They are readily known from the planets, by their twinkling. They
are observed never to change their situations with respect to each other, and
hence they obtained the name of fixed stars: They shine by their own light; and
there is the greatest reason to think they are suns fixed in the centres of
other systems, having planets and comets revolving round them like our sun.
They appear of various sizes, owing to their different distances; those sizes
are generally distinguished into six or seven classes, called magnitudes; the
largest and brightest are said to be of the first magnitude; those of the next
class, or degree of brightness, are called stars of the second magnitude, and
so on to the last, or those just visible to the naked eye. But besides these
there are scattered in every part of the heavens, a prodigious number of
others, called telescopic stars, from their being invisible without the
assistance of that instrument. Great part of the modern astronomy, indeed, owes
both its rise and perfection to that admirable machine. The distance between
the earth and the nearest fixed star is astonishing. The orbit of the earth is
at least 162 millions of miles in diameter; yet this prodigious difference has
no effect on the distance of the star, which appears as far from the earth when
in the nearest, as in the farthest point of its orbit. It has been computed, by
some of the most able astronomers, that if a cannon ball continued to move with
the same velocity as when first discharged from the piece, or 480 miles an
hour, it would not reach the nearest fixed star in less than 700,000 years.
Light, which is transmitted from one body to another almost instantaneously,
takes up more time in passing from the fixed stars to this earth, than we do in
making a voyage to Europe; so that if all the fixed stars were now struck out
of existance, they would appear to us to keep their stations, for several
months yet to come. It is impossible therefore that they should borrow their
light from the sun, as do the planets. The distance therefore is too great for
the power of human beings to conceive; the understanding is bewildered and lost
in the contemplation. But though the fixed stars are placed at such immense
distances from us and from each other, and are doubtless suns illuminating
different worlds, yet astronomers, in order to facilitate their computations,
consider them as all equally distant from our sun, forming the surface of a
sphere, enclosing our system, and called the celestial sphere: a supposition
which may be strictly admitted, considering the astonishing distance of the
nearest fixed star.

A constellation is a number of stars which appear to lie in the neighborhood
of one another on the surface of the celestial sphere, and which astronomers,
for their easy remembrance, suppose to be circumscribed with the outlines of
some ancient or other sigure, whereby the motions of the planets is more
readily described and composed. These constellations are eighty in number;
twelve of which are in the zodiac, thirty six in the northern, and thirty two
in the southern hemisphere. The number of stars in the whole amounts to two
thousand eight hundred and forty three, of which twenty are of the first, sixty
five of the second, two hundred and five of the third, four hundred and eighty
five of the fourth, six hundred and forty eight of the fifth, and one thousand
four hundred and twenty of the sixth magnitude.

These stars, by not altering their situation, in respect to one another, serve
astronomers as fixed points whereby the motions of other bodies may be
compared; and, accordingly, their relative positions have been sought after
with the most assiduous care, during many ages, and catalogues of the
observations have, from time to time, been published, by those who have been at
the pains to make them. Among these the most copious, and at the same time the
most accurate, is that called the Historia Coelestis of Mr. Flamstead. To
consider these stars as designed merely to decorate the sky, and form a rich
and beautiful canopy for this earth, would derogate from the wisdom of the
creator. Astronomers therefore with much reason have considered the fixed stars
as so many suns attended with a number of revolving planets, which they
illuminate, warm and cherish. If this be true, there are as many systems as
there are fixed stars. These may also revolve round one common center, forming
one immense system of systems. All these systems we may conceive, are filled
with inhabitants suited to their respective climes; and are so many theaters,
on which the great Creator and Governor of the Universe displays his infinite
power, wisdom and goodness. Such a view of the starry heavens, must fill the
mind of every contemplative beholder, with sublime, magnificent and glorious
ideas of the Creator.

The ancient Egyptian priests, to whom the Greeks owed all their philosophical
learning, are supposed to have been the first acquainted with the true system
of the world. Pythagoras learned it in Egypt, and taught it to his disciples,
after his return to Europe. But it was so totally forgotten, during the ages of
ignorance, that when Copernicus, a celebrated astronomer, revived it, in the
fifteenth century, he was considered as the author, rather than the restorer.
Some of the learned immediately adopted the hypothesis, and it would probably
soon have been universally received, had it not met with a formidable
opposition from an ignorant and bigoted clergy. Nursed in the lap of indolence,
and inveterate enemies to every species of free and impartial enquiry, they
condemned the Copernican system, under pretense of its being repugnant to the
sacred writings. The thunder of the Vatican was employed to silence the voice
of reason, and the dread of ecclesiastical censures almost deterred mankind
from thinking. At last, the reformation in religion gave a fatal blow to
superstitious tyranny; the rays of learning broke through the night of
ignorance, and genuine philosophy triumphed over the chicanery of the schools:
Mankind were now convinced, that the scriptures were never intended to explain
the systems of philosophy, but to make us humane, virtuous, and happy; that it
is agreeable to the Great Author of our being to contemplate his works, and
display the wonders of his creating hand. From this fortunate era the sciences
made rapid strides toward perfection, and every day produced a discovery of
some new truth, or the detectection of some ancient error. Proofs were
multiplied in confirmation of the Copernican system, which is now established
on a foundation not to be shaken. The astonishing harmony which prevails among
the several parts, prove it to have been the work of a divine hand; and that
nothing less than infinite wisdom could have planned so beautiful a fabric.

The limits we are confined to, will not admit of our multiplying proofs to
establish the Copernican system; the following therefore only will be added;
but these, if there were no other, would be more than sufficient for the
purpose.

1. The planets Mercury and Venus, are always observed to have two conjunctions
with the sun, but no opposition: This could not happen, unless their orbits
were circumscribed by that of the earth.

2. Mars, Jupiter and Saturn have each their conjunctions and oppositions to
the sun, alternately and successively, which they they could not have, unless
their orbs were exterior to that of the earth.

3. The greatest elongation or distance of Mercury from the sun is about twenty
eight degrees, and that of Venus forty seven degrees; which answers exactly to
their distance in the Copernican system: But according to the Ptolemaic, they
must often be seen in opposition to him, or at the distance of 180 degrees.

4. In this disposition of the planets, they will all of them be sometimes much
nearer to the earth than at others; the consequence of which is, that their
brightness and splendor, as well as their apparent diameters, will be
proportionally greater at one time than at another; and this we observe to be
true every day. Thus the apparent diameter of Venus, when greatest, is near
sixty six seconds; when least, not more than nine seconds and an half: That of
Mars, when greatest, is twenty one seconds; when least, only two and an half.
But if the Ptolemaic hypothesis be true, they must always be equal.

5. All the planets sometimes appear in direct motion; sometimes stationary,
and sometimes retrograde. These appearances must happen according to the
Copernican system, but are absolutely repugnant to any other.

6. The bodies of Mercury and Venus, in their superior conjunction with the
sun, pass behind the body of that luminary, and in the inferior conjunction are
seen to transit or pass over his disk, in the form of a round black spot. These
phenomena are necessary in the Copernican system, but impossible in that of
Ptolemy.

7. The times in which these conjunctions, oppositions, stations, and
retrogradations of the planets happen, are not such as they would be, were the
earth at rest in the center; but precisely such as would happen, if the earth
and all the planets move about the sun, in the order, and with the velocities
assigned them in the Copernican system. Consequently this, and no other, can be
the true system of the world.

Of GEOGRAPHY. -- Its RISE and PROGRESS.
GEOGRAPHY is a word derived from the Greek, (...) scribo.
and literally signifies a description of the earth, its figure, magnitude, and
the positions of the several parts of its surface. -- Geography is either
universal, as it relates to the earth in general, or particular, as it relates
to any single part of it.

This science, like all others of a practical nature, has advanced toward
perfection by slow, and, in some periods of time, by almost imperceptible
degrees. In the infancy of the world the figure of the earth was unknown. It
was generally supposed to be a plane, of a circular surface, terminated by the
heavens; that this plane was of no remarkable thickness; and that the regions
below it were the habitations of spirits.

Observations, however, soon demonstrated, that this was not the real figure of
the earth. The desire of keeping up a mutual intercourse between each other,
and of exchanging their different commodities, induced the inhabitants of
ancient times to undertake journies of considerable length; and these were
extended in proportion as the inhabitants spread themselves into distant
countries. Their principal guides in these journies were the heavenly bodies.
The sun was their direction during the day, and the stars supplied his place in
the night. The plains of Asia, where these discoveries were made, are extremely
favorable for contemplating the face of the heavens during the night. Blessed
with a climate generally serene, the sky is rarely obscured; and the practice
of sleeping upon the house tops, which has been continued from the earliest
ages, rendered the positions of the stars familiar. They could not help
observing, that, while the greater part revolved round the earth, some in the
northern parts remained nearly in the same situation; and that the sun every
day, in his greatest elevation, was directly opposite to the place of these
stars. Hence it was natural to imagine, that all the heavenly bodies revolved
round some fixed point situated near those stars; and this point they called
the pole. Assisted by these discoveries, however imperfect, and animated with a
desire of carrying on a commerce with distant people, they traveled to very
remote countries, and traded with the inhabitants of other climes. Those who
directed their journies to the south, could not help observing, that the fixed
point round which the heavens appeared to revolve, was nearer the horizon there
than in their own country; and that new stars appeared in the southern
extremities of the heavens, which they had not seen before. On the contrary,
those who directed their course toward the north, perceived that some of the
stars in the southern hemisphere became more depressed, and those in the
northern more elevated than in their own country. Hence they saw that the earth
was not a plane, as they had at first imagined, but a curve. They further
observed, that after passing over equal distances in the direction of the
meridian, the greatest and least elevations of the stars were equally increased
or diminished; and hence they found, that in the direction of the meridian, at
least, the surface of the earth was circular. From this period geography
improved gradually by travels, by commerce and by conquest.

Homer has described so many places with great accuracy and precision, that
Strabo considered him as the first among the geographers of early times.

Thales divided the year into 365 days; which was undoubtedly a method
discovered by the Egyptians, and communicated by their to him. It is said to
have been invented by the second Mercury, surnamed Trismegistus, who, according
to Eusebius, lived about 50 years after the Exodus. From the days of Thales,
who flourished in the sixth century before Christ, very little seems to have
been done toward the establishment of geography for 200 years.

The expedition of Alexander, who extended his conquests into India, and to the
borders of Scythia, made the Greeks acquainted with many countries very remote
from their own. That conqueror entertained in his service two engineers,
Diognetus and Baeton, whose business consisted in measuring, and keeping an
accurate account of his marches. Pliny and Strabo have preserved these
measures; Arrian has handed down to us the particulars of the navigation of
Nearchus and Onesicritus, who sailed back with Alexander's fleet from the mouth
of the Indus to those of the Euphrates and Tigris. By reducing Tire and Sidon,
the Greeks informed themselves of all the places to which the Phenicians traded
by sea; and we know that their commerce extended even to the British Islands.
The successors of Alexander in the East, by carrying their conquests to the
mouths of the Ganges, obtained a general knowledge of many parts of India.
Ptolemy Evergetes, led his armies into Abyssinia; and from his marches and
success in that distant country, a general knowledge of it was obtained. But
geography acquired still greater advantages from the conquests of the Romans.
Ambitious of establishing an universal monarchy, and of forcing all the
inhabitants of the earth to submit to the Roman eagles, they carried their
armies into very remote countries, and conquered the inhabitants of distant
climes. Hence the geographers of those times were enabled to describe countries
before hardly known, and correct the errors of former writers. The great roads
of the empire, measured through their whole extent, proved extremely useful;
and the Itineraries, though often altered, and sometimes incorrect, afforded
considerable assistance. Accordingly most of the valuable geographical
treatises wrote by the ancients, were composed during the reigns of the Roman
emperors.

Timocharis and Aristillus, who began to observe about 295 years before Christ,
seem to have been the first who attempted to fix the longitudes and latitudes
of the fixed stars, by considering their distances from the equator. One of
their observations gave rise to the discovery of the precession of the
Equinoxes, which was first observed by Hipparchus about 150 years after; and he
made use of Timocharis and Aristillus' method, in order to delineate the
parallels of latitude, and the meridians on the surface of the earth; thus
laying the foundation of the science of geography as we have it at present.

Strabo and Ptolemy are the first among the ancient geographers, and dispute
the chair of precedence. The geography of Ptolemy is more extensive; it takes
in a greater part of the earth, while it seems equally circumstantial every
where: But this very extent renders it more suspected; it is not easy to be
every where exact and correct. Strabo, on the contrary, relates very little
more than what he saw with his own eyes; he made a vast number of voyages to
gain the experience nenessary to give the requisite certainly to his accounts,
and is very short in what he relates from others. Strabo was a philosopher as
well as a geographer. Good sense, perspicuity, accuracy, and solidity of
judgment are visible in every part of his works. Ptolemy, however, by disposing
his geography by latitudes and longitudes, opened a way for improvement, and
pointed out a method for carrying the art to perfection. The discovery of the
longitudes and latitudes immediately laid a foundation for making maps, or
delineations of the surface of the earth in plano, on a very different plan
from what had been attempted before. Formerly the maps were little more than
rude outlines and topographical sketches of different countries. The earliest
were those of Sesostris, mentioned by Eustathius; who says, that "this Egyptian
king, having traversed great part of the earth, recorded his march in maps, and
gave copies of his maps not only to the Egyptians, but to the Scythians, to
their great astonishment." -- Some have imagined, that the Jews made a map of
the holy land, when they gave the different portions to the nine tribes at
Shiloh: For Joshua tells us, that they were sent to walk through the land, and
that they described it in seven parts in a book; and Josephus tells us, that
when Joshua sent out people from the different tribes to measure the land, he
gave them, as companions* persons well skilled in geometry.

Eratosthenes was the first who attempted to reduce geography to a regular
system, and introduced a regular parallel of latitude. This was traced over
certain places where the longest day was of the same length. He began it from
the straits of Gibraltar; and it thence passed through the Sicilian sea, and
near the southern extremities of Peloponnes^s. From thence it was continued
through the island of Rhodes and the bay of Issus; and there entering Cilicia,
and crossing the rivers Euphrates and Tigris, it was extended to the mountains
of India. By means of this line, he endeavored to rectify the errors of the
ancient map, supposed to be that of Anaxi^^ander. In drawing this parallel, he
was regulated by observing where the longest day was fourteen hours and an
half, which Hipparchus afterward determined to be the latitude of 36 degrees.

The first parallel through Rhodes was ever afterward considered with a degree
of preference, like the foundation stone of all ancient maps; and the longitude
of the then known world was often attempted to be measured in stadia and miles,
according to the extent of that line, by many succeeding geographers.
Eratosthenes soon after attempted not only to draw other parallels of latitude,
but also to trace a meridian at right angles to these, passing through Rhodes
and Alexandria, down to Syene and Merce; and as the progress he thus made
tended naturally to enlarge his ideas, heat last undertook a still more arduous
task, namely, to determine the circumference of the globe by an actual
measurement of a segment of one of its great circles. He knew that at the
summer solstice, the sun was vertical to the inhabitants of Syene, a town on
the confines of Ethiopia, under the tropic of Cancer, where they had a well
sunk for that purpose, on the bottom of which the rays of the sun fell
perpendicular the day of the summer solstice: He observed by the shadow of a
wire set perpendicular in an hemispherical bafon, how much the sun was on the
same day at noon distant from the zenith of Alexandria; and found that distance
to be one 50th part of a great circle in the heavens. Supposing then Syene and
Alexandria to be under the same meridian, he concluded the distance between
them to be the 50th part of a great circle upon the earth; and this distance
being by measure 5000 stadia, he concluded the circumference of the earth to be
250,000 stadia; but as this number divided by 360 would give 694 4/9; stadia to
a degree, either Eratosthenes himself or some of his followers assigned the
round number 700 stadia to a degree; which multiplied by 360, makes the
circumference of the earth 252,000 stadia A stadium is the 8th part of a mile,
hence 252,000 stadia are equal to 31,^00 miles. The real circumference of the
earth is but 25,038 miles.
; whence both these measures are given by different authors as that of
Eratosthenes.

Astronomy, was not neglected by the ancient geographers. They were convinced,
that without its assistance no great progress could be made in their art. Their
instruments, indeed, were inaccurate and imperfect, but they were assiduous in
their observations. They generally determined the latitudes of places by the
shadow of a gnomon of some known height; but they had no other method for
determining the longitudes of places than that of observing the eclipses of the
moon; they knew, that by comparing the times when any of these phenomena
happened at different places, the difference of longitude between them might be
known.

The parts of the earth's surface known to the ancients were confined within
narrow bounds. On the west, the Atlantic ocean and British isles limited their
knowledge. The Fortunate islands, now called the Canaries, were the remotest
lands they were acquainted with to the south. Their notions were very imperfect
with regard to the northern countries. Though Scandinavia was known, yet that,
and some other countries on the same continent, were considered as large
islands. It is not easy to determine what place the ancients understood by
Ultima Thule; many take it for Iceland; but Procopius thinks it was a part of
Scandinavia.

Their knowledge of Sarmatia and Scythia was far from extending to the sea
which bounds Russia and Great Tartary on the north and east. Their discoveries
went no farther than the Rippean mountains, which now divide Russia from
Siberia. The western frontier of China seems to have bounded the knowledge of
the ancients on the east. Ptolemy, indeed, had a very imperfect notion of the
southern parts of that extensive empire. He composed his system of geography
about 150 years after Christ, in the reign of Antoninus Pius. The principal
materials he made use of for composing this work, were the proportions of the
gnomon to its shadow, taken by different astronomers at the times of the
equinoxes and solstices; calculations founded upon the length of the longest
days; the measures or computed distances of the principal roads contained in
their surveys and itineraries; and the various reports of travelers and
navigators, who often determined the distances of places by hearsay and
conjecture. All these were compared together, and digested into one uniform
body or system; and afterward were translated by him into a new mathematical
language, expressing the different degrees of longitude and latitude, according
to the invention of Hipparchus, but which Ptolemy had the merit of carrying
into full practice and execution, after it had been neglected for upwards of
250 years. With such imperfect and inaccurate materials, it is no wonder to
find many errors in Ptolemy's system. Neither were these errors such as had
been introduced in the more distant extremities of his maps, but even in the
very center of that part of the world which was the best known to the ancient
Greeks and Romans, and where all the famed ancient astronomers had made their
observations. -- Yet this system, with all its imperfections, continued in
vogue till the beginning of the present century. All the others, which now make
so conspicuous a figure in the commerce of Europe, were unknown. How far they
extended their discoveries with regard to Africa, cannot certainly be known.
Some are of opinion, that they were acquainted with the whole coast, having
sailed round the southern extremity, now called the Cape of Good Hope, and
extended their voyages from the Red Sea to the Mediterranean. Ptolemy, however,
seems to insinuate, that the southern parts had escaped their knowledge.
Indeed, the opinion almost universally embraced by the ancients, that the
torrid zone was uninhabitable, seems to prove, that their knowledge of Africa
was very confined; because, as great part of that country lies in the burning
zone, their acquaintance with it must have convinced them, that the general
notion was founded on mistake.

The discovery of the southern parts of Africa was reserved for the Portuguese.
Animated with a desire of finding a passage to the East Indies, they coasted
along the western side of Africa, and, in the fifteenth century, completed the
design. They passed the Cape of Good Hope, and pursued their course to the
Indies. The passage being thus opened, several European nations, desirous of
sharing in the rich commerce of the east, sent their ships to the Indian Sea,
where they discovered the Asiatic islands, and penetrated to the empire of
Japan. The voyages of the Russians have completed our knowledge of the eastern
parts of the continent of Asia.

The prodigious length of the voyage to India, round the southern extremity of
Africa, induced Christopher Columbus to attempt the discovery of a shorter
tract. About the end of the fifteenth century he crossed the Atlantic ocean;
but, instead of the Indies, he found America, and put the crown of Castile,
under whose auspices the voyage was undertaken, in possession of a New World.

The improvements in geography which since have taken place, have been owing to
the great progress made in astronomy. More correct methods and instruments for
observing the latitude have been found out; and the discovery of Jupiter's
Satellites have afforded a much easier method of finding the longitudes than
was formerly known. The voyages made by different nations also, which are now
become frequent, have brought to our knowledge, a vast number of countries
utterly unknown before. The late voyages of Captain Cook and other late
navigators, and the travels of Mr. Bruce and others, have contributed greatly
to the improvement of geography during the present century; so that now the
geography of the utmost extremities of the earth is in a fair way of being much
better known to the moderns than that of the adjacent countries was to the
ancients.

FIGURE, MAGNITUDE and MOTION of the EARTH.
THE fundamental principles of geography are, the spherical figure of the
earth; its rotation on its axis; its revolution round the sun; and the position
of the axis or line round which it revolves, with regard to the celestial
luminaries. That the earth and sea taken together constitute one vast sphere,
is demonstrable by the following arguments.

1st, Such a figure is best adapted to motion. 2d, The higher the eye is
placed, the more extensive is the prospect; whence it is common for sailors to
climb up to the tops of the masts to discover land or ships at a distance. But
this would give them no advantage were it not for the convexity of the earth;
for upon an infinitely extended plane objects would be visible at the same
distance whether the eye were high or low; nor would any of them vanish till
the angle under which they appeared became too small to be perceptible. 3d, To
people on shore, the mast of a ship at sea appears before the hull; but were
the earth an infinite plane, not the highest objects, but the biggest, would be
longest visible; and the mast of a ship would disappear, by reason of the
smallness of its angle, long before the hull. 4th, To people at sea, the land
disappears, though near enough to be visible were it not for the intervening
convexity of the water. 5th, We argue from analogy, all the other planets being
of a spherical figure. 6th, The earth has often been sailed round; as by
Magellan, Drake, Dampier, Anson, Cook, and many others; which demonstrates
that the surface of the ocean is spherical; and that the land is very little
different, may easily be proved from the small elevation of any part of it
above the surface of the water. The mouths of rivers, which run 1000 miles, are
not more than one mile below their sources; and tho highest mountains are not
quite four miles of perpendicular height: so that, though some parts of the
land are elevated into hills, and others depressed into valleys, the whole may
still be accounted spherical. 7th, An undeniable and indeed occular
demonstration of the spherical figure of the earth, is taken from the round
figure of its shadow, which falls upon the moon in the time of eclipses. As
various sides of the earth are turned toward the sun during the time of
different phenomena of this kind, and the shadow in all cases appears circular,
it is impossible to suppose the figure of the earth to be any other then
spherical. The inequalities of its surface have no effect upon the earth's
shadow on the moon; for as the diameter of the terraqueous globe is very little
less than 8000 miles, and the height of the highest mountain on earth not quite
four, we cannot account the latter any more than the 2000th part of the former;
so that the mountains bear no more proportion to the bulk of the earth, than
grains of dust beat to that of a common globe.

The earth is not truly spherical, but an oblate spheroid, or flatted at the
poles, something in the form of a flat turnip. Its diameter from east to west
is a few miles longer than that from north to south. As many find it difficult
to conceive how people can stand on the opposite side of the globe, without
falling off, their conception may be assisted by supposing all the various
bodies on the earth's surface were of iron, and a very large magnet were placed
at the center; then all bodies being attracted toward the center by the magnet
they would not fall off, which way soever the earth should turn. Now the
attraction of gravitation operates on all bodies, as that of magnetism does on
iron only.

According to Norwood's measure of a degree, which is generally preferred, on
supposition that the earth is a true sphere, its circumference is 25,020 miles.
But by considering its true figure, its circumference at the equator is 25,038
miles, and the length of an eliptical meridian 25,927. Though the earth is an
oblate spheriod, yet the difference between the two diameters and their two
circumferences is but small. Had the difference been more considerable it would
have greatly affected all nautical and geographical conclusions deduced from a
sphere; but the smallness of the difference renders the error scarcely
discernible, unless the distance be very great, and the latitudes very high. In
the construction of globes, maps, charts, etc. the earth is considered as a
perfect sphere.

The earth, like the rest of the planets, has two motions, one round its axis,
the other round the sun. It revolves round its axis once in 24 hours, and
causes a continual succession of day and night, and an apparent motion of the
heavenly bodies, from east to west. By this motion on its axis the inhabitants
on the equator are carried 1040 miles in an hour. It completes its revolution
round the sun once in a year, and occasions the difference in the length of the
days and nights, and the agreeable variety in the seasons.

The diameter of the earth's orbit is 190,346,000 miles, and its circumference
597,987,646 miles. Its hourly motion in its orbit is 68,217 miles, which is 142
times greater than that of a cannon ball, which moves about 8 miles in a
minute; and would be 22 years and 228 days in going from this earth to the sun.
Many of the terrestrial phenomena depend upon the globular figure of the earth,
and the position of its axis with regard to the sun; particularly the rising
and setting of the celestial luminaries, the length of the days and nights,
etc. It belongs to geography to take notice of the difference betwixt the same
phenomena in different parts of the earth. Thus, though the sun rises and sets
all over the world, the circumstances of his doing so are very different in
different countries. The most remarkable of these circumstances is the duration
of the light not only of the sun himself, but of the twilight before he rises
and after he sets. In the equatorial regions, for instance, darkness comes on
very soon after sunset: because the convexity of the earth comes quickly in
between the eye of the observer and the luminary, the motion of the earth being
much more rapid there than any where else. In our climate the twilight always
continues between one and two hours, and during the longest days in the summer
season it continues in a considerable degree during the whole night. In
countries farther to the northward or southward, the twilight becomes brighter
and brighter as we approach the poles, until at last the sun does not appear to
touch the horizon, but goes in a circle at some distance above it for many days
successively. In like manner, during the winter, the same luminary sinks lower
and lower, until at last he does not appear at all; and there is only a dim
twinkling of twilight for an hour or two in the middle of the day. By reason of
the refraction of the atmosphere, however, the time of darkness, even in the
most inhospitable climates, is always less than that of light; and so
remarkable is the effect of this property, that in the year 1682 when some
Dutch navigators wintered in Nova Zembla, the sun was visible to them 16 days
before he could have been seen above the horizon had there been to atmosphere,
or had it not been endowed with any such power. The reason of all this is, that
in the northern and southern regions only a small part of the convexity of the
globe is interposed betwixt us and the sun for many days, and in the high
latitudes none at all. In the warmer climates the sun has often a beautiful
appearance at rising and setting, by reason of the refraction of his light
through the vapors which are copiously raised in those parts. -- In the colder
regions, halos, parhelia, aurora borealis, and other meteors, are frequent; the
two former owing to the great quantity of vapor continually flying from the
warm regions of the equator to the colder ones of the poles. The aurora
borealis is owing, some say, to the electrical matter imbibed by the earth from
the sun in the warm climates, and going off through the upper regions of the
atmosphere to the place from whence it came. In the high northern latitudes,
thunder and lightning are unknown, or but seldom heard of; but the more
terrible phenomena of earthquakes, volcanoes, etc. are by no means unfrequent.
These however, seem only to affect islands and the maritime parts of the
continent.

Notwithstanding the seeming inequality in the distribution of light and
darkness, it is certain, that throughout the whole world, there is nearly an
equal proportion of light diffused on every part, abstracting from what is
absorbed by clouds, vapors, and the atmosphere itself. The equatorial regions
have indeed the most intense light during the day, but the nights are long and
dark; while on the other hand, in the northerly and southerly parts, though the
sun shines less powerfully, yet the length of time that he appears above the
horizon, with the greater duration of the twilight, makes up for the seeming
deficiency.

Were the earth a perfect plane, the sun would appear to be vertical in every
part of it: for in comparison with the immense magnitude of that luminary, the
diameter of this globe itself is but very small: and as the sun, were he near
to us, would do much more than cover the whole earth; so, though he were moved
to any distance, the whole diameter of the latter would make no difference in
the apparent angle of his latitude. By means of the globular figure of the
earth also, along with the great disparity between the diameters of the two
bodies, some advantage is given to the day over the night: (...) thus the sun
being immensely the larger of the two, shines upon moon than one half of the
earth; whence the unenlightened part has (...) shorter way to go before it
again receives the benefit of his rays. This difference is greater in the
inferior planets, Venus and Mercury, th^n in the earth.

DOCTRINE of the SPHERE.
DEFINITIONS and PRINCIPLES.
A SPHERE with astronomers, is the whole frame of the world, (...) being of a
globular figure, or more strictly, the Primum Mobile, which encloses all the
other orbs and heavenly bodies.

A direct or ^ight sphere, is when both the poles of the world are in the
horizon, and all equinoctial passes through the zenith; so that the equator and
all its parallels, such as the tropics and polar circles, make right angles
with the horrizon, and the divided by it into two equal parts; so that the sun,
moon and stars ascend directly above, and descend directly below the horizon.
See the Plate.

An oblique sphere is that where all the diurnal motions are oblique to the
horizon. This is common to all parts of the earth, except those under the poles
and the equator. In an oblique sphere, one of the poles is elevated above, and
the other depressed below the horizon.

A parallel sphere is when one pole is in the zenith and the other in the
nadir, in which the equator, and all its parallels, are parallel with the
horizon: This position is peculiar to those parts which lie directly under the
poles.

In geography the circles which the sun apparently describes in the heavens,
are supposed to be extended as far as the earth, and marked on its surface. We
may imagine as many circles as we please to be, described on the earth, and
their planes to be extended to the celestial sphere till they mark concentric
ones on the heavens. Each circle is divided into 360 equal parts, called
degrees, each degree is divided into 60 seconds. The circles supposed by
geographers to be described in this manner, are denominated great and less
circles.

Great Circles are those which divide either the celestial or terrestrial
sphere into two equal parts. Of these there are six -- the Equator, the
Meridian, the Ecliptic, the Horizon and the two Colures.

Less circles are those which divide the sphere into two unequal parts; of
which there are four, the two Tropics and the two Polar Circles.

Axis and Poles of the Earth.] The axis of the earth is an imaginary line
passing through its center from north to south. The extreme points of the axis
are called the poles.

Equator.] The equator is that line or circle which encompasses the middle of
the earth, dividing the northern half from the southern. This line is often
called the equinoctial, because, when the sun appears therein, the days and
nights are equal in all parts of the world. From this line latitude is reckoned.

Meridian.] This circle, represented on the artificial globe by a bra^^ring,
passes through the poles of the earth, and the zenith and the nadir; crossing
the equator at right angles and dividing the globe into eastern ARTIFICIAL
SPHERE
COPERNICAN SYSTEM
and western hemispheres. It is called meridian from the Latin meridies,
midday; because when the sun comes to the south part of this circle it is
called noon, and the day is half spent. There are an infinite number of
meridians, which vary as you travel east or west. Geographers assume one of the
meridians for the first; commonly that which passes through the metropolis of
their own country. The meridian of Philadelphia is the first for Americans;
that of London for the English; and that of Paris for the French.

Zodiac.] If two circles were drawn parallel to the ecliptic, at the distance
of eight degrees on each side of it, the space, or girdle included between
these two parallels, sixteen degrees broad, and divided in the middle by the
ecliptic, will comprehend within it the orbits of all the planets, and is
called the Zodiac.

Ecliptic.] The Ecliptic is a great circle, in the plane of which the earth
performs her annua' revolution round the sun, or in which the sun seems to move
round the earth, once in a year. This circle is called the Ecliptic, from the
word Eclipse, because no eclipse of the sun or moon happens, but when the moon
is in or near the plane of this circle. It makes an angle with the equator of
23 30, and intersects it in two opposite parts, called the Equinoctial points,
because when the sun is in either of these points, he has no declination, and
shines equally to both poles, and the day is then equal to the night all over
the world. The times when the sun passes through these points, are the 21st of
March, and the 21st September: The former is called the vernal, the latter the
autumnal equinox.

The ecliptic is divided into twelve equal parts, of thirty degrees each,
called signs. These begin at the vernal intersection of the ecliptic with the
equator, and are numbered from west to east. The names and characters of the
signs, with the months in which the sun enters them, are as follows: Latin
names of the signs. English names. Characters. Months in which the sun enters
them. 1 Aries The Ram March 2 Taurus The Bull April 3 Gemini The Twins May 4
Cancer The Crab etc;ancer; June 5 Leo The Lion July 6 Virgo The Virgin August 7
Libra The Scales September 8 Scorpio The Scorpion October 9 Sagittarius The
Archer November 10 Capricornus The Goat etc;apri; December 11 Aquarius The
Water-Bearer January 12 Pisces The Fishes February

The first six are called northern; and the latter southern signs; because the
former possess that half of the ecliptic, which lies to the northward of the
equinoctial, and the latter that half which lies to the southward.

Horizon.] The horizon, represented on the artificial globe by a broad wooden
circle, divides it into upper and lower hemispheres. There are, geographically
speaking, two horizons, the sensible and the rational. The sensible horizon is
that circle which limits our prospect; where the sky and the land, or water,
appear to meet. The rational or real horizon, is a circle whose plane passes
through the center of the earth, dividing it into upper and lower hemispheres.

The horizon is divided into four quarters, and each quarter into 90 degrees.
The four quartering points, viz. east, west, north and south, are called the
cardinal points. The poles of the horizon are the zenith and the nadir. The
former is the point directly over our heads; the latter the point directly
under our feet.

Colures.] The two meridians that pass through the four above mentioned points
have particular names; that which passes through the first degrees of Aries and
Libra is called the equinoctial Colure, and that which passes through the first
degrees of Cancer and Capricorn is termed the solstitial Colure. There Colures
cut each other at right angles, in the poles of the world.

Circles of longitude in the heavens, are great circles of the sphere imagined
to pass through the poles of the ecliptic, and to cut the ecliptic at right
angles, as the meridians do the equinoctial.

The latitude of any heavenly object is an arch of a circle of longitude,
intercepted between the center of the object and the ecliptic. If the object be
on the north side of the ecliptic, it is said to be in north latitude; if on
the south, in south latitude.

Parallels of celestial latitude, are small circles drawn parallel to the
ecliptic.

The longitude of any heavenly object is an arch of the ecliptic, intercepted,
between the first point of Aries, and a circle of longitude passing through the
center of the object. The right ascension of any heavenly object is an arch of
the equinoctial, intercepted between the first point of Aries, and a meridian
passing through the center of the object.

The declination of any heavenly object is an arch of the meridian, intercepted
between the center of the object and the equinoctial. If the object be on the
north side of the equinoctial, it is said to have north declination; if on the
south side, it has south declination. All small circles in the celestial sphere
parallel to the equinoctial, are called parallels of declination. Among these
are the tropic of Cancer, the tropic of Capricorn, the Arctic and Antarctic
circles.

Tropics.] The tropics, are two circles drawn parallel to the equator, at the
distance of 23 29 on each side of it. These circles form the limits of the
ecliptic, or the sun's declination from the equator. That which is in the
northern hemisphere, is called the tropic of Cancer, because it touches the
ecliptic in the sign Cancer; and that in the southern hemisphere, is called the
tropic of Capricorn, because it touches the ecliptic in the sign Capricorn. On
the 21st of June the sun is in Cancer, and we have the longest day. On the 21st
of December the sun is in Capricorn, and we have the shortest day. They are
called tropics, from the Greek word TREPO, to turn, because when the sun
arrives at them, he returns again to the equator.

Polar Circles.] The two polar circles are described round the poles of the
earth at the distance of 23 29. The northern is called the Arctic circle, from
Arctos, or the bear, a constellation situated near that place in the heavens;
the southern, being opposite to the former, is called the Antarctic circle. --
The polar circles bound the places where the sun sets daily. Beyond them the
sun revolves without setting.

The azimuths, or vertical circles, are great circles passing through the
zenith and nadir, and cutting the horizon at right angles.

The altitude of an heavenly object, is an arch of a vertical circle,
intercepted between the center of the object and the horizon.

The zenith distance of any heavenly object, is an arch of a vertical circle,
intercepted between the center of the object and the zenith.

The meridian altitude, or meridian zenith distance, is the altitude, or zenith
distance, when the object is in the meridian.

Zones.] The surface of the earth is supposed to be divided into five unequal
parts called zones, each of which is terminated by two parallels of latitude.
Of these five zones, one is called the torrid or burning zone; two are styled
frigid or frozen; and two temperate; names adapted to the quality of the heat
and cold to which their situations are liable.

The torrid zone is that portion of the earth over every part of which the sun
is perpendicular at some time of the year. The breadth of this zone is
forty-seven degrees; extending from twenty-three degrees and a half north
latitude, to twenty-three degrees and a half south. The equator passes through
the middle of this zone, which is terminated on the north by the parallel of
latitude called the tropic of Cancer, and on the south by the parallel called
the tropic of Capricorn. The ancients considered this zone as uninhabitable, on
account of the heat, which they though too great to be supported by any human
being, or even by the vegetable creation; but experience has long since refused
this notion.

Many parts of the torrid zone are remarkably populous; and it has been found
that the long nights, great dews, regular rains and breezes, which prevail in
almost every part of the torrid zone, render the earth not only inhabitable,
but also so fruitful, that two harvests a year are very common. All sorts of
spices and drugs are almost solely produced there; and it furnishes more
perfect metals, precious stones, and pearls, than all the rest of the earth
together.

This zone comprehends the East and West Indies, Philippine Islands, greater
part of South America and Africa, and almost all Capt. Cook's discoveries,
including the northern parts of New Holland. The frigid zones are those regions
round the pole where the sun does not rise for some days in the winter, nor set
for some days in the summer. The two poles are the centres of these zones,
which extend from these points to twenty-three degrees and a half nearly; that
is, they are bounded by the northern and southern parallels of latitude of
sixty-six degrees and a half. The part that lies in the northern hemisphere is
called the north frigid zone, and is bounded by a parallel called the arctic or
polar circle; and that in the southern hemisphere, the south frigid zone, and
the parallel of latitude which bounds it, is called the antarctic, or polar
circle. The northern frigid zone comprehends Nova Zembla, Lapland, part of
Norway, Baffin's-Bay, part of Greenland, and part of Siberia. -- The southern
frigid zone has no land known to us. The two temperate zones are the spaces
contained between the tropics and polar circles.

The northern temperate zone contains almost all Europe, the greater part of
Asia, part of Africa, the United States of America, and the British Colonies.
-- The southern temperate zone comprizes the south part of New Holland,
(including Botany-Bay) Cape of Good Hope and Cape Horn.

In the frigid zones the longest day is never below 24 hours; in the temperate
zones not quite so much, and in the torrid never more than 14 hours.

Climates.] The word climate has two significations, the one common, and the
other geographical. In common language, the word is used to denote the
difference in the seasons and the temperature of the air. When two places
differ in these respects, they are said to be in different climates.

In a geographical sense, a climate is a tract of the earth's surface, included
between the equator and a parallel of latitude, or between two parallels of
such a breadth, as that the length of the day in the one, be half an hour
longer than in the other. Within the polar circles, however, the breadth of a
circle is such, that the length of a day, or the time of the sun's continuance
above the horizon without setting, is a month longer in one parallel, as you
proceed northerly, than in the other.

Under the equator, the day is always twelve hours long. The days gradually
increase in length as you advance either north or south from the equator. The
space between the equator, and a parallel line drawn at the distance of 8 25,
where the days are twelve hours and a half long, is called the first climate;
and by conceiving parallels drawn in this manner, at the increase of every half
hour, it will be found that there are twenty-four climates between the equator
and each of the polar circles. Forty-eight in the whole.

Under the polar circles, the longest day is twenty-four hours. The sun, when
at the tropics, skims the horizon without setting. As you advance from the
polar circles to the poles, the sun continues above the horizon for days, weeks
and months, in a constant increase, until you arrive at the poles, where the
sun is six months above the horizon; and the whole year may be said to consist
of but one day and one night.

There are thirty climates between the equator and either pole. In the first
twenty-four, between the equator and each polar circle, the period of increase
for every climate is half an hour. In the other six, between the polar circles
and either pole, the period of increase for each climate is a month. These
climates continually decrease in breadth as you proceed from the equator, as
may be seen by attending to the following table.

TABLE
Climates. Longest day. Latitudes in (...), the respective climate begin and
end. Names of countries and remarkable places, situated in the respective
climates, north of the equator. d. m. Within the first climate lie, 1 12 8 25 1
The Gold est. in Afr. Molucca in E. and. Cayenne and Surinamin S. A^^. 2 13 16
25 2 Abysin^a, Siam, Madras, Darien, Barbados, Tobago, etc. 3 13 23 50 3
Mecca, Bombay, Bengal, Canton, Mexico, Jamaica, Gaudaloupe. 4 14 30 25 4 Egypt,
Delhi, Canary Isles, E. Florida, Havannah. 5 14 36 28 5 Gibraltar, Jerusalem,
Ispahan, Nankin, Georgia and Carolinas. 6 15 41 22 6 Lisbon, Madrid,
Asia-Minor, Virginia, Maryland, Philadelphia. 7 15 45 29 7 Rome, Genoa,
Constantinople, Caspian, Sea, N. York, New England. 8 16 49 01 8 Paris, Vienna,
Nova Scotia, Newfoundland, Canada. 9 16 52 00 9 London, Flanders, Prague,
Dresden, Cracow, Tartary. 10 17 54 27 10 Dublin, Warsaw, Holland, Hanover,
Labrador, New South Wales. 11 17 56 37 11 Edinburgh, Copenhagen, Moscow,
capital of Russia. 12 18 58 29 12 South Part of Sweden, Tobol^^i, capital of
Siberia. 13 18 59 58 13 Orkney Isles, Stockholm, capital of Sweden. 14 19 61 18
14 Bergen in Norway, Petersburgh in Russia. 15 19 62 25 15 Hudson's Straits, N.
America. 16 20 63 22 16 South Part of West Greenland, Siberia. 17 20 64 06 17
Drontheim in Norway. 18 21 64 49 18 Part of Finland in Russia. 19 21 65 21 19
Archangel on the White-Sea, Russia. 20 22 65 47 20 Hecla in Iceland. 21 22 66
06 21 Northern Parts of Russia and Siberia. 22 23 66 20 22 New-North Wales in
N. America. 23 23 66 28 23 Davis's Straits in ditto. 24 24 66 31 24 Samoieda.
25 1month 67 21 25 South Part of Lapland. 26 2 do. 69 48 26 West Greenland. 27
3 do. 73 37 27 Zembla Australia. 28 4 do. 78 30 28 Zembla Borealis. 29 5 do. 84
05 29 Spitsbergen, or E. Greenland. 30 6 do. 90 0 30 Unknown.

Latitude.] The latitude of a place is its distance from the equator, reckoned
in degrees, etc. north or south, on the meridian. The greatest latitude is that
of the poles, which are ninety degrees distant from the equator. If the place
be situated between the equator and the north pole, it is said to be in north
latitude; if it lie between the equator and the south pole, it is in south
latitude.

The elevation of the pole above the horizon, is always equal to the latitude
of the place: for to a person situated on the equator, both poles will rest in
the horizon. If you travel one, two, or more degrees north, the north pole will
rise one, two, or more degrees, and will keep pace with your distance from the
equator.

Longitude.] Every place on the surface of the earth has its meridian. The
longitude of a place, is the distance of its meridian from some other fixed
meridian, measured on the equator. Longitude is either east or west. All places
east of the fixed or first meridian, are in east longitude; all west, in west
longitude. On the equator, a degree of longitude is equal to sixty geographical
miles; and of course, a minute on the equator is equal to a mile. But as all
the meridians cut the equator at right angles, and approach nearer and nearer
to each other, until at last they cross at the poles, it is obvious that the
degrees of longitude will lessen as you go from the equator to either pole: so
that in the sixtieth degree of latitude, a degree of longitude is but thirty
miles, or half as long as a degree on the equator; as is evident from the
following table.

A TABLE, Showing the number of miles contained in a degree of longitude in
each parallel of latitude from the equator.
Degrees of latitude. Miles. 60th parts of a mile. 1 59 56 2 59 54 3 59 52 4 59
50 5 59 46 6 59 40 7 59 37 8 59 24 9 59 10 10 59 00 11 58 52 12 58 40 13 58 28
14 58 12 15 58 00 16 57 40 17 57 20 18 57 4 19 56 44 20 56 24 21 56 00 22 55 36
23 55 12 24 54 48 25 54 24 26 54 00 27 53 28 28 53 00 29 52 28 30 51 56 31 51
24 32 50 52 33 50 20 34 49 44 35 49 8 36 48 32 37 47 56 38 47 16 39 46 36 40 46
00 41 45 16 42 44 36 43 43 52 44 43 8 45 42 24 46 41 40 47 41 00 48 40 8 49 39
20 50 38 22 51 37 44 52 37 00 53 36 08 54 3^ 26 55 34 24 56 33 32 57 32 40 58
31 48 59 30 50 60 30 00 61 29 04 62 28 03 63 7 12 64 26 16 65 25 20 66 24 24 67
23 28 68 22 32 69 21 32 70 20 32 71 19 32 72 18 32 73 17 32 74 16 32 75 15 32
76 14 32 77 13 32 78 12 32 79 11 28 80 10 24 81 09 20 82 08 20 83 07 20 84 06
12 85 05 12 86 04 12 87 03 12 88 02 04 89 01 04 90 00 00

METHODS of finding the LATITUDES and LONGITUDES of PLACES from CELESTIAL
OBSERVATIONS.
WHAT is meant by latitude and longitude has already been sufficiently
explained, it remains that we show the methods used for finding both by
celestial observations.

I. Of finding the latitude.
As the latitude of a place is an arch of the meridian intercepted between the
zenith and the equinoctial, which is always equal to the height of the visible
pole above the horizon, it follows that if the meridional altitude, or its
complement, the zenith distance, of any celestial object, whose place in the
heavens is known, can be found, the latitude is easily discovered. Thus, if the
heavenly object be in the equinoctial, the zenith distance will be equal to the
latitude, which will be either north or south, according as the observer is
situated either to the northward or southward of the object. But if the sun or
star has either north or south declination, that is, if its apparent diurnal
motion be either to the northward or southward of the equinoctial, the
declination must either be subtracted from, or added to, the zenith distance,
according as the zenith distance and declination are of the same or different
denominations.

1. If the zenith distance and declination have the same name, their difference
will give the latitude. And if the declination is greater than the zenith
distance, the latitude will be of the same name with the declination; but if
the declination be less than the zenith distance, the latitude will be of a
contrary name. If they are equal, the latitude will be 00 degrees, 00 minutes;
that is, the place is situated under the equinoctial.

2. If the declination and zenith distance are of contrary names, that is, one
north and the other south, their sum will be the latitude, and always of the
same name with the declination.

In most books of astronomy and navigation are tables of the declination of the
sun, and principal fixed stars; and the meridian altitude of the sun or stars
may be easily found by a great variety of instruments.

3. When the object appears in the zenith, the latitude is equal to the
declination, and also of the same name.

There are several other methods for finding the latitude, but the above will
be sufficient in this place, especially as it is generally used.

II. Of finding the longitude.
It has been already observed, that the difference of longitude between any two
places might be determined, by knowing the difference between the times that
any remarkable appearance in the heavens was seen in those places. For since
the sun and fixed stars appear to move round the earth, or, which is the same
thing, the earth revolves about its axis in twenty-four hours; it follows, that
in every hour there passes over the meridian one twenty-fourth part of 360
degrees, or of the whole circumference of the equator, equal to fifteen
degrees, and a proportionable part in a greater or less time.

The heavenly bodies afford frequent opportunities for making observations of
this kind. For as these appearances consist in the appulses, that is, the
approaches of the heavenly bodies to one another, or their passing by one
another; and these appulses, when they happen, are seen at the same instant of
absolute time in all parts of the earth where they are visible: therefore by
knowing the relative times of the day when such appearances are seen in two
distant places, the difference between those times is known, and consequently
the difference of longitude between those places.

Several Ephemeres or Almanacks are annually published, in which the times when
the eclipses of the sun, moon, and Jupiter's satellites; the rising, setting,
and southing of the planets; the appulsus of the moon to certain fixed stars,
and other celestial appearances, are determined with regard to some meridian.
By the help of one of these books, and a careful observation of these
appearances, the longitude may be determined.

Eclipses of the moon, when they happen, afford one method of finding the
difference of longitude. For as these eclipses are occasioned by an
interposition of the earth between her and the sun, and consequently she is
immersed in the earth's shadow, the moment any part of her body is deprived of
the solar rays, it is visible to all those people who can see her, at the same
instant of absolute time. Hence by observing the beginning, middle, or end of
an eclipse of the moon, in any part of the world, noting the apparent time of
these phenomena, and comparing it with the calculations of the same eclipse,
adapted to some other meridian, the difference of time, and consequently the
difference of longitude between those two places will be known.

Suppose for instance, the beginning of an eclipse of the moon happened at
London sixteen minutes after two in the morning, but not till fifty-seven
minutes and forty seconds after six in the morning at Boston in New England;
then will the difference of time be four hours, forty one minutes, forty
seconds, equal to seventy degrees twenty-five minutes, the difference of
longitude; and because the eclipse happened later at Boston than at London, the
difference of longitude will be west. Consequently, if the longitude be
reckoned from the meridian of London, the longitude of Boston will be seventy
degrees twenty-five minutes west.

The longitude of places may also be obtained from the observations of solar
eclipses, but these being incumbered with the consideration of parallaxes, are
much less adapted to that purpose than those of the moon.

But as the eclipses of the sun and moon happen but seldom, another expedient
offers, viz. the eclipses of Jupiter's satellites. That planet has four moons,
or satellites, moving round him at different distances, and in different
intervals of time; one or more of which is eclipsed almost every night: for
they disappear either in going behind Jupiter, or passing before him; and the
instant of such immersions or emersions may be seen by a refracting telescope
of about eight or nine feet long, or a reflecting one of nine inches focal
length.

The passage of the moon, or the superior planets, over the meridian, affords
another method of discovering the longitude: for by having the time in an
ephemeris, when the moon or any of the planets pass the meridian of some place,
and finding by observation the time when the object passes the meridian of
another place, the longitude will be determined; for the difference of time
converted into degrees, etc. will give the difference of longitude.

There is still another method, equally expeditious and certain, namely, the
appulses of the moon to certain fixed stars, and their occultations by the
interposition of her body. For the moon finishing her revolution in the space
of twenty-seven days, seven hours, forty-three minutes, there are but few clear
nights, when the moon does not pass over, or so near some fixed star, that the
time of the nearest approach, or the visible conjunction, may be easily
observed. And these, when compared with the visible time computed to the
meridian of some place, will show the difference of longitude.

The last method we shall mention for finding the longitude, is by a time
keeper, a kind of clock or watch, which will always show the true time under
the meridian of some particular place: for by finding the time of the day at
any other place, and comparing them with the time then shown by such a machine,
the difference of longitude between those places will be determined. The
ingenious Mr. Harrison, a few years since, completed such a time keeper, which
was found upon trial to answer even beyond the most sanguine expectations; and
he accordingly received ten thousand pounds from the government, as a reward
for his discovery: but for some reasons, not generally known, the time-keeper
has been hitherto kept from the public.

OF THE GLOBES, AND THEIR USE.
AN artificial Globe is a round body, whose surface is every where equally
remote from the center. But by the globes here is meant two spherical bodies,
whose unequal surfaces are supposed to give a true representation of the earth
and heavens, as visible by observation. One of these is called the terrestrial,
the other the celestial globe. On the unequal surface of the terrestrial globe,
all the parts of the earth and sea are delineated in their relative size, form,
and situation.

On the surface of the celestial globe, the images of the several
constellations, and the unformed stars, are delineated; and the relative
magnitude and position which the stars are observed to have in the heavens,
carefully preserved.

In order to render these globular bodies more useful, they are fitted up with
certain appurtenances, whereby a great variety of useful problems are solved in
a very easy and expeditious manner.

The brazen meridian is that ring or hoop in which the globe hangs on its axis,
which is represented by two wires passing through its poles. The circle is
divided into four quarters of 90 degrees each; in one semicircle the divisions
begin at each pole, and end at 90 degrees, where they meet. In the other
semicircle, the divisions begin at the middle, and proceed thence toward each
pole, where they end at 90 degrees. The graduated side of this brazen circle
serves as a meridian for any point on the surface of the earth, the globe being
turned about till that point comes under the circle.

The hour circle is a small circle of brass, divided into twenty-four hours,
the quarters and half quarters. It is fixed on the brazen meridian, equally
distant from the north end of the axis; to which is fixed an index, that points
out the divisions of the hour-circle as the globe is turned round its axis.

The horizon is represented by the upper surface of the wooden circular frame,
encompassing the globe about its middle. On this wooden frame is a kind of
perpetual calendar, contained in several concentric circles, the inner one is
divided into four quarters of ninety degrees each. The next circle is divided
into the twelve months, with the days in each according to the new style; the
next contains the twelve equal signs of the zodiac, each being divided into
thirty degrees; the next the twelve months and days according to the old style;
and there is another circle containing the thirty-two points of the compass,
with their halves and quarters. Although these circles are on all horizons, yet
they are not always placed in the same disposition.

The quadrant of altitude is a thin slip of brass, one edge of which is
graduated into ninety degrees and their quarters, equal to those of the
meridian. To one end of this is fixed 3 brass nut and screw, whereby it is put
on, and fastened to the meridian: if it be fixed in the zenith or pole of the
horizon, then the graduated edge represents a vertical circle passing through
any point.

Besides these, there are several circles described on the surfaces of both
globes, such as the equinoctial, or ecliptic, circles of longitude and right
ascension, the tropics, polar circles, parallels of latitude and declination on
the celestial globe; and on the terrestrial, the equator, ecliptic, tropics,
polar circles, parallels of latitude, hour-circles, or meridians to every
fifteen degrees; and on some globes, the spiral rhumbs flowing from the several
centres, called flies.

In using the Globes, keep the east side of the horizon toward you (unless the
problem requires the turning it) which side you may know by the word East, on
the horizon; for then you have the graduated meridian toward you, the quadrant
of altitude before you, and the Globe divided exactly into two equal parts, by
the graduated side of the meridian.

The following Problems, as being most useful and entertaining, are selected
from a great variety of others, which are easily solved with a globe fitted up
with the aforementioned appurtenances.

I. The latitude of a place being given, to rectify the globe for that place.
Let it be required to rectify the globe for the latitude of Boston, 42 degrees
25 minutes North.

Elevate the north pole, till the horizon cuts the brazen meridian in 42 25 and
the globe is then rectified for the latitude of Boston. Bring Boston to the
meridian, and you will find it in the zenith, or directly on the top of the
globe. And so of any other place.

II. To find the latitude and longitude of any place on the terrestrial globe.
Bring the given place under that side of the graduated brazen meridian where
the degrees begin at the equator, then the degree of the meridian over it shows
the latitude; and the degree of the meridian over it shows the latitude; and
the degree of the equator, under the meridian, shows the longitude.

Thus Boston will be found to lie in 42 25, north latitude, and 70 37 west
longitude, from Greenwhich, or 4 43, east longitude from Philadelphia.

III. To find any place on the globe whose latitude and longitude are given.
Bring the given longitude, found on the equator, to the meridian, and under
the given latitude, found on the meridian, is the place sought.

IV. To find the distance and bearing of any two given places on the globe.
Lay the graduated edge of the quadrant of altitude over both places, the
beginning or 0 degree being on one of them, and the degrees between them show
their distance; these degrees multiplied by 60, give the geographical miles,
and, by sixty-nine and a half, give the distance in English miles nearly.
Observe, while the quadrant lies in this position, what rhumb of the nearest
fly runs mostly parallel to the edge of the quadrant, and that rhumb shows
nearly the bearing required.

V. To find the sun's place in the ecliptic.
Look the day of the month in the outer calendar upon the horizon,(if the globe
was made before the alteration of the style) and opposite to it, you will find
the sign and degree the sun is in the day. -- Thus on the 25th of March, the
sun's place is 4 degrees in Aries. -- Then look for that sign and degree in the
ecliptic line marked on the globe, and you find the sun's place; there fix on a
small black patch, so is it prepared for the solution of the following problems.

Note. The earth's place is always in the sign and degree opposite to the sun;
thus, when the sun is 4 degrees in Aries, the earth is 4 degrees in Libra; and
so of any other.

VI. To find the sun's declination, that is, his distance from the equinoctial
line, either northward or southward.
Bring his place to the meridian; observe what degree of the meridian lies over
it, and that is his declination. If the sun lies on the north side the line, he
is said to have north declination, but if on the south side, he has south
declination.

Thus on the 20th. of April the sun has 11 degrees north declination, but on
the 26th of October he has 12 south declination.

Note. The greatest declination can never be more than 23 degrees either north
or south; that being the distance of the tropics from the equinoctial, beyond
which the sun never goes.

VII. To find where the sun is vertical on any day; that is, to find over wh^^^
heads the sun will pass that day.
Bring the sun's place to the meridian, observe his declination, or hold a pen
or wire over it, then turn the globe round, and all those countries which pass
under the wire, will have the sun over their heads that day at noon. Thus, on
the 16th day of April, the inhabitants of the north part of Terra Firma, Porto
Bello, Philippine Isles, southern parts of India, Abyssinia, Ethiopia, and
Guinea, have the sun over their heads that day at 12 o'clock.

Note. This appearance can only happen to those who live under the torrid zone,
because the sun never strays farther from the equinoctial either northward or
southward, than the two tropics, from whence he returns again.

VIII. To find over whose heads the sun is at any hour, or to what place the
sun is vertical.
Bring the place where you are (suppose at Boston) to the meridian, set the
index to the given hour by your watch; then turn the globe till the index
points to the upper 12, or noon, look under the degree of declination for that
day, and you find the place to which the sun i^ vertical, or over whose head it
is at that time.

Thus on the first day of May, at half past 8 o'clock, A. M. I find the sun is
then vertical at Cape Verd, the western point of Africa.

Note. If it be morning the globe must be turned from east to west. If in the
afternoon, it must be turned from west to east.

IX. To find, at any hour of the day, what o'clock it is at any place in the
world.
Bring the place where you are to the brass meridian; set the index to the hour
by the watch, turn the globe till the place you are looking for comes under the
meridian, and the index will point out the time required.

Thus when it is 10 o'clock in the morning, at Boston, it is 20 minutes past 12
at Olinda in Brasil, and 8 at Mexico in New Spain; the former being 35 degrees
W. Long. and the latter 100 degrees W. Long.

Note. By this problem you may likewise see, at one view, in distant countries,
where the inhabitants are rising -- where breakfasting -- dining -- drinking
tea; where going to assemblies -- and where to bed.

X. To find at what hour the sun rises and sets any day in the year; and also
upon what point of the compass.
Rectify the globe for the latitude of the place you are in; bring the sun's
place to the meridian, and set the index to 12; then turn the sun's place to
the eastern edge of the horizon, and the index will point out the hour of
rising; if you bring it to the western edge of the horizon, the index will show
the hour of setting.

Thus on the 10th day of April, the sun rose at half an hour after 5 o'clock,
and sat half an hour before seven.

Note. In summer the sun rises and sets a little to the northward of the east
and west points; and in winter a little to the southward of them. If therefore,
when the sun's place is brought to the eastern and western edge of the horizon,
you look on the inner circle, directly against the little patch, you will see
the point of the compass upon which the sun rises and sets that day.

XI. To find the length of the day and night, at any time of the year.
Double the the time of the sun's rising that day, and it gives the length of
the night; double the time of his setting, and it gives the length of the day.

This problem shows how long the sun stays with us any day, and how long he is
absent from us any night.

Thus on the 3d day of May, the sun rises at 5 o'clock, and sets at seven;
therefore the days are 14 hours long and the nights 10.

XII. To find the length of the longest or shortest day, at any place upon the
earth.
Rectify the globe for that place; if its latitude be north, bring the
beginning of Cancer to the meridian; set the index to 12. then bring the same
degree of Cancer to the east part of the horizon, and the index will show the
time of the sun's rising.

If the same degree be brought to the western side, the index will show the
time of his setting, which doubled. (as in the last problem) will give the
length of the longest day and shortest night.

If we bring the beginning of Capricorn to the meridian, and proceed in all
respects as before^punc; we shall have the length of the longest night and
shortest day.

Thus in the great Mogul's dominions, the longest day is 14 hours; and the
shortest night 10 hours. The shortest day is 10 hours, and the longest night 14
hours.

At Petersburgh, the seat of the Empress of Russia, the longest day is about 19
hours, and the shortest night 4 hours. The shortest day 4 hours, and the
longest night 19 hours.

Note. In all places near the equator, the sun rises and sets at 6 o'clock the
year round. From thence to the polar circles, the days increase as the latitude
increases; so that at those circles themselves, the longest day is 24 hours,
and the longest night just the same. -- From the polar circle to the poles, the
days continue to lengthen into weeks and months; so that at the very pole, the
sun shines for 6 months together in summer and is absent from it 6 months in
winter. -- Note; also, That when it is summer with the northern inhabitants,
it is winter with the southern, and the contrary; and every part of the world
partakes of an equal share of light and darkness.

XIII. To find all those inhabitants to whom the sun is this moment rising
(...) setting in their meridians or midnight.
Find the sun's place in the ecliptic, and raise the pole as much above the
horizon as the sun, that day, declines from the equator; then bring the place
where the sun is vertical at that hour, to the brass meridian; so will it then
be in the zenith or center of a the horizon. Now see what countries lie on the
western edge of the horizon; for in th^^ the sun is rising; -- to those on the
eastern side he is setting; -- to those under the upper part of the meridian
it is noon day; -- and to those under the lower part of it, it is midnight.

Thus at Charlestown (Mass.) on the 10th of April, at 4 o'clock in the morning;

The sun is about rising at Brasil, S. America. The sun is setting at New
Guinea, the Japan Isles and Kamtschatka. In the meridian, or noon, at Persia,
Austria, and Nova Zembla. Midnight at The Bay of Good Hope, in the vicinity of
King George's Sound.

XIV. To find the beginning and end of twilight.
The twilight is that faint light, which opens the morning by little and little
in the east, before the sun rises; and gradually shuts in the evening the in
west, after the sun is set. It arises from the sun's illuminating the upper
part of the atmosphere, and begins always when ^e approaches within 18 degrees
of the eastern horizon, and ends when ^e defends 18 degrees below the western;
when dark night commences, and continues 'till another day dawn.

To find the beginning of twilight: rectify the globe; bring the sun's place in
the ecliptic to the meridian, and set the index to 12 at noon. Turn the degree
of the ecliptic, which is opposite to the sun's place 'till it is elevated 18
degrees in the quadrant of altitude above the horizon on the west, so will the
index point the hour twilight begins.

To find when it ends -- bring the same degree of the ecliptic to 18 degrees of
the quadrant on the east side, and the index will point the time twilight ends.

Thus on the 10th of April, at Boston, twilight begins at 41 minutes after 3 in
the morning, and ends 19 minutes after 8 in evening. In London they have no
total night, but a constant twilight, while the sun is beneath the horizon for
two months, from the 20th of May to the 20th of July.

Under the north pole, the twilight ceases when the sun's declination is
greater than 18 degrees south, which is from the 13th of November to the 29th
of January; so that notwithstanding the sun is absent from that part of the
world for half a year together, yet total darkness does not continue above 11
weeks; and besides, the moon is above the horizon, at the poles, for a whole
fortnight of every month through the year.

Note. The less the sun's meridian altitude, the longer twilight continues;
therefore, at the equator, twilight is the shortest.

XV. To measure the distance from one town to another.
Only take their distance with a pair of dividers, and apply it to the
equinoctial, that will give the number of degrees between them, which being
multiplied by 60, (the number of geographical or computed miles in one degree)
gives the exact distance sought: -- Or, extend the quadrant of altitude from
one place to another, that will show the number of degrees in like manner,
which may be reduced to miles as before.

Thus, the distance from London to Madrid is 11 degrees. From Paris to
Constantinople 19 degrees. From Bristol, in England, to Boston, is 45 degrees,
which multiplied by 69, (the number of English miles in a degree) give
3127miles.

Note. No place can be further from another than 180 degrees -- that being half
the circumference of the globe, and consequently the greatest distance.

XVI. To find all those countries in which an eclipse of the sun or moon will
be visible.
1. Of the Sun: Find the place to which the sun is vertical at the time of the
eclipse, by problem 7th, and bring it to the zenith, or top of the globe; then,
to all those places above the horizon, if the eclipse be large, will the sun
appear (part of it) visibly obscured.

2. Of the Moon: Bring the antipodes, or country opposite the place where the
sun is vertical at the time of the eclipse, to the zenith or top of the globe,
and then the eclipse will be seen in all places above the horizon at that time.

XVII. To calculate the circumference of the earth, that is, to find how many
miles it is round.
A line going round our globe, is supposed by mathematicians to be divided into
360 equal parts, called degrees; and each of these parts are supposed to be
divided into 60 equal parts, called minutes. Mr. Norwood found, by accurately
measuring from London to York in 1635, that one degree upon the earth's surface
contained 69 statute miles nearly; consequently if the whole 360 degrees be
multiplied by 69 we shall find the circuit of the whole earth, in measured
miles, to be 25,020. The accurate measure is 25,038.

Note. 60 computed miles make a degree, which makes the circumference to be but
21,600 geographical miles.

XVIII. To calculate the diameter of the earth, i. e. to find how many (...) it
is through.
It has been found by accurate mensuration, that if a circle measure^ 22 round,
its diameter will be 7; i. e. the diameter is always a li^^ less than one third
part of the circumference; and this always (...) true, be the circle bigger or
less. The circumference of a circle is to its diameter more exactly as 355 to
113.


Therefore if we multiply the circumference of the earth by 7, and divide the
product by 22, the quotient will give the diameter, (...) thickness; and which,
in this case, will be found to be 8018 measured, 6872 computed, miles. The
diameter of the earth is commonly reckoned at 7,970 measured miles.

Note. From these dimensions of the earth we may discover, (...) that if there
were a hole made through it, and a millstone let (...) into this hole, and it
should descend at the rate of 1 mile a minute, it would be more than 3 days in
coming to the center.

2d. If a man be desirous of traveling round the earth, and should go 20 miles
each, day he would be 3 years and in completing the Journey.

3d. If a bird should fly round the earth in 2 days, she must go at the rate of
525 (measured) miles an hour.

XIX. To find the superficial content of the earth.
Multiply the circumference by the diameter.

XX. To find the solid content of the earth.
Multiply the surface by one sixth of the diameter and it will give the
solidity. Or, multiply the cube of the diameter by 11, and the product divided
by 21, will give the solidity.

After the same manner we may find the surface and solidity not only of the
natural globe, but also of the whole body of the atmosphere surrounding it,
(provided it be always and every where of the same height) for having found the
perpendicular height thereof by that common experiment of the ascent of Mercury
at the foot and top of a mountain, double the said height and add the same
diameter of the earth; then multiply the whole as a new diameter, by its proper
circumference, and from the product subtract the solidity of the earth, it will
leave that of the atmosphere.

PROBLEMS solved on the CELESTIAL GLOBE.
THE equator, ecliptic, tropics, polar circles, horizon and bras^^ meridians,
are exactly alike on both globes. Both also are rectified in the same manner.
N. B. The sun's place for any day of the year, stands directly over that day on
the horizon of the celestial globe, as it does on that day of the terrestrial.

The latitude and longitude of the stars, or of all other celestial phenomena,
are reckoned in a very different manner from the latitude and longitude of
places on the earth; for the all terrestrial latitudes are reckoned from the
equator; and longitudes from the meridian of some remarkable place, as, of
London by the British, and of Paris by the French. But the astronomers of all
nations agree in reckoning the latitudes of the moon, stars, planets, and
comets, from the ecliptic; and their longitudes from the equinoctial colure, in
that semicircle of in which cuts the ecliptic at the beginning of Aries; and
thence eastward, quite round the same semicircle again. Consequently those
stars which lie between the equinoctial and the northern half of the ecliptic,
have north declination and south latitude; those which lie between the
equinoctial and the southern half of the ecliptic, have south declination and
north latitude; and all those which lie between the tropics and poles, have
their declinations and latitudes of the same denomination.

PROB. I. To find the right ascension and declination of the sun, or any fixed
star; bring the sun's place in the ecliptic to the brazen meridian; then that
degree in the equinoctial which is cut by the meridian, is the sun's right
ascension; and that degree of the meridian which is over the sun's place, is
his declination. Bring any fixed star to the meridian, and its right ascension
will be cut by the meridian in the equinoctial; and the degree of the meridian
that stands over it is its declination. So that the right ascension and
declination on the celestial globe, are found in the same manner as longitude
and latitude on the terrestrial.

II. To find the latitude and longitude of any star. If the given star be on
the north side of the ecliptic, place the 90th degree of the quadrant of
altitude on the north pole of the ecliptic, where the twelve semicircles meet,
which divide the ecliptic, into the twelve signs; but if the star be on the
south side of the ecliptic, place the 90th degree of the quadrant on the south
pole of the ecliptic: Keeping the 90th degree of the quadrant on the proper
pole, turn the quadrant about, until its graduated edge cuts the star; then the
number of degrees in the quadrant, between the ecliptic and the star, is its
latitude; and the degrees of the ecliptic, cut by the quadrant, is the star's
longitude, reckoned according to the sign in which the quadrant then is.

III. To present the face of a starry firmament, as seen from any given place
of the earth, at any hour of the night. -- Rectify the celestial globe for the
given latitude, the zenith, and sun's place, in every respect, as taught by the
problem for the terrestrial; and turn it about, until the index points to the
given hour; then the upper hemisphere of the globe will represent the visible
half of the heaven for that time: all the stars upon the globe being then in
such situations, as exactly correspond to those in the heaven. And if the globe
be placed duly north and south, by means of a small sea compass, every star in
the globe will point toward the like star in the heaven: by which means, the
constellations and remarkable stars may be easily known. All those stars which
are in the eastern side of the horizon, are then rising in the eastern side of
the heaven; all in the western, are setting in the western side; and all those
under the upper part of the brazen meridian, between the south point of the
horizon and the north pole, are at their greatest altitude, if the latitude of
the place be north; but if the latitude be south, those stars which lie under
the upper part of the meridian, between the north point of the horizon and the
south pole, are at their greatest altitude.

IV. The latitude of the place, and day of the month, being given, to find the
time when any known star will rise, or be upon the meridian, or set.

Having rectified the globe, turn it about until the given star comes to the
eastern side of the horizon, and the index will show the time of the star's
rising; then turn the globe westward, and when the star comes to the brazen
meridian, the index will show the time of the star's coming to the meridian of
your place; lastly, turn on, until the star comes to the western side of the
horizon, and the index will show the time of the star's setting. N. B. In
northern latitudes those (...) which are less distant from the north pole than
the quantity of its elevation above the north point of the horizon, never set;
and those which are less distant from the south pole than the number of degrees
by which it is depressed below the horizon, never rise: And vice versa in
southern latitudes.

V. To find at what time of the year a given star will be upon the meridian, at
a given hour of the night. Bring the given star to the upper semicircle of the
brass meridian, and set the index to the given hour; then turn the globe, until
the index points to XII at noon, and the upper semicircle of the meridian will
then cut the sun's place, answering to the day of the year sought; which day
may be easily found against the like place of the sun among the signs on the
wooden horizon.

The different MANNER by which some NATIONS and PEOPLE reckon TIME.
THE Babylonians, Persians, and Syrians, and the inhabitants of some part of
Germany, begin their days at sunrising.

The (ancient) Jews, Athenians, and Italians, reckon from sun-setsetting.

The Egyptians, like the English, etc. begin at midnight.

The astronomers and seamen, begin the day at noon, and reckon on 24 hours to
the next day at noon. And according to this mode of reckoning are all the
calculations of the sun, moon, and planets, made and inserted in the common
almanacks.

GEOGRAPHICAL THEOREMS, or PROPOSITIONS.
THESE propositions, which are deducible from the nature of the foregoing work,
the learner will find to be so many real truths, if he properly applies and
contemplates them upon the globe.

I. Places lying under the equator, have no latitude; because the reckoning of
latitude begins at the equator.

II. Under the poles of the world the latitude is greatest, or just 90 degrees;
because the reckoning of latitude ends at the poles.

III. Going from the equator, toward the poles, the latitude increases; (...)
toward the equator, the latitude diminishes.

IV. The latitude of any place is equal to the height of the pole in degrees
above the horizon.

V. Places lying under that meridian, which is accounted the first, have no
longitude; because the reckoning of longitude begins at that meridian.

VI. Those places have the greatest longitude which lie under the meridian,
opposite to that where longitude begins.

VII. The longitude of any place cannot be greater than 180 degrees, eastward
or westward; because that brings you to the meridian opposite to that where
longitude began to be counted from.

VIII. No two places can be distant from one another above 180 degrees; because
180 degrees is half the circumference of a great circle on the globe.

IX. All the inhabitants of the earth enjoy the sun's light an equal length of
time, and have him equally absent from them.

X. Under the equinoctial, the days and nights are always equal to twelve
hours; but not exactly so in any other place.

XI. In all places between the equator and the poles, the days and nights are
never equal but at the time of the equinoxes, in March and September.

XII. The difference between the lengths of the days and nights in any place on
either side the equator, is greater in proportion as the latitude of that place
is greater.

XIII. In places exactly under the polar circles, the sun appears, when at the
summer tropic, one whole day without setting; and disappears one whole day when
in the winter tropic: At other times it daily rises and sets as elsewhere.

XIV. In all places of the frigid zones, the sun appears every year without
setting for a certain number of days; and disappears for about the same space
of time. And the nearer to, or further form the pole, those places are, the
longer or shorter is his appearance in, or absence from them.

XV. To all places under the same semicircle of the meridian, whether on the
north or south side of the equator, it is noon, or midnight, or any other hour
of the day or night, at the same time percisely.

XVI. Places lying eastward of any other place, have their morning, noon, and
evening hours earlier than at that place, by one hour for every 15 degrees it
lies eastward of it.

XVII. Places lying westward of any other place have their morning, noon, and
evening hours later than at that place, by one hour for every 15 degrees it
lies westward of it.

XVIII. A person in going eastward quite round the globe, will have gained one
day in his reckoning of time, above the account kept at the place the departed
from: But had his circuit been made westward, he would have been one day behind
the account kept at that place.

XIX. Two persons setting out at the same time from a place to make the circuit
of the globe, one going eastward the other westward, will, on their return,
differ in their account of time by two entire days.

XX. To all places within the torrid zone, the sun is vertical, i. e. comes
over the heads of the inhabitants, twice a year. To those under the tropics,
once: But it is never vertical to those in the temperate or frigid zones.

XXI. People who live to the north of the torrid zone, see the sun due south at
noon; and those who live to the south of the torrid zone, see the sun due north
at noon.

XXII. Those who see the sun to the northward have their shadows projected
southward; but when they see the sun to the southward, their shadows are
projected northward.

XXIII. The nearer the sun is to the zenith of any person, the shorter is the
shadow at noon; but the further from the zenith at noon, the longer is the
shadow: The shadow is always opposite to the sun; and those who have the sun in
their zenith, i. e. directly over their heads, have no [length of] shadow at
all.

XXIV. In all places situated in a parallel sphere, i. e. at or very near the
poles, the sun's daily motion runs always parallel, or nearly so, to the
respective horizon of such place.

XXV. In all places situated in a right sphere, i. e. at or near the equator,
the sun's daily motion is perpendicular, or nearly so, to the horizon of such
places.

XXVI. In all places situated in an oblique sphere, i. e. lying between the
equator and the poles, the circle of the sun's daily motion is always oblique
unto, or cuts the horizon of such place at unequal angles.

XXVII. On the days of the equinoxes only, that is, about the 20th of March,
and 23d of September, the sun rises exactly in the east point of the horizon,
and sets in the west point, to every place upon earth.

XXVIII. To places in north latitude, the sun rises to the northward of the
east, and sets to the northward of the west, from the vernal to the autumnal
equinox; and rises to the southward of the east, and sets to the southward of
west, from the time of the autumnal equinox to that of the vernal.

Lastly. In all places of the torrid zone, the morning and evening twilight is
least; in the two frigid zones it is greatest; and in the temperate zones the
twilight is a medium between the other two.

Of MAPS and their USE.
A MAP is the representation of some part of the earth's surface delineated on
a plane according to the laws of projection; for as the earth is of a globular
form, no part of its spherical surface can be accurately exhibited on a plane.

Maps are either general or particular: General maps are such (...) give us a
view of an entire hemisphere, or half of the globe, and (...) projected upon
the plane of some great circle, which terminates the projected hemisphere, and
divides it from the other half of the globe, as the meridian, equator, or the
horizon of some place; and from this circle the projection is said to be
meridional, equatorial, or horizontal.

Particular maps are such as exhibit a part less than a hemisphere; such as
maps of Europe, Asia, Africa, North America, and South America; or of
particular kingdoms, provinces, countries, or lesser districts.

There are two methods of projecting the circles in general maps, viz.
stereographic, and orthographic. In order to form an adequate idea of the
construction of maps, we may imagine the globe on which the circles are
delineated, to be of thin glass, and that half of it is viewed at the same
time. In taking this view, the eye may be conceived to be placed at different
distances from the hemisphere to be projected. If the eye be conceived to be
placed in some point of the surface of the sphere to view the concave of the
opposite hemisphere, it is called the stereographic projection: If the eye be
supposed to be placed (...) an infinite distance, it is called the orthographic
projection.

In the stereographic projection the parts about the middle are contracted,
being much less than those nearer the circumference.

All the maps in this treatise, and indeed those in almost all oth^^ are laid
down according to the laws of stereographic projection.

Maps differ from the globe in the same manner as a picture d^^^ from a statue.
The globe truly represents the earth, but a map (...) more than a plane surface
can represent one that is spherical. But although the earth can never be
exhibited exactly by one map, yet by means of several of them, each containing
about ten or twenty degrees of latitude, the representation will not fall very
much short of the globe for exactness; because such maps, if joined together,
would form a spherical unequal nearly as round as the globe itself.

Cardinal Points.] The north is considered as the upper part of the map; the
south is at the bottom, opposite to the north; the east is on the right hand,
the face being turned to the north; and the west on the left hand, opposite to
the east. From the top to the bottom are drawn meridians, or lines of
longitude; and from side to side, paralles of latitude. The outermost of the
meridians and parallels are marked with degrees of latitude or longitude, by
means of which, and the scale of miles, which is commonly placed in the corner
of the map, the situation distances, etc. of places may be found, as on the
artificial globe. Thus to find the distance of two places, suppose Philadelphia
and Boston, by the map, we have only to measure the space between them with the
compasses, or a bit of thread, and to apply this distance to the scale of
miles, which shows that Boston is 286 miles distant from Philadelphia. If the
places lie directly north or south, east or west, from one another, we have
only to observe the degrees on the meridians and parallels, and by turning
these into miles, we obtain the distance without measuring. Rivers are
described in maps by blank lines, and are wider toward the mouth than toward
the head or spring. Mountains are sketched on maps as on a picture. Forests and
woods are represented by a kind of shrub; bogs and morasses, by shades; sands
and shallows are described by small dots; and roads usually by double lines.
Near harbors, the depth of the water is expressed by figures representing
fathoms.

When any parts of the heaven, or earth, are said to be on the right or left,
we are to understand the expression differently acording to the profession of
the person who makes use of it; because, according to that, his face is
supposed to be turned toward a certain quarter. A geographer is supposed to
stand with his face to the north, because the northern part of the world is
best known. An astronomer looks toward the south, to observe the celestial
bodies as they come to the meridian. The ancient augers in observing the flight
of birds, looked toward the east; whilst the poets look west, toward the
Fortunate isles. In books of geography, therefore, by the right hand we must
understand the east; in those of astronomy, the west; in such as relate to
augury, the south; and in the writings of poets, the north.

GENERAL ORSERVATIONS concerning HEAT and COLD. Extracted from Kirwan's
ingenious work, entitled "An estimate of the temperature of different
latitudes," lately published.

THAT the presence of the sun is the principal source of heat, as well as of
light, and its absence of cold, is too obvious ever to have been doubted.

The next source of heat is the condensation of vapor. It is well known that
vapor contains a quantity of the matter of heat which produces no other effect
but that of making it assume an aerial expanded state, until the vapor is
condensed into a liquid; but during this condensation a quantity of sensible
heat is set loose, which warms the surrounding atmosphere. This condensation is
frequently caused by the attraction of an electrical cloud, and hence the
sultriness we frequently experience before rain.

As the earth is the chief source of heat, in the atmosphere that surrounds it.
distance from the earth is the source of cold; or, in other words, the greatest
cold must prevail in the highest regions of the atmosphere, and so much the
greater, as clear unclouded air seems to receive no heat whatsoever from the
rays of the sun, whether direct or reflected. This if the focus of the most
powerful burning glass be directed on mere air, it does not produce the
smallest degree of heat; and the reason is, because the air being transparent,
affords a free passage to the rays of light, which act as fire only when
confined within the minutest interstices of bodies; as it is then, and then
only, that they contract the attractive power of the particles of matter; in
which action and re-action hear consists.

Hence the highest mountains, even under the equator, are, during the whole
year, covered with snow. Mr. Bouguer found the cold of Pinchinca, one of the
Cordeliers, immediately under the line, to extend from 7 to 9 degrees under the
freezing point, every morning before sunrise; and hence at a certain height,
which varies in almost every latitude, it constantly freezes at night, in every
season, though in the warm climates in thaws to some degree the next day: This
height he calls the lower term of congelation. Between the tropics (...) places
it at the height of 15577 feet.

At still greater heights it never freezes, not because the cold decreases. but
because vapors do not ascend so high; this height Mr. Bouguer calls the upper
term of congelation, and under the equator he fixes it at the height of 28000
feet, at most. Under the equator, there being very little variety in the
weather, the height of both terms is nearly constant; under other latitudes
this height is variable, both in summer and winter, according to the degree of
heat which prevails on the surface of the earth.

The next general source of cold is, evaporation; for the attraction of the
particles of liquids decreases as their points of contact diminish, and thereby
their capacity for receiving the matter of heat (which is the same as that of
light) increases; by this increased capacity, the matter of heat or fire
contained in the neighboring bodies, which, like all other fluids, flows where
it finds least resistance, is determined to flow toward the vapor; and
consequently those bodies are cooled, though the vapor is not hea^ed; because
the re-action of its particles is barely equal to that which it had before its
capacity was increased Heat is observed to diminish in ascending into the
atmosphere, nearly in an arithmetical progression.


With respect to evaporation, we may remark, 1st. That in our climates, it is
about four times as great from the vernal to the autumnal equinox, as from the
autumnal to the vernal.

2dly. The degree of cold produced by evaporation, is much great^^ when the air
is warmer than the evaporating surface, than that which is produced when the
evaporating surface is the warmer of the two. Hence, warm winds, as the
Sirocco, Harmatan, etc. are more deficcative than cold winds.

3dly. That it is greatly increased by a current of air or wind flowing over
the evaporating surface, not only because the evaporating surface is thereby
increased, but also because unsaturated air is constantly brought into contact
with it. Hence it has been remarked that calm days are the hottest.

4thly. That tracts of land covered with trees or vegetables, emit more vapor
than the same space covered with water, as Dr. Hales has observed. Mr. Williams
found this quantity to amount to one third more.

Lastly, We may observe, that the heat and cold of different countries are
transmitted from one to the other by the medium of winds. How the air of a cold
country is determined to flow toward a warmer, is easily understood; but by
what means warm air is determined to flow toward cold countries, is somewhat
difficult to explain. I shall here mention two causes that occur to me, wishing
for a fuller explanation from others.

1st. If from any tract in the upper regions of the atmosphere, two currents of
air flow in opposite directions, as some time happens, the inferior air being
less compressed, will become specifically lighter; and currents of air in
opposite directions to the upper currents will take place.

2dly. I conceive that when easterly and westerly winds meet with unequal
force. one of them may be reflected northwards.

From what has been already said, it follows, that some situations are better
fitted to receive or communicate heat than other situations; thus high and
mountainous situations being nearer to the source of cold, must be colder than
lower situations; and countries covered with woods, as they prevent the access
of the sun's rays to the earth, or to the heaps of snow which they may conceal,
and present more numerous evaporating surfaces, must be colder than open
countries, though situated in the same latitude; and since all tracts of land
present infinite varieties of situation, uniform results cannot here be
expected.

With respect to the annual temperature, we may remark, 1st. That within 10
degrees of the poles the temperatures differ very little; neither do they
differ much within 10 degrees of the equator.

2d. The temperatures of different years differ very little near the equator,
but they differ more and more, as the latitudes approach the poles.

3d. If scarce ever freezes in latitudes under 35, unless in very elevated
situations. and it scarce ever hails in latitudes higher than 60.

4th. Between latitudes 35 and 60, in places adjacent to the sea, it generally
thaws when the sun's altitude is 40. and and seldom begins to freeze, until the
sun's meridian altitude is below 40.

Hence we may observe, that the month of January is the coldest in every
latitude.

2d. That July is the warmest month in all latitudes above 48; but in lower
latitudes, August is generally the warmest.

3d. That December and January, and also June and July, differ but little. In
latitudes above 30, the months of August, September, October and November,
differ more from each other, than those of February, March, April and May. In
latitudes under 30, the difference is not so great. The temperature of April
aproaches more, every where, to the annual temperature, than that of any other
month; whence we may infer, that the effects of natural causes. that operate
gradually over a large extent, do not arrive at their maximum, until the
activity of the causes begins to diminish; this appears also in the operation
of the moon on seas, which produces tides; but after these effects have arrived
at their maximum, the decrements are more rapid than the increments originally
were, during the progress to that maximum

4th. That the differences, between the hottest and coldest months, within 20
of the equator, are inconsiderable, except in some peculiar situations; but
that they increase in proportion as we reced^ from the equator.

5th. That in the highest latitudes, we often meet with a heat of 75 or 80
degrees; and particularly in latitudes 59 and 60, the heat of July is
frequently greater, than in latitude 51.

6th. That every habitable latitude enjoys a heat of 60 degrees at least, for
two months; which heat seems necessary, for the growth and maturity of corn.
The quickness of vegetation in the higher latitudes, proceeds from the duration
of the sun over the horizon. Rain is little wanted, as the earth is
sufficiently moistened by the liquefaction of the snow, that covers it during
the winter; in all this we cannot sufficiently admire the wise disposition of
providence.

7th. It is owing to the same provident hand, that the globe of the earth is
intersected with seas and mountains, in a manner, that on its first appearance
seems altogether irregular and fortuitous; presenting to the eye of ignorance,
the view of an immense ruin; but when the effects of these seeming
irregularities, on the face of the globe, are carefully inspected, they are
found most beneficial and even necessary to the welfare of its inhabitants; for
to say nothing of the advantages of trade and commerce, which could not exist
without these seas; it is by their vicinity, that the cold of the higher
latitudes is moderated, and the heat of the lower. It is by want of seas that
the interior parts of Asia, as Siberia and Great Tartary, as well as those of
Africa, are rendered almost uninhabitable; a circumstance which furnishes a
strong prejudice against the opinion of those, who think these countries were
the original habitations of man. In the same manner, mountains are necessary;
not only as the reservoirs of rivers, but as a defense against the violence of
heat, in the warm latitudes: without the Alps, Pyrenees, Apennine, the
mountains of Dauphine and Auvergne, etc. Italy, Spain, and France, would be
deprived of the mild temperature they at present enjoy. Without the Balgate
hills, or Indian Appennine, India would have been a desert. Hence Jamaica, St.
Domingo, Sumatra, and most other intertropical islands, are furnished with
mountains, from which the breezes proceed that refresh them.

A view of the ANNUAL TEMPERATURE of different places, according to the order
of their LATITUDES.
N. Lat. Longitude. Mean annual heat degrees. m. degrees. m. Wadso, in Lapland 70, 5 36
Abo 60, 27 22,18 E. 40. Petersburg 59, 56 30, 24 E. 38, 8 Upsal 59, 51 17, 47
E. 41, 88 Stockholm 59, 20 18. E. 42, 39 Solyskamski 59. 54 E. 36, ^ Edinburgh
55, 57 3. W. 47, 7 Francker 53. 5, 42 E. 52, 6 Berlin 52, 32 13, 31 E. 49.
Lyndon, in Rutland 52, 30 0. 3 W. 48, 3 Leyden 52, 10 4, 32 E. 52, 25 London
51, 31 51, 9 Dunkirk 51, 2 2, 7 E. 54, 9 Manheim 49, 27 9, 2 E. 51, 5 Rouen 49,
26 1. W. 51. Ratisbon 48, 56 12, 5 E. 49, 35 Paris 48, 50 2, 25 E. 52. Troyes,
in Champaigne 48, 18 4, 10 E. 53, 17 Vienna 48, 12 16, 22 E. 51, 53 Dijon 47,
19 4, 57 E. 52, 8 Nantes 47, 13 1, 28 E. 55, 53 Poitiers 46, 39 0, 30 E. 53, 8
Lausanne 46, 31 6, 50 E. 48, 87 Padua 45, 23 12. E. 52, 2 Rhodez, in Guienne
45, 21 2, 39 E. 52, 9 Bordeaux 44, 50 0, 36 W. 57, 6 Montpelier 43, 36 3, 73 E.
60, 87 Marseillies 43, 19 5, 27 E. 61, 8 Mont Louis, in Rousillon 42. 2, 40 E.
44, 5 Cambridge, in N. England 42, 25 71. W. 50, 3 Philadelphia 39, 56 75, 9 W.
52, 5 Pekin 39, 54 116, 29 W. 55, 5 Algiers 36, 49 2, 17 E. 72. Grand Cairo 30.
31, 23 E. 73. Canton 23. 133. E. 75, 14 Tivoli, in St. Domingo 19. 74.
Spanishtown, in Jamaica 18, 15 76, 38 W. 81. Manilla 14, 36 1^0, 58 E. 78, 4
Fort St. George 13. 87. E. 81. 3 Pondicherry 12. South Latitude. 67. E. 88.
Falkland Islands 51. 66. W. 47, 4 Quito 0, 13 ^7, 50 W. 62.

THEORY of the WINDS.
AIR is a fine invisible fluid, surrounding the globe of the earth, and
extending to some miles above its surface: and that collection of it, together
with the bodies it contains, circumscribing the earth, is called the atmosphere.

Few natural bodies have been the subject of more experiments than the air; and
from these it appears, that it is both heavy and elastic. By its gravity it is
capable of supporting all lighter bodies, as smoke, vapors, fumes, odours,
etc. And by its elasticity, a small volume of air is capable of expanding
itself in such a manner as to fill a very large space, and also of being
compressed into a much smaller compass. -- Cold has the property of compressing
air, and heat of expanding it. But as soon as the expansion or compression is
taken away, it will return to its natural state. Hence if an alteration be made
in any part of the atmosphere, either by heat or cold, the neighboring parts
will be put into commotion, by the effort which the air always makes to recover
its former state. Wind is nothing more than a stream or current of air capable
of very different degrees of velocity, and generally blowing from one point of
the horizon to its opposite part. The horizon, like all other great circles of
the sphere, is divided into 360 degrees: but as these divisions are too minute
for common use, it is also divided into thirty two equal parts, called rhumbs,
or points of the compass.

Winds are either constant or variable, a general or particular. Constant winds
are such as always blow the same way, at least for a considerable length of
time. Variable winds, are such as frequently shift, or change from one point of
the compass to another. A general wind, is that which blows the same way over a
large tract of the earth the greater part of the year. A particular wind is
that which blows in any particular place, sometimes one way and sometimes
another.

The trade wind is a current of air blowing continually from the east on the
Atlantic and Pacific ocean, between thirty degrees north and thirty degrees
south latitude.

The cause of this constant wind is the action of the sun in his apparent
motion from east to west. For the air immediately under the sun being more
heated, and consequently more expanded in that (...) than in any other, the air
to the eastward is constantly rushing toward the west, in order to restore the
equilibrium, or natural state of the atmosphere; and by that means occasions a
continual current of air from the eastward within those limits.

But the the trade winds near the northern boundary, blow between the north and
east; and near the southern, between the south and east. For as the air is
expanded by the heat of the sun near the equator, therefore the air from the
northward and southward will both flow toward the equator, to restore the
equilibrium. But these motions from the north and south being compounded with
the foregoing easterly motion, will produce the motions observed near the above
limits, between the north and east, and between the south and west.

It must however be observed, that these general currents of the wind are
disturbed on the continents and near the coast. Sometimes the nature of the
soil increases or lessens the heat in the atmosphere; and sometimes chains of
mountains form a kind of eddy near their western sides; henc^ the motions of
the winds may be different and even contrary to the general motions above
observed.

In some parts of the Indian Ocean another species of trade-winds, called
monsoons, prevail, These blow six months one way, and six months the contrary
way.

These phenomena flow from the same cause. For the air that is cool and dense,
must force the rarefied air in a continual stream upwards, where it must spread
itself to preserve and equilibrium; consequently the upper course or current of
the air will be contrary to the under current; for the under current must move
from those parts where the greatest heat is; and so by a kind of circulation,
the north-east trade-wind below, will be attended with a south-west wind above;
and a south-east below with a north-west above. Experience had sufficiently
confirmed the truth of this proposition; the seamen (...) ways finding that as
soon as they leave the trade winds, they immediately find a wind blowing in an
opposite direction.

Between the fourth and tenth degrees of north latitude, and between the
longitudes of Cape Verd and the easternmost of the Cape (...) verd Islands, is
a tract of sea which seems to be condemned to perpetual calms, attended with
dreadful thunder and lightnings, and such frequent rains, that it has acquired
the name of the Rains. This phenomenon seems to be caused by the great
rarefaction of the air on the neighboring coast, which causing a perpetual
current of air to set in from the westward, and this current meeting here with
the general trade wind, the two currents balance each other, and cause a
general calm; while the vapors carried thither by each wind meeting and
condensing, occasion these frequent deluges of rain.

THEORY of the TIDES.
BY the word tide is understood that motion of the water in the seas and rivers
by which they regularly rise and fall. The phenomena of the tides occasioned a
variety of opinions among the ancient philosophers; but the true cause
continued unknown till the latter end of the last century, when it was
discovered by the illustrious Sir Isaac Newton, who deduced it from the
following observations.

One of the inherent properties of matter is gravitation or attraction. It is
owing to this property, that heavy bodies thrown up into the air fall down to
the surface of the earth in perpendicular directions. And as all lines drawn
from the center of a sphere to its circumference are perpendicular to its
surface, therefore all heavy bodies fall in lines tending to the center. This
property of gravitation or attraction is found to be universally diffused
through this solar system, and probably through the whole universe. The
heavenly bodies are governed by this great law of nature. The earth and moon
gravitate toward, or are attracted by the sun. Experience has also
demonstrated, that the force of attraction exerted by these bodies on one
another, is less and less, as they are farther removed asunder in proportion to
the squares of those distances.

From these general principles it follows, that the gravitation of bodies
toward the center of the earth will be less on those parts of its surface that
are opposite to the sun and moon than in the others: and this defect of
gravitation in particular parts, is the true cause of the ebbing and flowing of
the tide. For it is evident, that if no such forces were exerted by the sun and
moon, the oceans, being equally attracted toward the earth's center on all
sides by the force of gravity, would continue in a state of perfect stagnation.
But as these forces are really exerted, the waters in the oceans must rise
higher in those place where the sun and moon diminish their gravity; or where
the attraction of the sun and moon is greatest.

This being an ^^deniable fact, it follows, that as the force of gravity must
be diminished most in those places of the earth to which the moon is nearest.
viz. in the zenith; therefore the waters in such places will rise higher, and
consequently it will be full sea or flood in such places.

From the same principles it follows, that the parts of the earth directly
under the moon in the zenith, and those in the nadir, or those diametrically
opposite, will have the flood or high water at the same time.

But as the waters in the zenith and nadir rise at the same time, therefore the
waters in their neighborhood will press toward these places to maintain the
equilibrium; and, to supply the places of these, others will move the same way,
and soon to place ninety degrees distant from the said zenith and nadir;
consequently in those places where the moon appears in the horizon, the waters
will have (...) liberty to descend toward the center; and therefore in those
places, the water will be lowest.

From what has been said it follows, that if the surface of the earth was
entirely covered with water, the ocean must have a prolate sp^^roidical figure,
the longer diameter passing through the place where the moon is vertical, and
the shorter where she appears in the horizon. And as the moon apparently shifts
her place from east to west in moving round the earth every day, the longer
diameter of the spher^^ following her motion, there must be two floods and two
ebbs in the length of a lunar day, or about twenty-four hours, fifty minutes.

Hence we see the reason why the time of high water is about fifty minutes
later every day. That is, if it be high water at eleven today, it will not be
high water till near fifty minutes after eleven tomorrow.

The tides are higher than ordinary twice every month, viz. about the time of
the new and full moon; and these are called spring tides. Because at these
times both the sun and moon concur, or draw in the same right line; and
consequently the tides must be more elevated. When the two luminaries are in
conjunction, or when the sun and moon are on the same side of the earth, they
both conspire to raise the water in the zenith, and consequently in the nadir;
and when the sun and moon are in opposition, that is, when the earth is between
them, while one makes high water in the zenith and nadir the other does the
same in the nadir and zenith.

The tides are less than ordinary twice every month; that is, about the times
of the first and last quarters of the moon; and these are called neap-tides.

For in the quarters of the moon, the sun raises the water where the moon
depresses it; and depresses it where the moon raises the water; the tides are
made therefore by the difference of their actions.

It is however necessary to be observed, that the spring-tides happen not
precisely at the new and full moon, but a day or two after, when the
attractions of the sun and moon have acted in the same direction for a
considerable time. In the same manner the neap-tides happen a day or two after
the quarters, when the force of the moon's attraction has been lessened by that
of the sun's for several days together.

The spring tides are greater about the time of the equinoxes, than at other
times of the year; and the neap-tides are then less.

Because the longer diameter of the spheroid, or the two opposite floods, will
at that time be in the earth's equator; and consequently will describe a great
circle of the earth, by whose diurnal rotation those floods will move swifter,
describing a great circle in the same time they used to describe a lesser
circle parallel to the equator, and consequently the waters being impelled more
forcibly against the shores, they rise higher.

Such would be the phenomena of the tides if the whole surface of the earth was
entirely covered with water; but as this is not the case, there being besides
the continents, a multitude of islands, lying in the way of the tide, which
interrupt its course; therefore in many places near the shores, a great variety
of other appearances besides those already enumerated arise. These require
particular solutions, in which the shores, streights, shoals, rocks, and other
objects must be considered; a disquisition which requires much mo^^ room than
can be spared in this introduction. What has been laid will however be
sufficient to explain the theory of the tides, and enable the reader to pursue
the enquiry and solve the difficulties that may arise with regard to any
particular place.

LENGTH of MILES in different COUNTRIES.
THERE is scarcely a greater variety in any thing than in this fort of measure;
not only those of separate countries differ, as the French from the English,
but those of the same country vary, in the different provinces, and all
commonly from the standard. Thus the common English mile differs from the
statute mile, and the French have three forts of leagues.

We shall here give the miles of several countries, compared with the English
by Dr. Hally.

The English statute mile consists of 5280 feet, 1760 yards, or 8 furlongs.

Eleven miles Irish, are equal to fourteen English.

The Russian vorst is little more than English.

The Turkish, Italian, and old Roman lesser mile is nearly 1 English.

The Arabian, ancient and modern, is about 1 English.

The Scotch mile is about 1 English.

The Indian is almost 3 English.

The Dutch, Spanish, and Polish, is about 3 English.

The German is more than 4 English.

The Swedish, Danish, and Hungarian, is from 5 to 6 English.

The French common league is near 3 English, and

The English marine league is 3 English miles.

NATURAL DIVISIONS of the EARTH.
THE Planet which we inhabit, called the Earth, is made up of land and water,
and is therefore called terraqueous. About one fourth of the surface of the
globe is land; the other three fourths are water.

The common divisions of the land and water, are as follows: --

The Divisions of Land are, The Divisions of Water are, I. Continents.] A
Continent is a very large tract of country, not entirely separated by water.
There are commonly reckoned two Continents, the Eastern and Western. The
Eastern Continent is divided into Europe, Asia and Africa: The Western, into
North and South America. To these we may now add the continent of New Holland,
which is found to be sufficiently large to bear the respectable name of
Continent. Some geographers reckon four continents, viz. Europe, Asia, Africa,
and America. But according to the above definition there are but the three
mentioned. I. Oceans.] An ocean is a vast collection of water, not entirely
separated by land. There are five great Oceans; the Atlantic, lying between
America on the west, and Europe and Africa on the east, 3,000 miles wide. The
Pacific, between America on the East, and Asia on the west, 10,000 miles over.
The Indian, which washes the eastern shores of Africa, and the southern shores
of Asia, 3,000 miles wide. Besides these there is the Northern or Frozen ocean.
lying northward of Europe and Asia, 3,000 miles wide; and the Southern,
extending from the southern coasts of Africa to the south pole, 8,500 miles
over. II. Islands.] An island is a tract of land entirely surrounded with
water; as, Rhode Island, Long Isand, Cuba, Ireland, Great Britain, Japan. II.
Lakes.] A lake is a (...) collection of water, in the (...) parts of a country,
surrounded (...) land; most of them, however, ^^^municate with the ocean by
ri^^^ as lake Ontario, etc. A small ^^^lection of water surrounded ^bove, is
called a pond. III. Peninsulas.] A peninsula is almost an island, or a tract of
land surrounded by water, excepting at one narrow neck; as Boston, the Morea,
Crim Tartary and Arabia. III. Seas.] A sea or gulf is a (...) of the ocean,
surrounded by (...) excepting a narrow pass, called strait, by which it
communi^^^^ with the ocean; as the Mediterranean, Baltic and Red Seas; (...)
the gulfs of Mexico, St. Lawrence and Venice. IV. Isthmusses.] An isthmus is a
narrow neck of land joining a peninsula to the main land: as the isthmus of
Darien, which joins North and South America, 70 miles over; and the isthmus of
Seuz, which unites Asia and Africa, 60 miles over. IV. Straits.] A strait is a
(...) row passage out of one sea into another; as the straits of Gibra^^^
joining the Mediterranean to the Atlantic; the straits of Babe^^^deb, which
unite the Red Sea (...) the Indian Ocean. V. Promontories.] A promontory is a
mountain or hill extending into the sea, the extremity of which is called a
cape. A point of flat land projecting far into the sea is likewise called a
cape; as Cape Ann, Cape Cod, Cape Hatteras, Cape Horn. V. Bays.] A bay is a
part of the sea running up into the main (...) commonly between two capes;
(...) Massachusetts Bay, between Cap^ Ann and Cape Cod; Delaware Bay, between
Cape May and Cap^ Henlopen; Chesapeek Bay, between Cape Charles and Cape Henry.
VI. Mountains.] A mountain is a part of the land more elevated than the
adjacent country, and seen at a distance; as the White Hills. VI. Rivers.] A
river is a considerable stream of water, issuing from one or more springs, and
gliding into the sea. A small stream is called a rivulet or brook.

An ACCOUNT of the GREGORIAN or NEW STYLE. From Pike's Arithmetic.

POPE Gregory the XIII. made a reformation of the Calendar. The Julian
Calendar, or Old Style, had, before that time, (...) in general use all over
Europe. The year, according to the Julian Calendar, consists of 365 days and 6
hours; which 6 hours being (...) fourth part of a day, the common years
consisted of 365 days, (...) every fourth year one day was added to the month
of February, which made each of those years 366 days, which are usually called
(...) Years.

This computation, though near the truth, is more than the (...) year, by 11
minutes, which in 131 years amounts to a whole day. (...) consequence of this,
the vernal equinox was anticipated ten days from the general Council of Nice,
held in the year 325 of the Christian Era, to the time of Pope Gregory; who
therefore caused ten days to be taken out of the month of October, 1582, to
make the Equinox fall on the 21st of March, as it did at the time of that
Council. And to prevent the like variation in future, he ordered that three
days should be abated in every four hundred years, by reducing the Leap year at
the close of each century, for three successive centuries, to common years, and
retaining the Leap year at the close of each fourth century only.

At that time this was considered as exactly conformable to the true solar
year; but Dr. Hally makes the solar year to be 365 days, 5 hours, 48 minutes,
54 seconds, 41 3ds, 27 4ths, 36 5ths: according to which, in 400 years, the
Julian year of 365 days 6 hours will exceed the solar by three days, one hour
and 53 minutes, which is nearly two hours, so that in 50 centuries it will
amount to a day.

Though the Gregorian Calendar, or New Style, had long been used throughout the
greater part of Europe, it did not take place in Great Britain and America till
the first of January 1752, and in September following, the, 11 days were
adjusted, by calling the third day of that month the fourteenth, and continuing
the rest in their order.

A TABLE,
Exhibiting the Superficial Content of the whole Globe, in Square Miles, sixty
to a degree, and also of the Seas and Unknown Parts, the Habitable Earth, the
Continents; likewise the great Empires, and principal Islands, arranged
according to their magnitude.
Square Miles. The Globe about 199,000,000 Seas and unknown parts 160,000,000
The habitable World 89,000,000 America 14,000,000 Asia 10,500,000 Africa
9,500,000 Europe 2,600,000 Continent of New Holland 4,000,000 Persian Emp.
under Darius 1,600,000 Roman Em. in its meridian 1,600,000 Russia 4,000,000
Chinese 1,700,000 Great Mogul 1,100,000 United States of America 1,000,000
Turkish Empire 950,000 Present Persia 800,000 Borneo 228,000 Madagascar 168,000
Sumatra 129,000 Japan 118,000 Great Britain 72,900 Celebes 68,400 Manilla
58,500 Iceland 46,000 Terra del Fuego 42,000 Mindinao 39,100 Cuba 38,400 Java
38,200 Hispaniola 36,000 Newfoundland 35,500 Ceylon 27,700 Ireland 27,500
Formosa 17,000 Anian 12,000 Gilolo 10,400 Sicily 9,400 Timor 7,800 Sardinia
6,600 Cyprus 6,300 Jamaica 6,000 Flores 6,000 Ceram 5,400 Breton 4,000 Scorata
3,600 Candia 3,220 Porto Rico 3,200 Corsica 2,520 Zealand 1,900 St. Jago 1,400
Long Island or Manhattan 1,400 Majorca 1,400 Negropont 1,300 Teneriff 1,270
Gothland 1,000 Madeira 950 St Michael 920 Sky 900 Lewis 886 Funen 768 Yvica
625 Minorca 520 Rhodes 480 Cephalonia 420 Amboyna 400 Orkney Pomona 324 Scio
300 Martinico 260 Lemnos 220 Corfu 194 Providence 16^ Man 160 Bornholm 160
Wight 150 Malta 15^ Barbados 140 Antigua 100 St. Christopher's 80 St. Helena
80 Guernsey 50 Rhode Island 50 Jersey 43 Bermudas 40

Islands lately discovered, but not fully explored, and whole dimensions are
not exactly known. New Guinea New Zealand New Caledonia New Hebrides Otaheite
Friendly Islands Marquesas Easter or David's Pelew Islands



AMERICA.
This Continent being, to Americans, the most interesting part of the World, we
give it the first place in this Work.
HISTORY OF ITS DISCOVERY.
IT is believed by many, and not without some plausible foundation, that
America was known to the Ancients. Of this, however, history affords no certain
evidence. The Norwegians, the Welsh and the Germans, each in their turn, have
made pretensions to the discovery of America. As early as 874 the Norwegians
discovered, and planted a colony in Iceland; and in 982, they discovered, and
made settlements in Greenland. Thence, some of their enterprizing navigators,
proceeded still farther westward till they discovered a country, the coast of
which was sandy, but the interior parts level and covered with wood, on which
account they called it Helle-land and Mark-land, and having afterwards' found
some plants of the vine, which bore grapes, they called it Wine-land or
Vine-land. But where this country lies historians are not agreed. If it was any
part of the American coast, as it probably must have been, all attempts to
plant colonies in it proved unsuccessful, and the knowledge of it was soon
lost. Mons. Mallet, in the first volume of his Northern Antiquities, gives us
from authorities of unquestionable cr^cibility, a circumstantial account of the
discovery and settlements of Vine-land. This Author informs that Iceland was
peopled by a colony of Norwegians, under Ingulph, in the year 874. Greenland
was settled by Eric Rufus, a young Norwegian, in the year 982; and before the
eleventh century, churches were founded, and a bishopric erected at Guard, the
capital of the settlement. Shortly after this, Biarn, and Icelandic navigator,
by accident, discovered land to the westward of Greenland, which was more fully
explored in the year 1002, and from the description given answers to no other
than the American coast.

The discovery of a distant country, says our Author, "called Vine-land, and
the reality of a Norwegian colony's settling there, appear to be facts, so well
attested on all sides, and rela^ed with circumstances so probable, as to leave
no room for any doubt. But to settle the Geography of the country where this
happened, is not an easy matter. It could not, however, have been far from the
coasts of Labrador, or those of Newfoundland; both which are in the vicinity of
Greenland.

Mr. Calm (or Kalm) a Swedish botanist, educated under Linnaeus, who some years
since traveled through Canada, with a view to acquaint himself with its
natural history, conjectures that the colony of Vine-land was in the Island of
Newfoundland, which is separated from that part of the continent called
Labrador, by a narrow strait only, of a few leagues, called Belle-isle. Davi^'s
strait, which separates Greenland from the American continent, is known to be
very narrow in several places. The Greenlanders, according to Mr. Egede, assert
that it is only a deep bay, which runs on, narrowing toward the north, till
the opposite American continent can be easily discerned from the Greenland
shore; and that the extremity of this bay ends in a river, over which wandering
savages, inured to told, might easily pass from one land to the other, without
canoes. And hence the peopling of the north eastern part of the American
continent is easily and rationally accounted for.

All accounts agree in describing Vine-land as (...) country which
spontaneously produces the Vine. And this bas led Dr. Robertson and others to
consider the whole history as too fabulous to be credited. Doctor Robertson
asserts that grapes are not the production either of Labrador, or Newfoundland.
But the learned Mr. Ellis, in his voyage to Hudson's bay, mentions that he met
with the vine, about the English settlements at that place, and compares the
fruit of it to the currants of the Levant. And credible travelers say that the
vine grows spontaneously in Canada, and in still more northern latitudes, and
bears a small well tasted fruit.

On the whole, concludes our Author, "there can be on doubt but that the (...)
Greenlanders discovered the American continent; that the place where they
settled (...) either the country of Labrador of Newfoundland: and that their
colony subsisted (...) a good while. This is all we can say about it with any
certainty. To endeavors ascertain the exact situation, extent and fortune of
the establishment; would be a (...) labor."




The pretensions of the Welsh to the discovery of America, have (...) a slight
foundation. In the 12th Century, according to Powell, a dispute having arisen
among the sons of Owen Gwyneth, king of Northern Wales, concerning the
succession to his crown, Madoc, one of (...) number, weary of this contention,
betook himself to sea, in search (...) a more peaceful settlement. He steered
due west, leaving Ireland (...) the north, and arrived in an unknown country,
which appeared to (...) desirable; he returned to Wales, and carried thither
several of his ^^herents and companions. This is said to have taken place about
(...) year 1170. He and his colony have not been heard of since.

Some German authors ascribe the honor of having discovered America, to Martin
Behaim, their countryman. He descended from (...) noble family, of the imperial
town of Nuremburgh -- was a scholar (...) the celebrated John Muller, and
became an adept in the science of ^^^mography. Under the patronage of the
Duchess of Burgundy he repaired to Lisbon, whither the same of the Portuguese
discoveries invited all the adventurous spirits of the age. In 1483, in company
with Diego Cane, (...) made a voyage to the southward, and is said to have
discovered the kingdom of Congo, on the coast of Africa. He settled in the
island of (...) one of the Azores, and was a particular friend of Columbus. He
constructed a terrestrial globe, which afterward fell into the hands of
Magellan. On this globe Magellan laid down the course which he p^^posed to hold
in search of the communication with the South (...) which he afterward
discovered. In the year 1492, Behaim (...) his relations at Nuremburgh, and
left with them a map, drawn with his own hand, which is still preserved among
the archives of the (...). So far the story of Martin Behaim is well
authenticated; but (...) to the accounts of his having discovered any part of
the American (...) though credited by some ingenious men, they have too great
an appear^^^ of conjecture to gain general belief The Librarian of St. Mark's
Library at Venice, in a letter to the Editors of a (...) magazine, furnishes
the following curious fact relative to the discovery of America.

"To the enquiry which you make," said he "I answer, that in the nautical map,
^^ifting in St. Mark's Library, and lately published here by Signior
Formaleoni, on the (...) where at present the Antilles are known to be, there
certainly is delineated, a great (...) (...) with various harbors, and near it
is written y. de Antilli^^. The delineation and the (...) are all by the same
hand; it cannot therefore, be said, that any addition has made to it. In it is
written, in ancient characters, and by the same hand which (...) the rest,
Andreas B^anch^ de Veneciis me f^cit MCCCCXXXVI Fifty six years before columbus
sailed, for the first time, from the port of Poles, in (...) for the discovery
of the New World.
. Let it not app^^^ extraordinary to you, that in those times they had a
confused notion of the Anti^^^^ shall show that even before the discovery of
Columbus, they had an idea of them, and (...) the Antillia were mentioned. This
I shall treat of in illustrating the manuscripts of (...) Bianch^, together
with the rest of St. Marks Library, which now employs all the time (...) to
call my own."

Col. Mag. for Nov. 17^^

N. B. The Artilles lie in the bay of Mexico, between the island of Cuba and
(...) America.


. For ought we can learn from authentic documents, the eastern continent was
the only theater of (...) the partial discoveries of the Norwegians excepted,
from creation till the year of our Lord 1492; and Columbus has a fair claim to
the honor of being the discoverer of the NEW WORLD.

As the following work proposes to give a description of this NEW WORLD, as it
was originally called, especially of its most interesting parts, which have
lately become the scene of the most important events that adorn the page of
history, an account of its discovery may rationally be expected.

CHRISTOPHER COLON or COLUMBUS, a subject of the republic of Genoa, was among
the foreigners, whom the fame of the discoveries of the Portuguese had allured
into their service. He descended from a noble family reduced by misfortunes;
but neither the time nor place of his birth are certainly known. His ancestors,
having had recourse to a seafaring life for support, Columbus, from his early
youth, discovered such peculiar talents for that profession, as indicated his
future greatness. -- His parents encouraged this original propensity by giving
him a suitable education. After acquiring some knowledge of the Latin tongue,
the only language in which science was taught at that time, he was instructed
in geometry, cosmography, astronomy and the art of drawing. To these he applied
with such ardour and predilection, on account of their connection with
navigation, his favorite object, that he made rapid proficiency in them. Thus
qualified, in 1461, at the early age of fourteen, he went to sea, and began his
career on that element which conducted him to so much glory. His early voyages
were limited principally to those places which had before been discovered, in
which nothing very remarkable happened, except that in a sea fight, off the
coast of Portugal, with some Venetian coasters, the vessel on board which he
served, took fire, together with one of the enemy's, to which it was fast
grappled; upon which he threw himself into the sea, laid hold of a floating
oar, and by the support of it, and his dexterity in swimming, he reached the
shore, though more than six miles distant, and thus preserved a life designed
for great undertakings.

Soon after this he went of Lisbon, where he married a daughter of Bartholomew.
Perestrello, one of the captains employed by Prince Henry in his early voyages,
and who had discovered and planted the islands of Porto Santo and Maderia. The
journals and charts of this experienced navigator, his father-in-law, fell into
his hands, and he, with avidity, availed himself of the valuable information
they contained. His impatience to visit the places which Perestrello had seen
and described, became irresistible; and he made a voyage to Maderia, and spent
several years in trading with that island, the Canaries, the Azores, the
settlements in Guinea, and all other places which the Portuguese had discovered
on the continent of Africa.

By the experience acquired during such a variety of voyages, Columbus became
one of the most skilful navigators of Europe. But his ambition did not permit
him to rest satisfied with that praise. He aimed at something more. A project
had been conceived of finding out a passage by sea, to the East Indies. The
accomplishment of this became a favorite object with Columbus. The Portuguese
sought this rout by steering toward the south, in hope of arriving at India,
by turning to the east, after they had sailed round the farther extremity of
Africa; which passage was afterward effected 1497, by Vasco d^ Gama, a
Portuguese navigator. Columbus contemplated a shor^^ and more direct passage to
the East Indies, by sailing toward the west across the Atlantic Ocean. The
principles and arguments which induced him to adopt this opinion, then
considered as chimerical, (...) highly rational and philosophical. The
sphericity and magnitude (...) the earth, were at that period ascertained with
some degree of (...). From this it was evident, that the continents of Europe,
Asia, and Africa, formed but a small part of the terraqueous globe. It app^^^ed
likewise extremely probable, that the continent on the one side of the globe,
was balanced by a proportionable quantity of land in the other hemisphere.
These conclusions concerning the existence of (...) other continent, drawn from
the figure and structure of the globe, (...) confirmed by the observations and
conjectures of modern navigat^^^ and from pieces of timber artificially carved,
canes of an enormous (...) trees torn up by the roots, and the dead bodies of
two men with ^^gular features, which had been discovered and taken up, floating
before a westerly wind, or driven on the coasts of the Azores. The some of this
united evidence, arising from theoretical principles and practi^^^
observations, led Columbus to conclude, that by sailing directly toward the
west, across the Atlantic ocean, new countries, which probably formed a part of
the vast continent of India, must infallibly be discovered.

As early as the year 1474, he communicated his ingenious theory to Paul, a
physician of Florence, eminent for his knowledge of co^^^graphy. He warmly
approved of the plan; suggested several facts in confirmation of it, and
encouraged Columbus to persevere in an undertaking so laudable, and which must
redound so much to the hou^^^ of his country, and the benefit of Europe.

Columbus now became impatient to bring to the test of experiment the truth of
his system, and to set out upon a voyage of discovery. The first step toward
this, was to secure the patronage of some of the considerable powers of Europe.
With this view he laid his scheme before the Senate of Genoa, and making his
native and beloved country, the (...) tender of his service, offered to sail,
under the banners of the republic, in quest of new regions which he expected to
discover. But they incapable of forming just ideas of his principles,
inconsiderately rejected his proposal as chimerical. He then submitted his plan
to the Portuguese, who perfidiously attempted to rob him of the honor of
accomplishing it, by privately sending another person to pursue the ^^^^tract
which he had proposed. But the pilot, who was thus basely employed to execute
Columbus' plan, had neither the genius nor the ^^^titude of its author.
Contrary winds arose -- no land appeared ^^courage failed, and he returned to
Lisbon, execrating a plan which (...) had not abilities to execute.

On discovering this flagrant treachery, Columbus immediately (...) the kingdom
in disgust, and landed in Spain, toward the (...) of the year 1484. Here he
resolved to propose it in person to Ferd^^^ and Isabella, who at that time
governed the united kingdoms of (...) and Aragon. He, in the mean time, sent
his brother, Bart^^^mew of England, to propose his plan to Henry VII.

After experiencing a series of mortifying disappointments, (...) eight tedious
years, which the brevity of this history will not (...) us to relate, Columbus,
in deep anguish, withdrew from court, determined to repair to England as his
last resource. At this juncture the affairs of Spain, which had been perplexed
in consequence of a war with the Moors, took a favorable turn. Quintanilla and
Santangel, two powerful, vigilant and discerning patrons of Columbus, seized
this favorable opportunity to make one more effort in behalf of their friend.
They addressed themselves to Isabella, with such forcible arguments as produced
the desired effect. They dispelled all Isabella's doubts and fears; -- she
ordered Columbus, who had proceeded on his journey, to be instantly recalled --
declared her resolution to employ him on his own terms; and regretting the low
estate of her finances, generously offered to pledge her own jewels, in order
to raise as much money as might be needed in making preparations for the
voyage. Santangel, in a transport of gratitude, kissed the queen's hand, and,
in order to save her from having recourse to such a mortifying expedient for
procuring money, engaged to advance, immediately, the sum that was requisite.

Columbus had proceeded some leagues on his journey, when the messenger from
Isabella overtook him. He returned with joy, mingled with some degree of fear
lest he should again be disappointed. The manner of his reception by the queen
was, however, such as quickly dispelled his fears. A negotiation commenced, and
was forwarded with dispatch, and a treaty of capitulation, with Columbus, was
signed on the 7th of April 1492. The chief articles of it were, 1. Ferdinand
and Isabella, as sovereigns of the ocean, constituted Columbus their high
admiral in all the seas, islands, and continents, which should be discovered by
his industry; and stipulated, that he and his heirs forever should enjoy this
office, with the same powers and prerogatives which belonged to the high
admiral of Castile, within the limits of his jurisdiction. 2. They appointed
Columbus their viceroy in all the islands and continents which he should
discover; but if, for the better administration of affairs, it should be
necessary to establish a separate Governor in any of those countries, they
authorized Columbus to name three persons of whom they would choose one for that
office; and the dignity of viceroy with all its immunities, was likewise to be
hereditary in the family of Columbus. 3. They granted to Columbus and his heirs
forever, the tenth of the free profits accruing from the productions and
commerce of the countries which he should discover. 4. They declared, if any
controversy or lawsuit shall arise, with respect to any mercantile transaction,
in the countries which shall be discovered, it should be determined by the sole
authority of Columbus, or of judges to be appointed by him. 5. They permitted
Columbus to advance one eighth part of what should be expended in preparing for
the expedition, and in carrying on commerce with the countries which he should
discover, and entitled him, in return, to an eighth part of the profit.

Though the name of Ferdinand appears conjoined with that of Isabella in this
transaction, his distrust of Columbus was still so violent, that he refused to
take any part of the enterprise, as king of Aragon. As the whole expense of the
expedition was to be defrayed by the crown of Castile, Isabella reserved for
her subjects of that kingdom, an exclusive right to all the benefits which
might redound from its success.

After all the efforts of Isabella and Columbus, the armament was suitable,
neither to the dignity of the power who equipped it, nor to the importance of
the service to which it was destined. It consisted of three vessels; the
largest, a ship of no considerable burden, was commanded by Columbus, as
admiral, who gave it the name of Santa Maria. Of the second, called the Pinta,
Martin Pinzon was captain, and his brother Francis pilot. The third, named the
Nigna, was under the command of Vincent Yanez Pinzon. These two last mentioned,
were light vessels, hardly superior in burden or force to large boats. -- This
little squadron was victualled for twelve months, and had on board ninety men,
mostly sailors, together with a few adventurers, who followed the fortune of
Columbus, and some gentlemen of Isabella's court, whom she appointed to
accompany him. The sum employed in sitting out this squadron did not exceed
L.4000, sterling.

On the 3d of August, 1492, being Friday The superstitious notion that Friday
is an unlucky day to commence a voyage, did not, it seems, exist in the time of
Columbus; otherwise he would not have fixed on this unlucky day to set sail on
so important a voyage. When and whence did this superstitious notion originate?
Why do men continue to entertain it, in an age, which boasts of freedom from
the shackles of superstition? Is it not time that it was banished? The success
of Columbus in discovering a New World, during a voyage commenced on Friday
proves, if any things that this is the most lucky day in the seven, for going
to sea: -- If so, why would it not (...) well to substitute it in the room of
the Sabbath, which is now too commonly fixed on (...) that purpose?
, Columbus set sail, in the presence of a vast crowd of spectators, who offered
fervent supplications to heaven for his success, which they rather wished than
expected. He steered directly for the Canary islands, and in the short run
thither, found his ships crazy and ill appointed, and very unfit for so long
and dangerous a navagation as he had undertaken. After resisting them as well
as he could, he left the Canaries on the 6th of September, and here properly
commenced the voyage of discovery. He held his course due west, and immediately
left the usual track of navigation, and stretched into unknown and unfrequented
seas. By the 14th of September the fleet was about 2oo leagues west of the
Canaries, at a greater distance from land than any Spaniard had been before
that time.

Columbus early discovered, from the spirit of his followers, that he must
prepare to struggle, not only with the unavoidable difficulties which might be
expected from the nature of his undertaking, but with such also as were likely
to arise from the ignorance and timidity of the people under his command. All
the art and address he was master of was hardly sufficient to quell the
mutinous disposition of his sailors, who grew the more turbulent in proportion
as their distance from home increased. What most astonished Columbus, during
the voyage, was the variation of the magnetic needle. He observed that it did
not point exactly to the polar star, but varied toward the west. This
appearance, then one of the mysteries of nature, though now familiar, filled
the companions of Columbus with terror. They were now in the midst of a
trackless ocean -- nature herself seemed to be altered, and the only guide they
had left was about to fail them. Columbus, with no less quickness than
ingenuity, invented a reason for this appearance, which, though it did not
satisfy himself, seemed so plausible to them, that it dispelled their fears,
and silenced their murmurs.

On the evening of the 11th of October, Columbus was so confident, from various
appearances, of being near land, that he ordered the sails to be furled, and
the ships to lie too, and strict watch to be kept left they should be driven on
shore in the night. During this interval of suspense and expectation, no man
shut his eyes, all kept on deck, gazing intently toward that quarter where
they expected to discover the land, which had so long been the object of their
wishes. A little before midnight. Columbus, from the forecastle, discovered a
light at a distance -- and shortly after the joyful sound of land! land! was
heard from the Pinta, which always kept a head of the other ships. At the dawn
of day, an island was seen from every ship, at the distance of about two
leagues north, whose verdant aspect indicated a most delightful country. The
crews of all the ships, with tears of joy and transports of congratulation,
unitedly sang ^e Deum, as a hymn of thanksgiving to God. They then, with
feelings of self condemnation, mingled with reverence, threw themselves at the
feet of Columbus, begged him to forgive their ignorance, incredulity and
insolence, which had given him so much unnecessary disquiet -- acknowledged his
superior abilities, and promised obedience in future.

At s^nrising, the boats were manned and armed, and they rowed toward the
island with their colors displayed, with warlike music and other martial pomp.
As they approached the coast, they saw it covered with a multitude of people,
whom the novelty of the spectacle had drawn together, whose attitudes and
gestures expressed wonder and astonishment at the strange objects before them.
Columbus was the first European who set foot in the New World which he had
discovered. He landed in a rich dress, and with a naked sword in his hand. His
men followed, and kneeling down, they all kissed the ground which they had so
long desired to see. They next erected a crucifix, and prostrating themselves
before it, returned thanks to God for conducting their voyage to so happy an
issue. They then took solemn and formal possession of the country for the crown
of Castile and Leon.

The dress of the Spaniards, their beards, their arms, the vast machines with
which they had traversed the ocean, the thundering roar of the cannon,
accompanied with lightning and smoke, filled the natives with surprise and
terror, and they began to consider them as chilren of the sun, who had
descended to visit mortals here below.

The Spaniards were hardly less amazed in their turn. The productions of the
island were different from any thing they had seen in Europe. The inhabitants
appeared in the simple innocence of nature, entirely naked. Their black hair,
long and uncurled, floated upon their shoulders, or was bound in tresses round
their heads. They had no beards, and every part of their bodies was perfectly
smooth. Their complexion was of a dusky copper color; their features singular
rather than disagreeable, and their aspect gentle and timid. They were shy at
first, through fear, but soon became familiar with the Spaniards, and with
transports of joy, received from them various kinds of trinkets, in return for
which they gave provisions, and some cotton yarn, the only commodity of value
they could produce. Thus in the first interview between the inhabitants of the
Old and New Worlds, every thing was conducted amicably, and to their mutual
satisfaction.

The island on which Columbus first landed he called San Salvador. It is one of
that large cluster of islands known by the name of the Lucaya or Bahama
islands, and is above 3000 miles west of the Canaries.

He afterward touched at several islands of the same cluster, enquiring every
where for gold, which he thought was the only object of commerce worth his
attention. In steering southward, he discovered the islands of Cuba and
Hispaniola, abounding in all the necessaries of life, and inhabited by a humane
and hospitable people.

On his return to Spain he was overtaken by a storm, which had nearly proved
fatal to his ships and their crews. At a crisis when all was given up for lost,
Columbus had presence of mind enough to reti^^ into his cabin, and to write
upon parchment a short account of his voyage. This he wrapped in an oiled
cloth, which he enclosed in a cake of wax, put it into a tight cask, and threw
it into the sea, in hopes that some fortunate accident might preserve a deposit
of so much importance to the world. He arrived at Palos in Spain, whence he had
sailed the year before, on the 15th of March 1493. He was welcomed with all the
acclamations which the populace are ever ready to bestow on great and glorious
characters; and the court received him with marks of the greatest respect.

In September, of this year, (1493) Columbus sailed upon his second voyage to
America; during the performance of which, he discovered the islands of
Dominica, Marigalante, Gaudaloupe, Montserrat, Antigua, Porto Rico and Jamaica;
and returned to Spain 1496.

In 1498, he sailed a third time for America; and on the 1st of August
discovered the continent, at the mouth of the river Oronoke. He then coasted
along westward, making other discoveries for 200 leagues to Cape Vela, from
which he crossed over to Hispaniola, where he was seized by a new Spanish
governor, and sent home in chains.

In 1502 Columbus made his fourth, and last, voyage to Hispaniols; thence the
went over to the Continent -- discovered the bay of Hon^^ias -- thence sailed
along the main shore easterly 200 leagues, to Cape Gracias a Dios, Veragua,
Porto Bello and the Gulf of Darien, searching in vain, for a passage to the
East Indies. During this voyage, he was shipwrecked on the Island of Jamaica,
where he suffered almost in conceivably from the cruelty of the inhabitants,
the mutiny of his men, and especially from the infamous conduct of the
governor of Hispaniola. He returned to Spain in 1504. On his arrival he
received the fatal news of the death of his patroness, Queen Isabella.

The jealous and avaricious Spaniards, not immediately receiving those golden
advantages, from these new discoveries, which they had promised, and lost to
the feelings of humanity and gratitude, suffered their esteem and admiration of
Columbus to degenerate into ignoble envy.

The latter part of his life was made wretched by the cruel persecutions of his
enemies. Queen Isabella, his friend and patroness, was no longer alive to
afford him relief. He sought redress from Ferdinand, but in vain. Disgusted
with the ingratitude of a monarch, whom (...) had served with so much fidelity
and success, exhausted with hardship^ and broken with the infirmities which
these brought upon him, Columbus ended his active and useful life at Valadolid,
on the 20th of May, 1506, in the 59the year of his age. He died with a
composure mind suited to the magnanimity which distinguished his character and
with sentiments of piety becoming that supreme respect for religion which he
manifested in every occurrence of his life. He (...) grave though courteous in
his deportment, circumspect in his (...) and actions, irreproachable in his
morals, and exemplary in all the duties of his religion.

Among other adventurers to the New World, in pursuit of ga^^ was Americus
Vespucius, a Florentint gentleman, whom Ferdinand had appointed to draw sea
charts, and to whom he had given the title of chief pilot. This man accompanied
Ojeda, and enterprizing Spanish adventurer, to America; and having with much
art, and some degree of elegance, drawn up an amusing history of his voyage, he
published it to the world. It circulated rapidly, and was read with admiration.
In his narrative, he had insinuated that the glory of having first discovered
the New World, belonged to him. This was in part believed, and the country
began to be called after the name of its supposed first discoverer. The
unaccountable caprice of mankind has perpetuated the error; so that now, by the
universal consent of all nations, this new quarter of the globe is called
AMERICA. The bold pretentions of a fortunate imposter, have robbed the
discoverer of the New World of a distinction which belonged to him. The name of
Americus has supplanted that of Columbus, and mankind are lest to regret and
act of injustice, which, having been sanctioned by time, they can never redress.

GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF AMERICA
BOUNDARIES AND EXTENT. THE continent of America, of the discovery of which a
succinct account has just been given, extends from Cape Horn, the southern
extremity of the continent, in latitude 56 south, to the north pole; and
spreads between the 40th degree east, and the 100th degree west longitude from
Philadelphia. It is nearly ten thousand miles in length from north of south.
Its average breadth may be about 14 or 1500 miles. This extensive continent
lies between the Pacific Ocean on the west, and the Atlantic on the east. It is
said to contain upwards of 14,000,000 square miles.

CLIMATE, SOIL AND PRODUCTIONS.]In regard to each of these, America has all the
varieties which the earth affords. It stretches through almost the whole width
of the five zones, and feels the heat and cold of two summers and two winters
in every year. Most of the animal and vegetable productions which the eastern
continent affords, are found here; and many that are peculiar to America, of
which accounts will be given in their proper places.

RIVERS.]This continent is watered by some of the largest rivers in the world.
The principal of these, are Rio de la Plata, the Amazon and Oronoke, in South
America -- The Mississippi and St. Lawrence, in North America.

GULF.]The Gulf or Bay of Mexico, lying in the form of a basin, between North
and South America, and opening to the east, is conjectured by some, to have
been formerly land; and that the constant attrition of the waters in the Gulf
Stream, has worn it to its present form. The water in the Gulf of Mexico, is
said to be many yards higher, than on the western side of the continent in the
Pacific Ocean.

GULF STREAM.]The Gulf Stream is a remarkable current, issuing from the Gulf of
Mexico, whence it takes its name, and proceeding along the coast of Florida and
the United States, to the banks of Newfoundland, where it turns off and runs
down through the western Islands; thence to the coast of Africa, and along that
coast in a southern direction till it arrives at, and supplies the place of
those waters, carried by the constant trade winds from the coast of Africa,
toward the west, thus producing a perpetual circulating current.

This stream is probably generated by the great accumulation of water, on the
eastern coast of America between the tropics, by the trade winds which
constantly blow there. It is known that a large piece of water ten miles broad,
and generally only three feet deep, has, by a strong wind, had its waters
driven to one side and sustained so as to become six feet deep, while the
windward side was laid dry. This may give some idea of the quantity heaped upon
the American coast, and the reason of its running down in a strong current
through the islands into the Gulf of Mexico and issuing as above mentioned.
This also renders the opinion, that the waters in the bay of Mexico, are
considerably higher than the waters on the opposite coast of the Pacific Ocean,
in a high degree probable.

This stream is distinguished from the other parts of the ocean, by the gulf
weed, with which it is every where interspersed. It is also always much warmer,
8 or 10 degrees, than the sea on each side of it, and it does not sparkle in
the night, as do the other waters of the ocean. It is no wonder that so vast a
body of deep warm water, several leagues wide, coming from between the tropics,
and issuing out of the gulf, into the northern seas, should retain its warmth
longer than the 20 or 30 days required to its passing the banks of
Newfoundland. The quantity is too great, and two deep, to be suddenly cooled by
passing under a cooler air. The air immediately over it may receive so much
warmth from it as to be rarefied and rise, being rendered lighter than the air
on each side of the stream; hence the surrounding denser air must rush in to
supply the place of the rising warm air, and meeting with each other form those
tornadoes and water spouts, which are (...) common in and near the stream: and
as the vapor from a cup of tea in a warm room, is hardly discernible, but
becomes visible, in the cold air; so the vapor from the Gulf Stream, in warm
latitudes, is scarcely visible, but when it comes into cool air, off
Newfoundland, it is condensed into the fogs for which those parts are so
remarkable.

The power of wind to raise water above its common level in the sea, is evident
by the high tides occasioned in all our American sea ports, when a strong
north-east wind blows against the Gulf Stream.

Skilful navigators, who have acquired a knowledge of the extent to which this
stream reaches on the New England coast, have learnt, in their voyages from
Europe to New England, New York or Pennsylvania, to parts the banks of
Newfoundland in about 44 or 45 North Latitude; to sail thence in a course,
between the northern edge of the Gulf Stream, and the shoals and banks of Sable
Island, Georges Bank and Nantucket, by which they make better and quicker
passages (...) America.

This stream is about 75 miles from the shores of the southern States. The
distance increases as you proceed northward. The width of it (...) about 40 or
50 miles, widening toward the north. Its common rapidity is 3 miles an hour. A
northeast wind narrows the stream, readers it more rapid and drives it nearer
the coast; north-west and west winds have a contrary effect.

Isthmus of Darien.] The celebrated Isthmus of Darien, which divides North and
South America, lies in about 8 North Latitude, and in the narrowest part is not
more than 70 miles across on an E. N. E. and W. S. W. course. The country about
the narrowest parts of the Isthmus, is made up of low, sickly valleys, and
mountains of such stupendous height, as to incline one to imagine that nature
had raised them to serve as an eternal barrier between the Atlantic and Pacific
oceans, which here approach so near each other, that from these mountains you
can plainly discern the waters of both at the same time, and seemingly at a
very small distance.

Some have imagined it practicable to unite these Oceans by a Canal, through
this Isthmus. But an English Gentleman, from a late careful survey of the
country, pronounces such and undertaking impracticable; as the mountains run
north and south, and several ridges of them, consisting of little else than
solid rock and immense beds of oyster shells, must be dug through in order to
accomplish it. But by going into 12 North Latitude, and joining the head of
Lake Nicaragua to a small river that runs into the Pacific Ocean, a
communication becomes practicable; and by 30 miles digging through a level, low
country, two oceans may be joined, and a tedious navigation saved, of 10,000
miles, round Cape Horn. What would be the consequences of such a junction is
not easy to say, but is very probable, that a small canal, into this place,
would in the course of a few years be formed into a deep river, more especially
when we consider that the waters on the opposite shore of the Atlantic, as we
before observed, are considerably higher than those in the Pacific.

Probably too, in a length of years, such a junction would wear away the earthy
parts of the Isthmus, and form a broad strait between the Oceans; in which case
the Gulf Stream would cease, being turned into a different channel, and a
voyage round the World would become an inconsiderable thing.

Upwards of an hundred years ago, the Scots people had so just an idea of the
great importance of this Isthmus, that they sent out a colony to settle there,
which settlement, however, proved abortive, through the extreme jealousy of the
Spaniards in that neighborhood, but more through the shameful partiality of
William III. and the jealousy of the English nation.

Mountains.]The principal mountains on this Western Continent are the famous
chain of the Andes of South America. They stretch along the Pacific Ocean from
the Straits of Magellan to the Isthmus of Darien of Panama, upwards of 4000
miles; thence they are continued through the extensive kingdom of New Spain
till they lose themselves in the unknown countries of the north. In New Spain,
the most considerable part of this chain is known by the name of Sierra Madre,
particularly in Cinaloa, and Tarahumary, Provinces 1200 miles distant from the
Capital. Farther north they have been called, from their bright appearance, the
Shining Mountains.

Little is known respecting them. It is conjectured that they terminate in
about 47 or 48 degrees of north latitude, where a number of rivers use and
empty themselves either into the Pacific Ocean, into Hudson's Bay, into the
waters which lie between them, or into the Atlantic ocean.

The Allegany Mountains, extending from Georgia to Hudson's river, in New York,
are next in magnitude and length of the Andes. It is not improbable that they
are a branch of the Andes, striking off in some part of South America, and
interrupted by the Gulf of Mexico. (...) has been conjectured that the West
India Islands were formerly u^^^^ed with each other, and formed a part of the
continent. Their present disjointed situation is supposed to have been
occasioned by (...) trade winds. It is well known, as we have before mentioned,
the they produce a strong and continual current in the ocean from east west,
which, by beating against the continent for a long course of years, must have
caused great alterations, and may possibly have produced the effect supposed.

In the Bahama channel are many indications that the Island of Cuba was once
united to Florida.

POPULATION.]There are no data from which we may estimate the number of
inhabitants in America, with any degree of accuracy. All calculations must
proceed on uncertain grounds. The population of most of those countries which
have been settled by Europeans have been ascertained; who then is capable of
estimating the number of inhabitants in those numerous countries which have
been very parts particularly explored, and those which are altogether unknown
to any European or other civilized nation? and such are those vast regions w^^^
north west, and north of the Missisipi and the Lakes, and imme^^^ countries in
the interior parts of South America. The number of provinces, kingdoms, and
even of nations, is unknown. We can therefore hardly guess at the number of
inhabitants.

It has been common in estimating the population of the whole world to give 150
millions to America. The calculations of P. Ri^cioli, make them 300 millions.
-- Susimilch, in one part of his work computes them at 100 millions, in another
at 150 millions. -- M. de Paw says that political arithmeticians, do not reckon
more than 100 millions; but it is his own opinion that there are not more than
from thirty to forty millions of "real Americans." I know not the principles
upon which either of these authors grounded their calculations. I am inclined,
however, to differ from them all. Some of them I and persuaded are far beyond
the truth; and M. de Paw; I imagine, ^^^erred on the other hand. I ground my
dissent from the common opinion, and from the estimates of the forementioned
respectable author, on a calculation, made on the following simple principles,
which I adopt because I know of none better.

I suppose the continent of America to contain 14 millions of squaremiles;
including the islands, 15 millions. The United States contain one million
square miles, or one fifteenth part of the American continent and islands. I
suppose (merely for the purpose of calculation, what I do not believe to be
fact) that every other part of America is as populous as the United States.
Probably there may be some parts, particularly the West India islands, and some
provinces in Spanish America, which are more populous, but there are many other
pa^^^ which are by no means so populous. The probability is, in my opinion,
that the other parts of America, collectively considered, are (...) nearly so
thickly inhabited as the territory of the United States. Their is certainly no
reason to believe that they are more populous. Indian population is thin: and
vast tracts of deserts, marshes, and mountains are uninhabited. In the United
States we reckon four millions inhabitants. Anglo-Americans, Negroes,
Mulattoes, and Indians, with in the jurisdiction of the General Government.
Besides these their may be about 50,000 Indians, independent of the United
States, and subject to their own Princes. The whole population of the United
States then we reckon at 4,050,000. If then we suppose America to contain 15
millions of square miles; and that in every part it is equally as populous as
the United States, that is, that there are in every million of square miles
4,050,000 inhabitants, the whole number will be sixty millions, seven hundred
and fifty thousand. The exact number I presume is considerably less than this.

WHEN WAS AMERICA PEOPLED?} That America was peopled very anciently and soon
after the flood, is very probable: 1. Because the aboriginal Americans, till
they became acquainted with Europeans, were ignorant of those arts and
inventions, such, among others, as those of wax and oil for light, which being
very ancient in Europe and Asia, on the one hand, are, on the other, most
useful not to say necessary, and when once discovered, are never forgotten. 2.
Because the polished nations of the New World, and particularly those of
Mexico, preserve in their traditions and paintings, the memory of the Creation
of the World, the building of the Tower of Babel, the confusion of languages,
and the dispersion of the people, though blended with some fables, and had no
knowledge of the events which happened afterward in Asia, Africa or in Europe,
many of which were too remarkable to escape the memory. 3. Because neither was
there among the Americans any knowledge of the people of the old continent, nor
among the latter any account of the passage of the former to the New World.
These reasons we presume render it at least probable that America was peopled
early after the flood. Abbe Clavigero's Hist. Mexico, Vol. II. Page 210.


WHO WERE THE FIRST PEOPLE OF AMERICA? AND WHENCE DID THEY COME?} On these two
questions much has been said. Those who call in question the authority of the
sacred writings say, the Americans are not descendants from Adam, that he was
the father of the Asiatics only, and that God created other men to be the
patriarchs of the Europeans,* Africans and Americans. But this is one among the
many weak hypotheses of unbelievers, and is wholly unsupported by history. It
is contrary to the tradition of the Americans, who in their paintings, and in
their hymns, called themselves the descendants of those who escaped from the
general deluge. The Mexicans, Toltecas, and several other nations were agreed
in this point. They all said their ancestors came from other parts into those
countries; they pointed out the road they came, and even preserved the names,
true or false, of their first progenitors, who, after the confusion of
languages, separated from the rest of mankind. These traditions, with others,
which the limits of this work will not allow us to insert, considered in
connection with the sacred writings, must convince us that we ought to seek
among the descendants of Noah, for the first peoplers of America.

But who were they? To recite all the opinions given in answer to this
question, and the reasons to support them, would fill a volume. Dr. Robertson,
and the Abbe Clavigero have extensively and learnedly investigated the subject.
I cannot expect to afford the reader more satisfaction than to give him the
result of their enquiries. Dr. Robertson, having recapitulated and canvassed
the most plausible opinions on the subject, comes to the following conclusions.
viz.

1. That America was not peopled by any nation from the ancient continent,
which had made any considerable progress in civilization because when America
was first discovered, its inhabitants were (...) acquainted with the necessary
arts of life, which are the first essays (...) the human mind toward
improvement; and if they had ever (...) acquainted with them, for instance,
with the plow, the loom, and (...) forge, their utility would have been so
great and obvious, that it (...) impossible they should have been lost.
Therefore the ancestors of (...) first settlers in America were uncivilized and
unacquainted with (...) necessary arts of life.

2. America could not have been peopled by any colony from the more southern
nations of the ancient continent; because none of the rude tribes of these
parts possessed enterprise, ingenuity, or po^^^ sufficient to undertake such a
distant voyage: but more especially, because, that in all America there is not
an animal, tame or wild, which properly belongs to the warm, or temperate
countries of the eastern continent. The first care of the Spaniards, when they
settled in America, was to stock it with all the domestic animals of Europe.
The first settlers of Virginia and New England, brought over (...) them,
horses, cattle, sheep, etc. Hence it is obvious that the peopled who first
settled in America, did not originate from those countries where these animals
abound, otherwise, having been accustomed (...) their aid, they would have
supposed them necessary to the improvement, and even support of civil society.

3. Since the animals in the northern regions of America correspond with those
found in Europe in the same latitudes, while those in the tropical regions, are
indigenous, and widely different from those wh^^^ inhabit the corresponding
regions on the eastern continent, it is (...) than probable that all the
original American animals were of those kinds which inhabit northern regions
only, and that the two continents, toward the northern extremity, are so
nearly united as that those animals might pass from one to the other.

4. It having been established beyond a doubt, by the discoveries of Capt. Cook
in his last voyage, that at Kamtsatha, in about latitude of 66 north, the
continents of Asia and America are separated by a strait only, 18 miles wide,
and that the inhabitants on each continent are similar, and frequently pass and
repass in canoes from one continent to the other; from these and other
circumstances it is rendered highly p^^^bable that America was first peopled
from the northeast parts of Asia. But since the Esquimaux Indians are
manifestly a separate species of men, distinct from all the nations of the
American Continent, in language, in disposition, and in habits of life; and in
all these respects bear a near resemblance to the northern Europeans, it is
believed that the Esquimaux Indians emigrated from the north west parts of
Europe Several circumstances confirm this belief. As early as the ninth century
the Norwegians discovered Greenland, and planted colonies there. The
communication with that country, after long interruption, (...) renewed in the
last century. Some Lutheran and Moravian missionaries, prompted by zeal for
propagating the Christian faith, have ventured to settle in this frozen region.
From them we learn, that the north west coast of Greenland is separated from
America, but by a very narrow strait, if separated at all; and that the
Esquimaux (...) America perfectly resemble the Greenlanders in their aspect,
dress, mode of living, and probably language. By these decisive facts, not not
only the consanguinity of the Esquimaux and Greenlanders is established, but
the possibility of peopling America from the north west parts of Europe. On the
whole, it appears rational to conclude, that the progenitors of all the
American nations, from Cape Horn to the southern limits of Labrador, from the
similarity of their aspect, color, etc. migrated from the north east parts of
Asia; and that the nations that inhabit Labrador, Esquimaux, and the parts
adjacent, from their unlikness to the American nations, and their resemblance
to the northern Europeans, came over from the north west parts of Europe. Hist.
of America, Vol. II. p.22, etc.


Such is the opinion of Dr. Robertson, on the question before us; and for want
of information, it is in several respects inaccurate and without foundation.
The opinion of the Abbe Clavigero, who was a native of America, and had much
better advantages for knowing its history than Dr. Robertson, and who also is a
later writer, is in my opinion far less exceptionable, and has much better
grounds for its support. He explains his opinions in the following conclusions:
--

1. The Americans descended from different nations, or from different families
dispersed after the confusion of tongues. No person will doubt of the truth of
this who has any knowledge of the multitude and great diversity of the American
languages. In Mexico alone thirty five have already been discovered. In South
America still more are known. In the beginning of the last century the
Portuguese counted fifty in Maragnon. Between some of these languages, there is
indeed a great affinity; but others are as different from each other as the
English and the Hebrew. It is a truth, that no living or dead languages can
differ more than the languages of the Mexicans, Otomies, Tarascas, Mayas, and
Miztecas, five languages prevailing in different provinces of Mexico. It would
therefore be absurd to say, that languages so different were different dialects
of one original. Is it probable or even possible that a nation should alter its
primitive language to such a degree, or multiply its dialects so variously as
that there should not be, even after many centuries, if not some words common
to all, as least an affinity between them, or some traces lest of their origin?

2. The Americans do not derive their origin from any people now existing as a
nation on the eastern continent; at least there is no reason to affirm that
they do. This inference is founded on the same argument with the preceding;
since, if the Americans are descendants from any of these nations it would be
possible to trace their origin by some marks in their languages, in spite of
the antiquity of their separation: but any such traces have not yet been
discovered, although most diligent and attentive search has been made, as
appears from the work of Dominican Garcia. We have, says Clavigero, leisurely
compared the Mexican and other American languages with many others which are
now living, and with those which are dead, but have not been able to discover
the least affinity between them. This argument is strong with respect to the
Americans, as they show great firmness and constancy in retaining their
languages. The Mexicans preserve their language among the Spaniards, and the
Otomies retain their difficult dialect among Spaniards and Mexicans, after
communication with both for more than two centuries and an half.

If the Americans descended from different families dispersed (...) after the
confusion of tongues, as we believe, and have since been separated from those
others who peopled the countries on the eastern continent, authors will labor
in vain, to seek, in the language or ^^^^oms of the Asiatics, for the origin of
the people of America.

But the most difficult point in the problem of the population (...) America,
remains to be solved, and that is, how did the inhabitant and animals
originally pass to America, and from what parts did (...) come? Among the
various opinions of authors upon this point, (...) following is the Abbe
Clavigero's.

1. The men and animals of America passed there from, the old continent. This
is confirmed by the sacred writings. Moses, who declares Noah the common father
of all men who survived the de^^^^ says expressly, that in that general
inundation of the earth all (...) quadrupeds, birds and reptiles, perished,
except a few, of the several s^^cies which were saved alive in the ark, to
re-people the earth with th^^ kind. The repeated expressions which the sacred
historian uses (...) signify its universality, do not permit us to doubt, that
all qua^^, peds, birds, and reptiles, which are in the world, descended (...)
those few individuals which were saved from the general inundation.

2. The first inhabitants of America might pass there in vessels (...) sea, or
travel by land or by ice. 1. They might either pass there vessels designedly,
if the distance by water were but small, or be ca^^ed upon it accidentally by
favorable winds. 2. They might pass (...) land, on the supposition of the
union of the continents. 3. They might also make that passage over the ice of
some frozen arm of (...) sea.

3. The ancestors of the nations which peopled Anahuac, (now called New Spain)
might pass from the northern countries of Europe into the northern parts of
America, or which is more probable, from the (...) eastern parts of Asia, to
the most western parts of America. The conclusion is founded on the constant
and general tradition of (...) nations, which unanimously say, that their
ancestors came into A^^huac from the countries of the north and north west.
This tradition is confirmed by the remains of many ancient edifices, built by
the people in their migrations. In a journey made by the Spaniards in 1606,
from New Mexico unto the river which they call Tizon, (...) miles from that
Province toward the north west, they found that some large edifices, and met
with some Indians who spoke the (...) can language, and who told them, that a
few days journey from that river, toward north, was the kingdom of Tollan, and
many other inhabited places, whence the Mexicans migrated. In fact, the whole
people of Anahua have usually affirmed, that toward the north, (...) the
kingdoms and provinces of Tollan, Aztlan, Copalla and sev^^^ others which have
all Mexican names. Boturini says, that in the ancient paintings of the
Toltecas, was represented the migration of (...) ancestors through Asia and the
northern countries of America, (...) they established themselves in the country
of Tollan; and even end^^vours to ascertain in his general history, the rout
they pursued in the travels.

With respect to the other nations of America, as there is no tradition among
them, concerning the way by which their ancestors (...) to the new world, we
can say nothing certain of them. It is possible, that they all passed by the
same way in which the ancestors of the Mexicans passed, but it is more probable
that they passed by a very different rout. We conjecture that the ancestors of
the nations of South America, went there by the way in which the animals proper
to hot countries passed; and that the ancestors of those nations inhabiting
Esquimaux, and Labrador, and the countries adjacent, passed thither from the
north west parts of Europe. The difference of character which is discoverable
in the three above mentioned classes of aboriginal Americans, and the situation
of the countries which they occupied, afford ground to suspect that they had
different origins, and that their ancestors came there by different routs. But
this is mere conjecture.

4. The quadrupeds and reptiles of the New World passed there by land. This
fact is manifest from the improbability and inconsistency of all other
opinions. St. Augustine solves the difficulty of peoling the islands with wild
beasts and destructive animals by supposing either, 1. That the angels
transported them thither, (a solution, which, though it cuts off every
difficulty in the passage of animals to the new world, would not be
satisfactory in the present age) or 2. That they might swim to the islands, or
3. That they might have been carried there by men for the sake of hunting, or
4. That they might have been formed there by the Creator in the beginning.
Others have imagined that beasts might pass over some frozen strait or arm of
the sea. But as neither of these opinions can be supported See Clavigero's
Hist. of Mex. Vol. II. Dissert. I. p. 216, where all these opinions (...) shown
to be highly improbable, not to say impossible.
, the probability is, that the quadrupeds, as well as the reptiles which are
found in America, passed thither by land, and of course that the two continents
were formerly united. This was the opinion of Acosta, Grotius, Buffon, and
other great men. That this earth has experienced great changes since the deluge
will not admit of a doubt. Earthquakes have swallowed up large tracts of land
in some places -- subterraneous fires have thrown up others -- the sea in some
places has been forced to retreat many miles from the shore -- in others it has
made encroachments -- and in many instances separated territories which were
formerly united. Very considerable tracts of land have been also formed at the
mouths of rivers. We have many examples of all these revolutions -- Sicily was
formerly united to the continent -- The straits of Gibraltar, as Diodorus,
Strabo and other ancient authors affirm, were formed by a violent irruption of
the ocean upon the land between the mountains Abyla and Calpe. The people of
Ceylon have a tradition, that a similar irruption of the sea separated their
island from the peninsula of India. The same is believed by the inhabitants of
Malabar with respect to the Isles of Maldivia, and by the Malayans with respect
to Sumatra. Ceylon, as Buffon asserts, has lost 30 or 40 leagues of land, by
the sea; and Tongres, a place in the Low Countries, has gained 30 leagues of
land from the sea -- And Florida and the southern American States have gained
as much from the Bay of Mexico, and the islands between North and South
America. -- The northern parts of Egypt owes its existence to inundations of
the Nile -- And the province of Yellow-River in China, and part of Louisiana in
America, have both been formed by the mud of rivers. The peninsula of Yucatan,
has every appearance of having once formed a part of the bed of the sea. In the
strait which separates America from Asia, many islands are found which probably
were the mountains belonging to that part of the (...) which we suppose to have
been swallowed up by earthquakes; (...) is rendered probable by the multitude
of volcanoes which have (...) discovered in the peninsula of Kamtskatka. The
sinking of that (...) however, and the separation of the two continents, was
probably ^^^^sioned by those extraordinary earthquakes mentioned in the history
of the Americans, which formed an era almost as memorable as (...) of the
deluge.

5. The quadrupeds and reptiles of America passed by different places from the
one continent to the other. Among the American (...) there are many whose
natures are averse to cold; such are apes, dan^^ crocodiles, etc. -- There are
others formed to inhabit cold countries such are martins, rein-dear, and
gluttons. The former could not go (...) America through any country in the
frigid zone; -- their nature would not have admitted it -- they would have
perished in their passage -- We cannot indeed imagine what inducement they
could (...) to quit a climate, congenial to their nature, and undertake a
journal they knew not whither, through a region whose cold they could (...)
endure -- How did they know there was a country friendly to the natures in
America?

The apes which are in New Spain passed there, certainly, from South America.
Time was when they did not inhabit that country and it is known that they came
from the South. The center of the population is the country under the equator,
and 14 or 15 degrees (...) each side of it. It decreases as you depart from
this tract on either side, till you arrive at the tropics, when it ceases, and
none are found, except in some few districts, which, from the peculiarity of
their situation* are as hot as the equinoctial country. None can imagine that
the species of animals traveled to the New World, through the cold ^^gions of
the north. Nor can we believe that they were transported thither by men; for,
not to mention that some of them are of a fe^cious disposition, and vere
unlikely to be selected to be companions as a long voyage, to people a new
country, there is another still greater difficulty: As they could not have been
conducted over the seas and countries of the north, on account of the cold,
they must have been transported from the warm countries of the old, to the warm
countries of the new world, over a sea subject to a clime not dissimilar to the
native country of those quadrupeds, that is, by the countries of the southern
parts of Asia, to about the same latitudes in America, over (...) Indian and
Pacific Oceans -- or from the western countries of Africa to the eastern
countries of America, over the Atlantic Ocean. If therefore, men transported
those animals from the one to the other world, they did it across those seas.
But was this navigation ac^^dental or designed? If the former, how, and why did
they carry (...) many animals with them? If the latter, if they were determined
(...) pass from the old to the new continent, who gave them intelligence of the
New World? Who showed them the situation of those countries? How did they
venture to cross such vast seas without a compass? (...) what vessels did they
pass? If they landed there happily, why (...) there not remain, among the
Americans, some memory of their (...) constructions? Why -- but it is needless
to start more objections; these already mentioned can never be answered.

Besides in the torrid zone, and the warm climates that border upon it, in the
New World, crocodiles are common animals which require a hot or temperate
climate, and live alternately on land or in sweet water: how did such animals
pass there? Not by the north -- they could not endure the cold -- No one will
believe they were transported by men -- nor yet that they swam thither 2000
miles through an ocean of salt water.

There remains no other solution but that of admitting an ancient union between
the equinoctial countries of America and those of Africa -- and a connection of
the northern countries of America with Europe on the east, and Asia on the west
-- so that there has probably been a period since the flood, when there was but
ONE Continent. -- The beasts of cold climes passed over the northern
isthmusses, which probably connected Europe, America and Asia -- and the
animals and reptiles peculiar to hot countries, passed over the isthmus that
connected South America with Africa -- For the reasons already mentioned induce
us to believe that there was formerly a tract of land, which united the most
eastern part of Brazil, to the most western part of Africa; and that all the
space of land may have been sunk by violent earthquakes, leaving only some
traces of it in that chain of islands of which Cape de Verd, Fernando, de
Norona, Ascension and St. Matthew's islands make a part; and also in those many
sand banks discovered by different navigators, and particularly by de Bauche,
who founded that sea with great exactness. These islands and sand banks, may
probably have been the highest parts of that sunken isthmus. In like manner it
is probable the north western part of America was united to the north eastern
part of Asia by a neck of land which has been sunk or washed away, and the
north eastern parts of America to the north western parts of Europe, by
Greenland, Iceland, etc.

On the whole, we cannot but believe that the quadrupeds and the reptiles of
the new world passed there by land, and by different routs, from the old
continent. All other suppositions are subject to heavy difficulties; and this
is not without some, which however are not altogether insurmountable. The
greatest is the improbability of an earthquake so great as to sink a space of
land for more than 1500 miles in length, which, according to our supposition,
united Africa and South America. But we do not ascribe this stupendous
revolution to a single shock -- it may have been effected by a succession of
earthquakes. It is well known that they are common in the climates where we
suppose the isthmus to have been. It is not impossible nor improbable, that
such an effect should be produced by earthquakes, nor is history unfurnished
with such examples to our purpose. The earthquake which was felt in Canada in
1663, See an account of this earthquake, and of many others which happened in
New England, in the third Vol. of the American Museum, p. 292, written by
Professor, Williams, F. A. A. of Cambridge, (N. E.)
overwhelmed a chain of mountains of free stone more than 300 miles long, and
the whole of that immense tract was changed into a plain. How great than must
have been the convulsion which was occasioned by those extraordinary
earthquakes, mentioned in the histories of America, when the world was thought
to be coming to an end!

It may farther be objected to this system, that if beasts passed by land from
one continent to the other, it is not easy to assign the cause why some species
passed there without leaving a single individual in the old continent; and on
the contrary, that some entire species should remain in the old continent, and
not a single individual of them (...) to America. But this objection operates
with equal force against (...) other opinions, except that which employs angels
in the transport^^^ of beasts. But suppose it did not, we have a satisfactory
answer (...). All the quadrupeds of the earth are not yet known, we cannot
therefore say how many are in the one which are not in the other continent. The
knowledge of the best informed zoologists is very imperfect, (...) they differ
among themselves. The Count de Buffon numbers (...) two hundred species of
quadrupeds. Bomare, who wrote a little (...) him, makes them 265; but to say
how many more there may be, and (...) what kinds they are, until we have
examined the interior regions of Africa, of a great part of Tartary, the
country of the Amazons, (...) the vast territory west of the Mississippi, and
various other unexpl^^^^ and extensive countries, which together constitute a
great part of the whole globe, would be mere conjecture. No argument,
therefore, (...) inferred from the difference of the animals in the two
continents, again our system, till the animals is these unexplored regions
shall have been examined. Abbe Clav^gero's Hist. of Mexico, Vol. II. Diss. 1^.


We have dwelt the longer on this subject, as it must be interesting to every
inquisitive mind, and the discussion of it is blended with (...) useful
information.

INHABITANTS.] Having stated the present population of America, from the best
data we could find, and given the most probable (...) counts of the manner in
which it was originally peopled, it will be expected that we now say something
of its inhabitants, of their character manners, etc.

The present Americans, whose number we reckon at about 60 millions, may be
divided into two general classes -- First, the proper Americans, commonly
called Indians, sometimes Aborigines, or these who are descended from the first
inhabitants of the new world, and who have not mixed their blood with the
inhabitants of the old continent. Secondly, those who have migrated, or have
been transported to America, since its discovery by Columbus, and their
descend^^^. The former may be subdivided into three classes; first, the South
American Indians, who came over in the manner we have supposed from the
northern and western parts of Africa, and the southern part of Asia and Europe.
Secondly, the Mexicans and all the Indians (...) of the Lakes and west of the
Mississippi. Thirdly, the inhabitants of Esquimaux. Labrador, and the countries
around them. The latter (...) also be distinguished into three classes --
First, Europeans of many different nations, who have migrated to America, and
their descendants of unmixed blood: -- In this class we include, the Spaniards,
English, Scotch, Irish, French, Portuguese, Germans, Dutch, Swedes, etc. (...)
in North and South America. Secondly, Africans who have (...) transported to
America and its Islands, and their descendants. Thi^^^ the mixed breeds, called
by the Spaniards, Castas, by the English (...) lattoes, that is, those who are
descended from an European and American, or from an European and African, or
from an African and American. Leaving the second class, viz. the migrants to
American since its discovery by Columbus, and their descendants, to be
described, when we shall treat of the countries they respectively inhabit,
(...) shall, under this article, confine ourselves to the proper aborigine
Americans, or Indians.

We begin with the South Americans. Various have been the accounts given of
these people. Some historians exalt them to the rank of the best and happiest
people on earth; others seem unwilling to give them a place among human beings.
We presume these historians, who differ so widely, spoke of different nations;
and on this ground, with proper allowances for exaggeration on both sides, we
may reconcile them. Columbus gives the following account of the Indians of
Hispaniola, to Ferdinand and Isabella.

"I swear to your majesty's, that there is not a better people in the world
than these; more affectionate, affable and mild; they love their neighbors as
themselves; their language is the sweetest, the softest and the most cheerful,
for they always speak smiling; and although they do naked, let your majesty's
believe me, their customs are very becoming; and their king, who is served with
great majesty, has such engaging manners, that it gives great pleasure to see
him, and also to consider the great retentive faculty of that people, and their
desire of knowledge, which invites them to ask the causes and effects of things
Hist. Columb. Chapter xxxii.
."

Las Casas, the first bishop of Chiapa, who resided several years in different
parts of America, speaks thus of them: "The Americans are a people of a bright
and lively genius, easy to be taught, and to apprehend every good doctrine,
extremely ready to embrace our faith, and the people, of all others in the
world, who feel least embarrassment by it." In another place, this writer says,
"The Indians have as good an understanding, and acute a genius, as much
docility and capacity for the moral and speculative sciences, and are, in most
instances, as rational in their political government, as appears from many of
their very prudent laws, and are as far advanced in our faith and religion, in
good customs and civilization, where they have been taught by persons of
religious and exemplary life, and are arriving at refinement and polish as fast
as any nation ever did since the times of the apostles."

Doctor Robertson, speaking of the Mexicans and Peruvians, whom he is not
disposed to rank with those nations which merit the name of civilized, has the
following remarks -- "When compared with other parts of the new world, Mexico
and Peru may be considered as polished states. Instead of small independent,
hostile tribes, struggling for subsistence amidst woods and marshes, strangers
to industry and arts, unacquainted with subordination, and almost without the
appearance of regular government, we find countries of great extent subjected
to the dominion of one sovereign, the inhabitants collected together in cities,
the wisdom and foresight of rulers employed in providing for the maintenance
and security of the people, the empire of laws in some measure established, the
authority of religion recognized, many of the arts essential to life brought to
some degree of maturity, and the dawn of such as are ornamental beginning to
appear." These are testimonies respecting the Indians who inhabit the more
northern parts of South America, and the islands; who appear to have made
greater advances in civilization than those farther south, concerning whom our
information is very imperfect.

Charlevoix, in his history of Paraguay, has collected from the Jesuits,
perhaps the best information, respecting the more southern Indians. Comparing
his particular descriptions of the numerous nations who inhabit the southern
division of South America, we give the following as the leading traits in their
general character. They are generally of an olive complexion, some darker,
others lighter, and some as white as the Spaniards. Their stature is rather
below than above the middling size; though some nations rank among the tallest
of the human species -- most of them are thick legged and jointed, and have
round and (...) faces.

Almost all the men and children, in the warm climates, and in the summer, in
colder regions, go quite naked. The women wear no more covering than the most
relaxed modesty seems absolutely to require. Every nation have a different
dialect, and a different mode of adorning themselves. The clothing of such as
make use of it, is made of the ski^ of beasts, of feathers sewed together, and
in the southern and colder regions, where they raise sheep, of wool
manufactured into stuffs and blankets. They are represented as almost
universally addicted (...) drunkenness. There see^m to be no other vice common
to them all. A few of them are canibals, and some nations are idolaters; in
general they have some notions of a Supreme Being, and have words in their
various languages to express their ideas of him. They believe in the
immortality of the soul, and have some imperfect ideas of future rewards and
punishments. They are universally addicted to various superstitions, and have
much to do with witches and evil spirits. Father Pastor, a Jesuit, one day
visited one of the old women of the Abipone (...) a reputed witch, and at the
point of death, and told her that if she died without (...) her soul would be
eternally tormented by the devils. She very calmly answered, that (...) had
been her friends for a long time, and she was therefore, very sure they would
(...) no harm. Hist. Par. Vol. I. p. 406.
-- A great proportion of them lead a wandering life, are extremely indolent,
dirty and wretched, living on fish, and the flesh of the various wild animals,
birds, and even reptiles which inhabit the forests. -- "All the Indians of
South America," says Charlevoix, "have hot stomachs," which can digest all
sorts of food, and in great quantities, and they are in general "excessively
voracious." Their notions of religion and government, with a few exceptions,
are very rude. Some nations live compactly in towns and cultivate the earth,
raising, among other productions, wheat, which they bruise between stones, and
make into cakes. Some nations are represented as dull, cruel and inconstant --
others as fierce, cunning, and thievish -- others as humane, ingenuous and
hospitable -- and in general they are kind and attentive to strangers, so long
as they are well used by them; and we seldom read of the^^ being first in a
quarrel with those who pass their territories, or sojour^ among them. The
astonishing success of the Jesuits in converting such multitudes of them to
their faith, is a convictive proof of the^^ capacity to receive instruction; of
their docility, humanity and friendly dispositions.

All accounts agree that the middle and southern parts of S. America are very
thinly inhabited, being interspersed with extensive ridges (...) mountains,
immense barren plains, and numerous marshes.

As to the second class of American Indians, who formerly inhabited, and who
yet inhabit, Mexico and the country south of the lakes and west of the
Missisippi, and who came over, as we have supposed from the north east parts of
Asia; they seem, from whatever cause to be advanced somewhat higher, in the
scale of human beings, than (...) South Americans, if we except the Peruvians,
who appear to have (...) greater progress in civilization than even the
Mexicans. Concern^^^ the nations of the vast country of Anahuac or New Spain,
composing a large portion of the second class of the proper Americans, the
(...) Clavigero, has the following observations: "We have had intimate
commerce, for many years, with the Americans, have lived several years in a
seminary destined for their instruction, had some Indians among your pupils,
had particular knowledge of many American rectors, many nobles and numerous
artists -- attentively observed their character, their genius, their
dispositions and manner of thinking; and have examined, besides, with the
utmost diligence, their ancient history, their religion, their government,
their laws and their customs, after such long experience and study of them,
from which we imagine ourselves able to decide without danger of erring, we
declare that the mental qualities of the American Indians are not in the least
degree inferior to those of the Europeans -- that they are capable of all, even
the most abstract sciences, and that if equal care and pains were taken in
their education, we should see rise among them philosophers, mathematicians and
divines, who would rival the first in Europe. But it is not possible to make
great progress in the sciences, in the midst of a life of misery, servitude and
oppression. -- Their ancient government, their laws, and their arts evidently
demonstrate that they suffered no want of genius."

This same author, who appears to be a competent judge, describes the Mexicans
as being of a good stature, rather exceeding the middle size -- well
proportioned in all their limbs -- as having a fine olive complexion -- narrow
foreheads -- black eyes -- clean, firm, regular white teeth -- thick, black,
coarse, glossy hair -- thin beards, and generally no hair on their legs, thighs
and arms. They are neither very beautiful nor the reverse, but hold a middle
place between the extremes. Some of the women are fair and beautiful.
Deformities are scarcely known among them. Their senses are very acute,
especially that of sight, which they enjoy unimpaired to the greatest age. They
are moderate eaters, but much addicted to intemperance in drinking, which, as
far as we know, is true of all the American Indians. They are patient of
injuries and hardships, and grateful for benefits. Good faith is not so much
respected as it deserves to be. They are naturally unsocial, serious and
austere, and are more anxious to punish crimes than to reward virtues.
Generosity and perfect disinterestedness are striking traits in their
character. Their religion is blended with much superstition; and some of the
more ignorant are very prone to idolatry.

The respect paid by children to their parents, and by the young to the old,
among those people, is highly commendable. Parents are fond of their children.
The affection of husbands for their wives is less than the wives for their
husbands; and it is very common for men to love their neighbors wives better
than their own. Courage and cowardice seem alternately to affect their minds,
and it is difficult to determine which predominates. They can meet dangers in
war, and such as proceed from natural causes, with great intrepidity, but are
panic struck by the stern look of a Spaniard. On the whole, their character,
like that of all other nations, is a mixture of good and bad.

Of their morality, the following exhortation of a Mexican to his son, may
serve as a specimen: "My son, who art come into the light from the womb of thy
mother like a chicken from the egg, and like it art preparing to fly through
the world, we know not how long Heaven will grant to us the enjoyment of that
precious gem which we possess in thee; but however short the period, endeavor
to live exactly, praying God continually assist thee. He created thee: thou art
his property. He is thy father, and loves thee still more than I (...) repose
in him thy thoughts, and day and night direct thy sighs to him. Reverence and
salute thy elders, and hold no one in contempt. To the poor and distressed be
not dumb, but rather use words of comfort. Honor all persons, particularly thy
parents, to whom thou owe ^^^dience, respect and service. Guard against
imitating the example of those wicked sons, who, like brutes that are deprived
of reason, neither reverence their parents, listen to their instruction, nor
submit to (...) correction; because whoever follows their steps will have an
unhappy end, will die in a desperate or sudden manner, or will be killed and
devoured by wild beasts.

"Mock not, my son, the aged or the imperfect. Scorn not him wh^^ you see fall
into some folly or transgression, nor make him reproaches, but restrain
thyself, and beware left thou fall into the same error which offends thee in
another. Go not where thou art not called, nor interfere in that which does not
concern thee. Endeavor to manifest thy good breeding in all thy words and
actions. In conversation, do not lay thy hands upon another; nor speak too
much, nor interrupt (...) disturb another's discourse. When any one discourses
with thee, (...) him attentively, and hold thyself in an easy attitude, neither
pla^^^ with thy feet, nor putting thy mantle to thy mouth, nor spitting (...)
often, nor looking about you here and there, nor rising up frequently if thou
art sitting; for such actions are indications of levity and (...) breeding." --
He proceeds to mention several particular vices which are to be avoided, and
concludes -- "Steal not, nor give thyself to gaming; otherwise thou will be a
disgrace to thy parents, whom thou ough^^^ rather to honor for the education
they have given thee. If thou will be virtuous, thy example will put the wicked
to shame. No more, (...) son; enough has been said in discharge of the duties
of a father. With these counsels I wish to fortify thy mind. Refuse them not,
(...) act in contradiction to them; for on them thy life, and all thy
happiness, depend."

Although so much cannot be said with truth, perhaps, in favor of the more
northern Indians, whom we have included in the second class, owing to the
inferiority of their advantages, yet we are far from thinking them inferior in
point of corporeal or mental endowments, to the Mexicans. In their complexion,
size, and form, they are not in general unlike the Mexicans. In social and
domestic virtues, in agriculture, arts, and manufactures they are far behind
the Mexicans -- in their hospitality, equal -- and in their eloquence in
council, and bravery i^ war, perhaps superior. Their mode of life, and the
state of society among them, afford few objects for the display either of their
literary or political abilities.

Mons. Buffon has given an humiliating picture of the Aborigines of North
America, which, as it is a false one, I shall not give the read^^ Mr.
Jefferson's answer to M. Buffon, however, is so full of the (...) valuable
information on this subject, that it must not be omitted in this place. -- "Of
the Indians of South America," says Mr. Jefferson, (...) know nothing; for I
would not honor with the appellation of knowledge, what I derive from the
fables published of them. These I believe to be just as true as the fables of
AEsop. This belief is founded on what I have seen of man, white, red, and
black, and what has been written of him by authors, enlightened themselves, and
writing ami^^ an enlightened people. The Indian of North America being more
(...) in our reach, I can speak of him somewhat from my own knowledge, but more
from the information of others better acquainted with him, and on whose truth
and judgment I can rely. From these sources I am able to say, in contradiction
to this representation, that he is neither more defective in ardor, nor more
impotent with his female, than the white reduced to the same diet and exercise:
That he is brave, when an enterprise depends on bravery; education with him
making the point of honor consist in the destruction of an enemy by stratagem,
and in the preservation of his own person free from injury; or perhaps this is
nature; while it is education which teaches us to honor force more than
finesse: that he will defend himself against an host of enemies, always choosing
to be killed, rather than to surrender, though it be to the whites, who he
knows will treat him well: that in other situations also he meets death with
more deliberation, and endures tortures with a firmness unknown almost to
religious enthusiasm with us: that he is affectionate to his children, careful
of them, and indulgent in the extreme: that his affections comprehend his other
connexions, weakened, as with us, from circle to circle, as they recede, from
the center: that his friendships are strong and faithful to the uttermost A
remarkable instance of this appeared in the case of the late Col. Byrd, who was
sent to the Cherokee nation to transact some business with them. It happened
that some of our disorderly people had just killed one or two of that nation.
It was therefore proposed in the council of the Cherokees that Col. Byrd should
be put to death, in revenge for the loss of their countrymen. Among them was a
chief called Silouee, who, on some former occasion, had contracted an
acquaintance and friendship with Col. Byrd. He came to him every night in his
tent, and told him not to be a raid, they should not kill him. After many days
deliberation, however, the determination was, contrary to Silouee's
expectation, that Byrd should be put to be death, and some various were
dispatched as executioners. Silouee attended them, and when they entered the
tent, he threw himself between them and Byrd, and and said to the warriors,
'this men is my friend: before you get at him, you must kill me. On which thy
returned, and the council respected the principle so much as to recede from
their determination.
extremity: that his sensibility is keen, even the warriors weeping most
bitterly on the loss of their children, though in general they endeavor to
appear superior to human events: that his vivacity and activity of mind is
equal to ours in the same situation; hence his eagerness for hunting, and for
games of chance. The women are submitted to unjust drudgery. This I believe is
the case with every barbarous people. With such, force is law. The stronger sex
therefore imposes o^ the weaker. It is civilization alone which replaces women
in the enjoyment of their natural equality. That first teaches us to subdue the
selfish passions, and to respect those rights in others which we value in
ourselves. Were we in equal barbarism, our females would be equal drudges. The
man with them is less strong than with us, but their women stronger than ours;
and both for the same obvious reason; because our man and their woman is
habituated to labor, and formed by it. With both races, the sex which is
indulged with case is least athletick. An Indian man is small in the hand and
wrist, for the same reason for which a sailor is large and strong in the arms
and shoulders, and a porter in the legs and thighs. -- They raise fewer
children than we do. The causes of this are to be found, not in a difference of
nature, but of circumstance. The women very frequently attending the men in
their parties of war and of hunting, childbearing becomes extremely
inconvenient to them. It is said, therefore, that they have learn the practice
of procuring abortion by the use of some vegetable; and that it even extends to
prevent conception for a considerable time after. During these parties they are
exposed to numerous hazards, to excessive exertions, to the greatest
extremities of hunger. Even at their homes the nation depends for food, through
a certain part of every year, on the gleanings of the forest: that is, they
experience a famine once in every year. With all animals, if the female be
badly fed, or not fed at all, her young perish: and if both male and female be
reduced to like want, generation becomes less active, less productive. To the
obstacles then of want and hazard, which nature has opposed to the
multiplication of wild animals, for the purpose of restraining their numbers
within certain bounds, those of labor and of voluntary abortion are added with
the Indian. No wonder then if they multiply less than we do. Where food is
regularly supplied, a single farm will show more of cattle, than a whole
country of forests can of buffaloes. The same Indian women, when married to
white traders, who feed them and their children plentifully and regularly, who
exempt them from excessive drudgery, who keep them stationary and unexposed to
accident, produce and raise as many children as the white women. Instances are
known, under these circumstances, of their rearing a dozen children. An inhuman
practice once prevailed in this country of making slaves of the Indians. It is
a fact well known with us, that the Indian women so enslaved, produced and
raised as numerous families as either the whites or blacks among whom they
lived. -- It has been said, that Indians have less hair than the whites, except
on the head. But this is a fact of which fair proof can scarcely be had. With
them it is disgraceful to be hairy on the body. They say it likens them to
hogs. They therefore pluck the hair as fast as it appears. But the traders who
marry their women, and prevail on them to discontinue this practice, say, that
nature is the same with them as with the whites. Nor, if the fact be true, is
the consequence necessary which has been drawn from it. Negroes have
notoriously less hair than the whites; yet they are more ardent. But if cold
and moisture be the agents of nature for diminishing the races of animals, how
comes she all at once to suspend their operation as to the physical man of the
new world, and to let loose their influence on his moral faculties? How has
this combination of the elements and other physical causes, so contrary to the
enlargement of animal nature in this new world, these obstacles to the
development and formation of great germs, been arrested, and suspended, so as
to permit the human body to acquire its just dimensions; and by what
inconceivable process has their action been directed on his mind alone? To
judge of the truth of this, to form a just estimate of their genius and mental
powers, more facts are wanting, and great allowance to be made for those
circumstances of their situation which call for a display of particular talents
only. This done, we shall probably find that they are formed in mind as well as
in body, on the same model with the Linn. Syst. Definition of a Man.
'Homo sapiens Europaeus.' The principles of their society forbidding all
compulsion, they are to be led to duty and to enterprise by personal influence,
and persuasion. Hence eloquence in council, bravery and address in war, become
the foundations of all consequence with them. To these acquirements all their
faculties are directed. Of their bravery and address in war we have multiplied
proofs, because we have been the subjects on which they were exercised. Of
their eminence in oratory we have fewer examples, because it is displayed
chiefly in their own councils. Some, however, we have of very superior luster.
I may challenge the whole orations of Demosthenes and Cicero, and of any more
eminent orator, if Europe has furnished more eminent, to produce a single
passage, superior to the speech of Logan, a Mingo chief, to lord Dunmore, when
governor of this state And* as a testimony of their talents in this line, I
beg leave to introduce it, first stating the incidents necessary for
understanding it. In the spring of the year 1774, a robbery and murder were
committed on an inhabitant of the frontiers of Virginia, by two Indians of the
Shawanee tribe. The neighboring whites, according to their custom* undertook
to punish this outrage in a summary way. Col. Cresap, a man infamous for the
many murders he had committed on those much injured people, collected a party,
and proceeded down the Kanhaway in quest of vengeance. Unfortunately a canoe of
women and children, with one man only, was seen coming from the opposite shore,
unarmed, and unsuspecting an hostile attack from the whites. Cresap and his
party concealed themselves on the bank of the river, and the moment the canoe
reached the shore, singled out their objects, and, at one fire, killed every
person in it. This happened to be the family of Logan, who had long been
distinguished as a friend of the whites. This unworthy return provoked his
vengeance. He accordingly signalized himself in the war which ensued. In the
autumn of the same year, a decisive battle was fought at the mouth of the Great
Kanhaway, between the collected forces of the Shawances, Mingoes, and
Delawares, and a detachment of the Virginia militia. The Indians were defeated,
and sued for peace. Logan however disdained to be seen among the suppliants.
But, lest the sincerity of a treaty should be distrusted, from which so
distinguished a chief absented himself, he sent by a messenger the following
speech to be delivered to Lord Dunmore.

'I appeal to any white man to say, if ever he entered Logan's cabin hungry,
and he gave him not meat; if ever he came cold and naked, and he clothed him
not. During the course of the last long and bloody war, Logan remained idle in
his cabin, as advocate for peace. Such was my love for the whites, that my
countrymen pointed as they passed, and said, 'Logan is the friend of white
men.' I had even thought to have lived with you, but for the injuries of one
man. Col. Cresap, the last spring, in cold blood, and unprovoked, murdered all
the relations of Logan, not sparing even my women and children. There runs not
a drop of my blood in the veins of any living creature. This called on me for
revenge. I have sought it: I have killed many: I have fully glutted my
vengeance. For my country, I rejoice at the beams of peace. But do not harbor
a thought that mine is the joy of fear. Logan never felt fear. He will not turn
on his heel to save his life. Who is there to mourn for Logan? -- Not one.'

Before we condemn the Indians of this continent as wanting genius, we must
consider that letters have not yet been introduced among them. Were we to
compare them in their present state with the Europeans' north of the Alps, when
the Roman arms and arts first crossed those mountains, the comparison would be
unequal because, at that time, those parts of Europe were swa^^ting with
numbers, because numbers produce emulation, and multiply the chan^^ of
improvement, and one improvement begets another. Yet I may safely ask, How many
good poets, how many able mathematicians, how many great inventors in arts or
sciences, had Europe, north of the Alps, then produced? And it was sixteen
centuries after this before a Newton could be formed. I do not mean to deny,
that then are varieties in the race of man, distinguished by their powers both
of body and mind. I believe there are, as I see to be the case in the races of
other animals. I only mean to suggest a doubt, whether the bulk and faculties
of animals depend of the side of the Atlantic on which their food happens to
grow, or which furnishes the elements of which they are compounded? Whether
nature has enlisted herself as a Cis or Trans-Atlantic partisan?".

No people in the world have higher notions of military honor than the
Indians. The fortitude, the calmness and even exultation which they manifest
while under the extremest torture, is owing to their education, to their
exalted ideas of military glory, and their rude notions of future happiness,
which they believe they shall forfeit by the least manifestation of fear, or
uneasiness, under their sufferings. They are as bitter and determined in their
resentments as they are sincere in their friendships, and often pursue their
enemies several hundred miles through the woods, surmounting every difficulty,
in order to be revenged. The following anecdote of an Algonquin woman, we find
adduced as a remarkable (...) of their innate thirst of blood. That nation
being at war with the Iroquois, she happened to be taken prisoner, and was
carried to one of the villages belonging to them. (...) she was stripped naked,
and her hands and feet bound with ropes in one of their (...). In this
condition she remained ten days, the savages sleeping round her every night.
The eleventh night, while they were asleep, she found means to disengage one of
her hands, with which she immediately freed herself from the ropes, and went to
the door. Though she had now an opportunity of escaping unperceived, her
revengeful temper could not be slip so favorable an opportunity of killing one
of her enemies. The attempt was manifestly at the hazard of her own life; yet,
snatching up a hatchet, she killed the (...) that lay next her; and springing
out of the cabin, concealed herself in a hollow tree which she had observed the
day before. The groans of the dying person soon alarmed the (...) savages, and
the young ones immediately set out in pursuit of her. -- Perceiving from (...)
tree, that they all directed their course one way, and that no savage was near
her, she (...) her sanctuary, and, flying by an opposite direction, ran into a
forest without being pertained The second day after this happened, her foot
steps were discovered; and they pursued her with such expedition, that the
third day she discovered her enemies at her hands. Upon this she threw herself
into a pond of water; and, diving among some weeds and (...) rushes, she could
just breathe above water without being perceived. Her pursuers, (...) making
the most diligent search, were forced to return. -- For 35 days this woman
(...) her course through woods and deserts, without any other sustenance than
roots and (...) ^^ries. When she came to the river St. Lawrance, she made with
her own hands a (...) of a wicker raft, on which she crossed it. As she went by
the French for Trois Rivieres, without well knowing where she was, she
perceived a canoe full of savages; and searing they might be Iroquois, ran
again into the woods, where she remained till sunset. -- Continuing her course
soon after, she saw Trois Rivieres; and was then discovered by a party whom she
knew to be Hurons, a nation in alliance with the Algonquins. She then squatted
down behind a bush, called out to them that she was not in a condition to be
seen, because she was naked. They immediately threw her a blanket, and then
conducted her to the fort, where she recounted her story.
In their public councils they observe the greatest decorum. In the foremost
rank fit the old men, who are the counselors, then the warriors, and next the
women and children. As they keep no records, it is the business of the women to
notice every thing that passes, to imprint it on their memories, and tell it to
their children. They are, in short, the records of the council; and with
surprising exactness, preserve the stipulations of treaties entered into a
hundred years back. Their kindness and hospitality is scarcely equalled by any
civilized nation. Their politeness in conversation is even carried to excess,
since it does not allow then to contradict any thing that is asserted in their
presence. In short, there appears to be much truth in Dr. Franklin's
observation, "We call them savages, because their manners differ from ours,
which we think the perfection of civility; they think the same of theirs."

Society among the Indians, we are sorry to say, has not been improved, but in
most instances corrupted, by their intercourse with Europeans. It is believed
by many, that the wars with them generally originate in the injustice, avarice
and pride of their opposers and vanquishers. None, however, can justify their
mode of carrying on a war when once it has commenced. If the guilty, or those
who should conceal and defend the guilty, were the sole objects of their
vengeance, we could not condemn them. But when those who never did or meant
them an injury, when defenseless women, and children, and even babes, are made
the victims of their shocking barbarity, we cannot but deeply lament their want
of that humanity, and just discrimination between the innocent and the guilty,
which are the peculiar fruits of civilization. We wish we could say, that they
never had any examples of indiscriminate barbarity from their neighbors, who
ought to have taught them better.

The Indians many times treat their prisoners in the most cruel and barbarous
manner; but they often use them with the greatest humanity, feeding and
clothing them, even better than themselves, and adopting them as fathers,
mothers, sons and daughters, brothers and sisters, and treating them in all
respects as such. There have been instances of whites, thus adopted, while
young, who have become Chiefs of the nations that adopted them. Compulsion has
frequently been found necessary to separate from their Indian relations, those
white prisoners who have resided a few years with them; and many men and women,
who have been ransomed and delivered up by the Indians to their white parents
or relations, have returned back to their Indian friends, and of choice,
married and settled among them.

A late enterprising traveller Mr. Stewart.
into the country west on the Missisippi, who took his course west south west
from the posts on the Lakes, and penetrated to the head of the Missouri, and
thence due west, till he arrived within about 500 miles of the Pacific ocean,
informs that beyond the Missouri he met with many powerful nations of Indians,
who were in general courteous and hospitable. The nations which he visited to
the westward appeared to be a polished, civilized people, having regularly
built towns, and enjoying a state of society not far removed from the European,
and in order to be perfectly equal, wanting only the use of iron and steel.
Their clothing is of skins, cut in an elegant manner, and in many respects
preferable to the garments in use among the whites. This information of Mr.
Stewart's serves to confirm the accounts given of the kingdom of T^llan, by the
Spaniards who journeyed far north in 1606, and of whose discoveries we have
already given an account in page 78.
Adjacent to these nations is a vast range of mountains, which may be called
the Allegany of the western parts of America, and serves as a barrier against
the too frequent incursions of the coast Indians, who, Mr. Stewart relates,
appear to be inveterate enemies to the tribes eastward of the mountains.

The Indians are unacquainted with letters, and their history is preserved in
some few instances by ^ierogliphic paintings, and sculpture, but principally by
tradition. They often discover great ingenuity i^ communicating information to
the absent. Of the following instance of Indian hierogliphic writing, Doctor
Mitchill, who in a very obliging manner communicated it to the Author, was an
eye witness.

Dr. Mitchill, in company with several other gentlemen, as they (...)
proceeding up Onondago river, to an Indian treaty, overtook several canoes of
Seneka Indians, who encamped with them at night (...) fort Brewington; and the
next day proving rainy, the continued (...) company till the weather became so
favorable as to permit them (...) cross the Oneida Lake. During the storm, one
of the Indian ca^^^^ stove, and became unfit for service. The commissioners,
took the (...) on board their boat, and carried them to a landing place some
distance up Wood Creek. Here one of them, before he left the water, took the
following method to let his companions, who were left behind, know when and
whither they had proceeded. He took a piece of wood, and hewed it flat and
smooth, and then raked his fire for a suitable coal, with which he rudely
delineated, on the slab, the figure of an Indian, carrying a gun reversed upon
his shoulder. In front of him he drew a crooked line, which reached to a man
with a long coat and cocked hat, and holding a cane in his hand; and behind him
a framed house. He then took a strait pole, and tied some weeds and grass upon
one end of it, and fixed the other in the earth, in such a manner, that, in the
position the sun then was, which was six o'clock in the morning, it cast no
shadow -- or, in other words, he pointed it exactly toward the sun. The
meaning of all, was this -- "Susquewewah (the name of the Indian) left this
spot at six o'clock in the morning, or when the sun was in the place where the
pole pointed, and has proceeded up Wood Creek, (which is remarkably crooked) to
the settlement where the Commissioners of the State of New York are assembled
to hold a treaty with the Indians." -- All these insignia were arranged so
conspicuously on the margin of the creek, that his companions behind could
scarcely avoid observing them as they passed.

In the interior parts of America various monuments of art have been found,
which discover greater ingenuity in their construction, than the present
generation of Indians appear to possess. -- Two miles west of the Genessee
river, in the State of New York, we have been informed, By the Rev. Mr.
Kirkland, Missionary to the Six Nations, who visited this Fort, is 23.
are the remains of an ancient Indian Fort. It encloses about 4 acres -- is
encompassed with a ditch 8 feet wide and 5 or 6 feet deep, and has six gate
ways. Its form is circular, except on one part, which is defended by nature
with a high bank, at the foot of which is a fine stream of water; there is an
appearance of there having been a deep covered way through the middle of the
bank, to the water. Some of the trees on the bank and in the ditch look as if
they had been growing 150 or 200 years. Half a mile south, on an eminence, are
the ruins of another Indian fortified town, of smaller dimensions, and more
advantageously situated for defense. The old Indians say these forts were built
before the Senakas were admitted into confederacy with the Mohawks, Onondagos,
Oneidas and Cayogas, and while the Senakas were at war with the Mississauges,
and other Indians, on the great Lakes, which Mr. Kirkland conjectures, from
various accounts that he received from different tribes, was at least 300 years
ago.

A few miles from the above mentioned forts, at a place which the Senakas call
^egateenedaghque, signifying a town with a fort at each end, are the remains of
two other forts, constructed nearly in the same form, with six gates, a ditch,
and a stream of water, and a covered way to it. -- Near the northern fort, are
the ruins of a funeral pile, 6 feet high, and 20 or 30 feet diameter, where
were buried 800 Indians, who, according to tradition, fell in a famous battle
fought at this place, between the Senakas, who were the victors, and the
western Indians. The weapons of war then in use were bows and arrows, the spear
or javelin pointed with bone, and the war club, or death-mall. When the former
fort of weapons were expended, they came to close engagement with the latter.
The warriors wore a short jacket made of willow sticks or of moose wood, laced
tight round their bodies -- on their heads they wore a cap of the same kind,
but commonly wove double, the better to secure them against a mortal blow from
the death-mall. The battle above mentioned was fought, some of the Indians say
300, some 400, and some 600 lives or ages ago, and long before the arrival of
the Europeans. They commonly reckon a life or an age, one hundred winters or
colds.

Mr. Kirkland observes, that there are similar vestiges of ancient fortified
towns throughout the extensive territories of the Six Nations, and, by Indian
report, in various other parts, and particularly on a branch of the Delaware
river, which appear to be very ancient. He adds, "I find on enquiring, that a
tradition prevails among the Indians in general, that all Indians came from the
west." This is a confirmation of the opinion that this second class of Indians,
of whom we have been speaking, and of which the Six Nations make a part, came
over from the north east of Asia, to the north west coast of America, whence
they migrated south toward Mexico, and eastward into the present territory of
the United States.

Judging of the ancient Indians from the traditionary accounts of them, and the
ruins we have been describing, we are led to conceive of them as a more
civilized, ingenious, and warlike people than their descendants at the present
time. We are at a loss for the causes of their degeneracy, unless we mention as
such the introduction of spirituous liquors among them, a deep sense of their
inferiority in military skill to the white people, and their chagrin and broken
heartedness, at the loss of their lands, and being forced to give place to
their supposed enemies.

The third class of American Indians, viz. those who inhabit Esquimaux,
Labrador, and the countries around, are much less known than either of the
aforementioned classes. Those who profess to be best acquainted with them say,
they differ in size and shape from the other American Indians, and resemble the
Laplanders, and Samoeids, of Europe, from whom, it is conjectured, they
descended. Cr^ntz, however, is of a different opinion, as will be mentioned
further on.


In the years 1771, and 1772, Mr. Hearne, an ingenious young Gentleman,
traveled many hundred miles into these dreary countries, (for such be found
them) and in his Journal draws a plain, artless picture of the savage modes of
life, the scanty means of subsistence, and the singular wretchedness in almost
every respect, of the various tribes, who without fixed habitations, pass their
lives in roving over (...) deserts and frozen lakes, of the extensive tract of
Continent thro^^ which he passed. Mr. Hearne set out in his tour from Prince of
Wales' fort on Churchill river, N. Lat. 58. 47, W. Long. 97. 7, and traveled
nearly 1300 miles in a northwesterly direction. His whole track, to the
northward of 61 N. Lat. lay nearly 600 miles due West from the western coast of
Hudson's bay. His Indian guides assured him there was vast tracts of land,
stretching further in the same direction. Hence it appears that a passage into
the Pacific ocean, round the N. West part of America, is clearly impracticable.
The following extracts from his Journal will (...) the reader a better and
more just idea of these Indians, than any (...) counts of them which the Author
can furnish from any other sov^^^.

"We arrived at the Copper-mine river on the 13th of July, and (...) found
afterward, about forty miles from its exit into the sea. On (...) arrival at
the river, the Indians dispatched three men before, as sp^^^ to see if any
Esquimaux Indians were about the river: and on the (...) of the same month, as
I was continuing my survey toward the mo^^^ of the river, I met the spies, who
informed me there were 5 ten^^^ Esquimaux on the west side of the river, and by
their accounts of (...) distance, I judged they were about twelve miles off. On
receive (...) this news, no more attention was paid to my survey, but their
wh^^ thought was engaged on planning the best method of stealing on th^^ the
ensuing night, and killing them while asleep. The better to complete their
design it was necessary to cross the river, and by the account of the spies, no
place was so proper for that purpose as where (...) were, it being fine and
smooth and at some distance from any cataract. Accordingly, after they had put
their guns, targets, spears, etc. in order we were ferried over the river, the
doing of which (as we had only three canoes) took up a considerable time. It
must be observed this before we set out on the west side, all the men painted
their target some with the image of the Sun, others with the Moon, others with
different kinds of birds and beasts of prey, and some had the imaged fairies,
and other imaginary beings on them, which, according to this silly
imaginations, are inhabitants of the different elements, as the early sea, air,
etc. By a strict enquiry into the reason of this superstition, I found that
each man had the image of that being painted on his target, which he relied
most on for success in the intended battle with the Esquimaux: and some were
contented with a single representation, whilst others, doubtful I suppose of
the power of any single being would have their targets covered to the very
margin with hieroglyphics, quite unintelligible.

"This piece of superstition being completed, we began to advance toward the
tents of the Esquimaux, always walking in low grounds, and being very careful
how we crossed any hills, for fear of being seen by the inhabitants. The number
of my gang being so far superior to the five tents of Esquimaux, and the
warlike manner in which they were equipped, in proportion to what might be
expected of the post Esquimaux, rendered a total massacre inevitable, unless
kind providence should work a miracle for their preservation. The land was so
situated that we walked under cover of the hills till we came within 200 yards
of their tents, where the Indians that were with me lay so^^ time in ambush,
watching the motions of the Esquimaux (for we were in full sight of their
tents.) The Indians advised me to stay here till the sight was over, with which
I would by no means comply, for I thought when the Esquimaux were surprised,
they would fly every way for refuge, and if they found me alone, not knowing me
from an enemy, they would lay violent hands on me when there were none to
assist. I therefore determined to accompany them, assuring them at the same
time that I would have no hand in the murder unless I found it necessary for my
own safety. They seemed highly pleased with my proposal, and directly fixed a
spear and bayonet for me, but I had no target. By the time this was all settled
it was near one o'clock in the morning, when finding all the Esquimaux asleep
in their tents, they ran on them without being discovered, until they came
close to their very doors. They then began the cruel massacre, while I stood
neuter in the rear, and in a few seconds a scene truly shocking presented
itself to my view. For as the poor unhappy victims were surprised in the midst
of their sleep, they had neither power not time to make any resistance, but
men, women and children ran out of their tents quite naked. But alas, where
could they fly for shelter! They every soul fell a sacrifice to Indians
barbarity, in all near thirty. The shrieks and groans of the poor expiring
souls were truly horrible, and this was much increased by the sight of one poor
girl (about 18 years old) whom they killed so near to me, that when the first
spear was struck into her, she fell down and twisted about my feet and legs,
and it was with much difficulty I disengaged myself from her dying grasps. As
the Indians pursued her, I solicited for her life, but so far was it from being
granted, that I was not fully assured of my own being in entire safety for
offering to speak in her behalf. When I begged her life the two fellows that
followed her made no reply, till they had both their spears through her fixed
into the ground: they then both looked me sternly in the face, and began to
upbraid me by asking if I wanted an Esquimaux wife; at the same time paying no
regard to the loud shrieks of the poor girl, who was twining round the spears
like an eel. Indeed I was obliged at last to desire that they would be more
expeditious in dispatching her out of her misery, lest otherwise I should be
obliged out of pity, to assist in performing that friendly office. The brutish
manner in which they used the bodies, which they had deprived of life, is too
shocking, and would be too indecent to describe, and the terror of mind I was
in from such a situation is so much easier to be conceived than described, that
I shall not attempt it. When they had completed this most inhuman murder, we
observed seven more tents on the opposite side of the river. The Indians of
these tents were soon in great confusion, but did not offer to make their
escape. The Indians fired many shot at them across the river, but the poor
Esquimaux were so unacquainted with the nature of guns, that when the bullets
struck the rocks they ran in great bodies to see what was sent them, and seemed
curious in examining the pieces of lead which the leg, after which they found
slatted on the rocks, till at last one man was shot through the leg, after
which they embarked in their canoes, with their wives and children, and paddled
to a shoal in the river. When my Indians had made all their observations on the
bodies, as above mentioned, and had plundered their tents of all their
copper-work (which they and the Copper Indians used instead of iron) they
assembled at the top of an high hill, standing in a circle with their spears
erect in the air, and gave shouts of victory, calling Tima! Tima! by way of
derision to the surviving Esquimaux who were standing on the shoal. We then
went up the river about half a mile, to the place where out canoes and baggage
were, with an intent to cross over and plunder the other seven tents. It taking
up a considerable time to get all across the river, as we had only three
canoes, and being entirely under cover of the rocks, the pour Esquimaux whom we
left on the shoal, thought we were gone about our own business, and had
returned to their own tents again. And the land was so situated on the east
side that the Indians went under cover of the hills, until they were within a
hundred yards of their tents, where they saw the Esquimaux busy in tying up
their bundles. They ran on them again with great fury, but having their canoes
ready, they all embarked, and reached the shoals beforementioned, except one
poor old man, who being too attentive in tying up his things, had ^^tune to
reach his canoe, and so fell a sacrifice to Indian fury. After the Indians had
plundered these tents of what they thought worth their notice, they threw their
tent poles into the river, broke their stone kettles, and did all they could to
distress the poor survivors. We found an aged woman at a small distance up the
river, snaring of salmon whom they butchered in the same manner, every man
having a thrust at her with his spear."

The other extract is as follows:

"This day, January 11th 1772, as the Indians were hunting, some of them saw a
strange snow shoe track, which they followed, and at a considerable distance
came to a little but, where they found a young woman sitting alone. They
brought her to the tents, and an examining her found that she was one of the
western dog-ribbed Indians, and had been taken prisoner by the Arathapescow
Indians, in the summer of 1770, and when the Indians, who took her prisoner,
were near this place in 1771, she eloped from them, with an intent to return to
her own country. But it being so far off, and when she was taken prisoner
having come all the way in canoes, with the winding of rivers and lakes, she
had forgot the way, and had been in this little hut ever since the beginning of
fall. By her account of the moons past since her elopement, it appears to have
been the middle of last July when she left the Arathapescow Indians, and she
had not seen a human face since. She had supported herself by snaring rabbits,
partridges and squirrels, and was now in good health, and I think, as fine a
woman of a real Indian, as I have seen in any part of North America. She had
nothing to make snares of but the sinews of rabbits legs and feet, which she
twisted together for that purpose, and of the rabbits skins had made a neat and
warm winter's clothing. The stock of materials she took with her when she
eloped, consisted of about five inches of an iron hoop for a knife, a stone
steel, and other hard stones for flints, together with other fire tackle, as
tinder, etc. about an inch and an half of the shank of the shoeing of an arrow,
of iron, of which she made an awl. She had not been long at the tents, before
half a score of men wrestled to see who should have her for a wife. She says,
that when the Arathapescow Indians took her prisoner they stole upon the tents
in the night, when all the inhabitants were asleep, and murdered every soul
except herself and three other young women. Her father, mother and husband were
in the same tent with her, and they were all killed. Her child, of about five
months old, she took with her, wrapped in a bundle of her own clothing
undiscovered, in the night. But when she arrived at the place where the
Arathapescows had left their wives, which was not far off, it being then day
break, these Indian women immediately began to examine her bundle, and having
there found the child, took it from her and killed it immediately. The relation
of this shocking scene only served the savages of my gang for laughter. Her
country is so far to the westward, that she says she never saw any iron or
other metal till she was taken prisoner; those of her tribe making their
hatchets and chissels of deer's horns, and knives of stone and bone; their
arrows are shod with a kind of state, bone, and deer's horns, and their
instruments to make their wood work are nothing but beaver's teeth. They have
frequently heard of the useful materials that the nations to the east of them
are supplied with from the English, but instead of drawing nearer to be in the
way of trading for iron work, etc. are obliged to remove farther back to avoid
the Arathapescow Indians, as they make surprising slaughter among them every
year, both winter and summer."

The Esquimaux, according to Mr. Pennant, are distinguished from the tribes
south of them, chiefly by their dress, their canoes, and their instruments of
chase. He divides them into two varieties. About Prince Williams Sound they are
of the largest size. As you advance northward they decrease in height, till
they dwindle into the dwarfish tribes, which occupy some of the coasts of the
Icy sea, and the maritime parts of Hudson's Bay, of Greenland and Labrador.
Their dw^rsishness is doubtless occasioned by the scantiness of their
provisions, and the severity of their climate. Beyond the 67th degrees. N. Lat.
according to Capt. Ellis's account, there are no inhabitants. The Arctic
countries in America, Asia and Greenland, if inhabited at all, have very few
inhabitants; and those are of the dwarfish kind, scattered on the banks of
rivers, lakes, and seas, and subsistmiserably upon fish, and the flesh of those
animals which inhabit those frozen regions, with the skins of which they clothe
themselves.

Mr. Crantz gives it as his opinion that the Esquimaux came originally from the
northeast regions of Great Tartary, between the Icy sea and Mungalia; because
he observes a greater assinity between them and the Kalmucks, Tunguses and
Kamskadales, who inhabit those regions, that between them and the Laplanders,
Samoi^ds and Ostiaks, who inhabit the northwest parts of Europe, whence, it has
generally been conjectured the Esquimaux migrated. It is his opinion also, that
Greenland was settled in the 14th century, from the northeastern parts of
America; for till that period, Greenland appears not to have had any
inhabitants. The rout which the first migrants took, he supposes was, first
into Tartary, after the dispersion on the nations, thence into Kamtskatka,
thence across the strait which separates the two continents; whence they spread
themselves unmolested, into the then uninhabited countries round Hudson's Bay,
and down as far south as Canada. And here they were found in the 11th century,
by the Norwegians, in their Wineland. Afterward these more southerly regions
were conquered by the more numerous and powerful tribes south of the lakes, and
the Esquimaux were forced to retire as far north as the 60th degrees. N. lat. Here
Capt. Ellis found the Esquimaux, in his voyage to Hudson's bay, and discovered
that they had the same aspect, dress, boats, hunting and fishing implements,
habitations, manners and usages as the Greenlanders. One of the Moravian
brethren, who understood the Greenland language, made a voyage to Laorador in
1764. On the fourth of September he met about 200 Indians. The first that be
spoke to behaved very wild and shy; but when the Indian saw him clad in his own
dress, and heard him speak in his own language, he called out to the others
with shouts of joy, "Our friend is come." They conducted him further up, to
their families, and though other Europeans think they risk their lives in being
alone with them, they showed him all imaginable friendship, and rejoiced when
he gave them hopes of visiting them the next year; which he did, in company
with the Rev. Mr. Drachart, a gentleman well skilled in the Greenland language.
He found that the two languages did not differ so much at the high and low
Dutch -- that their stature, way of living, dress, (...), darts and boats were
the same as the Greenlanders.
They are often pursued and hunted by the other Indians, who live about the
south and west shores of Hudson's Bay, and who appear to be quite a different
people.

The newly discovered American Indians about Nootka Sound, disguise themselves
after the manner of the ancient Scythians, in dresses made of the skins of
wolves and other wild beasts, and wear even the heads fitted to their own.
These habits they use in the chase to circumvent the animals of the field.

Concerning the religion of the Indians much has been said, and much that has
no foundation. In general it may be said, that they all have an idea of a
Supreme Being, whom they worship under different names, and with a great
variety of superstitious rites and ceremonies. Some, particularly the nations
of the Algonquin language, call their Supreme God, the Great Hare; some
Michabou, and others Atahocan. The Being opposed to this First Spirit, whom
they consider as the Creator and Governor of the world, they style, the Great
Tiger.

The name of the Hurons' Supreme God, or more properly their God of War, is
Areskoui; of the Iroquois, Agrestouse; but most of the nations south of the
Lakes, as far as Louisiana, denominate their Supreme God, the Great, the Good,
or the Grand Spirit, to whom they ascribe a kind of omnipresence, and whom they
invoke as their guardian. To their evil genii they never address themselves,
except to entreat them not to do them any injury; and to appease their wrath
they often sacrifice to them. Mr. Kirkland mentions a small lake, which he
visited, situated at the foot of a precipice, nearly 50 feet perpendicular
height, in the territory of the Six Nations, in which, the old Indians affirm,
resided formerly a demon in the shape of a dragon, and that he had been seen
frequently to disgorge balls of liquid fire. To appease his wrath, they said,
many a sacrifice of tobacco had been made at the lake, by the fathers.

NEW DISCOVERISE ON THE NORTH-WEST COAST OF AMERICA.} The country on the North
Western part of the Continent of America, bounded by the Pacific ocean, is yet
unexplored. We however have several charts of the coast: the latest published,
is that, taken by Captains Portlock and Dixon, in a voyage performed in the
years 1785 -- 86 -- 87 and 88; and from the enterprizing genius and repeated
voyages of our own countrymen, we expect to be furnished with others much
improved. "This vast country, with very little deviation, has the appearance of
one continued forest, being covered with pines of a different species, and
these intermixed with alder, birch, witch-hazle, etc. besides various kinds of
brushwood: and the valleys and low grounds afford wild currants, gooseberries,
raspberries, and various flowering shrubs. On the coast and many islands,
spacious bays, commodious, harbors and mouths of navigable rivers: among which
arc, Queen Charlotte's islands, Since called Washington Island.
extending from N. lat. 51 42 to 54 18 -- W. long 129 54 to 133 18 from
Greenwich. Nootka Sound, situated in N. lat. 40 30. W. long. 126 42. Admiralty
bay and port Mulgrave, N. lat. 59 31 -- W. long. 140 18. Prince William's
Sound, N. lat. 60 30 -- W. long. 147 30. Cook's river, N. lat. 59 30 -- W.
long. 153 12.

This coast is inhabited by numerous but small tribes of Indians; each tribe
appears to be independent and governed by its own chief. They differ from each
other in their language and customs. The neighboring tribes are frequently
involved in wars with each other. It is impossible to ascertain with any degree
of certainty the number of inhabitants; but they have been computed at ten
thousand, from Cook's river to Nootka Sound, an extent of about 1000 miles.
Capt. Portlock saw^t Cape Edgecomb, several men much marked with the small pox;
and was informed that the distemper carried of great numbers of the
inhabitants. From what circumstances be could collect, be conjectured it was
brought by the Spaniards, who were there in 1775. The (...), are for the most
part short in stature: their faces, men and women, are in general shat and
round, with high cheek bones and slat noses; and their teeth white and regular.
Their complexions are lighter than the Southern Indians, and some of their
women have rosy cheeks. Both sexes are fond of ornamenting themselves with
beads and trinkets, and they generally paint their hands and faces. They have a
custom of making a longitudinal slit in the under lip, between the mouth and
chin, some of them as large as the mouth, in which they wear a piece of bone,
wood or ivory, fitted with holes in it, from which they suspend beads as low as
the chin. They are very fond of masks or visors, and various kinds of caps
painted with different devices, such as birds, beasts, fishes and sometimes
representations of the human face. They have likewise many devices carved in
wood, which are greatly valued by them. There appears to be a greater
uniformity in the dress of the different tribes than in their ornaments. The
aperture, or second mouth, above the chin, seems confined to the men of Cook's
river and Prince William's Sound; whilst the wooden ornament in the under lip
is worn by the women only, in that part of the coast from port Mulgrave to
Queen Charlotte's Islands. -- Thieving is a very prevalent inclination among
them, which is practiced, not only upon strangers, but among themselves. In the
course of their trading, they are frequently seen to steal from each other, and
on being detected they will give up the articles stolen with a laugh, and
immediately appear as unconcerned as if nothing had happened. Their habitations
are generally the most wretched that can be conceived: a few poles stuck in the
ground, without regularity, loosely covered with bark, constitute their huts,
which are quite insufficient to shelter them from the snow and rain, and the
insides of their dwellings exhibit a complete picture of filth and indolence.
In one corner are thrown the bones and remaining fragments of victuals lest at
their meals; in another, heaps of fish and putrefied flesh, grease, oil, etc.
In short, the whole serves to show in how wretched a state it is possible for
human beings to exist.

They subsist wholly by fishing and hunting. Their clothing is made of the
skins of animals and birds; and the probable reason why the Indians take no
greater pains in the construction of their habitations, is, that their
situation is merely temporary; for no sooner does the master of a tribe find
game begin to grow scarce, or fish rot so plenty as he expected, then he takes
down his hut, puts the boards or barks into his canoe, and paddles away to seek
a spot better adapted to his purposes; which having found, he erects his
dwelling in the same careless manner as before.

Few or no remarks concerning their religious ceremonies have yet been handed
to us; but from the traits already discerned, those cannot be less rude than
their other customs.

The chief object of civilized nations in navigating this coast hither to, has
been to traffic with the natives for furs; which they give in exchange for
pieces of iron, nails, beads, penknives and other trifling trinkets. These furs
are carried to China and disposed of to a great profit. The skins obtained, are
those of the sea otter, racoon, pine martin, land beaver, earless mammot, etc.

A traffic, which in prospect, affords such uncommon profit, has induced many
citizens of the United States to engage in it; but whether the number of
vessels fitted out by other nations, has not made a scarcity of furs, and
taught the natives to set a higher value on them experience will determine

The following statement shows the number of vessels that had arrived at China,
from the N. W. coast, to February 1788, with the number of furs, and their
value, viz.

Vessels. Names. Capts. Tons Burden. Years. From whence sent. No of furs
obtained. Sold for D^^^ B^g Hanna, 60 1765 560 S. Otter 20,^00 Ditto ibid.
ibid. 400 8,000 Snow Capt. Cook, Lovie, 300 1786 Bombay, 600 24,000 Snow
Experiment, Guise, 100 -- Nootka, Mears, 1786 Bengal, 357 14,24^ -- Imperial
Eagle, Berkley, -- -- -- 800 30,000 1700 Skins imported by the Spaniards,
unsold, valued Ship Peyrouse, 54.^^ Ship De Langle,

What furs the Russians procure is not known, as they never carry them to
Canton. From the above sketch it appears that the fur trade has been very
lucrative. There are also other articles which might perhaps be procured to
advantage, such as ginseng, copper, oil, spars, etc. with great quantities of
salmon.

The following extracts from the account of Capt. Cook's discoveries, contain
much valuable information respecting the N. W. coast of America, and its
neighboring islands.

Having left the Society Islands, Captain Cook proceeded to the northward,
crossing the equator on the 22d and 23d of December 1777; and on the 24th
discovered a low uninhabited Island about 15 or 20 leagues in circumference.
Here the longitude and latitude were exactly determined, by means of an eclipse
of the sun. The west side of it where the eclipse was observed, lies in N. Lat.
1 59 E. Lon. 202 30. From the time of its discovery it obtained the name of
Christmas Island. Plenty of turtle were found upon it, and the Captain ca^^ed
the seeds of the cocoa-nut, yams, and melons, to be planted.

Proceeding still to the northward, our navigator next fell in with in five
islands, to which he gave the general name of Sandwich Isles, in honest of his
patron. Their names in the language of the country are W^^hoo, Atooi, Oneeheow,
Oreehoua, and Tehoora. They are situated in the latitude of 21 30 and 22 15
North, and between 199 20 and 201. 30. E. Long. The longitude was deduced from
no fewer than 72 sets of lunar observations. The largest of these islands is
Atooi, and does not in the least resemble the islands of the South Sea formerly
visited by our navigators. excepting only that it has hills near the center,
which slope gradually toward the sea side. The only domestic animals found
upon it were hogs, dogs, and fowls: Captain Cook designed to have made the
inhabitants of this island a present of some others; but being driven out of it
by stress of weather, he was obliged to land them upon a smaller one named
Oncchccow. He left a he goat with two females, and a boar and sow of the
English breed, which is much superior to that of the South Sea Islands. He left
also the seeds of melons, pumpkins, and onions. The soil of this island seemed
in general to be poor: it was observed that the ground was covered with shrubs
and plants, some of which had a more delicious fragrancy than he had ever
experienced before. The inhabitants of these islands are much commended, not
with standing their horrid custom of eating human flesh. In every thing
manufactured by them there is an ingenuity and neatness in an uncommon degree;
and the elegant form and polish of some of their fishing books could not be
exceeded by an European artist, even assisted by all his proper tools. From
what was seen of their agriculture also, it appeared that they were by no means
novices in that art, and that the quantity and goodness of their vegetable
productions might with propriety be attributed as much to their skilful culture
as to the fertility of the soil. The language of the Sandwich Isles is almost
identically the same with that of Otaheite.

Proceeding farther to the northward, our navigator discovered the coast of New
Albion, on the 7th of March 1778. Its appearance was very different from that
of the countries with which they had hitherto been conversant. The land was
full of mountains, the tops of which were covered with snow; while the valleys
between them, and the grounds on the sea coast, high as well as low, were
covered with trees, which formed a beautiful prospect as of one vast forest.
The place where they landed was situated in N. Lat. 74. 33. E. Long. 235. 20.
At first the natives seemed to prefer iron to every other article of commerce;
but at last they showed such a predilection for brass, that scarcely a bit of
it was left in the ships, except what belonged to the necessary instruments. It
was observed also, that these people were much more tenacious of their property
than any of the savage nations that had hitherto been met with, insomuch that
they would part neither with wood, water, grass, nor the most trifling article,
without a compensation, and were sometimes very unreasonable in their demands;
with which, however, the captain always complied as far as was in his power.

The place where the Resolution was now anchored, was by our navigator called
St George's Sound, but he afterward understood that the natives gave it the
name of Nootka. Its entrance is situated in the east corner of Hope Bay: in N.
Lat. 49. 33. E. Long. 233. 12. The climate, as far as they had an opportunity
of observing it, was much milder than that on the eastern coast of the American
continent in the same parallel of latitude; and it was remarkable that the
thermometer, even in the night, never fell lower than 42, while in the day time
it frequently role to 60. The trees met with here are chiefly the Canadian
pine, white cypress, and some other kinds of pne. There seemed to be a scarcity
of birds, which are much harassed by the natives, who ornament their clothes
with the feathers, and use the flesh for food. The people are no strangers to
the use of metals, having iron tools in general use among them; and Mr. Gore
procured two silver spoons, of a construction similar to what may be observed
in some Flemish picture, from a native who wore them round his neck as an
ornament. It is most probable that these metals have been conveyed to them by
the way of Hudson's Bay and Canada; nor is it improbable that some of them may
have been introduced from the north western parts of Mexico.

While Capt. Cook sailed along this coast, be kept always at a distance from
land when the wind blew strongly upon it: whence several large gape were left
unexplored, particularly between the latitudes of 50 and 55. The exact
situation of the supposed straits of Anian was not ascertained, though there is
not the least doubt, that if he had lived to return by the same way in 1779, he
would have examined every part with his usual accuracy. On departing from
Nootka Sound, our navigator first fell in with an island in N. lat. 59. 49. E.
long. 216. 58. to which he gave the name of Kay's Island. Several others were
discovered in the neighborhood; and the ship came to an anchor in an inlet
named by the Captain Prince William's Sound. Here he had an opportunity of
making several observations on the inhabitants, as well as on the nature of the
country. From every thing relative to the former, it was concluded, that the
inhabitants were of the same race with the Esquimaux or Greenlanders. The
animals were much the same with (...) met with at Nootka, and a beautiful skin
of one animal, which seemed to be peculiar to the place, was offered for sale.
Mr. Anderson was inclined to think that it was the same to which Mr. Pennant
has given the name of the casan marmot. The alcedo, or great King's fisher, was
found here, having very fine and bright colors. The humming bird also came
frequently, and flew about the ship while at anchor; though it is scarce to be
supposed that it can live throughout the winter, on account of the extreme
cold. The water fowl were in considerable plenty; and there is a species of
diver which seemed to be peculiar to the place. Almost the only kinds of fish
met with in the place were torsk and halibut. The trees were chiefly the
Canadian and spruce pines, some of which were of a considerable height and
thickness. The Sound is judged by Captain Cook to occupy a degree and a half of
latitude, and two of longitude, exclusively of its arms and branches, which
were not explored. There was every reason to believe that the inhabitants had
never been visited by any European vessel before; but our navigator found them
in possession not only of iron but of beads, which it is probable are conveyed
to them across the continent from Hudson's Bay.

Soon after leaving Prince William's Sound, our navigator fell in with another
inlet, which it was expected would lead either to the northern sea or to
Hudson's or Baffin's bay; but upon examination it was found to end in a large
river. This was traced for 210 miles from the mouth, as high as N. lat. 61. 30,
and promises to vie with the most considerable ores already known, as it lies
open by means of its various branches to a very considerable inland
communication. As no name was given by our commander to this river, it was
ordered by Lord Sandwich to be named Cook's River. The inhabitants seemed to be
of the same race with those of Prince William's Sound; and like them had glass
beads and knives; they were also clothed in very fine furs; so that it seemed
probable that a valuable fur trade might be carried on from that country.
Several attempts have accordingly been made from the British settlements in the
East Indies to establish a traffic of that kind; but little benefit accrued
from it, except to the proprietors of the first vessel, her cargo having
greatly lowered the price of that commodity in the Chinese market. It must be
observed, that on the western side of the American continent, the only valuable
skins met with are those of the sea otter; those of the other animals,
especially foxes and martins, being of an inferior quality to such as are met
with in other parts.

Proceeding farther to the northward our navigator now fell in with a race of
people who had evidently been visited by the Russians, and seemed to have
adopted from them some improvements in dress, etc. In the prosecution of this
part of their voyage, it appeared that they had been providentially conveyed in
the dark through a passage so dangerous, that our commander would not have
ventured upon it in the day time. They were now got in among those islands
which had lately been discovered by Capt. Beering and other Russian navigators,
and came to an anchor in a harbor of Oonalashka, situated in N. lat. 53. 55.
E. long. 193. 30. Here it was remarked, that the inhabitants had as yet
profited very little by their intercourse with the Russians; so that they did
not even dress the fish they used for their food, but devoured them quite raw.

From Oonalashka our navigator proceeded again toward the continent, which he
continued to trace as far as possible to the northward. In the latitude of 54.
48. E. long. 195. 45. J. lat. is a volcano of the shape of a perfect cone,
having the crater at the very summit. On the coast farther to the north the
soil appears very barren. Producing neither three nor shrub, though the lower
grounds are not destitute of grass and some other plants. To a rocky point of
considerable height situated in N. lat. 58. 42. E. long. 197. 36. our commander
gave the name of Cape Newnham.

Here Mr. Anderson, the surgeon of the Resolution, died of a consumption, under
which he had labored for more than twelve months. Soon after he had breathed
his last, land being seen at a distance, it was named Anderson's Island; and on
the 9th of August the ship anchored under a point of the continent which he
named Cap, Prince of Wales. This is remarkable for being the most westerly
point of the American continent hitherto known. It is situated in N. lat. 65.
46. E. long. 191. 45. It is only 39 miles distant from the eastern coast of
Siberia; so that our commander had the pleasure of ascertaining the vicinity of
the two continents to each other, which had only been imperfectly done by the
Russian navigators. Setting sail from this point next day, he steered to the
west and north, when he soon fell in with the country of the Tschutski, which
had been explored by Beering in 1728. Here he had an opportunity of correcting
M. Stoehlin's map, who had placed in these seas fear an imaginary island, on
which he bestowed the name of Alas^hka. Being convinced that the land he had
now reached was part of the Asiatic continent, our commander directed his
course eastward, in order to fall in with that of America; and on the 17th
reached the latitude of 70. 33. and E. long. 197. 41. Here they began to
perceive that brightness in the horizon called by (...) mariners the bl^nk of
the ice; and in 70 41 they had got quite up (...) it, so that no farther
progress could be made. Next day they made shift to get as far as 70 44. but
the ice was now as compact (...) wall, and about ten or twelve feet in height.
Its surface was extrem^^^ rugged, and farther to the northward appeared much
higher. Its (...) face was covered with pools of water; and great numbers of
seasons lay upon it, whose flesh they were now glad to use as food. (...)
commander continued to traverse the Icy Sea till the 29th, but the ^^structions
becoming every day greater and greater, it was thought pro^^ to give over all
further attempts of finding a passage to Europe for that (...) He did not,
however, omit the investigation of the Asiatic and American coasts, until he
had fully ascertained the accuracy of Captain B^^^ing's accounts as far as he
went, and corrected the errors of M. St^^^lin. Great additions were thus made
to the geographical knowledge of this part of the globe. From Beering's straits
he sailed for Oonalashka, where he arrived on the 2d of October, and staid for
(...) time in order to repair his ships. While the carpenters were employed in
this work one third of the people had permission to go (...) those by turns, in
order to gather berries, with which the island abounds, and which, though now
beginning to decay, were of great service, in conjunction with the spruce beer,
to preserve the people from the scurvy. With regard to the natives of
Oonalashka, they (...) to appearance the most innoffensive and peaceable people
in the world not to be in a state of civilization; though perhaps this may be
owi^^^ in some measure to the connection they have long had with the Russians.
From the affinity observed between the language of the Esquimaux, Greenlanders,
and those of Norton's Sound, in N. lat. 64.(...) there is great reason to
believe, that all those nations are of the sa^^ extraction; and if that be the
case, there is little reason on doubt, th^^ a communication, by sea, exists
between the eastern and western (...) of the American continent; which,
however, may very probably (...) shut up by ice in the winter time, or even for
the most part throughout the year.

The following information respecting the N. West coast of America, is
extracted from the journal of Mr. John Cordis of Charlestown, Massachusetts*
second officer of the Snow Eleanora, from Boston.

On the 30th of August, 1789, Mr. Cordis, at Washington Island, left the Sloop
Washington, which was commanded by Captain Kendric, and went on board the Snow
Eleanora, commanded by Captain Simcon Metcalf.

Captain Cook, when he passed this Island, supposed it to be a part of the
continent* as the weather at the time was thick, and the wind boisterous, which
obliged him to keep at sea, till he made the western cape of the continent in
about lat. 55. Captain Gray, in the Sloop Washington, first discovered it to be
an island, and gave it the name of WASHINGTON. To a harbor, about the middle
of the island, he gave the name of Barrell's Inlet, in honor of Joseph
Barrel, E^^ of Boston. Another harbor, whose entrance is in lat. 52 12 (...)
lon. 136 W. they called Clinton's Harbor, in honor of Governor Clinton of New
York.

On the continent opposite the island is a convenient harbor, with a muddy
bottom, which they called Cordis's Cove. The island has (...) excellent
harbors.

This island is about 100 miles in length, from S. E. to N. W. and about 30 in
breadth. The southernmost point is in about lat. 51 50 N. lon.135 W.

It is composed principally of irregular mountains, the tops of which, even in
summer, are covered with snow. It abounds with spruce, pine, and cedar trees.
Among other animals on this island, are the bear, deer, dog, seal, and sea
otter; of the latter, are great numbers, whose skins are of a most beautiful
black, intermixed with white hair, and their fur is extremely fine and delicate.

The number of inhabitants on this island, Mr. Cordis conjectures. is between
ten and eleven thousand. He calculates thus -- One of the Chiefs informed him
that he possessed six large canoes, or as they call them, Lux Chepotts, which
would carry upwards of 50 men each; and his tribe was large enough to man them
all. There were seventeen other Chiefs, he said, beside himself, on the island;
each of whom, had nearly the same number of men; hence he concludes, that upon
a moderate calculation each tribe contains 600 souls; and the whole island
about ten thousand eight hundred.

The natives of this island are in general well made, robust, active, and
athletic; and of a larger size than those on the opposite continent, and of a
lighter complexion. Their hair is very harsh and long, and tied back with a
piece of red cedar bark^ The women have a very singular mode of ornamenting, or
rather of disfiguring themselves, by making, when very young, a small hole in
the under lip, and putting in a small piece, or plug of wood, for the purpose
of keeping it distended. By frequently increasing the size of this plug, as
they advance in age, by the time they are five and twenty, the hole becomes
large enough to contain a piece of wood two inches long, and about an inch
wide, the upper part of which is dug out in the form of a spoon, which serves
both for ornament and use, as it is used at their meals to contain the oil for
their fish. This custom, however, is not general throughout the island. Their
war implements, which they have frequent occasion to use* some or other of the
tribes being almost perpetually at war, are spears about 15 feet long* with the
ends pointed with shells or stone, and bows and arrows. The iron which they
obtain in traffic is immediately converted into ornaments for the neck, and
into knives. Their mode of working it could not be discovered. It is a custom
in some of the tribes, when a prisoner offends them, for the Chiefs to kill and
eat him. Mr. Cordis was an eye witness to one instance of this kind* as he
found a piece of human flesh, with an Indian woman, the wife of a Chief, of
which she ate, and appeared to be fond. Their common diet is dried fish and
their spawns* mixed with a large quanity of fish oil. They sometimes* when they
have no fire near, eat small fish ^aw* just as they are taken from the water.

Their habitations are small huts, of a triangular form, constructed of poles,
and the bark of cedar trees, with a small hole for a door. They frequently
remove from place to place as the fish go up or down the river. The man are
extremely jealous of their wives, but chastity is not among the virtues of the
young unmarried women. Both men and women generally paint themselves red or
black, every morning. Their dress consists of skins thrown over their
shoulders, and tied round their necks with a leathern thong: the rest part of
their bodies is entirely naked, except the women, who sometimes, but not
always, have a skin fastened round their waist.

Their method of disposing of their dead is very singular. They put the corpse
into a square box; if the box happens to be too small for the body, they cut
off the head, or other parts of it, which they put into the vacant places. This
being done, the box is secured by having several mats wound round it, and then
is hoisted into the top of the highest tree in the neighborhood, where it is
fastened and lest till the box decays and drops in pieces. Though frequently
asked, they would not tell their reasons for this custom.

The manner of treating the dead, on the continent opposite the Island, is
somewhat different. They put the dead body into a square box, when it has
become a little putrefied, and secure it well with cords. After this the
relations of the deceased, seat themselves on the box, and with an instrument
made of a shell, cut their faces till they are covered with blood, speaking all
the while in a loud and melancholy tone. This ceremony being over, they wash
themselves, and return to the company with great gaiety. The corpse is then put
under a great tree, and covered with mats and earth, and left to be devoured by
wild beasts.

It has been conjectured by navigators upon this coast, that there i^ some
where between the latitudes of 50 and 60 degrees, a passage through the
continent, from the Pacific ocean, into Hudson's Bay. Mr. Cordis, by order of
Capt. Metcalf, explored a large strait, to the eastward of Washington Island,
running up N. E. into the country. On the 24th of September 1789, he left the
ship, and in the yawl, with six men, proceeded N. N. E. about 25 miles up the
strait, where he found it about 3 miles wide. The land on each side was
mountainous and woody, and bears and wolves were heard during the night.
Continuing his course next day, N. N. E. till 10 o'clock, A. M. he found the
strait to lead north, and to be much narrower. He kept on the eastern shore,
till 2 o'clock, P. M. when the strait opened wider to the N. E. The next day he
proceeded upwards of 40 miles, N. E. and N. N. E. where he found the strait
much wider than any part he had passed, except the entrance. The time to which
he was limited being now expired, and his provisions short, he returned on
board, strongly impressed, however, with the opinion that this strait
communicated with Hudson's Bay, or with some of the water^ of the Atlantic
Ocean.

In January 1790, Capt. Metcalf visited the Sandwich Islands. The principal of
these Islands. O-why-hee, according to Mr. Cordis's reckoning, lies in 19 50 N.
Lat. and 154 50W. or in 205 20 E. Long. from Greenwich. The natives of these
Islands are, generally speaking, stout, vigorous and active, and by being
almost constantly in the water, seem to be nearly amphibious. They are of a
light copper color, with black hair. The women have a custom of anointing
themselves with an ointment which gives them a yellowish appearance.

They have two kinds of canoes, the single and the double. The former are about
30 feet long and two and a half broad; and to prevent their overturning* have
an out* rigger which projects 5 feet from the canoe. The latter, are two
canoes, connected by arched timbers passing from the gunwale of one, to the
gunwale of the other, and are about three feet apart; some of these double
canoes are above 80 feet in length, and will contain as many men. The paddles
of these canoes are about 5 feet long* and the part which goes into the water
15 inches broad; with these they will paddle at the rate of 6 miles an hour.

These islands produce sugar canes, potatoes, cocoa nuts, bread fruit,
plantains, water mellons, yams, and a root they call tea, which is of a
sweetish taste, not disagreeable. It is about the bigness of a man's arm and
nearly as long. They have also a root which they call avd. With its juice they
often get intoxicated, or rather stupefied. Those who make a free use o^ it,
when they become old, have a scaly appearance not unlike the leprosy. These
islands abound with hogs, which are large and good. Dogs are considered by the
chiefs as a delicate dish, and are fed with great care for their use. A few
dunghill fowls were also found on these islands, which probably were left here
by some ship, not many years since.

The only valuable wood on these islands, is what is called sandle wood, which
is of a yellowish color, and has a most agreeable smell. It is much esteemed
by the Chinese, who burn it in their Churches. They have another species of
wood, not unlike the lignum vitoe, with which they make their spears, which are
from ten to twelve feet in length. These spears, with the knife, which is made
of a small piece of wood, and on both sides stuck full of sharks' teeth, appear
to be their only instruments of war.

The Island of O-why-hee, is nearly twenty leagues in circumference, and
contains upwards of 30,000 inhabitants, under the arbitrary government of one
Chief.

A SUMMARY ACCOUNT of the first DISCOVERY and SETTLEMENT of NORTH AMERICA,
arranged in chronological order.
NORTH AMERICA was discovered in the reign of Henry VII. a period when the arts
and sciences had made very considerable progress in Europe. Many of the first
adventurers were men of genius and learning, and were careful to preserve
authentic records of such of their proceedings as would be interesting to
posterity. These records afford ample documents for American historians.
Perhaps no people on the globe, can trace the history of their origin and
progress with so much precision, as the inhabitants of North America;
particularly that part of them who inhabit the territory of the United States.

The same which Columbus had acquired by his first discoveries on this western
continent, spread through Europe, and inspired many with the spirit of
enterprise. See Hizard's "Historical Collections," page ^. Vol I, where this
grant is recited at large. It is dated A. D.1495.


In the spring of 1496 he sailed from England with two ships, carrying with him
his three sons. In this voyage, which was intended for China, he fell in with
the north side of Terra Labrador, and coasted northerly as far as the 67th
degree of latitude.

1497.] The next year he made a second voyage to America with his son
Sebastian, who afterward proceeded in the discoveries which his father had
begun. On the 24th of June he discovered Bonavista, on the north east side of
Newfoundland. Before his return he traversed the coast from Davis's straits to
Cape Florida.

1502.] Sebastian Cabot was this year at Newfoundland; and return, carried
three of the natives of that island to King Henry.

1513.] In the spring of 1513, John Ponce sailed from Ports northerly, and
discovered the continent in 30 8north latitudes landed in April, a season when
the country around was covered verdure, and in full bloom. This circumstance
induced him (...) the country FLORIDA, which, for many years, was the common
for North and South America.

1516.] In 1516, Sir Sebastian Cabot and Sir Thomas Port, exp^^ the coast as
far as Brazil in South America.

This vast extent of country, the coast of which was thus exp^^^ remained
unclaimed and unsettled by any European power, (exce^^ the Spaniards in South
America) for almost a century from the ti^^ its discovery.

1524.] It was not till the year 1524 that France attempted d^^^^eries on the
American coast. Stimulated by his enterprizing ^^^^^bours, Francis I. who
possessed a great and active mind, sent John ^^razano, a Florentine, to
America, for the purpose of making dis^^^ries. He traversed the coast from
latitude 28 to 50 north. In ^^cond voyage, sometime after, he was lost.

1525.] The next year Stephen Gomez, the first Spaniard who (...) upon the
American coast for discovery, sailed from Groyn in Sp^^^ to Cuba and Florida,
thence northward to Cape Razo, in latitude (...) north, in search of a northern
passage to the East Indies.

1534.] In the spring of 1534, by the direction of Francis I. a (...) was
fitted out at St. Malo's in France* with design to make discov^^ in America.
The command of this fleet was given to James Car^^* He arrived at Newfoundland
in May of this year. Thence he sa^^ northerly: and on the day of the festival
of St. Lawrence, he fou^^ himself in about latitude 48 30 north, in the midst
of a broad (...) which he named St. Lawrence. He gave the same name to the ^^er
which empties into it. In this voyage, he sailed as far north a^ ^^^itude 51,
expecting in vain to find a passage to China.

1535.] The next year he sailed up the river St. Lawrence 300 leagues to the
great and swift Fall. He called the country New France; (...) a fort in which
he spent the winter, and returned in the following spring to France.

1539.] On the 12th of May, 1539, Ferdinand de Soto, with (...) men, besides
seamen, sailed from Cuba, having for his object the (...) quest of Florida. On
the 30th of May he arrived at Spirito Sa^^^ from whence he traveled northward
to the Chickasaw country, in about latitude 35 or 36. He died and was buried on
the bank (...) Mississippi River, May, 1542, aged 42 years. Alverdo succeeded
him.

1542.] In 1542, Francis la Roche, Lord Robewell, was sent to Canada, by the
French king, with three ships and 200 men, women and children. They wintered
here in a fort which they had built, a returned in the spring. About the year
1550, a large number of venturers sailed for Canada, but were never after heard
of. In (...) the king of France commissioned the Marquis De la Roche to conq^^^
Canada, and other countries not possessed by any Christian Pri^^^* We do not
learn, however, that la Roche ever attempted to execute commission, or that any
further attempts were made to settle Canada during this century. (...) (...)
Historical Collections, Vol, I Page 19, Commission from Francis (...) Jones
Carrier or Quarter, for making an establishment in Canada, dated Oct^.17, (...)
(...) was given him in consequence of his former discoveries.


January 6, 1548-49.] This year king Henry VII. granted a pension for life to
Sebastian Cabot, in consideration of the important services he had rendered to
the kingdom by his discoveries in America. Hazard's Hist. Coll. Vol. I. page
23. Hackluyt calls this "The large pension granted by K. Edward VI. to
Sebastian Cabot, constituting him Grand Pilot of England."
Very respectable descendants of the Cabot family now live in the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts.

1562.] The Admiral of France, Chatillon, early in this year, sent out a fleet
under the command of John Ribalt. He arrived at Cape Francis on the coast of
Florida, near which, on the first of May, he discovered and entered a river
which he called May river. It is more than probable that this river is the same
which we now call St. Mary's, which forms a part of the southern boundary of
the United States. As he coasted northward he discovered eight other rivers,
one of which he called Port Royal, and sailed up it several leagues. On one of
the rivers he built a fort and called it Charles, in which he left a colony
under the direction of Captain Albert. The severity of Albert's measures
excited a mutiny, May, on which he built a fort, and, in honor to his king,
Charles IX. he called it CAROLINA.

In August, this year, Capt. Ribalt arrived at Florida the second time, with a
fleet of seven vessels, to recruit the colony, which, two years before, he had
left under the direction of the unfortunate Capt. Albert.

The September following, Pedro Melandes, with six Spanish ships, pursued
Ribalt up the river on which he had settled, and over powering him in numbers,
cruelly massacred him and his whole company. Melandes, having in this way taken
possession of the country, built three forts, and left them garrisoned with
1200 soldiers. Laudonier and his colony on May River, receiving information of
the fate of Ribalt, took the alarm and escaped to France.

1567.] A fleet of three ships was this year sent from France to Florida, under
the command of Dominique de Gourges. The object of this expedition, was to
dispossess the Spaniards of that part of Florida which they had cruelly and
unjustifiably seized three years before.

1576.] Capt. Frobisher* was sent this year, to find out a north west passage
to the East Indies. The first land which he made on the coast was a Cape,
which, in honor to the queen, he called Queen Elizabeth's Foreland. In coasting
northerly he discovered the straits which bear his name. He prosecuted his
search for a passage into the western ocean, till he was prevented by the ice,
and then returned to England. Hazard's Historical Collection, Vol. I. page 23.


June 11th, 1578.] In 1578, Sir Humphry Gilbert obtained a p^^ from queen
Elizabeth, for lands not yet possessed by any Christ prince, provided he would
take possession within six (...)

1584.] This year two patents were granted by queen Elizabeth one to Adrian
Gilbert, (Feb.6.) the other to Sir Walter Raleigh ((...) 25.) for ^nds not
possessed by any Christian prince. Hazard's Hist. Coll. Vol. 1. p. 28 and 33.
By the direction of Sir Walter, two ships were fitted and sent out under the
command of Philip Amidas, and Arthur Barlow, with 107 passangers. In June 1585
they arrived on the coast, and anchored in a harbor seven leagues west of the
Roanoke. This colony returned to England in June, 1586. On the 13th of July,
they, in a formal manner, took possession of the country, and, in honor of
their virgin queen Elizabeth, they called it Virginia. Till this time the
country was known by the general name of Florida. After this VIRGINIA became
the common name for all North America.

1586.] This year, Sir Walter Raleigh sent Sir Richard Greenville to America,
with seven ships. He arrived at Wococon harbor in June. Having stationed a
colony of more than an hundred people (...) Roanoke, under the direction of
Capt. Ralph Lane, he coasted northeasterly as far as Chesapeak Bay, and
returned to England.

The colony under Capt. Lane, endured extreme hardships, and (...) have
perished, had not Sir Francis Drake fortunately returned to Virginia, and
carried them to England, after having made several conquests for the queen in
the West Indies and other places.

A fortnight after, Sir Richard Greenville arrived with new recruits; and
although he did not find the colony which he had before left, and knew not but
they had perished, he had the rashness to leave 50 men at the same place.

1587.] The year following, Sir Walter sent another company to Virginia, under
Governor White, with a charter and twelve assistants. In July he arrived at
Roanoke. Not one of the second company remained. He determined, however, to
risk a third colony. Accordingly he left 115 people at the old settlement, and
returned to England.

This year (Aug. 13.) Mantco was baptized in Virginia. He was the first native
Indian who received that ordinance in that part of America. He, with Towaye,
another Indian, had visited England, and returned home to Virginia with the
colony. On the 18th of August, Mrs. Dare was delivered of a daughter, whom she
called VIRGINIA. She was born at Roanoke, and was the first English child that
was born in North America.

1590.] In the year 1590, Governor White came over to Virginia with supplies
and recruits for his colony; but, to his great grief, not a man was to be
found. They had all miserably famished with hunger, or were massacred by the
Indians.

1602.] In the spring of this year, Bartholomew Gosnold, with 3^ persons, made
a voyage to North Virginia, and discovered and gave names to Cape Cod, Martha's
Vineyard, and Elizabeth Islands, and to Dover Cliff. Elizabeth Island was the
place which they fixed for their first settlement. But the courage of those who
were to have tarried, failing, they all went on board and returned to England.
All the attempts to settle this continent which were made by the Dutch, French,
and English, from its discovery to the present time, a period of 110 years,
proved ineffectual. The Spaniards only, of all the European nations, had been
successful. There is no account of there having been one European family, at
this time, in all the vast extent of coast from Florida to Greenland.

1603.] Martin Pring and William Brown, were this year sent by Sir Walter
Raleigh, with two small vessels, to make discoveries in North Virginia. They
came upon the coast which was broken with a multude of islands, in latitude 43
30 north. They coasted southward to Cape Cod Bay; thence round the Cape into a
commodious harbor in latitude 41 25 where they went ashore and tarried seven
weeks, during which time they loaded one of their vessels with sassafras, and
returned to England.

Bartholomew Gilbert, in a voyage to South Virginia, in search of the third
colony which had been left there by Governor White, in 1587, having touched at
several of the West India Islands, landed near Chesapeak Bay, where, in a
skirmish with the Indians, he and four of his men were unfortunately stain. The
rest, without any further search for the colony, returned to England.

France, being at this time in a state of tranquillity in consequence of the
edict of Nantz in favor of the Protestants, passed by Henry IV. (April 1598)
and of the peace with Philip king of Spain and Portugal, was induced to pursue
her discoveries in America. Accordingly the king signed a patent Hist, Coll.
Vol. 1. p 4^. --
in favor of De Mons, (November 8, 1603) of all the country from the 40th to
the 46th degrees of north latitude, Acadia. The next year De Mons ranged the
coast from St. Lawrence to Cape Sable, and round to Cape Cod.

1605.] In May 1605, George's Island and Pentecost Harbor were discovered by
Capt George Weymouth. In May he entered a large river in latitude 43 20,
(variation 11 15 west,) which Mr. Prince, in his Chronology, supposes must have
been Sagadahok; but from the latitude, it was more probably the Piscataqua.
Capt. Weymouth carried with him to England five of the natives.

1606.] April 10th this year, James I. by patent, lbid p. 50.
divided Virginia into two colonies. The southern, included all lands between
the 34th and 41st degrees of north latitude. This was styled the first colony,
under the name of South Virginia, and was granted to the London Company. The
northern, called the second colony, and known by the general name of North
Virginia, included all lands between the 38th and 45th degrees north latitude,
and was granted to the Plymouth Company. Each of these colonies had a council
of thirteen men to govern them. To prevent disputes about territory, the colony
which should last place themselves was prohibited to plant within an hundred
miles of the other. There appears to be an inconsistency in these grants, as
the lands lying between the 38th and 41st degrees are covered by both patents.

Both the London and Plymouth companies enterprized settle^ within the limits
of their respective grants. With what succ^^ now be mentioned.

Mr. Piercy, brother to the Earl of Northumberland, in the (...) the London
Company, went over with a colony to Virginia, (...) covered Powhatan, now James
River. In the mean time the Ply^^^ company sent Capt. Henry Challons, in a
vessel of fifty five tons, (...) a colony in North Virginia; but in his voyage
he was taken Spanish fleet and carried to Spain.

1607. April 26. The London company this spring, sent Capt. Christ Newport,
with three vessels, to South Virginia. On (...) of April he entered Chesapeak
Bay, and landed, and soon after gav^ most southern point the name of Cape
Henry, which (...) retains.

August22.] In August died Capt. Bartholomew Gosnold, th^^ projector of this
settlement, and one of the council. The fol^^^ winter James-Town was burnt.

During this time, the Plymouth company fitted out two ships (...) the command
of Admiral Rawley Gilbert. They sailed for (...) Virginia on the 31st of May,
with one hundred planters, and (...) George Popham for their president. They
arrived in August ^^^tled about nine or ten leagues to the southward of the
mouth of (...) dahok river. A great part of the colony, however, disheartened
(...) severity of the winter, returned to England in December, leaving (...)
president, Capt. Popham, with only forty five men.

It was in the fall of this year that the famous Mr. Robinson, (...) part of
his congregation, who afterward settled at Plymouth in (...) England, removed
from the north of England to Holland, to av^^^ cruelties of persecution, and
for the sake of enjoying "purity of (...) ship and liberty of conscience."

This year a small company of merchants at Dieppe and St. (...) founded Quebec
or rather the colony which they sent, built (...) huts there, which did not
take the form of a town until the (...) Lewis XIV.

1608.] Sagadahok colony suffered incredible hardships after the ^^parture of
their friends in December. In the depth of winter, (...) was extremely cold,
their storehouse caught fire and was co^^^ with most of their provisions and
lodgings. Their misfortun^^^ increased soon after, by the death of their
president. Rawley (...) was appointed to succeed him.

Lord chief Justice Popham made every exertion to keep the (...) any alive, by
repeatedly sending them supplies. But the circumstance of his death, which
happened this year, together with that of ^^^dent Gilbert's being called to
England to settle his affairs, (...) the colony, and they all returned with him
to England.

The unfavorable reports which these first unfortunate ad^^^ propagated
respecting the country, prevented any further att^^^ settle North Virginia for
several years after.

1609.] The London company, last year, sent Capt. Nelson, with two ships and
one hundred and twenty persons, to James'-Town; and this year, Capt. John
Smith, afterward president, arrived on the coast of South Virginia, and by
sailing up a number of the rivers, discovered the interior country. In
September, Capt. Newport arrived with seventy persons, which increased the
colony to two hundred souls.

Mr. Robinson and his congregation, who had settled at Amsterdam, removed this
year to Leyden; where they remained more than eleven years, till a part of them
came over to New England.

The council for South Virginia, having resigned their old commission, The
second Charter of Virginia, ^ears date May 23^. 1609. Hist. Coll. Vol. 1. P. 58.
requested and obtained a new one; in consequence of which they appointed Sir
Thomas West, Lord De la War, general of the colony; Sir Thomas Gates, his
lieutenant; Sir George Summers, Admiral; Sir Thomas Dale, high marshal; Sir
Ferdinand Wainman, general of the horse; and Capt. Newport, vice admiral.

June8.] In June Sir Thomas Gates, Admiral Newport, and Sir George summers, with
seven ships, a ketch and a pinnace, having five hundred souls on board, men,
women and children, sailed from Falmouth for South Virginia.

1610.] The year following, the South Virginia or London company, sealed a
patent to Lord De la War, constituting him Governor and Captain General of
South Virginia. He soon after embarked for America with Capt. Argal and one
hundred and fifty men, in three ships.

The unfortunate people, who, the year before, had been shipwrecked on the
Bermuda Islands, had employed themselves during the winter and spring, under
the direction of Sir Thomas Gates, Sir George Summers, and Admiral Newport, in
building a sloop to transport themselves to the continent. They embarked for
Virginia on the 10th of May, with about one hundred and fifty persons on board;
leaving two of their men behind, who chose to stay; and landed at James'-Town
on the ^3d of the same month. Finding the colony, which at the time of Capt.
Smith's departure, consisted of five hundred souls, now reduced to sixty, and
those few in a distressed and wretched situation, they with one voice resolved
to return to England; and for this purpose, on the 7th of June, the whole
colony repaired on board their vessels, broke up the settlement, and sailed
down the river on their way to their native country.

Fortunately, Lord De la War, who had embarked for James-Town the March before,
met them the day after they sailed, and pers^^^ them to return with him to
James-Town, where they arrived and ^^^ed the 10th of June. The government of
the colony of right, de^^^ed upon Lord De la War. From this time we may date
the es^^^^ settlement of Virginia. Its history from this period, will be (...)
in its proper place.

As early as the year 1607 and 1608, Henry Hudson, an Englishman, under a
commission from king James, in the employ of certain merchants, made several
voyages for the discovery of a north west passage to the E. Indies. In 1609*
upon some misunderstanding, he ^^gaged in the Dutch service, in the prosecution
of the same design, (...) on his return ranged along the sea coast of what has
since been called New England, (which, three years before was granted by king
James to his English subjects, the Plymouth Company) and entered Hudson's
river, giving it his own name. He ascended this river in his bo^^^ far as what
has since been called Aurania or Albany. In 1613, the Dutch West India company,
sent some persons to this river, to trade with the Indians; and as early as
1623, the Dutch had a trading house, on Connecticut river. In consequence of
these discoveries and settlements, the Dutch claimed all the country extending
from Caps C^^ to Cape Henlopena long the sea coast, and as far back into the
country as any of the rivers within those limits extend. But their claim has
been disputed. This extensive country, the Dutch called New N^^^lands, and in
1624 the States General granted a patent to sundry ^^chants for an exclusive
trade on Hudson's river, who the (...) year,

Conception Bay, on the Island of Newfoundland, was settled in the year 1610,
by about forty planters under governor John Guy, (...) whom king James had
given a patent of incorporation.

Champlain, a Frenchman, had begun a settlement at Quebec 16th St. Croix, Mount
Mansel, and Port Royal were settled about the same time. These settlements
remained undisturbed till 1613, when the Virginians, hearing that the French
had settled within their limits, sent Capt. Argal to dislodge them. For this
purpose he sailed to S^^adahock, took their forts at Mount Mansel, St. Croix
and Port Royal, with their vessels, ordnance, cattle and provisions, and
carried them to James-Town in Virginia. Quebec was left in possession of the
French.

1614.] This year Capt John Smith with two ships and forty five men and boys,
made a voyage to North Virginia, to make experiments upon a gold and copper
mine. His orders were, to fish and trade (...) the natives, if he should fail
in his expectations with regard (...) mine. To facilitate this business, he
took with him Tantum, an (...) perhaps one that Capt. Weymouth carried to
England in 1605. (...) April he reached the island Monahigan in latitude 48 30.
(...) Capt. Smith was directed to stay and keep possession with ten men (...)
the purpose of making a trial of the whaling business, but being disappointed
in this, he built seven boats, in which thirty-seven men (...) a very
successful fishing voyage. In the mean time the Captain (...) self with eight
men only, in a small boat, coasted from Penobs^^ Sagadahok, Acocisco,
Passataquack, Tragabizanda, now called (...) Ann, thence to Acomac, where he
skirmished with some Indians; thence to Cape Cod, where he set his Indian,
Tantum, ashore, and left him, and returned to Monahigan. In this voyage he
found two French ships in the Bay of Massachusetts, who had come there six
weeks before, and during that time, had been trading very advantageously with
the Indians. It was conjectured that there were, at this time, three thousand
Indians upon the Massachusetts Islands.

In July, Capt. Smith embarked for England in one of the vessels, leaving the
other under the command of Capt. Thomas Hunt, to equip for a voyage to Spain.
After Capt. Smith's departure, Hunt perfidiously allured twenty Indians (one of
whom was Squanto, afterward so serviceable to the English) to come on board
his ship at Patuxit, and seven more at Nausit, and carried them to the island
of Malaga* where he sold them for twenty pounds each, to be slaves for life.
This conduct, which fixes an indelible stigma upon the character of Hunt,
excited in the breasts of the Indians such an inveterate hatred of the English,
as that, for many years after, all commercial intercourse with them was
rendered exceedingly dangerous.

Capt. Smith arrived at London the last of August, where he drew a map of the
country, and called it NEW ENGLAND. From this time North Virginia assumed the
name of New England, and the name Virginia was confined to the southern colony.

Between the years 1614 and 1620, several attempts were made by the Plymouth
company to settle New England, but by various means they were all rendered
ineffectual. During this time, however, an advantageous trade was carried on
with the natives.

1617.] In the year 1617, Mr. Robinson and his congregation, influenced by
several weighty reasons, meditated a removal to America. Various difficulties
intervened to prevent the success of their designs until the years 1620,

The particulars relating to the first emigrations to this northern part of
America; the progress of its settlement, etc. will be given in the history of
New England, to which the reader is referred.

In order to preserve the chronological order in which the several colonies,
now grown into independent states, were first settled, it will be necessary
that I should just mention,

1627.] In 16^7* a colony of Swedes and Finns came over and landed at Cape
Henlopen; and afterward purchased of the Indians the land from Cape Henlopen
to the Falls of Delaware, on both sides the river, which they called New
Swedeland Stream. On this river they built several forts, and made settlements.

1628.] On the 19th of March, 1628, the council for New England sold to Sir
Henry Roswell, and five others, a large tract of land, lying round
Massachusetts Bay. The June following, Capt. John Endicot, with his wife and
company, came over and settled at Naumkeag, now called Salem. "Among others who
arrived at Naumkeag, were Ralph Sprague, with his brethren, Richard and
William; who, with 3 or 4 more, by Govern^^ Endicot's consent, under^^^^ a
journey through the woods above 12 miles westward, till they came to a neck of
land called Mishaw^^, between Mystic and Charles Rivers, full of Indians, named
Ab^rgini^^. Their old Sachem being dead, his eldest son, called by the English
John Sagamore, (...) Chief; a man of gentle and good disposition, by whose free
consent they settled here; wh^^^ they found but one English house thatched and
pallisadoed, possessed by Thomas Walf^^^ a smith." Prince's Chron. p. 174.

"June 1629, Mr. Thomas Graves removed from Salem to Mishaw^^, and with the
Governor's consent called it Charlestown. He laid the town out in two acre
lots, and built the Great House, which afterward became the house of Public
Worship." Mr. Bright, Mini^^^loin. p. 188.


This was the first English settlement which was made in MASSACHUSETTS BAY.
Plymouth, indeed, which is now included in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
was settled eight years before, but at this time it was a separate colony,
under a distinct government; and continued so, until the second charter of
Massachusetts was granted by William and Mary in 1691; by which, Plymouth, the
Province of Main and Sagadahok, were annexed to Massachusetts.

June13, 1633.] In the reign of Charles the first, Lord Baltimore, a Roman
Catholic, applied for and obtained a grant of a tract of land upon Chesapeak
Bay, about one hundred and forty miles long and one hundred and thirty broad.
Soon after this, in consequence of the rigor of the laws of England against the
Roman Catholics, Lord Baltimore, with a number of his persecuted brethren,
came over and settled it, and in honor of queen Henrietta Maria, they called it
MARY, LAND.

The first grant of Connecticut was made by Robert, Earl of Wa^wick, president
of the council of Plymouth, to Lord Say and Seal, Hazard's Hist. Coll. p. 318.
In consequence of several smaller grants made afterward, by the Patentees to
particular persons, Mr. Fenwick made a settlement at the mouth of Connecticut
river, and called it Saybrook. About the same time (1636) a number of people
from Massachusetts Bay came and began settlements at Hartford, Wethersfield and
Windsor, on Connecticut river. Thus commenced the English settlement of
CONNECTICUT.

Rhode Island was first settled in consequence of religious persecution. Mr.
Roger Williams, who was among those who came early over to Massachusetts, not
agreeing with some of his brethren in sentiment, was very unjustifiably
banished the colony, and went with twelve others,

1664.] On the 20th of March, 1664, Charles the second granted to the Duke of
York, what is now called NEW JERSEY, then a part of a large tract of country by
the name of New-Netherland. Some parts of New Jersey were settled by the Dutch
as early as about 1615.

1662.] In the year 1662, Charles the second granted to Edward Earl of
Clarendon, and seven others, almost the whole territory of the three Southern
States, North and South Carolina and Georgia. Two years after he granted a
second charter, them by their charter, engaged Mr. Lo^ke to frame a system of
laws for the government of their intended colony. Notwithstanding these
preparations, no effectual settlement was made until the year 1669,

1681.] The Royal charter for Pennsylvania was granted to William Penn on the
4th March 1681. The first colony came over the next year and settled under the
proprietor.

The proprietary government in Carolina, was attended with so many
inconveniences, and occasioned such violent dissentions among the settlers,
that the Parliament of Great Britain was induced to take the province under
their immediate care. The proprietors, (except Lord Granville) accepted of L.
22.500 sterling, from the crown, for the property and jurisdiction. This
agreement was ratified by act of Parliament in 1729.

For the relief of poor indigent people of Great Britain and Ireland, and for
the security of Carolina, a project was formed for planting a colony between
the rivers Savannah and Alatamaha. Accordingly, application being made to King
George the second: he issued letters patent,

The country, now called Kentucky, was well known to the Indian traders, many
years before its settlement. They gave a description of it to Lewis Evans,

1773.] Four years after, Col. Boon and his family, with five other families,
who were joined by forty men from Powle's valley, began the settlement of
KENTUCKY, This settlement was made in violation of the Treaty, in 1768, at Fort
Stanwix, which expressly stipulates, that this tract of country should be
reserved for the western nations hunt upon, until they and the crown of England
should otherwise agree. This has (...) one great cause of the enmity of those
Indian nations to the Virginians. [ Col. (...)
which is now one of the most growing colonies, perhaps, in the world, and was
erected into an independent state, by act of Congress, December 6th, 1790, and
received into the Union, June 1st, 1792.

The tract of country called VERMONT* before the late war, was claimed both by
New York and New Hampshire. When ho^^^^ties commenced between Great Britain and
her Colonies, the inhabitants considering themselves as in a state of nature,
as to civil government, and not within any legal jurisdiction, associated and
formed for themselves a constitution of government. Under this constitution,
they have ever since continued to exercise all the powers of an independent
State. Vermont was not admitted into union with the other states till March 4th
1791; yet we may venture to date her political existence as a separate
government,

The extensive tract of country lying northwest of the Ohio River, within the
limits of the United States, was erected into a separate ^^^porary government,

Thus we have given a summary view of the first discoveries and progressive
settlement of North America in their chronological order.

The following recapitulation will comprehend the whole in (...) view.

Names of places. When settled. By whom. Quebec, 1608 By the French. Virginia,
June 10, 1610 By Lord De la War. Newfoundland, June, 1610 By Governor John Guy.
New York, about 1614 By the Dutch. New Jersey, Plymouth, 1620 By part of Mr.
Robinson's cong^^gation. New Hampshire, 1623 By a small English colony near the
mouth of Piscataqua river. Delaware, 1627 By the Swedes and Fins. Pennsylvania,
Massachusetts Bay, 1628 By Capt. John Endicot and company. Maryland, 1633 By
Lord Baltimore, with a of Roman Catholics. Connecticut, 1635 By Mr. Fenwick, at
Saybrook, (...) the mouth of Connecticut river. Rhode Island, 1635 By Mr. Roger
Williams and his persecuted brethren. New Jersey. 1664 Granted to the Duke of
York (...) Charles II. and made a distinct government, and settled some time
before this by the English. South Carolina 1669 By Governor Sail.
Pennsylvania, 1682 By William Penn, with a colony of Quakers. North Carolina,
about 1728 Erected into a separate government, settled before by the English.
Georgia, 1732 By General Oglethorpe. Kentucky, 1773 By Col. Daniel Boon.
Vermont about 1764 By emigrants from Connecticut and other parts of
New England. Territory N. W. of Ohio river. 1787 By the Ohio and other
companies.

The above dates are from the periods, when the first permanent settlements
were made.

NORTH AMERICA
BOUNDARIES AND EXTENT.

NORTH AMERICA comprehends all that part of the western continent which lies
north of the isthmus of Darien, extending north and south from about the 10th
degree north latitude, to the north pole; and east and west from the Atlantic
to the Pacific Ocean, between the 45th and 165th degrees of west longitude from
London. Beyond the 70th degree N. Lat. few discoveries have been made. In July
1779, Capt. Cook proceeded as far as lat. 71, when he came to a solid body of
ice extending from continent to continent.

BAYS, SOUNDS, STRAITS AND ISLANDS. Of these (except those in the United
States, which we shall describe under that head) we know little more than their
names. Baffin's Bay, lying between the 70th and 80th degrees N. Lat. is the
largest and most northern, that has yet been discovered in N. America. It opens
into the Atlantic ocean through Baffin's and Davis's Straits, between Cape
Chidley, on the Labrador coast, and Cape Farewell. It communicates with
Hudson's Bay to the south, through a cluster of islands. In this capacious bay
or gulf, is James Island, the south point of which is called Cape Bedford; and
the smaller islands of Waygate and Disko. Davis's Straits separate Greenland
from the American continent, and are between Cape Walsingham, on James island,
and South Bay in Greenland, where they are about 60 leagues broad, and extend
from the 67th to the 71st degrees of lat. above Disko island. The most southern
point of Greenland is called Cape Farewell.

Hudson's Bay took its name from Henry Hudson, who discovered it in 1610. It
lies between 51 and 69 degrees of north latitude. The eastern boundary of the
Bay is Terra de Labrador; the northern part has a straight coast, facing the
bay, guarded with a line of isles innumerable. A vast bay, called the
Archiwinnipy Sea, lies within it, and opens into Hudson's bay* by means of
gulf Hazard; through which the Beluga whales pass in great numbers. The
entrance of the Bay, from the Atlantic ocean, after leaving* to the north, Cape
Farewell and Davis's Straits, is between Resolution isles on the north, and
Button's isles, on the Labrador coast, to the south, forming the eastern
extremity of Hudson's straits.

The coasts are very high* rocky and rugged at top; in some places precipitous,
but sometimes exhibit extensive beaches. The islands of Salisbury, Nottingham,
and Digges are very lofty and naked: The depth of water in the middle of the
Bay is 140 fathoms. From Cape Churchill to the south end of the bay, are
regular soundings; (...) the shore, shallow, with muddy or sandy bottom. To the
northward of Churchill, the soundings are irregular, the bottom rocky, and in
some parts the rocks appear above the surface at low water.

James's Bay lies at the bottom, or most southern part of Hudson's Bay, with
which it communicates, and divides New-Britain (...) South Wales. To the
northwestward of Hudson's bay is an extensive chain of lakes, among which is
Lake Menichlick, Lat. 61^ Long. 105 W. North of this, is Lake Dobount, to the
northward of which lies the extensive country of the northern Indians. West of
these lakes, between the latitudes of 60 and 66 degrees, after passing a large
cluster of unnamed lakes, lies the lake or sea Arathapescow, whose southern
shores are inhabited by the Arathapescow Indians. North of this, and near the
Arctic circle, is Lake Edlande, around which live the Dog-ribbed Indians.
Further north, is Buffaloe Lake, near which, is Copper Mine River, in lat. 72
N. and Long. 119 W. of Greenwich. The Copper Mine Indians inhabit this country.

Between Copper Mine River, (which according to Mr. Herne ^^^ties into the
Northern sea, where the tide rises 12 or 14 feet, and which in its whole course
is encumbered with shoals and falls) and the North west coast of America, is an
extensive tract of unexplored country. As you descend from north to south on
the western coast of America, (...) south of the Arctic circle, you come to
Cape Prince of Wales, opposite East Cape on the eastern Continent; and here the
two Continent approach nearest to each other. Proceeding southward you pass
Nort^^ Sound, Cape Stephen's, Shoalness, Bristol Bay, Prince William's Sound,
Cook's River, Admiralty Bay and Port Mulgrave, No^^^ Sound. etc. From Nootka
Sound proceeding south, you pass the unexplored country of New Albion, thence
to California, and New Mexico.

DIVISIONS OF NORTH AMERICA.
THE vast tract of country, bounded west by the Pacific Ocean, south and east
by California, New Mexico and Louisiana -- the United States, Canada and the
Atlantic ocean, and extending as far north (...) the country is habitable (a
few scattered English, French, and some other European settlements excepted) is
inhabited wholly by various nations and tribes of Indians. The Indians, also
possess large tracts of country within the Spanish American, and British
dominions. Those part^^ North America, not inhabited by Indians, belong (if we
incl^^^ Greenland) to Denmark, Great Britain, the American States, and Spain.
Spain claims East and West Florida, and all west of the Missisippi, and south
of the northern boundaries of Louisiana, North Mexico and California. Great
Britain, claims all the country inhabited by Europeans, lying north and east of
the United States, ex^^^ Greenland, which belongs to Denmark. The remaining
part is (...) territory of the Fifteen United States. The particular provinces
(...) States, are exhibited in the following Table.

TABLE
Belonging to Countries, Provinces and States. Number of Inhabitants. Chief
Towns. Denin. Greenland 10,000 New Herrnhut British Provinces. New Britain
unknown Upper Canada 20,000 Kingston, Detroit, Niagara Lower Canada Cape Breton
1. 130,000 Quebec, Montreal 1,000 Sidney, Louisburgh New Brunswick Nova Scotia
35,000 Fredericktown Nova Scotia Halifax Nova Scotia St. John's Isl. in 1783
5,000 Charlottetown Newfoundland Island 7,000 Placentia, St. John's United
States of America. Vermont 85,539 Windsor, Rutland New Hampshire 141,885
Portsmouth, Concord Massachusetts District of Maine 378,787 Boston, Salem,
Newbury Port Massachusetts District of Maine 96,540 Portland, Hallowell Rhode
Island 68,825 Newport, Providence Connecticut 237,946 New Haven, Hartford New
York 340,120 New York, Albany New Jersey 184,139 Trenton, Burling. Brunswick
Pennsylvania 434,373 Philadelphia, Lancaster Delaware 59,094 Dover, Wilmington,
Newcastle Maryland 319,728 Annapolis, Baltimore Virginia 747,610 Richmond,
Petersb. Norsolk Kentucky 73,677 Lexington North Carolina 393,751 Newbern,
Edenton* Halifax South Carolina 249,073 Charleston, Columbia Georgia 82,548
Savannah, Augusta Territory S. of Ohio 35,691 Abingdon Territory N. W. of Ohio
Marietta Span. Provin. East Florida Augustine West Florida Pensacola Louisiana
New Orleans New Mexico St. Fee California St. Juan Mexico, or New Spain Mexico

GREENLAND.
THIS extensive country properly belongs to neither of the two continents;
unless, as seems probable, it be united to America to the northward of Davis'
Straits. As it has commonly been described as belonging to Europe, we shall
give Guthrie's account of it in our description of that quarter of the Globe.
From its contiguity to, and probable union with the American continent,
however, it appears most proper to rank it among the countries of the western
continent^ and we have accordingly given it a place in the table of divisions
of N. America, and shall here give a new description of it from the best
authorities extant.

BOUNDARIES AND EXTENT. Greenland is bounded by Davis' Straits which divide it
from America, on the west; to the northward, it is not limited, except by some
unknown ocean, or by the North pole; east, it has the Icy sea, and a strait
which separate it from Iceland; southeast, it is washed by the Atlantic ocean;
south it terminates in a point called Cape Farewell, in latitude 59 degrees
north. From Cape Farewell, northeasterly, along the southeast sh^^^ the coast
has been discovered as far as 80 degrees north, and along the western shore, up
Davis' Straits, as far as the 78th degree.

Whether Greenland be an island, has not yet been decided, as (...) ship has
yet penetrated higher than the 78th degree, on account of the ice. That it is
not an island, but a part of the American continent, i^ rendered probable, 1
ft. Because Davis' Straits. These straits were first discovered by John Davis,
an Englishman, in 1585, in (...) to find a northwest passage to the East Indies.
or rather Bassin's Bay, grows narrower and narrower toward the 78th degree
north 2d. Because the coast, which in other places is very high toward the
sea, grows lower and lower northward. 3d. The tide, which at Capt. Farewell,
and as far up as Cockin's Sound, in latitude 65, rises (...) feet at the new
and full moon, decreases to the northward of Disko, so that in latitude 70 it
rises little more than 8 feet, and p^^ably continues to diminish, till there is
no tide at all. See "E^^is voyage to Hudson's Bay for the discovery of the N.
W. passage."(...) (...) to 54. From the reasons above, the English Capt.
Bassin, gave up all hope of finding (...) passage into the South Sea, through
Davis' Straits, and consequently concludes (...) Greenland joins America.
To the above may be added the relation of the Greenlanders, (which however
cannot be much depended on) viz. that the strait contracts itself (...) narrow
at last, that they can go on the ice so near to the other side a^ to be able to
call to the inhabitants, and that they can strike a fish (...) both sides at
once; but that there runs such a strong current from the north into the strait,
that they cannot pass it.

FACE OF THE COUNTRY. The western coast, which is washed by Davis' Straits is
high, rocky, barren land, which rears its (...) in most places, close to the
sea, in lofty mountains and inaccessiable cliffs, and meets the mariner's eye
40 leagues at sea. All these, except the excessively steep and slippery rocks,
are constantly covered with ice and snow, which has also, in length of time,
filled all the elevated plains, and many valleys, and probably increases
yearly. Those rocks and cliffs, which are bare of snow, look, at a distance, of
a dark brown, and quite naked as to any kind of growth; but by a nearer
inspection, they are found to be interspersed with many (...) of variegated
colors of stone, here and there spread over with a little earth and turf.

POPULATION. Most of the Greenlanders live to the southward of the (...) degree
of N. latitude, or as the inhabitats are wont to say, i^ the south; but no
Europeans live there, so that these parts are (...) (...) known. The European
colonies have fixed themselves to the northward of latitude 62.

Formerly the western part of Greenland was inhabited by (...) thousands of
Indians; but the small pox, in 1733, almost depopulated this country, which is
the finest part of Greenland.

A factor, who lived many years in the country, and whose accuracy, (...) far
as the subject will admit, may be depended on, found in the compass of 40
leagues, which was the circle of his dealings, 957 souls; constant residents,
besides occasional visitors. This part of Greenland is the most populous,
except Disko bay, (which is the best place for trade) and the southern parts.
In other places, a person may travel 60 miles and not meet with a single
person. Suppose however, that the country is inhabited for the space of 400
leagues, and that there are 1000 souls, for every 40 leagues, the amount would
be 10,000. The above mentioned factor, thinks that there are not more than
7000, because there are so many desert places. He asserts indeed that the
native Greenlanders, in 1730, amounted to 30,000; and when he made his first
calculation in 1746, there were still 20,000. Consequently since that time
their number has diminished at least one half.

CORIOSITIES. The astonishing mountains of ice in this country may well be
reckoned among its greatest curiosities. Twelve leagues from the colony at
Good-hope, lies the famous Ice glance, called in some charts, Eis-blink. It is
a large high field of ice, whose glance in the air may be seen for many leagues
at sea, resembling the Aurora Borealis. The mouth of an inlet, 4 leagues north
of the colony, is blocked up in such a manner, by many large pieces of ice
driven out by the ebb, that it forms a phenomenon like an arched ice bridge,
stretching from land to land, 8 leagues in length, and two in breadth. The
openings or arches of it are computed to be from 14 to 40 yards high. People
might pass through them in boats, if they were not afraid of the broken
fragments of ice that often fall from the top and sides of the arches. Places
are found here, where Greenland houses once stood, which proves that the mouth
of this harbor was once open.

Nothing can exhibit a more dreadful, and at the same time a more dazzling
appearance, than those prodigious masses of ice that surround the whole coast
in various forms, reflecting a multitude of colors from the sun beams, and
calling to mind the enchanting scenes of romance. Such prospects they yield in
calm weather, but when the wind begins to blow, and the waves to rise in vast
billows* the violent shocks of those pieces of ice, dashing against one
another, fill the mind with horror.

The ice mountains are pieces of ice floating in the sea, of an amazing size,
and of very curious forms: Some have the appearance of a church or castle, with
square or pointed turrets; others, of a ship under sail; and people have often
given themselves fruitless toil to go on board and pilot the imaginary ship
into harbor; others look like large islands, with plains, allies and hills,
which often rear their heads 200 yards above the level of the sea: In Disko
Bay, on a ground which the whale fishers say is 300 fathoms deep, several such
ice mountains have stood fast for many years, one of which they call the city
Harlem, and another Amsterdam. This ice for the most part, is very hard, clear,
and transparent as glass, of a pale green color, and some pieces sky blue --
but if you melt it and let it freeze again it becomes white.

TIDES, SPRINGS AND RIVERS. The tide flows from south to north, and rises in
common 3 fathoms in the south; two, at Good Hope, and one at Disko, and
continues to decrease as you proceed north. It is remarkable that the wells and
springs in the country rise and fall, in exact conformity to the waxing and
waning of the moon, or the ebbing and flowing of the tides. In winter*
especially, when all is covered over with ice and snow, new and brisk fountains
of water rise at spring tides, and disappear again in places where there is
commonly no water, and which are elevated far above the level of the (...)

This country, in general, is not so well supplied with water, as (...) hilly
countries in warmer regions. Most of the springs which (...) clear and
wholesome water, have no other supply than the melted ^^imbibed snow water. In
the valleys, large ponds are thinly ^^^spersed, which are fed by the ice and
snow distilling from the mountains. The little streams from the hills, called
salmon elves, are (...) so considerable as the hill waters, in more southern
latitudes.

The country does not admit of large rivers. The valleys are (...) long, for
the mountains presently shoot up aloft, and are covered (...) perpetual ice,
which melts very little, and of course affords the (...) but a scanty supply.
Many springs are therefore dry in summer* and the winter are arrested by the
frost. Men and beasts would then (...) of thirst, if a wise providence had not
ordered; that in the (...) winter, rains and thaws sometimes happen, when the
filtrated (...) water gathers in pools under the ice, and is thence taken by
the inhabitants.

AIR AND SEASONS. As this country is covered, in most (...) with everlasting
ice and snow, it is easy to imagine that it must extremely cold. In those
places where the inhabitants enjoy the (...) of the sun for an hour or two in a
day in winter, the cold is tolerable though even there strong liquors will
freeze, when out of the (...) rooms. But where the sun entirely forsakes the
horizon, while (...) are drinking tea, the emptied cup will freeze on the
table. Mr. Paul (...) in his Journal of January 7th, 1738, records the
following effects (...) cold at Disko: "The ice and hoar frost reaches through
the chimney to the stove's mouth, without being thawed by the fire in the day
(...) Over the chimney is an arch of frost with small holes, through (...) the
smoke discharges itself. The door and walls are as if they (...) plastered over
with frost, and, which is scarcely credible, beds are ^^en frozen to the
bedsted. The linen is frozen to the drawers. (...) ^^^er eider-down-bed and the
pillows are quite stiff with frost (...) inch thick, from the breath. The flesh
barrels must be hewn in (...) to get out the meat."

The most severe cold commences in January, and is so piercing (...) February
and March, that the stones split, and the sea reeks like (...) oven, especially
in the bays. When this frost smoke, as it is called (...) wasted into the
colder atmosphere, if freezes into little icy parti^^^ which are driven by the
wind, and create such a keen cold on the (...) that one can scarcely leave the
house without being frozen.

We may fix the limits of their summer from the beginning of (...) to the end
of September; for during these five months the native^^^ camp in tents. The
ground however is not thawed till June, and (...) only on the surface, and till
then, it does not entirely leave off ^^^ing. In August it begins to snow again,
but the permanent snow (...) not fall till October. In the long summer days,
the weather is so (...) as to oblige the inhabitants to throw off their warm
garments. (...) heat, in a clear sunshine upon the open sea, has been known to
(...) great, as to melt the pitch on the sides of a ship.

In summer there is no night in this country. Beyond the 66th degree, in the
longest days, the sun does not set; and at Good-Hope latitude 64, the sun does
not set till to minutes after to 10 o'clock, (...) rises again 50 minutes after
one o'clock. The winter days are (...)

PRODUCTIONS, MINERAL AND VEGETABLE. The amiantus and asbestos, or stone flax,
is found in plenty in the hills of this country. There are also quartzes and
crystals in pretty large pieces, coarse marble of all colors, iron stone and
ore, and a soft stone called by some, French chalk, by others bastard marble,
out of which the inhabitants make all their vessels. When rubbed with oil, it
assumes a beautiful marble smoothness, and grows more firm and solid by being
used over the fire.

Among the vegetables of this cold country, are sorrel of various sorts,
angelica, wild tansey, scurvy grass, in great quantities, wild rosemary,
dandelions in plenty, and various sorts of grass. Whortle-berries and
cranberries grow here. Europeans have sown barley and oats, which grow as high
and thrifty as in warmer climates, but seldom advance so far as to ear, and
never, even in the warmest places, to maturity, because the frosty nights begin
too soon.

ANIMALS. Unfruitful as this country is, it affords food for some, though but
few kinds of beasts, which furnish the natives with food and raiment. Of the
wild game, are white hares, rein deer, foxes, and white bears, who are fierce
and mischievous. The Greenlanders have no tame animals but a species of dogs,
which resemble wolves.

The Seal of Greenland, is a quadruped, and amphibious. There are several sorts
of them, but they are alike in having a tough hairy skin, like the land
animals, except that the hair is thick, short and smooth. They have two short
feet before, standing downwards, for the convenience of rowing, and behind they
have also two standing outward for steering, one on each side of the tail.
They have five toes on their feet, each consisting of four joints, and
terminating in a long nail or claw, with which they climb the ice or rocks. The
hinder feet are webbed like those of a goose, so that in swimming they spread
them like a fan. The water is their proper element, and fish their food. Their
flesh affords the inhabitants a nourishing food, and their skins an excellent
warm covering.

RELIGION. The first missionaries among the Greenlanders, entertained a doubt
whether they had any conception of a Divine Being, as they had no word in their
language by which to designate him. When they were asked who made the heaven
and earth and all visible things? their answer was -- "We know not; or, we
don't know him; or* it must have been some mighty person: or, things always
have been as they are, and will always remain so." But when they understood
their language better, they found they had some vague notions concerning the
soul, and spirits; and were solicitous about the state after death. It was
evident also that they had some faint conceptions of a Divine Being.

They believe in the doctrine of the transmigration of souls -- that the soul
is a spiritual essence, quite different from the body -- that it needs no
corporeal nourishment -- that it survives the body, and lives in a future
better state, which they believe will never end. But they have very different
ideas of this state. Many place their Elysium in the abysses of the ocean, or
the bowels of the earth, and think the deep cavities of the rocks are the
avenues leading to it. There dwells Torngarsuck The name of the good Spirit,
answering to the heathen Jupiter.
and his mother; there a joyous summer is perpetual, and a shining sun is
obscured by no night; there is the limpid stream, and abundance of sowls,
fishes, rein deer and their beloved seals, and th^^ are all to be caught
without toil, may they are even found in a (...) kettle boiling alive. But to
those delightful seats none must approach but those who have been dextrous and
diligent at their work, (for (...) their grand idea of virtue) that have
performed great exploits, (...) have mastered many whales and seals, have
undergone great hard (...) have been drowned in the sea or died in childbed.
The disemb^^^^ spirit does not enter dancing into the Elysian fields, but must
spend (...) whole days, some say longer, in sliding down a rugged rock, which
i^ thereby smeared with blood and gore. Those unfortunate souls which are
obliged to perform this rough journey in the cold winter, or i^ boisterous
weather, are peculiar objects of their pity, because they (...) be easily
destroyed on the road, which destruction they call the (...) death, and
describe it as a perfect extinction, and this, to them, is the (...) dreadful
consideration. Therefore during these five days or more, (...) surviving
relations must abstain from certain meats, and from all (...) work. (except the
necessary fishing) that the soul may not be dist^^^ or perish in its perilous
passage. From all which, it is plain that (...) Greenlanders, stupid as they
have been represented, have an idea (...) the good will be rewarded -- and the
bad punished -- and that they conceive a horror at the thoughts of the entire
annihilation of (...) soul.

Others have their paradise among the celestial bodies, and they imagine their
flight thither so easy and rapid, that the soul rests the very (...) evening in
the mansion of the moon, who was a Greenlander, and (...) it can dance and play
at ball with the rest of the souls; for they (...) the northern lights to be
the dance of sportive souls. The souls in (...) paradise, are placed in tents
round a vast take abounding with fish (...) fowl. When this lake overflows, it
rains on the earth, but should ^^dam once break, there would be a general
deluge.

The wiser Greenlanders, who consider the soul as a spiritual ^^^^terial
essence, laugh at all this, and say, if there should be such a material,
luxuriant paradise, where souls could entertain themselves (...) hunting, still
it can only endure for a time. Afterward the souls (...) certainly be conveyed
to the peaceful mansions. But they know (...) what their food or employment
will be. On the other hand, they (...) their hell in the subterraneous regions,
which are devoid of light (...) heat, and filled with perpetual terror and
anxiety. This last (...) people lead a regular life, and refrain from every
thing they think (...) evil.

HISTORY. West Greenland was first peopled by Europeans (...) eighth century.
At that time a company of Icelanders, headed by (...) Ericke Rande, were by
accident driven on the coast. On his (...) he represented the country in such a
favorable light, that some ^^^ies again followed him thither, where they soon
became a (...) colony, and bestowed on their new habitation the name of (...)
land, or Greenland, on account of its verdant appearance. This (...) was
converted to christianity by a missionary from Norway, (...) thither by the
celebrated Olaf, the first Norwegian monarch (...) embraced the true religion.
The Greenland settlement continues increase and thrive under his protection;
and in a little time the ^^^try was provided with many towns, churches,
convents, bishops, (...) under the jurisdiction of the archbishop of Drontheim.
A co^^^able commerce was carried on between Greenland and Norway; and a regular
intercourse maintained between the two countries till the year 1406, when the
last bishop was sent over. From that time all correspondence was cut off, and
all knowledge of Greenland has been buried in oblivion.

This strange and abrupt cessation of all trade and intercourse has been
attributed to various causes; but the most probable is the following. The
colony, from its first settlement, had been harassed by the natives, a
barbarous and savage people; agreeing in customs, garb, and appearance, with
the Esquimaux found about Hudson's Bay. This nation, called Schrellings, at
length prevailed against the Iceland settlers who inhabited the western
district, and exterminated them in the 14th century: insomuch that when their
brethren of the eastern district came to their assistance, they found nothing
alive but some cattle and ^^ocks of sheep running wild about the country.
Perhaps they themselves afterward experienced the same fate, and were totally
destroyed by these Schrellings, whose descendants still inhabit the western
parts of Greenland, and from tradition confirm this conjecture. They affirm
that the houses and villages, whose ruins still appear, were inhabited by a
nation of strangers whom their ancestors destroyed. There are reasons, however,
for believing that there may be still some descendants of the ancient Iceland
colony remaining in the eastern district, though they cannot be visited by
land, on account of the stupendous mountains, perpetually covered with snow,
which divide the two parts of Greenland; while they have been rendered
inaccessible by sea, by the vast quantity of ice driven from Spitzbergen, or
east Greenland. One would imagine that there must have been some considerable
alteration in the northern parts of the world since the 15th century* so that
the coast of Greenland is now become almost totally inaccessible, though
formerly visited with very little difficulty. It is also natural to ask, by
what means the people of the eastern colony surmounted the abovementioned
obstacles when they went to the assistance of their western friends; how they
returned to their own country: and in what manner historians learned the
success of their expedition? Concerning all this we have very little
satisfactory information. All that can be learned from the most authentic
records is, that Greenland was divided into two districts, called West Bygd and
East Bygd: that the western division contained four parishes and 100 villages:
that the eastern district was still more flourishing, as being nearer to
Iceland, sooner settled, and more frequented by shipping from Norway. There are
also many accounts, though most of them romantic and slightly attested, which
render it probable that part of the eastern colony still subsists, who, at some
time or other, may have given the imperfect relation above mentioned. This
colony, in ancient times, certainly comprehended twelve extensive parishes, one
hundred and ninety villages; a bishop's see, and two monasteries. The present
inhabitants of the western district are entirely ignorant of this part, from
which they are divided by rocks, mountains, and deserts, and still more
effectually by their apprehension: for they believe the eastern Greenlanders to
be a cruel, barbarous nation, that destroy and eat all strangers who fall into
their hands. About a century after all intercourse between Norway and Greenland
had ceased, several ships were sent successively by the kings of Denmark, in
order to discover the eastern district; but all of them miscarried. Among (...)
adventurers, Mogens Heinson, after having surmounted many di^^^ties and
dangers, got sight of the land, which, however he could (...) approach. At his
return, he pretended that the ship was arrested in (...) middle of her course,
by certain rocks of loadstone at the bottom of sea. The same year, 1576, in
which this attempt was made, ha^^^ rendered remarkable by the voyage of Captain
Martin Frobisher* upon the same errand by Queen Elizabeth. He likewise (...)
the land; but could not reach it, and therefore returned to Eng^^^ yet not
before he had sailed sixty leagues in the strait, which ^^^^tains his name, and
landed on several islands, where he had some ^^^munication with the natives. He
had likewise taken possession (...) country in the name of Queen Elizabeth; and
brought away (...) pieces of heavy black stone, from which the refiners of
London ex^^ed a certain proportion of gold. In the ensuing spring, he under^^^
second voyage at the head of a small squadron, equipped at the ex^^^ of the
public; entered the straits a second time; discovered upon (...) island a gold
and silver mine; bestowed names on different bays, ^^^ands and headlands; and
brought away a lading of ore, together (...) two natives, a male and a female,
whom the English Kidnapped.

Such was the success of this voyage, that another armament was ^^^ted out
under the auspices of Admiral Frobisher, consisting of 15 (...) including a
considerable number of soldiers, miners, smelters, car^^^ters, and bakers, to
remain all winter near the mines in a wooden (...) the different pieces of
which they carried out in their transported. They met with boisterous weather,
impenetrable fogs, and violent ^^^rents upon the coast of Greenland, which
retarded their operat^^^ until the season was far advanced. Part of their
wooden fort was (...) at sea; and they had neither provision nor fuel
sufficient for the ^^^^ter. The admiral therefore determined to return with as
much (...) he could procure: of this they obtained large quantities out (...)
new mine, to which they gave the name of the Countess of (...) They likewise
built an house of stone and lime, provided with ov^^ and here, with a view to
conciliate the affection of the natives, (...) left a quantity of small
morrice-bells, knives, beads, looking-gl^^^ leaden pictures, and other toys,
together with several loaves of (...) They buried the timber of the fort where
it could be easily (...) next year; and sowed corn, peace, and other grain, by
way of ^^^iment, to know what the country would produce. Having taken (...)
precautions, they sailed from thence in the beginning of September (...) and
after a month's stormy passage, arrived in England: but this ^^^^ble design was
never prosecuted.

Christian IV. king of Denmark, being desirous of discovering (...) old
Greenland settlement, sent three ships thither, under the ^^^mand of Captain
Godske Lindenow; who is said to have reach^^ east coast of Greenland, where he
traded with the savage inhabit^^^ such as they are still found in the western
district, but saw no (...) a civilized people. Had he actually landed in the
eastern (...) he must have perceived some remains of the ancient colony, (...)
the ruins of their convents and villages. Lindenow kidnapped (...) the natives,
who were conveyed to Copenhagen; and the same (...) fraud Nothing can be more
inhuman and repugnant to the dictates of (...) justice, than this practice of
tearing away poor creatures from their families and connections: unless we
suppose them altogether destitute of natural affection; and that this was not
the case with those poor Greenlanders, some of whom were brought alive to
Copenhagen, appears from the whole tenor of their conduct, upon their first
capture, and during their confinement in Denmark. When first captivated, they
rent the air with their cries and lamentations: they even leaped into the sea;
and, when taken on board, for some time refused all sustenance. Their eyes were
continually turned toward their dear country, and their faces always bathed in
tears. Even the countenance of his Danish majesty, and the caresses of the
court and people, could not alleviate their grief. One of them was perceived to
shed tears always when (...) (...) an infant in the mother's arms; a
circumstance from whence it was naturally concluded, that he had left his wife
with a young child in Greenland. Two of them went to sea in their little canoes
in hope of reaching Greenland; (...) one of them was retaken. Other two made
the same attempt; but were driven by a storm on the coast of Schonen, where
they were apprehended by the pea^ants, and reconveyed to Copenhagen. One of
them afterward died of a fever, caught in fishing pearl, during the winter,
for the governor of (...). The rest lived some years in Denmark; but at length,
seeing no prospect of being able to revisit their native country, they sunk
into a kind of melancholy disorder, and expired.
was practiced by other two ships which sailed into (...) Straits, where they
discovered diverse fine harbors and delightful meadows covered with verdure. In
some places they are said to have found a considerable quantity of ore, every
hundred pounds of which yielded twenty six ounces of silver. The same Admiral
Lindenow, made another voyage to the coast of Greenland in the year 1606,
directing his course to the westward of Cape Farewell. He coasted along the
straits of Davis; and having made some observations on the face of the country,
the harbors and islands, returned to Denmark. Carsten Richards, being detached
with two ships on the same discovery, descried the high land on the eastern
side of Greenland; but was hindered by the ice from approaching the shore.

Other expeditions of the same nature have been planned and executed with the
same bad success, under the auspices of a Danish company of merchants. Two
ships returned from the western part of Greenland loaded with a kind of yellow
sand, supposed to contain a large proportion of gold. This being assayed by the
goldsmiths of Copenhagen, was condemned as useless, and thrown overboard: but
from a small quantity of this sand, which was reserved as a curiosity, an
expert chemist afterward extracted a quantity of pure gold. The captain, who
brought home this adventure, was so chagrined at his disappointment, that he
died of grief, without having left any directions concerning the place where
the sand had been discovered. In the year 1654, Henry Moller, a rich Dane,
equipped a vessel under the command of David de Nelles, who sailed to the west
coast of Greenland, from which he carried off three women of the country. Other
efforts have been made, under the efforts of the Danish king, for the discovery
and recovery of the old Iceland colony in Greenland: but all of them
miscarried, and people began to look upon such expeditions as wild and
chimerical. At length the Greenland company at Bergen in Norway, transported a
colony to the western coast, about the 64th degree of latitude, and these
Norwegians sailed in the year 1712, accompanied by the Reverend Hans Egede, to
whose care, ability, and precision, we owe the best and most authentic account
of modern Greenland. This gentleman endeavored to reach the eastern district,
by coasting southwards, and advanced as far as the States Promontory: but the
season of the year, and continual storms, obliged him to return; (...) as he
could not even find the Strait of Frobisher, he concluded the no such place
ever existed. In the year 1724, a ship, being equip^^ by the company, sailed on
this discovery, with a view to land on (...) east side opposite to Iceland; but
the vast shoals of ice, which barri^^^ed that part of the coast, rendered this
scheme impracticable. (...) Danish majesty, in the year 1728, caused horses to
be transported, (...) Greenland, in hopes that the settlers might, by their
means, travel (...) land to the eastern district; but the icy mountains were
found impossible. Finally, lieutenant Richards, in a ship which had wintered
(...) the new Danish colony, attempted, in his return to Denmark, to (...) on
the eastern shore; ^ut all his endeavors proved abortive.

Mr. Egede is of opinion, that the only practicable method of ^^^^ing, that
part of the country, will be to coast north-about in small ^^^sels, between the
great flakes of ice and the shore; as the Greenlanders have declared, that the
currents continually issuing from the (...) and inlets, and running south-west
wards along the shore, hinder (...) ice from adhering to the land; so that
there is always a channel (...) through which vessels of small burden might
pass, especially if (...) were built at suitable distances on the shore, for
the conveni^^ and direction of the adventures.

BRITISH AMERICA.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.

UNDER the general name of British America, we comprehend (...) vast and
unknown extent of country, bounded south, by the United States of America, and
the Atlantic ocean; east, by the same (...) and Davis's Straits, which divide
it from Greenland; extending (...) to the northern limits of the Hudson's bay
charter; and westward (...) an unknown extent -- Lying between 42 30 and 70
north latit^^^ and between 50 and 105 W. Lon. from Greenwich; and between 25 E.
and 30 W. Lon. from Philadelphia.

DIVISIONS.] British America is divided into four Provinces, (...) 1. Upper
Canada; 2. Lower Canada, to which are annexed New Britain, or the country lying
round Hudson's Bay, and the Island of Cape Breton; 3. New Brunswick; 4. Nova
Scotia, to which is (...) nexed the island of St. John's Besides these there is
the island of Newfoundland, which is governed by the admiral for the time (...)
and two lieutenant governors, who reside at Placentia and St. John's. The
troops stationed at Newfoundland, however, are subject to the orders of the
Governor General of the four British Provinces.

NEW BRITAIN.
THE country lying round Hudson's Bay, or the country of (...) quimaux,
comprehending Labrador, New North and South (...) has obtained the general name
of NEW BRITAIN, and is attach^^ the government of Lower Canada. A
superintendant of trade (...) pointed by the Governor General of the four
British Provinces (...) responsible to him, resides at Labrador.

RIVERS.] The principal rivers which water this country, (...) Wager, Monk,
Seal, Pockerekesko, Churchill, Nelson, Hayes, ^^^^^^ern Albany and Moose
rivers, all which empty into Hudson's and (...) Bay, from the west. The mouths
of all the rivers are filled with shoals, except Churchill's, in which the
largest ships may lie; but ten miles higher, the channel is obstructed by sand
banks. All the rivers as far as they have been explored, are full of rapids and
cataracts, from 10 to 60 feet perpendicular. Down these rivers the Indian
traders find a quick passage; but their return is a labor of many months.

FACE OF THE COUNTRY, SOIL, etc.} As far inland as the Hudson Bay company have
settlements, which is 600 miles to the west of fort Churchill, at a place
called Hudson House, Lat. 53, Lon. 106 27 W. from London, is flat country: nor
is it known how far to the eastward, the great chain seen by navigators from
the Pacific Ocean, branches off. From Moose river, or the bottom of the Bay, to
Cape Churchill, the land is flat, marshy and wooded with pines, birch, larch
and willows. From Cape Churchill, to Wager's river, the coasts are high and
rocky to the very sea, and woodless except the mouths of Pockerekesko and Seal
rivers. The hills on their back are naked, nor are there any trees for a great
distance inland.

The eastern coast is barren, past the efforts of cultivation. The surface is
every where uneven, and covered with masses of stone of an amazing size. It is
a country of fruitless valleys and frightful mountains, some of an astonishing
height. The valleys are full of lakes, formed not from springs, but rain and
snow, so chilly as to be productive of a few small trout only. The mountains
have here and there a blighted shrub, or a little moss. The valleys are full of
crooked, stanted trees, pines, fir, birch, and cedars, or rather a species of
the Juniper. In Lat. 60, on this coast, vegetation ceases. The whole shore,
like that on the west, is faced with islands at some distance from lane.

INHABITANTS, CUSTOMS, etc.] The inhabitants among the mountains are Indians;
along the coasts, Esquimaux. The dogs of the former are very small; of the
latter large, and headed like a fox. Notwithstanding they have rein deer, they
never train them for the sledge, but apply their dogs to that use. Walruses
visit a place called Nuchvunk, in lat. 60* during winter; from thence the
natives purchase the teeth, with which they head their darts.

The laudable zeal of the Moravian clergy induced them, in the year 1752, to
send missionaries from Greenland to this country. They fixed on Nesbit's
harbor for their settlement; but of the first party, some of them were killed,
and the others driven away. In 1764, under the protection of the British
government, another attempt was made. The missionaries were well received by
the Esquimaux, and the mission goes on with success.

CLIMATE.] The climate, even about Haye's river, in only lat. 57, is, during
winter, excessively cold. The snows begin to fall in October, and continue
falling by intervals the whole winter; and, when the frost is most rigorous, in
form of the finest land. The ice on the rivers is eight feet thick. Port wine
freezes into a solid mass; brandy coagulates. The very breath falls on the
blankets of the beds in the form of a hoar frost, and the bed clothes often are
found frozen to the wall. The sun rises, in the shortest day, five minutes past
nine, and sets five minutes before three. In the longest day the sun rises at
three, and sets about nine. The ice begins to disappear in May, and h^t weather
commences about the middle of June, which at times is so violent as to scorch
the faces of the hunters. Thunder is not frequent, but very violent. But there
must be a great difference of heat and cold in this vast extent, which reaches
from lat. 50. 40, to lat. 63 north. During winter the firmament is not without
its beauties. Moc^ (...) halos are not unfrequent; they are very bright, and
richly tinged (...) all the colors of the rainbow. The sun rises and sets with
a (...) cone of yellowish light. The night is enlivened with the Aurora (...)
realis, which spreads a thousand different lights and colors over (...) whole
concave of the sky, not to be defaced even by the splendo^^ (...) the full
moon; and the stars are of a fiery redness.

ANIMALS.] The animals of these countries are, the moose (...) stags, rein
deer, bears, tigers, buffaloes, wolves, foxes, beavert, (...) lynxcs, martins,
squirrels, ermines, wild cats, and hares. The rein (...) pass in vast herds
toward the north in October, seeking the ex^^^ cold. The male polar bears rove
out at sea, on the floating ice, (...) of the winter, and till June; the
females lie concealed in the (...) or beneath the banks of rivers, till March,
when they come (...) with their twin cubs, and bend their course to the sea in
search of the consorts. Several are killed in their passage; and those that
wounded show vast fury, roar hideously, and bite and throw up (...) air even
their own progeny. The females and the young, wh^^ interrupted, continue their
way to the sea. In June the males (...) to shore, and by August are joined by
their consorts, with their (...) by that time of a considerable size. The
feathered kinds are, (...) bustards, ducks, growse, and all manner of wild
fowls. (...) multitudes of birds retire to this remote country, to Labrad^^
Newfoundland, from places more remotely south, perhaps fr^^ Antilles; and some
even of the most delicate little species. (...) them, with numbers of aquatic
fowls, are seen returning south^^^ with their young broods to more favorable
climates. The fava^^^ some respects regulate their months by the appearance of
birds; (...) have their goose month, from the vernal appearance of geese, fr^^^
south. All the growse kind, ravens, cinereous crows, titmouse,(...) Lapland
finch, brave the severest winter: and several of the (...) and owls seek
shelter in the woods. Of fish, there are whales, (...) seals, codfish, and a
white fish, preferable to herrings; and in (...) rivers and fresh waters, pike,
perch carp, and trout.

All the quadrupeds of these countries are clothed with a close, (...) warm
fur. In summer there is here, as in other places, a vari^^^ (...) the colors
of the several animals; when that season is over, (...) holds only for three
months, they all assume the livery of winter, (...) every sort of beasts, and
most of their fowls, are of the color of (...) snow; every thing animate and
inanimate is white. This is (...) (...) prising phenomenon. But what is yet
more surprising, and what is indeed one of the most striking things, that draw
the most inatt^^^^ to an admiration of the wisdom and goodness of Providence,
is (...) the dogs and cats from Britain that have been carried into Hu^^^ Bay,
on the approach of winter, have entirely changed their ^^^^nce, and acquired a
much longer, softer, and thicker coat of ha^^^ they had originally.

DISCOVERY AND COMMERCE.} The knowledge of these northern (...) countries was
owing to a project sta^^^ England for the discovery of a north west passage to
China (...) East Indies, as early as the year 1576. Since then it has be^^
^^quently dropped and as often revived, but never yet completed (...) from the
late voyages of discovery it seems probable, that no pr^^^^ passage ever can be
found. Frobisher discovered the Main of New Britain, or Terra de Labrador, and
those straits to which he has given his name. In 1585, John Davis failed from
Portsmouth, and viewed that and the more northern coasts, but he seems never to
have entered the bay. Hudson made three voyages on the same adventure, the
first in 1607, the second in 1608, and his third and last in 1610. This bold
and judicious navigator entered the straits that lead into the bay known by his
name, coasted a great part of it, and penetrated to eighty degrees and a half,
into the heart of the frozen zone. His ardour for the discovery not being
abated by the difficulties he struggled with in this empire of winter, and
world of frost and snow, he stayed here until the ensuing spring, and prepared,
in the beginning of 1611, to pursue his discoveries, but his crew, who suffered
equal hardships, without the same spirit to support them, mutinied, seized upon
him and seven of those who were most faithful to him, and committed them to the
fury of the icy seas, in an open boat. Hudson and his companions were either
swallowed up by the waves, or gaining the inhospitable coast, were destroyed by
the savages; but the ship and the rest of the men returned home.

Other attempts toward a discovery were made in 1612 and 1667; and a patent
for planting the country, with a charter for a company, was obtained in the
year 1670. In 1646 captain Ellis wintered as far north as 57 degrees and a
half, and captain Christopher attempted farther discoveries in 1361. But
besides these voyages, we are indebted to the Hudson's Bay company for a
journey by land; See page 93.
which throws much additional light on this matter, by affording what may be
called demonstration, how much farther North, at least in some parts of their
voyage, ships must go, before they can pass from one side of America to the
other. The northern Indians, who came down to the Company's factories to trade,
had brought to their knowledge a river, which on account of much copper being
sound near it, had obtained the name of the Copper Mine river. The Company
being desirous of examining into this matter with precision, directed Mr.
Hearne, a young gentleman in their service, and who having been brought up for
the navy, and served in it the war before last, was extremely well qualified
for the purpose, to proceed over land, under the convoy of those Indians, for
that river; which he had orders to survey, if possible, quite down to its exit
into the sea; to make observations for fixing the latitudes and longitudes; and
to bring home maps and drawings, both of it and the countries through which he
should pass.

Accordingly Mr. Hearne, set out from Prince of Wales's Fort, on Churchill
river, latitude 58 47' North, and longitude 94 7 West from Greenwich, on the
7th of December, 1770. Mr. Hearne on the 13th of July reached the Copper Mine
river, and found it all the way, even to its exit into the sea, incumbered with
shoals and falls, and emptying itself into it over a dry slat of the those, the
tide being then out, which seemed, by the edges of the ice to rise about 10 or
14 feet. This rise, on account of the falls, will carry it but a very small way
within the river's mouth, so that the water in it has not the least brackish
taste. Mr. Hearne is, nevertheless, sure of the place it emptied itself into
being the sea, or a branch of it, by the quantity of whale bone and seal skins
which the Esquimaux had at their ten's; and also by the number of seals which
he saw upon the ice. The sea, at the river's mouth, was full of islands and
shoals, as (...) as he could see, by the assistance of a pocket telescope: and
the ice was (...) (July 17th) broke up, but thawed away only for about three
(...) of a mile from the shore, and for a little way round the (...) shoals
which lay off the river's mouth. But he had the most (...) view of the sea when
he was about eight miles up the river, from (...) station the extreme parts of
it bore N. W. b. W. and N. E.

By the time Mr. Hearne had finished his survey of the river, (...) was about
one o'clock in the morning on the 18th, there (...) very thick fog and
drizzling rain; and as he had found the riv^^ sea, in every respect unlikely to
be of any utility, he thought is ^^cessary to wait for fair weather, to
determine the latitude more ^^^ly by observation; but by the extraordinary care
he took in ob^^^ the courses and distances, walking from Congecathawhachaga,
(...) had two very good observations, he thinks the latitude may be ^^^ed on
within 10' at the utmost. It appears from the map which (...) Hearne
constructed of this singular journey, that the month (...) Copper Mine river
lies in latitude 72 N. and longitude 25 W. (...) Churchill river; that is,
about 119 W. of Greenwich. Mr. (...) journey back from the Copper Mine river to
Churchill lasted (...) 30th 1772; so that he was absent almost a year and seven
(...) The unparalleled hardships he suffered, and the essential (...)
performed, have met with a suitable reward from his mast^^ (...) has been
several years governor of Prince of Wales's Fort, on Churchill river, where he
was taken prisoner by the French in 1782.

Though the adventurers failed in the original purpose for (...) they navigated
this bay, their project, even in its failure, has (...) great advantage to
England. The vast countries which surround Hudson's Bay, as we have already
observed, abound with animals, (...) and skins are excellent. In 1670, a
charter was granted to a (...) which does not consist of above nine or ten
persons, for the (...) trade to this bay, and they have acted under it ever
since with (...) benefit to the private men, who compose the company, though
(...) paratively with little advantage to Great Britain. The fur and (...)
trade might be carried on to a much greater extent, were it not ^^^^^ly in the
hands of this exclusive company, whose interested, not (...) iniquitous spirit,
has been the subject of long and just (...). The company employ four ships, and
130 seamen. They have (...) sorts, viz. Prince of Wales's fort, Churchill
river, Nelson, New (...) and Albany, which stand on the west side of the bay,
and are (...) oned by 186 men. The French, in May 1782, took and destroyed
(...) ^orts, and the settlements, etc. said to amount to the value of (...)
They export commodities to the value of 16,000l. and carry ^^^^turns to the
value of 29,340l, which yield to the revenue (...) This includes the fishery in
Hudson's Bay. This commerce, (...) it is, affords immense profits to the
company, and even some ad^^^es to Great Britain in general; for the commodities
(...) with the Indians for their skins and furs, are all manufactured ^^^tain;
and as the Indians are not very nice in their choice, such (...) are sent of
which there is the greatest plenty, and which, in th^^ (...) phrase, are drugs.
Though the workmanship too (...) to be in many respects so deficient, that no
civilized people (...) take it, it may be admired among the Indians. On the
other the skins and furs brought from Hudson's Bay, are manufa^^^ and afford
articles for trading with many nations of Europe, to great advantage. These
circumstances prove the immense benefit that would redound to Britain, by
throwing open the trade to Hudson's Bay, since even in its present restrained
state it is so advantageous. The only attempt made to trade with Labrador, has
been directed toward the fishery. Great Britain has no settlement here. The
annual produce of the fishery, amounts to upwards of 49,000l.

UPPER AND LOWER CANADA.
THE Provinces of Upper and Lower Canada, constituted by act of Parliament in
1791, comprehend the territory heretofore called Canada, or the Province of
Quebec.

SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 600 Miles. between Degrees. 61 and 81 61 and 81 W. Lon. from London, or
14 E. and 6 W. from Philadelphia. Breadth 550 Miles. Degrees. 42 30 and 52 N.
Latitude.

BOUNDARIES AND DIVISIONS.} Bounded north, by New Britain; east, by the Gulf of
St. Lawrence, and part of the Province of New Brunswick; south east and south,
by the District of Main, New Hampshire, Vermont, New York and the Lakes; the
western boundary is undefined. The Province of Upper Canada is the same, as
what is commonly called the Upper Country. It lies north of the great Lakes,
between the latitudes of 42 30 and 50, and is separated from New York by the
river St. Lawrence, here called the Cataraqui, and the Lakes Ontario and Erie.

Lower Canada lies on both sides the river St. Lawrence, between 61 and 71 W.
Lon. from London; and 45 and 52 N. Lat. and is bounded south by New Brunswick,
Maine, N. Hampshire, Vermont and New York; and west by Upper Canada.

The line which divides Upper from Lower Canada, commences at a stone boundary,
on the north bank of the Lake St. Francis, at the Cove west of Point au
Boudet, in the limit between the township of Lancaster and the Seigneurie of
New Longuevil, running along the said limit in the direction of north thirty
four degrees west, to the westernmost angle of the said Seigneurie of New
Longuevil; thence along the north western boundary of the Seigneurie of
Vandreuil, running north, twenty five degrees east, until it strikes the
Ottawas river; to ascend the said river into the Lake Tomiscanning; and from
the head of the said lake by a line drawn due north, until it strikes the
boundary line of Hudson's Bay or New Britain. Upper Canada, to include all the
territory to the westward and southward of the said line, to the utmost extent
of the country known by the name of Canada.

RIVERS.] The river St. Lawrence is one of the largest rivers in North America.
It issues from Lake Ontario, forming the outlet of the long chain of great
lakes, which separate Upper Canada from the United States. It takes its course
northeast* washes the island of Montreal, which it embosoms; just above which
it receives Ottawas from the west, and forms many fertile islands. Continuing
the same course, it meets the tide upwards of 400 miles from the sea, and is so
far navigable for large vessels. Below Quebec it becomes broad and of
sufficient depth for ships of war. Having received in its (...) besides
Ottawas, St. John's Seguina, Despraires, Trois Rivier^^, (...) innumerable
other smaller streams, it falls into the ocean at Capa^^sieres, by a mouth 90
miles broad. In its course it forms a great ^^^riety of bays, harbors and
islands, many of them fruitful and extr^^ly pleasant.

A river has lately been surveyed, by the deputy Surveyor (...) of Canada, from
its entrance into the Bay of Kenty, near Cada^^^^ to its source in Lake St.
Clie; from which there is an easy and (...) portage across N. W. to the N. E.
angle of Lake Huron; and (...) there that is neither long nor difficult, to the
southward, to the old ^^^tlement of Toronto. This is a short rout from Fort
Frontinac (...) Michillimakkinak.

CLIMATE.] Winter continues, with such severity, from December to April, as
that the largest rivers are frozen over, and the snow (...) commonly from four
to six feet deep during the winter. But (...) air is so serene and clear, and
the inhabitants so well defended (...) the cold, that this season is neither
unhealthy nor unpleasant. (...) spring opens suddenly, and vegetation is
surprizingly rapid. Th^^ summer is delightful, except that a part of it is
extremely hot.

SOIL AND PRODUCE.] Though the climate be cold, and (...) winter long and
tedious, the soil is in general very good, and in (...) parts both pleasant and
fertile, producing wheat, barley, rye, (...) many other sorts of grain, fruits
and vegetables; tobacco, in particular, thrives well, and is much cultivated.
The isle of Orleans, (...) Quebec, and the lands upon the river St. Lawrence
and other rive^^ are remarkable for the richness of the soil. The meadow
grounds (...) Canada, which are well watered, yield excellent grass, and feed
(...) numbers of great and small cattle.

ANIMALS.] See this article under the head of the United States.

PRINCIPAL TOWNS.] Quebec is the capital, not only of Lower Canada, but of all
British America, and is situated at the confluence of the rivers St. Lawrence
and St. Charles, or the Little River, about 320 miles from the sea. It is built
on a rock, partly of marble and partly of slate. The town is divided into an
upper and lower. The houses in both are of stone, and built in a tolerable
manner. The fortification are strong, though not regular. The town is covered
with a regular and beautiful citadel, in which the governor resides. The number
of inhabitants is computed at about 15,000. The river, which from the sea
hither is four or five leagues broad, narrows all of a sudden to about a mile
wide. The haven which lies opposite the town, is safe and commodious, and about
five fathoms deep. The harbor is flanked by two bastions, that are raised 25
feet from the ground, which is about the height of the tides at the time of the
equinox.

From Quebec to Montreal, which is about 170 miles, in sailing up the river St.
Lawrence, the eye is entertained with beautiful landscapes, the banks being in
many places very bold and steep, and shaded with lofty trees. The farms lie
pretty close all the way, several gentlemen's houses, neatly built, show
themselves at intervals, and there is all the appearance of a flourishing
colony; but there are few towns or villages. It is pretty much like the well
settled part of Virginia and Maryland, where the planters are wholly within
themselves. Many beautiful islands are interspersed in the channel of the
river* which have an agreeable effect upon the eye. After passing the Riche^ieu
islands, the air becomes so mild and temperate, that the traveller thinks
himself transported to another climate; but this is to be understood only in
the summer months.

The town called Trois Rivieres, or the Three Rivers, is about half way between
Quebec and Montreal, and has its name from three rivers which join their
currents here, and fall into the river St. Lawrence. It is much resorted to by
several nations of Indians, who, by means of these rivers come hither and trade
with the inhabitants in various kinds of furs and skins. The country is
pleasant, and fertile in corn, fruit etc. and great numbers of handsome houses
stand on both sides the river.

Montreal stands on an island in the river St. Lawrence, which it ten leagues
in length and four in beadth, at the foot of a mountain which gives name to it,
about half a league from the south shore. While the French had possession of
Canada, both the city and island of Montreal belonged to private proprietors,
who had improved them so well, that the whole island had become a most
delightful spot, and produced every thing that could administer to the
conveniences of life. The city forms an oblong square, divided by regular and
well-formed streets; and when taken by the English the houses were built in a
very handsome manner; and every house might be seen at one view from the
harbor, or from the southernmost side of the river, as the hill on the side of
which the town stands falls gradually to the water. This place is surrounded by
a wall and a dry ditch; and its fortifications have been much improved by the
English. Montreal is nearly as large as Quebec, but since it fell into the
hands of the English it has suffered much by fires.

The principal towns in Upper Canada are Kingston, on Lake Ontario, Niagara,
between Lake Ontario and Lake Erie, and Detroit, situated on the western bank
o^ Detroit river, between Lake Erie and Lake Huron, and nine miles below Lake
St. Clair. Niagara and Detroit, though (...) in possession of the British
government, contrary^^ treaty of place, are both within the limits of the
United States.


GOVERNMENT.] By the Quebec Act, passed by the parliament of Great Britain in
the year 1791, so much of the act of the 14th of George III. passed in the year
1774, as relates to the appointment of a council for the Government of the
Province of Quebec, is repealed; and it is enacted that there shall be within
each of the Provinces of Upper and Lower Canada, a legislative council, and an
assembly, who, with the consent, of the Governor, appointed by the king, shall
have power to make laws. The Governor may give or withold his Majesty's assent
to bills passed by the legislative council and assembly, or reserve them for
his Majesty's pleasure. Bills reserved are to have no force till his Majesty's
assent is signified by the Governor, which, to be valid must be signified
within two years from the time the bill is presented to the Governor. The
Governor must transmit to the Secretary of State copies of such bills as have
been assented to, which his Majesty's in Council may declare his disallowance
of within two years from the receipt.

The Legislative Council is to consist of not fewer than seven members for
Upper, and fifteen for Lower Canada, to be summoned by the Governor, who must
be authorized by the King. Such members are to hold their seats for life;
unless forfeited by four years continual absence, or by swearing allegiance to
some foreign power.

The house of assembly is to consist of not less than sixteen members from
Upper, and not less than fifty from Lower Canada; chosen by (...) freeholders
in the several towns and districts. The council and assembly are to be called
together at least once in every year, and every assembly is to continue four
years, unless sooner dissolved by the Government. All questions are to be
decided by a majority of votes of the members present. His Majesty may
authorize the Governor to fix the times and place, of holding the elections;
(subject however, to such provisions as may hereafter be made by the
Legislature) and to fix the times and places of holding the sessions of the
assembly, and to prorogue and dissolve the same whenever he shall judge it
necessary.

The Governor, together with such of the executive council as shall appointed
by the King, for the affairs of each Province, are to be a court of civil
jurisdiction for hearing and determining appeals, subject however to such
appeals from their judgment as heretofore existed. All lands i^ Upper Canada
are to be granted hereafter in free and common socca^^^; and also in Lower
Canada, when the grantee shall desire it, subject nevertheless to alterations
by an act of the Legislature.

British America is superintended by an officer styled Governor General of the
four British Provinces in N. America, who, besides other powers, is commander
in chief of all the British troops in the four Provinces and the governments
attached to them, and Newfoundland. Each of the Provinces, have a Lieutenant
Governor, who, in the absence of the Governor General, has all the powers
requisite to a Chief Magistrate.

POPULATION.] Upper Canada, though an infant settlement, is said by some to
contain 40,000, by others, only 20,000 inhabitants. The truth probably is
between them. Lower Canada, in 1784, contained 113,012 souls. Both Provinces
may now contain about 150,000 souls, which number is multiplying both by
natural increase and by emigrations.

RELIGION.] As many as about nine tenths of the inhabitants of these Provinces
are Roman Catholics, who enjoy under the present Government, the same
provision, rights, and privileges, as was granted them in 1774, by the act of
the 14th of George III. The rest of the people are Episcopalians,
Presbyterians, and a few of almost all the different sects of christians.

Agreeably to constitution, his Majesty may authorize the Governor to make
allotments of lands, for the support of a Protestant clergy in each Province,
out of the crownlands already granted; and to the same purpose is to be
appropriated, the amount of one seventh of the value of all future grants of
lands. His Majesty may authorize the Governor, with the advice of the Executive
Council, to erect parsonages, according to the establishment of the Church of
England, within every township, or parish already formed, or which may
hereafter be founded; and to endow them with so much of the lands appropriated,
as aforesaid, as they shall judge to be expedient; and also to present (...)
every such parsonage, a minister of the Church of England, duly ^^dained, who
is to hold and enjoy in the same manner, and upon the same conditions as
incumbents in England. But presentations to parsonages, and the enjoyment of
them, are to be subject to the eccle^^^ical jurisdiction granted to the bishop
of Nova Scotia.

TRADE.] The amount of the exports from the Provinces of Quebec, in the year
1786, was L343,262: 19: 6. The amount of imports (...) the same year was
L325,116. The exports consisted of wheat, flour, biscuit, flaxseed, lumber of
various kinds, fish, potash, oil, ginseng and other medicinal roots, but
principally of furs and peltries, to the amount of L285,977. The imports
consisted of rum, brandy, molasses, coffee, sugar, wines, tobacco, salt,
chocolate, provisions for the troops, and dry goods.

HISTORY.] This country was discovered by the English as early as about 1497,
and settled by the French in 1608, who kept possession of it till 1760, when it
was taken by the British arms, and at the treaty of Paris, in 1763, was ceded,
by France, to the crown of England, to whom it has ever since belonged,

For the best history of this country the reader is referred to Charlevoix's
history of it; to the Encyclopedia Brittannica; articles, Canada, Quebec, and
America, No. 195, 200, and 207.

THE ISLAND OF CAPE BRETON.
Annexed to the Province of LOWER CANADA.
THE island, or rather collection of islands, called by the; French Les Isles
de Madame, which lie so contiguous as that they are commonly called but one,
and comprehended under the name of the Island of Cape Breton, lies between lat.
45 and 47 N. and between 59 and 60, W. long. from London, or 14 and 15 E. lon.
from Philadelphia, and about 45 leagues to the eastward of Halifax. It is about
100 miles in length, and 50 in breadth; and is separated from Nova Scotia by a
narrow strait, called the Gut of Canso, which is the communication between the
Atlantic Ocean and the Gulf of St. Lawrence.

It is surrounded with little sharp pointed rocks, separated from each other by
the waves, above which some of their tops are visible. All its harbors are
open to the east, turning toward the south. On the other parts of the coast
there are but a few anchoring places for small vessels, in creeks, or between
islets. The harbor of St. Peter's, at the west end of the island, is a very
commodious place for carrying on the fishery.

FACE OF THE COUNTRY, CLIMATE, SOIL AND PRODUCTIONS.} Except in the hilly
parts. the surface of the country has but little solidity, being every where
covered with a light moss and with water. The dampness of the soil is exhaled
in fogs, without rendering the air unwholesome. In other respects, the climate
is very cold, owing either to the prodigious quantity of lakes, which cover
above half the island, and remain frozen a long time; or to the number of
forests, that totally intercept the rays of the sun; the effect of which is
besides decreased by perpetual clouds.

The inhabitants never applied themselves to agriculture, the soil being unfit
for it. They often sowed corn, but it seldom came to maturity; and when it did
thrive so much as to be worth reaping. it had degenerated so considerably, that
it was not fit for seed for the next harvest. They have only continued to plant
a few pot herbs that are tolerably well tasted, but must be renewed every year
from abroad. The poorness and scarcity of pastures has likewise prevented the
increase of cattle. In a word, the soil of Cape Breton seems calculated to
invite none but fishermen and soldiers.

Though the island was entirely covered with forests before (...) inhabited,
its wood has scarce ever been an object of trade. A (...) quantity, however, of
soft wood, was found there, fit for firing (...) some that might be used for
timber; but the oak has always (...) scarce, and the fir never yielding much
resin.

POPULATION, CHIEF TOWNS, etc.} On this island there are about 1000 in^^^tants,
who have a lieutenant gov^^^ ^^sident among them, appointed by the king. The
principal tow^^^ Sidney, the capital, and Louisburg, which has the best harbor
(...) island.

This island may be considered as the key to Canada, and the (...) valuable
fishery, in its neighborhood, depends for its protecti^^ the possession of
this island; as no nation can carry it on (...) some convenient harbor of
strength to supply and protect it; (...) Louisburg is the principal one for
these purpose.

TRADE.] The peltry trade was a very inconsiderable object. ^^^sisted only in
the skins of a few lynxes, elks, musk-rats, wild (...) bears, otters, and
foxes, both of a red, silver and gray color. (...) these were procured from a
colony of Micmac Indians, who (...) settled on the island with the French, and
never could raise (...) than 60 men able to bear arms. The rest came from St.
John's or (...) neighboring continent. Greater advantages might possibly,
(...) been derived from the coal mines which abound in this island. (...) lie
in a horizontal direction; and being no more than six or (...) feet below the
surface, may be worked without digging deep, or ^^^ing off the waters.
Notwithstanding the prodigious demand for (...) coal from New England, from the
year 1745 to 1749, these (...) would, probably have been forsaken, had not the
ships, which (...) sent out to the French islands, wanted ballast. In one of
these (...) a fire has been kindled, which could never yet be extinguished.

The people of Cape Breton did not send all their fish to Europe. They sent
part of it to the French southern islands, on board 20 (...) ships from 70 to
140 tons burden. Besides the cod, which made at (...) half their cargo, they
exported to the other colonies timber, (...) thin oak boards, salted salmon and
mackerel, train oil, and sea-oil. These were paid for, some in sugar and
coffee, but chiefly in (...) molasses. The island could not consume all these
commodities. Canada took off but a small part of the overplus; it was chiefly
bought by the people of New England, who gave in exchange fruits, vegetables,
wood, bricks, and cattle. This trade of exchange was allowed; but a smuggling
trade was added to it, carried on in flour and salt (...).

In 1743, while this island belonged to the French, they caught 1,149,000
quintals of dry fish, and 3,500,000 do. of mud-fish, the value of both which,
including 3,116 tons of train oil, drawn from the blubber, amounted to
L926,577: 10 sterling, according to the prime cost of the fish at Newfoundland.
The whole value of this trade, annually, at that period, amounted to a million
sterling. No (...) than 564 ships, besides shallops, and 27,000 seamen, were
employed in this trade. Charlevoix, in his history of France, says, "This
fishery is a more valuable source of wealth and power to France, than (...) the
mines of Peru and Mexico would be."

HISTORY.] Though some fishermen had long resorted to this (...) and every
summer, not more than 20 or 30 had ever fixed there. (...) French, who took
possession of it in August 1713, were properly the first inhabitants. They
changed its name into that of Isle Royalc, and fixed upon Fort Dauphin for
their principal settlement. This harbor was two leagues in circumference. The
ships came to the very shore, and were sheltered from the winds. Forests,
affording oak sufficient to fortify and build a large city, were near at hand;
the ground appeared less barren than in other parts, and the fishery was ^^^re
plentiful. This harbor might have been rendered impregnable at a trifling
expense; but the difficulty of approaching it (a circumstance that had at first
made a stronger impression than the advantages resulting from it) occasioned it
to be abandoned, after great labor had been bestowed upon the undertaking.
They then turned their views to Louisburg, the access to which was easier; and
convenience was thus preferred to security: the fortification of Louisburg,
however, was not begun till 1720.

In the year 1714, some fishermen, who till then had lived in Newfoundland,
settled in this island. It was expected that their number would soon have been
increased by the Acadians, who were at liberty from the treaties that had been
granted them, to remove with all their effects, and even to dispose of their
estates; but these hopes were disappointed. The Acadians chose rather to retain
their possessions under the dominion of Britain, than to give them up for any
precarious advantage they might derive from their attachment to France. Their
place was supplied by some distressed adventurers from Europe, who came over
from time to time to Cape Breton, and the number of inhabitants gradually
increased to 4000. They were settled at Louisburg* Fort Dauphin, Port Toulouse,
Neruka, and on all the coasts where they found a proper beach for drying the
cod.

This island remained in possession of the French till 1745, when it was
captured for the crown of Great Britain, by a body of troops from New England,
under the command of Lieutenant General William Pepperell. For the authentic
particulars of this important, singular and successful expedition, see "The
American Apollo," Part I. Vol. I. containing the publications of the Historical
Society, in Boston. Also Encyclopedia Brittannica, article Breton.

NOVA SCOTIA.
Comprehending the Provinces of NEW BRUNSWICK and NOVA SCOTIA.
BOUNDARIES AND EXTENT.
Length 400 Miles. between Degrees. 43 30 and 49 north latitude. Breadth 300
Miles. Degrees. 60 and 67 east long. from London. 8 and 15 east long. from
Phil.

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED on the north, by the River St. Lawrence; east, by the
Gulf of St. Lawrence, (which washes its coast 110 leagues in extent, from the
Gut of Canso, at its entrance into the Gulf, to Cape Rozier, which forms the
south part of the river St. Lawrence.) and by the Gut of Canso, which divides
it from Cape Breton; south, it is washed by the Atlantic Ocean, having a sea
coast of 90 leagues, from Cape Canso, east, to Cape ^^bles, west, which forms
one part of the entrance into the Bay of ^^^dy, which also forms a part of its
southern boundary; west, by a (...) of Lower Canada, and the District of Maine.

The tract of country within these limits, known by the (...) of Nova Scotia,
or New Scotland, was, in 1784, divided into two provinces, viz. New Brunswick
on the northwest, and Nova Scotia on the southeast. The former comprehends that
part of the old province of Nova Scotia, which lies to the northward and
westward of a (...) drawn from the mouth of the river St. Croix, through the
center of the Bay of Fundy, to Bay Verte, and thence into the Gulf of St.
Lawrence, including all lands within 6 leagues of the coast. The re^^ (...) the
province of Nova Scotia, to which is annexed, the Island of St. John's, which
lies north of it, in the Gulf of St. Lawrence.

DIVISIONS.] In 1783, were the following countries in Nova Scotia, viz.

Counties. Townships. By whom settled. Rivers. Avon or Pigiguit All emptying
into the Av^^ and except^^ last ^avigable. HANTS, on the river Avon. Windsor
St.Croix Falmouth Kenetcoot Newport Coemiguen Cacaguet Nav. 40 ^. for vess. Of
60 Cobeguit HALI^AX. Eastern part of Nova Scotia. Hai^ax London Der. Irish and
Scotch Shebbenaccadie. Boatable. Pitcoudiac Memremcoot. Truro Onflow N.England.
Colchester Lawrenence Southamp. Canso Tinmouth KINGS. on the Basin of Miner.
Cornwallis Percau, small Habitant, nav. for v. of 40 (...) a small distance.
Horton Canaid, nav. for vess. of (...) tons 3 or 4 miles. Cornwallis, nav. for
vess. of 100 tons 5 m. for v. of 50 tons 10^ Salmon river There are settlements
of Acadians on all these rivers, whose banks are good land.
ANNAPOLIS on Annapolis river. Wilmot set. from Ire. and N. Eng. Annapolis,
navigable for (...) of any burden 10 miles -- of 100 tons ^5 miles; tide (...)
30 miles, passable in (...) (...) within 20 miles of Horton. Granville do. a
finetownship 30 miles in leng. On the Bay of Fundy. Annapolis Clare 40 families
of Acadians. Moncton Do. CUMBERLAND at the head of Bay of Fundy. An Lac
whicharenav. 3 or 4 mil. for vess. of 5 tons. Marequesh Cumberland La Planche
Sackville, settled from N. Eng. and Yorksh. Napan shoal rivers. Macon Amberst,
settled from N. of Ire. N. Eng. and Yorkshire. Memrem. navigable 4 or 5 miles.
Hillsboro Petcoudia Hopewell Chepodie Herbert. navigable by boats to its head
12 mil. SUNBURY, on the river St. John's, north shore of Bay of Fundy. Conway
St. John's, described under the head of rivers. Gage Town Burton Sunbury St.
Ann's Settled from Massachusetts, Connecticut, etc. Willmot Newton Maugerville
QUEENS, south side of Bay of Fundy. Argyle Scots and Acad. None Yarmouth New
England. Barrington(Sable Is It.) Quakers from Nantucket. Liverpool New England.
LUMENBURG, on Mahone Bay. New Dublin Irish formerly, now Germans. None
Lunenburg Chester Germans New England. Blandford 3 families only.

RIVERS, BAYS, LAKES AND CAPES.} Most of the rivers which water this country
have already been mentioned. The rivers Risgonche and Nipisiguit, run from west
to east into Chaleur and Nipisiguit Bays, which communicate with the Gulf of
St. Lawrence. The river St. Croix, (which is the true St. Croix, is yet
undetermined) empties into Passamaquoddy Bay, and forms a part of the boundary
between New-Brunswick and Main. St. John's is the largest river in the
province. It empties into the north side of the bay of Fundy, and is navigable
for vessels of 50 tons, 60 miles, and for boats upwards of 200 miles. This is a
common rout to Quebec. The banks of this river, enriched by the annual
freshets, are excellent land. About 30 miles from the mouth of this river
commences a fine level country, covered with large trees of timber of various
kinds. Masts, from 20 to 30 inches in diameter, have been cut on this tract.
The tide flows, in this river, 80 or 90 miles. It furnishes the inhabitants
with salmon, bass and sturgeon. Near fort How, the river suddenly narrows, and
occasions a fall at certain times of tide, like that at London bridge.

The coast of these provinces is indented with numerous bays, and commodious
harbors. The principal, as you descend southerly from the mouth of St.
Lawrence river, are Gaspee, Chaleur, Verte, which is separated from the bay of
Fundy by a narrow isthmus of about 18 miles wide; Cape and harbor of Canso, 40
leagues eastward of Halifax. Chedabucto bay is about 10 leagues N. W. of Canso.
Chebucto Bay, on which stands the town of Halifax. In the Bay of Fundy, which
extends 50 leagues into the country, the ebb and flow of the (...) from 45 to
60 feet. Chenigto bay is at the head of Fundy Bay. (...) samaquoddy bay borders
on the District of Main, and receives the waters of St. Croix river. At the
entrance of this bay is an (...) granted to several gentlemen in Liverpool in
Lancasbire, who ^^^ed it Campobello. At a very considerable expense, they
attemp^^^^ form a settlement here, but failed. On several other islands in
(...) bay there are settlements made by people from Massachusetts. (...) the
lakes in these provinces, which are very numerous, and as (...) without names,
is Grand Lake, in the province of N. Brunswick, (...) St. John's river, about
30 miles long and 8 or 10 broad, and in (...) Places 40 fathoms deep.

The principal Capes, are Cape Canso, on the west side of th^^ ^^trance into
Chedabucto Bay, and Cape Sables, on the east side, of (...) entrance into the
Bay of Fundy.

PRINCIPAL TOWNS.] Halifax is the capital of the Prov^^^^ Nova Scotia. It
stands on Chebucto Bay, commodiously situ^^^ (...) the fishery, and has a
communication with other parts of this (...) and New Brunswick, by land and
water carriage. It has a (...) harbor, where a small squadron of ships of war
lies during the ^^^^ter, and in the summer, protects the fishery. The town has
(...) ^^^^trenchment, and is strengthened with forts of timber. It is (...) to
contain 15 or 16,000 inhabitants.

Shelburne (N. Scotia) on Port Roseway, near Cape Sables* (...) supposed, in
1783, to contain 600 families. Since that time it (...) come less populous.
Guysborough, (N. S.) formerly called Manc^^^ter, situated on Chedabucto Bay,
about 10 leagues N. W. of (...) Canso, contained, in 1783, about 250 families.
Rawdon (N. S.) (...) miles from Halifax, has about 60 houses. Annapolis (N. S.)
(...) east side of Fundy Bay, has one of the finest harbors in the (...). In
other respects it is a poor, inconsiderable place.

Fredricktown, about 90 miles up St. John's River, is the capital of the
province of New Brunswick.

CLIMAIE, SOIL, AND PRODUCTIONS.} During a great part of the year, the
atmosphere is clouded with thick fog, which ^^ders it unhealthy for the
inhabitants; and four or five months it is intensely cold. A great part of this
country lies in forest, and the soil, in many parts, is thin and barren. On the
banks of the rivers, however, and some other parts, the soil in very good,
producing large crops of English grass, hemp and flax: many of the bays, and
salt water rivers, and some parts of the sea coast, are bordered with fine
tracts of salt marsh. The inhabitants (...) not raise provisions enough for
home consumption.

FORTS.] These are Fort Edward at Windsor, capable of containing 200 men;
Annapolis, in its present state, 100; Cumberland, (...) Fort How, on St.
John's River, 100; besides which there are barr^^^ enclosed in a stockade at
Cornwallis, for about 50 men.

INDIANS.] These are the Micmacks, and the tribe called the ^^^chites. The
former inhabit the eastern shore, between Halifax (...) Cape Breton; between
Cumberland county and the northeast cost (...) the Province, toward Chaleur
Bay; about the heads of the ^^ers which run through the counties of Hants and
Kings Co^^^^^ and between Cape Sable and Annapolis Royal. This tribe is (...)
posed to have about 300 fighting men. The Marechites, inhabit the river St.
John's, and around Passamaquoddy Bay; and are estimated at 140 fighting men:
they are much superior in all respects to the Mickmacks.

ANIMALS.] The same as in the United States, though much less numerous.

TRADE.] The exports from G. Britain to this country consist chiefly of linen
and woollen cloths, and other necessaries for wear, of fishing tackle, and
rigging for ships. The amount of exports, at an average of three years, before
the new settlements, was about 26,500l. The only articles obtained in exchange
are, timber and the produce of the fishery, which, at a like avarage, amounted
to 38,000l. But from the late increase of inhabitants, it is supposed that they
will now crect saw mills, and endeavor to supply the West India islands with
lumber of every kind, as well as the produce of the fishery, which will be a
profitable article to both countries. The whole population of Nova Scotia and
the islands adjoining, is estimated at 50,000. This estimate it is supposed is
considerably too large. Recent accounts of these settlements represent them as
in a declining state, having great numbers of the houses built in the new towns
uninhabited, and considerably reduced in value.

HISTORY.] Notwithstanding the forbidding appearance of this country, it was
here that some of the first European settlements were made. The first grant of
lands in it was given by James 1. to his secretary, Sir William Alexander, from
whom it had the name of Nova Scotia, or New Scotland. Since then it has
frequently changed hands, from one private proprietor to another, and from the
French to the English nation backward and forward. It was not confirmed to the
English, till the peace of Utrecht, and their design in acquiring it, does not
seem to have arisen so much from any prospect of direct profit to be obtained
by it, as from an apprehension that the French, by possessing this province,
might have had it in their power to annoy the other British settlements. Upon
this principle, 3000 families were transported in 1749, at the charge of the
government, into this country, who built and settled the town of Halifax.

ISLAND OF ST. JOHN's.
THIS island lies in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, near the northern coast of the
Province of Nova Scotia, and is about 60 miles long, and 30 or 40 broad. It has
several fine rivers, a rich soil, and is pleasantly situated. Charlottetown is
its Principal town, and is the residence of the lieutenant governor, who is the
chief officer on the island. The number of inhabitants are estimated at about
5000. Upon the reduction of Cape Breton, in 1745, the inhabitants of this
island, amounting to about 4000, submitted quietly to the British arms. While
the French possessed this island, they improved it to so much advantage as that
it was called the granary of Canada, which it furnished with great plenty of
corn, as well as beef and pork. It is attached to the province of Nova Scotia.

NEWFOUNDLAND ISLAND.
NEWFOUNDLAND is situated to the east of the Gulf of St. Lawrence, between 46
and 52 degrees of north lat. and between 53 and 59 degrees west long. separated
from Labrador, or New Britain, by the straits of Belleisle; and from Canada, by
the Bay of St. Lawrence; being 550 miles long and 200 broad. The coasts are
extremely subject to fogs, attended with almost continual storms of snow and
sleet, the sky being usually overcast. From the soil of this island the British
reap no great advantage, for the cold is long continued and severe; and the
summer heat, though violent, warms it not enough to produce any thing valuable;
for the soil, at least i^ those parts of the island which have been explored,
is rocky and barren. However, it is watered by several good rivers, and has
many large and good harbors. This island, whenever the continent shall come to
fail of timber, convenient to navigation (which on the sea coast perhaps will
be at no very remote period,) it is said will afford a large supply for masts,
yards, and all sorts of lumber for the West India trade. But what at present it
is chiefly valuable for, is the great fishery of cod carried on upon those
shoals, which are called the Banks of Newfoundland. Great Britain and North
America, at the lowest computation, annually employ 3000 sail of small craft in
this fishery; on board of which, and on shore to cure and pack the fish, are
upwards of 100,00 hands; so that this fishery is not only a very valuable
branch of trade to the merchant, but a source of livelihood to so many
thousands of poor people, and a most excellent nursery to the royal navy. This
fishery is computed to increase the national stock 300,000l. a year in gold and
silver, remitted for the cod sold in the North, i^ Spain, Portugal, Italy, and
the Levant. The plenty of cod, both on the great bank and the lesser ones,
which lie to the east and south-east of this island, is inconceivable; and not
only cod, but several other species of fish, are caught there in abundance; all
of which are nearly in an equal plenty along the shores of Newfoundland, Nova
Scotia, New England, and the isle of Cape Breton; and very profitable fisheries
are carried on upon all their coasts.

This island, after various disputes about the property, was entirely ceded to
England by the treaty of Utrecht, in 1713; but the French were left at liberty
to dry their nets on the northern shores of the island; and by the treaty of
1763. they were permitted to fish in the gulf of St. Lawrence, but with this
limitation, that they should not approach within three leagues of any of the
coasts belonging to England. The small islands of St. Pierre and Miquelon,
situated to the southward of Newfoundland, were also ceded to the French, who
stipulated to ^rect no fortifications on these islands, nor to keep more than
(...) soldiers to enforce the police. By the last treaty of peace, the French
are to enjoy the fisheries on the north and on the west coasts of the (...)
and; and the inhabitants of the United States are allowed the same ^^^^eges in
fishing as before their independence. The chief toward (...) Newfoundland, are,
Placentia, Bonavista, and St. John's: but not above 1000 families remain here
in winter. A small squadron of (...) of war are sent out every spring to
protect the fisheries and inhabitants, the Admiral of which, for the time
being, is Governor of the island, besides whom there are two lieutenant
Governors, one at Placentia, and the other at St. John's.

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 1250 Miles. between Degrees. 31 and 46 North Latitude. Breadth 1040
Miles. Degrees. 8 E. and 24' W. Long. from Philadelphia. 64 and 96 W. Long.
from London.

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED north and east, by British America, or the Provinces of
Upper and Lower Canada, and New Brunswick; south east, by the Atlantic ocean;
south, by East and West Florida; west, by the river Missisippi.

In the treaty of peace, concluded in 1783, the limits of the American United
States are more particularly defined in the words following. "And that all
disputes which might arise in future on the subject of the boundaries of the
said United States may be prevented, it is hereby agreed and declared, that the
following are and shall be their boundaries, viz. From the north west angle of
Nova Scotia, viz. That angle which is formed by a line drawn due north from the
source of St. Croix River to the Highlands, along the said Highlands, which
divide those rivers that empty themselves into the river St. Lawrence, from
those which fall into the Atlantic Ocean, to the north westernmost head of
Connecticut river; thence down along the middle of that river to the
forty-fifth degree of north latitude; from thence by a line due west on said
latitude, until it strikes the river Iroquois or Cataraqui; thence along the
middle of the said river into Lake Ontario; through the middle of said lake,
until it strikes the communication by water between that lake and Lake Erie;
thence along the middle of said communication into Lake Erie, through the
middle of said lake, until it arrives at the water communication between that
lake and Lake Huron; thence through the middle of said lake to the water
communication between that lake and Lake Superior; thence through Lake
Superior, northward of the Isles Royal and Phillipeaux, to the Long Lake;
thence through the middle of said Long Lake, and the water communication
between it and the Lake of the Woods, to the said lake of the Woods; thence
through the said lake to the most northwestern point thereof, and from thence,
on a due west course, to the River Missisippi; thence by a line to be drawn
along the middle of said River Missisippi, until it shall intersect the
northernmost part of the thirty-first degree of north latitude.

"South, by a line to be drawn due east from the determination of the line last
mentioned, in the latitude of thirty-one degrees north of the equator, to the
middle of the River Apalachichola, or Catahouche; thence along the middle
thereof to its junction with the Flint River; thence strait to the head of St.
Mary's River; and thence down along the middle of St. Mary's River to the
Atlantic Ocean.

"East by a line to be drawn along the middle of the River St. Croix from its
mouth, in the Bay of Fundy, to its source, and from its source directly north,
to the aforesaid Highlands, which divide, the rivers that fall into the
Atlantic Ocean, from those which fall into the River St. Lawrence;
comprehending all islands within twenty leagues of (...) part of the shores of
the United States, and lying between lines to be drawn due east from the points
where the aforesaid boundaries between Nova Scotia on the one part, and East
Florida on the other, shall respectively touch the Bay of Fundy and the
Atlantic Ocean, excepting such islands as now are, or heretofore have been,
within the limits of the said province of Nova Scotia."

The territory of the United States, according to Mr. Hutchins, contains, by
computation, a million of square miles, in which are 640,000,000 acres Deduct
for water 51,000 000 Acres of land in the United States 589,000,000

That part of the United States, comprehended between the west boundary line of
Pennsylvania, on the east; the boundary line between Great Britain and the
United States, extending from the river St. Croix to the northwest extremity of
the Lake of the Woods, on the north; the river Missisippi, to the mouth of the
Ohio, on the west; and the river Ohio on the south, to the aforementioned
bounds of Pennsylvania, contains, by computation, about 411,000 square, miles*
in which are 263,040,000 acres. Deduct for water 43,040,000 acres. To be
disposed of by order of Congres, when purchased of the Indians} 220,000,000

The whole of this immense extent of unappropriated western territory,
containing, as above stated, 220,000,000 of acres, and several large tracts
south of the Ohio, Ceded by North Carolina, South Carolina and Georgia, with
certain reservation (...) the Indians and other purposes, as will be mentioned
hereafter.
have been, by the cession of some of the original thirteen states, and by the
treaty of peace, transferred to the federal government, and are pledged as a
fund for sinking the (...) of the United States. Of this territory the Indians
now possess a very large proportion. Mr. Jefferson, in his report to congress,
Nov. ^, 1791, describes the boundary line between us and the Indians, as
follows; "Beginning at the mouth of the Cayahoga (which falls into the
southernmost part of Lake Erie) and running up the river to the portage,
between that and the Tuscarora (or N. E.) branch of the Muskingum; then down
the said branch to the forks, at the crossing place above fort Lawrence; then
westwardly, toward the portage of the Great Miami, to the main branch of that
river; then down the Mi^^^i, to the fork of that river, next below the old
fort, which was taken by the French, in 1752; thence due west to the river De
la (...) (a branch of the Wabash) and down that river to the Wabash. So for the
line is precisely determined, and cleared of the claims of the Indians. The
tract comprehending the whole country within the above described line, the
Wabash, the Ohio, and the western limits of Pennsylvania, contains about 55,000
square miles. How far on the ^^^ern side of the Wabash, the southern boundary
of the Indians (...) been defined, we known not. It is only understood in
general, that their title to the lower country, between that river and the
Illinois, was formerly extinguished by the French, while in their possession."

Estimate of the number of acres of water, north and westward of the river
Ohio, within the territory of the United States.
Acres. In Lake Superior, 21,95^,780 Lake of the Woods, 1,133,800 Lake Rain,
etc. 165,200 Red Lake, 551,000 Lake Michigan, 10,^68,000 Bay Puan, 1,216,000
Lake Huron 5,009,920 Lake St. Clair, 89,500 Lake Erie, western part, 2,252,800
Sundry small lakes and rivers, 301,000 43,040,000

Estimate of the number of acres of water within the thirteen United States.
In the Lakes, etc. as abovementioned -- 43,040,000 In Lake Erie, westward of
the line extended from the north west corner of Pennsylvania, due north to the
boundary between the British territory and the United States, 410,000 In Lake
Ontario, 2,390,000 Lake Champlain, 500,000 Chesapeek Bay, 1,700,000 Albemarle
Bay, 330,000 Delaware Bay, 630,000 All the rivers within the thirteen States,
including the Ohio, 2,000,000 7,960,000 Total, 51,000,000

LAKES.] It may in truth be said, that no part of the world is so well watered
with springs, rivulets, rivers, and lakes, as the territory of the United
States. By means of these various streams and collections of water, the whole
country is checkered into islands and peninsulas. The United States, and indeed
all parts of North America, seem to have been formed by nature for the most
intimate union. The facilities of navigation, render the communication between
the ports of Georgia and New Hampshire, far more expeditious and practicable,
than between these of Provence and Picardy in France; Cornwall and Caithness,
in Great Britain; of Gallicia and Catalonia, in Spain. The Canals proposed
between Susquehannah and Delaware, between Pasquetank and Elizabeth rivers, in
Virginia, and between the Schuylkill and Susquehannah, will open a
communication from the Carolinas to the western counties of Pennsylvania and
NewYork. The improvements of the Potomak, will give a passage from the southern
States, to the western parts of Virginia, Maryland, Pennsylvania, and even to
the lakes. From Detroit, to Alexandria, of the Potomak, six hundred and seven
miles, are but two carrying places, which together do not exceed the distance
of forty miles. The (...) of Delaware and Chesapeek, will open the
communication from South Carolina, to New Jersey, Delaware, the most populous
parts of Pennsylvania, and the midland counties of New York. Were these, and
the proposed canal between Ashley and Cooper rivers, in S. Carolina -- the
canals in the northern parts of the state of New York, and those of
Massachusetts and New Hampshire, all opened, North America would thereby be
converted into a cluster of large and fertile islands, communicating with each
other with ease and little expense, and in many instances without the
uncertainty or danger of the seas.

There is nothing in other parts of the globe, which resembles the prodigious
chain of lakes in this part of the world. They may properly be termed inland
seas of fresh water; and even those of the second or third class in magnitude,
are of larger circuit than the greatest lake in the eastern continent. Some of
the most northern lakes belonging to the United States, have never been
surveyed, or even visited by white people; of course we have nor description of
them which can be relied on as accurate. Others have been partially surveyed
and their relative situation determined. The best account of them which we have
been able to procure is as follows.

The Lake of the Woods, the most northern in the United States, is so called
from the large quantities of wood growing on its banks; such as oaks, pines,
firs, spruce, etc. This lake lies nearly east of the south end of the Lake
Winnepeek, and is supposed to be the source or conductor of one branch of the
river Bourbon, if there by such a river. Its length from east to west is said
to be about seventy miles, and in some places it is forty miles wide. The
Killistinoe Indians encamp on its borders to fish and hunt. This lake is the
communication between the Lakes Winnepeek and Bourbon, and Lake Superior.

Rainy, or Long Lake, lies east of the Lake of the Woods, and i^ said to be
nearly and hundred miles long, and in no part more than twenty miles wide.

Eastward of this lake, lie several small ones, which extend in a string to the
great carrying place, and thence into Lake Superior. Between these little lakes
are several carrying places, which render the trade to the north west di^^cult,
and exceedingly tedious, as it takes two years to make one voyage from
Michillimakkinak to these parts.

Lake Superior, formerly termed the Upper Lake, from its northern situation, is
so called from its magnitude, it being the largest on the continent. It may
justly be termed the Caspian of America, and, i^ supposed to be the largest
body of fresh water on the globe. According to the French charts, it is 1500
miles in circumference. A great part of the coast is bounded by rocks and
uneven ground. The water is pure and transparent, and appears generally,
through the lake, to lie upon a bed of huge rocks. It has been remarked, in
regard to the waters of this lake, with how much truth I pretend not to say,
that although their surface, during the heat of summer, is impregnated with no
small degree of warmth, yet on letting down a cup to the depth of about a
fathom, the water drawn from thence is cool and refreshing.

The situation of this lake, from the most accurate observations which have
come to our knowledge, lies between forty-six and fifty degrees of north
latitude, and between nine and eighteen degrees of west longitude from the
meridian of Philadelphia.

There are many islands in this lake, two of them have each land enough, if
proper for cultivation, to form a considerable province; especially Isle Royal,
which is not less than an hundred miles long, and in many places forty broad.
The natives suppose these islands are the residence of the Great Spirit.

Two large rivers empty themselves into this lake, on the north and northeast
side; one is called the Nipegon, which leads to a tribe of the chipeways, who
inhabit a lake of the same name, and the other is the Mschipicooton river, the
source of which is toward James' Bay, from whence there is said to be but a
short portage to another river, which empties itself into that bay.

Not far from the Nipegon is a small river, that, just before it enters the
lake, has a perpendicular fall from the top of a mountain, of more than a
hundred feet. It is very narrow, and appears at a distance like a white garter
suspended in the air. There are upwards of thirty other rivers, which empty
into this lake, some of which are of a considerable size. On the south side of
it is a remarkable point or cape of about sixty miles in length, called point
Chegomegan. About an hundred miles west of this cape, a considerable river
falls into the lake, the head of which is composed of a great assemblage of
small streams. This river is remarkable for the abundance of virgin copper that
is found on and near its banks. Many small islands, particularly on the eastern
shores, abound with copper ore lying in beds, with the appearance of copperas.
This metal might be easily made a very advantageous article of commerce. This
lake abounds with fish, particularly trout and sturgeon; the former weigh from
twelve to fifty pounds, and are caught almost any season of the year in great
plenty. Storms affect this lake as much as they do the Atlantic Ocean; the
waves run as high, and the navigation is equally dangerous. It discharges its
waters from the south east corner, through the Straits of St. Marie, which are
about forty miles long. Near the upper end of these Straits is a rapid, which
though it is impossible for canoes to ascend, yet, when conducted by careful
pilots, may be descended without danger.

Though Lake Superior is supplied by near forty rivers, many of which are
large, yet it does not appear that one tenth part of the waters which are
conveyed into it by these rivers, is discharges by the abovementioned strait.
Such a superabundance of water can be disposed of only by evaporation. That
such a superabundance of water should be disposed of by evaporation is no
singular circumstance. "There are some seas," says an ingenious correspondent,
who has not obliged me with his name, "in which there is a presty just balance
between the waters received from rivers, brooks, etc. and the waste by
evaporation. Of this the Caspian Sea in Asia affords an instance; which, though
it receives several large rivers, has no outlet. There are others,(to speak in
borrowed language) whose expense, exceeds their income; and the^^ would soon
become bankrupt, were it not for the supplies which they constantly receive
from larger collections of water, with which they are connected; such are the
Black and Mediterranean seas; into the former of which there is a constant
current from the Mediterranean, through the Bosphorus of (...) and into the
latter, from the Atlantic, through the Straits of Gibraltar. Others again
derive more from their tributary streams than they loose by evaporation. These
give rise to large rivers. Of this kind are the Dambea, in Africa, the
Winipiseogee, in New Hampshire, Lake Superior and other (...) i^ North America,
and the quantity they discharge is only the difference between the influx and
the evaporation. It is observable that on the shores the evaportion is much
greater than at a distance from them on the ocean. The ^^^^^able cluster of
lakes in the middle of North America, of which Lake Superior is one, was
doubtless designed, by a wise Providence, to furnish the interior (...) of the
country with that supply of vapors, without which, like the (...) parts of
Africa, they must have been a mere desert. It may be thought ^^^^ly surprising
that there should be any water at all discharged from (...) as that the
quantity should bear so small a proportion to what they rece^^^
The entrance into this lake from the straits of St. Marie, affords one of the
most pleasing prospects in the world. On the left may be seen many beautiful
little islands that ^^^tend a considerable way before you; and on the right, an
(...) succession of small points of land, that project a little way in^^ (...)
water, and contribute, with the islands, to render this delightful (...) calm,
and secure from those tempestuous winds, by which the ^^^^ing lake is
frequently troubled.

Lake Huron, into which you enter through the straits of St. (...) is next in
magnitude to lake Superior. It lies between 43 30 and (...) 30' of north
latitude, and between six and eight degrees west ^^^^tude. Its circumference is
about one thousand miles. On the sou^^^^ side of this lake is an island called
Manataulin, signifying a pla^^ of spirits, and is considered as sacred by the
Indians. On the southern part of this lake is Saganaum Bay, about eighty miles
in length and about eighteen or twenty miles broad. Thunder Bay, so called
(...) the thunder that is frequently heard here, lies about half way between
Saganaum Bay and the north west corner of the lake. It is (...) nine miles
across either way. The fish are the same as in Lake Superior. At the northwest
corner this Lake communicates with (...) Michigan, by the Straits of
Michillimakkinak.

The Chipeway Indians live scattered around this lake; particularly near
Saganaum Bay. On its banks are found amazing quantities of (...) cherries.

Michigan Lake lies between latitude 42 10 and 46 30 north* and between 11 and
13 west long* from Philadelphia. Its compound length is 280 miles, from north
to south; its breadth from 60 to (...) miles. It is navigable for shipping of
any burden; and at the (...) eastern part communicates with Lake Huron, by a
strait six miles broad, on the south side of which stands fort
Michillimakki^^^; which is the name of the strait. In this lake are several
kinds of fish, particularly trout of an excellent quality, weighing from 20 to
60 pounds, and some have been taken in the Straits of Michillimakki^^, of 90
pounds. Westward of this lake are large meadows, said to ^^^^tend to the
Missisippi. It receives a number of rivers from the west and east, among which
is the river St. Joseph, very rapid and full of islands; it springs from a
number of small lakes, a little to the northwest of the Miami village, and runs
northwest into the southeast (...) of the lake. On the north side of this river
is fort St. Joseph, from which there is a road, bearing north of east, to
Detroit. The Powte^atamie Indians, who have about 200 fighting men, inhabit
this river opposite fort St. Joseph.

Between Lake Michigan on the west, and Lakes Huron, St. Clair, and the west
end of Erie on the east, is a fine tract of country, peninsulated, more than
250 miles in length, and from 150 to 200 in breadth. The banks of the lakes,
for a few miles, inland, are sandy and barren, producing a few pines, shrub
oaks and cedars. -- Back of this, from either lake, the timber is heavy and
good and the soil luxuriant.

Lake St. Clair lies about half way between Lake Huron and Lake Erie, and is
about ninety miles in circumference. It receives the waters of the three great
lakes, Superior, Michigan and Huron, and dischares them through the river or
strait, called Detroit, (which is in French, the Strait) into Lake Erie. This
lake is of an oval form, and navigable for large vessels. The fort of Detroit
is situated on the western bank of the river of the same name, about nine miles
below Lake St. Clair. The settlements are extended on both sides of the strait
or river, for many miles toward Lake Erie, and some few above the fort.

Lake Erie is situated between forty-one and forty-three degrees of north
latitude, and between 3 40 and 8 degrees west longitude. It is nearly three
hundred miles long, from east to west, and about forty, in its broadest part. A
point of land projects from the north side into this lake, several miles,
toward the southeast, called Long Point. The islands and banks toward the
west end of the lake are so inse^ted with rattle-snakes, as to render it
dangerous to land on them. The lake is covered near the banks of the islands
with the large pond lily, the leaves of which lie one the surface of the water
so thick, as to cover it entirely for many acres together; on these, in the
summer season, lie myri^ds of water-snakes basking in the sun. Of the venomous
serpents which infest this lake, the hissing snake is the most remarkable. It
is about eighteen inches long, small and speckled. When you approach it, it
flattens itself in a moment, and its spots, which are of various colors,
become visibly brighter through rage; at the same time it blows from its mouth,
with great force, a subtle wind, said to be of a nauseous smell; and if drawn
in with the breath of the unwary traveller, will infallibly bring on a decline,
that in a few months must prove mortal. No remedy has yet been found to
counteract its baneful influence. This lake is of a more dangerous navigation
than any of the others, on account of the craggy rocks which project into the
water, in a perpendicular direction, many miles together from the northern
shore, affording no shelter from storms.

Presque Isle is on the southeast shore of this Lake, about lat.4^ 10. From
this to Fort Le Beuf, on French creek, is a portage of 15 miles. About 20 miles
northeast of this is another portage of 9^ miles between Chatoughque Creek,
emptying into Lake Erie, and Chatoughque Lake, a water of Allegany river.

Fort Erie stands on the northern shore of Lake Erie, and the (...) bank of
Niagara river, in Upper Canada. This lake, at its northeast end, communicates
with Lake Ontario, by the river Niagara which runs from south to north, about
30 miles, including its windings* ^^^bracing in its course, Grand Island, and
(...) from the east. About the middle of this river, are the cele^^^ falls of
Niagara, which are reckoned one of the greatest natural curiosities in the
world. The waters which supply the river Niagara (...) near two thousand miles
to the northwest, and passing through (...) lakes Superior, Michigan, Huron and
Erie, receiving in their c^^^se, constant accumulations, at length, with
astonishing grandeur, and down a stupendous precipice of 150 feet
perpendicular; and (...) strong rapid, that extends to the distance of eight or
nine miles (...) fall near as much more; the river then loses itself in Lake
Ontario. The noise of these falls, in a clear day and fair wind, may be (...)
between forty and fifty miles. When the water strikes the bottom^ its spray
rises a great height in the air, occasioning a thick cloud of vapors, in
which, when the sun shines, may be seen, morning and evening, a beautiful
rainbow. Fort Niagara, is situated on the (...) of Niagara river, at its
entrance into Lake Ontario. This (...) that at Detroit, contrary to the treaty
of 1783, are yet in the possession of the British Government.

Lake Ontario is situated between forty-three and forty-five degree north
latitude, and between one and five degrees west longitude. (...) form is nearly
oval. Its greatest length is from southwest to northeast, and its circumference
about six hundred miles. It abounds with fish of an excellent slavour, among
which are the Oswego bass, weighing three or four pounds. It receives the
waters of the (...) river from the south, and of Onondago, at Fort Oswego, from
the southeast, by which it communicates, through Lake Oneida, and Wood Creek,
with Mohawk river. On the northeast, this lake discharges itself through the
river Cataraqui, (which at Montreal, (...) the name of St. Lawrence) into the
Atlantic ocean.

About 8 miles from the west end of Lake Ontario, is a curious cavern, which
the Messisaugas Indians call Manito ah wigwam, or house of the Devil. The
mountains which border on the lake, at this place, break off abruptly, and form
a precipice of 200 feet perpendicular descent; at the bottom of which the
cavern begins. The first opening is large enough for three men conveniently to
walk abreast. It continues of this bigness for 70 yards in a horizontal
direction. Then it falls almost perpendicularly 50 yards, which may be
descended by irregular steps from one to four feet distant from each other. It
then continues 40 yards horizontally, at the end of which is another
perpendicular descent, down which there are no steps. The cold here is intense.
In spring and autumn, there are, once in about a week, explosions from this
cavern, which shake the ground for 16 miles round.

Lake Champlain is next in size to Lake Ontario, and lies nearly east from it,
forming a part of the dividing line between the State of New York and the State
of Vermont. It took its name from a French Governor, whose name was Champlain,
who was drowned in it. It was before called Corlaers Lake. It is about eighty
miles in length from north to south, and in its broadest part fourteen. It is
well s^^^ed with fish, and the land on its borders, and on the banks of its
rivers, is good. Crown Point and Ticonderoga, are situated on the bank of this
lake, near the southern part of it.

Lake George, lies to the southward of Champlain, and is a most clear,
beautiful collection of water, 36 miles long and from 1 to (...) miles wide. It
embosoms more than 200 islands, some say 365; very few of which, are any thing
more than barren rock, covered with heath, and a sew cedar, spruce and hemlock
trees and shrubs, and abundance of rattle snakes. On each side it is skirted by
prodigious mountains, from which large quantities of red cedar are every year
carried to New York for ship timber. The lake is full of fishes, and some of
the best kind; among which are the black or Oswego bass and large speckled
trouts. The water of this lake is about 100 feet above the level of Lake
Champlain. The portage between the two lakes is one mile and a half; but with a
small expense might be reduced to 60 yards; and with one or two locks might be
made navigable through, for batteaux. This lake, in the French charts, is
called Lake St. Sacrament; and it is said that the Roman Catholics, in former
times, were at the pains to procure this water for sacramental uses in all
their churches in Canada: hence probably it derived its name.

RIVERS.] The Missisippi receives the waters of the Ohio and Illinois, and
their numerous branches from the east; and of the Missouri and other rivers
from the west. These mighty streams united, are borne down with increasing
majesty, through vast forests and meadows, and discharged into the Gulf of
Mexico. The great length and uncommon depth of this river, says Mr. Hutchins,
and the excessive muddiness and salubrious quality of its waters, after its
junction with the Missouri, are very singular. In a half pint tumbler of this
water has been found a sediment of one inch of impalpable marle-like substance.
It is, notwithstanding, extremely wholesome and well tas^ed, and very cool in
the hottest seasons of the year; the rowers, who are there employed, drink of
it when they are in the freest perspiration, and never receive any bad effects
from it. The inhabitants of New-Orleans use no other water than that of the
river, which, by being kept in jars, becomes (...) clear.
The direction of the channel is so crooked, that from New Orleans to the mouth
of the Ohio, a distance which does not exceed four hundred and sixty miles in a
strait line, is about eight hundred and fifty-six by water. It may be shortened
at least two hundred and fifty miles, by cutting across eight or ten necks of
land, some of which are not thirty yards wide. Charlevoix relates that in the
year 1722, at Point Coupee or Cut Point, the river made a great turn, and some
Canadians, by deepening the channel of a small brook, diverted the waters of
the river into it. The impetuosity of the stream was so violent, and the soil
of so rich and loose a quality, that, in a short time the point was entirly cut
through, and travelers saved fourteen leagues of their voyage. The old bed has
no water in it, the times of the periodical overflowings only excepted. The new
channel has been since sounded with a line of thirty fathoms, without finding
bottom. Several other points, of great extent, have, in like manner, been since
cut off, and the river diverted into new channels.

In the spring floods the Missisippi is very high, and the current so strong
that it is with difficulty it can be ascended; but this disadvantage is
remedied in some measure by eddies or counter currents, which are generally
found in the bends close to the banks of the river, and assist the ascending
boats. The current at this season descends at the rate of about five miles an
hour. In autumn, when the waters are low, it does not run faster than two
miles, but it is rapid in such parts of the river, as have clusters of islands,
shoals and sand banks. The circumference of many of these shoals being several
miles, the (...) is longer and in some parts more dangerous than in the spring.
(...) merchandise necessary for the commerce of the upper settlements (...)
near the Missisippi, is conveyed in the spring and autumn in (...) rowed by
eighteen or twenty men, and carrying about sorty (...) From New Orleans to the
Illinois, the voyage is commonly per^^^ in eight or ten weeks. A prodigious
number of islands, some of (...) are of great extent, intersperse that mighty
river. Its waters, (...) overflowing its banks below the river lbberville on
the east, and (...) river Rouge on the west, never return within them again,
there (...) many outlets or streams, by which they are conducted into the (...)
Mexico, more especially on the west side of the Missisippi, (...) the country
into numerous islands. These singularities distinguish^ from every other known
river in the world. Below the Ibberville the land begins to be very low on both
sides of the river, across the country, and gradually declines as it approaches
nearer to the (...). The island of New Orleans, and the lands opposite, are to
all appearance of no long date; for in digging ever so little below the
surface, you find water and great quantities of trees. The many beeches and
breakers, as well as ^nlets, which have arisen out of the channel with^^ the
last half century, at the several mouths of the river, are convi^^^ proofs that
this peninsula was wholly formed in the same manner. And it is certain that
when La Salle sailed down the Missisippi (...) the sea, the opening of that
river was very different from what it (...) at present.

The nearer you approach to the sea, this truth becomes more ^^^ing. The bars
that cross most of these small channels, opened by the current, have been
multiplied by means of the trees carried down with the streams* one of which,
stopped by its roots or branches in a shallow part, is sufficient to obstruct
the passage of thousands more, and to fix them at the same place. Astonishing
collections of trees (...) daily seen in passing between the Balize and the
Missouri. No human force is sufficient to remove them, and the mud carried down
by the river serves to bind and cement them together. They are gradually
covered, and every inundation not only extends their length and breadth, but
adds another layer to their height. In less than ten years time, canes, shrubs
and aquatick timber grow on them, and form (...) and islands, which forcibly
shift the bed of the river.

Nothing can be asserted with certainty, respecting the length of this river.
Its source is not known, but supposed to be upwards of three thousand miles
from the sea as the river runs. We only know, that from St. Antony's falls in
lat. 43 it glides with a pleasant clear c^^^ent, and receives many large and
very extensive tributary streams, before its junction with the Missouri,
without greatly increasing the breadth of the Missisippi, though they do its
depth and rapidity. The muddy waters of the Missouri discolor the lower part
of the river, till it empties into the Bay of Mexico. The Missouri is a longe^,
broader, and deeper river than the Missisippi, and affords a more extensive
navigation; it is in fact the principal river, contributing (...) ^o the common
stream than does the Missisippi. It has been ascended by French traders about
twelve or thirteen hundred miles, and (...) the depth of water, and breadth of
the river at that distance, it app^^ed to be navigable many miles further.

From the Missouri river, to nearly opposite the Ohio, the western bank of the
Missisippi, is (some few places excepted) higher than the eastern. From Mine au
fer, to the Ibberville, the eastern bank is higher than the western, on which
there is not a single discernible rising or eminence, the distance of seven
hundred and fifty miles. From the Ibberville to the sea, there are no eminences
on either side, though the eastern bank appears rather the highest of the two,
as far as the English turn. Thence the banks gradually diminish in height to
the mouths of the river, where they are but a few feet higher than the common
surface of the water.

The slime which the annual floods of the river Missisippi leaves on the
surface of the adjacent shores, may be compared with that of the Nile, which
deposits a similar manure, and for many centuries past has insured the
fertility of Egypt. When its banks shall have been cultivated, as the
excellency of its soil and temperature of the climate deserve, its population
will equal that of any other part of the world. The trade, wealth and power of
America, may, at some future period, depend, and perhaps center upon the
Missisippi. This also resembles the Nile in the number of its mouths, all
issuing into a sea that may be compared to the Mediterranean, which is bounded
on the north and south by the two continents of Europe and Africa, as the
Mexican bay is by North and South America. The smaller mouths of this river
might be easily stopped up, by means of those floating trees with which the
river, during the floods, is always covered. The whole force of the channel
being united, the only opening then left would probably grow deep and the bar
be removed.

Whoever for a moment, will cast his eye over a map of the town of New Orleans,
and the immense country around it, and view its advantageous situation, must be
convinced that it, or some place near it, must, in process of time, become one
of the greatest marts in the world.

The falls of St. Anthony, in about latitude 45, received their name from
Father Lewis Hennipin, a French missionary, who traveled into these parts
about the year 1680, and was the first European ever seen by the natives. The
whole river, which is more than 250 yards wide, falls perpendicularly about
thirty feet, and forms a most pleasing cataract. The rapids below, in the space
of three hundred yards, render the descent considerably greater; so that when
viewed at a distance, they appear to be much higher than they really are. In
the middle of the falls is a small island, about forty feet broad, and somewhat
longer, on which grow a few cragged hemlock and spruce trees; and about half
way between this island and the eastern shore is a rock, lying at the very edge
of the fall, in an oblique position, five or six feet broad, and thirty or
forty long. These falls are peculiarly situated, as they are approacable
without the least obstruction from any intervening ^ill or precipice, which
cannot be said of any other considerable fall, perhaps in the world. The
country around is exceedingly beautiful. It is not an uninterrupted plain,
where the eye finds no relief, but composed of many gentle ascents, which in
the spring and summer, are covered with verdure, and interspersed with little
groves, that give a pleasing variety to the prospect.

A little distance below the falls, is a small island of about an acre and an
half, on which grow a great number of oak trees, almost all the branches of
which, able to bear the weight, are, in the proper season of the year, loaded
with eagle's nests. Their instinctive wisdom (...) taught them to choose this
place, as it is secure, on account of the ^^^ids above, from the attacks of
either man or beast.

From the best accounts that can be obtained from the Indians, we learn that
the four most capital rivers on the continent of North America, viz. The St.
Lawrence, the Missisippi, the river (...) and the Oregon, or the river of the
West, have their sources in (...) same neighborhood. The waters of the three
former, are said (...) within thirty miles of each other; the latter is rather
farther west.

This shows that these parts are the highest lands in North America* and it is
an instance not to be paralleled in the other three quarte^^ of the globe, that
four rivers of such magnitude should take their (...) together, and each, after
running separate courses, discharge their (...) into different oceans, at the
distance of more than two thousand miles from their sources. For in their
passage from this spot to the bay^^ St. Lawrence, east; to the bay of Mexico,
south; to Hudson's Bay, north; and to the bay at the straits of Annian, west;
where the (...) Oregon is supposed to empty, each of them traverses upwards of
(...) thousand miles.

The Ohio is a most beautiful river. Its current gentle, waters clea^^ and
bosom smooth and unbroken by rocks and rapids, a single instance only excepted.
It is one quarter of a mile wide at Fort Pit: (...) hundred yards at the mouth
of the Great Kanhaway: 1200 yards (...) Louisville; and the rapids, half a
mile, in some few places below Louisville: but its general breadth does not
exceed 600 yards. (...) some places its width is not 400, and in one place
particularly, (...) below the rapids, it is less than 300. Its breadth in no
one place ^^ceeds 1200 yards, and at its junction with the Missisippi, neither
river is more than 900 yards wide. The alterations in the description of this
river, were received by the Author, from Col. George Morgan of New Jersey, a
gentleman of accurate ^^servation, and who has repeatedly passed this river
from Pittsburg to its ^^^tion with the Missisippi.


Its length, as measured according to its meanders by Capt. Hutchin^, is as
follows: From Fort Pit Miles. To Log's Town 18 Big Beaver Creek 10 Little
Beaver Creek 13 Yellow Creek 11 Two Creeks 21 Long Reach 53 End Long Reach 16
Muskingum 26 Little Kanhaway 12 Hockhocking 16 Great Kanhaway 82 Guiandot 43
Sandy Creek 14 Sioto 48 To Little Miami 126 Licking Creek 8 Great Miami 26 Big
Bones 32 Kentucky 44 Rapids 77 Low Country ^55 Buffalo River 64 Wabash 97 Big
Cave 42 Shawnee River 52^^; Cherokee River 13 Massac 11 Missisippi 46 1188

In common winter and spring floods, it affords 30 or 40 feet water to
Louisville, 25 or 30 feet to La Tarte's rapids, forty miles above the mouth of
the great Kanhaway, and a sufficiency at all times for light batteaux and
canoes to Fort Pit. The rapids are in latitude 38 8. The inundations of this
river begin about the last of March, and subside in July, although they
frequently happen in other months, so that boats which carry 300 barrels of
flour, from the Monongahela, or Youhiogany, above Pittsburg, have seldom long
to wait for water only. During these floods a first rate man of war may be
carried from Louisville to New Orleans, if the sudden turns of the river and
the strength of its current will admit a safe steerage; and it is the opinion
of Col. Morgan, who has had all the means of information, that a vessel
properly built for the sea, to draw 1^ feet water, when loaded, and carrying
from 12 to 1600 barrels of flour, may be more easily, cheaply and safely
navigated from Pittsburg to the sea, than those now in use; and that this
matter only requires one man of capacity and enterprise to ascertain it. He
observes that a vessel intended to be rigged as a brigantine, snow, or ship,
should be double decked, take her masts on deck, and be rowed to the
Ibberville, below which are no islands, or to New Orleans, with 20 men, so as
to afford reliefs of 10 and 10 in the night. Such a vessel, without the use of
oars, he says, would float to New Orleans, from Pittsburg, in 20 times 24
hours. If this be so, what a^greeable prospects are presented to our brethren
and fellow citizens, in the western country.

The rapids at Louisville descend about 10 feet in a length of a mile and a
half. The bed of the river there is a solid rock, and is divided by an island
into two branches, the southern of which is about two hundred yards wide, but
impassable in dry seasons. The bed of the northern branch is worn into channels
by the constant course of the water, and attrition of the pebble stones carried
on with that, so as to be passable for batteaux through the greater part of the
year. Yet it is thought that the southern arm may be most easily opened for
constant navigation. The rise of the waters in these rapids does not exceed 20
or 25 feet. We have a fort, situated at the head of the falls. The ground on
the south side rises very gradually.

At Fort Pit the river Ohio looses its name, branching into the Monongahela
and Allegany.

The Monongahela is four hundred yards wide at its mouth. From thence is twelve
or fifteen miles to the mouth of Yohogany, where it is three hundred yards
wide. Thence to Red stone by water is 50 miles, by land thirty. Then to the
mouth of Cheat river, by water forty miles, by land twenty eight, the width
continuing at three hundred yards, and the navigation good for boats. Thence
the width is about two hundred yards to the western fork, fifty miles higher,
and the navigation frequently interrupted by rapids; which, however, with a
swell of two or three feet, become very passable for boats. It then admits
light boats, except in dry seasons, sixty five miles further, in the head of
Tygart's valley, presenting only some small rapids and falls of one or two feet
perpendicular, and lessening in its width to twenty yards. The Western fork is
navigable in the winter ten or fifteen miles toward the northern of the Little
Kanhaway, and will admit a good wagon road to it. The Yohogany is the
principal branch of this river. It passes through the Laurel mountain, about
thirty miles from its mouth; is, so far, from three hundred to one* (...) and
fifty yards wide, and the navigation much obstructed in dry ^^ther by rapids
and shoals. In its passage through the mounta^^ (...) makes very great falls,
admitting no navigation for ten miles, (...) Turkey foot. Thence to the Great
Crossing, about twenty miles, (...) again navigable, except in dry seasons, and
at this place is two hundred yards wide. The sources of this river are divided
from (...) the Patomak by the Allegany mountain. From the falls, where
^^tersects the Laurel mountain, to Fort Cumberland, the head (...) navigation
on the Patomak, is forty miles of very mountainous (...) Will's creek, at the
mouth of which was Fort Cumberland, is (...) or forty yards wide, but affords
no navigation as yet. Ch^^t (...) another considerable branch of the
Monongahela, is two (...) yards wide at its mouth, and one hundred yards at the
Dunka^^ ^^tlement, fifty miles higher. It is navigable for boats, except (...)
seasons. The boundary between Virginia and Pennsylvania (...) about three or
four miles above its mouth.

The Allegany river, affords navigation at all seasons for light batteaux to
Venango, at the mouth of French creek, where (...) hundred yards wide; and it
is practiced even to Le B^^uf, from (...) there is a portage of fifteen miles
and a half to Presque Isle on (...) Erie.

The country watered by the Mississippi and its eastern bra^^ (...) constitutes
five-eighths of the United States; two of which five (...) are occupied by the
Ohio and its waters: the residuary streams, (...) run into the Gulf of Mexico,
the Atlantic, and the St. Lawrence water the remaining three-eights.

Before we quit the subject of the western waters, we will (...) view of their
principal connections with the Atlantic. Th^se (...) sour, the Hudson's river,
the Patomak, St. Lawrence and (...) Down the last will pass all the heavy
commodities. But the ^^gation through the Gulf of Mexico is so dangerous, and
that (...) Missisippi so difficult and tedious, that it is thought probable
that ^^ropean merchandise will not be conveyed through that channel. (...) is
most likely that flour, timber, and other heavy articles (...) be floated on
rafts, which will themselves be an article for (...) as well as their loading,
the navigators returning by (...) as at present. There will therefore be a
competition (...) the Hudson, the Patomak and the St. Lawrence rivers, for
(...) residue of the commerce of all the country westward of Lake (...) on the
waters of the lakes of the Ohio, and upper parts of Missisippi. To go to New
York, that part of the trade which (...) (...) the lakes or their waters, must
first be brought into Lake Erie. (...) between Lake Superior and its waters,
and Huron, are the rapids (...) Marie, which will permit boats to pass, but not
larger vessels. (...) Huron and Michigan afford communication with Lake Erie by
(...) of eight feet draught. That part of the trade which comes (...) the
waters of the Missisippi, must pass from them through (...) portage into the
waters of the lakes. The portage from the (...) river into a water of Michigan,
is of one mile only. From the (...) Miami, Muskingum, or Allegany, are portages
into the waters of (...) Erie, of from one to fifteen miles. When the
commodities are (...) into and have passed through Lake Erie, there is between
that (...) Ontario an interruption by the falls of Niagara, where the (...) is
of eight miles; and between Ontario and the Hudson's river are portages of the
falls of Onondago, a little above Oswego, of a quarter of a mile; from Wood
creek to the Mohawks river two miles; at the little falls of the Mohawks river
half a mile, and from Schenectady to Alb^ny sixteen miles. Besides the increase
of expense occasioned by frequent change of carriage, there is an increased
risk of pillage produced by committing merchandise to a greater number of hands
^^^ssively. The Patomak offers itself under the following circum^^^nce. For the
trade of the lakes and their waters westward of Lake (...) when it shall have
entered that lake, must coast along its southern shore, on account of the
number and excellence of its harbors; (...) northern, though shortest, having
few harbors, and these unsafe. ^^^ing reached Cayahoga, to proceed on to New
York, it will have (...) hundred and twenty-five miles and five portages;
whereas it is but (...) hundred and twenty five miles to Alexandria, its
emporium on the Patomak, if it turns into the Cayahoga, and passes through
that, Bi^^eaver, Ohio, Yohoganey, (or Monongalia and Cheat) and Patomak, and
there are but two portages; the first of which, between Cayahoga and Beaver,
may be removed by uniting the sources of these (...), which are lakes in the
neighborhood of each other, and in a champaign country; the other, from the
waters of Ohio to Patomak, will be from fifteen to forty miles, according to
the trouble which (...) be taken to approach the two navigations. For the trade
of the (...) or that which shall come into it from its own waters or the
Missisippi, it is nearer through the Patomak to Alexandria than to New York, by
five hundred and eighty miles, and it is interrupted by one portage only. There
is another circumstance of difference too. The ^^kes themselves never freeze,
but the communications between (...) freeze, and the Hudson's river is itself
shut up by the ice three (...) in the year; whereas the channel to the
Chesapeek leads (...) into a warmer climate. The southern parts of it very
rarely (...) at all, and whenever the northern do, it is so near the sources of
the rivers, that the frequent floods, to which they are there liable, (...) up
the ice immediately, so that vessels may pass through the whole winter, subject
only to accidental and short delays. Add to all (...), that in case of a war
with our neighbors of Canada, or the Indians, the rout to New York becomes a
frontier through almost its whole length, and all commerce through it ceases
from that moment. But the channel to New York is already known to practice;
whereas, the ^^per waters of the Ohio and the Patomak, and the great falls of
the latter, are yet to be cleared of their fixed obstructions.

The rout by St. Lawrence is well known to be attended with many advantages,
and with some disadvantages: But there is a fifth rout, which the enlightened
and enterprizing Pennsylvanians contemplate* which, if effected, will be the
easiest, cheapest and surest passage from the lakes, and Ohio river, by means
of the Susquehanna, and a (...) from thence to Philadelphia. The latter part of
this plan, viz. the (...) between Susquehannah and the Schuylkill rivers, is
now actually (...) execution. Should they accomplish their whole scheme, (...)
they appear confident of success, Philadelphia, in all probability (...)
become, in some future period, the largest city that has ever yet (...).

Particular descriptions of the other rivers in the United States, are reserved
to be given in the geographical account of those states, through which they
respectively flow. One general observation respective^^ rivers will, however,
be naturally introduced here, and that i^ (...) the entrance into almost all
the rivers, inlets and bays, from (...) Hampshire to Georgia, are from
southeast to northwest.

BAYS.] The coast of the United Sates is indented with (...) bays, some of
which are equal in size to any in the known (...). Beginning at the
northeasterly part of the continent, and pro^^^ southwesterly, you first find
the bay or gulf of St. Lawrenc* (...) receives the waters of the river of the
same name. Next are (...) to and Chebukto Bays, in Nova Scotia, the latter
distinguished (...) loss of a French fleet in a former war between France and
G. Britain* (...) Bay of Fundy, between Nova Scotia and New-Brunswick, is (...)
for its tides, which rise to the height of fifty or sixty feet, and flow so
^^^ly as to overtake animals which feed upon the shore. Passa^^^ Penobscot,
Broad and Casco Bays, lie along the coast of the (...) Maine. Massachusetts Bay
spreads eastward of Boston, and is comprehended between Cape Ann on the north,
and Cape Cod on the (...). The points of Boston harbor are Nahant and Alderton
points. (...) by Narraganset and other bays in the state of Rhode Island, you
(...) Long Island found, between Montauk point and and the main. (...) Sound,
as it is called, is a kind of inland sea, from three to twenty (...) miles
broad, and about one hundred and forty miles long, (...) the whole length of
the island, and dividing it from Connecticut. It communicates with the ocean at
both ends of Long Island, and (...) fords a very safe and convenient inland
navigation.

The celebrated strait, called Hell-Gate, is near the west end of (...) sound,
about eight miles eastward of New York city, and is (...) able for its
whirlpools, which make a tremendous roaring at (...) times of tide. These
whirlpools are occasioned by the (...) and crookedness of the pass, and a bed
of rocks which (...) quite across it; and not by the meeting of the tides from
east to (...) as has been conjectured, because they meet at Frogs' point,
several (...) above. A skilful pilot may with safety, conduct a ship of any
^^^den through this strait with the tide, or, at still water, with a (...) wind
The following ingenious geological remarks, of Dr. Mitchill's, on certain (...)
parts of the state of New York, deserve a place in this connection.

"From the survey of the fossils in these parts of the American coast, one
becomes ^^^vinced that the principal share of them is GRANTICAL, composed of
the (...) (...) materials with the highest Alps, Py^enees, Caucasus and Andes,
and like them destitute of (...) and petref^ctions.

The occurrence of no horizontal strata, and the frequency of vertical layers,
lead (...) ^^ther to suppose that these are not secondary collections of
minerals, but are certainly (...) of primeval arrangement.

The St^a^ites, Amianthus, Shoerl, Feldspath, Mica, Garnet, Jaspar, Sbi^tus,
(...), and Quartz, must all be considered as primitive fossils, and by no means
of an alluvial (...).

What inference remains now to be drawn from this statement of fact, ^hut (...)
fashionable opinion of considering these maritime parts of our country as
^^ats, (...) from the deeps by the sea, or brought down from the heights by the
rivers, stands ^^ported by reason and contradicted by experience?

A more probable opinion is, that Long Island, and the adjacent continent, were
(...) ^^^mer days continuous, or only separated by a small river, and that the
strait which ^^vides them, was formed by successive inroads of the sea from the
eastward and (...) in the course of ages. This conjecture is supported by the
facts which follow, to (...) 1. The fossil bodies on both shores have a near
resemblance. 2. The rocks and (...) lying between are formed of similar
materials. 3. In several places, particular (...) White-Stone and Hell-Gate,
the distance from land to land is very small. 4. (...) the shore is not
composed of solid rock, there the water continues to make great inc^^ments; and
to cause the high banks to tumble down, as is true, not only here, but at (...)
Newton, and elsewhere, at this very day. 5. The rocky piles in the Sound,
called Executions, and Steeping-St^^es, and those named H^rtleberry Island, Pea
Island, Heart Island, and many more that tie up and down, are strong
circumstances in favor of this opinion; (...) from several of them all the
earthy matter, as far as the highest tides can reach, has long since been
carried away, and from the rest, the fand and gravel continue to be removed by
^^lly attrition; as is true also of the Brothers, R^^ker's, Blackwell's, and
other ^^^nds* (...) There is a tradition among that race of men, who, previous
to the Europeans, possessed this tract of country, that at some distant period,
in former times, their (...) (...) ^oul* step from rock to rock, and cross this
arm of the sea on (...)."


.

Delaware Bay is sixty miles long. from the Cape to the entrance of the river
Delaware at Bombay hook; and so wide in some parts, as that a ship, in the
middle of it, cannot be seen from the land. It opens into the Atlantic
northwest and southeast, between Cape Hen^^pen on the right, and Cape May on
the left. These Capes are eighteen or twenty miles apart.

The Chesapeek is one of the largest bays in the known world. Its entrance is
nearly E. N. E. and S. S. W. between Cape Charles, lat. ^7 12, and Cape Henry,
lat. 37. in Virginia, twelve miles wide, and it extends two hundred and seventy
miles to the northward, dividing Virginia and Maryland. It is from seven to
eighteen miles broad, and generally as much as nine fathoms deep; affording
many commodious ^^^bours, and a safe and easy navigation. It receives the
waters of the Susquehannah, Patomak, Rappahannok, York and James rivers, which
are all large and navigable.

FACE OF THE COUNTRY.} The tract of country belonging to the United States, is
happily variegated with plains and mountains, hills and valleys. Some parts are
rocky, particularly New England, the north parts of New York, and New Jersey,
and a broad space, including the several ridges of the long range of mountains
which run southwestward through Pennsylvania, Virginia, North Carolina, and
part of Georgia, dividing the waters which flow into the Atlantic, from those
which fall into the Missisippi. In the parts east of the Allegany mountains, in
the southern states, the country for several hundred miles in length, and sixty
or seventy, and sometimes more, in breadth, is level and entirely free from
stone. It has been a question agitated by the curious, whether the extensive
tract of low, flat country, which fronts the several states south of New York,
and extends back to the hills, has remained in its present form and situation
ever since the flood: or whether it has been made by the particles of earth
which have been washed down from the adjacent mountains, and by the
accumulation of soil from the decay of vegetable substances; or by earth washed
out of the bay of Mexico by the Gulf Stream, and lodged on the coast: or by the
recess of the ocean, occasioned by a charge in some other parts of the earth.
Several phenomena deserve consideration in forming an opinion on this question.

1. It is a fact, well known to every person of observation who has lived in,
or traveled through the southern states, that marine shells and other
substances which are peculiar to the sea shore, are almost invariably found by
digging eighteen or twenty feet below the surface of the earth. A gentleman of
veracity told me, that in sinking a well many miles from the sea, he found, at
the depth of twenty feet, every appearance of a salt marsh, that is, marsh
grass, marsh mud, and brackish water. In all this flat country, until you come
to the hilly land, wherever you dig a well, you find the water, at a certain
depth, fresh and tolerable good; but if you exceed that depth two or three
feet, you come to a saltish or brackish water that is scarcely drinkable, and
(...) earth dug up, resembles, in appearance and smell, that which is dug (...)
on the edges of the salt marshes.

2. On and near the margin of the rivers are frequently found (...) hills,
which appear to have been drifted into ridges by the force of water. At the
bottom of some of the banks in the rivers, fifteen (...) twenty feet below the
surface of the earth, are washed out from (...) solid ground, logs, branches
and leaves of trees; and the whole (...) from bottom to top, appears streaked
with (...) of logs, leaves (...) sand. These appearances are seen far up the
rivers, from eighty to (...) hundred miles from the sea, where, when the rivers
are low, the (...) are from fifteen to twenty feet high. As you proceed down
the ^^^^ers toward the sea, the banks decrease in height, but still are (...)
of layers of sand, leaves and logs, some of which are entirely (...) and appear
to have been suddenly covered to a considerable depth.

3. It has been observed that the rivers in the southern states, ^^^quently
vary their channels; that the swamps and low grounds (...) constantly filling
up, and that the land, in many places, annually (...) fringes upon the ocean.
It is an authenticated fact, that no longer (...) go than 1771, at Cape
Lookout, on the coast of North Carolina, (...) about latitude 34 50, there was
an excellent harbor, capa^^ enough to receive an hundred sail of shipping at a
time, in a good depth of water. It is now entirely filled up, and is solid
ground. Instance of this kind are frequent along the coast.

It is observable, likewise, that there is a gradual descent of (...) eight
hundred feet, by measurement, from the foot of the mountains (...) the sea
board. This descent continues, as is demonstrated by so^^^ings, far into the
sea.

4. It is worthy of observation, that the soil on the banks of the ^^^ers is
proportionably coarse or fine according to its distance from the mountains.
When you first leave the mountains, and for a considerable distance, it is
observable, that the soil is coarse, with a large mixt^^ of sand and shining
heavy particles. As you proceed toward the (...) the soil is less coarse, and
so on, in proportion as you advance, the (...) is finer and finer, until,
finally, is deposited a soil so fine, that it ^^^solidates into perfect clay;
but a clay of a peculiar quality, for a gr^^ part of it has intermixed with it
reddish streaks and veins, like a ^^^cies of ochre, brought probably from the
red-lands which lie up toward the mountains. This clay, when dug up and
exposed to the weather, will dissolve into a fine mould, without the least
mixture of sand or any gritty substance whatever. Now we know that running
waters, when turbid, will deposit, first, the coarsest and heaviest particles,
^^diately, those of the several intermediate degrees of fineness, and
ultimately, those which are the most light and subtle; and such in fact is the
general quality of the soil on the banks of the southern rivers.

5. It is a well known fact, that on the banks of Savannah river, about ninety
miles from the sea in a direct line, and one hundred and fifty or two hundred,
as the river runs, there is a very remarkable collection of oyster shells of an
uncommon size. They run in a northeast and southwest direction, nearly parallel
to the sea coast, in (...) distinct ridges, which together occupy a space of
seven miles in breadth. The ridges commence at Savannah river, and have been
traced (...) south as the northern branches of the Alatamaha river. They (...)
found in such quantities, as that the indigo planters carry them away in large
boat loads, for the purpose of making lime water, to be used in the manufacture
of indigo. There are thousands and thousands of tons still remaining. "On the
Georgia side of the river, about 15 miles below Silver Bluff, the high road
crosses a ridge of (...) swelling hills of uncommon elevation, and perhaps 70
feet higher than the surface of the river. These hills are from three feet
below the common vegetative surface, to the depth of 20 or 30 feet, composed
entirely of (...) oyster shells, internally of the color and consistency of
(...) white marble: they are of an incredible magnitude, generally 15 or 20
inches in length; from 6 to 8 wide, and from 2 to 4 in thickness, and their
hollows sufficient to receive an ordinary man's foot. They appear all to have
been opened before the period of (...); a transmutation they seem evidently to
have suffered. They are undoubtedly very ancient, or perhaps (...). The
adjacent inhabitants born them to ^ime, for building, for which purpose they
serve very well; and would undoubtedly afford an excellent manure, when their
longs require it, these hills now being remarkably fertile. The he^ps of shells
^e upon a stratum of yellowish land mould, of several feet in depth, upon a
foundation of soft white rocks, that has the outward appearance of free stone,
but on strict examination is really a testaccous concrete, or composition of
sand and (...) sea shells. In short, this testaccous rock approaches near in
quality and appearance to the Bahama or Bermudian White Rock." Bartram's
Tra^els, p. 31^.
The question is, how came they here? It cannot be supposed that they were
carried by land. Neither is it probable that they were conveyed in canoes, or
boats, to such a distance from the place where oysters are now found. The
uncivilized natives, agreeably to their roving manner of living, would rather
have removed to the sea shore, than have been at such immense labor in
procuring oysters. Besides, the difficulties of conveying them would have been
insurmountable. They would not only have had a strong current in the river
against them, an obstacle which would not have been easily overcome by the
Indians, who have ever had a great aversion to labor, but could they have
surmounted this difficulty, oysters, conveyed such a distance, either by land
or water, in so warm a climate, would have spoiled on the passage, and have
become useless. The circumstance of these shells being found in such
quantities, at so great a distance from the sea, can be rationally accounted
for in no other way, than by supposing that the sea shore was formerly near
this bed of shells, and that the ocean has since, by the operation of certain
causes not yet fully investigated, receded. These phenomena, it is presumed,
will authorize this conclusion, That a great part of the flat country which
spreads easterly of the Allegany mountains, had, in some past period, a
superincumbent sea; or rather, that the constant accretion of soil from the
various causes before hinted at, has forced it to retire.

MOUNTAINS.] The tract of country east of Hudson's river, comprehending part of
the State of New York, the four New England States, and Vermont, is rough,
hilly, and in some parts mountainous. These mountains will be more particularly
described under New England. In all parts of the world, and particularly on
this western continent, it is observable, that as you depart from the ocean, or
from a river, the land gradually rises; and the height of land, in common, is
about equally distant from the water on either side. The Andes, in
South-America, form the height of land between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.
The highlands between the District of Maine and the Province of Lower Canada,
divide the rivers which fall into the St. Lawrence, north, and into the
Atlantic, south. The Green Mountains, in Vermont, divide ^he waters which flow
easterly into Connecticut river, from those which fall westerly into Lake
Champlain, Lake George, and Hudson's River.

Between the Atlantic, the Missisippi, and the Lakes, runs (...) range of
mountains, made up of a great number of ridges. The^^ mountains extend
northeasterly and southwesterly, nearly (...) the sea coast, about nine hundred
miles in length, and from (...) one hundred and fifty, and two hundred miles in
breadth. Mr. (...) observes, with respect to that part of these mountains which
he ^^^led over, viz. in the back parts of Pennsylvania, that scarcely (...)
(...) in ten is capable of culture. This, however, is not the case in all (...)
of this range. Numerous tracts ^f fine arable and grazing land ^^^vene between
the ridges. The different ridges which compose (...) immense range of
mountains, have different names in different (...).

As you advance from the Atlantic, the first ridge in Pennsylvania, Virginia,
and North Carolina, is the Blue Ridge or South (...) which is from one hundred
and thirty, to two hundred miles from the sea. Between this and the North
Mountain, spreads a large ^^^vale; next lies the Allegany ridge; next beyond
this is the (...) Ridge, called the Laurel Mountains, in a spur of which, about
(...) 36, is a spring of water, fifty feet deep, very cold, and it is (...)
blue as indigo. From these several ridges, proceed innumerable ^^^less branches
or spurs. The Kittatinny mountains run through (...) northern parts of
New Jersey and Pennsylvania. All these (...) except the Allegany, are separated
by rivers, which appear to (...) forced their passages through solid rocks.

The principal ridge is the Allegany, which has been descri^^^^ called the back
bone of the United States. The general name for (...) mountains, taken
collectively, seems not yet to have been determined* Mr. Evans calls them the
Endless Mountains: Others have called (...) the Appalachian mountains, from a
tribe of Indians, who live (...) river which proceeds from this mountain,
called the Appalachian. But the most common, name i^ the Allegany Mountains, so
called, either from the principal ridge of the range, or from their running
(...) parallel to the Allegany or Ohio river; which, from its head (...) till
it empties into the Missisippi, is known and called by the (...) Allegany
river, by the Seneca and other tribes of the Six Nations, who (...) inhabited
it. These mountains are not confusedly scattered and ^^^en, rising here and
there into high peaks, overtopping each other* (...) stretch along in uniform
ridges, scarcely half a mile high. They (...) as you proceed south, and some of
them terminate in high perpendicular bluffs. Others gradually subside into a
level country, giving rise (...) the rivers which run southerly into the Gulf
of Mexico.

They afford many curious phenomena, from which naturalists have deduced many
theories of the earth. Some of them have been ^^^sical enough* Mr. Evans
supposes that the most obvious of the ^^^ries which have been formed of the
earth is, that it was originally (...) out of the ruins of another. "Bones and
shells which escaped the (...) of softer animal substances, we find mixed with
the old materials, and elegantly preserved in the loose stones and rocky bases
of the highest of these hills." With deference, however, to Mr. Evans's
opinion, these appearances have been much more rationally accounted for by
supposing the reality of the flood, of which Moses has given us (...) count.
Mr. Evans thinks this too great a miracle to obtain (...). But whether is it a
greater miracle for the Creator to alter a globe of earth by a deluge, when
made, or to create one new from the ruin^ of another? The former certainly is
not less credible than the latter. -- "These mountains," says our author,
"existed in their present elevated height before the deluge, but not so bare of
soil as now." How Mr. Evans came to be so circumstantially acquainted with
these pretended facts, is difficult to determine, unless we suppose him to have
been an Antediluvian, and to have surveyed them accurately before the
convulsions of the deluge; and until we can be fully assured of this, we must
be excused in not assenting to his opinion, and in adhering to the old
philosophy of Moses and his advocates. We have every reason to believe that the
primitive state of the earth was totally metamorphosed by the first convulsion
of nature, at the time of the deluge; that the fountains of the great deep were
indeed broken up, and that the various strata of the earth were dissevered, and
thrown into every possible degree of confusion and disorder. Hence those vast
piles of mountains which lift their craggy cliffs to the clouds, were probably
thrown together from the floating ruins of the earth: And this conjecture is
remarkably confirmed by the vast number of fossils and other marine exuvioe
which are found imbeded on the tops of mountains, in the interior parts of
continents remote from the sea, in all parts of the world hitherto explored.
The various circumstances attending these marine bodies, leave us to conclude,
that they were actually generated, lived, and died in the very beds wherein
they were found, and therefore these beds must have originally been at the
bottom of the ocean, though now in many instances elevated several miles above
its surface. Hence it appears that mountains and continents were not primary
productions of nature, but of a very distant period of time from the creation
of the world; a time long enough for the strata to have acquired their greatest
degree of cohesion and hardness; and for the testaccous matter of marine shells
to become changed to a stony substance; for in the fissures of the limestone
and other strata, fragments of the same shell have been frequently found
adhering to each side of the cleft, in the very state in which they were
originally broken; so that if the several parts were brought together* they
would apparently tally with each other exactly. A very considerable time
therefore must have elapsed between the chaotic state of the earth and the
deluge, which agrees with the account of Moses, who makes it a little upwards
of sixteen hundred years. These observations are intended to show, in one
instance out of many others, the agreement between revelation and reason,
between the account which Moses gives us of the creation and deluge, and the
present appearances of nature. Those who wish to have this agreement more fully
and satisfactorily stated, are referred to a very learned and ingenious
"Inquiry into the original state and formation of the earth," by John
Whitchurst, F. R. S. to whom I acknowledge myself indebted for some of the
foregoing observations.

SOIL AND VEGETABLE PRODUCTIONS.} In the United States are to be found every
species of soil that the earth affords. In one part of them or another, they
produce all the various kinds of fruits, grain* pulse and hortuline plants and
roots, which are found in Europe, and have been thence transplanted to America.
Besides these, a great variety of native, vegetable productions.

The natural history of the American States, particularly of New England, is yet
in its infancy. Several ingenious foreigners, skilled in Botany, have visited
the southern, and some of the middle States, and Canada; and these States have
also had ingenious (...) their own, who have made considerable progress in
describing the ^^^tions of those parts of America which they have visited;
(...) England seems not to have engaged the attention, either of (...) or
American Botanists. There was never an attempt to descri^^^ ^^^tanically, the
vegetable productions of the eastern states, till (...) Doct. Cutler, of
Ipswich, turned his attention to the subject. (...) result of his first
enquiries was published in the first volume (...) "Memoirs of the American
Academy of Arts and Science." (...) that period, the Doctor has paid very
particular attention to (...) favorite study;s and the public may shortly
expect to be (...) and improved by his botanical descriptions and discoveries.
The productions of the southern states and of Canada, have not been well
described by any one author, in a work professedly for that purpose; but are
mostly in* (...) with the productions of other parts of the world, in the large
works of European ^^^anists. This renders it difficult to select them, and to
give an accurate connected account of them. To remedy this inconvenience, and
to rescue this country from the reproach of not having any authentic and
scientific account of its natural history, (...) Cutler, who has already
examined nearly all the vegetables of New England, intends (...) soon as his
leisure will admit, to publish a botanical work, of considerable (...) confined
principally to the productions of the New England States. Doctor (...)
Philadelphia, I am informed, is collecting materials for a work of a similar
nature, to comprehend the middle and southern States; so that both together,
will form a complete Natural History of the American States.
(...) liberal and generous communications, I am principally indeb^^^ the
following account of the vegetable productions of the easter^^^ middle States.

N. B. The following catalogues are all incomplete, and (...) only to give
general ideas. They contain, however, more (...) formation concerning the
Natural History of New England, than (...) yet been published.

Grain, cultivated in the Eastern and Middle States.} Indian Corn (Zea mays) a
native (...) of N. America. The varieties of this (...) occasioned by
difference in soil, cultivation and climate, are almost endless. Of all the
different kinds of Indian corn, Botanists have been able to find (...) (...)
species. The differences in the genus of plants is probably accidental, owing
to the above mentioned causes. It is possible however, that among these
varieties, specific character^ may yet be found. What i^ called the sp^^ed
Indian ^orn, is probably on^ a variety. The plant commonly known in the
southern States by the ^ame of (...) of (...) (...) of (...), a^ are rye,
wheat, barley, ^^ts, etc.
Winter and summer rye (^^cale cereale, hybernum et vernum,) the only species
cultivated by our farmers. The winter rye succeeds best in ground newly (...),
but summer rye is frequently sown in old towns, where the land (...) been long
under cultivation. The winter and summer rye are the same species, forming two
varieties; but the winter and summer wh^^ are two distinct species. Several
species of barely are cultivated, the most common is the six ranked (Hordeum
hexastichon,) and the (...) ranked (Hordeum distichon.) The wheat principally
cultivated (...) the winter and summer (Triticum hybernum et aestivum.) -- Oats
(A^^na sativa.) -- Buck-wheat (Polygonum fagopi^um.)

In the southern States, as far north as Virginia, where the lands are
suitable, besides the grain already mentioned, they cultivate rice. -- This
grain was brought into Carolina first by Sir Nathaniel Johnson, in 1688; and
afterward more and of a different kind, probably a variety, was, imported by a
ship from Madagascar* in 1696; till which time it was not much cultivated. It
succeeds well also on the Ohio river, where it is planted both on the high and
low grounds, and in the same fields with Indian corn and other grain. A
gentleman who had planted it several years in his garden, informed Dr. Cutler
that it yielded at the rate of 80 bushels an acre. At Marietta, it has answered
the most sanguine expectations of the inhabitants, producing equal to any other
grain, without being at any time overflowed with water. The Doctor himself saw
it growing in a very flourishing state, on high land, but it had not, at the
season he saw it, began to bloom. It was said not to be of the same species of
the Carolina rice. It is probably the wild rice, which I have been informed
grows in plenty, in some of the interior parts of North America, and is the
most valuable of all the spontaneous productions of the country. In
Pennsylvania grows a sort of grain called, by the Germans, Spelts, which
resembles wheat; and is a very valuable grain.

Cultivated Grasses in the Eastern and Middle States.} All the grasses,
cultivated in the middle and New England States, are found growing indigenous.
It is not improbable, however, that some of them may be naturalized exotics.
The following are the principal grasses sown in our cultivated ground, or in
any way propagated for feed and hay.

Herd's Grass or Fox Tail, (Alopecurus pratensis,) this is reckoned the best
grass we have, is a native, and supposed to be peculiar to this country. Blue
Grass (Alopecurus geniculatus.) -- Many species of Bent. (Agrostis,)
Particularly the Rhode Island Bent (Agrostis interrupta?) The small and great
English grass (Poa trivialis et pratensis.) -- Wire grass (Poa compressa.) --
Fowl Meadow grass (Poa aviaria, spiculis subb^floris.) "The Fowl meadows, on
Neponsit river, between Dedham and St^ughton, are considered by some a
curiosity. A large tract of ^and is there cleared and sowed with an excellent
kind of grass, without the assistance of man." Dr. Fisher.
Red and white Clover (Trifolium pratense et repens.)

The grasses of Virginia, according to Mr. Jefferson, are Lucerne, St. Foin,
Burnet, Timothy, Ray and Orchard grass, red, white and yellow Clover;
Greenswerd, Blue grass and Crab grass. South of Virginia very little attention
is paid to the cultivation of grasses. The winters are so mild, that the cattle
find a tolerable supply of food in the woods.

Native Grasses in New England.} Besides the cultivated grasses, the States of
New England abound with a great variety which are found growing in their native
soils and situations, many of which have not been described by any botanical
writers. The small experiments which have been made, sufficiently evince that
several of them make excellent hay. They might be greatly improved by
cultivation, and are highly worthy the attention of our farmers. Those which
are found most common are the following, viz.

The vernal grass (Anthoxanthum odoratum.) -- Timothy, or bulbus cat's tail
grass (Phlcum pratense.) -- Several species of Panic grass (Panicum) -- Several
species of bent (Agrostis) -- Hair grass (Aira aquatica) -- Numerous species of
Poa* -- Quaking grass, (Briza) several species -- Cock's foot grass (Dactylis
glomerata) -- Millet (Milium effusum) -- Fescue grass (Festuco) many species --
Oat grass (Avena spicata) -- Reed grass (Arundo) several species -- Brom grass
(Bromus squarrosus) -- Lime grass (Elymus hystrix) -- Barley grass (Hordeum
pratense) -- Dog's or couch grass (Triticum repens) -- Many species of rush
grass (Juncus) -- Numerous species of Carex, in fresh and salt, marshy (...)
Several species of Beard grass (Andropogon) -- Soft grass, ((...) lanatus et
odoratus) -- Besides these, there are many valuable (...) which, at present,
are non-descripts.

Wild Fruits in New England.] Black Current (Ribes (...) Gooseberry (Ribes
glossularia) -- Prickly Gooseberry (Ribes (...) bati) -- Two species of Grapes
-- the Black grape (Vitis (...) and Fox grape (Vitis vulpina.) Of these two
species we (...) many varieties, differing only in size, color and taste. An
^^^lent wine, and in large quantities, has lately been made by (...) French
people, at their new settlement on the Ohio river, from (...) native grapes,
without any kind of cultivation. They collected (...) grapes promiscuously from
all the varieties growing in that (...) By separating them, wines of different,
and no doubt some of (...) of a much better quality, might have been made. The
native (...) propagated with great ease; its growth is luxuriant, overspread^^^
highest trees in the forests, and by proper attention, would aff^^^ ample
supply of wines, in the northern as well as southern States. (...) principal
difficulty seems to be the want of a proper knowledge of (...) process in
making wine, and preparing it for use. -- Barberry (...) (Berberis vulgaris) --
Whortleberry (Vaccinium ligustrinum) -- ^^^^berry (Vaccinium corymbosum) --
White Whortleberry (Vac^^^^ albu^^) -- Indian Gooseberry (Vaccinium frondosum)
-- Long (...) Whortleberry (Vaccinium stamineum) -- Craneberry (Vaccinium (...)
couo^) -- Yellow Plumb (Prunus americana) -- Beach Plumb ((...) marati^^a* --
Large black cherry (Prunus nigra) -- Purple (...) (Prunus virginiana) -- Wild
red Cherry (Prunus rubra) -- (...) (...) Choke Cherry (Prunus canadensis) --
Mountain Cherry ((...) ^ontana). -- Service tree (Mespilus canadensis) --
Bramble (...) (Rubus occidentalis) -- Sawteat Blackberry or Bumblekites
(^^fruticosus) -- Briar Blackberry (Rubus moluccanus) -- Dewberry (Rubus
hispidus) -- Common Raspberry (Rubus idaeus) -- Smo^^^ stalked Raspberry (Rubus
canadensis) -- Superb Raspberry (^^^^odoratus) -- Strawberry (Fragaria vesca.)
The native strawberry is much improved by cultivation, and produces a larger
and better flavoured fruit, than the exotic. -- Mulberry (Morus nigra.)

For information on this article, respecting the Southern States, the reader
may consult what Catesby, Clayton, Jefferson and Bartra^^ (...) written upon it.

Nut Fruit.] White Oak (Quercus alba) -- Red Oak (Quercus ^^bra) and several
other species with smaller fruit. -- Black Walnut (^^glans nigra) -- White
Walnut, Butternut, or Oilnut (Juglans catha^^ -- White, or round nut Hiccory
(Juglans alba) -- Shag-bark Hico^^^ (Juglans cineria?) The same, probably, as
Clayton's Scaly bark hiccory of Virginia. (Juglans (...) (...) squamoso.)
-- Chestnut (Fagus castanca) -- Chinquipin, or dwa^^ Chestnut (Fagus pumila) --
Beech nut (Fagus sylvatica.) -- Ha^c^^ (Corylus avallana) -- Filbert (Corylus
cornuta.)

We may here mention the Paccan or Illinois nut (Juglans alba, ^^^^lis
lanceolatis, acuminatis, serratis, tomentosis, fructu minore, (...) compresso,
vix insculpto, dulci, putamine, tenerrimo. Jefferson.) The nut is about the
size of a large long acorn, and of an oval form, the shell* is easily cracked,
and the kernel shaped like that of a (...). The trees which bear this fruit
grow, naturally, on the Missisippi (...) its branches, south of forty degrees
north latitude. They grow well when planted in the southern Atlantic States.

Medicinal Plants in New England.} Among the native and uncultivated plants of
New England, the following have been employed for medicinal purposes. Water
Horehound (Lycopus virginica) -- Blue Flag (Iris virginica) -- Skunk Cabbage
(Arum Americanum* Catesh* and Dracontium foetidum* Linn.) -- Partridge-berry
(Mitchella rep^ns) -- Great, and Marsh Plantain (Plantago major et maritima) --
Witch Hazel (Hamamelis virginica) -- Hounds tongue (Cynog^o^^um officinale) --
Comfrey (Symphytum officin.) -- Bear's ear Sanicle (Co^^^sa g^elini) --
Appleperu (Datura strammonium) -- Bittersweet (Solanum dulca-mare) --
Tivertwig, or American Maxerion (Celastrus scandens) -- Elm The bark of the
sweet Elm, is a most excellent mucilage.
(Ulmus americana) -- Great Laserwort, and Wild Angelica (Laserpitium trilobum,
et latifolium) -- Angelica, or American ^^^erwort (Angelica lucida) -- Water
Elder (Virburnum opulus) -- Elder (Sambucus nigra) -- Chickweed (Alfina ^pedia)
-- Pettimorrel* or Life of man (Aralia racemosa) -- Sarsaparilla (Aralia
nudicaulis? -- Marsh Rosemary (Statice limonium) -- Sundew (Drosera
rotundifolia) -- Solomon's Seal (Convallaria stellata?) -- Adder's tongue
(Convallaria bi^olia) -- Unicorn (Aletrisfarinosa) -- Sweet Flag (Acorus
calamus) -- Several species of Dock (Rumex) -- Bistort (Polygonum bistorta) --
Spice wood, or Feverbush (Laurus benzoin) -- Sassatras (Laurus saffa^ras) --
Consumption root (Pyrola rotundifolia) -- Rheumatism weed (Pyrola minor) --
Mouse ear (Cerastium viseosum) -- Gargit, or Skok^ (Phytolacca decandria) --
Wild Hyssop (Lythrum hysopis) -- Agrimony (Agrimonia eupatoria) -- Common
Avens, or Her^ Bennet (Geum Virg.) -- Water Avens, or Throat root (Geum rivale)
-- Blood root, or Puccoon (Sanguinario canadensis) -- Celandine (Chelidonium
majus) -- Yellow Water Lily (Nymphoea lutea) -- Pond Lily (Nymphoea alba) --
Golden thread, or Mouth root (Nigella?) -- Liverwort (Anemone hepatica) --
Crowsfoot (Ranunculus Pennsylv.) -- Germander (Teucrum Virg.) -- Catmint, or
Catnip (Nepeta cataria) -- Head Betony (Betonica officinalis) -- Horsemint,
Spearmint, Watermint and Penniroyal (Me^th^ spicata, viridis, aquatica, et
pulegium) -- Ground ^vy, or Gill go over the ground (Glecoma hederacea) --
Hedgene^le (Stachys sylvatica) -- Horehound (Marruhium vulgar) -- Motherwort
(Leonurus cardiaca) -- Wild Marjorum (Origanum vulgar) -- Wild Lavender
(Trichostema?) Wood Betony (Pidicularis canadensis) -- Shephard's p^^se or*
pouch (Th^apspi burs. pastoris) -- Water Cresses (Sisymbrium nasturtium) --
Cranesbill (Geranium macrorhizum) -- Marsh Mallow (Althoea officin.) -- Mallow
(Malva rotundifolia) -- Succory (Crepis barba^a) -- Burdock (Arctium lappa) --
Devil's bit (Serratula amara) The root resembles the European Devils bit
(Scabivla succisa) from which circumstance the English name has probably been
applied to this plant. -- Tanley (Tan^cetum vulgar) -- Wormwood (Artemi^ia
absinthiani) -- Life everlasting (Gnaphalium odoratissimum?) -- Colts foot
(Tussilago farsara) -- Goldenrod (Solidago canad.) -- Elecampane (Inula
helenium) -- Mayweed (Anthemis cotula) -- Yarrow (Achillea millefolia) --
American Pride (Lobelia cardinalis) Three other species of Lobelia (Lobelia
dortmanna, kal^^ii, et ^iphilitica) -- Dragon root (Arum Virg.) -- Stinging
Nettle (Urticaurens) -- White Walnut, Butter nut, or Oilnut (Juglans
cathartica) -- Swamp Willow (Salix cinerea?) -- Sweet Gale (Myrica gale) --
White Hellebore or Pokeroot (Veratrum album) -- Moonwort (Osmundalunaria) --
Female Fern (Pteris caudata) -- Hearts tongue (Alplenium scolopend^^ -- um --
Splcenwort (Asplenium salicifolium) -- Black Maidenhair (A^^^um ad^antum.) To
the above we may add, Arsmart (Poly^^^ Sagitatum. Linn.)

Among a great variety of other medicinal plants in the south^^^ and middle
States are Pink root ((...)) an excellent ^^^fuge -- Senna (Cassia ligustrina)
-- Clivers or Goose grass (Galium ^^^um) -- Palma Christi (Ricinus) from which
the Castor oil is ^^^ed -- Several species of Mallow -- Indian Physic (Spiraea
trif^^^ Euphorbia Ipecacuanhae -- Pleurisy root (Asclepias decumbens) -- V^^^ia
Snake root (Aristolochia serpentaria) -- Black snake root (A^^cemola) -- Seneca
rattle snake root (Polygala Senega) -- Valerian (^^ria^a locusta radiata) --
Ginseng (Panax quinquefolium) -- Angelica (Angelica fylvestris) -- Cassava
(Jatropha urens.)

Flowering Trees and Shrubs in the United States.} Globe flower (Cephalanthus
ocei^^lis) -- Pigeonberry (Cissus sicyoide^^) ^^^^ginian Dogwood (Cornus
florida) -- Conel (Cornus canadens^^) -- (...) flowered Honeysuckle (Azalea
nudiflora) -- White American (...) suckle (Azalea viscosa) -- American Tea
(Ceanothus americanus) -- ^^^ry Honeysuckle (Lonicera diervilla) -- Virginia
scarlet Honey (...) (Lonicera virginiana) -- Dwarf Cherry Honeysuckle (Lonicera
^^^densis) -- Evergreen spindle Tree (Euonymus sempervirens) -- Vir^^^ Itea
(Itea virginica) Stag's horn Sumach (Rhus typhinum) -- (...) Haw (Viburnum
prunifolium) -- Blackberried Elder (Sambucus (...)) -- Redberried Elder
(Sambucus canadensis) -- Scarlet flowered (...) Chestnut (AEsculus pavia) --
Judas Tree (Cercis canadensis) -- (...) Laurel (Kalmia latifolia) -- Dwarf
Laurel (Kalmia angustifolia) -- (...) leaved Marsh Cistus (Ledum Thymifolium)
-- American Senna ((...) dora canadensis) -- Rose bay Tree (Rhododendrum
maximum) -- (...) pepper bush (Andromeda arborea) -- Red bud Andromeda
(Andromeda racemosa) -- Bog evergreen (Andromeda calyculata) -- (...) Redbud
(Andromeda nitida) -- Carolina Iron wood Tree (Andro^^^ plumata) -- Carolinian
Syrianga (Philadelphus inodorus) -- Sorbus (...) (Sorbus aucuparia) -- Mountain
Ash (Sorbus americana) Service (...) (Mespilus canadensis) -- Medlar Tree
(Mespilus nivea) -- Sweet (...) Crab Apple tree (Pyrus coronaria) -- Meadow
sweet (Spiraea salic^^^lia) -- Queen of the Meadows (Spiraea tomentosa) --
Canadian Spir^^^ (Spiraea hypericifolia) -- Wild Rose (Rosa carolina) --
Pennsylvania Swamp Rose (Rosa palustris) -- Superb Raspberry (Rubus odorat^^^
Carolian Fothergilla (Fothergilla gardeni) -- Tulip Tree (Liriode^^^^ (...)
tulipifera) -- Evergreen Tulip Tree (Magnolia grandiflora) -- (...) Trumpet
flower (Bignonia radicans) -- Virginian Stewartia (Stewa^^^ malacodendron) --
Franklin Tree (Franklinia alatamaha) -- Locust (...) (Robinia pseud acacia) --
Roseflowered Locust Tree (Robinia rose^^^ Swamp Willow (Salix cineria?) --
Redflowered Maple (Acer (...).

N. B. The above catalogue is far from being complete, but (...) serve to give
a tolerable idea of this class of shrubs, in the United States.

Forest Trees.] Were we possessed of accurate materials for the ^^^pose, it
would far exceed the limits a work embracing such a (...) of subjects, to give
a complete catalogue of our trees. From the (...) going catalogues the reader
must necessarily conclude that they (...) very numerous. And it ought to be
observed that almost all of (...) for some purpose o^ other, have been used as
timber. Some of (...) most useful (...) not be omitted, and are (...) following
-- ELM (Ulmus americana) Of this tree there is but one species Query. Is not
what is called the Sweet Elm, the bark of which i^ used medicinally* (...)
highly esteemed, (...) different species from the U^mas Americana^ --
of which there are two varieties, the white and the red. WILD CHEERY; many
species, highly valued for cabinet work. LOCUST (Robinia pseudo-acacia) of
quick growth, good for fuel, and excellent for posts to set in the ground, and
trunnels for ships. EIRCH; several species, 1. White (Betula alba) 2. Black
(Betula nigra) 3. Red or yellow (Betula lenta) -- OAK; several species 1. Black
(Quercus niger) 2. Red (Quercus rubra) three varieties. 3. White (Quercus alba)
4. Shrub or ground oak (Quercus pumila) 5. Chestnut oak (Quercus prinus) 6. Live
oak (Quercus sempervirens -- Quercus Virginiana. Millar) 7. Black jack oak
(Quercus aquatica, Clayton) The two last are peculiar to the southern States.
CHESTNUT (Fagus castanea) chiefly used for fencing. BEACH (Fagus sylvatica)
three varieties. PINE (Pinus) seven species* 1. White (Pinus strobus) the
prince of the American forests, in size, age and majesty of appearance. It is
found in the greatest abundance in Maine, New Hampshire, and Vermont --
Excellent for masts, bowsprits and yards for ships. -- 2. Yellow (Pinus pinea)
its plank and boards are used for the floors of houses and the decks of ships
-- 3. Black or Pitch pine (Pinus taeda) when burnt in kilns it makes the best
of charcoal; its knots and roots being full of the ter^binthine oil, when
kindled, afford a brighter light than candles; its foot is collected and used
for lampblack. It grows sparsely in the N. England and middle States, but in
the greatest plenty in the southern States, between the sea coast and the
mountains. From it they (...) tar in large quantities. 4. The Larch (Pinus
larix) Its turpenti^e is said to be the same with the Burgundy pitch. Besides
these, naturalists reckon the Fir (Pinus balsamea) -- Spruce (Pinus canadensis)
^Hemlock (Pinusabies) -- ARBOR VITAE (Thuya occidentalis) the same (...) what
is called WHITE CEDAR. JUNIPER or RED CEDAR (Juniperns virginica) It produces
the Juniperberry. WHITE CEDAR, of the southern States (Cupressus Thyoides)
different from the white cedar of the northern states. CYPRESS (Cupressus
disticha) Found only in the southern states -- Used for shingles and other
purposes. Grows in swamps, very large. WHITE WILLOW (Salix alba) The bark of
its root is an excellent substitute for the Peruvian bark. ASH (Fraxinus
americana) two species, Black, or swamp Ash, and White Ash. MAPLE, three
species; 1. White (Acer negundo) much used in cabinet work. 2. Red (Acer
rubrum) 3. Black Rock or Sugar Maple (Acer saccha^inum) Its sap has a
saccharine quality; and when refined and hardened by boiling and baking, makes
a well tasted and wholesome sugar, the manufacture of which has greatly
increased in the eastern and middle States, within a few years past.

There is in the United States, an infinitude of trees of less note, and many
probably equally noticeable with those enumerated, for a catalogue and
descriptions of which, I must refer the reader, till a more perfect catalogue
he furnished by Dr. Cutler and Dr. Ba^ton* to Catesby's Natural History -- Dr.
Clayton's Flora Virginica -- Mr. Jefferson's Notes on Virginia -- Mr. Bartram's
Travels through North and South Carolina, etc. -- Dr. Cutler's paper in the
Memoirs of the American Academy -- and Dr. Belknap's History of New Hampshire,
Vol. III.

Exotic Fruits.] Of these, Apples are the most common in the United States.
They grow in the greatest plenty and variety in (...) eastern and middle
States; and the cider which is expressed (...) them, affords the most common
and wholesome liquor that is (...) by the inhabitants. The Crab Apple (Pyrus
coronaria) though not an ^^^oti^, on account of its being a genuine, but
distinct species of the ^^ple, ought to be mentioned in this connection. It
grows in all (...) of North America, which have been explored, from the
Atlantic (...) far west as the Missisippi. Its blossoms are remarkably
fragrant; (...) fruit small, possessing, perhaps of all vegetables, the keenest
(...). The cider made of this fruit, is admired by connoisseurs. It (...)
excellent vinegar. The European Crab Apple is very different (...) ours. The
other exotic fruits are pears, peaches, quinces, mulberries, plumbs, cherries,
currants, barberries, of all which, except quinces (...) barberries, we have
many species and varieties. These, with a (...) apricots, and nectarines,
flourish in the eastern states, and are i^ (...) section in the middle states.
"In regard to tree fruit" (says Dr. Tenney of Exeter, in New Hampshire, in a
(...) to Dr. Belknap) "we are in too northern a climate to have it of the first
quality, without particular attention. New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania,
have it in (...). As you depart from that tract, either southward or northward,
it degenerates. I (...) however, that good fruit might be produced even in New
Hampshire, with suitable ^^^tion." Belknap's Hist. N. H. VOL. III. p. (...).


The exotic fruits of the southern states, besides those already mentioned, are
figs, oranges and lemons.

Pulse and Hortuline Plants and Roots.} Besides those transplanted from Europe
(...) America, of which we have all the various kinds that Europe produces, the
following are natives of this country. Potatoes, (Solanum tuberosum) Ground
Nuts, a sort of potatoe, probably a species, highly relished by some people;
Tobacco (Nicotian^) (...) Pumpkins (Cucurbita pepo) -- Cymlings (Cucurbita
verrucosa) (...) Squashes (Cucurbito melopepo) Cantelope melons, Beans, Peace,
(...) Probably others.

ANIMALS.] America contains, at least, one half, and the terri^^^ of the United
States about one fourth of the quadrupeds of the know^^ world. Some of them are
common to North America, and to (...) European and Asiatic parts of the Eastern
Continent; others are peculiar to this country. All those that are common to
both ^^^nents, are found in the northern parts of them, and are such as may
(...) supposed to have migrated from one continent to the other. Comparing
individuals of the same species, inhabiting the different continents, some are
perfectly similar; between others there is some difference in size, color or
other circumstances; in some few instances (...) European animal is larger than
the American; in others the reverse i^ true. A similar variety, arising from
the temperature of the (...) quantity of food furnished in the parts they
inhabit, degree of safety, etc. takes place between individuals of the same
species, in different parts of this continent.

But our information on this suject is not sufficient to autho^^^ many
observations. It is very probable that some of our quadrup^^^ are utterly
unknown; others are known only by common report, (...) hunters and others, and
therefore could not be scientifically described and with respect to many
others, the multiplying and misapplying names has produced great uncertainty
and confusion. Animals in America which have been hunted for their flesh of
fur, such as the (...), beaver, etc. have become less in fi^e since the arrival
of the Europeans.


The Rev. Dr. Cutler, has obliged me with the Following Catalogue of our
Animals, with their Linnoean names annexed.

Seal Phoca vitulina. Wolf Canis lupus Red fox Canis alopex? Gray Fox Canis.
Wild cat Felis lynx. Skunk Viverra p^torius. Otter Mustela lutra? M^^tin
Mustela. -- Wo^f^l Mustela martes? Ermi^e Mustela ^rminea. Bear Ursus arctos.
(...) Ursus lotor. Wolverine Ursus luscus. Wood chuck (Ursi vel mustelae
species.) M^le Talpa europea. Shrew mouse Sorex cristatus. Ground mouse Sorex
murinus. Field mouse Sorex araneus. P^^cupine Hystrix dorsata. Have Lepus
timidus? Rabbit Lepus c^^niculus. (...) Castor fiber. Musquash Castor
zibethicus. M^^k -- Black ^at Mus -- Black squirrel Sciurus niger. Gray ditto
Sciurus cinerens. Red ditto Sciurus ^lavus. S^^iped ditto Sciurus striatus.
Flying ditto Sciurus v^lans. Mo^^e Cervus tarandus. Deer Cervus dama.

Mamillary biped
^at Vespertilio murinus.

The importance of this part of our natural History, has induced (...) to pay
the most assiduous attention to it, and to seek information from every
authority on the subject. With the liberal and generous assistance of an
ingenious friend, Dr. Fisher, of Beverly.
I have been enabled to form the following catalogue of the Quadruped animals
within the United States, and to add the descriptions of them which succeed.

Ma^^oth * Caribou * Bear * Catamount * H^pp^ta^^us This animal is added upon
the authority of Dr. Mitchill, Prof. Not. Hist. etc. Columbia College, N. York.
* Red Deer * Wolverene * Cougar * Bison * Fallow Deer * Wolf * Mountain Cat *
Moose * Roe * Fox * Lynx * Margay * Opossum * Flying Squir * M^squash *
Kincajou * Woodchuck Bat * Morse * Weasel Urchin * Field Mouse * Seal * Ermine
* Hare * Wood Rat Maniti * Martin * Raccoon * Shrew Mouse * Sapajou * Mink *
Fox Squirrel * Purple Mole * Sagoin * Otter * Gray Squirrel * Black Mole *
Fisher * Red Squirrel * Water Rat * Skunk * Striped Squir. * Beaver

N. B. Those Animals to which an asterism Col. G. Morgan, in a note to the
Author, says they are found "only at the (...) on the Ohio; some few scattered
grinders, have indeed been found in other places* (...) it has been supposed
these have been brought from the abovementioned deposit, by (...) warriors and
others who have passed it; as we know many have been spread in this (...)
^^^ner. When I first visited this falt lick (says the Col.) in 1766, I met here
a large (...) the Iroquoi^ and Wyandot Indians, who were then on a war
expedition against the (...) saw tribe. The head chief was a very old man, to
be engaged in war; he told me (...) 84 years old; he was probably as much as
80. I fixed on this venerable chief, as a (...) from whom some knowledge might
be obtained. After making him some small ^^^ble presents of tobacco, paint,
ammunition, etc, and complimenting him upon the (...) of his nation -- their
prowess in war and prudence in peace, intimated to him my ^^^ance respecting
the great bones before us, which nothing but his superior knowledge (...)
remove; and accordingly requested him to inform me what he knew concerning
(...) Agreeably to the customs of his nation, he answered me in substance, as
follows.

"Whilst I was yet a boy I passed this road, several times, to war against the
(...) and the wise old Chiefs, among whom was ^^y grandfather, then gave me the
(...) handed down to us, respecting th^se bones, the like to which are found in
(...) other (...) the country." It is as follows.

"After the Great Spirit first formed the world, he made the various birds and
(...) now inhabit it. He also made man; but having formed him white, and very
(...) and ill-tempered, he placed him on one side of it where he now inhabits,
and from (...) he has lately found a passage across the great water to be a
plague to us. As the (...) Spirit was not pleased with this his work, he took
of black clay, and made what (...) a Negro, with a woolly head. This black man
was much better than the white man, (...) he did not answer the wish of the
Great Spirit; that is, he was imperfect. At (...) Great Spirit having procured
a piece of pure, fine red clay, formed from it, the (...) perfectly to his
mind; and he was so well pleased with him, that he placed him (...) (...)
island, separate from the white and black men; and gave him r^les for his
conduct, (...) (...) happiness in proportion as they should be observed. He
increased exceedingly. (...) (...) perfectly happy for ages; but the foolish
young people, at length forgetting his (...), became exceedingly ill-tempered
and wicked. In consequence of this, the Great Spirit created the great
buffaloe, the bones of which you now see before us; these made (...) upon the
human species alone, and destroyed all but a few, who repented and prom^^^^ the
Great Spirit to live according to his laws, if he would restrain the devouring
ene^^^ ^hereupon he sent lightning and thunder and destroyed the whole race, in
this spot, (...) (...), a male and a female, which he shut up in yonder
mountain, ready to let loose (...), (...) occasion require."

(...) M^rgan adds, "I have every material ^one of the (...) of this animal,
with (...) (...) bones in which the grinders are entire; and several of the
great tusks, one of (...) feet long" -- He adds, "and twenty in circumference."
But supposing some (...), and that probably the word inches ought to have been
added to the twenty, I have (...) to add it -- or to alter it.

(...), of considerable importance, have been established at the lick, where
these (...) are found.


is prefixed, (...) animals; whose skins are sometimes dressed in alum, with
the (...) and worn in dress; or whose fur or soft hair is used for various
^^^ufactural purposes.

The Wolf, Fox, Weasel, Ermine, Otter, Flying Squirrel, (...), Water Rat, are
of the same species with the European anima^^^ (...) same name.

The Fallow Deer, Gray Fox, Martin, Otter, Opossum, Wood^^^ (...) Hare, some of
the Squirrels, and the Beaver, have been tamed. ^^^bably most of these, and
some others, might be perfectly do^^^ed. It has been observed of our wild
animals, in general, the (...) are not of so savage a nature as those in Europe.

Of the animals supposed to be larger in America than in (...) are the
following, viz. Moose or Elk, Fallow Deer, Bear, (...), Otter, and Beaver. Of
those that are less, are the Hare, Red (...) and Shrew Mouse.

MAMMOTH.] This name has been give to an unknown (...) whose bones are found in
the northern parts of both the old (...) world. From the form of their teeth,
they are supposed to have (...) carnivorous. Like the Elephant they were armed
with tusks of (...) but they obviously differed from the elephant in size;
their (...) prove them to have been 5 or 6 times as large. These enormous (...)
are found in several parts of North America, * particularly about (...) salt
licks or springs, near the Ohio river. These licks were formerly frequented by
a vast number of graminivorous animals, on account of the salt, of which they
are excessively fond. From the appearance of these bones, some of which are
entirely above ground, others wholly burried, it is probable that the animals
died at different periods, some perhaps as lately as the first settlement of
this country by the Europeans.

Mr. Jefferson informs us that a late Governor of Virginia, having (...) some
delegates of the Delawares, what they knew or had heard respecting this animal,
the chief speaker immediately put himself into (...) oratorial attitude, and
with a pomp suited to the supposed elevation of the subject, informed him that
it was a tradition handed down from their fathers, "That in ancient times a
herd of them came to the Big-bone licks, and began an universal destruction of
the bears, deer, elks, buffaloes, and other animals which had been created for
(...) use of the Indians: that the Great Man above, looking down and seeing
this, was so enraged that he seized his lightning, descended to the earth,
seated himself upon a neighboring mountain, on a rock, on which his seat and
the print of his feet are still to be seen, and (...) his bolts among them till
the whole were slaughtered, except the ^ig bull, who, presenting his forehead
to the shafts, shook them (...) as they fell; but at length missing one, it
wounded him in the (...); whereon, springing round, he bounded over the Ohio,
the Wa^^^, the Illinois, and finally over the great lakes, where he is living
at this day." It has been said by Mr. Jefferson that the grinders of the
Mammoth are five or six (...) large as those of the elephant. Col. Morgan says
not; "I have seen," he observes, "that grinder of an elephant, as large and as
heavy as the largest of the Mammoth. -- They are indeed thinner, deeper rooted
and differently shaped, denoting a graminivorous (...)* whereas the grinders of
the Mammoth resemble those of a wolf or dog* and (...) have been carnivorous."


HIPPOPOTAMUS.] That this animal ever existed in America was (...) supposed
till a few years ago. The ingenious Dr. Mitchill, in a (...) to the Author,
says, "That in the year 1788, some teeth were (...) on Long Island, which, from
their shape, size and consistence, (...) a doubt, belong to the HIPPOPOTAMUS.
Some of them, which (...) presented to me, I forwarded to Mr Peale of
Philadelphia. They (...) exactly with those of the same animal, which I saw in
the (...) Museum, at Oxford; and in the Leveri^^ Collection at Lon^^^. They
moreover correspond, precisely, with the plate and description of that animal's
skull and jaws, as given by Dr. Grew, i^ Musco Regalis Societatis; and printed
at London in folio, 1681. He is, therefore, worthy of a place in our history as
well as the Mammoth."

BISON. This animal has generally been called the Buffalo, but very improperly,
as this name has been appropriated to another ^^^mal. He is of the same species
with our common neat cat^^ (...) difference being the effect of domestication.
Compared with the (...) cattle, the Bison is considerably larger, especially
about the fore (...) of his body. On his shoulders, arises a large fleshy or
grisly substa^^ which extends along the back. The hair on his head, neck and
shoulders, is long and woolly, and all of it is fit to be spun, or wro^^ into
hats. Calves from the domestic cow and wild bull, are sometimes raised; but
when they grow up, they become so wild that no co^^^^fence will confine them.
-- Is found in the middle States.

These animals were once exceedingly numerous in the western parts of Virginia,
and Pennsylvania; and so late as the year 1766, herd of (...) were frequently
seen in Kentucky, and from thence to the Missisippi.

The American forests abound with various animals of the deer kind* Naturalists
have arranged them differently. I have followed M. (...) Buffon, who has
reduced them all to the several species known in Europe.

MOOSE. Of these there are two kinds, the black and the gray. The black are
said to have been from 8 to 12 feet high; at present they are very rarely seen.
The gray Moose are generally as tall as a horse, and some are much taller; both
have spreading* palmated (...), weighing from 30 to 40 pounds. These are shed
annually, in the month of February. They never run, but trot with amazing
speed. In summer they feed on wild grasses, and the leaves of the most
mucilaginous shrubs. In winter they form herds; and when the snow falls, by
moving constantly in a small circle, they tread the snow hard, and form what is
called a pen. While the snow is deep and will not bear them, they are confined
within this pen, and eat all the bark and twigs within their reach. They are
considered as of the same species with the Elk of the eastern continent. --
They are found in New England.

CARIBOU. This animal is distinguished by its branching* palmated horns, with
brow antlers. He is probably the rein deer of the northern parts of Europe.
From the tendons of this animal, as well as of the Moose, the aboriginal
natives made very tolerable thread. -- Found in the District of Main.

DEER. The Red Deer The male of the Red Deer is called Stag; the female, Hind;
the young, Calf. The male of the Fallow Deer is called Buck; the female, D^^;
the young, Fawn. The (...) Buck, and Roe Do, are the male and female of the
Roe.
has round branching horns. Of this species we have three or four different
kinds or varieties; one of which, found on the Ohio river, and in its vicinity,
is very large, and there commonly called the ELK.

The FALLOW DEER * has branching, palmated horns. In the United States, these
animals are larger than the European, of a different color, and supposed, by
some, to be of a different species. In the southern states, are several
animals, supposed to be varieties of the ROE DEER. *

BEAR. Of this animal two sorts are found in the northern states; both are
black, but different in their forms and habits. One has short legs, a thick,
clumsy body, is generally fat, and is very fond of sweet, vegetable food, such
as sweet apples, Indian corn in the milk, berries, grapes, honey, etc. Probably
he is not carnivorous. As soon as the first snow falls, he betakes himself to
his den, which is a hole in a cleft of rocks, a hollow tree, or some such
place; here he gradually becomes torpid, and dozes away the winter, sucking his
paws, and expending the stock of fat which he had previously acquired.

The other sort is distinguished by the name of the RANGING BEAR, and seems to
be a grade between the preceding and the wolf. His legs are longer, and his
body more lean and gaunt. He is carnivorous, frequently destroying calves,
sheep and pigs; and sometimes children. In winter he migrates to the southward.
The former appears to be the common black bear of Europe; the latter
corresponds to the brown bear of the Alps; and is probably of the same species
with those spoken of 2 Kings ii. 24th, which formerly inhabited the mountainous
parts of Judea, between Jericho and Bethel. -- Found in all the states.

The WOLVERENE, called in Canada the Carcajou, and by hunters the Beaver eater,
seems to be a grade between the bear and the woodchuck. He agrees exactly with
the badger of Europe. His length is (...) s^et and upwards; his circumference
nearly two feet; his head and ears resemble a woodchuck's; his legs short; feet
and paws large and strong; tail about 7 inches long, black and very bushy or
shaggy; hair about two inches long, and very coarse; his head, sallow gray;
back almost black; breast, sported with white; belly, dark brown; sides and
rump, light reddish brown. This animal lives in holes, cannot run fast, and has
a clumsy appearance. He is very mischievous to hunters, following them when
setting their traps, and destroying their game, particularly the beaver. --
Found in the northern states.

WOLF. Of this animal, which is of the dog kind, or rather the dog himself in
his savage state, we have great numbers, and a considerable variety in size and
color. The dimensions of a skin, measured of writing this account, were as
follows; length of the body 5 feet: the fore legs 18 inches; of the hind legs
15 inches; of the tail 18 inches. The circumference of the body was from 2 to 3
feet. The color of these animals in the northern states, is generally a light,
dirty fallow, with a list of black along their back. In some, the black is
extended down their sides, and sometimes forms waving streaks; others are said
to be spotted: Some of them, particularly in the southern states, are entirely
black and considerably smaller. The Indians are said to have so far tamed some
of these animals before their acquaintance with the Europeans, as to have used
them in hunting. They next made use of European dogs, and afterward of
mongrels, the offspring of the wolf and dog, as being more docile than the
former, and more oager in the chase than the latter. The appearance of many of
the dogs, in the newly settled parts of the country, indicate their relation to
the wolf. -- Found in all the states.

FOX. Of foxes we have a great variety; such as the Silver Fox, Red Fox, Gray
Fox, Cross Fox, Brant Fox, and several others. Naturalists have generally
supposed that there is more than one species of foxes, but they differ very
much in their mode of arranging them. It is highly probable however, that there
is but one species of these animals, as they are found in all their varieties
of size, and of ^^^^^riously intermixed, in different parts of the United
States. Fo^^ and other animals furnished with fur, of the northern states, are
larger (...) those of the southern.

CATAMOUNT. This animal, the most dreaded by hunters of (...) of the
inhabitants of the forests, is rarely seen, which is probably (...) reason why
no account of him has ever been published, to our (...) ledge, except what is
contained in a letter of Mr. Collinson's to (...) Buffon. The dimensions of
one, killed a few years ago, is (...) Hampshire, as nearly as could be
ascertained by the skin, worn as (...) lows; the length of his body (including
the head) 6 feet; circumference of his body 2 feet; length of his tail 3 feet,
and of his (...) about 1 foot. The color, along his back, is nearly black;
(...) sides, a dark reddish brown; his feet black. He seems not ^^^ed for
running, but leaps with surprising agility. His favouri^^^ is blood, which,
like other animals of the cat kind, he takes from (...) jugular vessels of
cattle, deer, etc. leaving the carcass. Smaller (...) he takes to his den; and
he has been known to carry off a (...). He seems to be allured by five, which
terrifies all other carniv^^ animals, and betrays no fear either of man of
beast. -- He is (...) the northern and middle states.

COUGAR. The body of this animal is about 5 feet long; him (...) longer in
proportion to his body, than those of the common cat (...) color is a dark
fallow. In his habits and manners he resem^^^ rest of the family. He is found
in the southern states, and th^^^ ^^^^ed the Tiger.

MOUNTAIN CAT. ( Pardalis, Linn.) ( Ocelot, de Buffon.) -- The (...) of his
body is from 3 to 4 feet; his tail about 2 feet. His (...) is a fallow ground,
with black spots and stripes. The male has a (...) list along his back, and is
the most beautiful animal of the cat (...). He is exceedingly fierce, but will
seldom attack a man -- Founded (...) southern states.

LYNX. We have three kinds of the Lynx, each probably for^^i^^g a distinct
species. The first, ( Lupus cervarius, Linn. 3d. (...) is called by the French
and English Americans, Loup (...). He is from 2 to 3 feet in length; his tail
is about 5 inches. His (...) is long, of a light gray color, forming, in some
places, small, ^^^lar, dark shades; the end of his tail is black. His fur is
(...) and thick. He is the Lynx of Siberia, and some of the northern pa^^^^
Europe. A few may be found in the northeastern parts of the district of Main;
but in the higher latitudes they are more numerous.

The second, ( Catus cervarius, Linn.) is called by the French Americans, Chat
cervier; and in New England, the Wild-cat. He is considerably less than the
former, or the Loup cervier. He is from (...) feet long; his tail is
proportionably shorter, about three inches (...) and wants the tuft of black
hair on the end of it. His hair is (...) or, particularly on his legs and feet;
is of a darker color, (...) dark sallow and green, variously intermixed. His
fur is said to (...) a very different quality; his ears are shorter, and he has
very (...) of the pencil of black hairs on the tips of them, which is so
^^^^^able in the former kind. This animal destroyed many of the (...) of the
first settlers of New England.

The third species is about the size of a common cat. The color of the male is
a bright brown or bay, and black spots on his legs. His tail is about 4 inches
long, and encircled by 8 white rings: The female is of a reddish gray. -- Found
in the middle and southern states.

MARGAY. This animal very much resembles the European wildcat, both in form and
size. His color is like that of some of our tabby cats -- dark, waving
streaks, on a sallow ground. -- Found in the southern states.

KINCAJOU. This animal is frequently confounded with the Carc^jou, though he
resembles him in nothing but the name. He belongs to the family of cats; at
least he very much resembles them. He is about as large as a common cat, and is
better formed for agility and speed, than for strength. His tail gradually
tapers to the end, and is as long as his whole body. His color is yellow.
Between him and the fox there is perpetual war. He hunts in the same manner as
do other animals of that class; but being able to suspend himself by twining
the end of his tail round the limb of a tree, or the like, he can pursue his
prey where other cats cannot; and when he attacks a large animal, his tail
enables him to secure his hold till he can open the blood vessels of the neck.
In some parts of Canada, these animals are very numerous, and make great havoc
among the deer, and do not spare even the neat cattle. But we have heard of
none in these states, except a few in the northern parts of New Hampshire.

The WEASEL is about 9 inches in length; his body is remarkably round and
slender; his tail long and well furnished with hair 5 his legs very short, and
his toes armed with sharp claws. His hair is short and thick, and of a pale,
yellowish color, except about the breast, where it is white. This is a very
sprightly animal; notwithstanding the shortness of his legs, it seems to dart
rather than to run. He kills and eats rats, striped squirrels and other small
quadrupeds: He likewise kills fowls, sucks their blood, and esteems their eggs
a delicacy.

The EZMINE does not differ materially from the Weasel, in size, form or
habits: even his color is the same in summer, except that the end of his tail
is black, and the edges of his ears and toes are white. In winter he is
entirely white, except the tip of the tail. He is generally considered as
forming a species distinct from the Weasel; but Linnaeus makes them the same.
-- They are said to be found in Canada, and Dr. Belknap mentions that a few
have been seen in New Hampshire.

In addition to the preceding we have another variety of this family. It
appears to differ from the Weasel in no respect, except its color, which is
perfectly white, both in summer and winter.

MARTIN. This animal is called the Martin (Mart) by M. de Buffon: -- in
England, the pine Martin, fir Martin, yellow breasted Martin, pine Weasel, and
yellow breasted Weasel; in New England, the Sable; and by the Indians,
Wauppanaugh. He is formed like the Weasel; is generally about 16 inches long,
and is of a sallow color; but his size, and the shades of his color, vary in
different parts of the country. Some have spots of yellow on the breast, others
of white, and others have none. He keeps in forests, chiefly on trees, and
lives by hunting. -- He is found in the northern states.

MINK. The Mink is about as large as a Martin, and of the same form. The hair
on its tail is shorter; its color is generally, black some have a white spot
under their throats; others have none. They burrow in the ground, and pursue
their prey both in fresh and salt water. Those which frequent the salt water
are of a larger size, light^^ color, and have inferior fur. They are found in
considerable number^ both in the southern and northern states.

OTTER. The Otter very much resembles the Mink in its (...) and habits. Its
color is not so dark; its fix much larger, being about 3 feet long and 15
inches in circumference. It lives in holes in banks near the water, and feeds
on fish and amphibious animals. Found in all the states.

FISHER. In Canada he is called Pekan: In these states frequently the Black
cat, but improperly, as he does not belong to the class of cats. He has a
general resemblance to the Martin, but is considerably larger, being from 20 to
24 inches in length, and 12 in circumference. His tail is a little more than
half his length; its hair long and bushy. His fore legs, about 4 inches long,
his hinder legs 6 inches. His ears short and round. His color is black, except
the head, neck and shoulders, which are a dark gray. He lives by hunting, and
occasionally pursues his prey in the water. -- Found is the northern states.

SKUNK. This animal as about a foot and an half long, of a moderate height and
size. His tail is long and bushy; his hair long and chiefly black; but on his
head, neck and back, is found more of less of white, without any regularity or
uniformity. He appears to see but indifferently, when the sun shines; and
therefore in the day time, keeps close to his burrow. As soon as the twilight
commences, be goes in quest of his food, which is principally beetles and other
insects: He is also very fond of eggs and young chickens. His flesh is said to
be tolerably good, and his fat is sometimes used as an emollient. But what
renders this animal remarkable is, his being furnished with organs for
secreting and retaining a liquor, volatile and saetid beyond any thing known,
and which he has the power of emitting to the distance of a rod or more, when
necessary for his defense. When this ammunition is expended he is quite
harmless. Concerning the American skunk, Dr. Mitchill, in a letter to Dr. Po^l,
(1788) writes thus "Not long since I had an opportunity to dis^^ct the American
skunk ( V^^ert^ p^^^ius Linn.) The most remarkable appearances, on examination,
were the following: the skin was exceedingly lax, insomuch that when pulled
away, from the subjacent membrane, the hairs, in many places drawn through it,
were left rooted in the fat; the ^^ine possessed no more faetor than it common
to that excrementious fluid in many either animals: But the peculiar odoriferous
substance, which the creature emits when pursued, proceeds from two fact, each
capable of containing about half an ^unce, situated at the extremity of the
intestinum rectum, and surrounded by large and strong circular muscles, which
contracting by a voluntary exertion, force out the thick, yellowith liquor,
through two ducts, opening near the verge of the anus. As the animal is neither
swift nor strong, this seems to have been given it as a defense against its
enemies, on whose approach, the volatile matter is discharged with considerable
force, and to no small distance. From its analogy to musk, ambergrease, civet
and castor, I am strongly inclined to think it might be with advantage ranked
among the antispajnudi^s of the matter a m^d^ca, or classed with (...) in the
shops of perfumers.

A ^^milar substance, although not so abundant and fragrant, I have likewise
found i^ bag^ of the same kind, when I dissected the common weasel, (Mustela
vulgaris) which, in all probability will be found to posses virtues not much
differing from the Spe^^^^, or liquor of the Viverra, or the American skunk.

The Musquash ( Caftor mu^^latus) which I have also di^^ected, had no sacs of
this (...) and therefore I am forceab^^ied to respect that its (...) resides in
the (...).


This volatile faetor is a powerful antispasmodic. -- Found in all the states.

Another Stinkard, called the Squash, is said by Buffon, to be found in some of
the southern states. He is of a chestnut color; climbs trees, and kills poultry.

OPOSSUM. This animal is about a foot and a half long; has a long pointed nose,
furnished with long stiff hairs; ears thin and naked; tail naked, nearly as
long as the body, and capable of holding the animal suspended; legs short; feet
small and naked. He uses his forepaws like a Monkey. His body is well covered
with a woolly for, white at the roots, and black at the ends. His hair is long,
thin and coarse; its color black and white, forming a gray of various shades;
and these different shades are often so intermixed as to give a spotted or
variegated appearance. But the most singular part of this animal is a kind of
false belly or pouch, with which the female is furnished; it is formed by a
duplicature of the skin; -- is so placed as to include her teats, and has an
aperture which she can open and shut at pleasure. She brings forth her young
from four to six at a time, while they are not bigger than a bean; -- incloses
them in this pouch, and they, from a principle of instinct, affix themselves to
her teats: Here they remain and are nourished till they are able to run about,
and are afterward taken in occasionally, particularly in time of danger. The
Opossum feeds on vegetables, particularly fruit. He likewise kills poultry,
sucks their blood, and eats their eggs. His fat is used instead of lard or
butter. -- Found in the southern and middle states.

WOODCHUCK. ( Monax, de Buffon.) His body is about 16 inches long, and nearly
the same in circumference; his tail is moderately long, and full of hair. His
color is a mixture of sallow and gray. He digs a burrow in, or near, some
cultivated field, and feeds on pulse, the tops of cultivated clover, etc. He is
generally very fat, excepting in the spring. They young are good meat; the old
are rather rank and disagreeable. In the beginning of October they retire to
their burrows, and live in a torpid state about 6 months. In many respects he
agrees with the Marmot of the Alps; in others he differs, and on the whole is
probably not the same.

An animal resembling the Woodchuck is found in the southern states, which is
supposed to form another species.

URCHIN. The Urchin, or Urson, is about two feet in length, and, when fat, the
same in circumference. He is commonly called Hedge-Mog or Porcupine, but
differs from both those animals in every characteristic mark, excepting has
being armed with quills on his back and sides. These quills are nearly as large
as a wheat straw; from three to four inches long, and, unless erected, nearly
covered by the animal's hair. Their points are very hard, and filled with
innumerable very small barbs or scales, whose points are raised from the body
of the quill. When the Urchin is attacked by a dog, wolf, or other beast of
prey, he throws himself into a posture of defense, by shortning his body,
elevating his back, and erecting his quills. The assistant soon finds some of
those weapons stuck into his mouth, or other part of his body, and every effort
which he makes to free himself, causes them to penetrate, the farther; they
have been known to bury themselves entirely in a few minutes. Sometimes they
prove fatal; at other times they make their way out again through the skin from
various parts of the body. If not molested, the Urchin is an inoffensive
animal. He finds a hole or hollow which he makes his residence, and feeds on
the bark and roots of vegetables. His flesh, in the opinion of hunters, is
equal to that of a fucking pig. -- Is found in the northern states.

HARE. Of this animal we have two kinds, which appear to the different species:
the one is commonly called the white Rabbit (...) Coney; the other is simply
the Rabbit; but from the proporti^^ length of their hinder legs, and other
specific marks, they both (...) to the family of the hare. The former has a
covering of (...) white hair, which comes on before winter, and falls off the
(...) spring. He is about half the size of a large European hare, and (...) as
large as the other kind. The latter burrows in the ground, like (...) rabbit.
They have both been found in the same tract of country (...) have not been
known to associate. The former has been found in the northern states, and
appears to be the same as the hare of the northern part of Europe; the latter
is found in all the states, and is probably a species peculiar to America.

RACCOON. The Raccoon, in the form and size of his body, resembles the fox; his
legs are larger and shorter. His toes are long, and armed with sharp claws. His
body is gray; his tail annulated with alternate rings of black and brown. In
his manners he resembles the squirrel; like him he lives on trees, feeds on
Indian corn, acorns, etc. and serves himself with his fore paws. His flesh is
good meat, and his fur is valued by the hatters. He is found in all the
climates in the temperate zone in North America.

The FOX SQUIRREL. Of this animal, there are several varieties, black, red and
gray. It is nearly twice as large as the common gray squirrel, and is found in
the southern States, and is peculiar to this continent.

The GRAY SQUIRREL of America, does not agree exactly with that of Europe, but
is generally considered as of the same species. Its (...) indicates its general
color; but some are black; and others black on the back and gray on the sides.
They make a nest of moss in a hollow tree, and here they deposit their
provision of nuts and acorns; this is the place of their residence during the
winter, and here they bring forth their young. Their summer house, which is
built of sticks and leaves, is placed near the top of the tree. They sometimes
mig^^ts is considerable numbers. If in their course they meet with a river,
each of them takes a shingle, piece of bark, or the like, and carries is to the
water. Thus equipped, they embark, and erect their tails to the gentle breeze,
which soon wafts them over in safety; but a (...) flaw of wind sometimes
produces a destructive shipwreck. The greater part of the males of this species
is found castrated.

A Gray Squirrel is found in Virginia, nearly thrice as large as this Whether
it be the same, or a different species, is uncertain.

The RED SQUIRREL, is less than the gray squirrel. It has a rod, list along its
back; gray on its sides, and white under the belly. It differs in some respects
from the common European squirrel; but ^^^de Buffon considers it as the same
species. Its food is the same (...) that of the gray squirrel, except that it
sometimes feeds on the seeds of the pine and other evergreens; hence it is
sometimes called the pine squirrel, and is found further to the northward than
the gray squirrel. It spends part of its time on trees, in quest of food; but
confident its hole, under some rock or log, as its home.

The STRIFED SQUIRREL, is still less than the last mentioned. Its color is
red. It has a narrow stripe of black along its back; at the distance of about
half an inch, on each side, is a stripe of white, bordered with very narrow
stripes of black. Its belly is white. In the males, the colors are brighter and
better defined than in the females. It is sometimes called a mouse squirrel,
and ground squirrel, (...) its forming a burrow in loose ground. Linnaeus
confounds it with a striped mouse squirrel, found in the north of Asia; but
that animal is represented as in some measure resembling the mouse; whereas
ours is a genuine squirrel. In summer it feeds on apples, peaches, and various
kinds of fruit and seeds; and for its winter store says up nuts, acorns and
grain. It sometimes ascends trees in quest of (...), but always descends on the
appearance of danger; nor does it feel secure but in its hole, a stone wall, or
some covert place. Found in the northern and and middle states.

FLYING SQUIRREL. This is the least and most singular of the class of
squirrels. A duplicature of the the skin connects the fore and hinder legs
together: by extending this membrane, it is able of leap much farther, and to
alight with more safety than other squirrels. It lives in the holes of trees,
and feeds on seeds. -- Is found in all the States.

BAT. The Bat is so common and so singular a creature that a particular
description of it is unnecessary. -- Found both in America and Europe.

FIELD MOUSE. This species in England, is called the short tailed field mouse.
It has a general resemblance to the common house mouse; but both its body and
tail are larger and his hair has a slight reddish tint. Its food depends very
much on its situation. In gardens it often destroys young fruit trees by eating
their bark; in fields and meadows, it feeds on the roots of grass, sometimes
leaving a groove in the sward, which appears as if it had been cut out with a
gouge. In woods, they are said to feed on acorns, and to lay up a large store
of these in their burrows.

WOOD RAT. "This is a very curious animal; they are not half the size of the
domestic rat; of a dark brown or black color; their tails slender and short in
proportion, and covered thinly with short hair. They are singular with respect
to their ingenuity and great labor in constructing their habitations, which
are conical pyramids, about 3 or 4 feet high, constructed with dry branches,
which they collect with great labor and perseverance, and pile up without any
apparent order; yet they are so interwoven with one another, that it would take
a hear or wild-cat some time to pull one of these castles to pieces, and allow
the animals sufficient time to retreat with their young.

There is likewise a ground-rat, twice as large as the common rat, and burrows
in the ground."

[ Bartram's Travels.

SHREW MOUSE. This is the smallest of quadrupeds, and holds nearly the same
place among them as the humming bird does among the feathered race. Some of the
European shrew mice, are three inches long: we have seen but two or three of
the American, and those dried; but should not judge that those ever exceeded 2
inches. Their head, which constitutes about one third of their whole length,
has some resemblance to that of a mole; the ears are wanting; their eyes
scarcely visible; the nose very long, pointed and furnished with long hairs. In
other respects these resemble the common mouse. They live in roods, and are
supposed to feed on grain and insects. -- Found in New England.

MOLE. The purple mole is found in Virginia; the black mole in New England; he
lives in and about the water: they differ from one another, and both from the
European.

The WATER RAT is about the size of the common rat; brown on the back and white
under the belly; feeds on aquatic animals.

BEAVER. The beaver is an amphibious animal, which cannot live for any length
of time in the water; and can exist without it provided he has the convenience
of sometimes bathing himself. The largest beavers, formerly, were four feet in
length, and weighed 50 or 60 pounds. At present they are not more than three
feet in length, and may weigh from 25 to 30 pounds. Their head of this animal
is large, and his ears short and round. Their fore teeth are prominent, long
broad, strong and grooved or hollowed like a gouge. Their fore legs are short,
with toes separate; their hinder legs are long, with toes webbed. The tail is
large, broad and scaly, resembling the body of a fish. Their color is
generally a dark brown, but varies according to the climate they inhabit. Their
hair is long and coarse; the fur very thick, fine and highly valued. The castor
used in medicine is found is sacks formed behind the kidneys.

Their houses are always situated in the water; sometimes they make use of a
natural pond, but generally they choose to form one by building a dam across
some brook or rivulet. For this purpose they select a number of saplings of
soft wood, generally of less than 6 inches diameter, but sometimes of 16 or 18
inches; these they fell, and divide into proper lengths, and place them in the
water, so that the length of the sticks make the width of the dam. These sticks
they lay in mud or clay, their tails serving them for tr^wels, as their teeth
did for axes. These dams are six or eight feet thick at bottom; sloping on the
side opposed to the stream; and are about a quarter as broad at top as at
bottom. Near the top of the dam they leave one or more waste ways, or sliding
places to carry off the surplus water.

The formation of their cabins is no less remarkable. They consist of two
stories, one under, the other above water. They are shaped like the oval
bee-hive; and of a size proportioned to the number of inhabitants. The walls of
the lower apartment are two or three feet thick, formed like their dams; those
of the upper story are thinner, and the whole, on the inside, plaistered with
mud. Each family constructs and inhabits its own cabin. The upper apartments
are curiously strewed with leaves, and rendered neat, clean and comfortable.
The winter never surprises these animals, before their business is completed;
for their houses are generally finished by the last of September, and their
stock of provisions laid in, which consists of small pieces of wood deposited
in the lower apartments. Before a storm, all hands are employed in repairing or
strengthening their dams. They retain this industrious habit even after they are
domesticated. In summer they roam abroad and feed on leaves, twigs, and food of
that kind. These beavers are considered as the same species as those in Europe,
but are vastly superior to them in every respect.

There is likewise a race of beavers, called Terriers, who dig holes and live a
solitary unsocial life. These are probably savages, who have never formed
themselves into societies, and consequently have not made those improvements,
which are to be acquired only in a social state. Found in all the States.

The MUSQUA^^ (...) MU^^ about (...) inches in length, an a foot in
circumference. His tail is nearly a foot long; his hair very short; the color
on his back, dark; on his sides, generally reddish; his head and tail very much
resemble those of a rat. This animal is furnished with glands, which separate a
substance that has the smell of musk. In his mode of living, he is a distant
imitator of the beaver; builds a rude cabin in shallow water, and feeds on
vegetables. Found in the northern and middle States.

The MORSE or SEA-COW, more properly called the Sea-Elephant, has two large
ivory tusks, which shoot from the upper jaw; Its head also is formed like that
of the elephant, and would entirely resemble it in that part, if it had a
trunk; but the morse is deprived of that instrument, which serves the elephant
in place of an arm and hand, and has real arms. These members, like those of
the seal, are shut up within the skin, so that nothing appears outwardly but
its hands and feet. Its body is long and tapering, thickest toward the neck;
the toes and the hands, or feet, are covered with a membrane, and terminated by
short and sharp pointed claws. Excepting the two great tusks, and the cutting
teeth, the morse perfectly resembles the seal; it is only much larger and
stronger, the morse, being commonly from twelve to sixteen feet in length, and
eight or nine in circumference; whereas the largest seals are no more than
seven or eight feet long. The morses and seals frequent the same places. They
have the same habits in every respect, except that there are fewer varieties of
the morse than of the seal; they are likewise more attached to one particular
climate, and are rarely found, except in the northern seas.

The SEAL, of which there are several species, is an amphibious animal, living
the greater part of the time in the sea, and feeds on marine plants. These
animals formerly frequented our northern shores; but at present have nearly
forsaken them.

MANATI. This animal forms the connecting link between beasts and fishes. It
cannot be called a quadrupede; nor can it entirely be termed a fish; it
partakes of the nature of the fish by its two feet or hands; but the hinder
legs, which are almost wholly concealed in the bodies of the seal and morse,
are entirely wanting in the manati. Instead of two short feet, and a small,
narrow tail, which is placed in a horizontal direction in the morse, the manati
has only a thick tad, spread out broad like a fan. It is a very clumsy misshapen
animal, with a head thicker than that of an ox; eyes small; and the two feet
are placed near the head, for the purpose of swimming. It is of sufficient size
to form a load for two oxen. Its flesh, which is more like beef than fish, is
said to be excellent for eating. They are about 15 feet long, and 6 broad. As
this animal has only fore feet, it has obtained the name of Manati, i. e. "an
animal with both hands." The female has breasts placed forward like those of a
woman's, and she generally brings forth two young ones at a time, which she
suckles. It is not properly amphibious; it only raises its head out of the
water to feed on the herbage by the sea side. This animal is very common in
South America, and some, it is said, have been found in the southern States.

SAPAJOU. SAGOIN. There are various species of animals said to inhabit the
country on the lower part of the Missisippi, called Sapajous and Sagoins. The
former are capable of suspending themselves by their tails: the latter are not.
They have a general resemlance to monkeys; but are not sufficiently known, to
be particularly

BIRDS.] Several catalogues of the birds in the southern and middle states,
have been published by different authors; and one, (...) those in New
Hampshire, by Dr. Belknap; but no general catab^^^ of the birds in the American
States has yet appeared. The follow (...) catalogue, which claims to be the
most full and complete of any (...) published, though fat from perfection, has
been carefully selec^^ from Bartram's Travels, Jefferson's Notes of Virginia,
Belknap's History of New Hampshire, and a Manuscript furnished by Dr. (...)
Bartram's catalogue, as far as it extends, appears to be the most (...) rate
and complete, and his mode of arrangement the most natur^^ (...) intelligible;
I have therefore adopted it, and inserted his noted (...) references. The birds
to whose names in this catalogue, these marks [^^^^] are (...) are land birds,
which, according to Bartram, are seen in Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia,
(...) and S. Carolina, Georgia and Florida, from the sea coast westward to the
Appala^^^ an mountains, viz.


Popular Names. Bartram's Designation. The OWL. STRIX. These arrive in
Pennsylvania in autumn, from the north, where some of them continue during the
winter, others continue their journey as far south as Florida. They (...) turn
northward in the spring, probably to breed and rear their young.
Great White Owl Strix arcticus, corpore toto (...) These breed and continue
the year round in Pennsylvania.
Great Horned Owl Strix pythaules, corpore rush. Great Horned White Owl Strix
maximus, corpore nive^. These are (...) in New England.
Horned Owl Strix bubo? Peck. Whooting Owl Strix acclamator, corpore gri^^^.
Sharp Winged or Speckled Owl Strix perigrinator, corpore ^^sicolore. Strix
alcuo, Cutler, Belk^^. Little Screech Owl Strix asio, corpore ferruginio. Barn
Owl -- Strix passeri. Cutler. Belknap. The VULTURE. VULTUR. These are natives
of Carolina, Georgia and Florida; where they breed and (...) the year round.
Turkey Buzzard Vultur aura. White Tailed Vulture Vultur sacra. Black Vulture,
or Carrion Crow Vultur atratus. EAGLE and HAWK. FALCO. Great Gray Eagle Falco
regalis. Bald Eagle Falco leucocephalus. These arrive in Pennsylvania in the
spring, from the south; and after building these nests and rearing their young,
return southward in autumn.
Fishing Eagle Falco piscatorius. Great Eagle Hawk Falco Aquilinus, cauda
ferruginia. Hen Hawk Falco gallinarius. Chicken Hawk Falco pularius. * Pigeon
Hawk Falco columbarius. Black Hawk Falco niger. * Marsh Hawk Falco ranivorus. *
Sparrow Hawk, or least Hawk Falco sparvenius. Brown Eagle Falco fulvus.
Belknap. These are (...) in New England.
Large Brown Hawk Falco hudsonius? Belknap. Pigeon Hawk Falco subbuteo. Peck.
Fish Hawk Falco haliaetus. Peck. Bird Hawk Lanius canadensis. Belkn. Cutl. KITE
HAWK. Kite hawks are characterized by having long sharp pointed wings; being of
swift (...); sailing without flapping their wings; having long, light bodies,
and feeding out of (...) wing.
MILVUS. These are natives of Carolina, Georgia and Florida; where they breed
and (...) the year round.
Forked Tail Hawk, or Kite Falco furcatus. Sharp Winged Hawk, of a pale, sky
blue color, the tip of the wings black. Palco glaucus. Sharp Winged Hawk, of a
dark or dusky blue color. Falco subcerulius. Parrot of Carolina, or Patrakeet
Psitticus Caroliniensis. The CROW kind. CORVUS. These arrive in Pennsylvania in
the spring, from the south; and after building these nests and rearing their
young, return southward in autumn.
The Raven Corvus carnivorus. These are natives of Carolina, Georgia and
Florida; where they breed and (...) the year round.
Great Sea side Crow or Rook Corvus maritimus. Common Crow Corvus frugivorus.
Royston Crow Corvus cor^ix. Cutler. Blue Jay Corvus cristatus, pica glandaria.
Little Jay of Florida Corvus Floridanus, pica glanda^ra minor. Purple Jackdaw
or Crow Blackbird Gracula quiscula. * L^sser Purple Jackdaw Gracula purpurea. *
C^^kow of Carolina Cuculus Caroliniensis. Whet Saw Cuculus -- Carver. WOOD
PECKERS. PIOUS. These are natives of Carolina, Georgia and Florida; where they
breed and (...) the year round.
Greatest crested Woodpecker, having a white back Picus princip^tis. These
arrive in Pennsylvania in the spring, from the south; and after building these
nests and rearing their young, return southward in autumn.
Great Red Crested, Black Woodpecker Picus pileatus. * Red Headed Woodpecker
Picus erythrocephalus. * Gold Winged Woodpecker Picus auratus. Red Bellied
Woodpecker Picus Carolinus. Least Spotted Woodpecker Picus pubescons. Hairy,
Speckled and Crested Woodpecker Picus villosus. Yellow Bellied Woodpecker Picus
varius. These are (...) in New England.
Swallow Woodpecker Picus hirundinacens. Cutler. Speckled Woodpecker Picus
maculosus. Cutler. Nuthatch Sitta capito nigro. Catesby. These arrive in
Pennsylvania in autumn, from the north, where some of them continue during the
winter, others continue their journey as far south as Florida. They (...) turn
northward in the spring, probably to breed and rear their young.
Small Nuthatch Sitta capite susco. Catesby. Little, Brown variegated Creeper
Certhia rufa. * Pine Creeper Certhia pinus. * Blue and White, pied Creeper
Certhia picta. * Great Crested King Fisher Alcedo alcyon. * Humming Bird.
Trochilus colobris. * Little Gray Butcher Bird of Pennsylvania. Lanius griseus.
* Little Black Capped Butcher Lanius garrulus. * (...) Bird Lanius tyrannus. *
Pewit, or Black Cap Fly Catcher. Muscicapa nunciola. * Great Crested, Yellow
Bellied Fly Catcher Muscicapa cristata. * Lesser Pewit, or Brown and Greenish
Fly Catcher. Muscicapa rapax. * Little Olive colored Fly Catcher Muscicapa
subviridis. * Little Domestic Fly Catcher or Green Wren Muscicapa cantacrix. *
Red Eyed Fly Catcher Muscicapa sylvicola. Turtle Dove of Carolina Columba
Caroliniensis. Ground Dove Columba passerina Wild Pigeon Columba migratoria. *
Great Meadow Lark Alauda magna. Sky Lark Alauda campestris, gutture flavo,
Little Brown Lark Alauda migratoria, corpore (...) ferruginio. Red Winged
Starling -- Marsh Black Bird or Red Winged Black Bird Sturnus niger alis
superne (...) ibus. Catesby. Robin Red Breast. Field Fare. Turdus migratorius.
* Fox colored Thrush Turdus rufus. * Mocking Bird Turdus polyglottos. * Wood
Thrush Turdus melodes. * Least Golden Crown Thrush Turdus minimus, vertice
au^io. Cross Bill Loxia curvi rostra? Belknap. Cherry Bird Ampelis garrulus.
Cutler. * Baltimore Bird, or Hang Nest Oriolus Baltimore. * Goldfinch or
Icterus Minor Oriolus spurius. * Sand Hill Red Bird of Carolina Merula
flammula. * Summer Red Bird Merula Marilandica. * Yellow Breasted Chat Garrulus
australis. * Cat Bird or Chicken Bird Lucar lividus, apice nigra. Muscicapa
vertice nigro. Catesby. Crown Bird or Cedar Bird Ampelis garrulus. GRANIVOROUS
TRIBES. Wild Turkey Meleagris Americanus. Gallopavo sylvestris. Catesby.
Pheasant of Pennsylvania or Partridge of New England? Tetrao tympanus. Mountain
Cock or Grous Ptarmigan. (Mitchill.) Tetrao lagopus. Quail or Partridge Tetrao
minor, s. coturnix. Red Bird. Virgnia Nightingale Loxia cardinalis. Cross Beak
Loxia rostro forsicato. * Blue Cross Beak Loxia caerulea. * Rice Bird. The rice
bird and pied rice bird are generally supposed to be male and female of the
same species; the pied rice bird the male, and the other, the female. Called in
New England Boblincoln, Conquedle; and by some, Old England Blackbird.
Boblincoln Emberiza oryzivora. Blue or Slate colored Rice Bird Emberiza
livida. * Pied Rice Bird The rice bird and pied rice bird are generally
supposed to be male and female of the same species; the pied rice bird the
male, and the other, the female. Called in New England Boblincoln, Conquedle;
and by some, Old England Blackbird.
Emberiza varia. Painted Finch, or Nonpareil Linaria ciris. Red Linnet Tangra
rubra. These arrive in Pennsylvania in the spring, from the south; and after
building these nests and rearing their young, return southward in autumn.
Blue Linnet Linaria cyanea. These breed and continue the year round in
Pennsylvania.
Goldfinch. Yellow Bird ( Cutl.) or Lettuce Bird Carduelus Americanus.
Fringilla tristis. Linn. These arrive in Pennsylvania in autumn, from the
north, where some of them continue during the winter, others continue their
journey as far south as Florida. They (...) turn northward in the spring,
probably to breed and rear their young.
Lesser Goldfinch. Carduelus pinus. These arrive in Pennsylvania in autumn,
from the north, where some of them continue during the winter, others continue
their journey as far south as Florida. They (...) turn northward in the spring,
probably to breed and rear their young.
Least Finch Carduelus pusilus. These arrive in Pennsylvania in the spring,
from the south; and after building these nests and rearing their young, return
southward in autumn.
Towhe Bird, Pewee, Cheeweeh, Fringilla erythrophthalma. Passer nigris occulis
rubris. Cat. These arrive in Pennsylvania in autumn, from the north, where some
of them continue during the winter, others continue their journey as far south
as Florida. They (...) turn northward in the spring, probably to breed and rear
their young.
Purple Finch Fringilla purpurea. These are (...) in New England.
Spring Bird Fringilla. Cutler. These arrive in Pennsylvania in autumn, from
the north, where some of them continue during the winter, others continue their
journey as far south as Florida. They (...) turn northward in the spring,
probably to breed and rear their young.
Hemp Bird Fringilla canabina. These are (...) in New England.
Winter Sparrow Fringilla grisea. Cutler. These arrive in Pennsylvania in
autumn, from the north, where some of them continue during the winter, others
continue their journey as far south as Florida. They (...) turn northward in
the spring, probably to breed and rear their young.
Red, Fox colored, Ground or Hedge Sparrow Fringilla rufa. These arrive in
Pennsylvania in autumn, from the north, where some of them continue during the
winter, others continue their journey as far south as Florida. They (...) turn
northward in the spring, probably to breed and rear their young.
Large, Brown, White Throated Sparrow. Fringilla fusca. These arrive in
Pennsylvania in the spring, from the south; and after building these nests and
rearing their young, return southward in autumn.
Little House Sparrow, or Chipping Bird Passer domesticus. These arrive in
Pennsylvania in the spring, from the south; and after building these nests and
rearing their young, return southward in autumn.
Reed Sparrow Passer palustris. These arrive in Pennsylvania in the spring,
from the south; and after building these nests and rearing their young, return
southward in autumn.
Little Field Sparrow. Passer agrestis. These arrive in Pennsylvania in autumn,
from the north, where some of them continue during the winter, others continue
their journey as far south as Florida. They (...) turn northward in the spring,
probably to breed and rear their young.
Snow Bird Passer nivalis. These arrive in Pennsylvania in the spring, from the
south; and after building these nests and rearing their young, return southward
in autumn.
May Bird Calandra pratensis. These arrive in Pennsylvania in the spring, from
the south; and after building these nests and rearing their young, return
southward in autumn.
Red winged Starling, or Corn Thief Sturuus predatorius. These arrive in
Pennsylvania in the spring, from the south; and after building these nests and
rearing their young, return southward in autumn.
Cowpen Bird Sturuus stercorarius. Passer fuscus. Catesby. These arrive in
Pennsylvania in the spring, from the south; and after building these nests and
rearing their young, return southward in autumn.
Blue Bird Motacilla sialis. Rubicula Americana caerulea. Catesby. These arrive
in Pennsylvania in the spring, from the south; and after building these nests
and rearing their young, return southward in autumn.
Water Wagtail Motacilla fluviatilis. These arrive in Pennsylvania in the
spring, from the south; and after building these nests and rearing their young,
return southward in autumn.
House Wren Motacilla domestica. (regulus rufus.) These breed and continue the
year round in Pennsylvania.
These arrive in Pennsylvania in the spring, from the south; and after building
these nests and rearing their young, return southward in autumn.
Marsh Wren Motacilla palustris (regulus minor.) These arrive in Pennsylvania
in the spring, from the south; and after building these nests and rearing their
young, return southward in autumn.
Great Wren of Carolina -- Body dark brown, throat and breast, pale clay color
Motacilla Caroliniana. (regulus magnus.) These are (...) in New England.
Grape Bird Motacilla icterocephala. Cutler. These arrive in Pennsylvania in
the spring, from the south; and after building these nests and rearing their
young, return southward in autumn.
Little Bluish Gray Wren Regulus griseus. These arrive in Pennsylvania in
autumn, from the north, where some of them continue during the winter, others
continue their journey as far south as Florida. They (...) turn northward in
the spring, probably to breed and rear their young.
Golden Crown Wren Regulus cristatus. These arrive in Pennsylvania in autumn,
from the north, where some of them continue during the winter, others continue
their journey as far south as Florida. They (...) turn northward in the spring,
probably to breed and rear their young.
Ruby Crown Wren (Edwards) Regulus cristatus, Alter vertice rubini coloris.
These arrive in Pennsylvania in the spring, from the south; and after building
these nests and rearing their young, return southward in autumn.
Olive colored, yellow Throated Wren Regulus peregrinus, gutture flavo. These
arrive in Pennsylvania in the spring, from the south; and after building these
nests and rearing their young, return southward in autumn.
Red Start Ruticilla Americana. These arrive in Pennsylvania in the spring,
from the south; and after building these nests and rearing their young, return
southward in autumn.
Yellow hooded Titmouse Luscinia, s. philomela Americana. These arrive in
Pennsylvania in the spring, from the south; and after building these nests and
rearing their young, return southward in autumn.
Bluish Gray crested Titmouse Parus cristatus. These breed and continue the
year round in Pennsylvania.
Black Cap Titmouse Parus Europeus. These arrive in Pennsylvania in the spring,
from the south; and after building these nests and rearing their young, return
southward in autumn.
Summer Yellow Bird Parus luteus. These arrive in Pennsylvania in the spring,
from the south; and after building these nests and rearing their young, return
southward in autumn.
Yellow Rump Parus cedrus, uropygio flavo. These are (...) in New England.
Tom Teet Parus atricapillus. Cutler. These arrive in Pennsylvania in the
spring, from the south; and after building these nests and rearing their young,
return southward in autumn.
Various colored Little Finch Creeper Parus varius. These arrive in
Pennsylvania in the spring, from the south; and after building these nests and
rearing their young, return southward in autumn.
Little Chocolate Breast Titmouse Parus peregrinus. These arrive in
Pennsylvania in the spring, from the south; and after building these nests and
rearing their young, return southward in autumn.
Yellow Red Pole Parus aureus, vertice rubro. These arrive in Pennsylvania in
the spring, from the south; and after building these nests and rearing their
young, return southward in autumn.
Green Black Throated Fly Catcher Parus viridis, gutturo nigro. These arrive in
Pennsylvania in the spring, from the south; and after building these nests and
rearing their young, return southward in autumn.
Golden Winged Fly Catcher Parus alis aureis. These arrive in Pennsylvania in
the spring, from the south; and after building these nests and rearing their
young, return southward in autumn.
Blue Winged Yellow Bird Parus aureus alis ceruleis. These arrive in
Pennsylvania in the spring, from the south; and after building these nests and
rearing their young, return southward in autumn.
Yellow Throated Creeper Parus griecus gutture luteo. These arrive in
Pennsylvania in the spring, from the south; and after building these nests and
rearing their young, return southward in autumn.
House Swallow, or Chimney Swallow Hirundo pelasgia, cauda acule^^^. These
arrive in Pennsylvania in the spring, from the south; and after building these
nests and rearing their young, return southward in autumn.
Great Purple Martin Hirundo purpurea. These arrive in Pennsylvania in the
spring, from the south; and after building these nests and rearing their young,
return southward in autumn.
Bank Martin or Swallow Hirundo riparia, vertice purpu^^^ These are (...) in
New England.
White Bellied Swallow Hirundo. -- These are (...) in New England.
Barn Swallow Hirundo subis. Cutler. These arrive, in the spring, in Carolina
and Florida, from the south; breed and (...) their young, and return again to
the south at the approach of winter. These never (...) so far north as
Pennsylvania.
Great Bat, or Chuck wills widow, or Goat Sucker Caprimulgus lucifugus. These
arrive in Pennsylvania in the spring, from the south; and after building these
nests and rearing their young, return southward in autumn.
Whip-poor-will. Bartram considers the whip-poor-will and the night-hawk as the
same bird (Capti^^ mulgus Americanous) but they are well known to be different
birds.
Caprimulgus minor Americanus. Catesby. Caprimulgus europeus. Cutler. These
arrive in Pennsylvania in the spring, from the south; and after building these
nests and rearing their young, return southward in autumn.
Night Hawk Caprimulgus americanus. Cutler. AMPHIBIOUS or AQUATIC BIRDS, of
such as obtain their food (...), and reside in the water. The CRANE. GRUS.
These are natives of Carolina, Georgia and Florida; where they breed and (...)
the year round.
Great Whooping Crane Grus clamator, vertice (...) corpore niveo, remighib^
nigris. These arrive, in the spring, in Carolina and Florida, from the south;
breed and (...) their young, and return again to the south at the approach of
winter. These never (...) so far north as Pennsylvania.
Great Savanna Crane Grus pratensis, corpore (...) vertice papilloso, The
HERON. ARDEA. These breed and continue the year round in Pennsylvania.
Great Bluish, Gray crested Heron Ardea Herodias. These arrive in Pennsylvania
in the spring, from the south; and after building these nests and rearing their
young, return southward in autumn.
Great White, River Heron Ardea immaculata. These are (...) in New England.
Crane Ardea canadensis. Cutler. These arrive in Pennsylvania in the spring,
from the south; and after building these nests and rearing their young, return
southward in autumn.
Little White Heron Ardea alba minor. These are (...) in New England.
Stork Ardea ciconia. Cutler. These arrive, in the spring, in Carolina and
Florida, from the south; breed and (...) their young, and return again to the
south at the approach of winter. These never (...) so far north as Pennsylvania.
Little crested Purple or Blue Heron Ardea purpurea cristata. These arrive in
Pennsylvania in the spring, from the south; and after building these nests and
rearing their young, return southward in autumn.
Gray, White crested, Heron Ardea varra cristata. These arrive, in the spring,
in Carolina and Florida, from the south; breed and (...) their young, and
return again to the south at the approach of winter. These never (...) so far
north as Pennsylvania.
Speckled crested Heron, or Crab Catcher. Ardea maculata cristata. These arrive
in Pennsylvania in the spring, from the south; and after building these nests
and rearing their young, return southward in autumn.
Marsh Bittern, or Indian Hen Ardea migitans. Ardea stellaris Americans. Cat.
These arrive in Pennsylvania in the spring, from the south; and after building
these nests and rearing their young, return southward in autumn.
Quaw Bird or Frog Catcher Ardea clamator, corpore subceruleo. These arrive, in
the spring, in Carolina and Florida, from the south; breed and (...) their
young, and return again to the south at the approach of winter. These never
(...) so far north as Pennsylvania.
Little Brownish spotted Bittern Ardea subfusca stillata. These arrive, in the
spring, in Carolina and Florida, from the south; breed and (...) their young,
and return again to the south at the approach of winter. These never (...) so
far north as Pennsylvania.
Crested Blue Bittern, called Poor Job Ardea violacca. These arrive in
Pennsylvania in the spring, from the south; and after building these nests and
rearing their young, return southward in autumn.
Green Bittern. Poke. Shouk. Ardea virescens. Ardea virescens minor. These
arrive in Pennsylvania in the spring, from the south; and after building these
nests and rearing their young, return southward in autumn.
Lesser Green Bittern. These arrive in Pennsylvania in the spring, from the
south; and after building these nests and rearing their young, return southward
in autumn.
Least Brown and Stripped Bittern Ardea parva. These arrive in Pennsylvania in
the spring, from the south; and after building these nests and rearing their
young, return southward in autumn.
Spoon Bill; seen as far north as the river Alatamaha Platalea ajaja. Popular
Names. Bortram's Designation. The WOOD PELICAN. TANTALUS. These arrive, in the
spring, in Carolina and Florida, from the south; breed and (...) their young,
and return again to the south at the approach of winter. These never (...) so
far north as Pennsylvania.
Wood Pelican Tantalus loculator. These arrive, in the spring, in Carolina and
Florida, from the south; breed and (...) their young, and return again to the
south at the approach of winter. These never (...) so far north as Pennsylvania.
White Curlew Tantalus alber. These arrive, in the spring, in Carolina and
Florida, from the south; breed and (...) their young, and return again to the
south at the approach of winter. These never (...) so far north as Pennsylvania.
Dusky and White Curlew Tantalus fuscus. These are natives of Carolina, Georgia
and Florida; where they breed and (...) the year round.
Crying Bird, beautifully speckled Tantalus pictus, (Ephouskyka. Indian.) These
are natives of Carolina, Georgia and Florida; where they breed and (...) the
year round.
Gannet, perhaps little different from the Ibis. Tantalus Ichthyophagus. These
are natives of Carolina, Georgia and Florida; where they breed and (...) the
year round.
White Godwit Numenius, alba varia. These breed and continue the year round in
Pennsylvania.
Great red breasted Godwit Numenius pectore rufo. These breed and continue the
year round in Pennsylvania.
The greater Godwit Numenius Americana. These breed and continue the year round
in Pennsylvania.
Red Shark, or pool Stripe Numenius fluvialis. These breed and continue the
year round in Pennsylvania.
Great seacoast Curlew Numenius magnus rufus. These arrive in Pennsylvania in
the spring, from the south; and after building these nests and rearing their
young, return southward in autumn.
Lesser field Curlew Numenius minor campestris. These breed and continue the
year round in Pennsylvania.
Sea side lesser Curlew Numenius cinereus. These arrive in Pennsylvania in the
spring, from the south; and after building these nests and rearing their young,
return southward in autumn.
Great red Woodcock Scolapax Americana rufa. Wood Snipe Scolapax fedoa. Cutler.
These arrive in Pennsylvania in the spring, from the south; and after building
these nests and rearing their young, return southward in autumn.
Meadow Snipe Scolapax minor arvensis. These arrive in Pennsylvania in the
spring, from the south; and after building these nests and rearing their young,
return southward in autumn.
Red coot footed Tring Tringa rufa. These arrive in Pennsylvania in the spring,
from the south; and after building these nests and rearing their young, return
southward in autumn.
White throated, coot footed Tring Tringa cinerea, gutture albo. These arrive
in Pennsylvania in the spring, from the south; and after building these nests
and rearing their young, return southward in autumn.
Black cap, coot footed Tring Tringa vertice nigro. These breed and continue
the year round in Pennsylvania.
Spotted Tring. Rock bird Tringa maculata. These breed and continue the year
round in Pennsylvania.
Little pond Snipe Tringa griseus. These breed and continue the year round in
Pennsylvania.
Little brown pool Snipe Tringa fusca. These breed and continue the year round
in Pennsylvania.
Little Trings of the sea shore. Sand Birds Tringa parva. Ox Eye Tringa
fulicaria? Cutler. These are (...) in New England.
Humility Tringa interpres? Cutler. These arrive in Pennsylvania in the spring,
from the south; and after building these nests and rearing their young, return
southward in autumn.
Turnstone or Dotril Morinella Americana. These arrive in Pennsylvania in
autumn, from the north, where some of them continue during the winter, others
continue their journey as far south as Florida. They (...) turn northward in
the spring, probably to breed and rear their young.
Wild Swan Cygnus ferus. These arrive in Pennsylvania in autumn, from the
north, where some of them continue during the winter, others continue their
journey as far south as Florida. They (...) turn northward in the spring,
probably to breed and rear their young.
Canadian Goose Anser Canadensis. These arrive in Pennsylvania in autumn, from
the north, where some of them continue during the winter, others continue their
journey as far south as Florida. They (...) turn northward in the spring,
probably to breed and rear their young.
Blue Winged Goose Anser aleis caeruleis. These arrive in Pennsylvania in
autumn, from the north, where some of them continue during the winter, others
continue their journey as far south as Florida. They (...) turn northward in
the spring, probably to breed and rear their young.
Laughing Goose Anser fuscus maculatus. These arrive in Pennsylvania in autumn,
from the north, where some of them continue during the winter, others continue
their journey as far south as Florida. They (...) turn northward in the spring,
probably to breed and rear their young.
White Brant Goose Anser branta, corpore albo, remigibus nigris, These arrive
in Pennsylvania in autumn, from the north, where some of them continue during
the winter, others continue their journey as far south as Florida. They (...)
turn northward in the spring, probably to breed and rear their young.
Great parti-colored Brant or Gray Goose Anser branta, grisea maculata. These
arrive in Pennsylvania in autumn, from the north, where some of them continue
during the winter, others continue their journey as far south as Florida. They
(...) turn northward in the spring, probably to breed and rear their young.
Great Wild Duck. Duck and Mallard Anasfera torquata major, caputet collum
viridisplendentis, dorsum griseo fuscum, pectore rufescente, speculum
violacrum. These arrive in Pennsylvania in autumn, from the north, where some
of them continue during the winter, others continue their journey as far south
as Florida. They (...) turn northward in the spring, probably to breed and rear
their young.
Great Black Duck Anas nigra maxima. These arrive in Pennsylvania in autumn,
from the north, where some of them continue during the winter, others continue
their journey as far south as Florida. They (...) turn northward in the spring,
probably to breed and rear their young.
Bull Neck or Buffaloe Head Quindar Anas bucepala. These arrive in Pennsylvania
in autumn, from the north, where some of them continue during the winter,
others continue their journey as far south as Florida. They (...) turn
northward in the spring, probably to breed and rear their young.
Blue Bill Anas subcerulea. These arrive in Pennsylvania in autumn, from the
north, where some of them continue during the winter, others continue their
journey as far south as Florida. They (...) turn northward in the spring,
probably to breed and rear their young.
Black White Faced Duck Anas leucocephala. These are (...) in New England.
Wood Duck Anas arborea. These arrive in Pennsylvania in autumn, from the
north, where some of them continue during the winter, others continue their
journey as far south as Florida. They (...) turn northward in the spring,
probably to breed and rear their young.
Sprigtail Duck Anas caudacuta. These arrive in Pennsylvania in autumn, from
the north, where some of them continue during the winter, others continue their
journey as far south as Florida. They (...) turn northward in the spring,
probably to breed and rear their young.
Little Brown and White Duck Anas rustica. These arrive in Pennsylvania in
autumn, from the north, where some of them continue during the winter, others
continue their journey as far south as Florida. They (...) turn northward in
the spring, probably to breed and rear their young.
Various colored Duck, his breast and neck as though ornamented with chains of
beads Anas principalis, maculata. Popular Names. Bartram's Designation. These
arrive in Pennsylvania in autumn, from the north, where some of them continue
during the winter, others continue their journey as far south as Florida. They
(...) turn northward in the spring, probably to breed and rear their young.
Little Black and White Duck, called Butter Back Anas minor picta Sea Duck Anas
mollissima. Cutler. Sea Pigeon Anas histrionica. Cutler. These are (...) in New
England.
Old Wife Anas thyemalis. Peck. Anas strepera. Cutler. These arrive in
Pennsylvania in autumn, from the north, where some of them continue during the
winter, others continue their journey as far south as Florida. They (...) turn
northward in the spring, probably to breed and rear their young.
Blue Winged Shoveller Anas Americana lato rostro. Catesby. These are (...) in
New England.
Dipper Anas albeola. Cutler. TEAL. QUERQUIDULAE, These arrive in Pennsylvania
in the spring, from the south; and after building these nests and rearing their
young, return southward in autumn.
Summer Duck Anas sponsa. These arrive in Pennsylvania in autumn, from the
north, where some of them continue during the winter, others continue their
journey as far south as Florida. They (...) turn northward in the spring,
probably to breed and rear their young.
Blue Winged Teal Anas discors. These arrive in Pennsylvania in autumn, from
the north, where some of them continue during the winter, others continue their
journey as far south as Florida. They (...) turn northward in the spring,
probably to breed and rear their young.
Least Green Winged Teal Anas migratoria. These arrive in Pennsylvania in the
spring, from the south; and after building these nests and rearing their young,
return southward in autumn.
Whistling Duck Anas sistulosa. These arrive in Pennsylvania in autumn, from
the north, where some of them continue during the winter, others continue their
journey as far south as Florida. They (...) turn northward in the spring,
probably to breed and rear their young.
Great Fishing Duck Mergus major pectore ruso. These arrive in Pennsylvania in
autumn, from the north, where some of them continue during the winter, others
continue their journey as far south as Florida. They (...) turn northward in
the spring, probably to breed and rear their young.
Round crested Duck Mergus cucultatus. These arrive in Pennsylvania in the
spring, from the south; and after building these nests and rearing their young,
return southward in autumn.
Eel Crow Colymbus migratorius. These are natives of Carolina, Georgia and
Florida; where they breed and (...) the year round.
Great Black Cormorant of Florida, having a red Beak Colymbus Floridanus. These
are natives of Carolina, Georgia and Florida; where they breed and (...) the
year round.
Snake Bird of Florida Colymbus colubrinus, cauda elongata. These breed and
continue the year round in Pennsylvania.
Great Black and White Pied Diver or Loon Colymbus musicus. These arrive in
Pennsylvania in autumn, from the north, where some of them continue during the
winter, others continue their journey as far south as Florida. They (...) turn
northward in the spring, probably to breed and rear their young.
Large Spotted Loon or Great Colymbus Glacialis. Peck. Speckled Diver Colymbus
arcticus. These breed and continue the year round in Pennsylvania.
Little eared, Brown Dobchick Colymbus auritus et cornutus. These breed and
continue the year round in Pennsylvania.
Little crested Brown Dobchick Colymbus minor fuscus. These are (...) in New
England.
Dobchick or Notail Colymbus podiceps. Peck. These are (...) in New England.
Cream colored Sheldrake Mergus merganser. Cutler. These are (...) in New
England.
Red Bellied Sheldrake Mergus serrator. Cutler. These are (...) in New England.
Pyed Sheldrake Mergus castor. Cutler. These are (...) in New England.
Penguin Alea impennis. Cutler. These are (...) in New England.
Water Hen Alea arctica. Cutler. These are (...) in New England.
Murr Alea torda. Peck. These are (...) in New England.
Petteril Procellaria pelagica. Peck These arrive, in the spring, in Carolina
and Florida, from the south; breed and (...) their young, and return again to
the south at the approach of winter. These never (...) so far north as
Pennsylvania.
Tropic Bird Phaaeton aetherius. These breed and continue the year round in
Pennsylvania.
Great White Gull Larus alber. These breed and continue the year round in
Pennsylvania.
Great Gray Gull Larus griseus. These breed and continue the year round in
Pennsylvania.
Little White, River Gull Larus alba minor. These are (...) in New England.
Mackarel Gull Larus ridibundus. Cutler. These are (...) in New England.
Fishing Gull Sterna minuta. Cutler. These arrive, in the spring, in Carolina
and Florida, from the south; breed and (...) their young, and return again to
the south at the approach of winter. These never (...) so far north as
Pennsylvania.
Sea Swallow or Noddy Sterna stolida. These are (...) in New England.
Sea Sucker Petromyzon marinus. Peck. These are natives of Carolina, Georgia
and Florida; where they breed and (...) the year round.
Pintado Bird Petrelle pintado. These are (...) in New England.
Thornback Raja sullonica. Peck. These breed and continue the year round in
Pennsylvania.
Shear Water or Razor Bill Rynchops niger. These arrive, in the spring, in
Carolina and Florida, from the south; breed and (...) their young, and return
again to the south at the approach of winter. These never (...) so far north as
Pennsylvania.
Frigate or Man of War Bird Pelicanus aquilus. These arrive, in the spring, in
Carolina and Florida, from the south; breed and (...) their young, and return
again to the south at the approach of winter. These never (...) so far north as
Pennsylvania.
Booby Pelicanus sula. These are (...) in New England.
Shag Pelicanus graculus. Cutler. Pelican of the Mississippi, whose pouch holds
2 or 3 quarts Pelicanus. These are natives of Carolina, Georgia and Florida;
where they breed and (...) the year round.
American Sea Pelican Onocratalus Americanus. The PLOVER KIND. CHARADRUS. These
arrive in Pennsylvania in the spring, from the south; and after building these
nests and rearing their young, return southward in autumn.
Kildee or Chattering Plover Charadrus vociferous. These arrive in Pennsylvania
in the spring, from the south; and after building these nests and rearing their
young, return southward in autumn.
Great Spotted Plover Charadrus maculatus. These arrive in Pennsylvania in the
spring, from the south; and after building these nests and rearing their young,
return southward in autumn.
Little sea side Ring Necked Plover Charadrus minor. These arrive in
Pennsylvania in the spring, from the south; and after building these nests and
rearing their young, return southward in autumn.
Will Willet or Oyster Catcher Hematopus ostrealegus. These are natives of
Carolina, Georgia and Florida; where they breed and (...) the year round.
Great Blue of Slate colored Coot Fulica Floridana. ^White Head Coot Anas
spectabilis. Cutler. ^Brown Coot Anas fusca. Cutler. These arrive in
Pennsylvania in the spring, from the south; and after building these nests and
rearing their young, return southward in autumn.
Soree. Brown Rail. Widgeon Rallus Virginianus. These arrive, in the spring, in
Carolina and Florida, from the south; breed and (...) their young, and return
again to the south at the approach of winter. These never (...) so far north as
Pennsylvania.
Little Dark Blue Water Rail Rallus aquatinus minor. These arrive in
Pennsylvania in the spring, from the south; and after building these nests and
rearing their young, return southward in autumn.
Greater Brown Rail Rallus rufus. These are natives of Carolina, Georgia and
Florida; where they breed and (...) the year round.
Blue or Slate colored Water Rail of Florida. Rallus major subceruleus. These
are (...) in New England.
Peep Rallus carolinus. Cutler. These arrive in Pennsylvania in the spring,
from the south; and after building these nests and rearing their young, return
southward in autumn.
Flamingo: seen about the point of Florida; rarely as far North as St.
Augustine Phoenicopterus ruber.

Besides these, the following have not been described or classed, unless, under
different names, they are contained in the above catalogue.

Sheldrach or Canvas Back Mow Bird Ball Coot Blue Peter Water Witch Water
Wagtail Water Pheasant Wakon Bird

The birds of America, says Catesby, generally exceed those of Europe in the
beauty of their plumage, but are much inferior to them in the melody of their
notes.

The middle states, including Virginia, appear to be the climates, in North
America, where the greatest number and variety of birds of passage celebrate
their nuptials and rear their offspring, with which they annually return to
more southern regions. Most of our birds are birds of passage from the
southward. The eagle, the pheasant, grous and partridge of Pennsylvania,
several species of woodpeckers, the crow, blue jay, robin, marsh wren, several
species of sparrows or snow birds, and the swallow, are perhaps nearly all the
land birds that continue the year round to the northward of Virginia.

Very few tribes of birds build or rear their young in the south or maritime
parts of Virginia, in Carolina, Georgia and Florida; yet all those numerous
tribes, particularly of the soft billed kind, which breed in Pennsylvania,
pass, in the spring season, through these regions in a few weeks time, making
but very short stages by the way; and again, but few of them winter there on
their return southwardly.

It is not known how far to the south they continue their rout, during their
absence from the northern and middle states.

"The SWAN ( Cygnus ferus) is the largest of the aquatic tribe of birds which
is seen in this country. One of them has been known to weigh 36 lb. and to be 6
feet in length, from the bill to the feet, when stretched. It makes a found
resembling that of a trumpet, both when in the water and on the wing."
(Belknap.)

The CANADIAN GOOSE ( A^ser Canaden^^^) is a bird of passage, and gregarious.
The offspring of the Canadian and common goose are mongrels, and reckoned more
valuable than either of them singly, but do not propagate.

The P^ARMIGAN ( Tetrao lagopus) ordinarily inhabits the colder climates about
Hudson's Bay, but is sometimes driven, through want of food, to the more
southern latitudes. In the winter of 1788 these birds were taken plentifully
about Quebec. Whenever the winter of the Arctic region sets in with rain, so as
to cover the branches and leaves of trees with a glaze of ice, they are
deprived of their food, and obliged to sly to the south, to a milder climate,
where it can be procured. Hence they frequently visit the United States. Their
feathers are mostly white, covered with down quite to the nails, and their
flesh black, and of an exquisite relish.

Probably this is a different bird from Bartram's Mountain Cock or Grous,
though both have the same Linnaean name.

The QUAIL or PARTRIDGE ( Tetrao minor, s-coturnix) This bird is the Quarl of
New England, and the Partridge of the southern states; but is properly neither.
It is a bird peculiar to America. The Partridge of New England ( Tetrao
tympanus) is the Pheasant of Pennsylvania, but is miscalled in both places. It
is a species of the Grous. Neither the Pheasant, Partridge or Quail, are found
in America.

CUCKOO ( Cuculus Caroliniensis) These birds are said not to pair, like the
rest of the feathered tribes. When the female appears on the wing she is often
attended by two or three males. Unlike all other birds, she does not build a
nest of her own, but takes the opportunity, while the Hedge Sparrow, (probably
they make use of other nests) is laying her eggs, to deposite her egg among the
rest, leaving the future care of it entirely to the hedge sparrow. The
cuckow's, egg requires no longer incubation than her own. When the hedge
sparrow has sat her usual time, and disengaged the young cuckoo and some of her
own offspring from their shells, the young cuckoo, astonishing as it may seem,
immediately sets about clearing the nest of the young sparrows, and the
remaining unhatched eggs, and with surprising expertness soon accomplishes the
business, and remains sole possessor of the nest, and the only object of the
sparrow's future care. American Museum, for Jan. 1792, p. 35. Extracted from
the Phila. Transactions (...) the Royal Society, London.


The WAKON BIRD, which probably is of the same species with the bird of
Paradise, receives its name from the ideas the Indians have of its superior
excellence; the Wakon Bird being in their language the bird of the Great
Spirit. It is nearly the size of a swallow, of a brown color, shaded about the
neck with a bright green. The wings are of a darker brown than the body. Its
tail is composed of four or five feathers, which are three times as long as its
body, and which are beautifully shaded with green and purple. It carries this
fine length of plumage in the same manner as the peacock does his, but it is
not known whether like him, it ever raises it to an erect position.

The WHETSAW is of the cuckoo kind, being, like that, a solitary bird, and
scarcely ever seen. In the summer months it is heard in the groves, where it
makes a noise like the filing of a saw, from which circumstance it has received
its name.

The HUMMING BIRD ( Trochilus colubris) is the smallest of all the feathered
inhabitants of the air. Its plumage surpasses description. On its head is a
small tuft of jetty black; its breast is red; its belly white; its back, wings
and tail of the finest pale green: small specks of gold are scattered over it
with inexpressible grace: and to crown the whole, an almost imperceptible down
softens the several colors, and produces the most pleasing shades.

AMPHIBIOUS REPTILES.] Among these are the mud tortoise or turtle (Testudo
denticulata.) Speckled land tortoise (testudo carolina.) Great soft shelled
tortoise of Florida (Testudo na^o cylindracea elongato, truncato. Bartram.) --
When full grown it weighs from 30 to 40 pounds, extremely fat and delicious
food. -- Great land tortoise, called gopher, its upper shell is about 18 inches
long, and from 10 to 12 broad. -- Found south of Savanna River.

Two species of fresh water tortoises, inhabit the tide water rivers in the
southern States, one is large, weighing from 10 to 12 pounds; the back shell
nearly of an oval form; the other species small; but both are esteemed
delicious food.

Of the frog kind, (Ranoe) are many species. The road (Rana luso?) several
species, the red, brown and black. The former are the largest; the latter the
smallest. Pond frog (Rana oc^llata.) Green fountain frog (Rana esculanta.) Tree
frog (Rana mu^ulata.) Bull frog (Rana boans.) Besides these are the dusky
brown, spotted frog of Carolina. 8 or 9 inches long from the nose to the
extremity of the toes; their voice resembles the grunting of a swine. The bell
frog, so called because their voice is fancied to be exactly like that of a
loud cow bell. A beautiful green frog, whose noise is like the barking of
little dogs, or the yelping of puppies. A less green frog, whose notes resemble
those of young chickens. -- Little gray speckled frog, who make a noise like
the striking of two pebbles together under the surface of the water. There is
yet an extremely diminutive species of frogs, called by some Savanna crickets,
whose notes are not unlike the chattering of young birds or crickets. They are
found in great multitudes after plentiful rains.

Of lizards (Lacertoe) we have also many species. The alligator, or American
crocodile, is a very large, ugly, terrible, creature, of prodigious strength,
activity and swiftness in the water. They are from 12 to 23 feet in length;
their bodies are as large as that of a horse, and are covered with horny places
or scales, said to be impenetrable to a rifle ball, except about their heads
and just behind their fore legs, where they are vulnerable; in shape they
resemble the lizard. The head of a full grown alligator is about three feet
long, and the mouth opens nearly the same length. The eyes are comparatively
small, and the whole head, in the water, appears at a distance like a piece of
rotten, floating wood. The upper jaw only, moves, and this they raise so as to
form a right angle with the lower one. They open their mouths, while they lie
basking in the sun, on the banks of rivers and creeks, and when filled with
flies, musketoes and other insects, they suddenly let fall their upper jaw with
surprising noise, and thus secure their prey. They have two large, strong,
conical tusks, as white as ivory, which are not covered with any skin or lips,
and which give the animal a frightful appearance. In the spring, which is their
season for breeding, they make a most hideous and terrifying roar, resembling
the Sound of distant thunder. The alligator is an evaporous animal; their
nests, which are commonly built on the margin of some creek or river, at the
distance of 15 or 20 yards from the water, are in the form of an obtuse cone,
about 4 feet high, and 4 or 5 in diameter at their basis. They are constructed
with a sort of mortar, made of a mixture of mud, grass and herbage. First they
lay a floor of this composition, on which they deposite a layer of eggs; and
(...) on this a stratum of their mortar, 7 or 8 inches thick; and their (...)
other layer of eggs, and in this manner, one stratum upon (...) nearly to the
top of the nest. They lay from one to two (...) eggs in a nest. These are
hatched, it is supposed, by the (...) (...) sun, assisted, perhaps, by the
fermentation of the vegetable (...) which they are deposited. The female, it is
said, carefully (...) her own nest of eggs till they are all hatched. She them
(...) brood under her care, and leads them about the shores like (...) a (...)
does her chickens, and is equally courageous in defending (...) time of danger.
When she lies basking upon warm banks (...) (...) brood around her, the young
ones may be heard whining and barking (...) young puppies. The old feed on the
young alligators, till they get (...) as that they cannot make a prey of them;
so that happily but few (...) brood survive the age of a year. They are fond of
the flesh of (...) hogs, which they devour whenever they have an opportunity.
(...) principal food in fish. In Carolina and Georgia they retire (...)
^^^dens, which they form by burrowing far under ground, (...) under water and
working upwards, and there remain in a torpi^^ (...) during the winter. Further
south, in warmer climates, they are (...) numerous, and more fierce and
ravenous, and will boldly attack (...). In South America, the carrion vulture
is the instrument of ^^^dence to destroy multitudes of young alligators, who
would other (...) render the country uninhabitable.

Besides the alligator, we have of this species of amphibious (...) the brown
lizard ( Lacerta punctatn.) -- Swist ( Lacerta fusciata) -- (...) lizard, or a
little green cameleon of Carolina, about 6 or 7 inches (...) it has a large,
red gill under its throat, and, like the camele^^, (...) (...) faculty of
changing its color. The striped lizard or scorpio^. mdash;(...) bellied,
squamous lizards, several varieties. -- Large copper (...) lizard. -- Swift,
slender, blue lizard, with a long slender tail, as (...) as that of the glass
snake. The two last are rarely seen, but are sometimes found about old log
buildings in the southern States.

AMPHIBIOUS SERPENTS.] The characters by which amphibious serpents are
distinguished are these, the belly is furnished with (...) and the tail has
both scuta and scales. Of these reptiles, the following are found in the United
States.

Rattle Snake Crotalus horidus. Yellow Rattle Snake Crotali species. Small
Rattle Snake Bastard Rattle Snake Moccasin Snake Coluber -- Gray Spotted
Moccasin Snake of Carolina Water Viper, with a sharp thorn tail Coluber
punctatus. Black Viper Coluber prester. Brown Viper Coluber luridus. White
Bodied, Brown Eyed Snake Coluber atropos. Black Snake with linear rings Coluber
leberis. A Snake with 152 scutae and 135 scutellae Coluber dispas. Bluish Green
Snake, with a stretched out triangular snout, or Hognose Snake Coluber
mycterizens. Copper Bellied Snake Coluber erythrogaster. Black Snake Coluber
constrictor. White Neck Black Snake Coluber -- Small Brown Adder Coluber
striatulus. House Adder Coluber punctatis. Water Adder Coluber -- Brown Snake
Coluber sipedon. Little Brown Bead Snake Coluber annulatus. Coach Whip Snake
Coluber flagellum. Corn Snake Coluber fulvius. Green Snake. Coluber aestivus.
Wampum Snake Coluber fasciatus. Ribbon Snake Pine, Horn, or Bull Snake, with a
horny spear in his tail Joint Snake Garter Snake Anguis eryx. Striped Snake
Chicken Snake Anguis maculata? Glass Snake Anguis ventralis. Brownish Spotted
Snake Anguis reticulata. Yellowish White Snake Anguis lumbricalis. Hissing
Snake Ring Snake Two headed Snake

The RATTLE SNAKE ( Crotalus horridus) is the largest serpent yet known to
exist in America. They are from 4 to upwards of 6 feet in length, and from 4 to
6 inches in diameter. Formerly, it is said, they were much larger. Their
rattles consist of several articulated, crusta^^^^, or rather horny bags,
forming their tails, which, when they move, make a rattling noise, warning
people of their approach. It is said, they will not attack a person unless
previously provoked. When molested or irritated, they erect their rattles, and
by intervals, give the warning alarm. If pursued and overtaken, they instantly
throw themselves into the spiral coil; their whole body swells through rage,
continually rising and falling like a bellows; their beautiful parti-colored
skin becomes speckled and rough by dilatation; their head and neck are
flattened; their cheeks swoolen, and their lips constricted, discovering their
fatal fangs; their eyes red as burning coals, and their brandishing forked
tongues, of the color of the hottest flame, menaces a horrid death. They never
strike unless sure of their mark. They are supposed to have the power of
fascination, in an eminent degree; and it is generally believed that they charm
birds, rabbits, squirrels and other animals, in such a manner as that they
loose the power of resistance, and flutter and move slowly, but reluctantly,
toward the yawning jaws of their devourers, and either creep into their
mouths, or lie down and suffer themselves to be taken and swallowed. This
dreaded reptile is easily killed. One well directed stroke on the head or
across the back, with a stick not larger than a man's thumb, is sufficient to
still the largest: and they are ^o slow of motion that they cannot make their
escape, nor do they attempt it when attacked. Many (...) remedies for the bite
of a rattle snake have been prescribed (...) used with different success; the
following, received from (...) authority, is recommended as a cure for the bite
of all venom^^ (...) "Bind a ligature tight round the leg or thigh, above the
part (...) as to interrupt the circulation; then open or scarify the wou^^
(...) lancet, knife or flint, and suck the wound or let a friend do it; (...)
with any unctious matter, either animal or vegetable; or if (...) not be
procured, make use of salt. Take care to keep the bow^^^ (...) and free, by
drinking sweet oil and milk or cream. If pure (...) at hand, apply it to the
wound, after opening and sucking it, (...) ^^^^ference to any other thing; and
eat plentifully of honey and (...).

The bastard rattle snake, is of the nature of the asp or adder of (...)
Eastern continent; in form and color they resemble the rattle snake, are 8 or
10 inches long; and very spiteful and venomous. (...) the rattle snake, they
throw themselves into a coil; swell and (...) their bodies; continually darting
out their heads, and seem capable of springing beyond their length. -- Found in
the southern States.

The moccasin snake is from 3 to 5 feet in length, and as thick as a man's leg:
When disturbed by an enemy they throw themselves (...) a coil, and then
gradually raise their upper jaw till it falls back, (...) touching the neck, at
the same time vibrating their long purple ^^^^ed tongue, and directing their
crooked poisonous fangs (...) their enemy. In this attitude the creature has a
most terrifying appearance. It is said their bite is incurable; but the
probability (...) that it is not. Like the rattle snake they are slow in their
(...) never bite a person unless provoked. -- Found in abundance in (...)
swamps and low grounds in the southern States.

The other moccasin snake is about 5 or 6 feet long, and as there is a man's
arm; of a pale gray, sky colored ground, with bro^^ ^^dulatory ringlets. --
They are said not to be venomous; have no ^^^onous sangs; are very swift and
active, and flee from an (...). Found in the southern States -- and supposed to
be a species of the wampum snake of Pennsylvania, if not the same snake, though
(...) and deeper colored.

The black snake is of various lengths from 3 to 6 feet, all over (...) a
shining black; it is not venomous; is useful in destroying rats, (...) pursues
its prey with wonderfully agility. It is said that it will (...) the rattle
snake by twisting round it and whipping it to death (...) has been reported
also that they have sometimes twined, themselves round the bodies of children,
squeezing them till they die. -- They are found in all the States.

The coach whip snake is of various and beautiful colors, some parts brown, or
chocolate, others black and others white; it is 6 or 7 feet long, and very
slender and active; it runs swiftly, and is quite in^^fensive; but the Indians
imagine that it is able to cut a man in two with a jerk of its tail. Like the
black snake, it will run upon its (...) with its head and body erect.

The pine or bull snake, called also the Horn snake, is the largest of the
serpent kind known in North America, except the rattle snake, and perhaps
exceeds him in length. -- They are pied black and white are inoffensive with
respect to mankind, but devour squirrels, rabbit^ and every other creature they
can take as food. Their tails terri^^^ with a hard horny spur, which they
vibrate very quick when dis^^^^ed, but they never attempt to strike with it.
They have dens in the earth to which they retreat in time of danger.

The glass snake has a very small head; the upper part of its body is of a
color blended brown and green, most regularly and elegantly spotted with
yellow. Its skin is very smooth and shining, with small scales, more closely
connected than those of other serpents, and of a different structure. A small
blow with a stick will separate the body, not only at the place struck, but at
two or three other places, the muscles being articulated in a singular manner,
quite through to the vertebra. They appear earlier in the spring than any other
serpent, and are numerous in the sandy woods of the Carolinas and Georgia; and
harmless.

The joint snake, if we may credit Carver's account of it, is a great
curiosity. Its skin is as hard as parchment, and as smooth as glass. It is
beautifully streaked with black and white. It is so stiff, and has so few
joints, and those so unyielding, that it can hardly bend itself into the form
of a hoop. When it is struck, it breaks like a pipe stem; and you may, with a
whip, break it from the tail to the bowels into pieces not an inch long, and
not produce the least tincture of blood. It is not venomous.

The two headed snake, has generally been considered as a monstrous production.
I am disposed to believe, however, that it is a distinct species of serpents. I
have seen one, and received accounts of three others, found in different parts
of the United States. One of these was about 8 inches long, and both heads, as
to every outward appearance, were equally perfect, and branching out from the
neck at an acute angle.

The snakes are not so numerous nor so venomous in the northern as in the
southern States. In the latter, however, the inhabitants are furnished with a
much greater variety of plants and herbs, which afford immediate relief to
persons bitten by these venomous creatures. It is an observation worthy of
perpetual and grateful remembrance, that, wherever venomous animals are found,
the God of natural has kindly provided sufficient antidotes against their
poison.

FISHES] Fishes form the fourth class of animals in the Linnaean (...). Mr.
Pennant, in his British Zoology, distributes fish into three divisions,
comprehending six orders. His divisions are, into Cetaceous, Cartilagenous, and
Bony. We are not sufficiently informed on this part of our natural history, to
arrange the following catalogue of our fishes agreeably to Mr. Pennant's
judicious divisions.

CETACEOUS FISH.
The Whale. Dolphin. Porpesse. Grampus. Beluga. CARTILAGENOUS FISH.
Lamprey. Brownspotted Garr fish. Red bellied Bream. Skate. Lump fish. Silver
or White Bream. Shark. Pipe fish. Yellow Bream. Dog fish. Golden Bream or Sun
Black or blue Bream. Storgeon. fish BONY FISH. Probably some that are places
under this division belong to one or other of the preceding. We are not able
accurately to class them.

Eel. Conger eel. Cat fish. Snake fish Pout Week Fish Haddock Horse Mackarel
King Fish Cod Blue Mackarel Sole Frost fish Speckled Mackarel Mummy^hog.
Pollock Salmon White Fish Small Pollock Salmon Trout Tide Black Fish Hake Trout
Rock Black Fish Sculpion Smelt Blue Fish (Be^i^^) Plaice Pike or Pickerel
Sheeps Head Flounder Athernie Red Drum Holly but Mullet Black Drum Dab Herring
Branded Drum Red Perch Carp Sheeps Head Drum White Perch Pond Fish Mossbonker
Yellow perch Toad Fish Shadine Sea Perch Roach Porsie Whiting Shad Dace Sea
Bass Hard Head Anchovy Shiner Alewise Flying Fish Chub Bret Stickle back Sucker
Skip jack Minow

The WHALE ( Balaena mysticetus) is the largest of all animals. In the northern
seas some are found 90 feet in length; and in the (...) zone, where they are
unmolested, whales have been seen 160 feet in length. The head is greatly
disproportioned to the size of the body. In the middle of the head are two
orifices, through which they sp^^t water to a great height. The eyes are not
larger than those of an (...), and are placed toward the back of the head, for
the convenience of seeing both before and behind. They are guarded by eyelids
as in quadrupeds; and they appear to be very sharp sighted, and quick of
hearing. What is called Whale bone adheres to the upper jaw, and it formed of
thin parallel laminae; some of the longest are 12 feet in length: Of these
there are from 350 to 500, on each side, according to the age of the whale. The
tail, which alone it uses to advance itself in the water, is broad and
semilunar, and when the fish lies on one side, its blow is tremendous.

In copulation, the male and female join, it is asserted, more hx^^^; and once
in two years feel the accesses of desire. Their fidelity to each other is
remarkable. An instance of it is related, by Mr. Anderson, as follows: "Some
fishers having struck one of two whales, a male and a female, in company, the
wounded fish made a long and terrible resistance; it struck down a boat with
two men in it, with a single blow of its tail, by which all went to the bottom.
The other still attended its companion, and lent it every assistance; till, at
last, the fish that was struck, sunk under the number of its wounds; while its
faithful associate, disdaining to survive the loss, with great bellowing,
stretched itself upon the dead fish, and shared its (...)." The whale goes with
young nine or ten months, and generally produces one young one, never above
two, which are black and about to feet long. The teats of the female are placed
in the lower (...) the belly. When she suckles her young, she throws herself
(...) side, on the surface of the water, and the young ones attach the^^ to the
teats. Nothing can exceed the tenderness and care of, ^^male for her young.

The Whale louse, Sword fish, and Thresher (a species of Squalus) are mortal
enemies to the whale, who itself is an inoffensive animal.

Formerly whales were found in plenty upon the coasts of the United States; at
present they are scarce. The principal branch of the whale fishery in the
United States, is carried on from Nantucket. The enterprise of the Nantucket
whalemen is remarkable. Not satisfied with the scope which the Atlantic Ocean
affords them, they have lately proceeded round Cape Horn, and penetrated the
great Western Ocean, in pursuit of whales. Capt. Worth has lately returned from
a very successful voyage, of which he gives the following account. viz. That he
went to the southward, from Nantucket, doubled Cape Horn, and then pursued a
north westwardly course, till he arrived at the island of Juan Fernandes. --
That here, where a harpoon was scarcely ever thrown, the whales swim in shoals,
and that it is quite a matter of choice, which of the company they shall fall
upon. -- That along the coast of Chili, for a considerable distance at sea, no
rain falls to incommode the frying of blubber, as happens, to the great
disadvantage of the whaling business, in Hudson's Bay and Davis's straits; so
that they can carry on their business without any of the interruptions common
in other places; in consequence of which they can make more advantageous
voyages. A cargo worth 6000L sterling, it is said, has been procured in a 15
months voyage to this ocean. For the manner of taking the whales, see Part. II.
page 9th.

The BELUGA (Delphinus beluga) is the 4th and last species of the Dolphin
genus. The head is short; nose blunt; eyes and mouth small; in each side of
each jaw are 9 teeth, short and rather blunt; those of the upper jaw are bent
and hollowed, fitted to receive the teeth of the under jaw, when the mouth is
closed; it has pectoral fins, nearly of an oval form; beneath the skin may be
felt the bones of five fingers, which terminate at the edge of the fin in five
very sensible projections. This brings it into the next rank, in the order of
beings, with the Manati, which we have already described under the head of
animals. -- Found in the northern parts of the American coasts; particularly in
the Gulf of St. Lawrence and Hudson's Bay.

The Lamprey frequents most of the rivers in the New England States, especially
where the passage is not interrupted by dams. That part of the lamprey which is
below the air holes is salted and dried for food. After the spawning season is
over, and the young fry have gone down to the sea, the old fishes attach
themselves to the roots and limbs of trees, which have fallen or run into the
water, and there perish. A mortification begins at the tail, and proceeds
upward to the vital part. Fish of this kind have been found at Plymouth, in New
Hampshire, in different stages of putrefaction. Belknap's Hist. New Hampshire,
Vol. III. p. 176.


The amphibious Lobster is found in the small brooks and swamps in the back
parts of North Carolina. In its head is found the eye stone.

INSECTS.] The following catalogues of insects and vermes, except some small
additions and the annexed descriptions, are taken from Dr. Belknap's History of
New Hampshire, Vol. III. page 180-183.

Horned Beetle Scarabaeus simson. Carolina Beetle Scarabaeus carolinus.
^^^ghill Beetle Scarabaeus stercorarius. Appgle Beetle Scarabaeus horticola?
Golden Beetle Scarabaeus lanigerus. Several new species, and others that have
not been arranged Stag Beetle Lucanus cervus. Fluted Beetle Lucanus
interruptus. Dermestes lardarius. Dermestes typographus. Water Flea Gyrinus
natator. Fetid Beetle Silpha vespillo. Lady Fly Coccinella 2 -- pustulata.
Several species. Chrysomela -- many species. Wheat Fly Weevil Bruchus pis^.
Snouted Weevil Curculio quercus, Many species. Goat Chaffer Cerambyx coriarius.
Many species. Firefly Lampyris lucida. Several species. Skipper Elater
oculatus. Many species. Glow Worm Cicindela carolina. One or two other species.
Cantharides Buprestris mariana. Two or three other species. Water Beetle
Dytiscus piceus. Dytiscus marginalis. Dytiscus striatus. Several other species.
Black Beetle Carabus americanus. Numerous species. Blossom Eater Meloe nigra.
Staphylinus maxillosus. Forsicula. -- Two species. Cockroach Blatta americana,
(non indigenu^.) Grasshopper Grillus. -- Numerous species. Cricket Locust Mole
Cricket Grillus gryllotalpa. Froghopper Cicada. -- Many species. Balm Cricket
Large and Small Water Fly Notanecta. -- Several species. Boat Fly Bug Cinex. --
Numerous species. Louse, on Cabbages. Aphis brassicae. Louse, on leaves of
trees and plants. Aphis. -- Numerous species. Bug, on plants and trees Chermes.
-- Many species. Butterfly Papilio. Numerous species (...) several non-
descri^^^ Night Flutterer Owl Moth Sphinx. Many new species. Moth, or
Miller(...) Palaena. -- (...) Numerous species. Apple Moth, or Canker Worm
Phalaena wauaria? Dragon Fly Libellula. -- Several species. Adder Fly
Hemerobius pectinicornis. Several species. Oak Apple Fly Cynips. -- Several
species. Saw Fly Tenthredo betulae. Wasp Vespa. -- Many species. Hornet Bumble
Be Aspis. -- Several species Wild Be Aunt Formica. -- Several species Black
Fly Musca. -- Numerous species Brown Fly Horse Fly Tabanus. -- Several species.
Mosquito, or Musketoe Culex pipiens. Stinging Fly Conops calcitrans. Snow Flea
Podura nivalis. Phalangium. Father Long Legs Several species. Spider Aranea, --
Many species. Crab Cancer. -- Many species. Lobster Shrimp Hermit Crab Slender
Crab King Crab, or Horse Shoe Monoculus polyphemus. Monoculus piscinus. Cray
Fish Amphibious Lobster Monoculus pulex. Monoculus quadricornis.

VERMES.
Sea Clam Holothuria phantaphus. Squid Sepia media. Sepia loligo. Sea Lungs
Medusa pil^aris. Star Fish, or Finger Fish Asterias. -- Three or four species.
Sea Egg Echinus. -- Several species. Barnaole Lepas anatifera. Hog Clam Mya
arenaria. Ra^or Shell Clam Solen ensis. Long Shell Clam Solen radiatis. Oyster
Ostrea -- Muscle Mytilus edulis. Cockle Nerita littoralis? Limpets Patella
fusca. Sand Shell Clam Sabella granulata. Sea Anemone Anemone marina
(locomotiva.)

The Wheat fly, commonly but improperly called the H^ssia^ (...) which has, of
late years, proved so destructive to the wheat in various parts of the United
States, has generally been supposed, to have (...) (...) ported from Europe.
This opinion, however, seems not ^o be (...) founded. Count Ginanni of Ravenna,
in a late learned (...) the diseases of wheat in its growing state, between
seed time and (...) vest, has given an account of more than 50 different
insects that (...) the Italian wheat, and yet our wheat fly is not delineated
nor desc^i^^^. There is reason therefore to doubt its existence in the south of
(...) Sir Joseph Banks said it did not exist in England; nor could he ^^^lect
any account of it in Germany. This destructive insect is probably a
non-descript, and peculiar to the United States. The following interesting
information respecting this insect, communicated to the President of the
Philadelphia Society for promoting Agricul^^ deserves to be (...) as public as
possible, for the benefit of our farmers wh^ fields are or may hereafter to be
liable to the ravages of this devouring fly.

Prospect Hill, June12, 1792. [State of Delaware] Dear Sir,
As the wheat fields in this neighborhood are now suffering from the (...) of
the Hessian fly, I have had an opportunity of observing some facts ^^^ing to
this destructive insect, which, perhaps, if publicly made known, (...) serve
to obviate, or at least to diminish, its pernicious effects.

This fly made its first appearance in this neighborhood about the (...) (...)
last September. They arrived in prodigious clouds, and immediately (...) their
eggs in the wheat, which at that time, afforded them a suitable (...) (...)
discovered, by accurate observation, that the plants, which had then (...) two
blades, were selected for this purpose. In the junction of these two (...)
immediately at the root of the plant, the eggs were laid, amounting, in (...)
instances, to a dozen and more. As these eggs continued to s^ell, the
^^^pression upon the tender capillary vessels of the plant, became more vi^^^^
until, at length, all circulation was intercepted, and these blades were
de^^^^ed. Where the soil was thin, I observed, that, with these blades, the
(...) also perished. But in rich ground, fresh shoots were made from the (...)
of the plant just below the junction of the original blades, and became
^^^^ishing plants in the fall, or early in the spring. As the last fall was
very day and mild, many of these eggs were hatched before winter, but I do not
imagine the grubs could have arrived at the fly state before the frosts, so
that, in all probability, they were destroyed before the spring. Very early,
however, in May, the fly appeared in great numbers, which must have been
hatched at the close of the winter, or have come from a distance to us. They
(...) their eggs immediately in the spring wheat, and that which had been (...)
(...) in the fall, and according to the quality of the soil, that effect has
been precisely the same. A p^^ce of yellow bearded wheat, which I sowed in
November, is the only field that I have examined, in which there is no
appearance of this insect; and I am informed by my neighbors, that this is the
case (...) ever this species of wheat has been sown. I own that I am at a loss
(...) count for this quality in the bearded wheat; the two first blades of
which, (...) should seem, are equally tender as those of any other kind. Its
power of ^^sistence may possibly arise chiefly from its being less debilitated
by the (...) frosts, and consequently from being sooner out of the way of the
fly (...) the spring. At any rate, it certainly admits of being sown later than
any (...) and thus effectually escapes the fall ravages of the insect. It
follow (...) what has been observed, that late sowing of the yellow bearded
(...) (...) rich land, is the only certain method of preventing the ravages of
the (...) the seed, moreover, be steeped in a strong brine, or a decoction of
(...) other nauseous herbs, the farmer's hopes may still be enhanced, and his
(...) (...) diminished. Nay, perhaps, by attending to these particulars, the
appearance of this fly among us, so far from injuring, may promote very
mate^^^^ the present state of our agriculture. The predilection to large,
instead of (...) fields of wheat, will be gradually done away; the sizes of
farms will be (...) (...) -- but the number of farmers will be increased, and
our country ^^^ght much sooner into that state of cultivation, from which human
labor (...) (...) the most ample fruits of its exertions. So that, if the
prosperity of a country consists principally in the greater returns that the
soil can make to (...) industry, why may not this insect be directed, by kind
Providence, to lead (...) (...) this point of national opulence?

P. S. Since writing the above, I have renewed my searching among the yellow
bearded wheat sown in November, and cannot find in it any signs of the fly.
(...) of spring wheat, of oats, and of rye, lying very near it, are all (...);
and some common wheat, which is contiguous to it, is nearly destroyed* ^o that
the spring ravages of the insect, which have been so severely (...) by (...)
kinds of grain, sown even on a very rich soil, have not as yet (...) this
species of wheat. If other communications to the society should (...) the (...)
of this wheat from the destruction of this insect, they will ^^^tly raise the
spirits of the desponding farmers in this quarter.

June 14, 1792.




The Ink or Cuttle fish, is a curiosity. It is furnished with a cyst of black
liquor, which is a tolerable substitute for ink. This it emits* when pursued by
its enemies. The moment this liquor is emitted, the water becomes like a thick,
black cloud, in the eyes of its pursuer, and it improves this opportunity to
make its escape. This cyst of liquor appears designed by Providence solely for
the purpose of personal defense, and is certainly a most apt and curious
contrivance. The Wholemen call these fish, Sq^ids, and say that they are eaten
in abundance by some species of whales.

POPULATION.] According to the census, taken by order of Congress, in 1790, the
number of inhabitants in the United States of America, was three millions, nine
hundred thirty thousand, nearly. In this number none of the inhabitants of the
Territory N. W. of the River Ohio, and but a part of the inhabitants of the
Territory south of the River Ohio, are included. These added, would undoubtedly
have increased the number to 3,950,000, at the period the census was taken. The
increase since, on supposition that the inhabitants of the United States double
once in twenty years, has been about 200,000: So that now, 1792* there are,
probably 4,150,000, souls in the American United States.

This number is rapidly multiplying by immigrations from Europe* as well, as by
natural increase. The American Republic is composed* of almost all nations,
languages, characters and religions which Europe can furnish; the greater part,
however, are descended from the English; and all ^ay, perhaps, be
distinguishingly denominated Federal Americans.

It has generally been considered as a fact, that, of the human race, (...)
males than females are born into the world. The proportion commonly fixed on,
is as thirteen to twelve. Hence a conclusive (...) has been derived against
poligamy. The larger number of (...) has been believed to be a wise appointment
of Providence, to balance the destruction of the males in war, by sea, and by
other occupations more hazardous to life than the domestic employment of the
female sex. The following table, formed from the census of (...) United States,
in which the males and females are numbered (...) ^^^ent columns, furnishes a
new proof of the truth of the com^^ ^^ion, as it respects the United States.
Mr. Bruce, in his Travels, as we shall, in the second part of this w^^k (...)
^larty relate, affirms that in that tract of country from the (...) of (...) to
(...) of (...), which contains the three Arabi^s, the proportion is fully (...)
to one man.


TABLE
Males. Females. Excess. (...) Vermont 44,763 40,505 4,258 In the columns of
the (...), in which are noted All other (...) per (...) the males and females
are not distinguished, and are therefore not regarded in (...).
(...) New Hampshire 70,937 70,160 777 (...) District of Maine The males and
females are not distinguished in the District of Main, in the (...) (...).
(...) Massachusetts 182,742 190,582 7,840 (...) Rhode Island 31,818 32,652 834
(...) Connecticut 114,926 117,448 2,522 (...) New York 161,822 152,320 9,502
(...) New Jersey 86,667 83,287 3,380 (...) Pennsylvania 217,736 206,363 11,373
(...) Delaware 23,926 22,384 1,540 (...) Maryland 107,254 101,395 5,839 (...)
Virginia 227,071 215,046 12,025 (...) Kentucky 32,211 28,922 3,289 (...) North
Carolina 147,494 140,710 6,784 (...) South Carolina 73,298 66,880 6,418 (...)
Georgia 27,147 25,739 1,408 (...) Territory S. of Ohio 16,548 15,365 1,18^
(...)

It is remarkable that the excess in all the states is on the (...) males,
except in Massachusetts, Rhode Island and Connecticut (...) these states the
females are considerably the most numerous. T^^ ^^^ference is obviously to be
ascribed to the large migrations from (...) states, to Vermont, the northern
and western parts of New York (...) Territory N. W. of Ohio, Kentucky,
Pennsylvania, and some (...) most all the southern states. A great proportion
of these (...) were males* and while they have served to increase the propor^^
of males, in the states where they have settled, as is strikingly (...) case in
Vermont and Kentucky, to which the migrations have (...) most numerous, and
where the males are to the females nearly (...) to nine, they have served to
lessen the proportion of males in the (...) from whence they emigrated.

The number of Slaves, in 1790, in all the states, was 697, 69^ (...) increase
of this number since, owing to salutary laws, in (...) of (...) states, and the
humane exertions which have been made in (...) (...) their emancipation, has
happily been small, and probably (...) (...) less in future.

CHARACTER AND MANNERS.] Federal Americans, collec^^ together from various
countries, of different habits, formed (...) different governments, have yet to
form their national character, or we may ^^ther say, it is in a forming state.
They have not yet existed as (...) nation long enough for us to form an idea of
what will be, in its maturity, its prominent features. Judging, however, from
its present promising infancy, we are encouraged to hope, that, at some future
period, not far distant, it will, in every point of view, be respectable.

Until the revolution which was accomplished in 1783, Europeans were strangely
ignorant of America and its inhabitants. They concluded that the New World must
be inferior to the old. The count de Buffon supposed that the animals in this
country were uniformly less than in Europe, and thence concluded, that, "on
this side the Atlantic there is a tendency in nature to belittle her
production." The Abbe Raynal, in a (...) edition of his works supposed this
belittling tendency or influence had its effect on the race of whites
transplanted from Europe, and thence had the presumption to assert, that
"America had not yet produced one good poet, one able mathematician, one man of
genius in a single art or science." Had the Abbe been justly informed
respecting Americans, we presume he would not have made an assertion so (...),
and injurious to their genius and literary character. This assertion drew from
Mr. Jefferson the following reply.

"When we shall have existed as a people as long as the Greeks did before they
produced a Homer, the Romans a Virgil, the French a Racine and Voltaire, the
English a Shakespeare and Milton, should this (...) be still true, we will
enquire from what unfriendly causes it (...) proceeded, that the other
countries of Europe and quarters of the (...) shall not have inscribed any name
in the roll of poets. In war (...) have produced a WASHINGTON, whose memory
will be adored while liberty shall have votaries, whose name will triumph over
time, and will in future ages assume its just station among the most celebrated
(...) of the world, when that wretched philosophy shall be for^^^^, which would
arrange him among the degeneracies of nature. (...) (...) we have produced a
FRANKLIN, than whom no one of the present age has made more important
discoveries, nor has enriched philosophy with more, or more ingenious solutions
of the (...) of nature. We have supposed Mr. RITTENHOUSE sec^^^ no astronomer
living: that in genius he must be the first, because he is self-taught. As an
artist, he has exhibited as great (...) of mechanical genius as the world has
ever produced. -- He has not indeed made a world; but he has, by imitation,
approached nearer its Maker than any man who has lived from (...) creation to
this day. As in philosophy and war, so in government, in oratory, in painting,
in the plastic art, we might show that America, though but a child of
yesterday, has already given hopeful (...) of genius, as well of the nobler
kinds, which arouse (...) most feelings of man, which call him into action,
which sub^^^ (...) his freedom, and conduct him to happiness, as of the
subor^^^ which serve to amuse him only. We therefore suppose, that (...) (...)
is as unjust as it is unkind; and that, of the geniuses (...) (...) the present
age, America contributes its full share. For (...) it with those countries,
where genius is most cultivated, (...) the most excellent models for art, and
scaffoldings for the (...) of science, as France and England for instance, we
calcu^^ (...). The United States contain three millions of inhabitants; France
twenty millions; and the British islands ten. We produc^^ Washington, a
Franklin, a Rittenhouse. France then should (...) half a dozen in each of these
lines, and Great Britain half that number, equally eminent. It may be true,
that France has; we are (...) just becoming acquainted with her, and our
acquaintance so far (...) us high ideas of the genius of her inhabitants. It
would be (...) too many of them to name particularly a Voltaire, a Buffon, the
^^^tellation of Encyclopedists, the Abbe Raynal himself, etc. (...) We
therefore have reason to believe she can produce her full (...) genius."

The two late important revolutions in America, which have (...) scarcely
exceeded since the memory of man, I mean that of the declaration and
establishment of independence, and that of the ado^^^ of a new form of
government without bloodshed, have called (...) historic fame many noble and
distinguished characters who (...) otherwise have slept in oblivion.

But while we exhibit the fair side of the character of Federal Americans, we
would not be thought blind to their faults.

An European writer has justly observed, that "If there be an ^^ject truly
ridiculous in nature, it is an American patriot, signing re^^lutions of
independency with one hand, and with the other brandishing a whip over his
affrighted slaves."

Much has been written, to show the injustice and iniquity of (...) slaving the
Africans; so much as to render is unnecessary here to (...) any thing on that
part of the subject. We cannot, however, (...) introducing a few observations
respecting the influence of slavery upon policy, morals and manners. From
calculations on the subject, i^ has been found, that the expense of maintaining
a slave, especially (...) the purchase money be included, is much greater than
that of ^^taining a free man: This however is disputed by some; but suppose the
expense in both cases be equal, it is certain that the labor (...) the free
man, influenced by the powerful motive of gain, is, at (...) twice as
profitable to the employer as that of the slave. Besides, ^^^ry is the bane of
industry. It renders labor, among the wh^^ not only unfashionable, but
disreputable. Industry is the offs^^^^ of necessity rather than of choice.
Slavery precludes this necess^^^ and indolence, which strikes at the root of
all social and (...) happiness, is the unhappy consequence. These observations,
(...) adding any thing upon the injustice of the practice, show that (...) is
impolitic.

Its influence on manners and morals is equally pernicious. (...) negro
wenches, in many instances, are nurses to their mistresses' children. The
infant babe, as soon as it is born, is delivered to its (...) nurse, and
perhaps seldom or never tastes a drop of its mother's (...). The children, by
being brought up, and constantly associating with (...) negroes, too often
imbibe their low ideas, and vitiated man (...) morals; and contract a negroish
kind of accent and dia^ect, wh^^ they often carry with them through life.

To these I shall add the observations of a native Mr. Jefferson.
of a state (...) contains a greater number of slaves than any of the others.
(...) his observations upon the influence of slavery were inte^^^ particular
state, they will apply equally well to all places (...) pernicious practice in
any considerable degree prevails.

"There must doubtless" he observes "be an unhappy influence on the ma^^^ers of
our people, produced by the existence of slavery among us. The whole commerce
between master and slave is a perpetual exercise of the most boisterous
passions, the most unremitting despotism on the one part, and degrading
submissions on the other. Our children see this, and learn to imitate it; for
man is an imitative (...). This quality is the germ of all education in him.
From his ^^^dle to his grave, he is learning to do what he sees others do* If a
(...) could find no motive either in his philanthropy or his self-love* for
restraining the intemperance of passion toward his slave, it should always be
a sufficient one that his child is present. But generally it is not sufficient.
The parent storms, the child looks on, catches the lin^^ments of wrath, puts on
the same ai^s in the circle of smaller slaves, giv^^ a loose to his worst of
passions, and thus nursed, educated, and daily exercised in tyranny, cannot but
be stamped by it with odious peculiarities. The man must be a prodigy who can
retain his manners and morals undepraved by such circumstances. And with what
exe^^tion should the statesman be loaded, who permitting one half of the
citizens thus to trample on the rights of the other, transforms those (...)
despots, and these into enemies; destroys the morals of the one part, and the
^^or patrioe of the other. For if a slave can have a country in this world, it
must be any other in preference to that in which he is born to live and labor
for another: in which he must lo^k up the faculties of his nature, contribute
as far as depends on his individual endeavors to the evanishment of the human
race, or entail his own miserable condition on the endless generations
proceeding from him. With the morals of the people, their industry also is
destroyed. For in a warm climate, no man will labor for himself who can make
another labor for him. This is so true, that of the proprietors of (...) a
very small proportion indeed are ever seen to labor. And (...) the liberties
of a nation be thought secure when we have removed their only firm basis, a
conviction in the minds of the people that these liberties are the gift of God?
That they are not to be violated but with his wrath? Indeed I tremble for my
country when I reflect that God is just: that his justice cannot sleep forever:
that considering ^^^bers, nature and natural means only, a revolution of the
wheel of fortune, an exchange of situation, is among possible events: that it
may become probable by supernatural interference! -- The Almighty ha^ ^o
attribute which can take side with us in such a contest. But it is impossible
to be temperate and to pursue this subject through the various considerations
of policy; of morals, of history, natural and (...)* We must be contented to
hope they will force their way into (...) one's mind. I think a change already
perceptible, since the (...) of the present revolution. The spirit of the
master is abating, (...) of the slave rising from the dust, his condition
mollifying, the (...) ^^^pe preparing, under the auspices of heaven, for a
total eman^^^^; and that this is disposed, in the order of events, to be with
the consent of their masters, rather than by their extirpation."

Under the Federal government, from the measures already (...) we have reason
to believe that all slaves in the United (...) will in time be emancipated, in
a manner most consistent with their own happiness, and the true interest of
their pro^^^^. Whether this will be effected by transporting them back (...)
(...); or by colonizing them in some part of our own territory and extending to
them our alliance and protection, until they shall have acquired strength
sufficient for their own defense; or by incorporation with the whites; or in
some other way, remains to be determined.

In the middle and northern states, there are comparatively but (...) slaves;
and of course there is less difficulty in giving them their freedom. In
Massachusetts alone, and we mention it to their distinguished honor, there are
NONE. Societies for the manumission of slaves, have been instituted in
Philadelphia and New York, and other places, and laws have been enacted, and
other measures taken in the New England states, to accomplish the same purpose.
The FRIENDS, (commonly called Quakers) have evinced the propriety of their
name, by their goodness in originating, and their vigorous exertions in
executing this truly humane and benevolent design.

The English Language is universally spoken in the United States, and in it
business is transacted, and the records are kept. It is sp^ken with great
purity, and pronounced with propriety in New England, by persons of education;
and, excepting some corruptions in pronunciation, by all ranks of people. In
the middle and southern states, where they have had a great ^uflux of
foreigners, the language, in many instances, is corrupted, especially in
pronunciation. Attempts are making to introduce a uniformity of pronunciation
throughout the states, which for political, as well as other reasons, it is
hoped will meet the approbation and encouragement of all literary and
influential characters.

Intermingled with the Americans, are the Dutch, Scotch, Irish, French,
Germans, Swedes and Jews; all these, except the Scotch and Irish, retain, in a
greater or less degree, their native language, in which they perform their
public worship, converse (...) transact their business with each other.

The time, however, is anticipated, when all improper distinctions shall be
abolished; and when the language, manners, customs, political and religious
sentiments of the mixed mass of people who inhabit the United States, shall
have become so assimilated, as that all nominal distinctions shall be lost in
the general and honorable name of AMERICANS.

GOVERNMENT.] Until the fourth of July, 1776, the present United States were
British colonies. On that memorable day, the Representatives of the United
States of America, in Congress assembled, made a solemn declaration, in which
they assigned their reasons for withdrawing their allegiance from the King of
Great Britain. Appealing to the Supreme Judge of the world for the rectitude of
their intentions, they did, in the name and by the authority of the good people
of the colonies, solemnly publish and declare, That these United Colonies were,
and of right ought to be, FREE and INDEPENDENT States; that they were absolved
from all allegiance to the British crown, and that all political connection
between them and Great Britain was, and ought to be totally dissolved; and that
as Free and Independent States, they had full power to levy war, conclude (...)
contract alliances, establish commerce, and do all other acts and things which
Independent States may of right do. For the support of th^^ declaration, with a
firm reliance on the protection of divine p^^^idence, the delegates then in
Congress, fifty-five in number, (...) pledged to each other their lives, their
fortunes, and their sacred (...).

At the same time they published articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union
between the states, in which they took the (...).

"THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA," and agreed, that each state should retain its
sovereignty, freedom, and independence, and every power, jurisdiction and right
not expressly delegated to Congress by the confederation. By these articles,
the thirteen United States severally entered into a firm league of friendship
with each other for their common defense, the security of their liberties, and
their mutual and general welfare, and bound themselves to assist each other,
against all force offered to, or attacks that might be made upon all, or any of
them, on account of religion, sovereignty, commerce or any other pretense
whatever. But for the more convenient management of the general interests of
the United States, it was determined, that Delegates should be annually
appointed, in such manner as the Legislature of each state should direct, to
meet in Congress the first Monday in November of every year, with a power
reserved to each state to recall its delegates, or any of them, at any time
within the year, and to send others in their stead for the remainder of the
year. No state was to be represented in Congress by less than two, or more than
seven members; and no person could be a delegate for more than three years, in
any term of six years, nor was any person, being a delegate, capable of holding
any office under the United States, for which he, or any other for his benefit,
should receive any salary, fees or emolument of any kind. In determining
questions in Congress, each state was to have one vote. Every state was bound
to abide by the determinations of Congress in all questions which were
submitted to them by the confederation. The articles of confederation were to
be invariably observed by every state, and the Union to be perpetual; nor was
any alteration at any time hereafter to be made in any of the articles, unless
such alterations be agreed to in Congress, and be afterward confirmed by the
legislatures of every state. The articles of confederation were ratified by
Congress, July 9th, 1778.

These articles of confederation, being found inadequate to the purposes of a
federal government, for reasons hereafter mentioned, delegates were chosen in
each of the United States, to meet and fix upon the necessary amendments. They
accordingly met in convention at Philadelphia, in the summer of 1787, and
agreed to propose the following constitution for the consideration of their
constituents.

Constitution.] WE, THE PEOPLE of the United States, in order to form a more
perfect union, establish justice, insure domestic tranquillity, provide for the
common defense, promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings of
liberty to ourselves and our posterity, do ordain and establish this
Constitution for the United States of America.

ARTICLE I.
Sect. 1. ALL legislative powers herein granted shall be vested in a Congress
of the United States, which shall consist of a Senate and House of
Representatives.

Sect. 2. The House of Representatives shall be composed of members chosen
every second year by the people of the several states, and the electors in each
state shall have the qualifications requisite for electors of the most numerous
branch of the state legislature.

No person shall be a Representative who shall not have attained to the age of
twenty five years, and been seven years a citizen of the United States, and who
shall not when elected, be an inhabitant of (...) state in which he shall be
chosen.

Representatives and direct taxes shall be apportioned among (...) several
states which may be included within this Union, according (...) their
respective numbers, which shall be determined by adding to the whole number of
free persons, including those bound to service for a term of years, and
excluding Indians not taxed, three fifths of (...) other persons. The actual
enumeration shall be made within three years after the first meeting of the
Congress of the United States, (...) within every subsequent term of ten years,
in such manner as they (...) by law direct. The number of representatives shall
not exceed one for every thirty thousand, but each state shall have at least
one representative; and, until such enumeration shall be made, the state of New
Hampshire shall be entitled to choose three, Massachusetts eight, Rhode Island
and Providence Plantations one, Connecticut five, New York six, New Jersey
four, Pennsylvania eight, Delaware one, Marryland six, Virginia ten,
North Carolina five, South Carolina five, and Georgia three.

When vacancies happen in the representation from any state, the executive
authority thereof shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies.

The House of Representatives shall choose their Speaker and other officers;
and shall have the sole power of impeachment.

Sect. 3. The Senate of the United States shall be composed of two senators
from each state, chosen by the legislature thereof, for six years; and each
senator shall have one vote.

Immediately after they shall be assembled, in consequence of the first
election, they shall be divided as equally as may be into three cla^^^. The
seats of the senators of the first class shall be vacated at the expiration of
the second year, of the second class at the expiration of the fourth year, and
of the third class at the expiration of the sixth year, so that one third may
be chosen every second year; and if vacancies happen by resignation, or
otherwise, during the recess of the legislature of any state, the executive
thereof may make temporary appointments until the next meeting of the
legislature, which shall th^^ (...) such vacancies.

No person shall be a senator who shall not have attained to the age of thirty
years, and been nine years a citizen of the United States, and who shall not,
when elected, be an inhabitant of that state for which he shall be chosen.

The Vice President of the United States shall be President of the Senate, but
shall have no vote, unless they be equally divided.

The Senate shall choose their other officers, and also a President pro ^empore
in the absence of the Vice President, or when he shall exercise the office of
President of the United States.

The Senate shall have the sol^ power to try all impeachments. When sitting for
that purpose, they shall be on oath or affirmation. When the President of the
United States is tried, the chief justice (...) preside: and no person shall be
convicted without the concurrence of two thirds of the members present.

Judgment in cases of impeachment shall not extend further than (...) removal
from office, and disqualification to hold and enjoy any (...) of honor, trust
or profit under the United States; but the party convicted shall nevertheless
be liable and subject to indictment, (...) judgment and punishment, according
to law.

Sect. 4. The times, places and manner of holding elections (...) senators and
representatives, shall be prescribed in each state by (...) legislature
thereof; but the Congress may at any time by law make or alter such
regulations, except as to the places of choosing Senators.

The Congress shall assemble at least once in every year, and such meeting
shall be on the first Monday in December, unless they shall by law appoint a
different day.

Sect. 5. Each house shall be the judge of the elections, returns and
qualifications of its own members, and a majority of each shall constitute a
quorum to do business; but a smaller number may adjourn from day, to day, and
may be authorized to compel the attendance of absent members, in such a manner,
and under such penalties as each house may provide.

Each house may determine the rules of its procedings, punish its members for
disorderly behavior, and, with the concurrence of two thirds, expel a member.

Each house shall keep a journal of its proceedings, and from time to time
publish the same, excepting such parts as may in their judgment require
secrecy; and the yeas and nays of the members of either house on any question,
shall, at the desire of one fifth of those present, be entered on the journal.

Neither house, during the session of Congress, shall, without the consent of
the other, adjourn for more than three days, nor to any other place than that
in which the two houses shall be sitting.

Sect. 6. The Senators and Representatives shall receive a compensation for
their services, to be ascertained by law, and paid out of the treasury of the
United States. They shall in all cases, all except treason, felony and breach
of the peace, be privileged from arrest during their attendance at the session
of their respective houses, and in going to and returning from the same; and
for any speech or debate in either House, they shall not be questioned in any
other place.

No Senator or Representative shall, during the time for which he was elected,
be appointed to any civil office under the authority of the United States,
which shall have been created, or the emoluments whereof shall have been
increased during such time; and no person holding any office under the United
States, shall be a member of either House during his continuance in office.

Sect. 7. All bills for raising revenue shall originate in the House of
Representatives; but the Senate may propose or concur with amendments as on
other bills.

Every bill which shall have passed the House of Representatives and the
Senate, shall, before it becomes a law, be presented to the President of the
United States; if he approve, he shall sign it, but if not he shall return it,
with his objections, to that house in which it shall have originated, who shall
enter the objections at large on their journal, and proceed to re-consider it.
If, after such re-consideration, two thirds of that house shall agree to pass
the bill, it shall be sent, together with the objections, to the other house,
by which it shall likewise be reconsidered, and if approved by two thirds of
that house it shall become a law. But in all such cases the votes of both
houses shall be determined by yeas and nays, and the names of the persons
voting for and against the bill shall be entered on the journal of each house
respectively. If any bill shall not be returned, by the President within ten
days, (Sundays excepted) after it shall have been presented to him, the same
shall be a law, in like manner as if he had signed it, unless the Congress, by
their adjournment, prevent its return, in which case it shall not be a law.

Every order, resolution, or vote, to which the concurrence of the Senate and
House of Representatives may be necessary (except on a question of adjournment)
shall be presented to the President of the United States; and before the same
shall take effect, shall be approved by him, or, being disapproved by him,
shall be re-passed by two thirds of the Senate and House of Representatives,
according to the rules and limitations prescribed in the case of bill.

Sect. 8. The Congress shall have power

To lay and collect taxes, duties, imposts and excises; to pay the debts and
provide for the common defense and general welfare of the United States; but
all duties, imposts and excises shall be uniform throughout the United States;

To borrow money on the credit of the United States;

To regulate commerce with foreign nations, and among the several states, and
with the Indian tribes;

To establish an uniform rule of naturalization, and uniform laws on the
subject of bankruptcies throughout the United States;

To coin money, regulate the value thereof, and of foreign coin, and fix the
standard of weights and measures;

To provide for the punishment of counterfeiting the securities and current
coin of the United States;

To establish post offices and post roads;

To promote the progress of science and useful arts, by securing for limited
times, to authors and inventors, the exclusive right to their respective
writings and discoveries;

To constitute tribunals inferior to the supreme court;

To define and punish piracies and felonies committed on the high seas, and
offenses against the law of nations;

To declare war, grant letters of marque and reprisal, and make rules
concerning captures on land and water;

To raise and support armies, but no appropriation of money to that use shall
be for a longer term than two years;

To provide and maintain a navy;

To make rules for the government and regulation of the land and naval forces;

To provide for calling forth the militia to execute the laws of the union,
suppress insurrections, and repel invasions;

To provide for organizing, arming, and disciplining the militia, and for
gove^^ing such part of them as may be employed in the service of the United
States, reserving to the states respectively, the appointment of the officers,
and the authority of training the militia according to the discipline
prescribed by Congress;

To exercise exclusive legislation in all cases whatsoever, over such district
(not exceeding ten miles square) as may by cession of particular states, and
the acceptance of Congress, become the seat of government of the United States,
and to exercise like authority over all places purchased by the consent of the
legislature of the state in which the same shall be, for the erection of forts,
magazines, arsenals, dockyards, and other needful buildings: -- And

To make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into
execution the foregoing powers, and all other powers vested by this
constitution in the government of the United States, or in any department or
officer thereof.

Sect. 9. The migration or importation of such persons as any of the states now
existing shall think proper to admit, shall not be prohibited by the Congress
prior to the year one thousand eight hundred and eight, but a tax or duty may
be imposed on such importation, not exceeding ten dollars for each person.

The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended, unless when
in cases of rebellion or invasion the public safety may require it.

No bill of attainder or ex post facto law shall be passed.

No capitation* or other direct tax, shall be laid, unless in proportion to the
census or enumeration herein before directed to be taken.

No tax or duty shall be laid on articles exported from any state. --

No preference shall be given by any regulation of commerce or revenue to the
ports of one state over those of another: nor shall vessels bound to or from,
one state, be obliged to enter, clear, or pay duties in another.

No money shall be drawn from the treasury, but in consequence of
appropriations made by law; and a regular statement and account of the receipts
and expenditures of all public money shall be published from time to time.

No title of nobility shall be granted by the United States: --

And no person holding any office of profit or trust under them, shall, without
the consent of the Congress, accept of any present, emolument, office or title
of any kind whatever, from any king, prince or foreign state.

Sect. 10. No state shall enter into any treaty, alliance or confederation;
grant letters of marque and reprisal; coin money; emit bills of credit; make
any thing but gold and silver coin a tender in payment of debts; pass any bill
of attainder, ex post facto law, or law impairing the obligation of contracts,
or grant any title of nobility.

No State shall, without the consent of the Congress, say any imposts or duties
on imports or exports, except what may be absolutely necessary for executing
its inspection laws; and the net produce of all duties and imposts, laid by any
state on imports or exports, shall be for the use of the Treasury of the United
States; and all such laws shall be subject to the revision and control of the
Congress. No state shall, without the consent of Congress, lay any duty of
tonnage, keep troops, or ships of war, in time of peace, enter into any
agreement or compact with another state, or with a foreign power, or engage in
war, unless actually invaded, or in such imminent danger as will not admit of
delay.

ARTICLE II.
Sect. 1. The executive power shall be vested in a President of the United
States of America. He shall hold his office during the term of four years, and,
together with the Vice President, chosen for the same term, be elected as
follows:

Each state shall appoint, in such manner as the legislature thereof may
direct, a number of electors, equal to the whole number of Senators and
Representatives to which the state may be entitled in the Congress: but no
Senator or Representative, or person holding an office of trust or profit under
the United States, shall be appointed an elector.

The electors shall meet in their respective states, and vote by ballot for two
persons, of whom one at least shall not be an inhabitant of the same state with
themselves. And they shall make a list all the persons voted for, and of the
number of votes for each; which list they shall sign and certify, and transmit,
sealed, to the seat of the government of the United States, directed to the
President of the Senate. The President of the Senate shall, in the presence of
the Senate and House of Representatives, open all the certificates, and the
votes shall then be counted. The person having the greatest number of votes
shall be the President, if such number be a majority of the whole number of
electors appointed; and if there be more than (...) who have such majority, and
have an equal number of votes, then the House of Representatives shall
immediately choose by ballot one of them for President; and if no person have a
majority, then from the five highest on the list, the said house shall in like
manner choose the President. But in choosing the President, the votes shall be
taken by states, the representations from each state having one vote; a quorum
for this purpose shall consist of a member or members from two thirds of the
states, and a majority of all the states shall be necessary (...) a choice. In
every case, after the choice of the President, the (...) having the greatest
number of votes of the electors, shall be the Vice President. But if there
should remain two or more who have equal votes, the Senate shall choose from
them by ballot the Vice President.

The Congress may determine the time of choosing the electors, and the day on
which they shall give their votes; which day shall be the same throughout the
United States.

No person, except a natural born citizen, or a citizen of the United States at
the time of the adoption of this constitution, shall be eligible to the office
of President; neither shall any person be eligible to that office who shall not
have attained to the age of thirty five years, and been fourteen years a
resident within the United States.

In case of the removal of the President from office, or of his death,
resignation, or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said
office, the same shall devolve on the Vice President, and the Congress may by
law provide for the case of removal, death, resignation or inability, both of
the President and Vice President, declaring what officer shall then act as
President, and such officer shall act accordingly, until the disability be
removed, or a President shall be elected.

The President shall, at stated times, receive for his services, a
compensation, which shall neither be increased or diminished during the period
for which he shall have been elected, and he shall not receive within that
period any other emolument from the United States, or any of them.

Before he enter on the execution of his office, he shall take the following
oath or affirmation:

"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully execute the office of
President of the United States, and will, to the best of my ability, preserve,
protect, and defend the constitution of the United States."

Sect. 2. The President shall be commander in chief of the army and navy of the
United States, and of the militia of the several states, when called into the
actual service of the United States; he may require the opinion, in writing, of
the principal officer in each of the executive departments, upon any subject
relating to the duties of their respective offices, and he shall have power to
grant reprieves and pardons for offenses against the United States, except in
cases of impeachment.

He shall have power, by and with the advice and consent of the senate, to make
treaties, provided two thirds of the senators present concur; and he shall
nominate, and by and with the advice and consent of the senate, shall appoint
ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls, judges of the supreme court,
and all other officers of the United States, whose appointments are not herein
otherwise provided for, and which shall be established by law. But the Congress
may by law vest the appointment of such inferior officers, as they think
proper, in the President alone, in the courts of law, or in the heads of
departments.

The president shall have power to fill up all vacancies that may happen during
the recess of the senate, by granting commissions which shall expire at the end
of their next session.

Sect. 3. He shall from time to time give to the Congress information of the
state of the union, and recommend to their consideration such measures as he
shall judge necessary and expedient; he may, on extraordinary occasions,
convene both houses, or either of them, and in case of disagreement between
them, with respect to the time of adjournment, he may adjourn them to such time
as he shall think proper; he shall receive ambassadors and other public
ministers; he shall take care that the laws be faithfully executed, and shall
commission all the officers of the United States.

Sect. 4. The President, Vice President, and all civil officers of the United
States, shall be removed from office on impeachment for, and conviction of,
treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemea^^^^.

ARTICLE III.
Sect. 1. The Judicial power of the United States shall be vested in one
supreme court, and in such inferior courts as the Congress may from time to
time ordain and establish. The Judges, both of the supreme and inferior courts,
shall hold their offices during good behavior, and shall, at stated times,
receive for their services, a compensation, which shall not be diminished
during their continuance in office.

Sect. 2. The Judicial power shall extend to all cases, in law and equity,
arising under this constitution, the laws of the United States, and treaties
made, or which shall be made, under their authority; to all cases affecting
ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls; to all cases of admiralty and
maritime jurisdiction; to controversies to which the United States shall be a
party: to controversies between two or more states, between a state and
citizens of another state, bebetween citizens of different states, between
citizens of the same state claiming lands under grants of different states, and
between a state, or the citizens thereof, and foreign states, citizens or
subjects.

In all cases affecting ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls* and
those in which a state shall be party, the supreme court shall have original
jurisdiction. In all the other cases before mentioned, the supreme court shall
have appellate jurisdiction, both as to law and fact, with such exceptions, and
under such regulations as the Congress shall make.

The trial of all crimes, except in cases of impeachment, shall be by jury; and
such trial shall be held in the state where the said crime shall have been
committed; but when not committed within any (...) the trial shall be at such
place or places as the Congress may by law have directed.

Sect. 3. Treason against the United States, shall consist only in levying war
against them, or in adhering to their enemies, giving them and and comfort. No
person shall be convicted of treason unless on the testimony of two witnesses
to the same overt act, or on confession in open court.

The Congress shall have power to declare the punishment of treason, but no
attainder of treason shall work corruption of blood, or forfeiture, except
during the life of the person attainted.

ARTICLE IV.
Sect. 1. Full faith and credit shall be given in each state to the public
acts, records, and judicial proceedings of every other state. And the Congress
may by general laws prescribe the manner in which such acts, records and
proceedings shall be proved, and the effect thereof.

Sect. 2. The citizens of each state shall be entitled to all privilege and
immunities of citizens in the several states.

A person charged in any state with treason, felony, or other crime, who shall
flee from justice, and be found in another state, shall, on demand of the
executive authority of the state from which he fled, be delivered up, to be
removed to the state having jurisdiction of the crime.

No person held to service or labor in one state, under the laws thereof,
escaping into another, shall in consequence of any law or regulation therein,
be discharged from such service or labor, but shall be delivered up on claim
of the party to whom such service or labor may be due.

Sect. 3. New states may be admitted by the Congress into this union, but no
new state shall be formed or erected within the jurisdiction of any other
state; nor any state be formed by the junction of two or more states, or parts
of states, without the consent of the legislatures of the states concerned as
well as of the Congress.

The Congress shall have power to dispose of and make all needful rules and
regulations respecting the territory or other property belonging to the United
States; and nothing in this constitution shall be so construed as to prejudice
any claims of the United States, or of any particular state.

Sect. 4. The United States shall guarantee to every state in this union of
republican form of government, and shall protect each of them against invasion;
and on application of the legislature, or of the executive (when the
ligislature cannot be convened) against domestic violence.

ARTICLE V.
The Congress, whenever two thirds of both houses shall deem it necessary,
shall propose amendments to this constitution, or, on the application of the
legislatures of two thirds of the several states, shall call a convention for
proposing amendments, which, in either ca^^, shall be valid to all intents and
purposes, as part of this constitution, when ratified by the legislatures of
three fourths of the several states or by conventions in three fourths thereof,
as the one or the other mode of ratification may be proposed by the Congress:
Provided, the no amendment which may be made prior to the year one thousand
eight hundred and eight, shall in any manner affect the first and fourth
clauses in the ninth section of the first article; and that no state, without
its consent, shall be deprived of its equal suffrage in the Senate.

ARTICLE VI.
All debts contracted, and engagments entered into, before the adoption of this
constitution, shall be as valid against the United States under this
constitution, as under the confederation.

This constitution, and the laws of the United States which shall be made in
pursuance thereof; and all treaties made, or which shall be made, under the
authority of the United States, shall be the supreme law of the land; and the
judges in every state shall be bound thereby, any thing in the constitution or
laws of any state to the contrary notwithstanding.

The Senators and Representatives before mentioned, and the members of the
several state Legislatures, and all Executive and Judicial officers, both of
the United States and of the several states, shall be bound by oath or
affirmation, to support this constitution; but no religious test shall ever be
required as a qualification to any office or public trust under the United
States.

ARTICLE VII.
The ratification of the conventions of nine states, shall be sufficient for
the establishment of this constitution between the states so ratifying the same.

DONE in Convention, by the unanimous consent of the states present, the
seventeenth day of September, in the year of our Lord One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Eighty-seven, and of the Independence of the United States of
America the Twelfth. In Witness whereof, we have hereunto subscribed our names.
GEORGE WASHINGTON, President, Signed also by all the Delegates which were
present from twelve states. Attest. WILLIAM JACKSON, Secretary.
In CONVENTION, Monday, September 17,1787.
PRESENT.

The States of New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Connecticut, Mr. Hamilton from New
York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina,
South Carolina and Georgia.

Resolved,

THAT the preceding constitution be laid before the United States in Congress
assembled, and that it is the opinion of this Convention, that it should
afterward be submitted to a convention of Delegates, chosen in each state by
the people thereof, under the recommendation of its Legislature, for their
assent and ratification; and that each convention assenting to, and ratifying
the same, should give notice thereof to the United States in Congress assembled.

RESOLVED, That it is the opinion of this convention, that as soon as the
conventions of nine states shall have ratified this constitution, the United
States in Congress assembled, should fix a day on which Electors should be
appointed by the states which shall have ratified the same, and a day on which
the Electors should assemble to vote for the President, and the time and place
for commencing proceedings under this constitution. That after such
publication, the Electors should be appointed, and the Senators and
Representatives elected: That the electors should meet on the day fixed for the
election of the President, and should transmit their votes certified, signed,
sealed and directed, as the constitution requires, to the Secretary of the
United States in Congress assembled; that the senators and representatives
should convene at the time and place assigned; that the senators should appoint
a President of the Senate, for the sole purpose of receiving, opening and
counting the votes for President; and, that after he shall be chosen, the
Congress, together with the President, should, without delay, proceed to
execute this Constitution.

By the unanimous order of the Convention, GEORGE WASHINGTON, President.
WILLIAM JACKSON, Secretary.

In CONVENTION, September 17, 1787. SIR,
WE have now the honor to submit to the consideration of the United States in
Congress assembled, that constitution which has appeared to us the most
advisable.

The friends of our country have long seen and desired, that the power of
making war, peace and treaties, that of levying money and regulating commerce,
and the correspondent executive and judicial authorities, should be fully and
effectually vested in the general government of the union; but the impropriety
of delegating such extensive trust to one body of men is evident. -- Hence
results the necessity of a different organization.

It is obviously impracticable, in the federal government of these states, to
secure all rights of independent sovereignty to each, and yet provide for the
interest and safety of all. -- Individuals entering into society, must give up
a share of liberty to preserve the rest. The magnitude of the sacrifice must
depend as well on situation and circumstance, as on the object to be obtained.
It is at all times difficult to draw with precision the line between those
rights which must be surrendered, and those which may be reserved; and on the
present occasion this difficulty was increased by a difference among the
several states as to their situation, extent, habits and particular interests.

In all our deliberations on this subject, we kept steadily in our view, that
which appears to us the greatest interest of every true American, the
consolidation of our union, in which is involved our prosperity, felicity,
safety, perhaps our national existence. This important consideration, seriously
and deeply impressed on our minds, led each state in the convention to be less
rigid on points of inferior magnitude, than might have been otherwise expected;
and thus the constitution, which we now present, is the result of a spirit of
amity, and of that mutual deference and concession which the peculiarity of our
political situation rendered indispensible.

That it will meet the full and entire approbation of every state i^ not
perhaps to be expected: but each will doubtless consider, that had her
interests been alone consulted, the consequences might have been particularly
disagreeable or injurious to others: That it is liable to as few exceptions as
could reasonably have been expected, we hope and believe: That it may promote
the lasting welfare of that country so dear to us all, and secure her freedom
and happiness, is our most ardent wish.

With great respect, we have the honor to be, Sir, Your Excellency's most
obedient, and humble servants,

GEORGE WASHINGTON, President. By unanimous order of the Convention. His
Excellency the President of Congress.

The Conventions of a number of the states having at the time of their adopting
the Constitution expressed a desire, in order to prevent misconstruction or
abuse of its powers, that further declaratory and restrictive ^^uses should be
added: And as extending the ground of public confidence in the government will
best ensure the beneficent ends of its institution.

RESOLVED by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of
America in Congress assembled, two thirds of both houses concurring, That the
following articles be proposed to the legislatures of the several states, as
amendments to the Constitution of the United States, all or any of which
articles, when ratified by three fourths of the said legislatures, to be valid
to all intents and purposes, as part of the said constitution, viz.

Articles in addition to, and amendment of, the Constitution of the United
States of America, proposed by Congress, and ratified by the Legislatures of
the several states, pursuant to the fifth Article of the original constitution.

ARTICLE I.
After the first enumeration required by the first article of the Constitution,
there shall be one Representative for every thirty thousand, until the number
shall amount to one hundred, after which the proportion shall be so regulated
by Congress, that there shall be not less than one hundred Representatives, nor
less than one Representative for every forty thousand persons, until the number
of Representatives shall amount to two hundred, after which the proportion
shall be so regulated by Congress, that there shall not be less than two
hundred Representatives, nor more than one Representative for every fifty
thousand persons.

ARTICLE II.
No law varying the compensation for the services of the Senators and
Representatives, shall take effect, until an election of Representatives shall
have intervened.

ARTICLE III.
Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or
prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or
of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition
the government for a redress of grievances.

ARTICLE IV.
A well regulated militia being necessary to the security of a free state, the
right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed.

ARTICLE V.
No soldier shall in time of peace be quartered in any house without the
consent of the owner, nor in time of war, but in a manner to be prescribed by
law.

ARTICLE VI.
The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, ^^pers and
effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and
no warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by oath or
affirmation, and particularly describing the place (...) be searched, and the
persons or things to be seized.

ARTICLE VII.
No person shall be held to answer for a capital, or otherwise infamous crime,
unless on a presentment or indictment of a grand jury, except in cases arising
in the land or naval forces, or in the mi^^^ when in actual service in time of
war or public danger; nor shall any person be subject for the same offense to
be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb; nor shall be compelled in any
criminal case to be a ^^^ness against himself, nor be deprived of life, liberty
or property, with out due process of law; nor shall private property be taken
for ^^^lic use without just compensation.

ARTICLE VIII.
In all criminal prosecutions the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and
public trial, by an impartial jury of the state and district wherein the crime
shall have been committed, which district shall have been previously
ascertained by law, and to be informed of the nature and cause of the
accusation; to be confronted with the witnesses against him; to have compulsory
process for obtaining witnesses in his favor, and to have the assistance of
counsel for his defense.

ARTICLE IX.
In suits at common law, where the value in controversy shall exceed twenty
dollars, the right or trial by jury shall be preserved, and no fact, tried by a
jury, shall be otherwise re-examined in any court of the United States, than
according to the rules of the common law.

ARTICLE X.
Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel
and unusual punishments inflicted.

ARTICLE XI.
The enumeration in the Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be construed
to deny or disparage others retained by the people.

ARTICLE XII.
The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor
prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to
the people.

The following states have ratified all the foregoing articles of amendment to
the constitution of the United States, viz. Maryland, North Carolina, South
Carolina, New York, Virginia and Ver^^^^, New Hampshire, New Jersey and
Pennsylvania reject the second article; and Delaware rejects the first article.
No official returns, to our knowledge, have been made from the other States.

SOCIETY OF THE CINCINNATI. This Society was instituted immediately on the
close of the war in 1783. At their first general (...) Philadelphia, in May
1784, they altered and a^^ended the original Institution, and reduced it to its
present form. They denominated themselves " The Society of the Cincinnati,"
from the high veneration they possessed for the character of that illustrious
Roman, Lucius Quintius Cin^^^^alus.

The persons who constitute this society, are all the commissioned and brevet
officers of the army and navy of the United States, who served three years, and
who left the service with reputation; all officers who were in actual service
at the conclusion of the war; all the principal staff officers of the
continental army; and the officers who have been deranged by the several
resolutions of Congress, upon the different reforms of the army.

There are also admitted into this society, the late and present ministers of
his most Christian majesty to the United States; all the generals and colonels
of regiments, and legions of the land forces; all the admirals and captains of
the navy, ranking as colonels, who have co-operated with the armies of the
United States in their exertions for liberty; and such other persons as have
been admitted by the respective state meetings.

The motives which originally induced the officers of the American army to form
themselves into a society of friends, are summ^d up in a masterly manner, in
their circular letter. "Having*" says they, "lived in the strictest habits of
amity through the various (...) of a war, unparalleled in many of its
circumstances; having seen (...) objects for which we have contended, happily
attained; in the moment of triumph and separation, when we were about to act
the la^^ pleasing, melancholy scene in our military drama-pleasing, because we
(...) to leave our country possessed of independence and pence -- melancholy,
because we were to part, perhaps never to meet again; while every breast was
penetrated with feelings which can be more easily conceived than described;
while every little act of tenderness recurred fresh to the recollection, it was
impossible not to wish our friendships should be continued; it was extremely
natural to desire they might be perpetuated by our posterity to the remotest
ages. With these impressions, and with such sentiments, we heartily confess we
signed the institution. -- We know our motives were irreproachable."

They rest their institution upon the two great pillars of FRIENDSHIP and
CHARITY. Their benevolent intentions are, to diffuse (...) and support to any
of their unfortunate companions who have seen better days, and have merited a
milder fate; to wipe the tear from the eye of the widow, who must have been
consigned, with her helpless infants, to indigence and wretchedness, but for
this charitable institution; to succor the fatherless; to rescue the female
orphan from destruction; and to enable the son to emulate the virtues of the
father* 'let us then,' they conclude, 'prosecute with ardor what we have
instituted in sincerity; let Heaven and our own consciences approve our (...);
let our actions be our best comment on our words; and let us (...) a lesson to
posterity, THAT THE GLORY OF SOLDIERS CAN^^^ (...) COMPLETED, WITHOUT ACTING
WELL THE PART O^ CITIZENS.'

The society have an order, (viz) A Bald Eagle of gold, bearing on its breast
the emblems described as follows --

The Principal figure is CINCINNATUS: three senators presenting him with a
sword and other military ensigns: On a field in the (...) ground, his wife
standing at the door of their cottage; near it a (...) and other instruments of
husbandry. Round the whole, (...) (...) servare rempubli^^m. On the reverse,
the sun rising, a city with (...) gates, and vessels entering the port; same
crowning Cincinn^tus (...) wreath, inscribed, virtutis proemium. Below, hands
joining, suppor^^^ a heart; with the motto, esto perpetua. Round the whole,
foci^^^s (...) cinnatorum, instituta, A. D. 1783.

AGRICULTURE, COMMERCE AND MANUFACTURES. The three important object (...)
attention in the United States, (...) agriculture, commerce and manufactures.
The richness of the (...) which amply rewards the industrious husbandman; the
temper^^^ (...) of the climate, which admits of steady labor; the cheapness of
(...) which tempts the foreigner from his native home, lead us to fix on
agriculture as the present great leading interest of this country. T^^
furnishes outward cargoes not only for all our own ships, but for (...) also
which foreign nations send to our ports; or in other (...) pays for all our
importations; it supplies a great part of the (...) of the inhabitants, and
food for them and their cattle. What i^ ^^^sumed at home including the
materials for manufacturing, is four or five times the value of what is
exported.

The number of people employed in agriculture, is at least (...) parts in four
of the inhabitants of the United States; some say (...). It follows of course
that they form the body of the militia, who (...) the bulwark of the nation.
The value of the property occupied by agriculture, is many times greater than
the property employed in ^^^ery other way. The settlement of waste lands, the
subdivision of form, and the numerous improvements in husbandry, annually
increase (...) preeminence of the agricultural interest. The resources we
derive (...) it, are at all times certain and indispensibly necessary. Besides,
the (...) life promotes health, by its active nature; and morality, by (...)
people from the luxuries and vices of the populous towns. In (...) agriculture
is the spring of our commerce, and the parent of our manufactures.

The vast extent of sea coast, which spreads before these ^^^^^^ated states;
the number of excellent harbors and seaport (...) the numerous creeks and
immense bays, which indent the (...) and the rivers, lakes and canals* which
peninsulate the whole country; added to its agricultural advantages and
improvements, give this part of the world superior advantages for trade. Our
commerce, ^^cluding our exports, imports, shipping, manufactures and fisher^^^
may properly be considered as forming one interest. This has been considered as
the great object, and the most important interest of the New England States.

Since commerce has ever been considered as the handmaid of agriculture,
particularly in this country, where the agricultural interest (...) greatly
predominates; and since neither can flourish without the (...) policy and
interest point out the necessity of such a system of (...) and agricultural
regulations, as will originate and effectually pre^^^ a proper connection and
balance between them.

The consumption of fish oil, whale-bone and other articles, ob^^^ed through
the fisheries, in the towns and counties that are con^^^ient for navigation,
has become much greater than is generally, supposed. It is computed that no
less than five thousand barrels of mackarel, salmon and pickled codfish are
vended annually in the city of Philadelphia: Add to them the dried fish, oil,
spermac^ti candles, whale-bone, etc. and it will be found that a little fleet
of sloops and schooners are employed in the business.

The demand for the forementioned articles is proportionably great in other
parts of the union, (especially in Boston and the large commercial towns that
lie along the coast northeast ward, which enter largely into the fishing trade)
and the vessels employed in transporting them pro^^^bly numerous. The increase
of our towns and manufactures will inc^^^^ the demand for these articles, and
of course the number of coasting vessels. In the present state of our
navigation, we can be in no (...) of procuring these supplies by means of our
own vessels. This (...) afford encouragement to the business of ship-building,
and increase the number of our seamen, who must hereafter form an important
part of the defense of our country. Add to these, our prospects from the fur
trade of Canada. The vast settlements which are making at pittsburg, Genesse
and in other parts in the neighborhood of Canada; the advantages of our inland
navigation, by means of the lakes, the northern branches of the Ohio, the
Patomak, the Susquehannah and the Hudson, with many other circumstances,
depending not only on the situation, but likewise on the climate, proximity,
etc. (...) in a few years put a large share of this fur trade into our hands,
and procure us at least, our proportionable share of the large profits thence
arising, which Canada, since the year 1763, has enjoyed almost exclusively.
These advantages, however, are still but in prospect; and must ^^tain so un^^
the British, agreeably to treaty, shall have evacuated the ^orts at Niagara,
the large settlements of the Heights, and that of Mi^^i^^imakinak. Although the
British, by the treaty of peace, are to enjoy with us the portages of the
navigation of the lakes, yet should a dispute arise, it will not be convenient
for them to contend with us; for the northern and north eastern parts of the
continent, included in the British limits, are much colder, more mountainous
and poorer than the United States, and have no rivers, but such as are full of
rapids and falls; consequently, this trade cannot be carried on by the
Canadians with the sa^^ facility nor advantage as by us. Still they will have
left the exclusive right to the communication from Montreal, with the
High-lands, through the large river of the Ottawas, which flows into the river
St. Lawrence at the lake of the Two Mountains, nine miles from that city; but
its rapids, and falls, will render this way, if not impracticable, at (...)
always very expensive and precarious.

The quantity of fur exported from the northern parts of America to Great
Britain, have amounted yearly to about forty one thousand pounds s^erling,
estimated from the freight during the years 1768, 1769 and 1770. The exports of
buck-skins amounted to upwards of thirty three thousand pounds. The sales of
fur, which take place in London (...) spring, produced in 1782, four thousand
seven hundred pounds. It was a little increased in 1783, and in 1784; it
exceeded two hundred and forty five thousand pounds. All this fur is paid for
by English manufacturers; and a fourth part of it is worked in England, where
its (...) is doubled. This valuable trade, which is carried on through Quebec,
will a great part of it fall into our hands, as soon as the fortifications,
which the British possess in our northern territories, shall be restored to us.
To this consideration, rather than to the pretended (...) passion for the
Royalists, may be attributed the delay of that r^^^^tion. The period when this
restitution must be made, the British ^^ticipate with sorrow. Such are some of
the commercial resources and prospects of this country.

But for various reasons, the advantages for trade which (...) (...) so
liberally given us, have never till since the establishment of (...) present
government, been properly improved. Before the revolution^ Great Britain
claimed an exclusive right to the trade of her American colonies. This right,
which she inflexibly maintained, (...) her to fix her own price, as well on the
articles which she purchased from us, as upon those of her own manufactures
exported for (...) consumption. The carrying trade too, was preserved almost
^^^sively in her own hands, which afforded a temptation to the carriers, that
was often too powerful to be withstood, to exact ^^^tant commissions and
freights. Although we will not even ha^^^d* conjecture how much Great Britain
enriched herself by this ex^^^^^ trade with her colonies, yet this we may say,
that by denying us (...) privilege of carrying our produce to foreign markets,
she deprived us of the opportunity of realizing, in their full extent, the
advantage for trade which nature has given us.

The late war, which brought about our separation from (...) Britain, threw our
commercial affairs into great confusion. The p^^ers of the old confederation
were unequal to the complete execution of any measures, calculated effectually
to recover them from their (...) ranged situation. Through want of power in the
old Congress (...) ^^^lect a revenue for the discharge of our foreign and
domestic debt, (...) credit was destroyed, and trade of consequence greatly
embarrassed, Each state, in her desultory regulations of trade, regarded her
own interest, while that of the union was neglected. And so different (...) the
interests of the several states, that their laws respecting trade, (...)
clashed with each other, and were productive of unhappy consequences. The large
commercial states had it in their power to ^^^press their neighbors; and in
some instances this power was (...) or indirectly exercised. These impolitic
and unjustifiable regulations formed on the impression of the moment, and
proceeding from (...) (...) form or permanent principles, excited unhappy
jealousies (...) the clashing states, and occasioned frequent stagnations in
th^^ly (...) and in some instances, a secrecy in their commercial policy. (...)
(...) wise measures which have been adopted by Congress, under ^^^sent
efficient government, have extricated us almost entirely (...) these
embarrassments, and put a new and pleasing face upon our public affairs.
Invested with the adequate powers, Congress (...) formed a system of commercial
regulations, which enable (...) meet the opposers of our trade upon their own
ground; a (...) which has placed our commerce on a respectable, uniform and
^^^ligible footing, adapted to promote the general interests of the (...) with
the smallest injury to the individual states.

The following tables, taken from authenticated copies, will give the best idea
of the present state of commerce in the United States.

ABSTRACT of Duties arising on Goods, Wares and Merchandise imported into the
UNITED STATES, commencing on the 1st October 1790, and ending the 30th of
September 1791.
STATES. Gross amount of Duties. Discount of 10 per cent* on goods imported in
American vessels. Addition of 10 per cent, on goods imported in Foreign
vessels. Total amount of Duties. Expense of collection. Drawbacks Bounties.
Nett amount of duties. Dol. Cts. Dol. Cts. Dol. Cts. Dol. Cts. Dol. Cts. Dol.
Cts. Dol. Cts. Dol. Cts. New Hampshire 29,429. 44 455. 24 86. 49 29,010. 69
1,558. (...) 144. 9^ 3^1. 68 27,000. 29 Massachusetts 480,129. 47 10,528. 97
1,448. 95 471,049. 45 25,953. 8310/10; 11,130. 48(...) 13,258. 00(...) 420,707.
17 5/12; Rhode Island 115,350. 42(...) 1,906. 37(...) 15. 68 113,459. 72 4,924.
88 389. 10 1,043. 39 107,102. 35 Connecticut 112,728. 47 1,762. 49 1,653. 04
112,619. 02 5,5^3. 29 -- 674. 19(...) 106,351. 53 New York 639,165. 53 5,202.
65 15,565. 50 649,528. 38 13,460. 45 16,416. 33 117. 44 619,534. 16 New Jersey
7,162. 56 214. 49 -- 6,948. 07 349. 36 -- --: 6,598. 68 Pennsylvania 727,133.
37 10,162. 19 13,179. 85 730,151. 03 15,280. 48 6,915. 26 -- 707,955. 29
Delaware 20,036. 52 571. 05 203. 67 19,669. 14(...) 1,246. 96(...) 138, 32 --
18,283. 86 Maryland 338,035. 25 4,798. 02 6,009. 70 339,246. 93 11,223. 62
5,058. 38 -- 322,964. 92 Virginia 340,303. 03 2/12 5,143. 70 11,502. 56
346,661. 88(...) 11,176. 49 461. 66 27. 90 334,995. 832/12 North Carolina
62,065. 11(...) 781. 97 1,788. 52 63,071. 66 4,180. 78 29. 45 -- 58,861. 42
South Carolina 239,912. 99 3,118. 33 8,166. 95 244,961. 61 10,879. 38 -- --
234,082. 23 Georgia 43,634. 91 334. 87 1,796. 59 45,096. 63 2,692. 77 118. 77
-- 42,285. 09 Total 3,155,087. 09 44,980. 35 61,367. 51 3,171,474. 25 5/12;
108,516. 16 7/12 40,802. 62 15,432. 61 3,006,722. 85 7/12

TREASURY DEPARTMENT, Register's Office, March 15 th, 1792.

JOSEPH NOURSE, Register.

GENERAL ABSTRACT of DUTIES arising on the TONNAGE of Vessels entered into the
United States from the 1st of October 1790, to 30th of September 1791.
UNITED STATES VESSELS. UNITED STATES COASTERS. UNITED STATES FISHERIES.
FRANCE. GREAT BRITAIN. STATES. Tons. 95 ths. Dol. Cts. Tons. 95 ths. Dol. Cts.
Tons. 95 ths Dol. Cts. Tons. 95 ths. Dol. Cts. Tons. 95 ths Dol. Cts. New
Hampshire 10,839 650. 34 1,560. 93. 60 629 37. 74 264 132. 1,386. 693
Massachusetts 96,564. 25 5,822. 98 46,063. 94 2,767. 56 29,560. 27 1,774. 70
404. 57 202. 28 22,495. 93 11,251. 21 Rhode Island 19,196. 70 1,151. 84(...)
9,103. 18 546. 25 810. 87 48. 65 88. 18 26. 46 180. 71 140. 37 Connecticut
19,728. 63 1,183. 72 8,098. 48 487. 70 913. 32 54. 80 3,996. 71 1,983. 23 New
York 40,334. 47 2,720. 85 5,725. 343. 38 567. 24 34. 3 1,503. 24 751. 60
35,154. 47 17,576. 56 New Jersey 1,213. 24 72. 79 4,567. 92 274. 34
Pennsylvania 50,327. 64 3,234. 34 3,923. 40 235. 43 967 483. 50 27,327. 48
13,664. 12 Delaware 4,610. 23 276. 61 1,187. 71. 22 1,913. 24 956. 62 Maryland
33,375. 11 2,029. 34 7,836. 16 470. 12 537. 4^ 32. 25 714. 48 357. 25 18,215.
55 9,107. 78 Viriginia 32,041. 6 1,922. 36 10,636. 60 638. 77 72. 71 4. 36
2,414. 34 1,207. 18 44,812. 9 22,406. 70 North Carolina 23,962. 75 1,437. 80
6,796. 31 438. 56 436. 79 218. 42 13,662. 59 6,831. 31 South Carolina 22,497.
55 1,349. 75 4,675. 38 280. 77 25 1. 50 339. 5 169. 52 20,827. 80 10,413. 47
Georiga 7,063. 40 423. 80 733. 20 43. 96 391. 60 195. 82 16,165. 75 8,082. 88
Total 361,754. 28 22,276. 54 110,906. 77 6,691. 67 33,116. 3 1,988. 4 7,523. 40
3,744. 3 206,208. 62 103,107.27

SPAIN. PORTUGAL. UNITED NETHERLANDS. GERMANY. HANSE TOWNS. STATES. Tons. 95
ths. Dol. Cts. Tons.95 ths Dol. Cts. Tons. 95 ths Dol. Cts. Tons. 95 ths Dol.
Cts. Tons. 95 ths Dol. Cts. New Hampshire 162. 81 Massachusetts 248. 69 124. 37
121. 65. 50 Rhode Island 47. 23. 50 100. 31 50. 26 Connecticut 59. 59 29. 80
100. 21 50. 11 New York 243. 24 121. 62 1,563. 71 781. 85 1,079. 71 539. 85 New
Jersey Pennsylvania 2,062. 79 1,025. 90 2,533. 14 1,266. 61 251. 88 125. 98
Delaware 163 81.50 Maryland 503 251. 50 589 294. 50 1,372. 47 686. 25 463 231.
50 Virginia 65 32. 50 180 90 North Carolina 73 36. 50 South Carolina 1,670. 32
835. 14 56. 21 28. 11 194. 68 97. 36 2,603. 9 1.301. 50 Georgia 102. 53 51. 26
243. 88 121. 96 218. 54 109. 28 Total 4,753. 57 2,371. 22 5,152. 80 2,576. 44
3,890. 54 1,945. 27 463 231. 50 2,821. 63 1,^^0. 78

DENMARK. SWEDEN AND RUSSIA. TOTAL AMERICAN TONNAGE. TOTAL FOREIGN TONNAGE.
TOTAL FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC. STATES. Tons. 95 ths Dol. Cts. Tons. 95 ths. Dol.
Cts. Tons. 95 ths. Dol. Cts. Tons. 95 ths. Dol. Cts. Tons. 95 ths Dol. Cts. New
Hampshire 13,028 781. 68 1,812 888. 40 14,840. 1,670. 8 Massachusetts 531. 16
265. 68 319. 92 160. 172,084. 51 10,359. 13 24,131. 42 12,046. 60(...) 196,215.
93 22,405. 73 Rhode Island 29,110. 80 1,729. 90 516. 45 240. 60 29,627. 30
1,970. 50 Connecticut 28,740. 48 1,726. 22 4,126. 56 2,063. 14(...) 32,867. 9
3,789. 37 New York 46,626. 71 3,098. 26 39,544. 47 19,448. 8 86,171. 23 22,546.
34 New Jersey 5,234. 69 302. 94 5,234. 69 302. 94 Pennsylvania 219 109. 50 225.
32 112. 67 53,186. 24 3,405. 87 33,586. 71 16,686. 86 86,773. 20,092. 73
Delaware 5,797. 23 347. 83 2,076. 24 1,038. 12 7,873. 47 1,385. 95 Maryland 497
248. 50 41,748. 74 2,^^1. 23 22,254. 55 10,699. 22 64,103. 34 13,230. 46
Virginia 194. 43 97. 25 42,750. 42 2,5^5. 50 47,665. 86 22,947. 59 90,416. 33
25,513. 9 North Carolina 136. 59 68. 31 30,759. 11 1,876. 37 14,309. 7 7,019.54
45,068. 18 8,895. 91 South Carolina 76. 54 38. 28 27,197. 93 1,632. 2 25,767.
79 12,883. 38 52,965. 77 14,515. 40 Georgia 7,796. 60 467. 76 17,122. 45 8,561.
20 24,919. 10 9,028. 96 Total 1,441. ^59 720. 93 758. 47 379. 26 504,061. 76
30,824. 72 233,013. 82 114,52^. 75 737,075. 63 145,347. 47

TREASURY DEPARTMENT, Register's Office, March 9 th, 1792.

JOSEPH NOURSE, Register.

ABSTRACT of GOODS, WARES and MERCHANDISE, exported from the United States,
from the 1st October 1790, to the 30th September 1791.

SPECIES OF MERCHANDISE EXPORTED.
Quantity. Value. ASHES, Pot 3,083 74/100;tons Dols. 308,36^ Ashes, Pearl 3,197
60/100;ditto 431,676 Apples 12,352 barrels 12,352 Bricks 737,764 number 2,58^
Boats 99 2,970 Bellows for smiths 4 12^ Beer, Ale and Porter 44,526 gallons
8,905.^^ Ditto bottled 719 dozens 1,4^^ Boots 482 pairs 2,89^ Boot-Legs 17
ditto 34 Brimstone 3,280 pounds 9^ Blacking or Lampblack 8,518 ditto 2,850
Bayberries 18 bushels ^ Cider 1,694 barrels 2,541 Ditto bottled 310 dozens 310
Chalk 10 tons 180 Cotton 189,316 pounds 47,329 Co^^^e 962,977 ditto 144,446. 55
C^^o^ 8,322 ditto 88^. 2^ Chocolate 497 boxes 3,832 Candles, Myrtle Wax 348
ditto ^,088 Wax 185 ditto 1,665 Tallow 2,745 ditto 13,725 Cables and Cordage
3,633 per 112 lb. 27,264 Copper Ore 20 ditto 300 Pig 216 ditto 4,320 Sheet 296
ditto 7,992 Manufactured 1,480 pounds 493. 33 Coals 3,788 bushels 758
Cran^berries 720 ditto 360 Corks 300 groce 45 Corn-Fans 1 number 16 Canes and
Walking-Sticks 598 ditto 153 Cotton and Wool Cards 25 dozens 2,350 CARRIAGES.
Coaches, Chariots, Phaetons, etc. 85 number 12,300 Wagons and Carts 25 ditto
1,280 Duck American 478 bolts 4,780 Russia 235 ditto 2,350 DRUGS and MEDICINE.
Glauber Salts 1,580 pounds ^5^ Pink, China and Snake Root, etc. 14,900 ditto
3,000 Sassafras Bark 3 tons 390 Sassafras Wood or Root 34 ditto 685 Carried
forward 1,059,006. 28 EARTHEN and STONE WARE. Brought forward, dols.
1,059,006,^^ Stone 55 dozens 100 Yellow or Queen's 157 crates 1,884 Flaxseed
58,492 casks 327,555. ^^ Flax 18,600 pounds 1,488 Feathers 900 ditto 420 Flints
40,000 number 200 FRAMES of Vessels 1 400 Scows 6 300 Boats 10 150 Houses 195
9,750 Windows and Doors 31 46

FURNITURE HOUSE
Tables. 75 750 Bedsteds 18 180 Desks 78 1,560 Bureaus 21 294 Sophas and
Settees 59 ^34 Clocks 8 640 Clock-Cases 3 90 Chests 785 1,410 Chairs Windsor
5,134 5,134 Chairs Rush 738 224

FISHERIES.
Fish dried 383,237 quin. P^ 112 lb. 958,09^. 50 Fish pickled 57,424 barrels
172,272 Oil Whale 447,323 gallons 89,464. 60 Oil Spermaceti 134,595 ditto
53,838 Candles ditto 4,560 boxes 54,720 Whalebone 124,829 pounds 24,965. 80
Gensang 29,208 ditto 7,682. 80 Grindstones 125 number 187. 50 Glass Ware 21
crates 84 ditto for Windows 92 boxes 920

GROCERIES.
Cassia and Cinnamon 1,778 pounds 3,389 Cloves 900 ditto 1,150 Pimento 141,701
ditto 22,672 Pepper 492 ditto 246 Brown Sugar 73,304 ditto 5,864. 32 Loaf Sugar
1,157 ditto 231. 33 Other Sugars 1,200 ditto 132 Raisins 400 ditto 64

GRAIN and PULSE.
Wheat 1,018,339 bushels 1,018,339 Rye 36,737 ditto 19,470. 6^ Barley 35 ditto
^23. 33 Indian Corn 1,713,241 ditto 856,620. 50 Oats 116,634 ditto 23,3^6. ^0
Buckwheat 14,499 ditto 4,784. 67 Peace and Beans 165,273 ditto 123,954. 73 Horns
and Horn^ips 119,776 number 1,348 Hides raw 704 1,408 Carried forward
4,857,667. ^^ Brought forward, dols. 4,857,667. 32 Hats 435 1,305 Honey 1,740
gallons 1,044 Hops 650 pounds 200 Ho^p 1,544 ditto 103 Hay 2,006 tons 25,075

IRON WROUGHT.
Axes 979 number 979 Hoes 200 99. 96 Drawing Knives 24 4 Scythes 48 48 Locks
and Bolts 2,000 600 Shovels 261 130. 50 Skimmers and Ladles 15 pair 50 Anchors
175 number 5,300 Giapnals 18 244 Muskets 160 800 Cutlasses 72 144 Knives and
Forks 240 10 Chests of Carpenters' Tools 4 200

IRON CASTINGS.
Wagon Boxes 50 pairs 83 Pots, Kettles and other Castings 808 number 600
Cannon 87 1,110 Swivels 8 24 Shot for Cannon 1,000 150 IRON the Ton. Pig 4,178
tons 108,647. 50 Bar 349 ditto 27,960 Nail-Rods 8 ditto 800 Hoops 16 ditto
1,980 Indigo (see note A.) 497,720 lbs. and sundry casks 570,234 Leather tanned
and dressed 5,424 pounds 1,356 Lime 1,320 bushels 198 LEAD Sheet 45 sheets
1,650 Pig 16 tons 1,848 Shot 6,473 pounds 388. 38

LIVE STOCK.
Horned Cattle 4,627 number 84,442. 67 Horses 6,975 279,000 Mules 444 17,760
Sheep 10,377 17,640. 90 Deer 4 16 Hogs 16,803 45,368. 10 Poultry 10,217 dozens
15,325. 50 Merchan. or dry Goods foreign 1,439 packages estim. at 120,000
Molasses 12,721 gallons 2,544. 20 Millstones 2 number 200 Mustard 710 pounds
390 Madder 1,034 ditto 258. 50 Nails 130,293 ditto 19,543. 95 Negro Slaves 24
number 3,808 Carried forward 6,217,330. 48 Brought forward, dols. 6,217,33^. 48
Nankeens 7,070 pieces 10,6^^ Nuts 1,240 bushels 1,24^

NAVAL STORES. (see note A.) Pitch 3,818 barrels 6,^^^. ^^ Tar 51,^44 ditto
76,^^^ Rosin 228 ditto 57^ Turpentine 58,107 ditto 116,21^ Spirits of
Turpentine 1,172 gallons 58^ Oil Linseed 90 ditto ^^ Porcelain or China Ware 2
boxes ^^ Powder Gun 25,854 pounds 1,^^^. ^^ Powder Hair 1,276 ditto 3^^ Pomatum
45 ditto 22. ^^ Paints 1,520 ditto ^^^ Pipes 1 box 2 Printing Presses 4 number
^^^ Plaster of Paris 4 tons 3^

PROVISIONS.
Rice (see note A.) 93,329 tierces 1,136,599. ^^ Flour 119,681 barrels
3,408,^45. 50 Ship Stuff 6,484 ditto 12,^^^ Rye Meal 24,062 ditto 60,1^^ Indian
Meal 70,339 ditto 140,^^^ Buckwheat Meal 422 ditto 1,^^^. ^^ Oat Meal 6 ditto
1^ Bread 100,279 ditto 250,69^. ^^ Beef 62,871 ditto ^^4,226 Pork 26,635 ditto
266,350 Crackers 15,346 kegs 6,138. ^^ Hams and Bacon 295,647 pounds 26,59^. ^^
Venison and Mutton Hams 600 ditto 1^^ Cheese 120,901 ditto 3,463. 7 Lard
522,715 ditto 41,817. ^^ Butter 16,670 firkins 91,6^^ Sausages 250 pounds 25
Fresh Beef 62,269 ditto 3,690. 76 Fresh Pork 29,334 ditto 1,7^0. 4 Carcases of
Mutton 561 number 2,^05 Neats Tongues 160 barrels 1,200 Oysters pickled 1,228
kegs 2,456 Potatoes 22,263 bushels 5,565. 75 Onions 42,420 ditto 21,21^ Other
Vegetables sundries 1,000 Reeds 15,450 77. 50

SPIRITS.
Rum American 513,234 gallons 205,29^. ^^ Rum West India 4,742 ditto 3,79^. ^^
Brandy 158 ditto 158 Brandy Peach 753 ditto 753 Gin 10,252 ditto 8,2^^. ^^
Ditto 3,817 cases 15,26^ Ditto 3,039 jugs 509. 75 Cordials 69 cases 207 Carried
forward 12,534,47^. ^^ Brought forward 12,534,474. 6^

SADLERY.
Saddl^^ M^^^ 414 number 4,968 Brid^^ 402 450 Coach and other Carriage Harness
74 sets 1,740 Wagon and Cart Geers 8 50 Shoes, Men's and Women's 7,046 pairs
6,341. 40 Soup 6^1 boxes 2,764 (...) 2,382 pounds 382. 82 St^^h 160 ditto 90.
60 Snuff 15,689 ditto 3,137. 80 (...) 1,375 bundles 7,333. 33 Silk^^^ 153
pounds 425. 34 Silver old 103 ounces 103 Salt 4,208 bushels 1,052 Sp^^^ Essence
of 94 cases 517

SEEDS.
Garden 1,060 pounds 1,060 Mustard 660 88 Play 60 8 (...) 199 bushels 104. 99

SKINS and FURS.
Mar^^^ 132 number of 264 Calf in Hair 404 ditto 3^1. 60 (...) Moose 1,063
ditto 563 Souls 2,672 ditto 13,36^ (...), Wolf and Tiger 37 ditto 56. 57 (...)
100 ditto 166. 6^ (...) Skins 49,01^ pounds 24,555. 50 Skins and Furs unknown
889 casks and packets 132,000 Tobacco [see note A.] 101,272 hogsheads 3,469,44^
Ditto manufactured 81,122 pounds 12,16^. 60 Tiger 3 boxes 3^0 (...) 317,195
pounds 28,547. 55 (...) 19 per 112 lb 441. 86 T^^cloth 1,850 yards 1,233 T^^
for children 112 dozens 225 Tin 9 boxes 120 Ditto manufactured 15 dozens 80
TEAS Bohea 17 chests 1,750 Souchong 492 ditto 24,600 Green 178 ditto 5,340
Hyson 2,235 ditto 145,323. 75 Vinegar 2,248 gallons 562 Varnish 60 ditto 20

WINES.
Madeira 76,466 ditto 99,405. 80 Other Wines 32,336 ditto 24,252 bottled 6
dozens 4^ WAX Bees 224,538 pounds 53,889. ^^ Myrtle 2,272 ditto 272. 6^ Whips
146 number 26 Carried forward 16,602,425. 6^ Brought forward, dols. 16,602,425.
6^

WOOD.
Staves and Heading 29,061,590 number 369,66^ Shingles 74,205,976 133,570 Shook
Casks 42,032 29,422. 40 Casks 297 297 Laths 25,500 20. 4^ Hoops 1,422,155
14,221. ^^ Hoop-poles 3,422 27. ^^ Masts 405 3,64^. ^^ Bowsprits 42 420. ^^
Rooms 74 148. ^^ Spars 4,983 7,474. ^^ Hand Spikes 36,714 1,529. ^^ Pumps 80
120. ^^ Boxes and Brakes 56 14. ^^ Blocks 7,040 2,000. ^^ Oars 28,456 5,69^. 2^
Oar Rafters 13,080 2,616. ^^ Trunnels 45,905 137. ^^ Cedar and Oak Knees 1,067
7,460. ^^ Breast Hooks 50 100. ^^ Carlings 13 1^^. ^^ Anchor Stocks 809 404. ^^
Cedar Posts 10,453 2,976. ^^ Oak Boards and Plank 963,822 feet 9,638. ^^ Pine
Boards and Plank 37,288,928 ditto 223,733. ^^ Other Boards and Plank 3,463,673
ditto 34,636. ^^ Scantling 6,237,496 ditto 31,187. ^^ Timber. Oak, Pine, etc.
Ditto ditto Mahogany 2,180,137 ditto 21,801. ^7 13,775 tons 41,325. ^^ 5 ditto
22. ^^ Lignum Vitae 1,180 per 112 lb. 354. ^^ Logwood and Nicaragua 105 2/2
ditto 105. 50 Mohogany, Logwood, etc. 3,251 pieces 2,879. ^6 Oak, Pine, etc.
38,680 ditto 18,000. ^^ Cords of Oak, Pine, Hickory, etc. 499 cords 748. 50
Ditto of Oak Bark 57 ditto 114. ^^ Oak Bark Ground 1,040 hhds. 6,240. ^^ Mast
Hoops 148 dozens 111. ^^ Axe Helves 149 ditto 74. 50 Truss Hoops 15 sets 37. 50
Yokes and Bows for Oxen 197 ditto 295. 50 Lock Stocks 4,000 number 60. ^^ Worm
Tubs 6 ditto 30. ^^ Wheel Barrows 6 ditto 9. 60 Wagon and Cart Wheels 25 pairs
300. ^^ Spokes and Fellies 12,972 number 1,621. 50 Spinning Wheels 17 ditto 52.
^^ Tubs, Pails, etc. 34 dozens 150. ^^ Bowls, Dishes, Platters, etc. 170 ditto
340. ^^ Total dollars, 17,571,551. 45

(A.) Returns for two quarters from Charleston, and from several small ports,
are deficient.

SUMMARY OF EXPORTS.
A Summary of the Value and destination of the EXPORTS of the UNITED STATES
agreeably to the foregoing abstract.
Dols. Cts. To the dominions of Russia 3,570 To the dominions of Sweden 21,866.
2 To the dominions of Denmark 277,273. 53 To the dominions of the United
Netherlands 1,634,825. 66 To the dominions of Great Britain 7,953,418. 21 To
the Imperial ports of the Austrian Netherlands and Germany 362,010. 21 To
Hamburg, Bremen and other Hanse towns 64,259. 25 To the dominions of France
4,298,762. 26 To the dominions of Spain 1,301,286. 95 To the dominions of
Portugal 1,039,696. 47 To the Italian Ports 31,726. 90 To Morocco 3,660. 50 To
the East Indies generally 318,628. 46 To Africa generally 168,477. 92 To the
West Indies generally 59,434. 36 To the North West Coast of America 3,380 To
Europe and the West Indies for a market 29,274. 75 Total Dollars 17,571,551. 45

TREASURY DEPARTMENT, March 28th, 1792.

TENCH COXE, Assist. Sec'ry.

The foregoing tables will serve to give the reader an accurate view of the
state of our commerce with foreign nations; of the articles, and the quantity
exported of each, and of the amount of duties arising from our imports and
tonnage.

In this connection it may be useful to notice the principal restrictions,
impositions and prohibitions sustained by the United States, in their trade
with the British Dominions, in contrast with those sustained by Great Britain
in her trade with the United States; and this is the more necessary, as there
are not wanting persons who affirm, that the balance of favor is given to the
United States, and that Great Britain is so far injured by our deportment, as
to justify a retaliation.

The principal facts, relative to the question of reciprocity of commercial
regulations, between Great Britain and the United States of America, have, by a
gentleman who had access to every necessary information for the purpose, been
thrown into the form of a table, as follows.

GREAT BRITAIN THE UNITED STATES Prohibits American vessels from entering into
the ports of several parts of her dominions, viz. the West Indies, Canada, Nova
Scotia, New Brunswick, Newfoundland, (...) ^reton, Hudson's Bay, Hon^^^ Bay,
and her East India spice (...). Admit British vessels into all their ports,
subject to a tonnage duty of 44 cents, or 24 sterling pence, more than American
vessels, and an addition of one tenth to the amount of the impost accruing on
their cargoes. She imposes double light money on American vessels in most of
her ports. They do not impose extra light money on British vessels in any of
their ports. She prohibits the navigating ad libitum, of American vessels, by
native or other seamen. They admit the navigating of British vessels by native
or other seamen, ad libitum. She prohibits the employment of American built
ships by her own citizens, in many branches of trade, upon any terms. They
admit the employment of British built ships by their (...) citizens, in every
branch of (...), upon the terms of 44 co^ts (...) per ton, and one tenth extra
on the impost arising from their ca^^^^. She charges a duty on American sail
cloth, made up in the United States for British ships. They do not charge a
duty (...) British sail cloth, made up in Great Britain for American ships. She
prohibits the importation of goods from several parts of her dominions into
others, in American vessels, upon any terms. They admit the importation of
goods from any part of their dominions into another, in British vessels, on the
terms of 44 (...) per ton extra on the vessel. She prohibits the importation of
goods into Great Britain, by American vessels, from any other country than the
United States. They admit the importation of goods into the United States, i^
British vessels, from every country whatever. She prohibits the importation
into G. Britain from the United States, by American vessels, of all goods not
produced by the United States. They do not prohibit the importation into the
United States from G. Britain, by British vessels, of any goods not produced by
G. Britain. She prohibits the importation of any goods previously brought into
the United States, from the said states into Great Britain, even in British
vessels. They do not prohibit the importation of any goods previously brought
into G. Britain, from that kingdom into the United States, i^ either British or
American bottoms She prohibits the exportation of several articles from Great
Britain to the United States. They do not prohibit the exportation of any
article from the United States to Great Britain. She lays duties of various
rates upon the exportation of many articles to the United States. They do not
lay a duty on the exportation of any article whatever to Great Britain. She
prohibits the importation of all manufactures from the United States, into her
European dominions, and her colonies, unless it be some very simple
preparations and decoctions, requisite to her navy, shipping and manufactures.
They do not prohibit the importation of any manufacture whatever from Great
Britain. She imposes very considerable duties upon some of the agricultural
productions of the United States, and excludes others by duties equal to their
value. They impose moderate duties (lower than any other foreign nation by 2,3,
and 4 for one) on the preduce and manufactures of Great Britain, except in a
very few instances, and exclude scarcely any articles by duties equal to (...)
value. She prohibits for considerable terms of time, some of the principal
agricultural productions of the United States, and others at all times. They
prohibit none of the agricultural productions of Great Britain or her
dominions. It is understood that by treaty she grants some favors, which are
not extended to the United States. They treat Great Britain as favorably as
any nation whatever, as to ships, imports, and exports, and in all other
respects. She prohibits the importation of some American articles, in American
ships, or any but British ships, into her European dominions. They do not
prohibit the importation of any British article in British vessels or any but
American vessels. She does not permit an American citizen to import goods into
some of her dominions, and to sell them there, even in British vessels. In
other parts of her dominions, she lays an extra tax on him, or his sales. They
permit a British citizen to import goods into all their ports, in any vessels,
and to sell them there without any extra tax on him, or his sales. She imposes
heavy duties on certain articles of the produce of the American fisheries, and
insupportable duties on others, in some parts of her dominions: and in other
parts, she prohibits their importation. They impose only five per cent. on the
produce of the British fisheries (which duty is drawn back on exportation) and
admit every article derived from them. She prohibits the consumption of some
American articles, of which she permits the importation. They do not prohibit
the consumption of any British article whatever. She prohibits the importation
of American articles from foreign countries into the British dominions, even in
her own ships. They do not prohibit the importation of British articles from
foreign countries in any ships.

Besides, there is no country that contributes so much to the support of the
navy of Great Britain, as the United States, by the employment they give to her
ships. From August 1789, to August 1790, no less than 230,000 tons of British
vessels, cleared from these states; which much exceed the quantity of vessels
they employed the same year in the Russian trade. The whole Baltic trade of
Great Britain, with all the countries of the various powers that lie within the
Sound, important as it is to her, does not fill more. Their trade with Holland,
France, Spain and Portugal, does not altogether employ as many vessels. Their
whole fisheries, American colonial trade, and West India trade, do not employ
and load more. And how, it may be asked, are the United States requited for
thus strengthening the acknowledged bulwark of Great Britain, by annually giving
a complete lading to the unequalled quantity of 230,000 tons of her private
vessels? The whole of the American vessels, which have arrived in our ports in
the same year, from all the countries and places subject to the British crown,
amount to no more than 43,580 tons.

Our allies and friends, the French, have been more liberal in their policy. In
the arret, passed in council December 29, 1787, for encouraging the commerce of
France with the United States of America, it is ordained. That whale oil and
spermaceti, the produce of the fisheries of the United States, brought directly
into France in French or American bottoms, shall be subject to a duty only of
seven livres ten sols (equal to six shillings and three pence sterling) the
barrel of five hundred and twenty weight; and whale fins shall be subject to a
duty of only six livres thirteen sols and four deniers (equal to five shillings
and six pence half penny) the quintal, with ten sols per livre on each of the
said duties; which ten sols per livre was to cease on the last day of December
1790.

The other fish oils and dry salted fish, produced and imported as aforesaid,
are not liable to pay any other or greater duties, than the most favored
nations are, or shall be subject to in the same case.

Corn, wheat, rye, rice, peace, beans, lentils, flax-seed and other seeds,
flour, trees and shrubs, pot and pearl ashes, skins, and fur of beaver, raw
hides, furs and peltry, and timber carried from the United States to France in
French or American bottoms, are subject to a duty of one eighth per cent. on
their value. Vessels, proved to have been built in the United States, and sold
in France, or purchased by Frenchmen, are exempted from duties. Turpentine, tar
and pitch, are liable to a duty of two and a half per cent. on their value.
Arms may be imported into the United States, in French or American vessels, on
paying a duty of one eighth per cent. on their value; and gunpowder duty free,
by giving a cautionary bond. Books and papers of all sorts imported as
aforesaid, are to be exempted from all duties, and entitled to a restitution of
the fabrication duties on paper and paste board. Permission is given to store
all productions and merchandise of the United States, for six months, in all
the ports of France open to the commerce of her colonies, subject to a duty
only of one eighth per cent. His majesty reserves to himself the power of
granting encouragement to favor the exportation of arms, hard ware, jewelry,
bonetry, wool, cotton, coarse woollens, small draperies and stuffs of cotton of
all sorts, and other merchandise of fabric, which may be sent to the United
States.

As to other merchandises not enumerated in this act, imported and exported in
French or American vessels, and with respect to all commercial conventions
whatever, his majesty ordains, 'That the citizens of the United States enjoy in
France, the same rights, privileges and exemptions, with the subjects of his
majesty; saving what is provided in the ninth article hereof. The article
referred to ordains that, 'The admiralty duties on the vessels of the United
States entering into, or going out of the ports of France, shall not be levied
but conformably with the edict of the month of June last, in the cases therein
provided, and with the letters patent of the tenth of January, 1770, for the
objects for which (...) provision shall have been made by the said edict: his
majesty reserving to himself more^ver to, make known his intentions as to the
manner in which the said duties shall be levied, whether in proportion to the
tonnage of the vessels, or otherwise, as also to simplify the side duties of
the admiralty, and to regulate them as far as shall be possible on the
principles of reciprocity, as soon as the orders shall be completed, which were
given by his majesty according to the twenty-sixth article of the said act of
the month of June last.'


'His majesty grants to the citizens and inhabitants of the United States all
the advantages which are enjoyed, or which may be hereafter enjoyed by the most
favored nations in his colonies of America: and moreover his majesty ensures
to the said citizens and inhabitants of the United States, all the privileges
and advantages which his own subjects of France enjoy or shall enjoy in Asia,
and in the seas leading thereto, provided always, that their vessels shall have
been fitted out and dispatched in some port of the United States.'

MANUFACTURES.] We now come to the subject of our Manufactures; a subject which
has lately become in a high degree interesting to the inhabitants of the United
States, but which is too copious to be treated at large in a work in this kind.
Mr Hamilton, Secretary of the Treasury, in his "Report on the subject of
Manufactures," and the Writer (supposed to be Mr. Coxe, Assistant to the
Secretary of the Treasury) of "A brief examination of Lord Sheffield's
observations on the commerce of the United States," in two supplementary notes
on American manufactures, have given the fullest and most accurate information
on this subject. To them the reader is referred, if he wishes for a more
particular account of our manufactures than is here given -- They are my
principal authorities for what follows.
I shall confine what I have to say, in this place, on this article, to a few
general observations on the advantages of encouraging manufactures in the
United States; and to an enumeration of the articles already manufactured among
us, and a specification of those branches which merit or require to be
particularly encouraged.

The prevailing disposition among the European nations, and particularly Great
Britain, to restrict and embarrass the external trade of the United States,
have forced them to serious and salutary reflections on the importance and
necessity of enlarging the sphere of their domestic commerce, and creating a
more extensive demand at home, for the increasing surplus of their agricultural
produce, by adopting measures for increasing the variety and quantity of their
manufactures, and consequently the number of manufactures. This circumstances,
and the complete success which has rewarded manufacturing enterprise, in some
valuable branches, and the promising prospects which attend some less mature
essays, have put the matter of expediency of encouraging manufactures in the
United States, which was not along since deemed very questionable, beyond a
doubt; and they also justify the belief, that the obstacles to the increase of
this species of employment among us, are less formidable than have been
generally imagined. That manufacturing establishments would, in a variety of
respects, be advantagous to these states, appears very evident from the
following circumstances.

1. They would occasion a proper division of labor, than which there is
scarcely any thing of greater moment in the economy of a nation. The separation
of occupations, causes each to be carried to much greater perfection than it
could possibly acquire, if they were blended; because there would be a saving
of time, by avoiding that loss of it, which is occasioned by a frequent change
from one operation to another of a different nature; and because from a
constant and undivided application to a single object, there naturally results
a greater skill and dexterity in accomplishing it.

2. Manufacturing establishments would be a means of extending the use of
machinery; which, as it is an artificial aid to man, and, to all the purposes
of labor, an increase of hands and of strength, without the expense of
maintaining the labourer, is of great importance in the general mass of
national industry. The cotton mill, invented in England within the last 20
years, is a signal illustration of this general idea. In consequence of it, all
the different processes for spinning cotton are performed by means of machines,
which are put in motion by water, and attended chiefly by women and children;
and by a smaller number of persons, in the whole, than are requisite in the
ordinary mode of spinning. And the operations of this mill may be continued
night and day with convenience and advantage. It is easy to conceive the
prodigious effect of such a machine. To this invention is to be attributed,
essentially, the immense progress, which has been so suddenly made in Great
Britain, in the various fabrics of cotton. The value of labor saving machines,
has, in some degree, been known and experienced already among us; and by their
general adoption in their most improved state, to the cotton, flaxen, hempen,
metal, and part of the woollen and silken branches, to all of which raw
materials they apply, the United States might, in a vory few years, acquire a
desirable degree of independency on British and other foreign manufactures. And
as to advantageous situations, for the erection of miles, and for the
establishment of manufactures in general, no country has more, and few so many
as the United States: And we are far from being deficient in ingenious
mechanics who are capable, not only of erecting machines already invented, and
making improvements upon them, but also of inventing new machines of the most
complicated and useful kind.

3. Another advantage resulting from manufacturing establishments is, they
would afford employment to classes of people who are either not fully occupied,
or wholly idle, and thereby give occasion to the exertion of a greater quantity
of industry, even by the same number of persons. In general, women and children
are rendered more useful, and the latter more early useful, by manufacturing
establishments, than they would otherwise be. Of the number employed in the
cotton manufactories of Great Britain, it is computed that 4 in 7, nearly, are
women and children; of whom the greatest proportion are children; and many of
them of a tender age.

4. The establishment of manufactures would greatly increase the inducements
which this country, in its present state, holds out to foreigners to come among
us, and become citizens. The oppression that is experienced by the people in
some parts of Europe, and the distresses that multitudes are brought into, by
the disturbed state of so many kingdoms, have excited a disposition in many of
their valuable citizens, to emigrate to a country where they may enjoy freedom
and peace. The effect of multiplying the opportunities of employment to those
who emigrate, by manufactural establishments, would probably be, an increase of
the number and extent of valuable acquisitions to the population, arts and
industry of the country. This sentiment, however, ought to be known, that while
we think ourselves justifiable, as it respects the cause of humanity, religion
and policy, in benefiting our country, by opening an asylum, for the oppressed
and distressed citizens of Europe, we are very far from finding a pleasure in
those affecting calamities which render a removal, on their part, desirable.

European manufacturers, listening to the powerful invitations of a better
price for their fabrics or their labor -- of greater cheapness of provisions
and raw materials -- of an exemption from the chief part of the taxes, burdens
and restraints which they endure in the Old World -- of freedom from those
distresses and embarrassments into which they have been thrown by the
disturbances of Europe -- of greater personal independence and consequence,
under the operations of a more equal government -- and of what is far more
precious than more religious toleration, a perfect equality of religious
privileges -- encouraged. I say, by all these powerful inducements,
manufactures would probably stock from Europe to America to pursue their
respective occupations, if they were once made sensible of the advantages they
would enjoy, and were inspired with an assurance of encouragement and
employment.

Besides the advantages already enumerated, which would result to these States
from the encouragement of manufactures, we may add, that in this way, greater
scope would be afforded for the exercise of the various talents and
dispositions of men, a more ample field opened for enterprise; which
circumstances are the more important, as there seems evidently to be, in the
genius of the people of this country, a remarkable aptitude for mechanical
inventions and improvements, and a singular spirit of enterprise. The increase
of manufactures, also, would be a mean of creating, in some instances a new,
and securing in all, a more certain and steady demand, for the surplus produce
of the soil. This circumstance, as it is a principal mean, by which the
establishment of manufactures contributes to an augmentation of the produce or
revenue of a country, and has an immediate and direct relation to the
prosperity of agriculture, is among the most important advantages enumerated.

But there are other considerations which serve to fortify the idea that the
encouragement of manufactures is the interest of all parts of the union. If the
northern and middle states should be the principal scenes of such
establishments, they would immediately benefit the more southern, by creating a
demand for productions, some of which they have in common with the other
states, and others of which either are peculiar to them, or more abundant, or
of better quality than elsewhere. These productions principally are, timber,
flax, hemp, cotton, wool, raw silk, indigo, iron, lead, furs, hides, skins and
coals; of these articles; cotton and indigo are peculiar to the southern
states; flax and hemp are, or may be raised in greater abundance there than in
the more northern states; and the wool of Virginia is said to be of a better
quality, than that of any other state; which is probable, as Virginia embraces
the same latitudes of the finest wool countries in Europe. The climate of the
south is also better adapted to the production of silk. The extensive
cultivation of cotton can hardly be expected, but from the previous
establishment of domestic manufactories of the article; and the surest
encouragement and vent for the others, would result from similar establishments
in regard to them.

The most material objection that has been made to the pursuit of manufactures
in the United States, is the impracticability of success, arising from scarcity
of hands, dearness of labor, and want of capital. The last of these
circumstances, want of capital, has no real foundation. With regard to the
scarcity of hands, the fact must be applied, with no small qualification, to
certain parts of the United States. There are large districts which may be
considered as pretty fully peopled; and which, notwithstanding a continual
drain for distant settlements, are thickly interspersed with flourishing and
increasing towns. -- Connecticut and Massachusetts contain, on an average as
many as 55 inhabitants to every square mile; and the country of Essex, in
Massachusetts, will average 1^5 inhabitants to every square mile. This latter
district has already reached the point at which the complaint of scarcity of
hands ceases; and the abovementioned states at large, are not far remote from,
and are approaching fast toward it; And having, perhaps, fewer attractions to
agriculture than some other more southern and temperate parts of the union,
they exhibit a proportionably stronger propensity to the pursuit of
manufactures, which is exemplified in the maturity which some branches have
already attained, in these districts.

But there are circumstances, which have been already noticed with another
view, that materially diminish every where the effect of a scarcity of hands.
These circumstances are, the great use which may be made of women and children
-- the vast extension given, by late improvements, to the employment of
machines, which, substituting the agency of fire and water, has prodigiously
lessened the necessity for manual labor -- and lastly, the attraction of
foreign emigrants. In all our populous towns there is already a large
proportion of ingenious and valuable workmen, in different arts and trades,
who, by expatiating from Europe, have improved their own condition, and added
to the industry and wealth of the United States. It is a natural inference,
from the experience we have already had, that as soon as the United States
shall present the countenance of a serious prosecution of manufactures -- as
soon as foreign artists shall be made sensible that the state of things here,
affords a moral certainly of employment and encouragement, competent numbers of
European workmen will transplant themselves, so as effectually to ensure the
success of the design. These circumstances sufficiently obviate the objection
which arises from a scarcity of hands.

But, to all the arguments which are brought to evince the impracticability of
success, in manufacturing establishments in the United States, it would be a
sufficient answer, to refer to the experience of what has been already done. It
is certain that several important branches have grown up and flourished, with a
rapidity which surprises; affording an encouraging assurance of success in
future attempts. Of these the following are the most considerable, viz. Of
skins -- Tanned and tawed leathers, dressed skins, shoes, boots and slippers,
harness and saddlery of all kinds, portmanteaus and trunks, leather breeches,
gloves, muffs and tippets, parchment and glue. -- Of Iron -- Bar and sheet
iron, steel, nail rods and nails, implements of husbandry, stoves, pots and
other household utensils, the steel and iron work of carriages and for ship
building, anchors, scale beams and weights, and various tools of artificers,
arms of different kinds. -- Of Wood -- Ships, cabinet wares, and turnery, wool
and cotton cards, and other machinery for manufactures and husbandry,
mathematical instruments, coopers wares of every kind. -- Of Flax and Hemp --
Cables, sail cloth, cordage, twine and packthread. -- Of Clay -- Bricks and
coarse tiles, and potters wares. -- Ardent spirits and malt liquors. -- Writing
and printing paper, sheathing and wrapping paper, paste boards, fullers or
press papers, and paper hangings. -- Hats of fur and wool, and mixtures of
both. -- Women's stuff and silk shoes. -- Refined sugars. -- Chocolate. -- Oil
of animals and seeds, soap, spermaceti and tallow candles -- Copper and brass
wares, particularly utensils for distillers, sugar refiners and brewers,
andirons and other articles for household use -- clocks, philosophical
apparatus -- Tin wares of almost all kinds for ordinary use -- Carriages of all
kinds -- Snuff, chewing and smoking tobacco -- Starch and hair powder --
Lampblack and other painters colors -- Gunpowder.

Besides the manufacture of these articles, which are carried on as regular
trades, and have attained to a considerable degree of maturity, there is a vast
scene of household manufacturing, which contributes very largely to the supply
of the community. These domestic manufactures are prosecuted as well in the
southern, as in the middle and northern states; great quantities of coarse
cloths, coatings, serges and flannels, linsey woolseys, hosiery of wool, cotton
and thread, coarse fustians, jeans and muslins, checked and striped cotton and
linen goods, bedticks, coverlets, and counterpanes, tow linens, coarse
shirtings, shootings, towelling and table linen, and various mixtures of wool
and cotton, and of cotton and flax, are made in the household way, and in many
instances, to an extent, not only sufficient for the supply of the families in
which they are made, but for sale, and even in some cases for exportation. It
is computed in a number of districts, that two thirds, three fourths, four
fifths, and in some places even a greater proportion, of all the clothing of
the inhabitants is made by themselves. In a moral and political view these
facts are highly pleasing and interesting.

The above enumeration does not comprehend all the articles that are
manufactured as regular trades. The following articles, though manufactured in
a less extensive degree, and some of them in less perfection, ought to be added
-- Gold, silver, pewter, lead, glass and stone wares of many kinds, books in
various languages, printing types and presses, bells, combs, buttons, corn
fans, ploughs and all other implements of husbandry. Some of these are still in
their infancy, as are others not enumerated, but which are attended with
favorable appearances. There are other articles also of very great importance,
which, through strictly speaking manufactures, are omitted, as being
immediately connected with husbandry; such are flour and meal of all kinds, pot
and pearl ashes, pitch, tar, turpentine, maple sugar, wine, and the like.

Having pointed out the advantages of encouraging manufactures in the United
States, and enumerated the articles manufactured, it remains that we specify
some of the articles which merit or require encouragement. In making the
selection of objects, five circumstances are entitled to particular attention:
the capacity of the country to furnish the raw material -- the degree in which
the nature of the manufacture admits of a substitute for manual labor in
machinery -- the faculty of execution -- the extensiveness of the uses, to
which the article can be applied -- its subserviency to other interests,
particularly the great one of national defense. And of this description, none
are more essential in their kinds, or more extensive in their uses, than the
manufactures of iron, steel, copper, brass, lead, coal, wood, skins, grain,
flax and hemp, cotton, wool, silk, glass, gunpowder, paper, printed books,
refined sugars, chocolate, wines and maple sugar. These are the most important
of the several kinds of manufactures, which appear to require, and at the same
time to be the most proper for public encouragement, either by bounties on the
articles manufactured, duties on imported articles of the same kind, or
drawbacks of the duties upon the imported raw materials, according to the
nature of the case.

We have mentioned the manufactures of wine and maple sugar, as objects worthy
of legislative attention and encouragement in the United States. A^ to the
first, successful experiments have already been made, by some new settlers of
French people, on the river Ohio, See page 170.
which evince the practicability of the manufacture of wines of an excellent
quality: And as grapes are the spontaneous production of all the United States,
and, by culture, might be raised in any desirable quantity, and in great
perfection, this manufacture, with proper legislative encouragement, might be
carried on to such an extent, as greatly to diminish, and in time, perhaps,
wholly to preclude foreign importations.

The manufacture of maple sugar, though it has for (...) years been carried on,
in the small way, in the eastern states, has but very lately become an object
of public attention. -- The eastern and middle states furnish a sufficient
number of maple trees (...) supply the United States with the article of sugar;
and, it is asserted, of a quality "equal, in the opinion of competent judges,
to the best sugars imported from the West India Islands." A person, whose
judgment on this subject is much to be relied on, as well from his experience
in the business, as his established character for candor and integrity, has
given it as his opinion, "That four active and industrious men, well provided
with materials, and conveniences proper for carrying on the business, may make,
in a common season, which lasts from four to six weeks, 4000lbs, of sugar, that
is 1000lbs to each man." If such be the amazing product of six weeks labor of
an individual, what may be expected from the labors of the many thousands of
people who now inhabit, and may hereafter inhabit, the extensive tracts of
country which abound with the sugar maple tree? This manufacture is so
important and interesting, as it respects th^^ wealth and prosperity of our
country, and the cause of humanity, that it deserves the countenance of every
good citizen, and even national encouragement. No less than 18 millions of
pounds of West India sugars, manufactured by the hands of slaves, is annually
imported into and consumed in the United States. In proportion as this quantity
can be lessened by our own manufactures, by the hands of (...) the wealth of
the United States will be increased, and the cause of humanity promoted.

MILITARY STRENGTH.] Standing armies are deemed inconsistent with a republican
government; we of course have none. Upwards of 5000 men, have lately been
raised, for three years, for the defense of the frontiers of the United States.
Our military strength lies in a well disciplined militia. According to the
(...) census, there are in the United States, 814,000 men of 16 years old and
upwards, whites. Suppose that the superannuated, the officers of government and
the other classes of people who are excused from military duty, amount to
114,000, there will remain a militia of 700,000 men. Of these a great
proportion are well disciplined, ve^eran troops. No nation or kingdom in
Europe, can bring into the field an army of equal numbers, more formidable than
can be raised in the United States.

FINANCES.] The Revenue of the United States is raised from ^^^ties on the
tonnage of vessels entered in the United States, and on ^^ported goods. wares
and merchandise, and from an excise on various articles of consumption. The
amount of the duties arising on the tonnage of vessels, for the year commencing
October 1st 1799, and ending September 30th 1791, amounted to 145,347 dollars.
The duties arising on goods, wares and merchandise, for the same year, amounted
to 3,006,722 dollars. The whole amount of the revenue from the excise is not
accurately known. In Massachusetts it amounts annually to 200,000 dollars. The
old Congress, in their last requisitions, considered Massachusetts as a sixth
part. If this proportion be accurate, the whole amount of the excise will be
1,200,000 dollars.

This revenue is appropriated to the purposes of supporting the civil and
military establishments, in the payment of the interest, and the diminution of
the principal, of the Public Debt.

In the year following October 1st 1789, the expenses and revenue of Government
were as follows, Expenses. Revenue. Dols. Cts. Dols. Cts. Civil list 299,276.
53 Duties on Imports 1,903,790. 48 Additional expense 50,756. 7 Duties on
Tonnage 165,465. 93 War Department 390,199. 54 Total 740,232, 14 Total
2,069,175. 47

From a report of the Secretary of the Treasury, of the 23d of January 1792, it
appears that the whole amount of the Domestic debt of the United States,
principal and interest, which has been subscribed to the loan proposed
concerning that debt, by the act entitled, "An act making provision for the
debt of the United States," is Dollars 31,797,481. 2^ which, pursuant to the
terms of that act, has been converted into stock bearing an immediate interest
of 6 per cent. 14,177,450. 43 Stock bearing the like interest from Jan. 1st,
1801 7,088,727. 79 Stock bearing an immediate interest of 3 per cent.
10,331,303 Making together Dollars. 31,797,481. 22 Of which there stands to the
credit of the Trustees of the sinking fund, (...) consequence of purchases of
the public debt, made under their direction, the sum of Dollars. 1,131,364. 76
The unsubscribed residue of the said debt amounts to 10,616,604. 63 The debts
of the respective states collectively are estimated to amount to 25,403,362. ^^
of which, 21,500,000 dollars have been assumed, and 17,072,334(...) subscribed,
agreeably to act of Congress, of 4th of August 1790. The amount of a debt due
to certain foreign officers, who served the United States, during the late war,
with arrears of interest, is 220,646. 81

FOREIGN DEBT.

The whole amount of the Foreign Debt of the United States, is about 1^ million
dollars; of which about 6,900,000 dollars are due to France. (...) the rest to
Holland. The Executive has been empowered to make (...) additional Loan in
Holland, sufficient to pay the debt to France; and measures for that purpose
have been in agitation in Holland.

The act, making provision for the debt of the United States, has appropriated
the proceeds of the western lands as a fund for the discharge of the public
debt. And the act, making provision for the reduction of the public debt, has
appropriated all the surplus of the ^^^ties on imports and tonnage, to the end
of the year 1790, to the purpose of purchasing the debt at the market price;
and has authorities the President to borrow the further sum of two millions of
dollars for the same object. These measures serve to indicate the intention of
the legislature, as early and as fast as possible, to provide for the
extinguishment of the existing debt.

The present eligible situation of the United States, compared with that of
Europe at large, as it respects taxes or contributions for the payment of all
public charges, appears from the following statement, furnished by a gentleman
of acknowledged abilities. In the United States, the average proportion of his
earnings which each citizen pays for the support of the civil, military and
naval establishments, and for the discharge of the interest of the public debts
of his country, is about one dollar and a quarter; equal to two days labor,
nearly; that is 5 millions of dollars to 4 millions of people. In Great
Britain, France, Holland, Spain, Portugal, Germany, etc. the taxes for these
objects, on an average, amount to about six dollars and a quarter, to each
person. Hence it appears, that in the United States, we enjoy the blessings of
free government, and mild laws; of personal liberty, and protection of
property, for one fifth part of the sum for each individual, which is paid in
Europe for the purchase of public benefits of a similar nature, and too
generally without attaining their objects: for less than one fifth, indeed, as
in European countries, in general, 10 days labor, on an average, do not amount
to 6 dollars. In this estimate proper allowances (...) made for public debts.
The Indian war in the United States, at present, requires nearly half a million
of dollars annually, extra; but this, being temporary only, is not taken into
the estimate.

From the best data that can be collected, the taxes in the United States, for
county, town and parish purposes; for the support of schools, the poor, roads,
etc. appear to be considerably less than in those countries; and perhaps the
objects of them, except in roads, is attained in a more perfect degree. Great
precision is not to be expected in these calculations; but we have sufficient
documents to prove that we are not far from the truth. The proportion in the
United States is well ascertained; and with equal accuracy in France, by Mr.
Neckar; and in England, Holland, Spain and other kingdoms in Europe, by him,
Zimmermann, and other writers on the subject.

For the objects of the late war and civil government, in the United States,
nearly 12 millions of dollars were annually raised, for nine years
successively, apportioned on the number of inhabitants at that period, which
amounted to a little short of four dollars to each person. This was raised
principally by direct taxes. Perhaps a contribution of six dollars a person,
would not have been so severely felt, had a part of it been raised by impost
and excise. These sums, raised for the war, by the free exertions of the
people, obviate all such objections as assert that the United States are poor;
at the same time they evince that their situation is eligible and prosperous,
by showing how large a proportion of their earnings, the people, in general,
can apply to their private purposes.

BANK OF THE UNITED STATES.] This Bank was incorporated by act of Congress,
February, 25th 1791, by the name and style of The President, (...) (...)
Company of the Bank of the United States. The amount of (...) capital stock is
10 million dollars, one fourth of which (...) that part of the public debt of
the United States, which, at the time of payment, bears an accruing interest of
6 per cent. per annum. Two millions of this capital stock of 10 millions, is
subscribed by the President, in behalf of the United States. The Stockholders
are to continue a corporate body, by the act, until the 4th day of March 1^11;
and are capable, in law, of holding property to an amount not exceeding, in the
whole, 15 million dollars, including the aforesaid 10 million dollars, capital
stock. The corporation may not at any time owe, whether by bond, bill or note,
or other contract, more than 10 million dollars, over and above the moneys then
actually deposited in the Bank for safe keeping, unless the contracting of any
greater debt shall have been previously authorized by a law of the United
States. The corporation is not at liberty to receive more than 6 per cent. per
annum for or upon its loans or discounts; nor to purchase any public debt
whatever, or to deal or trade, directly or indirectly, in any thing except
bills of exchange, gold or silver bullion, or in the sale of goods really and
truly pledged, for money lent, and not redeemed in due time, or of goods which
shall be the produce of its bonds; they may sell any part of the public debt of
which its stock shall be composed. Loans not exceeding 100,000 dollars, may be
made to the United States, and to particular states, of a sum not exceeding
50,000 dollars.

Offices for the purposes of discount and deposit only, may be established
within the United States, upon the same terms, and in the same manner, as shall
be practiced at the bank. Four of these offices, called Branch Banks, have been
already established, viz. at Boston, New York, Baltimore and Charleston. The
faith of the United States is pledged that no other bank shall be established
by any future law of the United States, during the continuance of the above
Corporation. The great benefits of this Bank, as it respects, public credit and
commerce, have already been experienced.

RELIGION.] The constitution of the United States, provides against the making
of any law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free
exercise of it. And in the constitutions of the respective states, religious
liberty is a fundamental principle. In this important article, our government,
is distinguished from that of every other nation, if we except France. Religion
here, is placed on its proper basis; without the feeble and unwarranted aid of
the civil power, it is left to be supported by its own evidence, by the lives
of its professors, and the Almighty care of its Divine Author.

All being thus left at liberty to choose their own religion, the people, as
might easily be supposed, have varied in their choice. The bull of the people
would denominate themselves Christians; a final proportion of them are Jews;
some plead the sufficiency of natural religion, and reject revelation at
unnecessary and fabulous; and many, we have reason to believe, have yet their
religion to choose. Christian profess their religion under various forms, and
with different ideas of it, doctrines, ordinances and precepts. The following
denominations o^ christians are more or less numerous in the United States,
viz. Congregationalists, Presbyterians, Dutch Reformed Church, Episcopalians,
Baptists, Quakers or Friends, Methodists, Roman Catholics, German Lutherans,
German Calvinists or Presbyterians, Moravians, Tunkers, ^eaonists,
Universalists, and Shakers.

Of these the CONGREGATIONALISTS are the most numerous. In New England alone,
besides those which are scattered through the (...) and southern states, there
are not less than 1000 congregations of this denomination, viz.

In New Hampshire 200 Massachusetts 440 Rhode Island 13 Connecticut 197 Vermont
(say) 150 Total 1000

It is difficult to say what is the present ecclesiastical constitution of the
Congregational churches. Formerly their ecclesiastical proceedings were
regulated, in Massachusetts, by the Cambridge platform of church discipline,
established by the Synod, 1648: and in Con^^^^ut, by the Saybrook Platform of
discipline; but since the revolution, less regard has been paid to these
constitutions, and in many instances they are wholly disused.
Congregationalists are pretty generally agreed in this opinion, that "Every
church or particular congregation of visible saints, in gospel order, being
furnished with a Pastor of Bishop, and walking together in truth and peace, has
received from the Lord Jesus full power and authority, ecclesiastical, within
itself, regularly to administer all the ordinances of Christ, and is not under
any other ecclesiastical jurisdiction whatsoever." Their churches, with some
exceptions, disclaim the word Independent, as applicable to them, and claim a
sisterly relation to each other.

From the answer of the Elders, and other messengers of the churches assembled
at Boston, in the year 1662, to the questions proposed to them by order of the
General Court, it appears that (...) churches, at that period, professed to
hold communion with each other in the following acts, viz.

1. "In hearty care and prayer one for another -- 2. In affording relief, by
communication of their gifts in temporal or spiritual ^^^^sities. -- 3. In
maintaining unity and peace, by giving account (...) another of their public
actions, when it is properly desired; to strengthen one another in their
regular administrations; in particular by a concurrent testimony against
persons justly censured. -- 4. To (...) and accept help from, and afford help
to each other, in case of ^^^sions, and contentions, whereby the peace of any
church is disturbed -- in matters of more than ordinary importance, as the
ordination, installation, removal, and deposition of Pastors or Bishops -- in
doubtful and difficult questions and controversies, doctrinal or practical,
that may arise -- and for the rectifying of mal-administration, and healing of
errors and scandals that are not healed among themselves. -- 5. In ^^^ing
notice, with a spirit of love and faithfulness, of the troubles and
difficulties, errors and scandals of another church, and to admini^^^ help
(when the case manifestly calls for it) though they should so ^^lect their own
good and duty, as not to seek it. -- 6. In admonis^^^^ one another, when there
is cause for it; and after a due con^^ of means, patiently to withdraw from a
church, or peccant party (...) obstinately persisting in error or scandal."

A consociation of churches was at the period mentioned, considered as
necessary to a communion of churches, (the former being but an agreement to
maintain the latter) and therefore a duty. The consociation of churches they
defined to be, "Their mutual and solemn agreement to exercise communion in such
acts as aforesaid (meaning, the acts of communion above recited) amongst
themselves, with special reference to those churches which, by Providence, are
planted in a convenient vicinity, though with liberty reserved without offense,
to make use of others, as the nature of the case, or the advantage of the
opportunity may lead thereunto."

The ministers of the Congregational order, are pretty generally associated for
the purposes of licensing candidates for the ministry, and friendly intercourse
and improvement; but there are few congregational churches that are
consociated, on the above principles; and the practice has very generally gone
into disuse, and with it the communion of churches in most of the acts before
recited. In Connecticut and the western parts of Massachusetts, the churches
have deviated less from their original constitution. The degeneracy of the
congregational churches from that order, fellowship and harmony, in discipline,
doctrines, and friendly advice and assistance in ecclesiastical matters, which
formerly subsisted between them, is matter of deep regret to many, not to say
to most people of that denomination. A reformation, or a return to a practice
conformable to the original principles of the congregational churches, is an
event more earnestly desired, than confidently expected.

Congregationalists are divided in opinion respecting the doctrines of the
gospel, and the proper subjects of its ordinances. The body of th^^^ are
Calvinists; a respectable proportion are what may be de^^inated Hopkensian
Calvinists; besides these, some are Arminians, some Arians, a few Socinians,
and a number who have adopted Dr. Chauncy's scheme of the final salvation of
all men. The render will find a well digested summary of the peculiar
sentiments (...) of these sects, in II. Adam's "View of Religions.


Next to Congregationalists, PRESBYTERIANS are the most numerous denomination
of christians in the United States. They have a constitution, by which they
regulate all their ecclesiastical proceedings, and a confession of faith, which
all church officers and church members are required to subscribe. Hence they
have preserved, a singular uniformity in their religious sentiments. and have
conducted their ecclesiastical affairs with a great degree of order and harmony.

The body of the presbyterians inhabit the middle and southern states, and are
united under the same constitution. By this constitution, the Presbyterians who
are governed by it, are divided into five synods and seventeen presbyteries;
viz. Synod of New York, 5 presbyteries; 94 congregations; 61 settled ministers.
-- 2. Synod of Philadelphia, 5 presbyteries; 92 congregations; 60 settled
ministers, besides the ministers and congregations belonging to Baltimore
presbytery. -- 3. Synod of Virginia, 4 presbyteries; 70 congregations; 40
settled ministers, exclusive of the congregations and ministers of Tran^^^^ia
presbytery. -- 4. Synod of the Carolinas, 3 presbyteries: 82 congregations; 42
settled ministers; the ministers and congregations in ^bington presbytery not
included. If we suppose the number of congregations in the presbyteries which
made no returns to their synods. (...) 100, and the number of settled ministers
in the same to be 40, the whole number of presbyterian congregations in this
connection, will be 438, which are supplied by 223 settled ministers, and
between 70 and 80 candidates, besides a number of ordained ministers who have
no particular charges. Each of the four synods meet annually; besides which
they have a joint meeting, by their commissioners, once a year, in General
Assembly at Philadelphia.

The Presbyterian churches are governed by congregational, presbyterial and
synodical assemblies. These assemblies possess no civil jurisdiction. Their
power is wholly moral or spiritual, and that only ministerial and declarative.
They possess the right of requiring obedience to the laws of Christ, and of
excluding the disobedient from the privileges of the church; and the powers
requisite for obtaining evidence and inflicting censure; but the highest
punishment, to which their authority extends, is to exclude the contumacious
and impenitent from the congregation of believers.

The Church Session, which is the congregational assembly of judicatory,
consists of the minister or ministers and elders of a particular congregation.
This body is invested with the spiritual government of the congregation; and
have power to enquire into the knowledge and christian conduct of all its
members; to call before them offenders and witnesses, of their own
denomination; to admonish, suspend or exclude from the sacraments, such as
deserve these censures; to (...) measures for promoting the spiritual interests
of the congregation; and to appoint delegates to the higher judicatories of the
church.

A Presbytery consists of all the ministers, and one ruling elder (...) each
congregation, within a certain district. Three ministers and three elders,
constitutionally convened, are competent to do business. This body have
cognizance of all things that regard the welfare of the particular churches
within their bounds, which are not cognizable by the session. Also, they have a
power of receiving and issuing appeals from the sessions -- of examining and
licensing candidates for the ministry -- of ordaining, settling, removing, or
judging ministers -- of resolving questions of doctrine or discipline -- of
condemning erroneous opinions, that injure the purity or peace of the church --
of visiting particular churches, to enquire into their state, and redress the
evils that may have arisen in them -- of uniting or dividing congregations, at
the request of the people; and whatever else pertains to the spiritual concerns
of the churches under their care.

A Synod is a convention of several presbyteries. The synod have power to admit
and judge of appeals, regularly brought up from the presbyteries -- to give
their judgment on all references made to them, of an ecclesiastical kind -- to
correct and regulate the proceedings of presbyteries -- to take effectual care
that presbyteries observe the conxstitution of the church, etc.

The highest judicatory of the Presbyterian church is styled The General
Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the United States of America. This grand
Assembly is to consist of an equal delegation of bishops and elders from each
presbytery within their jurisdiction, by the title of Commissioners, to the
General Assembly. Fourteen commissioners make a quorum. The General Assembly
constitute the bond of union, peace, correspondence, and mutual confidence
among all their churches; and have power to receive and issue all appeals and
references which may regularly be brought before them from inferior
judicatories -- to regulate and correct the proceedings of the synods, etc. To
the General Assembly also belongs the power of consulting, reasoning, and
judging in controversies respecting doctrine and discipline; of reproving,
warning or bearing testimony against error in doctrine, or immorality in
practice (...) any church, presbytery or synod -- of corresponding with foreign
churches -- of putting a stop to schismatical contentions and disputations --
and in general of recommending and attempting reformation of manners, and of
promoting charity, truth and holiness in all the churches -- and also of
erecting new synods, when they judge it necessary.

The confession of faith adopted by the Presbyterian church, embraces what are
called the Calvinistic doctrines; and none who disbelieve these doctrines are
admitted into fellowship with their churches. The General Assembly of the
Presbyterian church, hold a friendly correspondence with the General
Association in Connecticut, by letter, and by admitting delegates from their
respective bodies, to fit in each others general meetings.

Disconnected with the churches of which we have been speaking, there are four
small presbyteries in New England, who have a similar from of ecclesiastical
government and discipline, and profess the same doctrines.

Besides these, there is the "Associate Presbytery of Pennsylvania" having a
separate ecclesiastical jurisdiction, in America, and belonging to the
Associate Synod of Edinburgh, which they declare is the only ecclesiastical
body, either in Britain or America, with which they are agreed concerning the
doctrine and order of the church of Christ, and concerning the duty of
confessing the truth, and bearing witness to it by a public testimony against
the errors of the times. This connection is not to be understood as indicating
subjection to a foreign jurisdiction; but is preserved for the sake of
maintaining unity with their brethren in the profession of the christian faith,
and such an intercourse as might be of service to the interests of religion.
This sect of Presbyterians are commonly known by the name of Seceders, on
account of their seceding from the national church in Scotland, in 1736. (...)
H. Adam's, "View of Religions," Article, Seceders.


The DUTCH REFORMED churches in the United States, who maintain the doctrine of
the synod of Dort, held in 1618 are between 70 and 80 in number, constituting
six classes, which form one synod, styled. "The Dutch Reformed Synod of
New York and New Jersey." The classes consist of ministers and ruling elders;
each classis delegates two ministers and an elder to represent them in synod.
From the first planting of the Dutch churches in New York and New Jersey, they
have, under the direction of the classis of Amsterdam, been formed exactly upon
the plan of the established church of Holland, as far as that is
ecclesiastical. A strict correspondence is maintained between the Dutch
Reformed Synod of New York and New Jersey, and the synod of North-Holland, and
the classis of Amsterdam. The acts of their synods are mutually exchanged every
year, and mutual advice is given and received, in disputes respecting doctrinal
points and church discipline.

The PROTESTANT EPISCOPAL Church in the United States (the churches of that
denomination in New England excepted) met in Convention at Philadelphia,
October, 1785, and revised the book of common prayer, and administration of the
sacraments, and other rites and ^^monies, with a view to render the liturgy
consistent with the American Revolution. But this revised form was adopted by
none of the churches except one or two in Philadelphia.

In October, 1789, at another meeting of their convention, a plan of union
among all the Protestant Episcopal churches in the United States of America,
was agreed upon and settled; and an adequate representation from the several
States being present, they again revised the book of common prayer, which is
now published and generally adopted by their churches. They also agreed upon
and published 17 canons for the government of their church, the first of which
declares that "these shall, in this church, be three orders in the ministry,
viz. Bishops, Priests and Deacons."

At the same time they agreed upon a Constitution which provides that there
shall be a general convention of the Protestant Episcopal Church in the United
States, on the second Tuesday of September, of every third year from 1789 --
That each state is entitled to a representation of both the clergy and the
laity, or either of them, and may send deputies, not exceeding four of each
order, chosen by the convention of the State. -- That the bishops of the
church, when three or more are present, shall, in their general conventions,
form a separate house, with a right to originate and propose acts for the
concurrence of the house of deputies, composed of clergy and laity; and with a
power to negative (...) passed by the house of deputies, unless adhered to by
four fifths of the other house. -- That every bishop shall confine the exercise
of his episcopal office to his proper diocese or district. -- That no person
shall in admitted to holy orders, until examined by the bishop and two
presbyters, having produced the requisite testimonials -- and that no person
shall be ordained until he shall have subscribed the following declaration --
"I do believe the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be the Word
of God, and to contain all things necessary to salvation; and I do solemnly
engage to conform to the doctrines and worship of the Protestant Episcopal
Church in the United States."

They have not yet adopted any Articles of religion other than those contained
in the Apostles and Nicene Creeds. The number of Episcopal churches in the
United States is not ascertained; in New England there are between forty and
fifty; but in the southern states, they are much more numerous. Four Bishops,
viz. of Connecticut, New York, Pennsylvania and Virginia, have been elected by
the conventions of their respective states, and have been duly consecrated. The
former by the Bishops of the Scotch Church, the three latter, by the Bishops of
the English church. And these four, in September 179^, united in the
consecration of a fifth, elected by the conventions of the state of Maryland.

The BAPTISTS, with some exceptions, are upon the calvinistic plan, as to
doctrines, and independents as to church government and discipline. Except
those who are styled " open communion baptists," of whom there is but one
association, they refuse to communicate in the ordinance of the Lord's Supper,
with other denominations; because they hold that immersion only is the true
baptism, and that baptism is necessary to communion; it is, therefore, improper
and inconsistent, in their opinion, to admit unbaptized persons, (as all others
are, in their view, but themselves) to join with them in this ordinance; though
they allow ministers of other denominations to preach to their congregations,
and sometimes to assist in ordaining their ministers.

From an account taken by a preacher Mr. John Asplund.
of the baptist denomination, who has traveled through the United States, to
ascertain their number and state, we are enabled to give the following
statement of their associations, churches, ministers, church members, and
principles.

MINISTERS STATES CHURCHES ordained licensed MEMBERS. New Hampshire ^^ 23 17
1732 Massachusetts 107 95 31 7116 Rhode Island 38 37 39 3502 Connecticut 55 44
24 3214 Vermont 34 21 15 1610 New York 57 53 30 3987 New Jersey 26 20 9 2279
Pennsylvania 28 26 7 1231 Delaware 7 9 1 409 Maryland 12 8 3 776 Virginia 207
157 109 20157 Kentucky 42 40 21 3105 Western Territory 1 30 North Carolina 94
81 76 7742 Deceded Territory 18 15 6 889 South Carolina 68 48 28 4012 Georgia
42 33 39 3184 Total 868 710 422 64975

Of these there are MINISTERS ASSOC. CHH'S. ordained licensed MEM. Six
principle baptists 1 18 26 4 1599 Open Communion Do. 1 15 13 4 1714 General
Provision Do 3 30 26 19 1948 Seventh Day Do. 10 13 3 887 Regular or Particular
Do. 30 795 632 392 58827 Total 35 868 710 422 64975

To this account, the compiler conjectures that 1500 members, and 30 Churches
ought to be added -- making the whole number of Churches about 900, and the
members about 66,000. He suppose moreover that at least three times, as many
attend their meetings, as have joined their churches, which, if we suppose all
who attend their meetings are in principle Baptists, will make the whole number
of that denomination in these states, 198,000, or a twenty sixth part of the
inhabitants.

Some of the leading principles of the regular or particular baptists, are --
The imputation of Adam's sin to his posterity -- the inability of (...) to
recover himself -- effectual calling by sovereign grace -- justification by the
imputed righteousness of Christ -- immersion for baptism, and that on
profession of faith and repentance -- congregational churches, and their
independency, and reception into them upon evidence of sound conversion.

We shall next speak of the people called QUAKERS. They received their
appellation from this circumstance -- "In the year 1650, George Fox, being
brought before two justices in Derbyshire, one of them, scoffing at him, for
having bidden him and those about him, to tremble at the word of the Lord, gave
to him and his followers, the name of Quakers; a name by which they have since
been usually ^^^^i^ated: but they themselves adopted the appellation of
Friends."
This denomination of christians arose about the year 1648, and were first
collected into religious societies by their highly respected elder, George Fox.
They came to America as early as 1656. The first settlers of Pennsylvania were
all of this denomination; and the number of Friends meetings in the United
States, at present, is about 320.

Their doctrinal tenets may be summarily expressed as follows -- In common with
other christians, they believe in One Eternal God, and in Jesus Christ the
Messiah and Mediator of the new covenant. To Christ alone, in whose divinity
they believe, they give the title of the Word of God, and not to the
Scriptures; yet they profess a high esteem for these sacred writings, in
subordination to the Spirit who indicted them, and believe that they are able,
through faith, to make wife to salvation -- They reverence the excellent
precepts of Scripture, and believe them practicable and binding on every
christian; and that in the life to come, every man will be rewarded according
to his works. In order to enable mankind to put in practice these precepts,
they believe, that every man coming into the world is endued with a measure of
the Light, Grace or Good Spirit of Christ; by which he is enabled to
distinguish good from evil, and correct the disorderly passions and corrupt
propensities of his nature, which mere reason is altogether insufficient to
overcome -- that this divine grace is, to those who sincerely seek it, an all
sufficient and present help in time of need -- and that by it the snares of the
enemy are detected, his allurements avoided, and deliverance experienced,
through faith in its effectual operation, and the soul translated out of the
kingdom of darkness into the mavelous light and kingdom of the Son of God --
Thus persuaded, they think this divine influence especially necessary to the
performance of the highest act of which the human mind is capable, the worship
of God in spirit and in truth; and therefore consider, as obstructions to pure
worship, all forms which divert the mind from the secret influence of this
unction of the Holy One -- Though true worship is not confined to time or
place, they believe it is incumbent on churches to meet often together, but
dare not depend for acceptance, on a formal repetition of the words and
experiences of others -- They think it is their duty to wait in silence to have
a true sight of their condition bestowed on them; and believe even a single
sigh, arising from a sense of their infirmities and need of divine help, to be
more acceptable to God, than any performances which originate in the will of
man.

They believe the renewed assistance of the light and power of Christ, which is
not at our command, nor attainable by study, but the free gift of God, to be
indispensibly necessary to all true ministry -- Hence arises their testimony
against preaching for hire, and conscientious refusal to support such ministry
by tithes or other means. -- As they (...) not encourage any ministry, but such
as they believe to spring from the influence of the Holy Spirit; so neither
dare they attempt to restrain this influence to persons of any condition in
life, or to the (...) sex -- but allow such of the female sex as appear to be
qualified, to exercise their gifts for the general edification of the church.

They hold that as there is one Lord and one faith, so his baptism is one in
nature and operation, and that nothing short of it can made us living members
of his mystical body; and that baptism with water belonged to an inferior and
decreasing dispensation. With respect to the Lord's Supper, they believe that
communication between Christ and his Church, is not maintained by that nor any
other external ^^^^^nance, but only by a real participation of his divine
nature, through faith; that this is the supper alluded to Rev. iii. 20 -- and
that where the substance is attained, it is unnecessary to attend to the shadow.

Believing that the grace of God is alone sufficient for salvation, they can
neither admit that it is conferred on a few only, while others are left without
it; nor, thus asserting its universality, can they limit its operation to a
partial cleansing of the soul from sin, even in this life -- On the contrary,
they believe that God does vouchsafe to assist the obedient to submit to the
guidance of his pure spirit, through whose assistance they are enabled to bring
forth fruits unto holiness, and to stand perfect in their present rank.

As to oaths, they abide literally by Christ's positive injunction, "Swear not
at all." They believe that "wars and fightings" are, in their origin and
effects, utterly repugnant to the Gospel, which still breathes peace and good
will to men. During the late war, some of their number, contrary to this
article of their faith, thought it their duty to take up arms in defense of
their country. This laid the foundation of a secession from their brethren, and
they now form a separate congregation in Philadelphia, by the name of the
"Resisting or fighting Quakers."
They also are firmly persuaded that if the benevolence of the Gospel, were
generally prevalent in the minds of men, it would effectually prevent them from
oppressing, much more from enslaving In the present war of liberality and
humanity, against avarice and cruelty, in defense of the (...), the Quakers
have had the signal honor of having first set the illustrious (...).
their brethren, of whatever complexion; and would even influence their
treatment of the brute creation, which would no longer groan the victims of
their avarice, or of their false ideas of pleasure. -- They profess that their
principles, which inculcate submission to the laws in all cases wherein
conscience is not violated, are a security to the salutary purposes of
government. -- But they hold that the civil magistrate has no right to
interfere in matters of religion, and think persecution, in any degree,
unwarrantable. -- They reject the use of those names of the months and days,
which, having been given in honor of the heroes or gods of the heathen,
originated in their flattery or superstition; and the custom of speaking to a
flagle person in the plural number, as having arisen also from motives of
adulation. Compliments, superfluity of apparel or furniture, outward shows of
rejoicing or mourning, and observations of days and times, they deem
incompatible with the simplicity and sincerity of a christian life -- and they
condemn public diversions, gaming, and other vain amusements of the world. --
They require no formal subscription to any articles, either as the condition of
membership, or to qualify for the service of the Church.

To effect the salutary purposes of discipline, Monthly, Quarterly and Yearly
meetings are established. -- A Monthly meeting is composed of several
neighboring congregations. -- Its business is to provide for the subsistence
of the poor, and for the education of their offspring -- to judge of the
sincerity and fitness of persons appearing to be convinced of the religious
principles of the society, and desiring to be admitted to membership; to excite
due attention to the discharge of religious and moral duties; to deal with
disorderly members -- to appoint overseers to see that the rules of their
dicipline are put in practice -- to allow of marriages, etc. Their made of
marrying is as follows. -- Those who intend to marry, appear together, and
propose their intention to the monthly meeting, and if not attended by their
parents (...) (...), produce a written certificate of their consent, signed in
the presence of witnesses. The meeting then appoints a committee to enquire
whether they are clear of other engagements respecting marriage; and if at a
subsequent meeting, to which the parties also come and declare the continuance
of their intention, no objections are reported, they have the meeting's consent
to solemnize their intended marriage. This is (...) in a public meeting for
worship, toward the close of which the parties stand up and solemnly take each
other for husband and wise. A certificate of the proceedings is then publicly
read, and signed by the parties, and afterward by the relations and others, as
^^^^nesses, which closes the solemnity.


A Quarterly meeting is composed of several Monthly meetings. At this meeting
are produced written answers from monthly meetings, to certain questions
respecting the conduct of their members and the meeting's care over them. The
accounts thus received, are digested and sent by representatives, to the yearly
meeting. Appeals from the judgment of monthly meetings, are brought to the
quarterly meetings.

The Yearly meeting has the general superintendance of the society in the
country in which it is established. The Quakers have, in all, seven yearly
meetings. One in London, to which (...) representatives from Ireland. The other
six are in the United States. 1. New England, 2. New York, 3. New Jersey and
Pennsylvania, 4. Maryland, 5. Virginia, 6. The Carolinas and Georgia.
The business of this meeting is to give forth its advice -- make such
regulations as appear to be requisite, or excite to the observance of those
already made, etc. Appeals from the judgment of quarterly meetings are here
finally determined; and a brotherly correspondence, by epistles, is maintained
with other yearly meetings.

As they believe women may be rightly called to the work of the ministry, they
also think they may share in their christian discipline. Accordingly they have
monthly, quarterly, and yearly meetings of their own sex; held at the same
time, and in the same place with those of the men; but separately, and without
the power of making rules.

Their elders and ministers have meetings peculiar to themselves. These
meetings, called Meetings of ministers and elders, are generally held in the
compass of each monthly, quarterly, and Yearly meeting -- for the purposes of
exciting each other to the discharge of their several duties -- of extending
advice to those who may appear weak, etc. They also, in the intervals of the
yearly meetings, give certificates to those ministers who travel abroad in the
work of the ministry.

The yearly meeting, held in London, 1675, appointed a meeting to be held in
that city, for the purpose of advising and assisting in cases of suffering for
conscience sake, called Meeting for sufferings, which is yet continued. It is
composed of Friends under the name of correspondents, chosen by the several
quarterly meetings, who reside in and near the city. This meeting is entrusted
with the care of printing and distributing books, and with the management of
its stock, and considered as a standing committee of the yearly meeting. -- In
none of their meetings have they a President, as they believe Divine Wisdom
alone ought to preside; nor has any member a right to claim pre-eminence over
the rest.

The METHEODIST denomination of christians arose in England in 1739; and made
their first appearance in America about 24 years since. Their general style is,
"The United Societies of the Methodist Episcopal Church." They profess
themselves to be "a company of men, having the form and seeking the power of
godliness, united into order to pray together, to receive the word of
exhortation, and to watch over one another in love, that they may help each
other to work out their salvation." -- Each society is divided into classes of
12 persons; one of whom is styled the Leader, whose business it is to see each
person in his class once a week, in order to enquire, how their souls prosper,
to advise, reprove, comfort or exhort as occasion may require; and to receive
contributions for the relief of the church and poor. In order to admission into
their societies they require only one condition, viz. "A desire to flee from
the wrath to come, i. e. a desire to be saved from their sins." It is expected
of all who continue in their societies, that they should evidence their desire
of salvation, by doing no harm, by avoiding all manner of evil, by doing all
manner of good, as they have ability and opportunity, especially to the
household of faith; employing them preferably to others, buying of one another
(unless they can be served better elsewhere) and helping each other in business
-- And also by attending upon all the ordinances of God; such as public
worship, the supper of the Lord, family and private prayer, searching the
scriptures, and fasting or abstinence. The late celebrated Mr. John Wesley, is
considered as the father of this class of Methodists, who, as they deny some of
the leading Calvinistic doctrines, and hold some of the peculiar tenets of
Arminius, may be called Arminian Methodists. -- The famous Mr. Whitefield, was
the leader of the Calvinistic Methodists, who are numerous is England, and a
few are in different parts of the United States, who were patronized and
supplied with ministers, by the late lady Huntingdon.

In 1788, the number of Wesl^ian Methodists in the United States, stood thus,
Georgia 2011 S. Carolina 3366 N. Carolina 6779 Virginia 14356 Maryland 11017
Delaware 1998 Pennsylvenia New Jersey 1751 New York 2004 Total 43263

Since this estimate of their numbers was taken, some few scattering societies
have been collected in different parts of the New England States, and their
numbers increased in other parts; so that in 1790, the whole connection
amounted to 57,621. To superintend the Methodist connection in America, they
had, in 1768, two Bishops, 30 Elders and 50 Deacons.

In Great Britain and Ireland, the whole number of persons in full connection
with the Methodist Episcopal church, amounted, in (...) to 71,568.

The whole number of RONAN CATHOLICS in the United States is estimated at about
50 000; one half of which are in the state of Maryland. Their peculiar and
leading doctrines and tenets, are too generally known to need a recital here.
They have a Bishop, who resides in Baltimore, and many of their congregations
are large and respectable.

The German inhabitants in these states, who principally belong to
Pennsylvania, and New York, are divided into a variety of sects; the principal
of which are, Lutherans, Calvinists or Presbyterians, Mora^^^, Tunkers, and
Mennonists. Of these the German Lutherans are the most numerous. Of this
denomination, and the German Presbyterians or Calvinists, who are next to them
in numbers, there are upwards of 60 ministers, in Pennsylvania -- and the
former have 12, and the latter 6 churches in the state of New York. Many of
their churches are large and splendid* and in some instances furnished with
(...). These two denominations live together in the greatest harmony, money
often preaching in each others churches, and sometimes uniting in the erection
of a church, in which they alternately worship.

The MORAVIANS are a respectable body of christians in these States. Of this
denomination, there were, in 1788, about 1300 souls in Pennsylvania; viz. at
Bethlehem, between 5 and 600, which number has since increased -- at Nazareth,
450; at Litiz, upwards of 300. Their other settlements, in the United States,
are at Hope, in New Jersey, about 100 souls; at Wachovia, on Yadkin river,
North Carolina, containing 6 churches. Besides these regular settlements,
formed by such only as are members of the brethren's church, and live together
in good order and harmony, there are in different parts of Pennsylvania,
Maryland and New Jersey, and in the cities and towns of Newport, (R. Island)
New York, Philadelphia, Lancaster, Yorktown, etc. congregations of the
brethren, who have their own church and minister, and hold the same principles,
and doctrinal tenets, and church rites and ceremonies as the former, though
their local situation does not admit of such particular regulations, as are
peculiar to the regular settlements.

The call themselves, "The United Brethren of the Protestant Episcopal Church."
They are called Moravians, because the first settlers in the English dominions
were chiefly migrants from Moravia. These were the remnant and genuine
descendents of the church of the ancient United Brethren, established in
Bohemia and Moravia, as early as the year 1456. About the middle of the last
century, they left their native country to avoid persecution, and to enjoy
liberty of conscience, and the true exercise of the religion of their
forefathers. They were received in Saxony, and other Protestant dominions, and
were encouraged to settle among them, and were joined by many serious people of
other denominations. They adhere to the Augustan Confession of Faith, which was
drawn up by the Protestant divines at the time of the reformation in Germany,
in the year 1530, and presented at the diet of the empire at Ausburg; and
which, a^ that time, contained the doctrinal system of all the established
Protestant churches. They retain the discipline of their ancient church, and
make use of Episcopal ordination, which has been handed down to them in a
direct line of succession, for more than three hundred years. See David Crantz'
Hist. of 'The Ancient and Modern United Brethren's church, translated from the
German, by the Rev. Benjamin La Trobe.' London, 178o. Those who wish to obtain
a thorough and impartial knowledge of their religious sentiments and customs,
may see them excellently summed up in a plain, but nervous style, in (...)
^^position of Christian Doctrine, as taught in the Protestant church of the
United (...) written in German, by A. G. Spangenberg; and translated and
published in (...) 1784.,


They profess to live in strict obedience to the ordinances of Christ, such as
the observation of the Sabbath, Infant Baptism, and the Lord's Supper; and in
addition to these, they practice the foot washing the kiss of love, and the use
of the lot.

They were introduced into America by Count Zinzendorf, and settled at
Bethlehem, which is their principal settlement in America, as early as 1741.
Regularity, industry, ingenuity and economy, are characteristics these people.

The TUNKERS are so called in derision, from the word sunken, is put a morsel
in sauce. The English word that conveys the proper meaning of Tunkers is Sops
or Dippers. They are also called Tumbl^^^, from the manner in which they
perform baptism, which is by putting the person, while kneeling, head first
under water, so as to resemble the motion of the body in the action of
tumbling. The Germans sound the letters t and b like d and p; hence the words
Tunkers and Tumblers, have been corruptly written Dunkers and Dumplers.

The first appearing of these people in America, was in the fall of the year
1719, when about twenty families landed in Philadelphia, and dispersed
themselves in various parts of Pennsylvania. They are what are called General
Baptists, and hold to general redemption and general salvation. They use great
plainness of dress and language, and will neither swear, nor fight, nor go to
law, nor take interest for the money they lend. They commonly wear their beards
-- keep the first day Sabbath, except one congregation -- have the Lord's
Supper with its ancient attendants of Love Feasts, with washing of feet, kiss
of charity, and right hand of fellowship. They anoint the sick with oil for
their recovery, and use the trine immersion, with laying on of hands and
prayer, even while the person baptized is in the water. Their church government
and discipline are the same with those of the English Baptists, except that
every brother is allowed to speak in the congregation; and their best speaker
is usually ordained to be their minister. They have deacons, deaconesses (from
among their ancient widows) and exhorters, who are all licensed to use their
gifts statedly. On the whole, notwithstanding their peculiarities, they appear
to be humble, well meaning christians, and have acquired the character of the
harmless Tunkers.

Their principal settlement is at Ephrata, sometimes called Tunkerstown, in
Lancaster county, sixty miles westward of Philadelphia. It consists of about
forty buildings, of which three are places of worship: One is called Sharon,
and adjoins the sister's apartment as a chapel; another, belonging to the
brothers apartment, is called Bethany. To these the brethren and sisters
resort, separately, to worship morning and evening, and sometimes in the night.
The third is a common church, called Zion, where all in the settlement meet
once a week for public worship. The brethren have adopted the White Friars'
dress, with some alterations; the sisters that of the nuns; and both like them
have taken the vow of celibacy. All however do not keep the vow. When they
marry, they leave their cells and go among the married people. They subsist by
cultivating their lands, by attending a printing office, a g^ist mill, a paper
mill, an oil mill, etc. and the sisters by spinning, weaving, sewing, etc. They
at first slept on board couches, but now on beds, and have otherwise abated
much of their former severity. This congregation keep the seventh day Sabbath.
Their singing is charming, owing to the pleasantness of their voices, the
variety of parts, and the devout manner of performance. Besides this
congregation at Ephrata, there were, in 1770, fourteen others in various other
parts of Pennsylvania, and some in Maryland. The whole, exclusive of those in
Maryland, amounted to upwards of ^000 souls.

The MENNONISTS derive their name from Menno Simon, a native of Witmars in
Germany, a man of learning, born in the year 150^, in the time of the
reformation by Luther and Calvin. He was a famous Roman Catholic preacher, till
about the year 1^3^, when he became a Baptist. Some of his followers came into
Pennsylvania from New York and settled at Germantown, as early as 1692. This is
at present their principal congregation, and the mother of the rest. Their
whole number, in 1770, in Pennsylvania, was upwards of 4000, divided into
thirteen churches, and forty-two congregations, under the care of fifteen
ordained ministers, and fifty three licensed preachers

The Mennonists do not, like the Tunkers, hold the doctrine of general
salvation; yet like them, they will neither swear nor fight, nor bear any civil
office, nor go to law, nor take interest for the money they lend, though many
break this last rule. Some of them wear their beards; wash each others feet,
etc. and all use plainness of speech and dress. Some have been expelled their
society for wearing buckles in their shoes, and having pocket holes in their
coats. Their church government is democratical. They call themselves the
Harmless christians, Revengeless christians and Weaponless christians. They are
Baptists rather in name than in fact; for they do not use immersion. Their
common mode of baptism is this: The person to be baptized kneels; the minister
holds his hands over him, into which the deacon pours water, which runs through
upon the head of the person kneeling. After this, follow imposition of hands
and prayer.

The denomination styled UNIVERSALISTS, though their schemes are very various,
may properly enough be divided into two classes, viz. Those who embrace the
scheme of Dr. Chauncey, exhibited in his book entitled "The Salvation of all
Men;" and the disciples of Mr. Winchester and Mr. John Murray.

A judicious summary of Dr. Chauncey's sentiments has been given, In H. Adams's
"View of Religions," article Universalists, where the (...) (...) had also
summary of the arguments (...) and against his scheme.
as follows.

"That the scheme of revelation has the happiness of all mankind lying at
bottom, as its great and ultimate end; that it gradually tend^^^ this end; and
will not fail of its accomplishment, when fully completed. Some, in consequence
of its operation, as conducted by the Son of God, will he disposed and enabled,
in this present state, to make such improvements in virtue, the only rational
preparative for happiness, as that they shall enter upon the enjoyment of it in
the next state. Others, who have proved incurable under the means which have
been used with them in this state, instead of being happy in the next, will be
awfully miserable; not to continue so finally, but that they may be convinced
of their folly, and recovered to a virtuous frame of mind: and this will be the
effect of the future torments upon many; the consequence whereof will be their
salvation, they being thus fitted for it. And there may be yet other states,
before the scheme of God may be perfected, and mankind universally cured of
their moral disorders, and in this way qualified for, and finally instated in,
eternal happiness. But however many states some of the individuals of the human
species may pass through, and of however long continuance they may be, the
whole is intended to subserve the grand design of universal happiness, and will
finally terminate in it; insomuch, that the Son of God and Savior of men, will
not deliver up his trust into the hands of the Father, who committed it to him,
till he has discharged his obligations in virtue of it; having finally fixed
all men in heaven, when God will be All in All."

The number of this denomination is not known. The open advocates of this
scheme are few; though the number is larger, who embrace the doctrine of the
salvation of all men, upon principles similar, but variously differing from
those on which the abovementioned schemes is grounded.

The latter class of Universalists have a new scheme, differing essentially
from that of the former, which they reject as inconsistent and absurd: And they
cannot conceive how they who em brace it, can, "with any degree of propriety,
be called Universalists, on Apostolic principles, as it does not appear that
they have any idea of being saved by, or in the Lord, with an everlasting, or
with any salvation" -- Hence they call them "Pharisaical Universalists, who are
willing to justify themselves." see, Mr. Murray's "Letter to a Friend," page
40, 41. printed in Boston, 1791.


It is difficult to say what is the present scheme of the denomination of which
we are now speaking; for they differ not only from all other Universalists, and
from each other, but even from themselves at different periods. The reader,
however, may form an idea of some of their tenets from what follows, collected
from the Letter referred to in the note. This letter, written lately, by the
head of the denomination, and professing to rectify mistakes respecting
doctrines propagated under the christian name -- to give the character of a
Consistent Universalist -- and to acquaint the world with their rea^
sentiments, we have reason to conclude, gives as true an account of their
scheme as can be obtained.

From this Letter it appears, that they believe "that Religion of some sort or
other, is a public benefit;" and that every person is at liberty* and is bound,
to support what he conceives to be the true Religion -- That public worship on
every first day of the week, is an incumbent duty on all real lovers of divine
truth -- that prayer, as it indicates (...) is, and dependence on God, is part
of his worship -- They believe that the Deceiver, who beguiled Eve, and not our
first parents themselves, did the deed which brought ruin and death on all the
human race -- That there are two classes of fallen sinners -- the Angels who
kept not their first estate, and the human nature, deceived by the former, and
apparently destroyed consequent thereon -- that a just God, in the law given by
Moses, has denounced death and the curse on every one who continual not is all
things, written in the book of the law to do them -- but that the same God, was
manifested in the flesh as the head of every man, made under the law, is redeem
them that are under the law, being made a curse for them -- that he tasted
death for every man, being a Savior, not of a few only, but of all men -- and
that the declaration of this is the Gospel. -- They believe that when God
denounces on the human race, woes, wrath, tribulation, death, damnation, etc.
in the Scriptures, he speaks in his legislative capacity, as the just God who
will by no means dear the guilty -- that when he speaks of mercy, grace, peace*
of life as the gift of God, and salvation in whole or in part, he speaks in the
character of the (...) God and Savior -- that the former is the language of
the law; the latter the language of the Gospel.

Confession of sins -- Repentance, and supplications for mercy and forgiveness,
make no part of their creed or worship.

They believe that the Prince of Peace came to save the human nature from the
power and dominion of the Devil, and his works -- that he came to destroy the
latter, that he might save the former -- That "Sin is the work of the Devil --
that he is the Worker and Doer of whatever gives offense" -- That Jesus, as the
Savior of the world, small separate from his kingdom, both the evil Worker and
his evil works; the evil Worker, in the character of goats -- The evil works in
the character of tares. -- They suppose that what is wicked in mankind, is
represented by the evil seed sown by the evil One in human nature, and that
"when the Sower of the evil seed, and all the evil seed sown, shall be
separated from the seed which God sowed, then the seed which is properly God's
seed, will be like him who sowed it, pure and holy."

They consider all ordinances as merely shadows; yet they celebrate the Lord's
Supper, by eating bread and drinking wine -- and some of them suppose that
every time they eat bread and drink wine, they comply with our Lord's
injunction, "Do this in remembrance of me." -- Various other opinions prevail
among them respecting this ordinances, and that of baptism. They "admit of but
one baptism, the baptizer Jesus Christ, the elements made use of, the Holy
Ghost and fire" -- yet they are willing, in order to avoid contention, "to
become all things to all men" and to baptize infants by sprinkling, or adults
by immersion -- or to omit these signs altogether, according as the opinions of
parents may vary upon this subject. -- Some think it proper to dedicate their
children to the Lord, by putting them into the arms of the minister, to be by
him presented to Christ, to be baptized with his baptism, in the name of the
Trinity, the minister at the same time to bless them in the words in which God
commanded Aaron and his sons to bless the children of Israel -- "The Lord bless
thee, etc." -- It appears in short, that their notions respecting these
ordinances are various, vague and unsettled.

They believe in a judgment past and a judgment to come -- that the past
judgment is either that in which the world was judged in the second Adam,
according to the word of the Savior, " Now is the judgment of this world --
now is the Prince of this world cast out and judgment executed on them and on
the whole human nature, according is the righteous judgment of God -- or that
which every man is to exercise upon himself, according to the words " judge
yourselves and ye shall not be judged" -- "The judgment to come is that in
which all who have not judged themselves -- all unbelievers of the human race,
and all the fallen angels, shall be judged by the Savior -- but these two
characters viz. unbelievers of the human race, and the fallen angels, shall be
placed, the former on the right, the latter on the left hand of their Judge;
the one under the denomination of sheep, for whose salvation the Savior laid
down his life -- the other under the denomination of goats, who are the
accursed, whose nature he passed by -- "The human nature" (i. e. the sheep or
unbelievers of the human race) "as the offspring of the everlasting Father, and
the ransomed of the Lord -- shall be brought, by divine power, into the kingdom
prepared for them, before the foundation of the world -- the other nature, (i.
e. the goats, or fallen angels) "will be sent into the fire prepared for them."
The reader will doubtless notice that the plural pronoun them, is several times
used to express the singular noun human nature, and Prince of this world, as
the human nature, etc. shall be brought into the kingdom prepared for them; the
other nature will be sent into the fire prepared for them -- the Prince of this
world shall be cast out, and judgment be executed on them. This is a
phraseology peculiar to this denomination, for the grammatical p^^riety of
which, the compiler does not hold himself responsible.
From which it appears, that it is their opinion, that unbelievers of the human
race, or sheep, and the fallen angels, or goats, will be the only classes of
creatures concerned in the awards of the last judgment -- and that the
righteous, or believers in Christ, will not then be judged, having previously
judged themselves In the following passage, the contrary seems to be asserted.
Speaking of the last judgment it is said, "Here, instead of head and members
being judged together, by the (...) Christ, the divine nature, the members are
considered in then (...) characters, (...) and evil, or believer and
unbeliever, as children of (...) and (...) judged by their own (...)."
-- "But the rest of mankind," say they, "will be the subjects of this
judgment, when our Savior shall be revealed from heaven in flaming fire,
taking vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the gospel; and they
shall then be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord and the glory of his power." Their inference from, and exposition of this
passage, are peculiar, and will serve to give the reader an idea of their
manner of explaining other parallel passages of Scripture. From this awful
revelation of the Savior, to take vengeance on them that know not God, and
obey not the gospel, they infer this consequence, "they shall then be made to
know God, and obey the gospel." -- The everlasting destruction, from the
presence of the Lord and the glory of his power, with which they shall be
punished, they suppose is suffered by unbelievers, in consequence of the
revelation of the everlasting destruction, previous to this awful period -- and
that they will suffer no punishment after it -- for "it is not said," they say,
"that they shall be everlastingly punished with destruction." They explain
their idea of everlasting punishment and suffering the pain of eternal fire,
thus, "Were it possible to find a culinary fire that never would be
extinguished, but in the strictest sense of the word, was everlasting or
eternal -- should any member of the body pass through that burning flame,
though but a moment of time had been thus spent in passing through; yet even in
that moment, it would suffer the pain of eternal fire." -- But whether they
believe it possible that there should be such a fire, or that unbelievers shall
be doomed to suffer the punishment of eternal fire by thus passing through it,
they do not declare.

They do not suppose that "all mankind will be on a level in the article of
death, but that they who die in unbelief, will be down in sorrow, and rise to
the resurrection of damnation, or condemnation; and when the books shall be
opened, and the dead, both small and great, shall be judged out of the things
written in the books -- every month shall be stopped, and all the world become
guilty before God; and while conscious of guilt, but ignorant of a Savior --
they shall call on the rocks and mountains to fall on them to hide them from
the wrath of the Lamb -- But that in this judgment the judge is the Savior --
they will be judged by their own head;" and as the head of every man is Christ
-- all of course must be acquitted and saved.

Although the believe that the Devil is the doer or worker of every thing that
gives offense; yet they assert that " all men at all times are sinners, and
come short of the glory of God" -- but they believe that (...) Christ suffered,
"was considered by the Great Lawgiver, as done and suffered by every man in his
own person; and that every man is as much interested in what Christ, the second
Adam did, as they were in what the first Adam did" -- thus believing, they
consider God as just in being their Savior, as he would have been in their
eternal damnation.

The Consistent Universalist, "does not consider himself under the law any more
than a woman considers herself under the direction or dominion of a husband
that is dead and buried -- nor is he afraid of death, being assured that Jesus
has abolished death, and lest nothing of it but the shadow."

The Universalists of this denomination, in common with other christians,
profess themselves to be the advocates of piety, religion and morality. -- They
assert the duty of doing right as men -- as members of civil society -- and as
christians. "As mere men" they hold, (...) "they must follow nature, or they
will sink beneath the level of the beasts of the field" -- and yet they assert
that " all the righteousness found in the best of mere human nature is but as a
filthy rag" -- That as members of civil society they must submit to the laws,
or if thought (...) severe, they may avoid them by a removal from the state."
-- That as christians they must be under the direction of Christ, and do (...)
he commands them; and these are his commandments, " that we believe in him, and
love one another."

There are but a few of this denomination of Universalists in the United States
-- Of these few, some are in Pennsylvania -- some in different parts of New
York, Connecticut, Rhode Island, and N^w Hampshire; but the body of them are in
Boston, and Gloucester, in Massachusetts. They have several constituted
churches, which are governed by an ecclesiastical constitution, formed in 1789,
by a small convention of their ministers at Philadelphia.

There is a small, and singular sect of christians, called SHAKERS, which have
sprung up among us as lately as 1774; when a few of this sect came from England
to New York, and there being joined by a few others, they settled at
Nisqueunia, above Albany, which is th^^ principal settlement: a few others are
scattered in different parts of the country.

The head of this party, while she lived. Notwithstanding her predictions and
assertions to the contrary, she died in 1784 (...) was succeeded by one James
Whitaker, who also died in 1787. Joseph Meacham, who (...) attained the
reputation of a prophet among them, is at present their Leader.
was Anna Leese, styled the Elect Lady. Her followers asserted, that she was
the woman spoken of in the twelfth chapter of the Revelation, and that she
spoke seventy two tongues: And although these tongues were unintelligible to
the living, she conversed with the dead who understood her language. They
alleged also that she was the mother of all the Elect; that (...) travailed
for the whole world -- that no blessing could descend to any person but only by
and through her, and that in the way of her being possessed of their sins, by
their confessing and repenting of them, one by one, according to her direction.

Their leading doctrinal tenets, as given by one of their own denomination*
are, "That the first resurection is already come, and now is the time to judge
themselves. That they have power to heal the sick, to raise the dead and cast
out devils. That they have a correspondence with angels, the spirits of the
saints and their departed friends. That they speak with diverse kind of tongues
in their public assemblies -- That it is lawful to practice vocal mufick with
dancing in the christian churches, if it be practiced in praising the LORD. --
That their church is come out of the order of natural generation, to be as
Christ was and that those who have wives are as though they had none. -- That
by these means heaven begins upon earth, and they thereby lose their earthly
and sensual relation to Adam the first, and come to be transparent in their
ideas, in the bright and heavenly visions of God. That some of their people are
of the number of the 144,000 who were red^^^^ from the earth, and were not
defiled with women. That the (...) everlasting, when applied to the punishment
of the wicked, (...) only a limited period, except in the case of those who
fall from their church; and that for such there is no forgiveness, neither in
this world nor that which is to come. That it is unlawful to swear, game, or
use compliments -- and that water baptism and the Lord's Supper are a^^otified.
-- That Adam's sin is not imputed to his posterity -- and that the doctrines of
election and reprobation are to be rejected."

The discipline of this denomination is founded on the supposed perfection of
their leaders. The mother, or the Elect Lady, it is said, obeys God through
Christ. European elders obey her. American laborers, and common people obey
them; while confession is made of every secret thing, from the oldest to the
youngest. The people are made to believe that they are seen through and through
in the gospel glass of perfection, by their teachers, who behold the state of
the dead, and innumerable worlds of spirits good and bad.

These people are generally instructed to be very industrious, and to bring in
according to their ability, to keep up the meeting. They vary in their
exercises. Their heavy dancing, as it is called, is performed by a perpetual
springing from the house floor, about four inches up and down, both in the
men's and women's apartment, moving about with extraordinary transport, singing
sometimes one at a time, sometimes more, making a perfect charm.

This elevation affects the nerves; so that they have intervals of shuddering,
as if they were in a strong fit of the ague. They sometimes clap hands and leap
so as to strike the joist above their heads. They throw off their outside
garments in these exercises, and spend their strength very cheerfully this way.
Their chief speaker often calls for attention; when they all stop and hear some
harangue, and then fall to dancing again. They assert, that their dancing is
the token of the great joy and happiness of the new Jerusalem state, and
denotes the victory over sin. One of the postures, which increases among them,
is turning round very swift for an hour or two. This they say is to show the
great power of God.

They sometimes fall on their knees and make a sound like the roaring of many
waters, in groans and cries to God, as they say, for the wicked world who
persecute them. ^. Adams's "View of Religions," Article Shakers.


The Jews are not numerous in the United States -- They have Synagogues at
Savannah, Charleston, (S. C.) Philadelphia, New York, and New port. Besides
those who reside at these places, there are others scattered in different
towns, in the United States.

The Jews in Charleston, among other peculiarities in burying their dead, have
these: After the funeral dirge is sung, and just before the corpse is deposited
in the grave, the coffin is opened, and a small bag of ^^th, taken from the
grave, is carefully put under the head of the deceased; then some powder, said
to be earth brought from Jerusalem, and carefully kept for this purpose, is
taken and put upon the eyes of the corpse, in token of their remembrance of the
holy land, and of (...) expectations of returning thither in God's appointed
time. ^^^^^er this custom is universal among the Jews, is not known. For the
articles of their faith, etc. see H. Adams's "View of Religions," Article (...)
page 290.


They generally expect a glorious return to the Holy Land, when (...) shall be
exalted above all the nations of the earth. And they flatter themselves that
the period of their return will speedily arrive, though they do not venture to
fix the precise time.

The whole number of persons who profess the Jewish religion, in all parts of
the world, is supposed be about three millions; who, as their phrase is, are
witnesses of the unity of God in all the nations in the world.

Besides the religious sects enumerated, there are a few of the German
inhabitants in Pennsylvania, who are styled SWINSEILDIANS, and, in Maryland, a
small number called NICOLITES or NEW QUAKERS but with the distinguishing
sentiments of these sects I am not acquainted.

HISTORY.] In addition to what we have already said of the discovery and
settlement of North America, we shall here give a brief history of the late war
with Great Britain, with a sketch of the events which preceded and prepared the
way for the revolution. This general view of the history of the United States,
will serve as a suitable introduction to the particular histories of the
several states, which will be given in their proper places.

America was originally peopled by uncivilized nations, who lived mostly by
hunting and fishing. The Europeans, who first visited these shores, treating
the natives as wild beasts of the forest, which have (...) property in the
woods where they roam, planted the standard of their respective masters, where
they first landed, and in their names claimed the country by right of
discovery. As well may the New Zealanders, who have not yet discovered Europe,
fit out a ship, land on the coast of England or France, and, finding no
inhabitants but poor fisherman and peasants, claim the whole country by right
of discovery.
Prior to any settlement in North America, numerous titles of this kind were
acquired by the English, French, Spanish, and Dutch navigators, who came hither
for the purposes of fishing and trading with the natives. Slight as such cities
were, they were afterward the causes of contention between the European
nations. The subjects of different princes often laid claim to the same tract
of country, because both had discovered the same riv^^ or promontory; or
because the extent of their respective claims (...) undetermined.

While the settlements in this vast uncultivated country were inconsiderable
and scattered, and the trade of it confined to the bartering of a few trinkets
for furs, a trade carried on by a few adventurers, the interfering of claims
produced no important controversy among the settlers on the nations of Europe.
But in proportion to the progress of population, and the growth of the American
trade, the jealousies of the nations, which had made early discoveries and
settlements on this coast, were alarmed: ancient claims were received; and each
power took measures to extend and secure its own possessions at the expense of
a rival.

By the treaty of Utretcht in 1713, the English claimed a right of cutting
logwood in the Bay of Campeachy, in South-America. In the exercise of this
right, the English merchants had frequent opportunities of carrying on a
contraband trade with the Spanish settlements on the continent. To remedy this
evil, the Spaniards resolves to annihilate a claim, which though often
acknowledged, had never been clearly ascertained. To effect this design they
captured the English vessels, which they found along the Spanish Main, and many
of the British subjects were doomed to work in the mines of Potoss.

Repeated severities of this kind at length (1739) produced a war between
England and Spain. Porto Bello was taken from the Spaniards, by Admiral Vernon.
Commodore Anson, with a squadron of ships, failed to the South Seas, distressed
the Spanish settlements on the western shore of America, and took a galleon
laden with immense riches. But in 1741, a formidable armament, destined to
attack Carthagena, under the command of Lord Cathcart, returned unsuccessful,
with the loss of upwards of twelve thousand British soldiers and seamen; and
the defeat of the expedition, raised a clamor against the minister, Sir Robert
Walpole, which produced a change in the administration. This change removed the
scene of war to Europe, so that America was not immediately affected by the
subsequent transactions; except the Lou^sburgh, the principal fortress of
Cape-Breton, was taken from the French by General Pepperell, assisted by
Commodore Warren and a body of New England troops See Page 141.
.

This war was ended in 1748, by the treaty of peace signed at Aix la Chapelle,
by which restitution was made, on both sides, of all places taken during the
war.

Peace however was of short duration. The French possessed Canada, and had made
considerable settlements in Florida, claiming the country on both sides of the
Missisippi, by right of discovery. To secure and extend their claims, they
established a line of sorts, from Canada to Florida. They had secured the
important pass at Niagara, and erected a fort at the junction of the Allegany
and Monongahela rivers, called Fort Du Quesne. They took pains to secure the
friendship and assistance of the natives; encroachments were made upon the
English possessions, and mutual injuries succeeded. The disputes among the
settlers in America, and the measures taken by the French to command all the
trade of the St. Lawrence river on the north, and of the Missisippi on the
south, excited a jealously in the English nation, which soon broke forth in
open war.

The next year three other expeditions were undertaken in America against the
French. One was conducted by General Monckton, who had orders to drive the
French from their encroachments on the province of Nova Scotia. This expedition
was attended with success. General Johnson was ordered, with a body of troops,
to take possession of Crown Point, but he did not succeed. General Shirely
commanded an expedition against the fort at Niagara, but lost the season by
delay.

In 1755, General Braddock marched against fort Du Quesne, but in penetrating
through the wilderness, he incautiously fell into an ambuscade, and suffered a
total defeat. General Braddock was killed, but the enemy not pursuing the
vanquished across the river, being eager in plundering the baggage of the dead,
a part of his troops were saved by slight under the conduct of General
Washington, at that time a Colonel, who then began to exhibit proofs of those
military talents, by which he afterward conducted the armies of America to
victory, and his country to independence.

The ill success of these expeditions, left the English settlements in America
exposed to the depredations of both the French and Indians. But the war now
raged in Europe and the East Indies, and engaged the attention of both nations
in those quarters.

It was not until the campaign in 1758, that affairs assumed a more favorable
aspect in America. But upon a change of administration, Mr. Pit was appointed
prime minister, and the operations of war (...) came more vigorous and
successful. General Amherst was (...) take possession of Cape Breton; and after
a warm siege, the (...) of Louisburg surrendered by capitulation. General
Forbes wa^ ^^^cessful in taking possession of fort Du Quesne, which the French
thought fit to abandon. But General Abercrombie, who commanded the troops
destined to act against the French at Crown Point and (...) conderoga, attacked
the lines at Ticonderoga, and was defeated wi^^ a terrible slaughter of his
troops. After his defeat, he returned to (...) camp at Lake George.

The next year, more effectual measures were taken to subd^^ (...) French in
America. General Prideaux and Sir William Johnson began the operations of the
campaign by taking the French fort (...) Niagara. General Prideaux was killed
by the bursting of a mortar, before the surrender of the French.
General Amherst took possession of the forts at Crown Point and Ticonderoga,
which the French had abandoned.

But the decisive blow, which proved fatal to the French interests by America,
was the defeat of the French army, and the taking of Quebec, by the brave
General Wolf. This hero was slain in the beginning of the action on the plains
of Abram, and Monsieur Montcalm, the French commander, likewise lost his life.
The loss of Quebec was soon followed by the capture of Montreal, by General
Amherst, and Canada has remained ever since in possession of the English.

Colonel Grant, in 1761, defeated the Cherokees in Carolina, and obliged them
to sue for peace. The next year Martihico was (...) by Admiral Rodney and
General Monekton; and also the island of Grenada, St. Vincents and others. The
capture of these was (...) followed by the surrender of the Havanna, the
capital of the island of Cuba.

In 1763, a definitive treaty of peace was concluded at Paris, between Great
Britain, France and Spain; by which the English ceded to the French, several
islands which they had taken from them in the West Indies, but were confirmed
in the possession of all North America on this side the Missisippi, except the
island of Orleans.

But this war, however brilliant the successes and glorious the ev^^^ proved
the cause of great and unexpected misfortunes to Great Britain. Engaged with
the combined powers of France and Spain, (...) several years, her exertions
were surprising and her expense immensely. To discharge the debts of the
nation, the parliament was obliged to (...) recourse to new expedients for
raising money. Previous to the (...) treaty in 1763, the parliament had been
satisfied to raise a rev^^^^ from the American Colonies by a monopoly of their
trade.

It will be proper here to observe, that there were four kinds of government
established in the British American Colonies. The first was a charter
government, by which the powers of legislation were vested in a governor,
council and assembly, chosen by the people. Of this kind were the governments
of Connecticut and Rhode Island. The second was a proprietary government, in
which the propri^^^ of the province, was governor; although he generally
resided abroad and administered the government by a deputy of his own
appointment; the assembly only being chosen by the people. Such were the
governments of Pennsylvania and Maryland; and, originally, or New Jersey and
Carolina. The third kind was that of royal government, where the governor and
council were appointed by the crown, and the assembly by the people. Of this
kind were the governments of New Hampshire, New York, New Jersey, (after the
year 1702) Virginia, the Carolinas, after the resignation of the proprietors,
in 1728; and Georgia. The fourth kind was that of Massachusetts, which differed
(...) all the rest. The governor was appointed by the king. So far it was a
royal government. But the members of the council were elected by the
representatives of the people. The governor, however, had a right to negative
a certain number, but not to fill up vacancies th^^ occasioned. This variety of
governments created different degrees of dependence on the crown. In the royal
government, to render a lays valid, it was constitutionally required that it
should be ratified by the king; but the charter governments were empowered to
exact laws and no ratification by the king was necessary. It was only required
that such laws should not be contrary to the laws of England. The charter of
Connecticut is express to this purpose.

At the beginning of the last was with France, commissioners from many of the
colonies had assembled at Albany, and proposed that a great council should be
formed by deputies from the several colonies, which, with a general government
to be appointed by the crown, should be empowered to take measures for the
common safety, and to raise money for the execution of their designs. This
proposal was not relished by the British ministry; but in place of this plan,
it was proposed that the governors of the colonies, with the assistance of one
or two of their council, should assemble and concert measures for the general
defense; erect forts, levy troops, and draw on the treasury of England for
moneys that should be wanted; but the treasury to be reimbursed by a tax on the
colonies, to be laid by the English parliament. To this plan, which would imply
an avowal of the right of parliament to tax the colonies, the provincial
assemblies objected with (...) ^^en firmness. It seems therefore that the
British parliament, before the war, had it in contemplation to exercise the
right they claimed of taxing the colonies at pleasure, without permitting them
to be represented. Indeed it is obvious that they laid hold of the alarming
situation of the colonies, about the year 1754 and 1755, to force them into an
acknowledgment of the right, or to the adoption of measures that might
afterward be drawn into precedent. The colonies however, with an uncommon
foresight and firmness, defeated, all their at^^^ts* The war was carried on by
requisitions on the colonies for (...) of men and money, or by voluntary
contributions.

But no sooner was peace concluded, than the English parliament (...) the plan
of taxing the colonies; and to justify their attempts, said that the money to
be raised, was to be appropriated to defray the expense of defending them in
the late war.

The first attempt to raise a revenue in America, appeared in the memorable
stamp act, passed March 22, 1765; by which it was enacted that certain
instruments of writing, as bills, bonds, etc. should not be (...) in Law,
unless drawn on stamped paper, on which a duty was laid. When this bill was
brought in, Mr. Charles Townsend concluded a ^^ch in its favor, with words to
the following effect, "And now, (...) these Americans, children planted by our
care, nourished up by (...) indulgence, till they are grown to a degree of
strength and opu^^^^, and protected by our arms, will they grudge to contribute
their (...) to relieve us from the heavy weight of that burden which we lie
under?" To which Colonel Bar^e replied. "They planted by your care? No, your
oppressions planted them in America. They fled from tyranny to a then
uncultivated and unhospitable (...) where they exposed themselves to almost all
the hardships to (...) human nature is liable; and among others to the cruelty
of a (...) foe, the most subtle, and I will take upon me to say, the most
^^^^able of any people upon the face of God's earth; and yet, actually
principles of true English liberty, they met all hardships with (...) sure,
compared with those who suffered in their own country, (...) hands of those who
should have been their friends. They nour^^^^ up by your indulgence? They grew
by your neglect of them (...) soon as you began to care about them, that care
was exercised in ^^^ing persons to rule them in one department and another* who
were perhaps the deputies of deputies to some members of the house, (...) to
spy out their liberties, to misrepresent their actions and to pray upon them.
-- Men, whose behavior on many occasions, has (...) the blood of those sons of
liberty to recoil within them. -- Men promoted to the highest seats of justice,
some, who to my knowledge (...) glad, by going to a foreign country, to escape
being brought to (...) of a court of justice in their own. -- They protected by
your arms? They have nobly taken up arms in your defense, have exerted a (...)
midst their constant and laborious industry, for the defense of a ^^^try whose
frontier was drenched in blood, while its interior (...) yielded all its little
savings to your emolument; and believe (...) member I this day told you so,
that the same spirit of freedom which ^^^ated that people at first, will
accompany them still: but prudence (...) bids me to explain myself farther. God
knows, I do not at this (...) speak from any motives of party heat; what I
deliver are the (...) sentiments of my heart. However superior to me in general
knowledge and experience, the respectable body of this house may be, yet I
(...) to know more of America than most of you, having seen and been conversant
in that country. The people I believe are as truly loyal as any subjects the
king has, but a people jealous of their libert^^, and who will vindicate them,
if ever they should be violated: but the subject is too delicate -- I will say
no more."

No sooner was this act published in America, than it raised a (...) alarm. The
people were filled with apprehensions at an (...) which they supposed to be an
attack on their constitutional rights. The colonies petitioned the king and
parliament for a redress of the ^^^ance, and formed associations for the
purpose of preventing (...) portation and use of British manufactures, until
the act should be appealed. This spirited and unanimous opposition of the
Americans produced the desired effect; and on the 18th of March, 1766, the
(...) act was repealed. The news of the repeal was received in the colonies
with universal joy, and the trade between them and Great Britain was renewed on
the most liberal footing.

The parliament, by repealing this act, so obnoxious to this American brethren,
did not intend to lay aside the scheme of raising (...) venue in the colonies,
but merely to change the mode. Accordingly the next year, they passed an act,
laying a certain duty on glass, (...) paper and painters colors; articles
which were much wanted, and (...) manufactured, in America. This act kindled
the resentment of the Americans, and excited a general opposition to the
measure; so that parliament thought proper, in 1770, to take off these duties,
(...) (...) (...) a pound on tea. Yet this duty, however trifling, kept (...)
the jealousy of the colonists, and their opposition to parliamentary taxation
continued and increased.

(...) it must be remembered than the inconvenience of paying the du^^^ not the
sole, nor principal cause of the opposition; it was the (...) which, once
admitted, would have subjected the colonies to (...) parliamentary taxation,
without the privilege of being rep^^^^. The right, abstractly considered, was
denied; and the small^^ ^^^pt to establish the claim by precedent, was
uniformly resisted. (...) Americans could not be deceived as to the views of
parliament; (...) the repeal of the stamp act was accompanied with an
unequivocal (...), 'that the parliament had a right to make laws, of sufficient
validity, to bind the colonies in all cases whatsoever.'

The colonies therefore entered into measures to encourage their own
^^^^^tures, and home productions, and to retrench the use of for^^^
superfluities; while the importation of tea was prohibited. In (...) and
proprietary governments, and in Massachusetts, the govern^^^ and people were in
a state of continual warfare. Assemblies were (...) called, and suddenly
dissolved. While sitting, the assem^^^ employed the time in stating grievances
and framing remonstran^^. To inflame these discontents, an act of parliament
was passed, ^^^ining that the governors and judges should receive their
salaries of the crown; thus making them independent of the provincial as^^^^^,
and removeable only at the pleasure of the king.

These arbitrary proceedings, with many others not here men^^^, (...)
^^^^meration of grievances in the 'act of Independence,' and in a variety of
(...) to the king and parliament.
could not fail of producing a rupture.

On the second of March, a fray took place in Boston, near Mr. Gray's (...),
between a private soldier of the 29th regiment, and an inhabitant. The former
was supported by his comrades, the latter by the ^^^^akers, till several on
both sides were involved in the consequences. On the fifth a more dreadful
scene was presented. The soldiers, (...) under arms, were pressed upon,
insulted and pelted by a mob (...) with clubs, sticks* and snowballs covering
stones. They were ^^^^^red to fire. In this situation, one of the soldiers who
had received a blow, in resentment fired at the supposed aggressor. This (...)
followed by a single discharge from six others. Three of the in^^^ts were
killed, and five were dangerously wounded. The town (...) immediately in
commotion. Such was the temper, force, and (...) of the inhabitants, that
nothing but an engagement to remove (...) out of the town; together with the
advice of moderate (...), prevented the townsmen from falling on the soldiers.
The killed (...) buried in one vault, and in a most respectful manner, in order
to (...) the indignation of the inhabitants at the slaughter of their breth^^^
by soldiers quartered among them, in violation of their civil liber^^^ Capt.
Preston, who commanded the party which fired on the inhabitant, was committed
to jail, and afterward tried. The captain, and fix (...), were acquitted. Two
were brought in guilty of man-slaught^^^ (...) appeared on the trial, that the
soldiers were abused, insulted, (...) and pelted, before they fired. It was
also proved, that (...) seven guns were fired by the eight prisoners. These
circum^^^^ induced the jury to make a favorable verdict. The result of the
(...) great honor on John Adams, and Josiah Quincy. Esqs. the council for the
prisoners; and also on the integrity of the (...) who ventured to give an
upright verdict, in defiance of popular ^^^ions.

The consequences of this tragical event, sunk deep in the (...) of the people,
and were made subservient to important purposes, (...) anniversary of it was
observed with great solemnity for 13 years, ^^^^quent orators, were
successively employed to deliver an ^^^^^tion to preserve the remembrance of it
fresh in their minds. (...) occasions the blessings of liberty -- the horrors
of slavery -- the (...) of a standing army -- the rights of the colonies, and a
variety of (...) topics, were represented to the public view under their most
(...) and alarming forms. These annual orations administered fuel (...) fire of
liberty, and kept it burning, with an incessant flame. See Ramsay's Hist. of
the Amer. Revolution, p. sc.


In 1773, the spirit of the Americans broke out into open vi^^^^^. The Gaspee,
and armed schooner belonging to his Britannic (...), had been stationed at
Providence, in Rhode Island, to prevent ^^^gling. The vigilance of the
commander irritated the inhabitants that degree, that about two hundred armed
men entered the (...) night, compelled the officers and men to go ashore, and
set fire (...) schooner. A reward of five hundred pounds, ^^ered by gover^^^^
for apprehending any of the persons concerned in this daring of produced no
effectual discovery.

About this time, the discovery and publication of some private, confidential
letters, written by the royal officers in Boston, to person in office in
England, served to confirm the apprehensions of the A^^^cans, with respect to
the designs of the British government. It was now made obvious that more
effectual measures would be taken establish the supremacy of the British
Parliament over the (...). The letters recommended decisive measures, and the
writ^^^ (...) charged, by the exasperated Americans, with betraying their trust
and the people they governed.

As the resolutions of the colonies not to import or confirms (...) had, in a
great measure, deprived the English government of a ^^^^ue from this quarter,
the parliament formed a scheme of introducing tea into America, under cover of
the East India Company. For by purpose an act was passed, enabling the company
to export all (...) teas, duty free, to any place whatever. The company
departed (...) their usual mode of doing business and became their own
exp^^^^^. Several ships were freighted with teas, and sent to the American
colonies, and factors were appointed to receive and dispose of their cargoes.

The Americans, determined to oppose the revenue system of the English
parliament in every possible shape, considered the attempt of the East India
Company to evade the resolutions of the colonies and dispose of teas in
America, as an indirect mode of taxation, sa^^^ed by the authority of
parliament. The people assembled in (...) places, and in the large commercial
towns, took measures to (...) the landing of the teas. Committees were
appointed, and armed (...) extensive powers to inspect merchants books, to
propose (...) make use of other expedients to frustrate the designs of the
(...) India company. The same spirit prev^ded the people from (...) Hampshire
to Georgia. In some places, the consignees of the (...) were intimidated so far
as to relinquish their appointments, (...) to enter into engagements not to act
in that capacity. The cargo (...) south Carolina was stored, the consignees
being restrained from offering the tea for sale. In other provinces, the ships
returned back without discharging their cargoes.

It was otherwise in Massachusetts. The tea ships designed for the (...) of
Boston, were consigned to the son, cousins and particular (...) of governor
Hutchinson. When they were called upon to (...) they answered, "That is was out
of their power." Then col^^^ (...) to give a clearance, unless the vessels were
discharged (...) articles. The governor refused to give a pass for the vessels
unless properly qualified from the custom-house. The govern^^^ likewise
requested Admiral Montague to guard the passages out of the harbor and gave
orders to suffer no vessels, coasters excepted, to pass the fortress, from the
town, without a pass signed by himself. From a combination of these
circumstances, the return of the sea vessels from Boston, was rendered
impossible. The inhabitants then, had ^^^hernative, but to prevent the landing
of the tea, or to suffer it to be (...), and depend on the unanimity of the
people not to purchase it, on (...) destroy the tea, or to suffer a deep laid
scheme against their (...) liberties to take effect. The first would have
required in^^^ watching by night, as well as by day, for a period of time, the
duration of which no one could compute. The second would have been visionary to
childishness, by suspending the liberties of a gearing country, on the self
denial and discretion of every sea drink^^^ the province. They viewed the tea
as a vehicle of an uncon^^^onal tax, and is inseparably associated with it. To
avoid the one them resolved to destroy the other. About seventeen persons,
dressed as Indians, repaired to the tea ships, brook open 342 chests of tea,
and without doing any other damage, discharged their contents into the (...)
^^^say's History, p.99.


(...) sooner did the news of this destruction of the tea reach Great (...)
than the parliament determined to punish that devoted town. On the king's
laying the American papers before them, a bill was (...) in and passed, to
"discontinue the landing and discharging, lading and shipping of goods, wares
and merchandises at the town of Boston, or within the harbor."

This act, passed March 25, 1774, and called The Boston Port Bill, (...) the
inhabitants into the greatest consternation. The town of Boston passed a
resolution, expressing their sense of this oppressive measure, and a desire
that all the colonies would concur to stop all importations from Great Britain.
Most of the colonies entered into sp^^ited resolutions, on this occasion, to
unite with Massachusetts in a (...) opposition to the unconstitutional measures
of the parliament. The first of June, the day on which the Port Bill was to
take place, was appointed to be kept as a day of humiliation, fasting and
prayer throughout the colonies, to seek the divine direction and aid, in that
(...) and gloomy juncture of affairs.

^^ought here to be observed, that this rational and pious custom of (...)
fasts in times of distress and impending danger and of cel^^^^ days of public
thanks giving, after having received special tok^^^ divine favor, has ever
prevailed in New England since its first (...), and in some parts of other
states. These public supplications and acknowledgements to heaven, at the
commencement of hostilities, and during the whole progress of the war, were
more (...) than usual, and were attended with uncommon servour and (...). They
were considered by the people, as an humble appeal (...) for the justness of
their cause, and designed to manifest their (...) ^^^ence on the GOD OR HOSTS
for aid and success in maintainable against their hostile brethren. The prayers
and public disc^^^^ the Clergy, who were friends to their suffering country,
((...) (...) were very few who were not) breathed the spirit of patri^^^^ (...)
as their piety and integrity had generally secured to th^^^ (...) ^^^dence of
the people, they had great influence and success in (...) aging them to engage
in its defense. In this way, that cl^^^ of (...) aided the cause of their
country; and to their pious (...) (...) the GREAT ARBITER of human affairs, has
been justly (...) inconsiderable share of the success and victory that crowned
the American arms.

During the height of the consternation and confusion which Boston Bort Bill
occasioned, and at the very time when a town ^^^^ing was sitting to consider of
it, General Gage, who had been (...) ^^^ed to the government of Massachusetts,
arrived in the harbor. (...) arrival, however, did not allay the popular
ferment, or check the ^^^gress of the measures then taking, to unite the
colonies in opposition to the oppressive acts of parliament. He was received
with all the honors, usual on such occasions.

But the port bill was not the only act that alarmed the app^^^ ^^sions of the
Americans. Determined to compel the province of Massachusetts to submit to
their laws, parliament passed an act for (...) better regulating government in
the province of Massachusetts (...). The object of this act was to alter the
government, as it stood (...) charter of king William; and to make the judges
and sheriffs (...) ^^^dent on the king, and removeable at his will and pleasure.

The act was soon followed by another, which ordained th^^^^ person, indicted
for murder, or other capital offense committed ^^^ing the magistrates in
executing the laws, might be sent by the governor, either to any other colony,
or to Great Britain, ^^^^trial.

This was soon followed by the Quebec Bill; which extend (...) bounds of that
province, and granted many privileges to the (...) Catholics. The object of
this bill was, to secure the attachment of that province to the crown of
England, and prevent its joining the colonies in their resistance of the laws
of parliament.

But these measures did not intimidate the Americans. On the (...) hand, they
served to confirm their former apprehensions of that (...) designs of
government, and to unite the colonies in their oppo^^^^. A correspondence of
opinion with respect to the unconstitutional of parliament, produced a
uniformity of proceedings in the (...). The people generally concurred in a
proposition for holding (...) Congress, by deputation from the several
colonies, in order to (...) measures for the preservation of their rights.
Deputies were ^^ingly appointed, and met at Philadelphia, on the 26th of (...)
1774.

In this first congress, the proceedings were cool, deliberate ^^^^al; but
marked with unanimity and firmness. Their first (...) declaration, or state of
their claims as to the enjoyment of all (...) of British subjects, and
particularly that of taxing themselves (...) ^^^ly, and of regulating the
internal police of the colonies. They also drew up a petition to the king,
complaining of their grievances, and ^^^ying for a repeal of the
unconstitutional and oppressive acts of p^^^ent. They signed an association to
suspend the importation of British goods, and the exportation of American
produce, until their (...) should be redressed. They sent an address to the
inhabitants of Great Britain, and another to the people of America; in the
for^^^ of which they enumerated the oppressive steps of parliament, and called
on their British brethren not to aid the ministry in enslaving their American
subjects; and in the latter, they endeavored to con^^^ the people in a
spirited and unanimous determination to defend their constitutional rights.

In the mean time every thing in Massachusetts wore the appearance of
opposition by force. A new council for the governor, had been appointed by the
crown. New Judges were appointed and attempted to proceed in the execution of
their office. But the juries refused to be (...) under them. In some counties,
the people assembled to prevent the courts from proceeding to business; and in
Berkshire they ^^^^ded, setting an example of resistance that has since been
followed in violation of the laws of the state.

In this situation of affairs, the day for the annual muster of the (...)
approached. General Gage, apprehensive of some violence, had the precaution to
seize the magazines of ammunition and stores at Cambridge and Charlestown, and
lodged them in Boston. This mea^^^ with the fortifying of the neck of land
which joins Boston to the main land at Roxbury, caused a universal alarm and
ferment.

On this occasion, an assembly of delegates from all the towns in ^^^olk
county, was called; and several spirited resolutions were a^^^^ ^o. These
resolutions were prefaced with a declaration of allegiance; but they breathed a
spirit of freedom that does honor to the ^^^gates. They declared that the late
acts of parliament, and the proceedings of General Gage, were glaring
infractions of their rights and liberties, which their duty called them to
defend by all lawful means.

This assembly remonstrated against the fortification of Boston Neck, and
against the Quebec bill; and resolved upon a suspension of commerce, an
encouragement of arts and manufactures, the holding of a provincial congress,
and a submission to the measures which should be recommended by the continental
congress. They recommended that the collectors of taxes should not pay any
money into the treasury* without further orders; they also recommended peace
and good order, a^ they meant to act merely upon the defensive.

In answer to their remonstrance, General Gage assured them that (...) had no
intention to prevent the free egress and regress of the inhabitants to and from
the town of Boston, and that he would not suffer any person under his command
to injure the person or property of any of his majesty's subjects.

^^vious to this, a general assembly had been summoned by the (...) to meet at
S^lem; and notwithstanding the writs had been ^^^ermanded by the governor's
proclamation, on account of the vi^^^^ of the times, and the resignation of
several of the new coun^^^^, yet in defiance of the proclamation, 90 of the
newly elected* members met at the time and place appointed; and soon after
resolved themselves into a Provincial Congress and adjourned to Concord, 19
miles from Boston, and after choosing Mr. Hancock president, proceeded to
business.

This congress addressed the governor with a rehearsal of their distresses,
and took the necessary steps for defending their rights. They regulated the
militia, made provision for supplying the treasury, and furnishing the people
with arms; and such was the enthusiasm and union of the people, that the
recommendations of the provincial congress had the force of laws.

General Gage was incensed at these measures. He declared in (...) answer to
the address, that Britain could never harbor the black ^^sign of enslaving her
subjects, and published a proclamation, in which he insinuated that such
proceedings amounted to rebellion. He (...) ordered barracks to be erected for
the soldiers; but he found differently in procuring laborers, either in Boston
or New York.

In the beginning of 1775, the fishery bills were passed in parliament, by
which the colonies were prohibited to trade with Great Britain, Ireland or the
West Indies, or to take fish on the banks of Newfoundland.

In the distresses to which these acts of parliament reduced the (...) of
Boston, the unanimity of the colonies was remarkable, in the large supplies of
provision furnished by the inhabitants of different (...), from New Hampshire
to Georgia, and shipped to the relief of the sufferers.

Preparations began to be made, to oppose by force, the execution of these acts
of parliament. The militia of the country were trained (...) the use of arms --
great encouragement was given for the manufacture of gunpowder, and measures
were taken to obtain all kinds of (...) stores.

In February, Colonel Leflie was sent with a detachment of (...) from Boston,
to take possession of some cannon at Salem. But the people had intelligence of
the design -- took up the draw bridge in that town, and prevented the troops
from passing, until the (...) wore secured; so that the expedition failed.

Provisions and military stores were also collected and stored in different
places, particularly at Concord. General Gage, though zealous for his royal
master's interest, discovered a prevailing (...) after a peaceable
accommodation. He wished to prevent hostilities, by depriving the inhabitants
of the means necessary for carrying them on. With this view, It is believed
that another object of this expedition was, to seize on the (...) of Mess^^.
Hancock and S. Adams, who by their spirited exertions, had rendered themselves
obnoxious to General Gage.
he determined (...) destroy the stores which he knew were collected for the
support of a provincial army; and wishing to accomplish this without bloodshed,
he took every precaution to effect it by surprise, and without alarming the
country. At eleven o'clock at night 800 grenadiers and light infantry, the
flower of the royal army, embarked at the Common, landed at Leechmore's Point
and marched for Concord, under the command of lieutenant colonel Smith. Neither
the secrecy with which this expedition was planned -- the privacy (...) which
the troops marched out, nor an order that no inhabitants should leave Boston,
were sufficient to prevent intelligence from lying sent to the country militia*
of what was going on. About (...) in the morning, 130 of the Lexington militia
had assembled to oppose them, but the air being chilly, and intelligence
respecting the (...) uncertain, they were dismissed, with orders to appear
again at the ^ent of drum. They collected a second time, to the number of 70,
between 4 and 5 o'clock in the morning, and the British regulars soon after
made their appearance. Major Pitcairn, who led the advanced corpse, rode up to
them and called out, "Disperse you rebels, th^^w down your arms and disperse."
They still continued in a body, on which he advanced nearer -- discharged his
pistol -- and ordered his soldiers to fire. A dispersion of the militia was the
consequence, but the firing of the regulars was nevertheless continued.
Individuals finding they were fired upon, though dispersing, returned the fire.
Three or four of the militia were killed on the green. A few more were shot
after they had begun to disperse. The royal detachment proceeded on to Concord,
and executed their commission. They disabled two 24 pounders -- throw 500lb of
ball into rivers and wells, and broke in pieces about 60 barrels of flour. Mr.
John Buterick, major of a minute regiment, (...) knowing what had passed at
Lexington, ordered his men not to (...) the first fire, that they might not be
the aggressors. Upon his appe^^ching near the regulars, they fired, and killed
captain Isaac Davis, and one private of the provincial minute men. The fire was
returned, and a skirmish ensued. The king's troops having done their business,
began their retreat toward Boston. This was conducted with expedition, for the
adjacent inhabitants had assembled in arms and began to attack them in every
direction. In their return to Lexington they were exceedingly annoyed, both by
those who pressed on their rear, and others who poured in from all sides,
firing from behind (...) walls, and such like coverts, which supplied the place
of lines and redoubts. At Lexington the regulars were joined by a detachment of
900 men under lord Piercy, which had been sent out by general Gage to support
lieutenant colonel Smith. This reinforcement, having two pieces of cannon, awed
the provincials, and kept them at a greater distance; but they continued a
constant, though irregular and scattering fire, which did great execution. The
close firing from behind the walls by good marksmen, put the regular troops in
no small confusion, but they nevertheless kept up a brisk retreating (...) on
the militia and minute men. A little after sunset the regulars ^^^ched
Bunkers-hill, worn down with excessive fatigue, having (...) h^d that day
between thirty and forty miles. On the next day they crossed Charlestown ferry,
to Boston.

There never were more than 400 provincials engaged at one time, and often not
so many. As some tired and gave out, others came up and took their places.
There was scarcely any discipline observed among them. Officers and privates
fired when they were ready and saw a royal uniform, without waiting for the
word of command. (...) knowledge of the country enabled them to gain
opportunities, by crossing fields and fences, and to act as flanking parties
against the king's troops, who kept to the main road.

The regulars had 65 killed, 174 wounded, and 24 made prisoners. Of the
provincials 49 were killed, and 39 wounded and missing.

Here was spilt the first blood in the late war; a war which severed America
from the British empire. Lexington opened the first scene to this great drama,
which, in its progress, exhibited the most illustrious characters and events,
and closed with a revolution, equally glorious (...) the actors, and important
in its consequences to mankind.

This battle roused all America. The Provincial Congress of Massachusetts being
at this time in session, voted that "An army of 30,000 men be immediately
raised; that 13,600 be of their own province, and that a letter and delegate be
sent to the several colonies of New Hampshire, Connecticut and Rhode Island."
The militia collected from all quarters, and Boston, in a few days, was
besieged by twenty thousand men. A stop was put to all intercourse between the
town and country, and the inhabitants were reduced to great want of provis^^^^
General Gage promised to let the people depart, if they would de^^er up their
arms. The people complied; but when the general had obtained their arms, the
perfidious man, ^refused to lot the people go.

This breach of faith, and the consequences that attended it, were justly and
greatly complained of; and although many, at dif^^^^ times, were permitted to
leave the town, they were obliged to heart all their effects behind; so that
many who had been used to live i^ case and affluence, were at once reduced to
extreme indigence and misery. A circumstance peculiarly and wantonly
aggravating, and which was the ground of the bitterest complaints of congress,
was, that passports were granted and retained in such a manner, as that
families were broken* and the dearest connections separated; part being
compelled to quit the town, and part cruelly retained against their inclination.

About the latter end of May a great part of the reinforcements ordered from
Great Britain, arrived at Boston. Three British genera^^ How, Burgoyne and
Clinton, whose behavior in the preceding war had gained them great reputation,
also arrived about the same time. General Gage, thus reinforced, prepared for
acting with more deci^^^, but before he proceeded to extremities, he conceived
it due to ancient forms to issue a proclamation, holding forth to the
inhabitants the alternative of peace or war. He therefore offered pardon in the
king's name, to all who should forthwith lay down their arms, and return to
their respective occupations and peaceable duties, excepting only from the
benefit of that pardon "Samuel Adams, and John Hancock," who^^ offenses were
said to be "of too flagitious a nature to admit of any other consideration than
that of condign punishment." He also proclaimed, that not only the persons
above named and excepted, but also all their adherents, associates and
correspondents, should be deemed guilty of treason and rebellion, and treated
accordingly. By this proclamation it was also declared "that as the courts of
judicature were shut, martial law should take place, till a due course of
justice should be re-established." It was supposed that this proclamation was a
prelude to hostilities, and preparations were accordingly made by the
Americans. The heights of Charlestown, were so situated as to make the
possession of them a matter of great consequence, to either of the contending
parties. Orders were therefore issued, June 16th, by the provincial commanders,
that a detachment of a thousand men should entrench upon Breed's-hill.
Historians, through mistake, have called the hill where the battle was ^ought,
(...) (...)-hill, which is a quarter of a mile north of Breed's-hill, where the
battle was (...).
Here the Americans, between midnight and morning, with uncommon expedition and
silence, threw up a small redoubt, which the British did not discover till the
morning of the 17th, when they began an incessant firing and continued it till
afternoon. With the intrepidity of veteran soldiers the Americans bore this
(...), and proceeded to finish their redoubt, and to throw up a breast-work,
extending eastward of it to the bottom of the hill. About noon general Gage
detached Major General How, and brigadier general ^^got, with the flower of
his army, in two detachments, amounting in the whole to nearly 3000 men. --
They landed at a point about 150 or 200 rods S. E. of the redoubt, and
deliberately prepared for the attack. While the troops, who first landed, were
waiting for a reinforcement, the Americans on the left wing, toward Mystic
river, for their security, pulled up some adjoining post and rail fence, and
set it down in two parallel lines, near each other, and filled the space
between with hay, which the day before was mowed and remained in the adjacent
field. The British troops, in the mean time, formed in two lines, and about
^o'clock, advanced slowly toward the Americans. The hills and ^^ples in
Boston, and the circumjacent country, were crowded with (...) spectators of the
dubious conflict. While some felt for the honor of British troops, multitudes,
with a keener sensibility, felt for the liberties of a great and growing
country. The attack commen^^d on the part of the British troops. The Americans
had the precaution to reserve their fire, till their enemies had approached
within 10 or 12 rods of their works. They then began a well directed and
furious discharge of small arms, which mowed down their enemies in ranks, and
occasioned a disorderly and precipitate retreat. Their (...) rallied them with
difficulty, and pushed them forward with their swords, to a second attack. They
were, in the same manner put (...) slight a second time. With still greater
difficulty they were forced by General How, to a third attack. By this time
the powder of the Americans began to fail, and their redoubt was attacked on
two sides. Under these circumstances, a retreat was ordered; the left wing of
the Americans, N. E. of the redoubt, still continuing their fire, ignorant of
what had taken place on the right, till the British had nearly surrounded them.
The retreat was effected, with an inconsiderable (...), considering the greater
part of the distance they had to pass was completely exposed to the incessant
fire of the Glasgow man of war and two floating batteries.

During the heat of this bloody action, by order of General Gage, Charlestown
was ^et on fire, by a battery on Cop^-Hill, in Boston, and a party from the
Somerset man of war, lying in Charles river, and nearly 400 houses, including
^ix public buildings, were consumed, with their furniture, etc. valued by 19
men, under oath, at L^^6,900, specie; and 2000 persons reduced from affluence
and mediocrity, to (...) most aggravated poverty and exile. This pleasant town,
(that part of it which wa^ burnt) has since been rebui^^ upon an (...) plan,
and in the fall of 1792, contained, besides a large meeting house, a^ms house,
school house, and a number of ^^o^es and other buildings, about 215 dwelling
houses, (...) by 234 families. The whole number of (...), was 1254, of which
220 were (...) of 21 years and upwards. The number of males of upwards of 21
years in this (...), before the war, was 300, of which, in April, 179^, 100
only lived in Charlestown, (...) (...) never returned, 125 had (...). In
November 1791, there were (...) or men who were natives of Charlestown, besides
16 others widows o^ (...), natives, making in the whole 155, of whom -- were in
the town. (...) (...).


The number of Americans engaged in this memorable action, amounted to 1500
only. There have been few battles in modern wars in which, all circumstances
considered, there was a greater slaughter of men than in this short engagement.
The loss of the British, as acknowledged by General Gage, amounted to 1054 men.
Nineteen commissioned officers were killed and 70 wounded. The loss of the
Americans was 77 killed -- 278 wounded and missing.

The death of Major General Warren, who four days before had received his
commission, and who, having had no command assigned him, sought this day as a
volunteer, was particularly and greatly lamented. "To the purest patriotism,
and the most undaunted bravery, ^e added the virtues of domestic life, the
eloquence of an accomplished orator, and the wisdom of an able statesman."

About this time a scheme was laid by a number of gentlemen in Connecticut, to
take possession of Ticonder^ga, where a great quantity of military stores were
lodged, and which is the key to Canada. Having made the necessary preparations,
and collected 270 men, chiefly Green Mountain ^oy^, they rendezvoused at
Castleton, where they (...) joined by Col. Allen, and shortly after by Col.
Arnold from Cambridge, under commission from the Provincial Congress. Col.
Allen commanded this volunteer party. Having arrived at Lake Champlain,
opposite Ticonderoga, in the night, Cols. Allen and Arnold, with 83 men,
crossed over, and at the dawn of day entered the fort, without resistance, and
called upon the commander, who was in bed, to surrender the (...). He asked by
what authority? Col. Allen replied -- I demand it i^ the name of the Great
Jehovah and of the Continental Congress." -- Thus the fort was captured, with
its valuable stores and 43 prisoners. Crown Point was taken at the same time,
by Col. Warren, and possession obtained of all Lake Champlain, in the course of
a few days, by a few determined man.

On the 15th of June, two days before the memorable battle on Breeds Hill, the
Continental Congress unanimously appointed George Washington, Esquire
Notwithstanding it has often been asserted; with confidence, that President
Washington was a native of England, certain it is his ancestors came from
thence to (...) country (...) long ago as the year 1657. He, in the third
descent after their migration, was h^r^ on the 12th of February, (old style)
1732, at the parish of Washington, in Westmoreland county, in Virginia. His
father's family was numerous, and he was the first fr^it of a (...) marriage.
His education having been principally conducted by a private tutor, at fi^^^
years old he was entered a midshipman on board of a British vessel of war
stationed on the coast of Virginia, and his baggage prepared for embarkation;
but the plan was abandoned on account of the reluctance his mother expressed to
his engaging in that profession.

Previous to this transaction, when he was but ten years of age, his father
died, and the charge of the family devolved on his eldest brother. His eldest
brother, a young man of the most promising talents, had a command in the
colonial troops employed against Carthogena, and on his return from the
expedition, named his new patrimonial (...) MOUNT VERNON, in honor of the
admiral of that name, from whom he had received many civilities. He was
afterward made Adju^ant General of the militia of Virginia, but did not long
survive. At his decease, the eldest son by the second marriage, inherited this
seat and a considerable landed property. In consequence of the extensive limits
of the colony, the vacant office of Adjutant General was divided into three
districts, and the future Hero of America, before he attained his twentieth
year, began his military service by a principal appointment in that department,
with the rank of major.

When he was little more than twenty one years of age, an event occurred which
called his abilities into public notice. In 1753, while the government of the
colony was administered by lieutenant governor Dinwid^ie, encroachments were
reported to have been made by the French, from Canada, on the territories of
the British colonies, at the westward. Mr. Washington, who was sent with
plenary powers to ascertain the ^acts, (...) at with the savages, and warn the
French to desist from their aggressions, performed the duties of his mission,
with singular industry, intelligence and address. His journal, and report to
governor Dinwidd^e, which were published, announced to the world that
correctness of mind, manliness in style and accuracy in mode of doing business,
which have (...) characterised him in the conduct of more arduous affairs. But
it was deemed, by some, an extraordinary circumstance that so juvenile and
inexperienced a person should have been employed on a negotiation, with which
subjects of the greatest importance were involved; subjects which shortly after
became the origin of a war between England and France, that raged for many
years throughout every part of the globe.

It would not comport with the intended brevity of this sketch, to mention is
detail (...) fatigues he endured, the plans he suggested, or the system he
pursued for the defense of the frontiers, during this war until the year 1753.

Tranquillity on the frontiers of the middle colonies having been restored, and
the health of Colonel Washington having become extremely debilitated by an
inveterate (...) complaint, in 1759, he resigned his military appointment.

His health was gradually re-established. He married Mrs. Custis, President and
Mrs. Washington were both born in the same year.
a handsome and amiable young widow, possessed of an ample jointure; and
settled as a planter and farmer on his estate at Mount Vernon, in Fairfax
county.

After he left the army, until the year 1775, he cultivated the arts of peace.
He was constantly a member of assembly, a magistrate of his county, and a judge
of the court. He was elected a delegate to the first Congress in 1774; as well
as to that which assembled in the year following. Soon after the war broke out,
he was appointed, as we have mentioned, by Congress, Commander in Chief of the
forces of the United Colonies.

It is the less necessary to particularize, in this place, his transactions in
the course of the la^ was, because the impression which they made is yet fresh
in every mind. But it is hoped posterity will be taught, in what manner he
transformed an undisciplined body of peasantry into a regular army of soldiers.
Commentaries on his campaigns would undoubtedly be highly interesting and
instructive to future generations. The conduct of the first compaign, in
compelling the British troops to abandon Boston, by a bloodless victory, will
merit a minute narration. But a volume would scarcely contain the
mortifications he experienced and the hazards to which he was exposed in 1776
and 1777, in contending against the prowess of Britain, with an inadequate
force. His good destiny and consum^^^ prudence, prevented want of success from
producing want of confidence on the p^rt of the public; for want of success is
apt to lead to the adoption of pernicious counsels, through the levity of the
people, or the ambition of their demagogues. Shortly (...) this period, sprang
up the only ca^al, that ever existed during his public life, to rob him of his
reputation and command. ^^^roved as impotent in effect as it was audacious in
de^^gn. In the three succeeding years the germ of discipline unfolded; and the
sources of America having been called into cooperation with the land and naval
armies of (...), produced the glorious campaign in 1781. From this time the
gloom began to disappear from our political horizon, and the affairs of the
union proceeded in a me^^oratin* train, till a peace was most ably negociated
by our ambassadors in Europe, in 1783.

No person, who had not the advantage of being present when general Washington
received the intelligence of peace, and who did not accompany him to his
domestic retirement, can describe the relief which that joyful event brought to
his laboring mind, or the supreme satisfaction with which he withdrew to
private life. From his triumphal easy into New York, upon the evacuation of
that city by the British army, to his (...) at Mount Vernon, after the
resignation of his commission to Congress, festive (...) impeded his passage
through all the populous towns; the devotion of a whole people pursued him with
prayers to Heaven for blessings on his head, while their gratitude sought the
most expressive language of manifesting itself to him, as their common father
and benefactor. When he became a private citizen, he had the unusual felicity
to find that his native state was among the most zealous in doing justice to
his merits; and that stronger demonstrations of affectionate esteem (if
possible) were given by the citizens of has neighborhood, than by any other
description of men on the continent. But he has constantly declined accepting
any compensation for his services, or provision for the augmented expenses
which have been incurred by him in consequence of his public employment,
although proposals have been made in the most delicate manner, especially by
the States of Virginia and Pennsylvania.

The happiness of private life he did not long enjoy. In 1789, by the unanimous
voice of his countrymen, he was called to the dignifie^ office of Chief
Magistrate of the United States of America; which office he has ever since
sustained; and with how much dignity, prudence and ability, the general
applause of his constituents amply testify. The history of the life, and the
delineation of the character of this truly great man, are subjects which will
occupy many of the m^st entertaining and instructive pages, of the future
impartial histories of America.

While true merit is esteemed, or virtue honored, mankind will never cease to
revere the (...) of this Hero; and while gratitude remains in the human breast,
the praises of WASHINGTON shall dwell on every American tongue.


; a native o^ Virginia, to the chief command of the American army. This
gentleman had been a distinguished and successful officer in the preceding war,
and seemed destined by heaven to be the savior of his country. He accepted the
appointment with a diffidence which was a proof of his modesty, his prudence
and his greatness; and by his matchless skill, fortitude and perseverance,
conducted America through indescribable difficulties, to independence and peace.

General Washington, with other officers appointed by congress, arrived at
Cambridge, and took command of the American army in July. From this time, the
affairs of America began to assume the appearance of a regular and general
opposition to the forces of Great Britain.

In Autumn, a body of troops, under the command of General Montgomery, besieged
and took the garrison at St. John's, which commands the entrance into Canada.
The prisoners amounted to about seven hundred. General Montgomery pursued his
success, and took Montreal; and designed to push his victories to Quebec.

A body of troops, commanded by General Arnold, was ordered to march to Canada,
by the river Kennebek, and through the wilderness. After suffering every
hardship, and the most distressing hunger, they arrived in Canada, and were
joined by General Montgomery, before Quebec. This city, which was commanded by
Governor Carle^^^, was immediately besieged. But there being little hope of
taking the town by a siege, it was determined to storm it.

The garrison of Quebec, at this time, consisted of about 1520 m^n, of which
800 were militia. The American army consisted of (...) men. General Montgomery
having divided his little army into (...) detachments, ordered two feints to be
made against the upper town, one by Colonel Livingston, at the head of the
Canadians, against St. John's Gate; the other by Major Brown against Cape
Diamond; ^^serving to himself and Col. Arnold, the two principal attacks
against the lower town. At 5 oclock in the morning, General Montgomery advanced
against the lower town. He passed the first barrier, and was just opening to
attack the second, when he was killed, together with his Aid-de-camp, Capt.
M^Pherson. This so dispirited the men, that Col. Campbell, on whom the command
devolved, thought proper to draw them off. In the mean time Col. Arnold, with
350 men, made a successful attack on another part of the town. In the attack of
the first battery Col. Arnold was wounded, and was obliged to be carried off
the field of battle. His party, however, commanded by Capt. Morgan of Virginia,
proceeded, and entered the town; but not being joined by the other parties, was
obliged to surrender to superior force.

The loss of the Americans in killed and wounded* was about (...) and 300 were
taken prisoners. Historians will do justice to the bra^^ry of the Provincial
troops on this occasion.

After the defeat, Col. Arnold, who now commanded the troops, continued some
months before Quebec, although his troops were reduced in numbers, and suffered
incredibly from cold and sickness.

The death of General Montgomery was greatly and sincerely regretted on both
sides. "His many amiable qualities had procured him an uncommon share of
private affection, and his great abilities, an equal proportion of public
esteem. His name was mentioned in parliament with singular respect. The
Minister himself acknowledged his worth, while he reprobated the cause in which
he fell. He concluded an involuntary panegyric, by saying, "Curse on his
virtues, they have undone his country." General Montgomery descended from a
respectable family in the North of Ireland, and was born in the year 1737. His
attachment to liberty was innate, and matured by a (...) education and an
excellent understanding. Having married a wife, and purchased an (...) in New
York, he was, from these circumstances, as well as from his natural (...) of
freedom, and from a conviction of the justness of her cause, induced to
consider (...) an American. From principle, he early embarked in her cause, and
quitted the (...) easy fortune, the enjoyment of a loved and philosophical
rural life, with the highest ^^^me^ic felicity, to take an active share in all
the hardships and dangers that attend (...) ^^^^er's life.

Before he came over to America, he had been an officer in the service of
England, and had successfully fought her battles with the immortal Wol^e at
Quebec, in the (...) of 1756, on the very spot, where, when fighting under the
standard of freedom, he was ^^^^ed ^o fall in arms against her.




About this time, the large and flourishing town of Norfolk in Virginia, was
wantonly burnt by order of lord Dunmore, the then royal governor of that
province.

General Gage went to England in September, and was succeeded in the command,
by General How.

Falmouth, a considerable town in the province of Main in Massachusetts, shared
the fate of Norfolk; being laid in ashes by order of the British admiral.

The British king entered into treaties with some of the German Princes for
about fourteen thousand men, who were to be sent to America the next year, to
assist in subduing the colonies. The parliament also passed an act, forbidding
all intercourse with America; and while they repealed the Boston port and
fishery bills, they declared all American property on the high seas, forfeited
to the captors.

Measures were taken to annoy the enemy in Boston. For this purpose, batteries
were opened on several hills, from whence shot and bombs were thrown into the
town. But the batteries which were opened on Dorchester point had the best
effect, and soon obliged General How to abandon the town. In March 1776 the
British troops embarked for Halifax, and General Washington entered Boston in
triumph.

In the ensuing summer, a small squadron of ships commanded by Six Peter
Parker, and a body of troops under the Generals Clinton and Cornwallis,
attempted to take Charleston, the capital of South Carolina. The ships made a
violent attack upon the fort on Sullivan's Island, but were repulsed with great
loss, and the expedition was abandoned.

In July, Congress published their declaration of independence, which separated
America from Great Britain. This great event took place two hundred and eighty
four years after the the discovery of America by Columbus -- one hundred and
sixty six, from the first effectual settlement in Virginia, and one hundred and
fifty six from the first settlement of Plymouth in Massachusetts, which were
the earliest English settlements in America.

Just after this declaration, General How, with a powerful force, arrived near
New York; and landed his troops on Staten Island. General Washington was in
New York with about thirteen thousand men, who were encamped either in the city
or the neighboring fortifications.

The operations of the British began by the action on Long Island, in the month
of August. The American Generals Sullivan and Lord Sterling, with a large body
of men, were made prisoners. The night after the engagement, a retreat was
ordered and executed with such silence, that the Americans left the island
without alarming their enemies, and without loss.

In September, the city of New York was abandoned by the American army, and
taken by the British.

In November, Fort Washington on York Island was taken, and more than two
thousand Americans made prisoners. Fort Lee* opposite to Fort Washington, on
the Jersey shore, was soon after taken, but the garrison escaped.

About the same time, General Clinton was sent with a body of troops to take
possession of Rhode Island; and succeeded. In addition to all these losses and
defeats, the American army suffered by desertion, and more by sickness, which
was epidemic, and very mortal.

The northern army at Ticonderoga, was in a disagreeable situation,
particularly* after the battle on Lake Champlain, in which the American force,
consisting of a few l^ght vessels, under the command of generals Arnold and
Waterbury, was totally dispersed. But General Carleton, instead of pursuing his
victory, landed at Crown Point, ^^connoitered our posts at Ticonderoga and
Mount Independence, and returned to winter quarters in Canada.

The American army might now be said to be no more. All that now remained of an
army, which at the opening of the campaign, amounted to at least twenty five
thousand men, did not now exceed (...) thousand. The term of their engagements
being expired, they returned, in large bodies, to their families and friends;
the few, who, from personal attachment, local circumstances, or superior
perseverance and bravery, continued with the Generals Washington and Lee, were
(...) inconsiderable to appear formidable in the view of a powerful and
victorious enemy.

In this alarming and critical situation of affairs, General Lee, through an
imprudent carelessness, which ill became a man in his important station, was
captured by a party of British light horse* commanded by Col. Harcourt. This
unfortunate circumstance gave a severe shock to the remaining hopes of the
little army, and rendered their situation truly distressing.

While these things were transacting in New Jersey, General Washington, far
from being discouraged by the loss of General Lee, and always ready to improve
every advantage to raise the drooping spirits of his handful of men, had made a
stand on the Pennsylvania side of the Delaware. He collected his scattered
forces, called in the assistance of the Pennsylvania militia, and on the night
of the 25th of December (1776) when the enemy were lulled into security by the
idea of his weakness, and by the inclemency of the night, which was remarkably
boisterous, as well as by the fumes of a Christmas eve, ^e crossed the river,
and at the breaking of day, marched down to T^^ton, and so completely surprised
them, that the greater part of the detachment which were stationed at this
place, surrendered after a short resistance. The horsemen and a few others made
their escape at the opposite end of the town. Upwards of nine hundred Hessians
were taken prisoners at this time.

The address in planning and executing this enterprise, reflected the highest
honor on the commander, and the success revived the desponding hopes of
America. The loss of General Mercer, a gallant officer, at Princeton, was the
principal circumstance that allayed the joys of victory.

The following year, 1777, was distinguished by very memorable events, infavour
of America. On the opening of the campaign, governor Tryon was sent with a
body of troops to destroy the stores at D^^bury in Connecticut. This plan was
executed, and the town mostly burnt. The enemy suffered in their retreat, and
the American* lost General Wooster, a brave and experienced officer.

General Prescot was taken from his quarters, on Rhode Island, by the address
and enterprise of Col. Barton, and conveyed prisoner to the continent.

General Burgoyne, who commanded the northern British army, took possession of
Ticonderoga, which had been abandoned by the Americans. He pushed his
successes, crossed Lake George, and encamped upon the banks of the Hudson, near
Saratoga. His progress however was checked, by the defeat of Col. Baum, near
Bennington, in which the undisciplined militia, under General Stark, displayed
unexampled bravery, and captured almost the whole detachment. The militia
assembled from all parts of New England, to stop the progress of General
Burgoyne.

These, with the regular troops, formed a respectable army, commanded by
General Gates. After two severe actions, in which the Generals Lincoln and
Arnold, behaved with uncommon gallantry, and were wounded, General Burgoyne
found himself enclosed with brave troops, and was forced to surrender his whole
army, amounting to five thousand seven hundred and fifty-two men, into the
hands of the Americans. (...) General Burgoyne (...) Canada, his army consisted
of 10,000 men.
This memorable event happened on the 17th of October, 1777: and diffused an
universal joy over America, and laid a foundation for the treaty with France.

But before these transactions, the main body of the British forces had
embarked at New York, sailed up the Chesapeek, and landed at the head of Elk
river. The army soon began their march for Philadelphia. General Washington had
determined to oppose them, and for this purpose made a stand, first at Red Clay
Creek, and then upon the heights, near Brandy wine Creek. Here the armies
engaged, and the Americans were overpowered, and suffered great loss. The enemy
soon pursued their march, and took possession of Philadelphia, toward the
close of September.

Not long after, the two armies were again engaged at Germantown, and in the
beginning of the action, the Americans had the advantage; but by some unlucky
accident. The fortune of the day was turned in favor of the British. Both
sides suffered considerable losses; on the side of the Americans, was General
Nash.

In an attack upon the forts at Mud-Island and Red Bank, the Hessians were
unsuccessful, and their commander, Col. Donop, killed. The British also lost
the Augusta, a ship of the line. But the forts were afterward taken, and the
navigation of the Delaware opened. General Washington was reinforced, with a
part of the troops, which had composed the northern army, under General Gates;
and both armies retired to winter quarters.

In October, the same month in which General Burgoyne was taken at Saratoga,
General Vaughan, with a small fleet, sailed up Hudson's river, and wantonly
burnt Kingston, a beautiful Dutch settlement, on the west side of the river.

The beginning of the next year, 1778, was distinguished by a treaty of
alliance between France and America; by which we obtained a powerful and
generous ally. When the English ministry were informed that this treaty was on
foot, they dispatched commissioners to America, to attempt a reconciliation.
But America would not now accept their offers. Early in the spring, Count de
Estaing, with a fleet of fifteen sail of the line, was sent by the court of
France to assist America.

General How left the army, and returned to England; the command then devolved
upon Sir Henry Clinton.

In June the British army left Philadelphia, and marched for New York. On their
march they were annoyed by the Americans; and at Monmouth, a very regular
action took place, between part of the armies; the enemy were repulsed with
great loss. General Lee, for his misconduct that day, was suspended, and was
never afterward permitted to join the army.

General Lee's conduct, at several times before this, had been very suspicious.
In December 1776, he lay at Chatham, about eleven miles from Elizabeth Town,
with a brigade of troops, when a great quantity of baggage was stored at
Elizabeth Town, under a guard of only five hundred Hessians. General Lee was
apprised of this, and might have surprised the guard and taken the baggage. But
he neglected the opportunity, and after several marches and counter marches
between Troy, Chatham and Morris Town, he took up his quarters at, or near
White's tavern, where he was surprised and taken prisoner by a party of the
British horse. He was heard to say repeatedly, that General Washington would
ruin a fine army. It was suspected that he had designs to supplant the General,
and his friends attempted to place him at the head of the army. General
Washington's prudent delays, and cautious movements, afforded General Lee's
friends many opportunities to spread reports unfavourable to his character. It
was insinuated, with some success, that General Washington wanted courage and
abilities. Reports of this kind, at one time, rendered General Lee very
popular, and it is supposed he wished to frustrate rate General Washington's
plans, in order to increase the suspicions already entertained of his
generalship, and turn the public clamor in his own favor. His conduct at
Monmouth, was, by some, supposed to have proceeded from such a design; for he
commanded the flower of the American army, and was not destitute of courage.

In August, General Sullivan, with a large body of troops, attempted to take
possession of Rhode Island, but did not succeed. Soon after, the stores and
shipping at Bedford in Massachusetts, were burnt by a party of the British
troops. The same year, Savannah, the capital of Georgia, was taken by the
British, under the command of Colonel Campbell.

In the following year (1779) General Lincoln was appointed to the command of
the southern army.

Governor Tryon and Sir George Collier made an incursion into Connecticut, and
burnt, with wanton barbarity, the towns of Fairfield and Norwask. But the
American arms were crowned with success, in a bold attack upon Stoney Point,
which was surprised and taken by the brave General Wayne, in the night of the
15th of July. Five hundred men were made prisoners, with little loss on either
side.

A party of British forces attempted this summer, to build a fort on Penobscot
river, for the purpose of cutting timber in the neighboring forest. A plan was
laid in Massachusetts to dislodge them and a considerable fleet collected for
the purpose. But the plan ^ailed of success, and the whole marine force fell
into the hands of the British, except some vessels which were burnt by the
Americans themselves.

In October, General Lincoln and Count de Estaing made an assault upon
Savannah; but they were repulsed with considerable loss. In this action, the
celebrated Polish Count Pulaski, who had acquired the reputation of a brave
soldier, was mortally wounded.

In this summer, General Sullivan marched with a body of troops, into the
Indian country, in the western part of New York State, and burnt and destroyed
all their provisions and settlements that fell in their way.

On the opening of the campaign, the next year, (1780) the British troops left
Rhode Island. All expedition under General Clinton and Lord Cornwallis, was
undertaken against Charleston, South Carolina, where General Lincoln commanded.
This town, after a close siege of about six weeks, was surrendered to the
British commander; and General Lincoln, and the whole American garrison, were
made prisoners.

General Gates was appointed to the command in the southern department, and
another army collected. In August, Lord Cornwallis attacked the American troops
at Camden, in South Carolina, and routed them with considerable loss. He
afterward marched through the southern states, and supposed them entirely
subdued.

The same summer, the British troops made frequent incursions from New York
into the Jersies; ravaging and plundering the country.

In July, a French fleet, under Monsieur d'Ternay, with a body of land forces,
commanded by Count de Rochambeau, arrived at RhodeIsland, to the great joy of
the Americans.

This year was also distinguished by the infamous treason of General Arnold.
General Washington having some business to transact at Weathersfield in
Connecticut, left Arnold to command the important post of West Point; which
guards a pass in Hudson's river, about sixty miles from New York. Arnold's
conduct in the city of Philadelphia, the preceding winter, had been censured;
and the treatment he received in consequence, had given him offense.

He determined to take revenge; and for this purpose, he entered into a
negotiation with Sir Henry Clinton, to deliver West Point, and the army, into
the hands of the British. While General Washington was absent, he dismounted
the cannon in some of the forts, and took other steps to render the taking of
the post easy for the enemy.

But by a providential discovery, the whole plan was defeated. Major Andre, aid
to General Clinton, a brave officer, who had been sent up the river as a spy,
to concert the plan of operations with Arnold, was taken, condemned by a court
martial, and executed. Arnold made his escape, by getting on board the Vulture,
a British vessel which lay in the river. His conduct has stamped him with
infamy; and like all traitors, he is despised by all mankind. The name of
Benedict Arnold has become proverbially contemptible. General Washington
arrived in camp just after Arnold made his escape, and restored order in the
garrison.

After the defeat of General Gates in Carolina, General Green was appointed to
command in the southern department. General Green was born at Warwick, in the
State of Rhode Island, about the year 1741, of reputable parents, belonging to
the society of Friends. He was endowed with an (...) degree of judgment and
penetration; his disposition was benevolent, and his (...) (...). At an early
period of life, he was chosen a member of the assembly, (...).

After the battle of Lexington, three regiments of troops were raised in Rhode
Island, and the command of them given to Mr. Green, who was nominated a
Brigadier General. His merit and abilities, both in council and in the field,
were soon noticed by General Washington, and in August 1776, he was appointed
Major General. His action with the British troops at Eutaw Spring was o^e of
the best conducted, and most successful engagements that took place during the
war. For this General Green was honored by Congress with a British standard
and a gold medal. As a reward for his particular services in the southern
department, the state of Georgia presented him with a large and valuable tract
of land on an Island near Savannah.

After the war he returned to his native state. The contentions and bad policy
of that state, induced him to leave it and retire to his estate in Georgia.

He removed his family in October 1785; but in June the next summer, the
extre^^t heat, and the fatigue of a walk, brought on a disorder that put a
period to his life, on the 19th of the same month. He lived universally loved
and respected, and his death was universally lamented.

His body was intered in Savannah, and the funeral procession attended by the
Cincinnati.


From this period, things in that quarter wore a more favorable aspect.
Colonel Tarleton, the active commander of the British legion, was defeated by
General Morgan, the intrepid commander of the riflemen.

After a variety of movements the two armies met at Guilford, in Carolina. Here
was one of the best fought actions during the w^^ General Green and Lord
Cornwallis exerted themselves at the head of their respective armies; and
although the Americans were obliged to retire from the field, yet the British
army suffered an immense loss, and could not pursue the victory. The action
happened on the 15th March, 1781.

In the spring, Arnold, the traitor, who was made a Brigadier General in the
British service, with a small number of troops, sailed for Virginia, and
plundered the country. This called the attention of the French fleet to that
quarter, and a naval engagement took place between the English and French, in
which some of the English ships were much damaged, and one entirely disabled.

After the battle of Guilford, General Green moved toward South Carolina, to
drive the British from their posts in that state. Here Lord Rawdon obtained an
inconsiderable advantage over the Americans near Camden. But General Green
more than recovered this disadvantage, by the brilliant and successful action
at the Eutaw Springs; where General Marian distinguished himself, and the brave
Col. Washington was wounded and taken prisoner.

Lord Cornwallis, finding General Green successful in Carolina, marched to
Virginia collected his forces, and fortified himself in Yorktown. In the mean
time Arnold made an incursion into Connecticut, burnt a part of New London,
took Fort Griswold by storm, and put the garrison to the sword. The garrison
consisted chiefly of men collected from the little town of Groton, which, by
the savage cruelty of the British officer who commanded the attack, lost, in
one hour, almost all its heads of families. The brave Col. Ledyard, who
commanded the fort, was slain with his own sword after he had surrendered.

The Marquis de la Fayette, The Marquis de la Fayette was born about the year
1757. At the age of nineteen he espoused the cause (...) America, with all the
ardor which the most generous philanthropy could inspire. At a very early
period of the war, he dermined to embark from hi^ ^^^tive country, for the
United States. Before he could complete his intention, into (...) arrived in
Europe, that the American insurgents, reduced to two thousand men, (...) ^^^ing
though Jersey before a British force of thirty thousand regulars. The n^ws so
effectually extinguished the little credit which America had in Europe, in
(...) of the year 1777, that the commissioners of Congress at Paris, though
they had previously encouraged his project, could not procure a vessel to
forward his intentions. Under these circumstances, they thought it but honest
to dissuade him from the present prosecution of his perilous enterprise. It was
in vain they acted so candid a part. The flame which America had kindled in his
breast, could not be extinguished by her misfortunes. 'H^th^^^^,' said he, in
the true spirit of patriotism, 'I have only cherished your cause -- now I am
going to serve it. The lower it is in the opinion of the people, the greater
will be the effect of my departure; and since you cannot get a vessel, I shall
purchase and fit out (...) to carry your dispatches to congress and myself to
America.' Whilst this vessel was preparing he visited England, was introduced
to the king's minister and many of the nobility and first characters of the
nation. By this means he was enabled to form a good judgment of men and things
there. He embarked and arrived in Charleston early in the year 1777. Congress
soon conferred on him the rank of major general. He accepted the appointment,
but not without exacting two conditions, which displayed the elevation of his
spirit: the one, that he should serve on his own expense; the other, that (...)
should begin his services as a volunteer.

He was soon appointed to command an expedition to Canada. The plan was to
cross the lakes on the ice; the object, to seize Montreal and St. John's. He was
now at the age of twenty, and must have keenly experienced the allurements of
independent command: But his cool judgment, and honest heart, restrained him
from indulging a passion for military same, under circumstances which might
have injured the cause which he had so zealously espoused. He found that, in
case of his proceeding, the army under his command would be in danger of
experiencing a ^ate similar to that of the unfortunate Burgoyne. With a
boldness of judgment that would have done honor to the most experienced
general, and without advancing beyond Albany, he relinquished the expedition.
Soon (...) he received the thanks of Congress for his prudence.

In the (...) campaigns which succeeded the arrival of the Marquis de la
Fayette in America, he gave repeated proofs of his military talents in the
middle and eastern states; (...) the events that took place under his command
in Virginia, contributed most to his military glory.

Sometime after the capture of Cornwallis, the Marquis de la Fayette went to
France, (...) he used his endeavors to promote the commercial and political
interest o^ these (...), and to effect a revolution in his native country, in
favor of liberty. It remains for (...) (...) to pou^^ray the virtues and
exploits of this truly great man -- this friend to (...) nature -- this second
WASHINGTON.


the brave and generous nobleman, whose services command the gratitude of every
American, had been dispatched with about two thousand light infantry, from the
main army, to watch the motions of Lord Cornwallis in Virginia. He prosecuted
this expedition with the greatest military ability. Although his force was much
inferior to that of the enemy he obliged them to leave Richmond and
Williamsburgh, and to seek protection under their shipping.

About the last of August, Count de Grass arrived in the Chesapeek and blocked
up the British troops at Yorktown. Admiral Greaves, with a British fleet,
appeared off the Capes, and an action succeeded; but it was not decisive.

General Washington had before this time moved the main body of his army,
together with the French troops, to the southward; and as soon as he heard of
the arrival of the French fleet in the Chesaspeek, he made rapid marches to the
head of Elk, where embarking, the troops soon arrived at Yorktown.

A close siege immediately commenced, and was carried on with such vigor, by
the combined forces of America and France, that lord Cornwallis was obliged to
surrender. This glorious event, which took place on the 19th of October, 1781,
decided the contest in favor of America; and laid the foundation of a general
peace.

A few months after the surrender of Cornwallis, the British evacuated all
their posts in South Carolina and Georgia and retired to the main army in New
York.

The next spring (1782) Sir Guy Carleton arrived in New York, and took the
command of the British army in America. Immediately on his arrival, he
acquainted General Washington and Congress, that negociations for peace had
commenced at Paris.

On the 30th of November, 1782, the provisional articles of peace, and
reconciliation, between Great Britain and the American States, were signed at
Paris; by which Great Britain acknowledged the independence and sovereignty of
the United States of America. These articles were ratified by a definitive
treaty, September 3d, 1783. This peace was negociated on the part of Great
Britain by David Hartley, Esquire: and on the part of the United States by John
Adams, John Jay, John Jay, Esquire. is a descendent of one of the French Protestant
Emigrants, who came to America, in consequence of the Revolution of the Edict
of Nantz, in 1685. It is remarkable that among the descendants of these
Emigrants, some of whom settled in New York, and some in Boston, there have
been the following eminent characters; James, B^wdoin, Esquire. who had been
Governor of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and at his death was President
of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences; Henry Laurens, Esquire. who has been
President of Congress, and Ambassador to a foreign court. Ellas Bon^inot, Esquire.
who has been; President of Congress, and is now a Representative; and John Jay,
Esquire. who has been President of Congress, Ambassador to a foreign Court, and is
now Chief Justice of the American States.
and Benjamin Franklin, Dr. Franklin was born in Boston, January 6th, 1706, O.
S. He was educated to the business of printing. In the first 24 years of his
life he passed through an uncommon variety of scenes, which he improve^ to
valuable purposes. He early discovered a strong and distinguishing mind, and a
fertile, inventive genius. About the age of 24 he married Miss Read of
Philadelphia* where he had established himself (...) a printer. In 1736 he was
chosen Clerk of the General Assembly of Pennsylvania; and the year following
was appointed Post Master in Philadelphia. In 1744, he broached the i^ea of the
American Philosophical Society, and had the p^easure to find it meet with all
the success he could desire. He was the principal instrument also in planning
and establishing the Academy of Philadelphia, from which have sprung the
College and University in that city.

In 1747, and for twenty years after, successively, he was chosen a
representative to the Assembly for the city of Philadelphia; in which situation
he was highly respected, and singularly useful. He was appointed joint Post
Master General with Mr. William Hunter in 1753. He was greatly instrumental in
carrying into effect Dr. ^ond's plan for a hospital in Philadelphia, the
advantages of which have been ex^ensively experienced. By this time his
character as a philosopher was known in Europe as well as America, and he
received the honorary degree of Master of Arts, from Yale and Harva^^ Colleges.

In 1754, he was appointed one of the Commissioners from Pennsylvania to attend
the celebrated Albany Congress, in order to devise a plan for defending the
country against the French. Here he drew up his. "Albany plan of Union," which
was unanimously agreed to by congress, but, though wisely adapted to preserve
the harmony between Great Britain and her Colonies, was ultimately rejected.

In 1757, the Assembly of Pennsylvania, indignant a^ the obstinacy of the
Governors, who were shackled with instructions not to assent to any tax bill,
that did not ^xempt the estates of the Proprietors, from contributing to the
public service, determined to send an agent to London, to petition the King for
redress. Mr. Franklin was appointed for this purpose, and ably negociated the
business, for which, on his return to Philadelphia, he received the thanks of
the General Assembly.

His distinguished literary reputation, procured him while in England, the
honorary title of Doctor of Laws, from Edinburgh and Oxford Universities.

Sometime after this, he was again sent to England, by the Assembly of
Pennsylvania, with a petition to have a new form of Government established,
(...) to be taken under the roval protection. Before his return to America, he
traveled, in 17^6, into Germany, and in 1767, into France; and wherever he
appeared, he was receive with the highest respect and veneration. His
endeavors to prevent the ^^action of the st^mp act, the ability (...) which he
sustained his examination at the bar of the House of Commons, his obtain^^ and
forwarding to Boston, the insidious letters of Governor Hutchinson, procured
(...) him, on his return to America, the most unbounded applause of his
countrymen. (...) was soon elected a member of Congress; and in 1776, was
chosen with John Adams and Edward Rutledge, Esquires, a Committee of Congress
to wait on Lord How, and to ^^quire into the extent of his powers to treat of
the restoration of peace. Lord How ^^^ing expressed his concern at being
obliged to distress those whom he so much (...), Dr. Franklin assured him, that
the Americans, out of reciprocal regard, would endeavor ^o lessen, as much as
possible, the pain he might feel on their account, by taking the utmost care of
themselves.

In 1776, a convention was called, in Pennsylvania, to establish a new form of
Government. Dr. Franklin was appointed President. The latter end of the same
year (...) ^^^sent to France, where, with the assistance of Mr. S^^as Dean, he
negociated a treaty (...) France, Feb. 1778.

We have already mentioned his being one of the three Commissioners, who
negociated the peace of 1783. He returned to America in 1785, and was chosen
President of the Supreme Executive Council of Pennsylvania, and in 1787, was
appointed a delegate from that (...), to the august body which formed the
present frame of government of the United States.

On the 17th of April, 1790, after a long and painful illness, he resigned a
life, which had been singularly devoted to the welfare of his country and the
good of mankind.

Among the many testimonies of respect paid to his memory, the Congress of the
United States, and the National Assembly of France, went into mourning on his
death.

Dr. Franklin possessed an original genius. The faculties of his mind,
qualified him to ^^^^trate into every science; and his singular and unremitting
diligence, left no field of knowledge unexplored. He was eminently
distinguished as a politician, and a scholar, and if possible more so as a man
and a citizen. He was great in common things, and his life was useful beyond
most men that have lived. The whole tenor of his life was a perpet^^l lecture
against the idle, the extravagant and the proud. It was his principal aim to
(...) mankind with a love of industry, temperance and frugality. By a judicious
division of time, he acquired the art of doing every thing to advantage. In
whatever situation (...) placed, by chance of design, he extracted something
useful for himself or others. (...) manners were easy and accommodating, and
his address winning and respectful. All who knew him speak of him as an
agreeable man; and all who have heard of him, (...) him as a very useful one. A
man so wise and so amiable, could not but have many admiress and many friends.
(...)


Esquires.

Thus ended a long and arduous conflict, in which Great Britain expended near
an hundred millions of money, with an hundred thousand lives, and won nothing.
America endured every cruelty and distress from her enemies; lost many lives
and much treasure; but delivered herself from a foreign dominion, and gained a
rank among the nations of the earth.

Holland acknowledged the independence of the United States on the 19th of
April 1782; Sweden, February 5th 1783; Denmark the 25th of February; Spain, in
March, and Russia in July 1783.

No sooner was peace restored by the definitive treaty, and the British troops
withdrawn from the country, than the United States began to experience the
defects of their general government. While an enemy was in the country, fear,
which had first impelled the colonies to associate in mutual defense, continued
to operate as a band of political union. It gave to the resolutions and
recommendations of Congress the force of laws, and generally commanded a ready
acquiescence on the part of the state legislatures. Articles of confederation
and perpetual union had been framed in Congress, and submitted to the
consideration of the states, in the year 1778. Some of the states immediately
acceded to them; but others, which had not unappropriated lands, hesitated to
subscribe a compact, which would give an advantage to the states which
possessed large tracts of unlocated lands, and were thus capable of a great
superiority in wealth and population. All objections however had been overcome,
and by the accession of Maryland in March 1781, the articles of confederation
were ratified, as the frame of government for the United States.

These articles however were framed during the rage of war, when a principle of
common safety supplied the place of a coercive power in government; by men who
could have had no experience in the art of governing an extensive country, and
under circumstances the most critical and embarrassing. To have offered to the
people, at that time, a system of government armed with the powers necessary to
regulate and control the contending interests of thirteen States, and the
possessions of millions of people, might have raised a jealousy between the
states or in the minds of the people at large, that would have weakened the
operations of war, and perhaps have rendered a (...) impracticable* Hence the
numerous defects of the confederation.

On the conclusion of peace, these defects began to be felt. Each state assumed
the right of disputing the propriety of the resolutions of Congress, and the
interest of an individual state was placed in opposition to the common interest
of the union. In addition to this sour^^ of division, a jealousy of the powers
of Congress began to ^e excited in the minds of people.

The jealousy of the privileges of freemen, had been roused by the oppressive
act of the British parliament; and no sooner had the danger from this quarter
ceased, than the fears of people changed their object, and were turned against
their own rulers.

In this situation, there were not wanting men of industry and talents, who had
been enemies to the revolution, and who embraced the opportunity to multiply
the apprehensions of people and increase the popular discontents. A remarkable
instance of this happened in Connecticut. As soon as the tumults of war had
subsided, an attempt was made to convince the people, that the act of Congress
passed in 1778, granting to the officers of the army, half play for life, was
highly unjust and tyrannical; and that it was but the first step toward the
establishment of pensions and an uncontrolable desp tism. The act of Congress,
passed in 1783* commuting half pay for life, for five years full pay, was
designed to appease the apprehensions of people, and to convince them that this
gratuity was intended merely to indemnify the officers for their losses by the
depreciation of the paper currency, and not to establish a precedent for the
granting of pensions. This act however did not satisfy the people, who supposed
that the officers had been generally indemnified for the loss of their pay, by
the grants made them from time to time by the legislatures of the several
states. Besides, the act while it gave five years full pay to the officers,
allowed but one years pay to the privates: a distinction which had great
influence in exciting and continuing the popular ferment* and one that turned a
large share of the public rage against the officers themselves.

The moment an alarm was raised respecting this act of Congress, them enemies
of our independence became active in blowing up the flame, by spreading reports
unfavourable to the general government and tending to create public
dissentions. -- Newspapers, in some parts of the country, were filled with
inflammatory publications; while false reports and groundless insinuations were
industriously circulated to the prejudice of Congress and the officers of the
late army. Among a people feelingly above to every thing that could affect the
rights for which they had been contending these reports could not fail of
having a powerful effect; the clamor soon became general; the officers of the
army it was believed, had attempted to raise their fortunes on the distresses
of their fellow citizens, and Congress become the tyrants of their country.

Connecticut was the seat of this uneasiness; although other states were much
agitated on the occasion. But the inhabitants of that state, accustomed to
order and a due subordination to the laws, did not proceed to outrages: they
took their usual mode of collecting the sense of the state -- assembled in town
meetings -- appointed committees to meet in convention, and consult what
measures should be adopted to procure a redress of their grievances. In this
convention, which was held (...) Middletown, some nugatory resolves were
passed, expressing the disapprobation of the half pay act, and the subsequent
commutation of the grant for five years whole pay. The same spirit also
discovered itself in the assembly at their October session 1783. A remonstrance
against the acts in favor of the officers, was framed in the house of
representatives and notwithstanding the upper house refused to concur in the
measure, it was sent to congress.

During this situation of affairs, the public odium against the officers, was
augmented by another circumstance. The officers, just before the disbanding of
the army, had formed a society, called by the name of the Cincinnati, after the
Roman Dictator, Cincinnatus.

Whatever were the real views of the framers of this institution, its design
was generally understood to be harmless and honorable. The (...) views of the
society could not however screen it from popular jealousy. A spirited pamphlet
appeared in South Carolina, the avowed production of Mr. Burke, one of the
Judges of the supreme court in the state, in which the author attempted to
prove that the principles, on which the society was formed, would, in process
of time, originate and establish an order of nobility in this country, which
would be repugnant to the genius of our republican governments and dangerous to
liberty. This pamphlet appeared in Connecticut, during the commotions raised by
the half pay and commutation acts, and contributed not a little to spread the
flame of opposition.

Notwithstanding the discontents of the people were general, and ready to burst
forth in sedition, yet men of information, viz. the officers of government, the
clergy, and persons of liberal education, were mostly opposed to the
unconstitutional steps taken by the committees and convention at Middletown.
They supported the propriety of the measures of Congress, both by conversation
and writing, proved that such grants to the army were necessary to keep the
troops together, and that the expense would not be enormous nor oppressive.
During the close of the year 1783, every possible exertion was made to
enlignten the people, and such was the effect of the arguments used by the
minority, that in the beginning of the following year, the opposition (...),
the committees were dismissed, and tranquillity restored to the state. In May,
the legislature were able to carry several measures which had before been
extremely unpopular. An act was passed granting the impost of five per cent* to
Congress; another giving great encouragement to commerce; and several towns
were incorporated with extensive privileges, for the purpose of regulating the
exports of the state, and facilitating the collection of debts.

The opposition to the congressional acts in favor of the officers, and to the
order of the Cincinnati, did not rise to the same pitch in the other states as
in Connecticut; yet it produced much disturbance i^ Massachusetts, and some
others. Jealousy of power had been universally spread among the people of the
United States. The destruction of the old forms of governments, and the
licentiousness of war, had, in a great measure, broken their habits of
obedience; their passions had been inflamed by the cry of despotism; and like
sentinels, (...) have been suddenly surprised by the approach of an enemy, the
(...) of a leaf was sufficient to give them an alarm. This spirit of jealousy,
operated with other causes to relax the energy of federal oppositions.

During the war, vast sums of paper currency had been emitted by Congress, and
large quantities of specie had been introduced, toward the close of the war,
by the French army, and the Spanish trade. Th^s plenty of money enabled the
states to comply with the first requisitions of Congress; so that during two or
three years, the federal treasury was, in some measure, supplied. But when the
danger of war (...) ceased, and the vast importations of foreign goods had
lessened the quantity of circulating specie, the states began to be very (...)
in furnishing their proportion of moneys. The annihilation of the credit of the
paper bills had totally stopped their circulation, and the sp^^^ was leaving
the country in cargoes, for remittances to Great Britain still the luxurious
habits of the people, contracted during the war, called for new supplies of
goods, and private gratification seconded the narrow policy of state interest
in defeating the operations of the general government.

Thus the revenues of Congress were annually diminishing; some of the states
wholly neglecting to make provision for paying the interest of the national
debt; others making but a partial provision, (...) the scanty supplies received
from a few of the richest states, would hardly satisfy the demands of the civil
list.

This weakness of the federal government, in conjunction with the flood of
certificates or public securities, which Congress could neither fund nor pay,
occasioned them to depreciate to a very inconsiderable value. The officers and
soldiers of the late army, and those who furnished supplies for public
exigencies, were obliged to receive for wages these certificates, or promistary
notes, which passed at a fifth, (...) eighth or a tenth of their nominal value;
being thus deprived at once of the greatest part of the reward due for their
services. Some indeed profited by speculations in these evidences of the public
debt; but such as were under a necessity of parting with them, were robbed of
that support which they had a right to expect and demand from their countrymen.

Pennsylvania indeed made provision for paying the interest of her debts, both
state and federal; assuming her supposed proportion of the continental debt,
and giving the creditors of her own state notes in exchange for those of the
United States. The resources of that state are immense, but she was not able to
make punctual payments, even in a depreciated paper currency.

Massachusetts, in her zeal to comply fully with the requisitions of Congress,
and satisfy the demands of her own creditors, laid a heavy tax upon the people.
This was the immediate cause of the rebellion in that state, in 1786. But a
heavy debt lying on the state, added to burdens of the same nature, upon almost
every corporation within it; a decline, or rather all extinction of public
credit; a relaxation and corruption of manners, and a free use of foreign
luxuries; a decay of trade and manufactures, with a prevailing scarcity of
money; and, above all, individuals involved in debt to each other. These were
the real, though more remote causes of the insurrection. It was the tax which
the people were required to pay, that caused them to f^^l the evils which we
have enumerated -- this called forth all their other grievances; and the first
act of violence committed, was the burning or destroying of the tax bill. This
sedition threw the state into a convulsion which lasted about a year; courts of
justice were violently obstructed; the collection of debts was suspended; and a
body of armed troops, under the command of General Lincoln, was employed during
the winter of 1786, to disperse the insurgents. Yet so numerous were the latter
in the counties of Worcester, Hampshir^ and (...), and so obstinately combined
to oppose the execution of law by (...), that the governor and council of the
state thought proper not (...) entrust General Lincoln with military powers,
except to act on the defensive, and to repel force with force, in case the
insurgents (...) him. The leaders of the rebels, however, were not men (...)
(...); they were desperate, but without fortitude; and while they were
supported with a superior force, they appeared to be impro^^ed with that
conciousness of guilt, which awes the most daring wretch, and makes him shrink
from his purpose. This appears by the conduct of a large party of the rebels
before the magazine at Springfield; where General Shepard, with a small guard,
was stationed to protect the continental stores. The insurgents appeared upon
the plain, with a vast superiority of numbers, but a few shot from the (...)
made the multitude retreat in disorder, with the loss of four men. This
spirited conduct of General Shepard, with the industry, perseverence and
prudent firmness of General Lincoln, dispersed the (...) -- drove the leaders
from the state, and restored tranquillity. A^ (...) of indemnity was passed in
the legislature for all the insurgents, except a few of the leaders, on
condition they should become ^^^eable subjects and take the oath of allegiance.
The leaders afterward petitioned for pardon, which, from motives of policy,
was (...) by the legislature. (...) elegant and impartial History of this
Rebellion, by George Richa^^ (...) (...) Esquire.


But the loss of public credit, popular disturbances and insurrections, (...)
not the only evils which were generated by the peculiar circumstances of the
times. The emissions of bills of credit and tender laws, were added to the
black catalogue of political disorders.

The expedient of supplying the deficiences of specie, by emissions of paper
bills, was adopted very early in the colonies. The expedi^^ was obvious and
produced good effects. In a new country, (...) population is rapid, and the
value of lands increasing, the far^^^^ finds an advantage in paying legal
interest for money; for if he (...) pay the interest by his profits, the
increasing value of his lands (...) a few years, discharge the principal.

(...) no colony was this advantage more sensibly experienced than in
Pennsylvania. The emigrations to that province were numerous -- the natural
population rapid -- and these circumstances combined, advanced the value of
real property to an astonishing degree. As the first set^^^^ there, as well as
in other provinces, were poor, the purchase of a few foreign articles drained
them of specie. Indeed for many years, the balance of trade ^^st have
necessarily been greatly against the colonies.

But bills of cedit, emitted by the state and loaned to the industrious
inhabitants, supplied the want of specie, and enabled the farmer to (...)
stock. These bills were generally a legal tender in all colonial or private
contracts, and the sums issued did not generally exceed the quantity requisite
for a medium of trade; they retained their full nominal value in the purchase
of commodities. But as they were not received by the British merchants, in
payment of their goods, there (...) a great demand for specie and bills, which
occasioned (...) latter at (...) times to appreciate. Thus was introduced a
difference between the English sterling money and the currencies of the
colonies, which remains to this day. A Dollar in Ste^^ing money, is 4^6. But
the price of a Dollar rose in New England (...) in New York to (...) New
Jersey, Pennsylvania and Maryland to (...) in North Carolina to (...) in South
Carolina and George (...) to 4^8. This (...) between paper and specie, (...)
afterward to exist in (...).


The advantages the colonies had derived from bills for credit, under the
British government, suggested to Congress, in 1775, the idea of issuing bills
for the purpose of carrying on the war. And this wa^ perhaps their only
expedient. Money could not be raised by taxation -- it could not be borrowed.
The first emissions had no other effect upon the medium of commerce, than to
drive the specie from circulation. But when the paper substituted for specie,
^ad, by repeated emissions, augmented the sum in circulation, much beyond the
usual sum of specie, the bills began to loose their value. The depreciation
continued in proportion to the sums emitted, until seventy, and even one
hundred and fifty nominal paper dollars, were hardly an equivalent for one
Spanish milled dollar. Still, from the year 1775 to 178^, this depreciating
paper currency was almost the only medium of trade. It supplied the place of
specie, and enabled Congress to support a numerous army; until the sum in
circulation amounted to two hundred millions of dollars. But about the year
1780, specie began to be plentiful, being introduced by the French army, a
private trade with the Spanish islands, and an illicit intercourse with the
British garrison at New York. This circumstance accelerated the depreciation of
paper bills, until their value had sunk almost to nothing. In 1781, the
merchants and brokers in the southern states, apprehensive of the approaching
sat of the currency, pushed immense quantities of it suddenly into New England
-- made vast purchases of goods in Boston -- and instantly the bills vanished
from circulation.

The whole history of this continental paper is a history of public and private
frauds. Old specie debts were often paid in a depreciated currency -- and even
new contracts for a few weeks on days were often discharged with a small part
of the value received. From this plenty and fluctuating state of the medium,
sprung hosts of speculators and itinerant traders, who left their honest
occupations for the prospect of immense gains, in a fraudulent business, that
depended on no fixed principles, and the profits of which could be reduced to
no certain calculations.

To increase these evils, a project was formed to fix the prices of articles,
and restrain persons from giving or receiving more for any commodity than the
price stated by authority. These regulating acts were reprobated by every man
acquainted with commerce and finance; as they were intended to prevent an
effect without removing the cause. To attempt to fix the value of money, while
streams of bills were incessantly flowing from the treasury of the United
States, was as ridiculous as an attempt to restrain the ^^^ing of wa^ ^n rivers
amidst showers of rain.

Notwithstanding all opposition, some states framed and attempted to enforce
these regulating acts. The effect was, a momentary apparent stand in the price
of articles; innumerable acts of collusion and evasion among the dishonest;
numberless injuries done to the honest; and finally a total disregard of all
such regulations, and the consequential contempt of laws and the authority of
the magistrate.

During these fluctuations of business, occasioned by the variable value of
money, people lost sight, in some measure, of the steady principles which had
before governed their intercourse with each otherSpeculation followed and
relaxed the rigor of commercial obligations.

Industry likewise had suffered by the flood of money which had deluged the
states. The prices of produce had risen in proportion to the quantity of money
in circulation, and the demand for the commodities of the country. This made
the acquisition of money easy, and indolence and luxury, with their train of
desolating consequences, spread themselves among all descriptions of people.

But as soon as hostilities between Great Britain and America were suspended,
the scene was changed. The bills emitted by congress had for sometime before
ceased to circulate; and the specie of the country was soon drained off to pay
for foreign goods, the importations of which exceeded all calculation. Within
two years from the close of the war, a scarcity of money was the general cry.
The merchants found it impossible to collect their debts, and make punctual
remittances to their creditors in Great Britain; and the consumers were driven
to the necessity of retrenching their superfluities in living, and of returning
to their ancient habits of industry and economy.

This change was however progressive and slow. In many of the states which
suffered by the numerous debts they had contracted, and by the distresses of
war, the people called aloud for emissions of paper bills to supply the
deficiency of a medium. The depreciation of the continental bills, was a recent
example of the ill effects of such an expedient, and the impossibility of
supporting the credit of paper, was urged by the opposers of the measure as a
substantial argument against adopting it. But nothing would silence the popular
clamor; (...) many men of the first talents and eminence, united their voices
^ith that of the populace. Paper money had formerly maintained its credit, and
been of singular utility; and past experience, notwithstanding a change of
circumstances, was an argument in its favor that have down all opposition.

Pennsylvania, although one of the richest states in the union, was the first
to emit bills of credit, as a substitute for specie. But the revolution had
removed the necessity of it, at the same time, that it had destroyed the means
by which its former credit had been supported. Lands, at the close of the war,
were not rising in value -- bills on London could not so readily be purchased,
as while the province was dependent on Great Britain -- the state was split
into parties, one of which attempted to defeat the measures most popular with
the other -- and the depreciation of continental bills, with the injuries which
it had done to individuals, inspired a general distrust of all public promises.

Notwithstanding a part of the money was loaned on good landed security, and
the faith of that wealthy state pledged for the redemption of the whole at its
nominal value, yet the advantages of specie a^ a medium of commerce, especially
as an article of remittance to London, soon made a difference of ten per cent.
between the bills of credit and specie. This difference may be considered
rather as an appreciation of gold and silver, than a depreciation of paper; but
its effects, in a commercial state, must be highly prejudicial. It on^^ the
door to frauds of all kinds, and frauds are usually (...) on the honest and
unsuspecting, especially upon all classes of laborers.

North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia, had recourse to the fame wretched
expedient to supply themselves with money; not reflecting that industry,
frugality, and good commercial laws are the only means of turning the balance
of trade in favor of a country, and that this balance is the only permanent
source of solid wealth and ready money. But the bills they emitted shared a
worse fate than those of Pennsylvania; they expelled almost all the circulating
cash from the states; they lost a great part of their nominal value, they
impoverished the merchants, and embarrassed the planters.

The state of Virginia tolerated a base practice among the inhabitants of
cutting dollars and smaller pieces of silver, in order to prevent it from
leaving the state. This pernicious practice prevailed also in Georgia. A dollar
was usually cut in five pieces, and each passed by t^ll for a charter; so (...)
the man who ^ut (...) a quarter, of (...).


Maryland escaped the calamity of a paper currency. The house of delegates
brought forward a bill for the emission of bills of credit to a large amount;
but the senate firmly and successfully resisted the pernicious scheme. The
opposition between the two houses was violent and tumultuous; it threatened the
state with anarchy; but the question was carried to the people, and the good
sense of the senate finally prevailed.

New Jersey is situated between two of the largest commercial towns in America,
and consequently drained of specie. This state also emitted a large sum in
bills of credit, which served to pay the interest of the public debt; but the
currency depreciated, as in other states.

Rhode Island exhibited a melancholy proof of that licentiousness and anarchy
which always follows a relaxation of the moral principles. In a rage for
supplying the state with money, and filling every man's pocket without obliging
him to earn it by his diligence, the legislature passed an act for making one
hundred thousand pounds in bills; a sum much more than sufficient for a medium
of trade in that state, even without any specie. The merchants in Newport and
Providence opposed the act with firmness; and their opposition added fresh
vigor to the resolution of the assembly, and induced them to enforce the scheme
by a legal tender of a most extraordinary nature. They passed an act, ordaining
that if any creditor should refuse to take their bills, for any debt whatever,
the debtor might lodge the sum due, with a justice of the peace, who should
give notice of it in the public papers; and if the creditor did not appear and
receive the money within six months from the first notice, his debt should be
forfeited. This act astonished all honest men; and even the promoters of paper
money-making in other states, and other principles, reprobated this act of
Rhode Island, as wicked and oppressive. But the state was governed by faction.
During the cry for paper money, a number of boisterous, ignorant men, were
elected into the legislature, from the smaller towns in the state. Finding
themselves united with a majority in opinion, they formed and executed any plan
their inclination suggested; they opposed every measure that was agreeable to
the mercantile interest; they not only made bad laws to suit their own wicked
purposes, but appointed their own corrupt creatures to fill the judicial and
executive departments. Their money depreciated sufficiently to answer all their
vile purposes in the discharge of debts -- business almost totally ceased, all
confidence was lost, the state was thrown into confusion a^ home and was
execrated abroad.

Massachusetts Bay had the good fortune, amidst her political calamities, to
prevent an emission of bills of credit. New Hampshire made no paper: but in the
distresses which followed her loss of business after the war, the legislature
made houses, lumber, and most articles of produce, a legal tender in the
fulfillment of contracts. It is doubtless unjust to oblige a creditor to receive
any thing for his debt, which he had not in contemplation at the time of the
contract. But as the commodities which were to be a tender by law, in New
Hampshire, were of an intrinsic value, bearing some proportion to the amount of
the debt, the injustice of the law was less flagrant, than that which enforced
the tender of paper in Rhode Island. Indeed a similar law prevailed for some
time in Massachusetts; and in Connecticut it is optional with the creditor
either to imprison the debtor or take land on execution at a price to be fixed
by three indifferent freeholders; provided no other means of payment shall
appear to satisfy the demand. It must not however be omitted, that while the
most flourishing commercial states introduced a paper medium, to the great
injury of honest men, a bill for an emission of paper in Connecticut, where
there is very little specie, could never command more than one eighth of the
votes of the legislature. The movers of the bill have hardly escaped ridicule;
so generally is the measure reprobated as a source of frauds and public
mischief.

The legislature of New York, a state that had the least necessity and apology
for making paper money, as her commercial advantages always furnish her with
specie sufficient for a medium, issued a large sum in bills of credit, which
supported their value better than the currency of any other state. Still the
paper raised the value of specie* which is always in demand for exportation,
and this difference of exchange between paper and specie, ever exposes commerce
to most of the inconveniences resulting from a depreciated medium.

Such is the history of paper money thus far; a miserable substitute for real
coin, in a country where the reins of government are too weak to compel the
fulfillment of public engagements, and where all confidence in public faith is
totally destroyed.

While the states were thus endeavoring to repair the loss of specie, by empty
promises, and to support their business by shadows, rather than by reality, the
British ministry formed some commercial regulations that deprived them of the
profits of their trade to the West Indies and Great Britain. Heavy duties were
laid upon such articles as were remitted to the London merchants for their
goods, and such were the duties upon American bottoms, that the states were
almost wholly deprived of the carrying trade. A prohibition, was laid upon the
produce of the United States, shipped to the English West India Islands in
American built vessels, and in those manned by American seamen. These
restrictions fell heavy upon the eastern states, which depended much upon ship
building for the support of their trade; and they materially injured the
business of the other states.

Without a union that was able to form and execute a general system of
commercial regulations, some of the states attempted to impose ^^^^aints upon
the British trade that should indemnify the merchant for the losses he had
suffered, or induce the British ministry to enter into a commercial treaty and
relax the rigor of their navigation laws. These measures however produced
nothing but mischief. The states did not act in concert and the restraints laid
on the trade of one state, operated to throw the business into the hands of its
neighbor. Massachusetts, in her zeal to counteract the effect of the English
navigation laws, laid enormous duties upon British goods imported into that
state: but the other states did not adopt a similar measure; and the loss of
business soon obliged that state to repeal or suspend the law. Thus when
Pennsylvania laid heavy duties on British goods, Delaware and New Jersey made a
number of free ports to encourage the landing of goods within the limits of
those states; and the duties in Pennsylvania served no purpose, but to create
smuggling.

Thus divided, the states began to feel their weakness. Most of the
legislatures had neglected to comply with the requisitions of Congress for
furnishing the federal treasury; the resolves of Congress were disregarded; the
proposition for a general impost to be laid and collected by Congress was
negatived first by Rhode Island, and afterward by New York. The British troops
continued, under pretense of a breach of treaty on the part of America* to hold
possession of the forts on the frontiers of the states. Many of the states
individually were infested with popular commotions or iniquitous tender laws,
while they were oppressed with public debts; the certificates or public notes
had lost most of their value, and circulated merely as the objects of
speculation; Congres lost their respectability, and the United States, their
credit and importance.

In the midst of these calamities, a proposition was made in 1783, in the house
of delegates in Virginia, to appoint commissioners, to meet such as might be
appointed in the other states, who should form a system of commercial
regulations for the United States, and recommend it to the several legislatures
for adoption. Commissioners were accordingly appointed* and a request was made
to the legislatures of the other states to accede to the proposition.
Accordingly several of the states appointed commissioners who met at Annpolis
in the summer of 786, to consult what measures should be taken to unite the
states in some general and efficient commercial system. But (...) the states
were not all represented* and the powers of the commissioners were, in their
opinion, too limited to propose a system of regulations adequate to the
purposes of government, they agreed to recommend a general convent on to be
held at Philadelphia the next year* with powers to frame a general plan of
government for the United States. This measure appeared to the commissioners
absolutely necessary. The old confederation was essentially defective. It was
destitute of almost every principle necessary to give effect to legislation.

It was defective in the article of legislating over states, instead of
individuals. All history testifies that recommendations will not operate as
laws, and compulsion cannot be exercised over states, without violence, war and
anarchy. The confederation was also desti^^^ of a sanction to its laws. When
resolutions were passed in Congress* there was no power to compel obedience by
fine, by suspension of privileges or other means. It was also destitute of a
guarantee for the state governments. Had one state been invaded by its
neighbor, the union was not constitutionally bound to assist in repelling the
invasion, and supporting the constitution of the invaded state. The
confederation was further deficient in the principle of apportioning the quotas
of money to be furnished by each state; in a want of power to form commercial
laws, and to raise troops for the defense and security of the union; in the
equal suffrage of the states, which placed Rhode Island on a footing in
Congress with Virginia; and to crown all the defects, we may add the want of a
judiciary power, to define the laws of the union, and to reconcile the
contradictory decisions of a number of independent judicatories.

These and many inferior defects were obvious to the commissioners, and
therefore they urged a general convention, with powers to form and offer to the
consideration of the states, a system of general government that should be less
exceptionable. Accordingly in May, 1787, delegates from all the states, except
Rhode Island, assembled at Philadelphia, and chose General Washington for their
President. After four months deliberation, in which the clashing interests of
the several states, appeared in all their force, the convention agreed to
recommend the plan of federal government which we have already recited.

As soon as the plan of the federal constitution was submitted to the
legislatures of the several states, they proceeded to take measures for
collecting the sense of the people upon the propriety of adopting it. In the
small state of Delaware, a convention was called in November, which, after a
few days deliberation, ratified the constitution, without a dissenting voice.

In the convention of Pennsylvania, held the same month, there was a spirited
opposition to the new form of government. The debates were long and
interesting. Great abilities and firmness were displayed on both sides; but, on
the 13th of December, the constitution was received by two thirds of the
members. The minority were ^^^atisfied, and with an obstinacy that ill became
the representatives of a free people, published their reasons of dissent, which
were calculated to inflame a party already violent, and which, in fact,
produced (...) disturbances in the western part of the state.

In New Jersey, the convention which met in December, were unanimous in
adopting the constitution; as was likewise that of Georgia.

In Connecticut there was some opposition; but the constitution was on the 9th
of January 1788, ratified by three fourths of the ^^es in convention, and the
minority peaceably acquiesced in the de^^on.

In Massachusetts, the opposition was large and respectable. The convention,
consisting of more than three hundred delegates, were assembled in January, and
continued their debates, with great candor and liberality, about five weeks. At
length the question was carried (...) the constitution by a small majority, and
the minority, with that ^^^ly condescension which becomes great minds,
submitted to the ^^^^sure, and united to support the government.

In New Hampshire, the federal cause was for sometime doubtful. The greatest
number of the delegates in convention, were at first on beside of the
opposition; and some, who might have had their object^^^ removed by the
discussion of the subject, were instructed to reject the constitution. Although
the instructions of constituents cannot, on the true principles of
representation, be binding upon a deputy, in any legislative assembly, because
his constituents are but a part of the state, and have not heard the arguments
and objections of the whole, whereas his act is to affect the whole state, and
therefore is to be directed by the sense or wisdom of the whole, collected in
the legislative assembly; yet the delegates in the New Hampshire convention
conceived very erroneously, that the sense of the freemen in the towns, those
little dictricts, where no act of legislation can be performed, imposed a
restraint upon their own wills. This pernicious (...) the places, (...) (...)
infinite mischief.
An adjournment was therefore moved, and carried. This gave the people
opportunity to gain a farther knowledge of the merits of the constitution, and
at the second meeting of the convention, it was ratified by a respectable
majority.

In Maryland, several men of abilities appeared in the opposition, and were
unremitted in their endeavors to persuade the people, that the proposed plan
of government was artfully calculated to deprive them of their dearest rights;
yet in convention it appeared that five sixths of the voices were in favor of
it.

In South Carolina, the opposition was respectable; but two thirds of the
convention appeared to advocate and vote for the constitution.

In Virginia, many of the principal characters opposed the ratification of the
constitution with great abilities and industry. But after a full discussion of
the subject, a small majority, of a numerous convention, appeared for its
adoption.

In New York, two thirds of the delegates i^^ convention were, at their first
meeting, determined to reject the constitution. Here therefore the debates were
the most interesting, and the event extremely doubtful. The argument was
managed with uncommon address and abilities on both sides of the question. But
during the session, the ninth and tenth states had acceded to the proposed
plan, so that by the constitution, Congress were empowered to issue an
ordinance for organizing the new government. This event placed the opposition
on new ground; and the expediency of uniting with the other states -- the
generous motives of conciliating all differences, and the danger of a
rejection, influenced a respectable number, who were originally opposed to the
constitution, to join the federal interest. The constitution was accordingly
ratified by a small majority; but the ratification was accompanied here, as in
Virginia, with a bill of rights, declaratory of the sense of the convention, as
to certain great principles, and with a catalogue of amendments, which were to
be recommended to the consideration of the new Congress, and the several state
legislatures.

North Carolina met in convention in July, to deliberate on the new
constitution. After a short session they rejected it by a majority of one
hundred and seventy-six, against seventy-six. In November 1789, however, this
state again met in convention, and ratified the constitution by a large
majority.

Rhode Island was doomed to be the sport of a blind and singular policy. The
legislature, in consistency with the measures which had been before pursued,
did not call a convention, to collect the sense of the s^ate upon the proposed
constitution; but in an unconstitutional and absurd manner, submitted the plan
of government to the consideration of the people. Accordingly it was brought
before town meetings, and in most of them rejected. In some of the large towns,
particularly in Newport and Providence, the people collected and resolved, with
great propriety, that they could not take up the subject; and that the
proposition for embracing or rejecting the federal constitution, could come
before no tribunal but that of the state in convention or legislature. On the
24th of May 1790, a convention of this state met at Newport, and on the 29th,
adopted the constitution by a majority of two only.

Vermont, in convention at Bennington, January 10th 1791, ratified the
constitution of the United States, by a great majority. The following exhibits
at one view, the order, time, etc. in which the several states (...) (...)
Federal Constitution. Majority. Delaware, December 3, 1787, unanimously.
Pennsylvania, December 13, 46 to 23 23 New Jersey, December 19, unanimously.
Georgia, January 2, 1783, unanimously. Connecticut, January 9, 128 to 40 ^^
Massachusetts, February 6, 187 to 168 1^ Maryland, April 28, 63 to 12 ^1 South
Carolina, May 23, 149 to 73 76 New Hampshire, June 21, 57 to 46 11 Virginia,
June 25, 89 to 79 10 New York, July 26, ^0 to 2^ 5 North Carolina, November 27,
1789, 193 to 75 1^^ Rhode Island, May 2^, 1790, 2 Vermont, January 10, 1791, by
a great majority. Kentucky,


From the moment the proceedings of the general convention at Philadelphia
transpired, the public mind was exceedingly agitated, and suspended between
hope and sear, until nine states had ratified their plan of a federal
government. Indeed the anxiety continued until Virginia and New York had
acceded to the system. But this did not prevent the demonstrations of their
joy, on the accession of each state.

On the ratification in Massachusetts* the citizens of Boston, in the elevation
of their joy, formed a procession in honor of the happy event, which was novel,
splendid, and magnificent. This example was afterward followed, and in some
instances improved upon, in Baltimore, Charleston, Philadelphia, New Haven,
Portsmouth and New York, successively. Nothing could equal the beauty and
grandeur of these exhibitions. A ship was mounted upon wheels, and drawn
through the streets; mechanics erected stages* and exhibited specimens of
labor in their several occupations, as they moved along the road; ^^ags with
^^^lems, descriptive of all the arts and of the federal union, were invented
and displayed in honor of the government; multitudes of all ranks in life
assembled to view the splendid scenes; while sobriety, joy and harmony marked
the brilliant exhibitions, by which the Americans celebrated the establishment
of their Empire.

On the 3d of March 1789, the delegates from the eleven states, which at that
time had ratified the constitution, assembled at New York, where a convenient
and elegant building had been prepared for their accommodation. On opening and
counting the votes for President, it was found that GEORGE WASHINGTON was
unanimously elected to that dignified office, and that JOHN ADAMS Mr. Adams is
a descendant of one of the first families who founded the colony of
Massachusetts Bay in 1630. He was born at Braintree, in Massachusetts, October
19th, 17^^.

Be was by profession a lawyer; and such were his abilities and integrity, that
he at^^^^ the attention, the esteem, and the confidence of his fel^o^ citizens.
Not contended with barely maintaining the rights of individuals, he early
signalized himself in the defense of the rights of his country and of mankind
at large, by writing his admirable Dissertation on the Cannon and Feudal Laws;
a work well adapted to convince or cen^^ent the advocates either for civil or
ecclesiastical tyranny. It evinces that he had abilities to afford powerful aid
in the formation of republics, on the genuine principles of justice and virtue.

The zeal and firmness with which Mr. Adams defended the liberties of his
country, (...) not prevent his acting in the service of her enemies, where he
thought they were (...) with too much severity. Called upon by his profession,
he boldly stood forth at the advocate of Capt. Preston, who had been imprisoned
as the murderer of some of the citizens of Boston, on the memorable 5th of
March, 1770. His client's cause was most (...) popular. The whole town had been
in a state of irritation, on account of the conduct of Governor Hutchinson,
and the the troops which were stationed in it. Their resentment now burst into
a flame. But he felt the cause to be a just one; and the danger of incurring
the displeasure of his countrymen could not deter him from undertaking it. He
conducted the cause with great address, by keeping off the trial till the
passions of the people had time to subside. The trial at length commenced, and
lasted several days, during which he displayed the most extensive knowledge of
the laws of (...) country, and of humanity; and at the conclusion he had the
satisfaction of proving to Great Britain herself, that the citizens of
Massachusetts would be just and humane to their enemies amidst the grossest
insults and provocations. Capt. Preston was acquitted. In this most delicate
and important trial, Mr. Adams manifested that firmness of mind, that
disinterested and enlightened patriotism, and that love of justice and
humanity, which have uniformly marked his conduct in all those great
departments which he has since filled with so much ability and dignity.

He was a member of the first Congress in 1774; and was one of the principal
promoters of the famous resolution of the 4th of July, 1776, which declared the
American colonies FREE, SOVEREIGN, AND INDEPENDENT STATES.

Having been for a considerable length of time one of the commissioners of the
war department, and a principal suggestor of the terms to be offered to (...)
for forming a treaty of alliance and commerce, he was sent to the court of
Versai^^^^, (...) one of the ministers plenipotentiary of the United States, to
consummate that important business.

On his return from France he was called upon by Massachusetts to assist in
forming a plan of government; and to him this State is chiefly indebted for
their present excellent constitution.

After this important business was accomplished, he returned to Europe, vested
with full powers from Congress to assist at any conference which might be
opened for the establishment of peace; and he soon after received other powers
to negociate a loan of money for the use of the United States; and to represent
them as their minister plenipotentiary to their High Mightinesses the States
General of the United provinces. Such i^ or^ant trusts, show in what high
estimation he was held by his country, and the able and satisfactory manner in
which he executed them, proved that their confidence was well placed.

While in Europe, Mr. Adams published his learned and and celebrated work,
entitled "A Defense of the Constitutions of Government of the United States of
America," in which he advocates, as the fundamental principles of a free
government -- equal representation, of which numbers, or property, or both,
should be the rule -- a total separation of the executive from the legislative
power, and of the judicial from both -- and a balance in the legislature, by
three independent, equal branches. "If there is one certain truth," says he,
"to be collected from the history of all ages, it is this: That the people's
rights and liberties, and the democratical mixture in a constitution, can never
be preserved without a strong executive; or in other words, without separating
the executive power from the legislative."

A character who rendered such eminent services to his country, both at home
and abroad, in seasons of the greatest gloominess and danger, and who possessed
such an extensive knowledge of politics and government, did not remain
unnoticed by his grateful countrymen. He was called, in 1789, by the choice of
his country, to the Vice Presidency of the United States, which office he still
retains.

"They who have had an opportunity of knowing his Excellency, Mr. Adams," says
an European writer, "trace in his features the most unequivocal marks of
probity and candor. He unites to that gravity which is suitable to the dignity
of his station, an affability which prejudices you in his favor. Although of a
silent turn, as is common to men who engage in important affairs, yet he has a
natural eloquence for the discussion of important subjects, and for the
recommending and enforcing the measures and systems which are dictated by sound
policy. He has neither the corrupted nor corrupting principles of Lord
Chesterfield, but the plain and virtuous demeanor of Sir William Temple. Like
him also he is simple in negotiation, where he finds candor in those who treat
with him. Otherwise he has the severity of a true Republican, his high idea of
virtue giving him a rigidness, which makes it difficult for him to accommodate
himself to those intrigues which European politics have introduced in to
negotiation."


was chosen Vice President. The annunciation of the choice of the first and
second Magistrates of the United States, occasioned a general diffusion of A
MAP of the NORTHERN and MIDDLE STATES: Comprehending the Western Territory and
the British Dominions in NORTH AMERICA Compiled from the best Authorities.
map of central states of United States and western territories including
Michigan joy among the friends to the union, and fully evinced that these
eminent characters were the choice of the people.

On the 30th of April 1789, GEORGE WASHINGTON was inaugurated PRESIDENT of the
United States of America, in the city of New York. The ceremony was performed
in the open gallery of Federal Hall, in the view of many thousand spectators.
The oath was administered by Chancellor Livingston. Several circumstances
concurred to render the scene unusually solemn -- the presence of the beloved
Father and Deliverer of his country -- the impressions of gratitude for his
past services -- the vast concourse of spectators -- the devout fervency with
which he repeated the oath, and the reverential manner in which he bowed to
kiss the sacred volume -- These circumstances, together with that of his being
chosen to the most dignified office in America, and perhaps in the world, by
the unanimous voice of more than three millions of enlightened freemen, all
conspired to place this among the most august and interesting scenes which have
eve^ been exhibited on this globe. "It seemed, from the number of witnesses,"
said a spectator of the scene, 'to be a (...) appeal to heaven and earth at
once. Upon the subject of this great and good man, (...) may perhaps, be an
enthusiast; but I confess I was under an awful and religious persua^^^, that
the gracious Ruler of the Universe, was looking down at that moment, with (...)
complacency on an act, which, to a part of his creatures, was so very
important. (...) this impression, when the Chancellor pronounced, in a very
feeling manner, (...) LONG LIVE GEORGE WASHINGTON," my sensibility was wound up
to such a pitch, (...) I could do no more than wave my hat, with the rest,
without the power of joining (...) the (...) acclamations which rent the air."


Hitherto the deliberations of the legislature of the union, have been marked
with wisdom, and the measures they have adopted have been productive of great
national prosperity. The wise appointments to office, which, in general, have
been made -- the establishment of a revenue and judiciary system, and of a
national bank -- the assumption of the debts of the individual states, and the
encouragement that has been given to manufactures, commerce, literature, and to
useful inventions, open the fairest prospect of the peace, union and increasing
respectability of the American States.

GRAND DIVISIONS OF THE UNITED STATES.
THE AMERICAN REPUBLIC, of which we have given a general account, consists of
three grand divisions, denominated the Northern, more properly Eastern, Middle
and Southern States.

The first division, (the Northern or Eastern States) comprehends VERMONT NEW
HAMPSHIRE DISTRICT of MAINE (belonging to Massachusetts) MASSACHUSETTS RHODE
ISLAND CONNECTICUT


These are called the New England States, and comprehend that part of America,
which, since the year 1614, has been known by the name of NEW ENGLAND.

The second division (the Middle States) comprehends NEW YORK NEW JERSEY
PENNSYLVANIA DELAWARE TERRITORY N. W. of OHIO


The third division (the Southern States) comprehends MARYLAND VIRGINIA
KENTUCKY NORTH CAROLINA TERRITORY S. of OHIO. SOUTH CAROLINA GEORGIA


Of these we shall treat in their order.

NEW ENGLAND, OR NORTHERN OR EASTERN STATES.
SITUATION AND BOUNDARIES.

NEW ENGLAND lies between 41 and 46 degrees N. Lat. and between 1 degree 30
minutes and 8 degrees E. Lon. from Philadelphia; and is bounded north, by Lower
Canada; east, by the Province of New Brunswick, and the Atlantic Ocean; south,
by the same ocean, and Long Island Sound; west, by the state of New York. It
lies in the form of a quarter of a circle. Its west line, beginning at the
mouth of Byram river, which empties into Long Island Sound at the south west
corner of Connecticut, lat. 41, runs a little east of north, until it strikes
the 45th degree of latitude, and then curves to the eastward almost to the Gulf
of St. Lawrence.

CLIMATE AND DISEASES.] New England has a very healthful climate, as is evinced
by the longevity of the inhabitants. It is estimated that about one in seven of
the inhabitants live to the age of 70 years; and about one in thirteen or
fourteen to 80 years a^^^wards.

North west, west, and south west winds are the most prevalent. East and north
east winds, which are unelastic and disagreeable, are frequent at certain
seasons of the year, particularly in April and May, on the sea coasts. The
^^^ther is less variable than in the middle and especially the southern states,
and more so than in Canada. The extremes of heat and cold according ^o
Farenheit's thermometer, are from 20 below, to 100 above 0. The medium is from
48 to 5^. The inhabitants of New England, on account of the dryness of their
atmosphere, can endure, without inconvenience, a greater degree of heat than
the inhabitants of a moister climate. It is supposed by some philosophers, that
the difference of moisture in the atmosphere in Pennsylvania and New England is
such, as that a person might hear at least ten degrees of heat more in the
latter than in the former.

The quantity of rain which falls in England annually, is computed to be 24
inches; in France 18 inches, and in New England from 46 to 50 inches* and yet
in New England they suffer more from drought than in either of the
forementioned countries, although they have more than double the quantity of
rain. These facts evince the remarkable dryness of the atmosphere, in this
eastern division of the United States, and in part account for its singular
healthfulness. Winter commonly commences, in its seventy, about the middle of
December -- sometimes earlier, and sometimes not till Christmas. Cattle are fed
or housed, in the northern parts of New England, from about the 20th of
November to the 20th of May -- In the southern parts not quite so long. There
have been frosts in almost every month in the year, though not in the same
year; but not very injurious.

The diseases most prevalent in New England are the following, viz.

Alvine fluxes Inflammatory Fevers St. Anthony's Fire Slow nervous, and Asthma
Mixed Atrophy Pulmonary Consumption Catarrh Quinsy Colic Rheumatism

These disorders, of which the pulmonary consumption is much the most
destructive, are commonly the effect of imprudent exposures to cold and rainy
weather, evening air, and the wearing of damp linen; or from frequent excesses
in the use of strong liquors, especially of fresh distilled rum, which in too
many instances proves the bane of morals, and the ruin of families.

The small pox, which is a specific, infectious disease, is not allowed at
present to be communicated by inoculation, except in hospitals erected for the
purpose, in bye places, and in cases where there is a probability of a general
spread of the infection in a town. Nor is this disease permitted to be
communicated generally by inoculation, in any of the United States, except New
York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware and South Carolina.

In populous towns, the prevalent diseases are more numerous and complicated,
owing to want of fresh air and exercise, and to luxurious and fashionable
living.

A late writer Dr. Foulke, in a discourse which he lately read before the
American Philosophical Society.
has observed that "in other countries, men are divided according to their
wealth or indigence, into three classes; the opulent, the middling and the
poor; the idleness, luxuries and debaucheries of the first, and the misery and
too frequent intemperance of the last, destroy the greater proportion of these
two. The intermediate class is below those indulgencies which prove fatal to
the rich, and above these sufferings to which the unfortunate poor fall
victims: This is therefore the happiest division of the three. Of the rich and
poor, the American Republic, furnishes a much smaller proportion than any other
district of the known world. In Connecticut particularly, the distribution of
wealth and its concomitants is more equal than elsewhere, and therefore, as far
as excess or want of wealth may prove destructive or salutary to life, the
inhabitants of this state may plead* exception from diseases." What this writer
says of Connecticut in particular, will, with very few exceptions, apply to New
England at large.

FACE OF THE COUNTRY, MOUNTAINS, etc.] New England is a high, hilly, and in
some parts a mountainous country, formed by nature to be inhabited by a hardy
race of free, independent republicans. The mountains are comparatively small,
running nearly north and south in ridges parallel to each other. Between these
ridges, flow the great rivers in majestic meanders, receiving the innumerable
rivulets and larger streams which proceed from the mountains on each side. To a
spectator on the top of a neighboring mountain, the vales between the ridges,
while in a state of nature, exhibit a romantic appearance. They seem an ocean
of woods, swelled and depressed in its surface like that of the great ocean
itself. A richer, though less romantic view is presented, when the valleys, by
industrious husbandmen, have been cleared of their natural growth; and the
fruit of their labor appears in loaded orchards, extensive meadows, covered
with large herds of sheep and neat cattle, and rich fields, of flax, corn and
the various kinds of grain.

These valleys are of various breadths, from two to twenty miles; and by the
annual inundations of the rivers and smaller streams, which flow through them,
there is frequently an accumulation of rich, fat soil, left upon their surface
when the waters retire.

There are three principal ranges of mountains, passing nearly from southwest,
to northeast, through New England. These consist of a multitude of parallel
ridges, each having many spurs, deviating from the course of the general range;
which spurs are again broken into irregular, hilly land. The main ridges
commence, in high bluff heads, near the sea coast; and sometimes by a gradual
assent in the interior part of the country. One of the main ranges runs between
Connecticut and Hudson's rivers. This range branches, and bounds the vales
through which flows the Housatonick river.

In Lyme, on the east side of the mouth of Connecticut river, another range of
mountains commences, forming the eastern boundary of Connecticut vale. This
range runs northerly, at the distance, generally, of about ten or twelve miles
east from the river, and passes through Massachusetts, from where the range
takes the name of Chicabee Mountain; thence crossing into New Hampshire, at the
distance of about twenty miles from the Massachusetts line, it runs up into a
very high p^^k, called Monadnock, which terminates this ridge of the range. A
western ridge continues* and in about latitude 43 20, runs up into (...)
mountains. About 50 miles further, in the same ridge, is Mo^^e (...) mountain.

A third range begins near Stonington in Connecticut. It takes its course
northeasterly, and is sometimes broken and discontinued; it th^^ rises again,
and ranges in the same direction into New Hampshire.

These ranges of mountains are full of springs of water, that give rise to
numberless streams of various sizes, which, interlocking each other in every
direction, and falling over the rocks in romantic cascades, flow meandering
into the rivers below. No country on the globe is better watered than New
England.

On the sea coast the land is low, and in many parts level and sandy. In the
valleys, between the forementioned ranges of mountains, the land is generally
broken, and in many places rocky, but of a strong rich soil, capable of being
cultivated to good advantage, which also is the case with many spots even on
the tops of the mountains.

RIVERS.] The principal rivers in New England are Penobscot, Kennebeck,
Androscogin, or Ameriscoggin, Saco, (pronounced Sawco) Merrimack, Connecticut,
Housatonick and Onion Rivers; besides many smaller ones.

FLOWERING SHRUBS AND PLANTS.] Dr. Cutler has furnished the following catalogue
of flowering shrubs and plants in New England, which, from the attention he has
paid to natural history, we have reason to rely upon as accurate.

Blue Flag ( his virginica) -- Globe Flower ( Cephalanthus occident^lis) --
Pigeonberry ( Cissus sicyo^des) -- Cornel ( Cornus canadensis) -- American
Honeysuckle ( Azalea viscosa) -- American Tea ( Ceanothus Americanus) -- Cherry
Honeysuckle ( Lonicera diervilla) -- Great Convolvulus ( (...) -- Stag's horn
Sumach ( Rhus typhinum) -- Mealtree ( V^^^^n lantana) -- White flowered Elder (
Sambucus nigra) -- Red berried Elder ( Sambucus canadensis.) -- Meadow Blue
Bells ( Gentiana ciliata) -- Lillies, several species ( Litrum) -- Bethlem Star
( Ormth^^ulum luteum) -- American Senna ( Rhodora canadensis) -- Great Laurel (
Kalmta lat^folta) -- Dwarf Laurel ( Kalmia angustesolia) -- White Pepper Bush (
Andro^^^e arborea) -- Bog Evergreen ( Andromeda calyculata) -- Sweet Pepper
bush ( Clethra alnifolia) -- Mountain Laurel, or Sorbus tree Sorbus ancupo^t ^)
-- Meadow-Sweet ( Spiroea salicisolia) -- Queen of the Meadows ( Spiroea
tormentosa) -- Service Tree ( Mespulus canadensts) -- Wild Rose ( Rose
carolina) -- Superb Raspberry ( Rubus odoratus) -- Bancherry ( Aclea spi^^^^)
-- Side saddle flower ( Sarracena purpurea) -- Red Columbine ( Aqui^^gin
c^^^densis) -- Anemone, several species ( anemone hepatica, sylvestris a
^^irosa) -- Traveller's Joy ( Clematis virginica) -- Dragon's Head (
Dr^cocephalum virginicum) -- Snap Dragon ( Antirrhinum canadensis) -- American
Cardamine ( Cardamine virginica) -- Lupin ( Lupinus angustrsolia) -- Locust (
Robinia pseud-acacia) -- Beach Pea ( Pisum maritimum) -- Pied (...) ( Pisum
ochrus) -- Wood Pea ( Orobus sylvaticus) -- Variegated Pea ( L^^thyrus
heterophyllus) -- Meadow Sunflower ( Ageratum ciliare) -- American Amaranthus (
Gnaphalium helian themifolium) -- New England Aster ( (...) ^^o-anglicum) --
Smooth leaved Golden rod ( Solida ^o allissima) -- New England Sunflower (
Helianthus divaricalus) -- American Pride ( (...) cardinalis.) -- Ladies Plume
( Orchis pycodes) -- Ladies Slipper ( Cypri^^^^ calceolus) -- Blue-eye (
Sisyrinchium bermudiauna) -- Swamp Willow, or Dog-wood ( Salix cinerea?) -- Red
flowered Maple ( Acerubrum.) --

PRODUCTIONS FROM CULTURE.] New England, generally speaking, is better adapted
for grazing than for grain, though a sufficient quantity of the latter is
raised for home consumption, if we except wheat, which is imported in
considerable quantities from the middle and southern states. Indian corn, rye,
oats, barely, buck wheat, flax and hemp, generally succeed very well. Wheat is
cultivated to advantage in many parts of the interior country, but on the sea
coast it i^ subject to blast. This has been attributed to various causes, but
the (...) one probably is, the sudden, cold, easterly winds, after a hot day,
which cause a stagnation and extravasation of the juices of the stalk. Apples
are common, and in general plenty in New England, and cider constitutes the
principal drink of the inhabitants. Peaches do on thrive as well as formerly.
The other common fruits are more or less cultivated in different parts.

New England is a fine grazing country; the valleys, between the hills, are
generally intersected with brooks of water, the banks of which are lined with a
tract of rich meadow or intervale land. The high and rocky ground is, in many
parts, covered with clover, and generally affords the finest of pasture. It
will not be a matter of wonder, therefore, that New England boasts of raising
some of the finest cattle in the world; nor will she be envied, when the labor
of raising their is taken into view. Two months of the hottest season in the
year, the farmers are employed in procuring food for their cattle; and the cold
winter is spent in dealing it out to them. The pleasure and profit of doing
this, is however a satisfying compensation to the honest and industrious
farmer. Butter and cheese are made for exportation Considerable attention has
lately been paid to the raising of sheep.

POPULATION, CHARACTER AND DIVERSIONS.] New England is the most populous part
of the United States. It contains, according to the census of 1790, 1,009,523
souls. The great body of these are landholders and cultivators of the soil. As
they possess, in see simple, the farms which they cultivate, they are naturally
all attached to their country; the cultivation of the soil makes them robust
and healthy, and enables them to defend it.

New England may, with propriety, be called a nursery of men, whence are
annually transplanted, into other parts of the United States, thousands of its
natives. Vast numbers of them, since the war, have emigrated into the northern
parts of New York, into Kentucky and the Western Territory, and into Georgia;
and some are scattered into every State, and every town of note in the union.

The inhabitants of New England are almost universally of English descent; and
it is owing to this circumstance, and to the great and general attention that
has been paid to education, that the English language has been preserved among
them so free of corruption.

The New Englanders are generally tall, stout, and well built. Their education,
laws and situation, serve to inspire them with high notions of liberty. Their
jealousy is awakened at the first motion toward an invasion of their rights.
They are indeed often jealous to excess; (...) circumstance which is a fruitful
source of imaginary grievances, and of groundless suspicions and complaints
against government. But these ebullitions of jealousy, though censurable, and
productive of some political evils, show that the essence of true liberty
exists in New England; for jealousy is a guardian of liberty, and a
characteristic of free republicans. A chief foundation of liberty and equality
in the New England States, is a law by which intestate estates dese^^d to all
the children, or other heirs, in equal proportions, except to the eldest son,
who has two shares. In 1789 Massachusetts abolished this exception. In
consequence of these laws, the people of New England enjoy an equality of
condition unknown in any other part of the world: And it is in this way that
the people have preserved that happy mediocrity among themselves, which, by
inducing economy and industry, removes from them temptations to luxury, and
forms them to habits of sobriety and temperance. At the same time, their
industry and frugality exempt them from want, and from the necessity of
submitting to any encroachments on their liberties.

In New England, learning is more generally diffused among all ranks of people
than in any other part of the globe; arising from the excellent establishment
of schools in almost every township.

In these schools, which are generally supported by a public tax, and under the
direction of a school committee, are taught the elements of reading, writing
and arithmetic, and in the more wealthy towns, they are beginning to introduce
the higher branches of grammar, geography, etc.

A very valuable source of information to the people is the Newspapers, of
which not less than thirty thousand are printed every week in New England, and
circulate in almost every town and village in the country. According to an
accurate estimate lately made, it appears that no less than 77,0^^, News papers
(...) weekly, in the American States, which, in a year, would amount to (...)
each would make 160,000 dollars.


A person of mature age, who cannot both read and write, is rarely to be found.
By means of this general establishment of schools, the extensive circulation of
Newspapers, and the consequent spread of learning, every township throughout
the country, is furnished with men capable of conducting the affairs of their
town with judgment and discretion. These men are the channels of political
information to the lower class of people; if such a class may be said to exist
in New England, where every man thinks himself at least as good as his
neighbor, and believes that all mankind are, or ought to be equal. The people,
from their childhood, form habits of canvassing public affairs, and commence
politicians. This naturally leads them to be very inquisitive. It is with
knowledge as with riches, the more a man has, the more he wishes to obtain; his
desire has no bound. This desire after knowledge, in a greater or less degree,
prevails throughout all classes of people in New England; and from their
various modes of expressing it, some of which are blunt and familiar, bordering
on impertinence, strangers have been induced to mention impertinent
inquisitiveness as a distinguishing characteristic of New England people. But
this is true only with regard to that class of people who have confined
themselves to domestic life, and have not had opportunity of mingling with the
world; and such people are not peculiar to New England; they compose a great
part of the citizens of every state and country.

Before the late war, which introduced into New England a flood of corruptions,
with many improvements, the Sabbath was observed with great strictness; no
unnecessary traveling, no secular business, no visiting, no diversions were
permitted on that sacred day. They considered it as consecrated to divine
worship, and were generally punctual and serious in their attendance upon it.
Their laws were strict in guarding the sabbath against every innovation. The
supposed severity with which these laws were composed and executed, together
with some other traits in their religious character, have acquired for the New
Englanders, the name of a superstitious, bigoted people. But superstition and
bigotry are so indefinite in their significations, and so variously applied by
persons of different principles and educations, that it is not easy to
determine whether they ever deserved that character. Leaving every person to
enjoy his own opinion in regard to this matter, we will only observe, that,
since the war, a catholic tolerant spirit, occasioned by a more enlarged
intercourse with mankind, has greatly increased, and is becoming universal; and
if they do not break the proper bound, and liberalize away all true religion,
of which there is very great danger, they will counteract that strong
propensity in human nature, which leads men to vibrate from one extreme to its
opposite.

There is one distinguishing characteristic in the religious character of this
people, which we must not omit to mention; and that is, the custom of annually
celebrating Fasts and Thanksgivings. In the spring, the governors of the
several New England states, except Rhode Island, issue their proclamations,
appointing a day to be religiously observed in fasting, humiliation and prayer
throughout then respective states, in which the predominating vices, that
particularly call for humiliation, are enumerated. In autumn, after harvest,
that gladsome era in the husbandman's life, the governors again issue their
proclamations, appointing a day of public thanksgiving, enumerating the public
blessings received in the course of the foregoing year.

This pious custom originated with their venerable ancestors, the first
settlers of New England; and has been handed down as sacred, through the
successive generations of their posterity. A custom so rational, and so happily
calculated to cherish in the minds of the people, a sense of their dependence
on the GREAT BENEFACTOR of the world for all their blessings, it is hoped will
ever be sacredly preserved.

The people of New England, generally obtain their estates by hard and
persevering labor: They of consequence know their value, and spend with
frugality. Yet in no country do the indigent and unfortunate fare better. Their
laws oblige every town to provide a competent maintenance for their poor, and
the necessitous stranger is protected, and relieved by their humane
institutions. It may in truth be said, that in no part of the world are the
people happier, better furnished with the necessaries and conveniences of life,
or more independent than the farmers in New England. As the great body of the
people are hardy, independent freeholders, their manners are, as they ought to
be, congenial to their employment, plain, simple, and unpolished. Strangers are
received and entertained among them with a great deal of artless sincerity, and
friendly, unformal hospitality. Their children, those imitative creatures, to
whose education particular attention is paid, early imbibe the manners and
habits of those around them; and the stranger, with pleasure, notices the
honest and decent respect that is paid him by the children as he passes through
the country.

As the people, by representation, make their own laws and appoint their own
officers, they cannot be oppressed; and living under governments, which have
few lucrative places, they have few motives to ^^^ibery, corrupt canvassings or
intrigue. Real abilities and a moral character unblemished, are the
qualifications requisite in the view of most people, for officers of public
trust. The expression of a wish to be promoted, is, in some parts of New
England, the direct way (...) be disappointed.

The inhabitants, in some parts of New England, are generally fond of the arts
and sciences, and have cultivated them with great success. Their colleges have
flourished. The illustrious characters they have produced, who have
distinguished themselves in politics, law, divinity, the mathematics and
philosophy, natural and civil history, and in the fine arts, particularly
poetry, evince the truth of these observations.

Many of the women in New England are handsome. They generally have fair, fresh
and healthful countenances, mingled with much female softness and delicacy.
Those who have had the advantages of a good education (and they are numerous)
are genteel, easy, and agreeable in their manners, and are sprightly and
sensible in conversation. They are early taught to manage domestic concerns
with neatness and economy. Ladies of the first rank and fortune, make it a part
of their daily business to superintend the affairs of the family. Employment at
the needle, in cookery, and at the spinning wheel, with (...) is honorable.
Idleness, even in those of independent fortunes, is ^^^^versally disreputable.
The women in country towns, manufacture (...) greatest part of the clothing of
their families. Their linen and wo^^len cloths are strong and decent. Their
butter and cheese is not inferior to any in the world.

Dancing is the principal and favorite amusement in New England* and of this
the young people of both sexes are extremely (...). Gaming is practiced by none
but those who cannot, or rather (...) not find a reputable employment. The
gamester, the horse (...) and the knave, are equally despised, and their
company is avoided by all who would sustain fair and irreproachable characters.

The athletic and healthy diversions of cricket, foot ball, quoits, wrestling,
jumping, hopping, foot races, and prison bass, are universally practiced in the
country, and some of them in the most populous places, and by people of almost
all ranks.

HISTORY.] New England owes its first settlement to religious persecution. Soon
after the commencement of the reformation The reformation was begun by Martin
Luther, a native of Saxony, born in the year ^^^3. He was educated in the Roman
Catholic religion, and was an Augustine Friar, (...), in 1517, having written
ninety five Theses against the Pope's indulgencies, he exhib^^^ them to public
view on the church door at Wirtenburg, in Saxony, and thus began the
reformation in Germany. In 1528, the reformed religion was introduced into
^^^^^^ by Zuinglius, Oecolampaoius, and others.

The year following, the Diet of the German Empire assembled at Spire, and
issued a (...) against the reformation. Against this decree, the Elector of
Saxony, George, Marquis of Bran^enburg, Ernest, and Francis, Duke of Lunenburg,
the Landgrave of (...), and the Count of Anhalt, who were joined by several of
the cities, publicly rea^ their Protest, and in this way, acquired for
themselves and their successors down to the (...) time, the name of Protestants.

Calvin, another celebrated reformer, was born at Noyon, in France, in the year
1^0^. The improved upon Luther's plan -- expunged many of the Romish ceremonies
which he had indulged -- entertained different ideas concerning some of the
great doctrines of Co^^tianit^, and set the Protestant, at a greater remove
from the Roman Catholic religion. The followers of Luther have been
distinguished by the name of Lutherans; and the followers of Calvin by the name
of Calvinists.

Such was the rapid growth of the Protestant interest, that in 156^, only 46
years after the commencement of the reformation by Luther, there were in France
2150 assem^^^ of Protestants.


in England, which was not until the year 1534, the Protestants were divided
into two parties, one the followers of Luther, and the other of Calvin. The
former had chosen gradually, and almost imperceptibly, to recede from the
church of Rome; while the latter, more zealous, and convinced of the importance
of a thorough reformation, and at the same time possessing much firmness and
high notions of religious liberty, was for effecting a thorough change at once.
Their consequent endeavors to expunge from the church all the inventions which
had been brought into it since the days of the Apostles, and to introduce the
"Scripture purity," derived for them the name of PURITANS. From these the
inhabitants of New England descended.

The first company that came to New England, planted themselves at Plymouth.
They were a part of the Rev. Mr. Robinson's congregation, which for 12 years
before, had lived in Holland, for the sake of enjoying liberty of conscience.
They came over in the year 1620.

It was their intention to have settled at the mouth of Hudson's river; but the
Dutch, intending to plant a colony there of their own, privately hired the
master of the ship to contrive delays in England, and then to conduct them to
these northern coasts, and there, under pretense of shoals and winter, to
discourage them from venturing to the place of destination. This is confidently
asserted by the historians of that time. Although Cape Cod harbor, in which
they first anchored, was good, the country around was sandy and barren. These
were discouraging circumstances; but the season being far advanced, they
prudently determined to make the best of their present situation.

As they were not within the limits of their patent, and consequently not under
the jurisdiction of the Virginia company, they concluded it necessary to
establish a separate government for themselves. Accordingly, before they
landed, having on their knees devoutly given thanks to God for their safe
arrival, they formed themselves into a body politic, by a solemn contract, The
following is an authentic copy of this contract. -- "In the name of God Amen:
We whose Names are underwritten, the Loyal Subjects of our dread Sovereign
Lord, King James, by the grace of God, of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
King, Defender of the Faith, etc.

"Having undertaken, for the Glory of God, and the advancement of the Christian
Faith and honor of our King and country, a Voyage to Plant the first Colony in
the Northern parts of Virginia, D^, by these Present, solemnly and mutually, in
the Presence of God, and one of another, Covenant and C^moi^e ourselves
together unto a Civil Body Politic, for our better Ordering and Preservation,
and Furtherance of the Ends aforesaid; and by virtue h^^e to enact, constitute
and frame such just and equal laws, Ordinances, Acts, Constitutions and Offices
from Time to Time, as shall be thought most meet and convenient for the General
(...) of the Colony; unto which we Promise all due Submission and Obedience: In
witness whereof we have hereunder subscribed our names at Cape C^d, the 11th of
November, in the Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King James, of
England, France, and Ireland, the Eighteenth, and of Scotland the Fiftyfourth,
Anno Domini, 1620."

This instrument was signed by 24 heads of families, with the number in their
respective (...), and 17 single men, making in the whole (...) souls.


to which they all subscribed, thereby making it the basis of their government.
They chose Mr. John Carver, a gentleman of piety and approved abilities, to be
their governor for the first year. This was on the 11th of November, 1620.

Their next object was to fix on a convenient place for settlement. In doing
this they were obliged to encounter numerous difficulties, and to suffer
incredible hardships. Many of them were sick in consequence of the fatigues of
a long voyage: Their provisions were bad -- the season was uncommonly cold --
the Indians, though afterward friendly, were now hostile -- and they were
unacquainted with the coast. These difficulties they surmounted, and on the
31st of December they were all safely landed at a place, which, in grateful
commemoration of Plymouth in England, the town which they last left in their
native land, they called Plymouth. This is the first English town that was
settled in New England.

In some of their excursions in search of a suitable place for settlement, they
found buried several baskets of Indian corn, to the amount of ten bushels,
which fortunately served them for planting the next spring, and perhaps was the
means of preserving them from perishing with hunger. They made diligent enquiry
for the owners, whom they found, and afterward paid the full value of the corn.

Before the end of November, Susanna, the wife of William White, was delivered
of a son, whom they called Peregrine. He is supposed to have been the first
child of European extract, born in New England.

The whole company that landed consisted of but 101 souls, Their situation was
distressing, and their prospect truly dismal and discouraging. Their nearest
neighbors, except the natives, were a French settlement at Port Royal, and one
of the English at Virginia. The nearest of these was five hundred miles from
them, and utterly incapable of affording them relief in a time of famine or
danger. Wherever they turned their eyes, distress was before them. Persecuted
for their religion in their native land -- grieved for the profanation of the
holy Sabbath, and other licentiousness, in Holland -- satigued by their long
and boisterous voyage -- disappointed through the treachery of their commander
of their expected country -- forced on a dangerous and unknown shore, in the
advance of a cold winter -- surrounded with hostile barbarians, without any
hope of human succor -- denied the aid or favor of the court of England --
without a patent -- without a public promise of a peaceable enjoyment of their
religious liberties -- worn out with toil and sufferings -- without convenient
shelter from the rigours of the weather. -- Such were the prospects, and such
the situation of these pious solitary christians; and to add to their
distresses, a general and very mortal sickness prevailed among them, which
swept off forty six of their number before the opening of the next spring. To
support them under these trials, they had need of all the aids and comforts
which christianity affords; and these were sufficient. The free and unmolested
enjoyment of their religion, reconciled them to their humble and lonely
situation -- They bore their hardships with unexampled patience, and persevered
in their pilgrimage of almost unparalleled trials, with such resignation and
calmness, as gave proof of great piety and unconquerable virtue.

On the 3d of November, 1620, king James signed a patent, incorporating the
duke of Lenox, the marquisses of Buckingham and Hamilton, the earls of Arundel
and Warwick, Sir Francis Gorges, with thirty four others, and their successors,
stiling them* The council established in Plymouth, in the county of Devon, for
the planting, ruling ordering and governing of New England in America. To this
council he granted all that part of America which lies between the 40th and
48th degrees of north latitude. This patent is the great civil basis of all the
grants and patents by which New England was afterward divided.

The Plymouth council retained the power vested in them by the crown, until the
year 1635, when they resigned their charter. Previous to this, however, the
council had made several grants of land to adventurers, who proposed to settle
in New England. -- They granted New Hampshire to Capt John Mason in 1621 -- the
Province of Main, to Sir R. Gorges in 1622, and Massachusetts Bay to Sir Henry
Roswell and five others, in 1627.

As early as March, 1621, Masassoit, The seat of Masassoit was at (...) river,
which empties into (...).
one of the most powerful Saga^^res of the neighboring Indians, with sixty
attendants, made a vine to the Plymouth settlers and entered into a formal and
very friendly treaty with them, wherein they agreed to avoid injuries on both
sides -- to punish offenders -- to restore stolen goods -- to assist each other
in all justifiable wars -- to promote peace among their neighbors, etc --
Masassoit and his successors for fifty years, inviolably observed this treaty.
The English are much indebted to him for his friendship; and his memory will
ever be respected in New England.

The Narragansets, disliking the conduct of Masassoit, declared war against
him, which occasioned much confusion and fighting among the Indians. The
Plymouth colony interposed in favor of Masassoit, their good ally, and
terminated the dispute, to the terror of their enemies. Even Canon^us himself,
the terrific Sachem of the Narragansets, fued for peace.

The prudent, friendly and upright conduct of the Plymouth colony toward their
neighbors, the Indians, secured their friendship and alliance. On the 13th of
September 1621, no less than nine Sachems declared allegiance to king James;
and Masassoit, with many of his Sub-Sachems, who lived around the bays of
Patuxent and Massachusetts, subscribed a writing, acknowledging the king of
England their master. These transactions are so many proofs of the peaceful and
benevolent disposition of the Plymouth settlers; for had they been otherwise
disposed they never could have introduced and maintained a friendly intercourse
with the natives.

On the 10th of Sept. this year, the king granted to Sir William Alexander a
patent of all the tract of country bounded by a line drawn from Cape Sables to
the Bay of St. Mary; thence to the river St. Croix; thence north to Canada
river -- down the river to Gachep^; thence southeast to Cape Breton Island and
Cape Breton; thence round to Cape Sables; with all seas and islands within six
leagues of the western and eastern parts, and within forty leagues southward of
Cape Breton and Cape Sables; to be called Nova Scotia.

The first duel in New England, was fought with sword and dagger between two
servants. Neither of them was killed, but both were wounded. For this
disgraceful offense, they were formally tried before the whole company, and
sentenced to have 'their heads and feet tied together, and so to be twenty four
hours without meal or drink.'

This year (1622) died Squanto, the friend of the English, who merits to have
his name perpetuated in history. Squanto was one of the twenty Indians whom
Hunt perfidiously carried to Spain; See page 115.
whence he came to London, and afterward to his native country with the
Plymouth colony. Forgetting the perfidy of those who made him a captive, he
became a warm friend to the English, and continued so to the day of his death.
A few days before he died, he desired the governor to pray that he might go to
the Englishman's God in heaven.

In March 1624, Mr. Winslow, agent for the colony, arrived, and together with a
good supply of clothing, brought a bull and three heis^^s which were the first
cattle of the kind in this part of America. From these, and others that were
afterward brought over from England, sprang the present multitude of cattle in
the northern states. None of the domestic animals were found in America by the
first European settlers.

At the close of this year, (1624) the plantation at New-Plymouth, consisted of
180 persons, who lived in thirty two dwelling houses. Their stock was a few
cattle and goats, and a plenty of swine and poultry. Their town was impaled
about half a mile in compass. On a high mount in the town, they had erected a
fort of wood, lime and stone, and a handsome watch tower.

The year 1625 is distinguished by the death of the Rev. Mr. Robinson. He died
at Leyden in March, in the 50th year of his age. He was truly a great and good
man, and lived in great love and harmony with his people. He was held in high
estimation by all his acqu^^^^ance, for his learning, piety, moderation and
excellent accomplishments. His death was lamented as a public loss, and felt by
none more than by his beloved and far distant people at Plymouth. His son (...)
ac came over to Plymouth, where he lived to the age of 90 years. His
descendants still live in Barnstable county, in Massachusetts.

After the death of Mr. Robinson, the remaining part of his congregation were
extremely desirous of coming over to their friends (...) Plymouth, and measures
were taken for the purpose; yet it was not until the year 1629, that they
effected their design.

From this time New England began to flourish. Sir Henry Roswell and others,
had received a patent of Massachusetts from the council of New England.
Settlements were successfully enterprized at Salem, Charlestown, Boston,
Dorchester and other places, so that in forty years from this time (1629) 120
towns were settled, and forty churches were gathered.

The Laudian persecution was conducted with unrelenting severity; and while it
caused the destruction of thousands in England, proved to be a principle of
life and vigor to the infant settlements in America. Several men of eminence in
England, who were the friends and protectors of the Puritans, entertained a
design of settling in New England, if they should fail in the measures they
were pursuing for the establishment of the liberty, and the reformation of the
religion of their own country. They solicited and obtained grants in New
England, and were at great pains in settling them. Among these patentees were
the Lords Brook, Say and Seal, the Pelhams, the Hampdens and the Pyms; names
which afterward appeared with great eclat. Sir Matthew Boynton, Sir William
Constable, Sir A^^^ur Haslerig, and Oliver Cromwell, were actually upon the
point of embarking for New England, when Archbishop Laud, unwilling that so
many objects of his hatred should be removed out of the reach of his power,
applied for, and obtained, an order from the court to put a stop to these
transportations. However, he was not able to prevail so far as to hinder New
England from receiving vast additions, as well of the clergy, who were silenced
and deprived of their living, for nonconformity, as of the laity who adhered
to their opinions.

The colony of Plymouth remained without a charter, until they were
incorporated with Massachusetts in 1691 or 1692. Notwithstanding (...), it was
a government de fact^, and considered as such by king Charles in his letters
and orders, which were sent them at various times previous to their
incorporation with Massachusetts.

It was in the spring of 1630, that the GREAT CONSPIRACY was entered into by
the Indians in all parts, from the Narragansets round (...) eastward, to
extirpate the English. The colony at Plymouth (...) the principal object of
this conspiracy. They well knew that if (...) could effect the destruction of
Plymouth, the infant settlement at Massachusetts would fall an easy sacrifice.
They laid their plan with much art. Under color of having some diversion at
Plymouth, they i^^^ded to have fallen upon the inhabitants, and thus to have
effected their design. But their plot was disclosed to the people at
Charlestown, by John Saga^ore, an Indian, who had always been a great friend
(...) English. This treacherous design of the Indians alarmed the English, and
induced them to erect forts and maintain guards, to prevent (...) fatal
surprise in future. These preparations, and the firing of (...) guns, so
terrified the Indians that they dispersed, relinquished their design, and
declared themselves the friends of the England.

(...) was the vast increase of inhabitants in New England by nature
regulation, and particularly by emigrations from Great Britain* (...) few
years, besides the settlements in Plymouth and Massachusetts, very flourishing
colonies were planted in Rhode Island, Connecticut, New Haven, and New
Hampshire. The dangers to which (...) were exposed from the surrounding
Indians, as well as from the Dutch, who, although very friendly to the infant
colony at Plymouth, were now likely to prove troublesome neighbors, first
induced them to think of an alliance and confederacy for their (...) defense.
Accordingly in 1643, the four colonies of Plymouth, Massachusetts, Connecticut
and New Haven, agreed upon articles of confederation, whereby a congress was
formed, consisting of two commissioners from each colony, who were chosen
annually, and when met were considered as the representatives of "The United
Colonies of New England." The powers delegated to the commissioners, (...) much
the same as those vested in Congress by the articles of confederation, agreed
upon by the United States in 1778. The colony (...) Rhode Island would gladly
have joined in this confederacy, but Massachusetts, for particular reasons,
refused to admit their commissioners. This union subsisted, with some few
alterations, until the year (...), when all the charters, except that of
Connecticut, were in effect vovacated by a commission from James the II.

The reader will obtain the best knowledge of the history of (...) England by
consulting Hutchinson's History of Massachusetts* Hazard's Historical
Collections, 4 to, 2 vols. the 2d vol. not yet published, but ready for the
press -- Belknap's History of New Hampshire -- The first letter in Dr. Gordon's
History of the American Revolution -- Gov. Winthrop's Journal -- Chalmer's
Political Annals -- (...) Gookins' Historical Collections of the Indians in New
England, published in Boston, by the Historical Society, in the American
Apollo. 17^^.

VERMONT.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 150 Miles. between 42 44 and 45 N. Lat. Breadth 70 Miles. 1 35 and 3 30
E. Long. from (...).

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED north, by Lower Canada; (...) by Connecticut River, which
divides it (...) New Hampshire; south, by Massachusetts; west, by New York.

DIVISIONS.] Vermont is naturally divided by the Green Mountain, which (...)
from south to north, and divides the state nearly in the middle. Its civil
divisions are as follows.

Counties Towns W. of the Moun. BENNINGTON BENNINGTON RUTLAND RUTLAND ADDISON
ADDISON CHITIENDON COLCHESTER E. of the Moun. ORANGE NEWBURY WINDSOR WINDSOR
WINDHAM NEW^^^^ P^T^^Y

These counties are divided into upwards of 200 townships, which are generally
six miles square. In every township is a reserve of (...) rights of land, of
350 acres each, one to be appropriated for the (...) port of public schools;
the other to be given in fee to the first ^^^^ister who settles in the
township. A part of the townships (...) granted by the governor of New
Hampshire, and the other (...) that of Vermont. In those townships granted by
the former, a (...) of land is reserved for the support of the gospel in
foreign parts (...) those granted by the latter, a college right, and a right
for the (...) port of county grammar schools, are reserved. In these
reservations, liberal provision is made for the support of the gospel, and for
the p^^cation of common and collegiate education.

RIVERS.] The principal rivers in this state are Michiscoui, La^^^, Onion, and
Otter Creek rivers, which run from east to west into Lake Champlain; West,
Sexton's* Black, Waterquechee, White, ^^^^panoosuck, Weld's, Wait's,
Passumsick, and several smaller rivers (...) (...) from west to east, into
Connecticut river. Over the river ^^^^ille is a natural stone bridge 7 or 8
rods in length. Otter Creek i^ navigable for boats 50 miles. Its banks are
excellent land, being ^^^ally overflowed, and enriched. White river takes its
name from (...) peculiar whiteness of its water, caused by the clear white
stones and gravel which constitute the bed of this river quite to its source.
This peculiarity deceives people in regard to its depth. It rises in ^^^^^ter
of the state, flows through a rich tract of country free from (...) and empties
into the Connecticut 4 miles below Dartmouth Col^^^, and is from 100 to 150
yards wide, some distance from its mouth. ^^^^panoosuck is a short, furious
river, not more than 40 or 50 (...) wide, emptying into the Connecticut at
Norwich. Weld's is al^^^ short and rapid river, 40 yards across. Passumsick is
100 yards (...) and noted for the quantity and quality of the salmon it
produces. In this river, which is settled 20 miles up, are some of the best
Townships in the state.

LAKES AND SPRINGS.] Memphremagog is the largest lake in this (...). It is the
reservoir of three considerable streams, Black, Barton, and Clyde rivers. One
of these rises in Willoughby Lake, and forms a communication between that and
lake St. Peter's, in the river St. Lawrence. Issuing from Willoughby's Lake, it
empties into Memphremagog, and thence, by the name of St. Francis, empties into
the St. Peter. This river is not all the way navigable; otherwise it would
afford a communication of very great importance to the northern part of this
state, as the settlers might transport their produce with (...) ease to
Montreal or Quebec. Willoughby's Lake furnishes fish ^^^^ling bass, of an
excellent flavor, weighing from 10 to 30 pounds. They form a most delicious
feast for the new settlers. People travel (...) miles to this lake, to procure
a winter's stock of this fish. Lake ^^^^zon, in the county of Rutland, gives
rise to a branch of Poulting river, on which iron works have been erected in
the township of for Haven.

In some low lands, over against the great Ox Bow, a remarkable spring was
discovered, about 20 years since, which dries up once in two or three years,
and bursts out in another place. It has a strong smell of sulphur, and throws
up continually a peculiar kind of white sand. A thick yellow scum rises upon
the water when settled. Ponds and other collections of water in this state are
remarkably clear and transparent, and afford abundance of trout and perch.

MOUNTAINS.] The principal mountain in this state is the one we (...) already
mentioned, which divides the state nearly in the center, (...) Connecticut
river and Lake Champlain. The ascent from (...) east to the top of this
mountain is much easier than from the west, (...) you get to Onion river, where
the mountain terminates. The ^^ight of land is generally from 20 to 30 miles
from the river, and a^^^ the same distance from the New York line. The natural
growth (...) this mountain, is hemlock, pine, spruce, and other evergreens;
hence it has always a green appearance, and on this account has obtained the
descriptive name of Ver Mons, Green Mountain. On some high parts of this
mountain, snow lies till May, and sometimes till June. This chain of mountains
passes through Massachusetts and Connecticut, and terminates in New Haven.

The other noted mountains is Aschutney, bordering on Connecticut river, in the
townships of Windsor and Weathersfield, and Upper Great Monadnock, quite in the
N. E. corner of the State.

It is remarkable that the hills and mountains are generally covered on the
east sides with what is called hard wood, such as (...), beach, maple, ash,
elm, and butternut; the west side is generally covered with evergreens.

CLIMATE.] During the winter season, which commonly lasts from the beginning of
November to the middle of April, the inhabitants enjoy a serene sky, and a keen
cold air. Snow begins to fall, commonly, by the first of November; but the
permanent snows do not (...) till about the 10th of December, which prevent the
ground fre^^^^^ any considerable depth. In April the snow is gradually
dissolved by the warm influences of the sun, which moistens and enriches the
(...), and vegetation advances with surprising rapidity.

FACE OF THE COUNTRY, SOIL, PRODUCTIONS, etc.} This state, generally speak^^ is
hilly but not rocky. (...) of the mountain, from the county of Rutland
northward to the Canada line, is a flat country well adapted for tillage. The
state at la^g^^ well watered, and affords the best of pasturage for cattle.
Some of the finest beef cattle in the world are driven from this state. (...)
also are raised for exportation. The natural growth upon the rivers, i^ white
pines of several kinds, intermingled with low intervales of (...), elm and
white oak. Back from the rivers, the land is thickly ^^^bered with birch, sugar
maple, ash, butternut and white oak of an excellent quality. The soil is
natural for wheat, rye, barley, oats, (...) hemp, etc. Indian corn, back from
the river, is frequently (...) by the frost; but on the river it is raised in
as great perfection (...) any part of New England, owing in a great measure to
the fogs, ^^^ing from the river, which either prevent or extract the frost.
Th^^ fogs begin as soon as the corn is in danger from frosts, and (...) till
cold weather commences. Fruit tro^s, in the northern counti^^^ not prosper.

TRADE AND MANUFACTURES.] The inhabitants of this state, trade principally with
Boston* New York and Hartford. The articles of export are pot and pearl ashes,
chiefly, beef, horses, grain, some ^^^ter and cheese, lumber, etc. The
inhabitants generally manufacture their own clothing, in the family way. Grain
has been raised in (...) plenty within a few years past, that the inhabitants
have been (...) to attempt the manufacture of corn spirits. For this purpose
six or seven stills have already been erected, which yield a sufficient supply
(...) the people, and a profit to the owners. Vast quantities of (...) pearl
ashes are made in every part of the state. But one of the (...) important
manufactures, in this state, is that of maple sugar. It (...) been estimated by
a competent judge that the average quantity (...) for every family back of
Connecticut river, is 200lbs. a year, (...) man, with but ordinary advantages,
in one month, made 550lbs, of (...) quality equal to imported brown sugar. In
two towns, in (...) county, containing no more than 40 families, 13 ^00lbs. of
sugar (...) made in the year 1791. The probability is that in a few years,
maple sugar will become an article of export. In some parts of the state, the
inhabitants are beginning to line the roads with maple trees. And it would
certainly be a wise measure if this practice should become general throughout
the states. Orchards of these trees, planted on sloping hills, so as to render
it easy to collect the juice, might be attended with peculiar advantages to the
owners.

POPULATION, RELIGION AND CHARACTER.} In 1790, according to the census then
taken, this state contained 85,539 inhabitants, consisting chiefly of emigrants
from Connecticut and Massachusetts, and their descendants. Two townships in
Orange county are settled principally by Scotch people. The body of the people,
are O^^^gregationalists. The other denominations are Presbyterians, Baptists
and Episcopalians. This state is rapidly peopling. Five years age, the township
of Danville, in the county of Orange, was a wildor^^^ without so much as a
single family. Now they have two considerable companies of militia; besides a
company of light in^^try, dressed in uniform.

The inhabitants of this state are an assemblage of people from va^^^ places,
of different sentiments, manners and habits. They have not lived together long
enough to assimilate and form a general character. Assemble together in
imagination, a number of individual of different nations -- consider them as
living together amicably, and ^^^ing each other through the toils and
difficulties of life; and yet r^^^ously opposed in particular religious and
political tenets; jea^^^ of their rulers, and tenacious of their liberties --
dispositions which originate naturally from the dread of experienced
oppression, and the (...) of living under a free government -- and you have a
pretty just (...) of the character of the people of Vermont. Indolence is never
^^^^acteristical feature of the settlers of a new country. Emigrants (...)
general are active and industrious. The opposite characters have (...) spirit
nor inclination to quit their native spot. The inference (...) that Vermont is
peopled with an active, industrious, hardy, frugal (...); as is really the
case. And as it is a maxim that the inhabitants of (...) new countries grow
virtuous before they degenerate, it will most probably be so in Vermont.

MILITARY STRENGTH.] In 1788, there were upwards of 17,000 man upon the militia
rolls of this state. These consisted of two divi^^nt one on the west, the other
on the east side of the mountain. In these two divisions were 7 brigades,
consisting of 22 regiments. The (...) of the Vermonteers, or Green Mountain
boys, is proverbial.

LITERATURE AND IMPROVEMENTS.] Much cannot be said in fa^^^ of the present
State of literature in this state; but their pros^^^ in this regard are good.
In every charter of a town, as we (...) mentioned, provision is made for
schools, by reserving a certain (...) of land solely for their support. The
assembly of this State, (...) October session in 1791, passed an act for the
establishment of (...) in the town of Burlington, on lake Champlain, on the
south (...) of Onion river, and appointed ^o Trustees. General Ira Allen, (...)
of the Trustees, on certain conditions, offers lands, etc. to the (...) of
L4000 toward this establishment.

The expediency of opening a communication between the waters of (...)
Champlain and Hudson's river; and of rendering the navigation (...) of
Connecticut river more easy and advantageous, has been discussed by the
legislature of this State; and measures have been adopted to effect the latter,
by incorporating a company for the purpose of locking Bellows' falls, who are
to complete the work within 4 years from the passing of the act, and to receive
a toll for all boats that p^^s; the toll to be a subject of regulation. The
works are already began, and when completed will be of great advantage to the
state, by ^^^itating the exportation of their produce. The other proposed canal
between Lake Champlain and Hudson's river, would also be important, but it is
doubtful whether it will, at present, be accompli^^^^.

CHIEF TOWNS.] In a new and interior country, large, (...) towns are not to be
expected. Bennington, situated near the (...) west corner of the state, is one
of the largest. It contains about (...) inhabitants, a number of handsome
houses, a congregational (...), a court house and goal. A famous battle was
fought in or (...) (...) town, during the late war, in 1777, between Brigadier
General States, at the head of 800 undisciplined militia, and a detachment of
^^^eral Burgoyne's army, commanded by Col. Baum. In this action, and the one
that succeeded it in the same place, and on the same day, between a
reinforcement of the British, under Col. Breymen, and ^^^eral Stark, who was
reinforced by Col. Warner, with a conti^^^ regiment, were taken, 4 brass field
pieces, and other military stores, and 700 prisoners. The overthrow of these
detachments was the first (...) in a grand chain of causes, which finally
proved the ruin of the ^^al army. This is one of the oldest towns in the state,
being first ^^^tled about the year 1764, and is a thriving town, and has been,
till ^^^ly, the seat of government.

Windsor and Rutland, by a late act of the legislature, are alternately to be
the seat of government for 8 years. The former is (...) on Connecticut river,
and contains about 1600 inhabitants; the (...) lies upon Otter Creek, and
contains upwards of 1400 inhabitants. Both are flourishing towns. Guildford,
Brattleborough, (...) Westminster, Weathersfield, Hartland, Norwich and
Newbur^^ (...) considerable towns, lying from south to north, on Connecticut
(...) Newbury is the shire town or Orange county, which comprehend^^ (...)
three eights of the whole state, and contains about 900 inhabitants. It has a
court house, and a very elegant meeting house for cong^^^tionalists, with a
steeple, the first erected in the state. The celeb^^^ Coos meadows or
intervales, commence about 9 miles below this (...) Newbury court house stands
on the high lands back from the river and commands a fine view of what is
called the great Ox Bo^^, which is formed by a curious bend in the river. It is
one of the most ^^^riful and fertile meadows in New England. The circumference
of (...) Bow, is about 4 miles; its greatest depth is seven eighths of a mile,
containing about 450 acres. At the season when nature is dressed in (...) green
attire, a view of this meadow from the high lands is truly ^^^uriant.

^^^aftsbury, Pownal, Manchester, Clarendon, Poultney, (...) Danby and
Charlotte, are considerable and flourishing towns (...) the mountain. In the
town of Orwell is Mount Independent (...) the southern extremity of Lake
Champlain, opposite to which (...) (...) conderoga, in the state of New York.

General Bayley and Col. Thomas Johnson, enterprized the first (...) part of
the country, about the year 1762. At this period there was no (...) inhabitant
for 70 miles down the river, nor for as many miles eastward. It (...) inhabited
by thriving farmers.
CURIOSITIES.] There is a very remarkable ledge of rocks in the town of
Bradford, in the county of Orange. It lies on the west bank of Connecticut
river, and is as much as 200 feet high. It appears to ^^ng over and threaten
the traveller as he passes. The space between this ledge and the river, is
scarcely wide enough for a road. Though out of place, the information not being
received early enough to be inserted (...) its proper head, I cannot refrain
from communicating the following curious and (...) information.

(...) river St. Lawrence, at Montreal, is about 3 miles wide. There is an
Island near (...) middle of the river, opposite the city, at the lower end of
which is a mill, with 3 pair of (...), all kept in motion at the same time,
with one wheel. The works are said to here (...) L12,000 sterling. A large
mound of stone, etc. built out into the river, stops a suf^^^ing of water to
keep the mill in perpetual motion. And what is very curious, at (...) of this
mound or dam, vessels pass against the stream, while the mill is in mo^^^.
Perhaps there is not another mill of the king in the world.




In the township of Tinmouth, on the side of a small hill, is a very curious
cave. The chasm, at its entrance, is about four feet in circumference. Entering
this you descend 104 feet, and then opens a spacious room, 20 feet in breadth,
and 100 feet in length. The angle of descent is about 45 degrees. The roof of
this cavern is of rock, through which the water is continually percolating. The
stalactites which bang from the roof appear like icicles on the eves of houses,
and are continually increasing in number and magnitude. The bottom and sides
are daily incrusting with sparr and other mineral substances. On the sides of
this subterraneous hall, are tables, chairs, (...), etc. which appear to have
been artificially carved. This (...) ornamented room, when illuminated with the
candles of the (...), has an enchanting effect upon the eye of the spectator.
If we might be indulged in assigning the general cause of these astonishing
appearances, we should conclude from the various circumstances accompanying
them, that they arise from water filtrating slowly through (...) incumbent
strata; and taking up in its passage a variety of mine (...) substances, and
becoming thus saturated with metallic particles, gradually exsuding on the
surface of the caverns and fissures, in a quiescent state, the aqueous
particles evaporate, and leave the mineral substances to unite according to
their affinities.

At the end of this cave is a circular hole, 15 feet deep, apparently have out,
in a conical form, enlarging gradually as you descend, in the form of a sugar
loaf. At the bottom is a spring of fresh water, in continual motion, like the
boiling of a pot. Its depth has never been founded.

CONSTITUTION.] The inhabitants of Vermont, by their representatives in
convention, at Windsor, on the 25th of December, 1777, declared that the
territory called Vermont, was, and of right ought to be, a free and independent
state; and for the purpose of maintaining regular government in the same, they
made a solemn declaration of (...) rights, and ratified a constitution, of
which the following is an ^^^^ract.

Their declaration, which makes a part of their constitution, asserts (...) all
men are born equally free -- with equal rights, and ought to en^^^ liberty of
conscience -- freedom of the press -- trial by jury -- power (...) form new
states in vacant countries, and to regulate their own internal police -- that
all elections ought to be free -- that all power is originally in the people --
that government ought to be instituted for the common benefit of the community
-- and that the community have a right to reform or abolish government -- that
every member of society has a right to protection of life, liberty and
property -- and in return is bound to contribute his proportion of the expense
of that protection, and yield his personal service when necessary -- that he
shall not be obliged to give evidence against himself -- that the people have a
right to bear arms -- but no standing armies shall be maintained in time of
peace -- that the people have a right to hold themselves, their houses, papers,
and possessions, free from search or seizure -- and therefore warrants without
oaths first made, affording sufficient foundation for them, are contrary to
that right and ought not to be granted -- that no person shall be liable to be
transported out of this state for trial for any offense committed within this
state, etc.

By the frame of government, the supreme legislative power is vested in a house
of representatives of the freemen of the state of Vermont, to be chosen
annually by the freemen on the first Tuesday in September, and to meet the
second Thursday of the succeeding October -- This body is vested with all the
powers necessary for the legislature of a free state -- Two thirds of the whole
number of representativ^^ ^^lected, make a quorum.

Each inhabited town throughout the state, has a right to send one
representative to the assembly.

The supreme executive power is vested in a governor, lieutenant governor,
and twelve counselors, to be chosen annually in the same manner, and vested
with the same powers as in Connecticut.

Every person of the age of 21 years, who has resided in the state one whole
year next before the election of representatives, and is of a quiet, peaceable
behavior, and will bind himself by his oath, to do what he shall in conscience
judge to be most conducive to the best good of the state, shall be entitled to
all the privileges of a freeman of this state.

Each member of the house of representatives, before he takes his seat, must
declare his belief in one God -- in future rewards and punishments, and in the
divinity of the scriptures of the Old and New Testament, and must profess the
protestant religion.

Courts of justice are to be established in every county throughout the state.

The supreme court, and the several courts of common pleas of this state,
besides the powers usually exercised by such courts, have the powers of a court
of chancery, so far as relates to perpetuating testimony, obtaining evidence
from places not within the state, and the care of the persons and estates of
those who are non compotes mentis, etc. All prosecutions are to be commenced in
the name, and by the authority of the freemen of the state of Vermont. The
legislature are to regulate entails so (...) to prevent perpetuities.

All field and staff officers, and commissioned officers of the army, and all
general officers of the militia, shall be chosen by the general assembly; and
be commissioned by the governor.

Every seventh year, beginning with the year 1785, thirteen persons (none of
whom are to be of the council or assembly) shall be chosen by the freemen, and
be called 'the council of censors,' whose duty it shall be to enquire whether
the constitution has been preserved inviolate in every part -- whether the
legislative and executive powers have been properly exercised -- taxes justly
laid and collected -- the public moneys rightly disposed of -- and the laws
duly executed. -- For these purposes they shall have power to send for persons,
papers, etc. -- to pass public censures -- to order impeachments, and to
recommend the repeal of all laws enacted contrary to the principles of the
constitution. They are to be vested with these powers for one year only, after
the day of their election.

The council of censors, when necessary, may call a convention, to meet two
years after their sitting -- to alter the constitution -- the proposed
alterations to be published at least six months before the election of
delegates to such convention.

HISTORY.] The tract of country called Vermont, before the late war, was
claimed both by New York and New Hampshire; and these interfering claims have
been the occasion of much warm altercation, the particulars of which it would
be neither entertaining nor useful to detail. They were not finally adjusted
till since the peace. When hostilities commenced between Great Britain and her
colonies, the inhabitants of this district, considering themselves as in a
state of nature, and not within the jurisdiction either of New York or New
Hampshire, associated and formed for themselves the constitution, of which we
have given an abstract. Under this constitution they have continued to exercise
all the powers of an independent state, and have been prospered. On the fourth
of March, 1791, agreeably to act of Congress of December 6th, 1790, this state
became one of the United States, and constitutes the fourteenth, and not the
least respectable Pillar in the American Union.

NEW HAMPSHIRE.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 168 Miles. between 42 41 and 45 11 N. Lat. Breadth 60 Miles. 4 30 and 6
17 E. Long.

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED north, by the Province of Lower Canada; east, by the
District of Main and the Atlantic Ocean; south, by Massachusetts; west, by the
western bank of Connecticut river; containing 9,491 squaremiles, or 6,074,240
acres; of which at least 100,000 acres are water. The shape of New Hampshire
resembles an open fan; Connecticut river makes the curve, the southern line the
shortest, the eastern line the longest side.

CIVIL DIVISIONS.] This state is divided into 5 counties, which are subdivided
into townships, most of which are about 6 miles square.

Counties Townships Inhabitants Chief Towns No. Inhab. Rockingham 46 43,169
Portsmouth, Lat. 43 5 4,720 Exeter 1,722 Concord 1,747 Strafford 24 and 3
locations 23,601 Dover 1,998 Durham 1,247 Hillsborough 37 and 3 locations
28,772 Amherst 2,369 Cheshire 34 32,871 Keen 1,314 Charlestown 1,09^ Grafton 50
and 17 locations 13,472 Haverhill 552 Plymouth 625 Total 214 141,885

CLIMATE.] See New England.

FACE OF THE COUNTRY.] This state has but about 18 miles of seacoast, at its
southeast corner. In this distance there are several coves for fishing vessels;
but the only harbor for ships is the entrance of Piscataqua river, the shores
of which are rocky. The shore is mostly a sandy beach, adjoining which are salt
marshes, intersected by creeks. From the sea no remarkable high lands in New
Hampshire appear, nearer than 20 or 30 miles. The first ridge, by the name of
the Blue Hills, passes through Rochester, Barrington, and Nottingham, and the
several summits are distinguished by different names. Beyond these are several
higher, detached mountains. Farther back, the mountains rise still higher, and
among this third range, Chocorua, Ossapy and Kyarsarge, are the principal.
Beyond these is the lofty ridge which divides the branches of Connecticut and
Merrimack rivers, denominated The Height of Land. In this ridge is the
celebrated Monadnock mountain. Thirty miles north of which is S^^^pee, and 42
miles further, in the same direction, is Moosehillock mountain. The ridge is
then continued northerly, dividing the waters of the river Connecticut from
those of Saco, and Ameriscoggin. Here the mountains rise ^uch higher, and the
most elevated summits in this range, are the White Mountains. The lands west of
this last mentioned range of mountains, bordering on Connecticut river, are
interspersed with extensive meadows or intervales, rich and well watered.

MOUNTAINS.] We have already named the most considerable mountains in this
state. Several of them require a particular description. We begin with the
Monadnock, which lies 10 miles north of the southern boundary of the state, and
22 miles east of Connecticut river. The elevation of this mountain above the
level of the sea, as measured by James Winthrop, Esquire 1780, is 3254 feet. The
base of this mountain is about 5 miles in diameter, from north to south, and 3
from east to west. Its summit is a bald rock; and on the sides are some
appearances of the explosion of subterraneous fires. In Westriver mountain,
adjoining Connecticut river, in the township of Chesterfield, appearances of a
similar nature are more visible. About the year 1730, the garrison of Fort
Dummer, 4 miles distant, was alarmed with frequent explosions of fire and smoke
emitted from the mountain. The like appearances have been observed since.

Ossapy mountain lies adjoining the town of Moultonborough, on the north east.
In this town it is observed, than in a N. E. storm, the wind falls over the
mountain, like water over a dam; and with such force, as frequently to unroof
houses.

Moosehillock mountain, is the highest of this chain, the White mountains
excepted. It takes its name from the circumstance of its being a remarkable
range for Moose. This mountain is about 70 miles westward of the White
mountains. From its N. W. side flows Baker's river, a branch of Pemigewasset.
On this mountain snow has been seen, from the town of Newbury, on the 30th of
June and 31st of August; and on the mountains intervening, called Franconia and
Lincoln mountains, snow, it is said, lies through the year.

People who live near these mountains, by noticing the various movements of
attracted vapors, can form a pretty accurate judgment of the weather; and they
hence style these mountains their Almanac. If a cloud is attracted by a
mountain, and hovers on its top, they predict rain; and if after rain, the
mountain continues capped, they expect a repetition of showers. A storm is
preceded for several hours, by a roaring of the mountain, which may be heard 10
or 12 miles.

But the White Mountains are by far the most stupendous of any in this state or
in New England, and perhaps are the most remarkable of any within the United
States. They therefore merit particular notice. The Rev. Dr. Belknap elegantly
describes them as follows. --

"They are undoubtedly the highest land in New England, and in clear weather,
are discovered before any other land, by vessels coming in to the eastern
coast; but by reason of their white appearance, are frequently mistaken for
clouds. They are visible on the land at the distance of eighty miles, on the
south and southeast sides; they appear higher when viewed from the northeast,
and it is said, they are seen from the neighborhood of Chamble and Quebec. The
Indians gave them the name of Agiocochook: They had a very ancient tradition
that their country was once drowned, with all its inhabitants, except one Powaw
and his wife, who, foreseeing the flood, fled to these mountains, where they
were preserved, and that from them the country was re-peopled. ^^^elyn's voyage
to New England, p. 135.
They had a superstitious veneration for the summit, as the habitation of
invisible beings; they never venture to ascend it, and always endeavor to
dissuade every one from the attempt. From them, and the captives, whom they
sometimes led to Canada, through the passes of these mountains, many fictions
have been propagated, which have given rise to mavelous and incredible
stories; particularly, it has been reported, that at immense and inaccessible
heights, there have been seen carbuncles, which are supposed to appear luminous
in the night. Some writers, who have attempted to given an account of these
mountains, have ascribed the whiteness of them, to shining rocks, or a kind of
white moss; and the highest summit has been deemed inaccessible, on account of
the extreme cold, which threatens to freeze the traveller, in the midst of
summer.

Nature has, indeed, in that region, formed her works on a large scale, and
presented to view many objects which do not ordinarily occur. A person who is
unacquainted with a mountainous country, cannot, upon his first coming into it,
make an adequate judgment of heights and distances; he will imagine every
thing to be nearer and less than it really is, until, by experience, he learns
to correct his apprehensions, and accommodate his eye to the magnitude and
situation of the objects around him. When amazement is excited by the grandeur
and sublimity of the scenes presented to view, it is necessary to curb the
imagination, and exercise judgment with mathematical precision; or the
temptation to romance will be invincible.

The White Mountains are the most elevated part of a ridge, which extends N. E.
and S. W. to an immense distance. The area of their base, is an irregular
figure, the whole circuit of which, is not less than sixty miles. The number of
summits within this area, cannot at present be ascertained, the country around
them being a thick wilderness. The greatest number which can be seen at once,
is at Dartmouth, on the N. W. side, where seven summits appear at one view, of
which four are bald. Of these the three highest are the most distant, being on
the eastern side of the cluster; one of these is the mountain which makes so
majestic an appearance all along the shore of the eastern counties of
Massachusetts: It has lately been distinguished by the name of MOUNT WASHINGTON.

To arrive at the foot of this mountain, there is a continual ascent of twelve
miles, from the plain of Pigwacket, which brings the traveller to the height of
land, between Saco and Ameriscoggin rivers. At this height there is a level of
about a mile square, part of which is a meadow, formerly a beaver pond, with a
dam at each end. Here, though elevated more than three thousand feet above the
level of the sea, the traveller finds himself in a deep valley. On the east is
a steep mountain, out of which issue several springs, one of which is the
fountain of Ellis river, a branch of Saco. which runs south; another, of
Peabody river, a branch of Amariscoggin, which runs north. From this meadow,
toward the west, there is an uninterrupted ascent on a ridge between two deep
gullies, to the summit of Mount Washington.

The lower part of the mountain is shaded by a thick growth of spruce and fin.
The surface is composed of rocks, covered with very long, green moss, which
extends from one rock to another, and is, in many places, so thick and strong,
as to bear a man's weight. This immense bed of moss, serves as a sponge, to
retain the moisture brought by the clouds and vapors, which are frequently
rising and gathering round the mountains; the thick growth of wood, prevents
the rays of the sun from penetrating to exhale it; so that there is a constant
supply of water deposited in the crevices of the rocks, and issuing in the form
of springs, from every part of the mountain.

The rocks which compose the surface of the mountain, are, in some parts,
state, in others flint; some specimens of rock crystal have been found, but of
no great value. No lime stone has yet been discovered, though the most likely
rocks have been tried with aqua fortis. There is one precipice, on the eastern
side, not only completely perpendicular, but composed of square stones, as
regular as a piece of masonry; it is about five feet high, and from fifteen to
twenty in length. The uppermost rocks of the mountain, are the common quartz,
of a dark gray color; when broken, they show very small shining specks, but
there is no such appearance on the exterior part. The eastern side of the
mountain, rises in an angle of 45 degrees, and requires six or seven hours of
hard labor to ascend it. Many of the precipices are so sleep as to oblige the
traveller to use his hands, as well as his feet, and to hold by the trees,
which diminish in size, till they degenerate into shrubs and bushes; above
these, are low vines, some bearing red, and others blue berries, and the
uppermost vegetation is a species of grass, called winter-grass, mixed with the
moss of the rocks.

Having surmounted the upper and steepest precipice, there is a large area,
called the plain. It is a dry health, composed of rocks covered with moss, and
bearing the appearances of a pasture, in the beginning of the winter season. In
some openings, between the rocks, there are springs of water, in others, dry
gravel. Here the grous or heath bird resorts, and is generally out of danger.
The sugar loaf, which stands on this plain, is a pyramidal heap of gray rocks,
which, in some places, are formed like winding steps. This pinnacle has been
ascended in an hour and a half. The traveller having gained the summit, is
recompensed for his toil, if the sky be serene, with a most noble and extensive
prospect. On the S. E. side, there is a view of the Atlantic ocean, the nearest
part of which, is sixty five miles, in a direct line. On the W. and N. the
prospect is bounded by the high lands, which separate the waters of Connecticut
and Ameriscoggin rivers, from those of Lake Champlain and St. Lawrence* On the
south, it extends to the southernmost mountains of New Hampshire, comprehending
a view of the Lake Winipiseogee. On every side of these mountains, are long
winding gullies, beginning at the precipice below the plain, and deepening in
the descent. In winter, the snow lodges in these gullies; and being driven, by
the N. W. and N. E. wind, from the top, is deepest in those which are situated
on the southerly side. It is observed to lie longer in the spring on the south,
than on the N. W. side, which is the case with many other hills in New
Hampshire.

During the period of nine or ten months, the mountains exhibit more or less of
that bright appearance, from which they are denominated white. In the spring,
when the snow is partly dissolved, they appear of a pale blue, streaked with
white; and after it is wholly gone, at the distance of 60 miles, they are
altogether of the same pale blue, nearly approaching a sky color; while at the
same time, viewed at the distance of eight miles or less, they appear of the
proper color of the rock. These changes are observed by people who live within
constant view of them; and from these facts and observations, it may with
certainty be concluded, that the whiteness of them is wholly caused by the
snow, and not by any other white substance, for in fact, there is none.

A company of gentlemen visited these mountains in July, 1784, with a view to
make particular observations on the several phenomena which might occur. It
happened unfortunately, that thick clouds covered the mountains almost the
whole time, so that some of the instruments, which, with much labor, they had
carried up, were rendered useless.

The height of the mountain was computed, in round numbers, at five thousand
and five hundred feet above the meadow, in the valley below and nearly ten
thousand feet above the level of the sea. 'This computation was made by the
Rev. Dr. Cutler. Subsequent observations and ^^^^ations have induced the author
to believe the computation of his ingenious friends too (...), and he is
perloaded, that whenever the mountain can be measured with the (...) precision,
it will be found to exceed ten thousand feet, of perpendicular altitude (...)
the level of the ocean.'


These vast and irregular heights, being copiously replenished with water,
exhibit a great variety of beautiful cascades; some of which, fall in a
perpendicular sheet or spout, others are winding and sloping, others spread,
and form a basin in the rock, and them gush in a cataract (...) its edge. A
poetic fancy may find full gratification amidst these wild and rugged scenes,
if its ardor be not checked by the fatigue of the approach. Almost every thing
in nature, which can be supposed capable of inspiring ideas of the sublime and
beautiful, is here realized. Aged mountains, stupendous elevations, rolling
clouds, impending ^eks, verdant woods, crystal streams, the gentle till, and
the roaring torrent, all conspire to amaze, to soothe and to enrapture.

On the western part of these mountains is a pass, commonly called the notch,
which, in the narrowest part, moa^^^res but twenty-two feet, between two
perpendicular rocks. From the height above it, a brook descends, and meanders
through a meadow, formerly a beaver pond. It is surrounded by rocks, which, on
one side, are perpendicular, and on the others, rise in an angle of forty-five
degrees -- a strikingly picturesque scene! This defile was known to the
Indians, who formerly led their captives through it to Canada; but it had been
for^^^ten or neglected, till the year 1771, when two hunters passed through it,
and from their report, the proprietors of lands, on the northern parts of
Connecticut river, formed the plan of a road through it, to the Upper Coos,
from which it is distant twenty-five miles. Along the eastern side of the
meadow, under the perpendicular roch, is a causeway, of large logs, sunk into
the mud by rocks, blown with gun powder, from the mountain. On this foundation,
is constructed a road which passes through the narrow defile at the south end
of the meadow, leaving a passage for the rivulet, which glides along the
western side. This rivulet, is the head of the river Saco; and on the north
side of the meadow, at a little distance, is another brook, which is the head
of Amonoosuck, a large branch of Connecticut river. The latitude of this place,
is 44 12, N.

The rivulet, which gives rise to Saco, descends toward the south; and at a
little distance from the defile, its waters are augmented by two streams from
the left, one of which descends in a trench of two feet wide, and is called the
flume, from the near resemblance which it bears to an artificial flume. Over
these are thrown strong bridges; and the whole construction of this road, is
firm and durable; much labor has been expended upon it, and the neat proceeds
of a confiscated estate, were applied to defray the expense. In the descent,
the pass widens, and the stream increases; but for eight or ten miles from the
north, the mountains on each side are so near, as to leave room only for the
river and its intervales; which are not more than half a mile wide. In the
course of this descent, several curious objects present themselves to view. On
the side of one mountain, is a projection, resembling a shelf, on which stand
four large square rocks, in a form resembling as many huge folio volumes. In
two or three places, at immense heights, and perfectly inaccessible, appear
rocks of a white and red hue, the surface of which is polished, like a mirror,
by the constant trickling of water over them. These being exposed to the west
and south, are capable, in the night, of reflecting the moon and star beans to
the wondering traveller in the deep, dark valley below, and by the help of
imagination, are sufficient to give rise to the fiction of carbuncles.

To encompass these mountains as the roads are laid out, through the eastern
and western passes, and round the northern side of the whole cluster, it is
necessary to travel more then seventy miles, and to send eight considerable
rivers, beside many smaller streams. The distance between the heads of rivers,
which pursue such different courses, from this immense elevation, and which
fall into the sea, so many hundred miles asunder, is so small, that a traveller
may, in the course of one day, drink the waters, of Saco, Ameriscoggin and
Connecticut rivers. These waters are all perfectly limpid and sweet, excepting
one brook, on the eastern side of Mount Washington, which has a saponac^^^
taste; and is covered with a very thick and strong froth. It is said that there
is a part of the mountain where the magnetic needle refuses to traverse; this
is probably caused by a body of iron one. It is also (...) that a mineral,
supposed to be lead, had been discovered, near the eastern pass; but that the
spot cannot now be found. What stores the bowels of these mountains contain,
time must unfold; all searches for subterraneous treasures, having hitherto
proved fruitless. The (...) certain riches which they yield, are the freshets,
which bring down the soil, to the intervales below, and form a fine mould,
producing, by the aid of cultivation, corn and herbage, in the most luxuriant
plenty. See Dr. Belknap's Hist. N. Hampshire, Vol. III. p. 39.


RIVERS.] Five of the largest streams in New England, receive more of less of
their waters from this state. These are Connecticut, Ameriscoggin, Saco,
Merrimack and Piscataqua rivers.

Connecticut river rises in the Highlands which separate the United States from
the British Province of Lower Canada. It has been surveyed about 25 miles
beyond the 45th degree of latitude, to the head spring of its northwestern
branch. It is settled all the way nearly to its source. Its general course is
about S. S. W. It extends along the western side of New Hampshire, about 170
miles, and then passes into Massachusetts. The rivers which it receives from
Vermont, on the western side, have been already mentioned. Besides smaller
streams, it receives from New Hampshire, Upper Amonoosuck, which passes through
excellent meadows: Israel river, a romantic stream, bordered with fine land, as
is John's river, a deep, muddy stream, 25 or 30 yards wide, 6 miles below
Israel river. This country is called Upper Coos. Just above the town of
Haverhill in Lower Coos, falls in Great of Lower Amonoosuck, 100 yards wide --
and which, 2 miles from its mouth, receives Wild Amonoosuck, 40 yards wide,
from Franconia and Lincoln mountains. Two or three hours heavy rain rises the
water in this river several feet, and occasions a current so furious, as to put
in motion stones of a foot in diameter; but its violence soon subsides. As you
proceed south to the Massachusetts line you pass Sugar, Cold and Ashuelot
rivers.

Connecticut river, in its course between New Hampshire and Vermont, has two
considerable falls; the first are called Fifteen Mile Falls, between Upper and
Lower Coos -- The river is rapid for 20 miles. At walpole is a second
remarkable fall, formerly known by the name of the Great Fall, now denominated
Bellows' Falls. The breadth of the river above them, is, in some places 22, in
others not above 16 rods. The depth of the channel is about 25 feet and
commonly runs full of water. In Sept. 1792, however, owing to the severe
drought, the water of the river, it is said, "passed within the space of 12
feet wide and 2 feet deep." A large rock divides the stream into two chan^^^,
^^ch about 90 feet wide. When the water is low, the eastern ^^^^nel is dry,
being crossed by a bar of solid rock, and the whole stream falls into the
western channel, where it is contracted to the ^^^dth of 16 feet, and flows
with astonishing rapidity. The perpendicular height of this fall has not been
ascertained, not the depth of the water below it. There are several pitches one
above another, in the length of half a mile, the largest of which is that where
the (...) divides the stream. Notwithstanding the velocity of the current, the
salmon pass up the fall, and are taken many miles above; but the (...) proceed
no farther. This is the famous fall which is so extrava gently and ludicrously
described in an anonymous publication, fill^^ with such extravagant falsehoods,
commonly known by the title of "Peters' history of Connecticut."

On the steep sides of the island rock, hang several arm chairs, fastened
^^ladders, and secured by a counterpoise, in which fishermen set to catch (...)
with dipping nets. In 1784, a bridge of timber, constructed by Col. Hale, was
projected over this fall, 365 feet long* and supported in the middle by the
great rock, under which the highest floods pass without detriment. This is the
first and only bridge that has been erected upon this river, but it is in
contemplation to erect another, (...) miles above, at the middle (...) of Agar
falls, where the passage for the water between the rocks is about 100 feet
wide. This place is in the township of Lebanon, two miles below Dartmouth
College. This beautiful river, in its whole length, is lined on each side, with
a great number of the most flourishing and pleasant towns in the United States.
In its whole course it preserves a distance of from 80 to 100 miles from the
sea coast.

Merrimack river is formed by the confluence of Pemigewassat and Winnipiseogee
rivers; the former is a very rapid river, and springs from a white mountain,
west of the noted mountains of that name; and before its junction with the
Winnipiseogee branch, it receives from the west, Baker's river, a pleasant
stream, forty miles in length, and several smaller streams. The Winnipiseogee
branch, rises from the Lake of the same name. The stream which issues from the
take is small, and in its course passes through a bay 12 miles long, and from 3
to five broad. A few miles from its entrance into the Pemigewasset, is a place
called the Wares, remarkable for the number of salmon and shad which are here
caught. The river is wide, and so (...) low that the fishermen turn the course
of the river, in a short time or compress it into a narrow channel, where they
fix their Gillnets, and take the fish as they pass up the stream. After the
Pemigewassge receives the waters of Winnipiseogee, it takes the name of
^^^mack; and after a course of about 90 miles, first in a southerly, and then
in an easterly direction, and passing over Hookset, Amu^^^^, and Pantacket
Falls, empties into the sea at Newburyport^^ (...) the west it receives,
Blackwater, Contoocook, Piscataquoag, S^^^^gan Nashua, and Concord rivers; from
the east, Bowcook, Su^^^^ Cohas, Beaver, Spicket and Powow rivers. Contoocook
heads (...) Monadnock mountain, is very rapid, and 10 to 12 miles from its
(...) is 100 yards wide, just before its entrance into the Merrimack it (...)
and forms a beautiful island of about 5 or 6 acres. This island remarkable as
being the spot where a Mrs. Duston performed an (...) ordinary exploit. This
woman had been taken by a party of (...) from Haverhill in Massachusetts, and
carried to this island. The (...) 8 or 10 in number, fatigued, and thinking
themselves secure, fall^^^^ She improved this opportunity to make her escape,
and that she (...) effect it without danger of being pursued, she, with one of
(...) tomahawks killed them all, and scalped them, and took their (...) and
returned down the river to Haverhill, and carried the (...) Boston, where she
was generously rewarded.

A bridge has lately been projected over Amuskeag falls, 556 (...) in length,
and 80 feet wide, supported by 5 piers, and an ^^^^ment on each side; the top
of the bridge is 30 feet from the bottom the river. In the construction of the
wood work, 2,000 tons ^^^^ber were used. And what is remarkable, this bridge
was (...) passable for travelers, in 57 days, after it was begun. Two other
(...) are building over this river, in Massachusetts.

"The Piscataqua is the only large river whose whole cour^^^ New Hampshire. Its
head is a pond in the N. E. corner of (...) of Wakefield, and its general
course thence, to the sea, is (...) about 40 miles. It divides New Hampshire
from York (...) the District of Main, and is called Salmon-fall river, from its
(...) to the lower falls at Berwick; where it assumes the name of (...)
wichawannock, which it bears till it meets with Cochecho rivers, (...) comes
from Dover, when both run together in one channel, ^^^ton's point, where the
western branch meets it. From this junction to the sea, the river is so rapid
that it never freezes; the distance is seven miles, and the course generally
form S. to S. E. The western branch is formed by Swamscot river, which comes
from Exeter, Winnicot river, which comes through Greenland, and Lamprey river,
which divides New market from Durham; these empty into a bay, four miles wide,
called the Great Bay. The water in its further progress it contracted into the
a lesser bay, and then it receives Oyster river, which runs through Durham, and
Back river, which come from Dover, and at length meets with the main stream at
Hilton's point. The tide rises into all these bays, and branches as far as the
lower falls in each river, and forms a most rapid current, especially at the
season of the freshets, when the ebb continues about two hours longer than the
flood; and were it not for the numerous eddies, formed by the indentings of the
shore, the ferries would then be impassable.

At the lower falls in the several branches of the river, are landing places,
whence lumber and other country produce is transported, and vessels or boats
from below discharge their lading: So that in each river there is a convenient
trading place, not more than twelve of fifteen miles distant from Portsmouth,
with which there is constant communication by every tide. Thus the river, from
its form, and the situation of its branches, is extremely favorable to the
purposes of navigation and commerce.

At Dover is an high neck of land between the main branch of Pas^^^^a and Back
river, about two miles long, and half a mile wide, rising gently along a fine
road, and declining on each side like a ship's (...) It commands an extensive
and variegated prospect of the rivere, bays, adjacent shores, and distant
mountains. It has often been (...) by travelers as an elegant situation for a
city, and by (...) gentlemen for a fortress. The first settlers pitched here,
but the trade has long since been removed to Cochecho falls, about four miles
farther up; and this beautiful spot is almost deserted of inhab^^^^." ^^^knap's
Hist. Vol. III. page 2^1.


Amariscoggin and Saco rivers, are principally in the District of Main, and
will be described under that head.

LAKES.] Winnipisiogee Lake, is the largest collection of water in New
Hampshire. It is about 21 miles in length, from S. E. (...) W. and of very
unequal breadth, from 3 to 12 miles. It is full of islands, and is supplied
with numerous rivulets from the surrounding mountains. This lake is frozen
about 3 month in a year, and (...) sleighs and teams, from the circumjacent
towns, cross it on the (...). In summer it is navigable its whole length. The
landing on the (...) (...) side of the lake is 26 miles from Dover landing,
where the (...) flows.

The other considerable lakes, are Umbagog, in the N. E. corner of the state,
and partly in the District of Main, Squam, Sunnapee, and (...) Ossapee.

SOIL AND PRODUCTIONS.] Of these there is a great variety in the state. The
intervale lands upon the margin of the large rivers (...) the most valuable,
because they are overflowed and enriched every (...) by the water from the
uplands, which brings down a fat flame (...) sediment. There are generally two
state of intervale lands, on the borders of the large rivers, one is overflowed
every year, the other, which is considerably higher, only in very high
freshets. These intervale lands are of various breadth, according to the near
or remote situation of the hills. On Connecticut river, they are from a quarter
of a mile to a mile and a half on each side; and it is observable that they
yield wheat in greater abundance and perfection, than the same kind of soil,
east of the height of land. These lands in every part of the state, yield all
the other kinds of grain, in the greatest perfection; but are not so good for
pasture as the upland of a proper quality. The wide spreading hill are
generally much esteemed as warm and rich; rocky, moist land, is accounted good
for pasture; drained swamps have a deep mellow soil; and the valleys between
hills are generally very productive.

Apples and pairs are the most common, and the principal fruits cultivated in
this state. No good husbandman thinks his farm complete without an orchard.

Agriculture is the chief business of the inhabitants of this state, Beef,
pork, mutton, poultry, wheat, rye, Indian corn, barley, pulse, butter, cheese,
flax, hemp, hops, esculent plants and roots, articles which will always find a
market, may be produced in almost any quantity in New Hampshire.

TRADE AND MANDEACTURES.] The inhabitants in the southwestern quarter of this
state generally carry their produce to Boston. In the middle and northern part,
as far as the Lower Coos, they trade at Portsmouth. Above the Lower Coos, there
are yet no convenient roads directly to the sea coast. The people on the upper
branches of Saco river, find their nearest market at Portland, in the District
of Main; and thither the inhabitants of Upper Coos have generally carried their
produce; some have gone in the other direction to New York market. But from a
survey made in 1782, it was found that a road from the upper Amonoosuck, which
empties into Connecticut River, to the head of navigation, in Kennebeck river,
is very practicable. The distance 80 or 90 miles; and for a third part of that
distance from Kennebeck, there are already roads and settlements.

The articles and the quantity of each, exported and imported into the port of
Pascataqua, in two years following Oct, 1st, 1789, will appear from the
following tables taken from Dr. Belknap's History.

TABLE of Exportation form the port of Pascataqua, from October ^, 1789, to
October 1, 1791.
Articles exported To Europe. W. Ind. N. S. Afri. Tot. 1000 feet of Pine Boards
6247 11622 96 69 18034 Do. feet of oak plank 378 26 404 Do. staves and heading
1317 1608 44 2969 Do. clapboards 2 19 21 Do. shingles 268 2689 Do. hoops 79 7
86 Feet of oar rafters 47000 950 47950 Tons of pine timber 88 86 174 Do. oak
timber 254 20 271 Frames of houses 12 12 Pine masts 41 4 45 Spruce spars 13 72
85 Shook hogsheads 2079 2079 Wagons 2 2 Pairs of cart wheels 14 14 Sets of
yokes and bows 28 28 Boats 30 30 Handspikes 80 80 Quintals of dry fish 250
26207 26457 Barrels of pickled fish 501 501 Do. Whale oil 120 120 Do. Tar 1613
60 1673 Casks of flax seed 1798 1798 Barrels of beef 2775 2 2777 Do. pork 9 1
10 Do. rice 2 2 Bushels of Indian corn 391 2000 2391 oxen and cows 577 33 6^0
Horses 207 2 209 Sheep 261 229 490 Gallons of N. E. rum 150 1449 1599 Do.
Madeira wine 845 845 Thousands of bricks 129 129 Tons of pot ash 88 88 Do.
pearl ash 30(...) 30 Bores of candles 28 28

Total value of exportation for two years 296,839 dollars 51 cents.

TABLE of Importation into the Port of P^scataqua, from October 1, 1789, to
October 1, 1791.
Articles imported from Europe. W. Indies. No. Sco^^a Total. Gallons of rum
138,911 130911 Do. gin 22 22 Do. molasses 270,785 270,785 Do. wine from Madeira
4721 Do. Porter 457 457 lbs of unrefined sugar 546,648 546,648 Do. loaf sugar
77 77 Do. Coffee 68,633 68,633 Do. cotton 17,564 17,564 Do. cocoa 27,944 27,944
Do. Cheese 1056 1056 Do. tea 2696 86 2782 Do. twine 2204 2204 Do. nails 16890
16,890 Hundreds of cordage 17,1,7 17,1,7 Do. hemp 940 -- 940 -- Bushels of salt
( part) ( part) 98,336 Do. sea coal 3131 3131 lbs of steel unwrought 16527
16527 Do. bar and sheet lead 4336 4336 Grindstones (a few not ascertained)

N. B."What comes coast ways from any of the United States cannot be
ascertained; as no regular entries are made where only the produce of the
United States is on board: except accompanied with more than two hundred
dollars value of foreign articles. The value of imported articles is generally
governed by the Boston market."

TABLE of CLEARANCES at the Port of Pascataqua, from October 1, 1789, to
October 1, 1791.
France Ships and Snows. Brigantines Schooners Sloops Total of vessels American
tonnage French ditto British ditto Portuguese ditto Total of tonnage French
West Indies 17 70 39 10 136 16616 264 16880 St. Peter's and Miquelon 8 1 9 428
34 462 England 16 25 1 42 6725 441 7166 Scotland 4 4 616 616 Ireland 1 3 4 666
666 British West Indies 8 3 4 1 16 3134 3134 Nova Scotia 12 12 502 502 Portugal
Portuguese Islands 1 1 162 162 Holland and Plantations 2 2 233 233 Denmark and
Islands Africa 1 1 110 110 Coasting and cod fishery 40 10 50 1166 1166 Total 43
107 105 22 277 26360 298 1077 162 31097

Statement of the FISHERIES at Pascataqua and its neighborhood.
Schooners 27 employed in the Cod and Scale Fishery annually. Boats 20 Tonnage
630 Seamen 2^0

The Schooners, Boats, and Seamen belonging to the Isles of Shoals, are not
included in the above estimation.

Product of the Fishery in the year 1791.
Quintals made Merchantable fish 5170 Jamaica ditto 14217 Seal ditto 6463
Total 25850

The fish made at the Isles of Shoals are included in this statement.

The success of the fishery in this season was uncommonly good.

The staple commodities of New Hampshire are ships, lumber, provisions, fish,
horses, pot and pearl ashes, and flax feed. -- Ships are built in all the towns
contiguous to the river Pascataqua and its branches. The number of ships, built
in 1790, was 8; in 1791, 20.

The number of ships and other vessels belonging to the Port of Pascataqua, in
1791, was as follows -- Above 100 tons, 33 -- Under 100 tons, 50; in all 83.

The people in the country generally manufacture their own clothing; and
considerable quantities of tow cloth for exportation. The other manufactures
are pot and pearl ashes, maple, sugar, bricks and pottery, and some iron, not
sufficient, however, for home consumption, though it might be made an article
of exportation.

BANK.] By act of assembly, of January 1792, a Bank, by the name of, "The Bank
of New Hampshire," was established, to continue 50 years, under the management
of a President and seven directors. The capital stock is 60,000 dollars: and
the stockholders have liberty to increase it to 200,000 dollars specie, and
100,000 dollars in any other estate.

POPULATION AND (...).] The number of inhabitants in 1790, has been mentioned
in the preceding table of divisions. In 1767 they were estimated at 52,700. The
mean increasing ratio per annum since. D. (...) at 1883. According to this mode
of computation, the (...) of people in New Hampshire, has actually doubled in
(...) were years of war.

Dr. Belknap^^ (...) of instances of remarkable long^^ity in this (...). In
(...) (...) of the first settlers were living in 1785, (...) years of age. In
Londonderry, the (...) years, and some to 104. One Robert (...) Wakefield, in
1787, aged 115. He (...) from Port^mouth to Boston, 66 miles, in one (...). He
performed this journey the last time (...).

The inhabitants of New Hampshire, like the settlers in all new countries, are
in general, a (...) round, active, brave people. The advantages of easy (...)
have not been to generally enjoyed, as good men have (...) of which there has
been a deficiency of (...) the various departments of government (...) the
means of information and improvement (...) and extended, and this political
evil, in a great (...).

"The free indulgence of spiritous liquors, has been and is now, one of the
greatest faults of many of the people of New Hampshire; especially in the
neighborhood of the river Pascataqua and its branches, and wherever the
business of getting lumber forms the principal employment of the people. In
traveling up the country it affords pleasure to observe the various articles
of produce and manufacture coming to market; but in traveling down the country
it is equally disgustful to meet, the same teams returning loaded with casks of
rum, along with fish, salt and other necessary articles. Among husbandmen,
cider is their common drink. Malt liqour is not so frequently used, as its
wholesomeness deserves. But after all, there are no persons more robust and
healthy, than those, whole only or principal drink, is the simple element, with
which nature has universally and bountifully supplied this happy land." Dr.
(...)


COLLEGE, ACADEMIES, etc.] The only college in this State is in the township of
Hanover, situated on a beautiful plain about half a mile east of Connecticut
river, inlatitude 43 33. It was named Dartmouth College. after the Right
Honorable William Ears of Dartmouth, who was one of its principal benefactors.
It was founded by the late pious and benevolent Dr. Eleazer Whe^lock. who, in
1769, obtained a royal charter, wherein ample privileges were granted, and
suitable provision made for the education and instruction of youth of the
Indian tribes, in reading, writing and all parts of learning which should
appear necessary and expedient for civilizing and christanizing the children of
Pagans, as well as in all liberal arts and sciences, and also of English youths
and any others. The very humane and laudable attempts which have been made to
christianize and educate the Indians, have not, through their native
untractableness, been crowned with that success which was hoped and expected.
Its situation, in a frontier country, exposed it, during the late war, to many
inconveniences, which impeded its property. It flourished, however, amidst all
its embarrassments, and is now one of the most growing seminaries in the United
States.

The funds of this college consist chiefly in lands, amounting to about 80,000
acres, which are increasing in value, in proportion to the growth of the
country. Twelve hundred acres he contiguous to the college, and are capable of
the best improvement. Twelve thousand acres lie in Vermont. A tract of 8 miles
square was granted by the assembly of New Hampshire, in 1789. The revenue of
the college, arising from the lands, amounts annually to L140. By contracts
already made, it will amount in four years to L450; and in twelve years to
L650. The income from tuition is about L600 per annum.

The number of under graduates in 1790, was about 150; they have since
increased. A grammar school of about 50 or 60 scholars, is annexed to the
college.

The students are under the immediate government and instruction of a
President, who is also professor of history: a professor of mathematics and
natural philosophy, a professor of languages and two tutors. In the 22 years
since the college was founded, 470 students have received degrees, 1^0 of whom
are, or have been ministers of the gospel, and 448 are now living.

The college is furnished with a handsome library and a philosophical apparatus
tolerably complete. A new college building of wood, 150 by 50 feet, and three
stories high, was erected in 178^, and since (...) containining 36 rooms for
students. Its situation is elevated, healthful and pleasant, commanding an
extensive prospect to the west. There are three other public buildings belong
to the College.

There are a number of academies in this State: the principal of which is at
Exeter, founded and endowed by the Hon. John Philips. LLD. of Exeter, and
incorporated by act of assembly in 1781, by the name of "Philips's Exeter
Academy." It is a very respectable and useful institution, under the inspection
of a board of trustees, and the immediate government and instruction of a
preceptor and an assistant. It has a fund of nearly L10,000 one fifth of which
is in lands not yet productive. The present and income is L480. It has commonly
between 50 and 60 students.

An Academy, at New Ipswich, was incorporate in 1789; and has a fund of about
L1000, and generally from 40 to 50 scholars.

There is another academy at Atkinson, sounded by the Hon. Na^^aiel Pcabody,
who has endowed it with a conation of 1000 acres of land. It was incorporated
in 1790.

At Amherst, an academy was incorporated in 1791, by the name of the "Aurean
Academy." Similar institutions are forming at Charlestown, Concord and other
places, which, with the peculiar attention which has lately been paid to
schools, by the legislature, and the establishment of social libraries in
several towns, afford a pleasing prospect of the increase of literature and
useful knowledge in this State.

CHIEF TOWNS.] Portsmouth is the largest town in this State. It is about two
miles from the sea, on the south side of Pascataqua river. It contains about
610 dwelling houses, and nearly as many other buildings, besides those for
public uses, which are three congregational churches, one episcopal, one
universalist, and state house, market house, four school houses, and a work
house.

Its harbor is one of the finest on the continent, having a sufficient depth
of water for vessels of any burden. It is defended against storms by the
adjacent land, in such a manner, as that ships may securely ride there in any
season of the year. Besides, the harbor is so well fortified by nature that
very little art will be necessary to render it impregnable. Its vicinity to the
sea renders it very convenient for naval trade. A light house, with a single
light, stands at the entrance of the harbor. Ships of war have been built
here; among others, the America, of 74 guns, launched Nov. 1782, and presented
to the King of France, by the Congress of the United States.

Exeter is 15 miles S. W. from Portsmouth, situated at the head of navigation,
upon Swam^cot, or Exeter river. The tide rises here 11 feet, it is well
situated for a manufacturing town, and has already a duck manufactory, in its
infancy -- 6 saw mills, a fulling mill, slitting mill, paper mill, snuff mill,
two chocolate and to grist mills, iron works and a printing office. The public
buildings are two congregational churches, an academy, a new and handsome court
house and a goal. The public offices of the State are kept here. Formerly this
town was famous for ship building, but this business has not flourished since
its interruption by the war.

Concord is a pleasant, flourishing, island town, situated on the west bank of
Merrimack river; (...) miles W. N. W. from Portsmouth. The general court, of
late have commonly held their sessions here; and from its central situation and
a thriving back country, it will probably soon become the permanent seat of
government. Much of the (...) of the upper country centers in this town.

Dover, Amhert, Keen. Charlestown, Plymouth and Haverhill, (...) the other most
considerable towns in this State. Haverhill, is a (...) thriving town, on the
east side of Connecticut river, in Lower Coun^^^^. It is the most considerable
town in the country of Grafton, and (...) a well constructed court house and a
congregational church. In is (...) a bed of iron one, which has yielded some
profit to the proprietor (...) also a quarry of free stone, from which the
people are supplied (...) chimney pieces, hearth stone, etc. It has also a
fulling mill and (...) oil mill, and many other excellent mill seats.

CURIOSITIES AND CANAL.] In the township of Chester, is (...) circular
eminence, half a mile in diameter, and 400 feet high, (...) Rattlesnake hill.
On the south side, 10 yards from its base, is them ^^trance of a cave called
the Devil's Den, in which is a room 15 or 20 (...) square and 4 feet high,
floored and circled by a regular rock, from the upper part of which are
dependent many excrescences, nearly in the (...) and size of a part, and when
approached by a torch throw out a sparkling luster of almost every hue. Many
frightful stories have been told of this cave, by those who delight in the
mavelous. It is a cold, dreary, gloomy place.

In the town of Durham is a rock, computed to weigh 60 or 70 tons. It lies so
exactly poised on another rock, as to be easily moved with one finger. It is on
the top of a hill, and appears to be natural. In the township of Atkinion, in a
large meadow, there is a small island of 6 or 7 acres, which was formerly
loaded with valuable pine timber, and other forest wood. When the meadow is
overflowed, by means of an artificial dam, this island rises with the water,
which is sometimes 6 feet. Near the middle of the island is a small pond, which
has been gradually lessening ever since it was known, and is now almost covered
with verdure. In this place a pole 50 feet long has disappeared, without
finding bottom. In the water of that pond, there have been fish in plenty,
which, when the meadow has been overflowed, have appeared there, and when the
water has been drawn off, have been left on the meadow, at which time the
island settles to its usual place.

In the year 1791, a canal was cut through the marshes, which opens and inland
navigation, from Hampton, through Salisbury, into Merrimack river, for about 8
miles. By this passage, laded boats may be conducted with the utmost ease and
safety.

RELIGION.] The principal denominations of christians in this State, are
Congregationalists, Presbyterians, Episcopalians, Baptists and Quakers. There
is a small society of Sandemanians, and another of Universalists, in
Portsmouth. For the distinguishing characteristics of these several sects, see
the general account of the United States, article RELIGION.

"The People in general throughout the state, are professors of the christian
religion its some form or other. There is however, a sort of wise men, who
pretend to reject it; but they have not yet been able to substitute a better in
its place." Dr. Belknap*


CONSTITUTION.] The citizens of this State have lately form (...) for
themselves a constitution of government, upon the same gene^^^^ principles with
their former one, which is not yet published.

THE DISTRICT OF MAIN from the latest Surveys
map of Maine ^. Carleton delin


HISTORY.] The first discovery made by the English of any part of New
Hampshire, was in 1614, by Captain John Smith, who range the shore from
Penobscot to Cape Cod; and in this rout, discovered the river Pascataqu^. On
his return to England, he published a description of the country, with a map of
the coast, which he presented to Prince Charles, who gave it the name of NEW
ENGLAND. The first settlement was made in 1623.

New Hampshire was for many years under the jurisdiction of the Governor of
Massachusetts, yet they had a separate legislature. They ever bore a
proportionable share of the expenses and levies in all enterprises, expeditions
and military exertions, whether planned by the colony or the crown. In every
stage of the opposition that was made to the inoroachments of the British
parliament, the people, who ever had a high sense of liberty, cheerfully bore
their part. At the commencement of hostilities, indeed, while their council was
appointed by royal mandamus, their patriotick ardour was checked by these crown
officers. But when freed from this restraint, they flew eagerly to the American
standard, when the voice of their country declared for war, and their troops
had a large share of the hazard and fatigue, is well as of the glory of
accomplishing the late revolution.

As the best and only history of this state, the reader is referred to the Rev.
Dr. Belknap's, published complete, in 3 vols. 8vo. in 1792, written in a pure,
neat, historic stlyle -- The two first volumes contain the history of New
Hampshire; the third contains "A geographical description of the State, with
sketches of its natural history, produc^^^ and improvements, laws and
government," and is replete a curious and useful information, and interspersed
with many ^^^emous and philosophical remarks. From this volume much distance
has been derived, in making the foregoing compilation.

DISTRICT OF MAIN. [BELONGING TO MASSACHUSETTS.]
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 170 Miles. between 4 and 9 E. Lon. Sq. miles. 21750 Breadth 125 Miles.
43 and 48 N. Lat. Sq. Miles. 21750

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED north, by Lower Canada, from which it is separated by the
high lands: east, by the river St. Croix, What river is referred to under the
name of St. Croix, in the treaty of 1783, is at present a subject of dispute,
between Great Britain and the United States. The French, according to their
mode of taking possession, always fixed a cross in every river they came to.
Almost every river on the coast they discovered, has in turn been called La
P^vi^rede St. Croix.

"There are three rivers that empty themselves into the Bay of passamaqu^^^,
the eastalmost always called by the native Indians and French, St. Croix, and
the (...). Before the commencement of the (...), and several others, to explore
the Bay of Pa^samaqua^dy, to examine the natives, and to find out which was the
true river St. Croix. They (...) accordingly, and reported it to be the eastern
most river, (...) and of their (...). At the forming of the treaty of peace*
the commissioners had Mitchell's maps; and in fixing the boundary between that
part of (...) (...), now called New Brunswick, and the commonwealth of
Massachusetts, they conducted it to be the river land down by (...). After the
peace, the British subjects of Nova Scotia, took possession of all the lands,
between St. Croix and (...) which tract is said to be nearly as large as the
state of New Hampshire, and now (...) the same, asserting that Schoodiat is the
(...)


and a line drawn due north from its source to the said highlands, which
divides it from the Province of New Brunswick; south, by the Atlantic Ocean;
west, by New Hampshire.

The Old Province of Main (included in the above limits) is bounded on the west
by New Hampshire; south by the Atlantic ocean, and north and northeast by the
land, called in some maps Sagadahock. It was supposed at the time of its being
made a province, to have been 120 miles square; but by a settlement of the
line, in 1737, on the part, or side adjoining New Hampshire, the form of the
land was reduced from a square to that of a diamond. The Province of Main
contains, according to Douglas, about 9,600 square miles.

DIVISIONS.] The District of Main is divided into five counties, viz.

Counties. No. Inhabitants. Chief Towns. Inhabitants. York 28,821 York 2,900
Cumberland 25,450 Portland Lat.43 43 2,240 Lincoln 29 962 Pownalborough 2,055
Hallowell 1,194 Waldoborough 1,210 Hancock 9,549 Penobscot 1,048 Washington
2,758 Machias 818 Total 96,540

FACE OF THE COUNTARY, SOIL AND CLIMATE.} The District of Main, though an
elevated tract of country, cannot be called mountainous. A great proportion of
the lands are arable and exceedingly fertile, particularly between Penobscot
and Kencbeck rivers. On some parts of the sea coast, the lands are but
indifferent; but this defect might easily be remedied, by manuring it with a
marine vegetable, called rock weed, which grows on the rocks between high and
low water mark, all along the shores. It makes a most excellent manure, and the
supply is immense. It generally grows, in this District, on all the shores that
are washed by the sea; and the breadth of the border is in proportion to the
height the tide rises, which, in the eastern part of the district, is nearly 30
feet. It is estimated that there are 4000 acres of this rock weed on this
coast, and that each acre will produce annually 20 loads, making in the whole
80,000 loads of the best manure, 10 loads of which spread upon an acre, is
reckoned sufficient for three years. The country has a large proportion of dead
swamps, and sunken lands, which are easily drained, and leave a rich, fat soil.
The interior country is universally represented as being of an excellent soil,
well adapted both for tillage and pasture -- The lands in general are easily
cleared, having but little under brush.

The District of Main may naturally be considered in three divisions -- The
first comprehending the tract lying east of Penobscot river, of about 4.500.000
acres -- The second, and best tract, of about 4,000*000 acres, lying between
Penobscot and Kenecbeck river. -- The third, first settled and most populous at
present, west of Kenebeck river, containing also about 4,000*000 acres.

The climate does not materially differ from the rest of New England. The
weather is more regular in the winter, which usually lasts, with severity, from
the middle of December, to the last of March; during this time the ponds and
fresh water rivers are passable on the ice, and sleighing continues
uninterrupted by thaws, which are common in the three southern in New England
States. Although vegetation, in the spring, commences earlier in these states
than in the District of Main, yet in the latter it is much more rapid. The
elevation of the (...) in general -- the purity of the air, which is rendered
sweet and ^^^^brious by the balsamic qualities of many of the forest trees --
the (...) streams, both large and small, which abundantly water this country,
and the regularity of the weather, all unite to render this one of the
healthiest countries in the world.

RIVERS, LAKES, etc.] This district has a sea coast of about 240 miles, in
which distance there is an abundance of safe and commodi^^^^ harbors; besides
which there is a security given to navigation, (...) (...) part of the coast,
by what is called the inland passage. Almost the whole coast is lined with
islands, among which vessels may generally anchor with safety.

The country of which we are speaking, is watered by many large and small
rivers. The principal are the following, as you proceed from east to west. St.
Croix, a short river, issuing from a large (...) in the vicinity of St. John's
river, remarkable only for its ^^^ming a part of the eastern boundary of the
United States. Next in Passamaquaddy river, which with the Schoodiac from the
west, (...) by one mouth into Passamaquaddy bay. Opposite Mount (...) island,
which is about 15 miles long and 12 broad, Union river (...) into a large bay.
A short distance west is the noble Penobscot, which rises in two branches from
the highlands. Between the source of the west fork, and its junction with the
east, is Moosehead lake 30 or 40 miles long and 15 wide. The eastern branch
passes through several smaller lakes. From the Forks, as they are called, the
Penobscot Indians pass to Canada, up either branch, principally the west, the
source of which they say is not more than 20 miles from the waters that empty
into the river St. Lawrence. At the Forks is a remarkable high mountain. from
the Forks down to Indian Old Town, situated on an island in this river, is
about 60 miles, 40 of which the water flows in a still, smooth stream, and in
the whole distance there are no falls to interrupt the passing of boats. In
this distance, the river widens and embraces a large number of small islands;
and about half way receives two considerable tributary streams, one from the
east and the other from the west, whose mouths are nearly opposite each other.
About so rods below Indian Old Town, are the great Falls, where is a carrying
place of about 20 rods; thence 12 miles to the head of the tide, there are no
falls to obstruct boats. Vessels of 30 tons, come within a mile of the head of
the tide. Thence 35 miles to the head of the bay, to the site of old Fort
Pownal, the river is remarkably straight, and (...) navigated. Passing by
Majabagaduse, on the east, 7 miles, and (...) head, 20 miles further, on the
west, you enter the ocean.

Proceeding westward, over several small creeks, you come to Ken^^^eck, one of
the finest rivers in this country. One branch of it rises in the highlands, a
short distance from a branch of the (...) which empties into the St. Lawrence.
Another branch rises in (...) head Lake. In its course it receives sandy river
from the (...) Sebasticook and several others from the (...), and passes to sea
by Cape Small Point. It is navigable for vessels of 150 tons, upwards of 40
miles from the sea.

Sneepscut river is navigable 20 or 30 miles, and empties into the ocean a
little to the east of Kennebeck. On this river is the important port of
Wiscasset, in the township of Pownalborough.

Ameriscoggin, now more generally called Androscoggin, properly speaking is but
the main western branch of the Kenebeck. Its founded are north of Lake Unbagog
-- Its course is southwardly, till it approaches near the White mountains, from
which it receives Moose and P^^body rivers; and then turns to the east, and
then southeast, in (...) course it passes within two miles of the sea coast,
and turning north (...) over Pejepskaeg, falls into Merry Meeting Bay, where it
forms a junction with the Kenebeck, 20 miles from the sea. Formerly, from (...)
bay to the sea, the confluent stream, was called Saggadahock. The lands on this
river are very good. Steven's river heads within a (...) of Merry Meeting Bay.
A canal, uniting these waters, has lately (...) opened. Cusien's river is
between Freeport and North Yarm^^^^ Royal's river empties itself into the sea
in North Yarmouth. P^^^scut is fed by Sebacook lake, and meets the sea at
Falmouth. (...) such river passes to sea through Scarborough. It receives its
(...) from its extraordinary freshets.

Saco river is one of the three largest rivers in this district. T^^ principal
part of its waters fall from the White mountains. It (...) some distance from
its source, is southwardly; it then suddenly (...) to the east and crosses into
the District of Main, and then makes large bend to the northeast, east and
southwest, embracing the (...) township of Fryeburg, in the country of York.
Its general (...) thence to the sea is S. E. Great and little Ossapee rivers
fall (...) from the west. This river is navigable for ships to Saco falls,
(...) 6 miles from the sea. Here the river is broken by Indian Island, (...)
which is the Post road. A bridge is thrown over each of the branches. A number
of miles are erected here, to which logs are (...) from 40 or 50 miles above;
and vessels can come quite to the miles take in the lumber. Four million feet
of pine boards were (...) sawed at these mills before the war. Biddeford and
Pepp^^ borough lie on either side of the mouth of this river. Mous^^^ York and
Cape Neddock rivers, in the county of York, are short (...) inconsiderable
streams.

We have already mentioned the most considerable lakes, which (...) known in
this District. Lake Scbacook, 18 miles N. W. of (...) land, in extent is equal
to two large townships, and is connected with long Pond, on the N. W. by Sungo
river. The whole extent these waters is neatly 30 miles N. W. and S. E.

BAYS AND CAPES.] The principal Bays are Passamaquaddy, (...) ch^as, Penobscot,
Cas^o and Wells. Of these, Penobscot and (...) are the most remarkable. Both
are full of islands, some of (...) are large enough for townships. Long Island,
in the center of (...) nobscot Bay, is 15 miles in length, and from 2 to 3 in
breadth, forms an incorporated township by the name of Islesborough. Containing
about 400 inhabitants. On a fine peninsula on the east side the bay, the
British built a ^ort and made a settlement, which is the shire town in the
county of Hancock. The points of Casce (...) are Cape Small Point on the east,
and Cape Elizabeth on the (...). This bay is about 25 miles wide, and 14 deep,
forming a most exce^^^ harbor for vessels of any burden, and interspersed with
a multitude of islands, some of which are nearly large enough for townships.
Wells Bay lies between Cape Porpoise and Cape Neddock.

PRODUCTIONS.] The soil of this country, in general, where it is properly
fitted to receive the feed, appears to be very friendly to the growth of wheat,
rye, barley, oats, peace, hemp, flax, as well as for the production of almost
all kinds of culinary roots and plants, and for English grass; and also for
Indian corn, provided the seed be (...) from a more northern climate. Hops are
the spontaneous growth of this country. It is yet problematical whether apple
and other fruit trees will flourish in the northern and eastern parts of this
District. It is said, however, that a century ago, there were good orch^^^^,
within the county of Washington, about the Bay of Passamaquadly, which were
destroyed alter Col. Church broke up the French settlements at that place. From
some experiments of the present inhabitants, the presumption is rather against
the growth of fruit trees. In the countries of York and Cumberland, fruit is as
plenty as in New Hampshire. This country is equally good for grazing as for
village, and large stocks of neat cattle may be fed both summer and winter.

The natural growth of this country consists of white pine and spruce (...) in
large quantities, suitable for masts, boards and shingles; the white pine is
perhaps, of all others the most useful and important; ^^wood will supply its
place in building. Maple, beech, white and (...) oak and yellow bitch, are the
growth of this country. The bitch (...) large sightly tree, and is used for
cabinet work, and receives a pol^^ little inferior to mahogany. The outer bark,
which consists of a great number of layers, when separated, is as smooth and
soft as the best writing paper, and in some cases a tolerable substitute for
it. The low (...) produce sir. This tree is fit neither for timber not fuel;
but (...) a balsam that is highly prized. This balsam is contained in small
^^^^berances like blisters, under the smooth bark of the tree. The (...) is an
evergreen, resembling the spruce, but very tapering and nei^^ tall nor large.

Under this article, the following remarks of General Lincoln merit a place.

"From the different rivers, in the eastern country, waters may be (...) for
mills, and all water work; besides, many are the advantages which arise to a
country, through which streams of water are so lib^^lly interspersed, as they
are in this; and especially when they a^^, as many of these do, with fish of
different kinds; among them (...) the salmon, shad, alewive and others, which
seek the quiet waters of the Lakes, as the only places in which they can with
safety lodge their spawns. From this source, the inland country may draw a
supply of fish, equal to all their demands, (if they are not interrupted in
their passage,) which are rendered peculiarly valuable, as their annual return
is at a season of the year when most needed, and when they (...) be cured with
a very little salt; so that a long and free use of them will not be injurious
to the health of the inhabitants. The cer^^^^ of the supply adds to its value.
These fish, as is supposed, and of which, there cannot, I think, be a doubt,
return to the same waters (...), in which they were spawned, unless some
natural obstruction (...) thrown in their way. Whilst the people inland may be
supplied with these fish, the inhabitants of the sea coast may be supplied with
(...) cod and other ground fish, which are allured quite into their har^^ in
pursuit of the river fish, and may be taken with the greatest ease, as no other
craft is necessary, in many places, than a common canoe. Great advantages arise
also, to those who live on the seacoast, from the shell fish, viz. the
lobster, the scollop and the clam. To these advantages may be added, those
which arise from the forests being filled with the moose and deer, and the
waters being covered with wild fowls of different kinds."

COMMERCE AND MANUFACTURES.] From the first settlement of Main, until the year
1774 or 1775, the inhabitants generally followed the lumber trade to the
neglect of agriculture. This afforded an immediate profit. Large quantities of
corn and other grain were ^^^ally imported from Boston and other places,
without which it was supposed the inhabitants could not have subsisted. But the
late war, by rendering these resources precarious, put the inhabitants upon
their true interest, i. e. the cultivation of their lands. The inhabitants now
raise a sufficient quantity for their own consumption; though too many are
still more fond of the axe than of the plough. Their wool and flax are very
good -- hemp has lately been tried with great success. Almost every family
manufacture wool and flax into cloth, and make husbandry utensils of every kind
for their own use.

EXPORTS.] This country abounds with lumber of various kinds, such as masts,
which of late, however, have become scarce; white pine boards, ship timber, and
every species of split lumber manufactured from pine and oak; these are
exported from the different ports is immense quantities. Dried fish furnishes a
capital article of export.

MINERALS.] Mountain and bog iron ore are found in some parts, and works have
been erected for its manufacture.

There is a species of stone in Lebanon, in the county of York, which yields
copperas and sulphur.

STATE OF LITERATURE.] The erection of a college near Casco Bay is
contemplated, and the legislature have proceeded to far in the business as to
determine on the principles of such an establishment. Academies in Hallowell,
Berwick, Fryeburg and Machias have been incorporated by the legislature, and
endowed with handsome grants of the public lands. And it is but just to
observe, than town schools are very generally maintained in most of the towns
that are able to defray the expense, and a spirit of improvement is increasing.

CHIEF TOWNS.] Portland is the capital of the District of Main. It is situated
on a promontory in Casco Bay, and was formerly a part of Falmouth. In July
1786, this part of the town, being the most populous and mercantile, and
situated on the harbor, together with the islands which belong to Falmouth,
was incorporated by the name of Portland. It has a most excellent, safe and
capacious harbor, which is seldom or never completely frozen over. It is near
the Main Ocean, and is easy of access. The inhabitants carry on a considerable
foreign trade, build ships, and are largely concerned in the fishery. It is one
of the most thriving commercial towns in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
Although three fourths of it was laid in ashes by the British fleet in 1775, it
has since been entirely rebuilt, and contains above 2300 inhabitants. Among its
public buildings are three churches, two for congregationalists, and one for
episcopalians, and a handsome court house.

A light house has lately been erected on a point of land called Portland head,
at the entrance of the harbor. It is a stone edifice, 72 feet high, exclusive
of the lanthorn.

York is 74 miles N. E. from Boston and 9 from Portsmouth. It is divided into
two parishes of congregationalists. York river, which is navigable for vessels
of 250 tons, 6 or 7 miles from the sea, passes through the town. Over this
river, about a mile from the sea, a wooden bridge was built in 1761, 270 feet
long, exclusive of the wharves at each end, which reach to the channel, and 25
feet wide. The bridge stands on thirteen piers; and was planned and conducted
by Major Samuel Sewall, an ingenious mechanic and a native of the town. The
model of Charles river bridge was taken from this, and was built under the
su^^^^tendance of the same gentleman. It has also served as the model of Malden
and Beverly bridges, and has been imitated, even in Europe by those ingenious,
American artists, M^ssicurs, Coxe and Thompson.

This town was settled as early as 1630, and was then called Aga^^^ticus, from
a remarkable high hill in it, of that name, a noted (...) mark for mariners. It
is in Lat. 43 16

About the the year 1640, a great part of this town, was incorporated by Sir
Ferdinando Gorges, by the name of Georgiana. He appointed a Mayor and Aldermen,
and made it a free port. In 1652, when it fell under the jurisdiction of
Massachusetts, in assumed the (...) of York, which it has since retained.

Hallowell is a very flourishing town, situated in latitude 44 40, at the head
of the tide waters on Kenebeck river. Pownalborough, Penobscot, and Machias,
are also towns of considerable and increasing importance. Bangor, situated at
the head of the tide waters on Pe^^^scot, river, latitude 45, it is thought,
will, in a few years, become a place of very considerable trade. The other
towns of consideration are, Kittery, Wells, Biddeford, Berwick, North Yarmouth,
and Waldoborough.

POPULATION, CHARACTER AND RELIGION.} For the first of these articles see the
table of divisions. There are no peculiar features in the character of the
people of this District, to distinguish them from their neighbors in New
Hampshire, and Vermont. Placed as they are in like circumstances, they are like
them a (...), hardy, enterprizing, industrious, hospitable people. The
prevailing religious denominations are Congregationalists and Baptists; There
are a few Episcopalians and Roman Catholics.

INDIANS.] The remains of the Penobscot tribe are the only Indians, who take up
their residence in this district. They consist of about 100 families, and live
together in regular society at Indian Old town, which is situated on an Island
of about 200 acres, in Penobscot river, just above the great falls. They are
Roman Catholics, and have a priest who resides among them -- and administers
the ordinances. They have a decent house for public worship, with a bell, and
another building where they meet to transact the public business of their
tribe. In their assemblies all things are managed with the greatest order and
decorum. The Sachems from the legislative and executive authority of the tribe:
though the heads of all the families are invited to be present at their
periodical public meetings. The tribe is increasing, in consequence of an
obligation laid, by the Sachems, on the young people, to marry early.

In a former war this tribe lost their lands: but at the commencement of the
last war, the Provincial Congress granted them all the lands from the head of
the tide in Penobscot river, included in lines drawn six miles from the river
on each side, i. e. a tract twelve miles wide, intersected in the middle by the
river. They, however, consider that they have a right to hunt and fish as far
as the mouth of the Bay of Penobscot extends. This was their original right, in
opposition to any other tribe, and they now occupy it.

CONSTITUTION.] The same as Massachusetts.

HISTORY.] The first attempt to settle this country was made in 1607, on the
west side of Kenebeck, near the sea. No permanent settlement, however, was at
this time effected. It does not appear that any further attempts were made
until between the years 1620 and 1630.

The Dutch formerly had a settlement at the place which is now called
Newcastle, which was under the jurisdiction of the governor of New York, then
called Manhadoes. The town was built on a beautiful neck of land, where rows of
old cellars, are now to be seen.

In 1635, Sir Ferdinando Gorges obtained a grant from the council of Plymouth,
of the tract of country between the rivers Pascata^^^ and Saggadahock, or
Kenebeck; and up Kenebeck so far as to form a square of 120 miles. It is
supposed that Sir Ferdinand first instituted government in this province.

In 1639, Gorges obtained from the crown a charter of the soil and
jurisdiction, containing as ample powers perhaps as the king of England ever
granted to any subject.

In the same year he appointed a governor and council, and they administered
justice to the settlers until about the year 1647, when hearing of the death of
Gorges, they supposed their authority ceased, and the people on the spot
universally combined and agreed to be under civil government, and to elect
their officers annually.

Government was administered in this form until 1652, when the inhabitants
submitted to the Massachusetts, who, by a new construction of their charter
which was given to Rosswell and others, in 16^^, claimed the soil and
jurisdiction of the Province of Main as far as the middle of Casco Bay. Main
then first took the name of Yorkshire; and county courts were held in the
manner they were in Massachusetts, and the towns had liberty to send their
deputies to the general court at Boston.

In 1691, by charter from William and Mary, the Province of Man and the large
territory eastward, extending to Nova Scotia, was incorporated with the
Massachusetts Bay; since which it has been governed, and courts held as in
other parts of the Massachusetts.

The separation of this district from Massachusetts, and its erection into an
independent state, have been subjects discussed by the inhabitants in town
meeting, by the appointment of the legislature. Such i^ the rapid settlement
and growth of this country, that the period when this contemplated separation
will take place, is probably not far dist^^^

For the best historical account of this District, the reader is re^^^^ed to
"Memoirs of Sir Ferdinando Gorges," by the Rev. Dr. Bel^^^^ published in the
Columbian Magazine for 1788 -- and to Hutchin^^^^ History of Massachusetts.

MASSACHUSETTS.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 125 Miles. between 1 30 and 5 40 E. Long. Sq. Miles. 6250 Breadth 50
Miles. 41 30 and 43 N. Lat. Sq. Miles. 6250

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED north, by Vermont and New Hampshire; east by the Atlantic
Ocean; (...), by the Atlantic, Rhode Island and Connecticut; west, by New York.

DIVISIONS.] This part of Massachusetts is divided into the following counties.

Counties No. Towns No. Hou. No. Fam. No. Inh. Chapter Towns. No. Inh. S^^folk 23
6355 8038 44875 BOSTON 18038 ^^^ex 22 7644 10883 57913 Salem 7921 Newbury Port
4837 Middlesex 41 5998 7580 42737 Charlestown 1583 Concord 1590 Hampshire 60
9181 9617 59681 Northampton 1628 Springfield 1574 ^^^^outh 15 4240 5173 29535
Plymouth 2995 ^^^tol 15 4514 5441 31709 Taunton 3804 ^^^nstable 10 2343 2889
17354 Barnstable 2610 Duke's 3 1013 558 3265 Edgartown 1352 ^^tucket 1 872 4620
Sherburne 4620 Worcester 49 8613 9729 56807 Worcester 2095 ^^^shire 26 4176
4899 30291 Stock bridge 1336 Great Barrington^ 1373 (...) counties 265 51377
65779 378787 Population for every square mile 60.

CLIMATE.] See New England.

RIVERS.] Housatonick river, rises from several sources in the western part of
this State, and flows southerly through Connecticut, (...) Long Island Sound.
Deerfield river falls into Connecticut river, (...) the west, between Deerfield
and Greenfield. A most excellent and beautiful tract of meadow lies on its
banks. Westfield river, ^^^ties into the Connecticut at West Springfield.
Connecticut river (...) through this state, and intersects the county of
Hampshire. (...) its course it runs over falls, above Deerfield, and between
Northampton and Springfield. A company by the name of "The Proprietors of the
Locks and Canals on Connecticut river," was incorporated by the General Court,
in 1792, for the purpose of rendering Connecticut (...) passable for boats and
other things from Chicapee river northward, to New Hampshire. Miller's and
Chicapee rivers fall into the Connecticut on the east side; the former at
Northfield, the latter at Springfield.

In the eastern part of the state, is Merrimack, which we have already in part
described. It is navigable for vessels of burden about 20 miles from its mouth,
where it is obstructed by the first falls, or rapids, called Mitchell's Eddy,
between Bradford and Haverhill. Vast quantities of ship timber, ranging timber,
plank, deals, clapboards, shingles staves and other lumber are brought down in
rafts, so constructed (...) to pass all the falls in the river except those of
Amuskaeg, and Pautucket. In the spring and summer considerable quantities of
salmon, shad and alewives are caught, which are either used as bait in the
(...) fishery, or pickled and shipped to the West Indies. There are 12 ^^^ries
across this river in the county of Essex. The bar across i^ a mouth of this
river is a very great encumbrance to the navigation, (...) is especially
terrible to strangers. There are 16 feet water upon it at common tides. In 1787
the general court granted a sum of money for the erection of two sufficient
light houses, and made the maintainer o^ of them a public charge. The houses
are of wood, and contrived (...) be removed at pleasure, so as to be always
conformed to the shifting of the bar; and thus the single rule of bringing them
in a line, will be the only necessary direction for vessels approaching the
harbor, and by this direction they may sail with safety, until they are
abreast of (...) lights, where is a bold shore and good anchoring ground. The
bri^^es over this river will be mentioned under that head.

Nashua, Concord and Shawsheen rivers, rise in this state and (...) a
northeasterly course into the Merrimack. Parker's river takes its (...) in
Rowley, and after a course of a few miles, passes into the Sound which
separates Plumb Island from the main land. It is navigable about two miles from
its mouth. Ipswich and Chebacco rivers (...) through the town of Ipswich into
Ipswich bay. Mistick river (...) into Boston harbor east of the peninsula of
Charlestown. It is navi^able 3 miles, to Medford.

Charles river is a considerable stream, the principal branch of which rises
from a pond bordering on Hopkinton. It passes through (...) liston, and
Bellingham, and divides Medway from Medfield, Wrentham and Franklin, and thence
into Dedham, where by a curious (...) it forms a peninsula of 900 acres of
land. And what is very singul^^, a stream called Mother Brook, runs out of this
river, in this (...) and falls into Neponsit river, which answers to a canal
uniting the two rivers, and affords a number of excellent mill seats. From
De^^hamt he course of the river is northerly through Newtown, passing over
romantic falls -- it then bends to the northeast and east, through Watertown
and Cambridge, and passes into Boston harbor, between Charlestown and Boston.
It is navigable for boats to Watertown, 7 miles.

Neponset river originates chiefly from Muddy and Punkapog Ponds, in Stoughton,
and Mashapog Pond in Sharon, and after passing over falls sufficient to carry
mills, unites with other small streams, and forms a very constant supply of
water for the many mills situated (...) the river below, until it meets the
tide in Milton, from whence it is navigable for vessels of 150 tons burden to
the bay, distant about four miles. Neponset river, from Milton to the bay,
forms a regular and beautiful serpentine, interspersed with hillocks of wood so
regularly placed, that from Milton hill it affords one of the finest prosp^^^
in the world. Passing Fore and Back rivers in Weymouth you come to North river,
which rises in Indian Head Pond in Pembroke, and running in a serpentine course
between S^^^uate and Marshfield, passes to sea. This river for its fine, in
remarkable for its great depth of water, it being, in some places, (...) more
than 10 or 50 feet wide, and yet vessels of 300 tons are built (...) P^^^roke,
18 miles (as the river runs) from its mouth. This river is navigable for boats
to the first fall, 5 miles from its source in Indian (...) Pond. Thence to the
nearest waters which run into Taunton (...), i^ only three miles. A canal to
connect the waters of these two (...) which communicate with Narraganset and
Massachusetts bays, (...) ^e of great utility, as it would save a long and
dangerous navigable, round Cape Cod.

(...) river is made up of several streams which unite in or (...) the town of
Bridgwater. Its course is from N. E. to S. W. till it (...) into Narragansett
Bay at Tiverton, opposite the north end of (...) Island. It receives a
considerable tributary stream at Taunton from the north west. The head waters
of Pautucket and Providence rivers, in Rhode Island, and of Quinnabaug and
Shetucket river, (...) Connecticut, are in this state.

(...), BAYS, ISLANDS, etc.] The only Capes of note, on the (...) of this
state, are Cape Ann on the north side of Massachusetts (...) Cape Cod on the
south. "Cape Cod, so called probably from the multitudes of cod fish which are
found on its coast, is the south(...) part of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts. In shape it resem^^^ man's arm when bended, with the hand turned
inward toward (...). The Cape comprehends the county of Barnstable, and is
(...) 70 and 80 miles in length.

^^vince Town is the hook of the Cape, and is generally narrow (...) place not
being more than three miles in extent. The (...), which is one of the best in
the state, opens to the southward, (...) (...) depth of water for any ships. It
was the first port entered by (...) fathers, when they came to settle this
country, in 1620. This place (...) (...) in a state of thriving and decaying
many times. It is now (...). It contains about ninety families, whose whole
dependence is (...) the sea for their support. They employ about twenty sail of
(...), great and small, in the cod fishery. They have been remarkable
successful of late. Ten of their vessels, employed in 1790 upon the Grand Bank,
took eleven thousand quintals of cod fish. They (...) not lost a vessel, or a
man, in the business, since the war.

The houses stand upon the inner side of the hook of the cape, fronting
southeast, and looking into the harbor. They are small; one (...) high, and
set up on blocks, or piles, that the driving sands may (...) them; otherwise
they would be buried in sand. The houses (...) in one range upon the beach; the
flakes on which they dry (...) fish are round them. The vessels run in upon the
shore, which is (...) find, throw their fish over, where they are washed from
the salt, (...) carried up to the flakes on hand barrows.

They raise nothing from their lands, but are wholly dependent upon (...)
market and other places, for every kind of vegetable production.

(...) are but two horses, and two yoke of oxen, kept in the town. (...) have
about fifty cows, which feed in the spring upon beach grass, (...) grows here
and there upon the shore; and in summer they feed (...) ^^nken ponds, and
marshy places, that are found between the (...) (...). Here the cows are seen
wading, and even swimming, ph^^g^^^ heads into the water up to their horns,
picking a s^^nty sub^^^^ from the roots and herbs produced in the water. They
are (...) (...) on sedge, cut upon the flats.

(...) a border of loose sand, which runs round the whole place, (...) very
broken and hilly. These hills are white sand, and their produce is whortleberry
bushes, and small pitch pine shrubs. The (...) next the village, have been much
cut off for firewood. Cutting away the wood, exposes the hills to be torn away
by the violence (...) the winds, and in some instances, persons have been
obliged to (...) their houses to prevent being covered up. These hills and sand
(...) are constantly shifting; and when torn away in one place, are (...) up on
another. It is not unfrequent, to have their fish flakes (...) up with banks of
sand like snow. Immediately in stepping from (...) house, the foot sinks in
sand to the depth of the shoe. The most s^^^erly point of this place, called
Wood End, is five miles southwest (...) the village. What is called Race Point,
known to all seamen, i^ (...) northwesterly extremity of the Cape, and lies
northwest from the village, distant three miles.

A traveller, in passing from the village over to Race Point, about (...) way,
travels some distance through a pine woods, the trees about (...) feet in
height; at length he finds the path obstructed with a (...) of sand, almost
perpendicular, rising among the trees to their (...). His horse with difficulty
mounts this precipice, his feet sinking (...) to the knees in the sand. This
volume of sand, is gradually (...) into the woods with the winds, and as it
covers the trees to the (...) they die. As soon as a traveller mounts this
bank, a curious ^^^^cle presents to view, a desert of white sand, five miles in
length. (...) with the sea, and one mile and an half in breadth. The (...) the
trees appear above the sand, but they are all dead. Where (...) have been
lately covered, the bark and twigs are still remaining; (...) others they are
fallen off; some have been so long whipped and (...) out with the sand and
winds, that there is nothing remaining but (...) hearts and knots of the trees.
But over the greater part of this (...) the trees have long since disappeared.

After crossing this wilderness, where the horse sinks to his (...) at every
step, you arrive at Race Point. Here are a number of (...) erected by the
persons who come over from the village to fish in (...). Here they keep their
fishing apparatus, and lodge. At the distance of fifteen rods from the point,
the water is thirty fathoms in depth and cod, h^ddock and other kinds of fish,
are taken in plenty, whenever the weather will permit. They take many kinds of
fish with (...) such as pollock, mackarel, and herrings: The two latter, are
(...) taken in their harbor in great abundance. At this place, Race (...) are
seen at some times, hundreds of sharks, lying on the (...) which have been
caught by the boats when fishing for cod. The weigh from three, to six hundred
weight. Their livers, which ^^^duce oil, are the only parts of them of which
any use is made. Th^^ are taken by a large hook, baited with a cod fish, and
fastened to (...) iron chain with a swivel, to prevent them from biting or
twisting it (...). When the shark has seized the hook, they drag him up to the
(...) of the boat, and being too large to take on board the boats there (...)
use of, they row ashore with him, drag him up on the beach, rip (...) open,
take out his liver, and the carcass is left to perish. (...) either at sea in
vessels, or round the shore in boats, is the whole employment of all the
inhabitants. There is no employment but (...) to which they can turn their
attention. And the boys as soon (...) (...) have strength to pull a cod fish,
are put on board a boat or a vessel.

As this harbor is of so much consequence, often affording (...) shelter from
storms to vessels both inward and outward bound, (...) of importance that there
should always be a settlement here. The Province formerly afforded them some
encouragement, besides exempting them from taxation. That encouragement is now
withholden, and a poll (...) has been required, whether with good policy has
been doubted by (...). The inhabitants complain of it, as an unreasonable
burden. (...) employment is a great public benefit, and what they acquire is
(...) many perils and the hardest labor.

The extent of Cape Cod, on the outer shore, beginning at Wood (...) round to
Buzzard's Bay, or to the line between Sandwich and (...), is about one hundred
and thirty miles. The inner (...) (...) Massachusetts Bay, is about seventy
five miles. The road (...) (...) commonly traveled on to the Cape, is on the
inner side, and (...) by this, the extent of the Cape will be as first
mentioned. Cape Cod in general is a thin, barren soil, by far the most so of
any (...) of New England. But the sea air impregnates all vegetables with a
quality which renders them far more nutritive to cattle, than the (...)
quantity far inland. It being an undoubted fact, that cattle will (...) in such
pastures, as, far up in the country, would starve them (...). Their salt hay,
which is almost their only forage, affords a (...) which is also far superior
to that which is made at a distance (...) the sea. This greatly assists their
crops of corn and rye, beyond (...) the land promises in its appearance. The
lands of Cape Cod (...) never support its inhabitants, which are nearly 17000.
A great (...) of the men and boys, are constantly employed at sea. In this
business they support themselves and families; and it is observed, that the
(...) people form family connections, earlier in life, than in any other part
of the country: which, perhaps, is one evidence, that the (...) of subsistence
are easily obtainable. Cape Cod is a nursery for (...), and in that view, one
of the most important places in the state, (...) America. If the cultivation of
the sea is a blessing to any nation, we may consider the inhabitants of the
Cape as the most valuable among our countrymen.

The Cape abounds with clear fresh ponds, generally stocked with fish. There is
little sunken land. The wood on the Cape is generally pitch pine. There are few
or no stones below Barnstable. The (...) are walled with brick, in a circular
form, to prevent the loose (...) from caving in. The wells are secured in the
same manner, and (...) are obliged to keep them covered, to prevent the sand
from blowing in, and spoiling the water. Formerly, the inhabitants took many
whales round the Cape, chiefly in Massachusetts bay: but that business is
almost at an end. The manner of taking black fish is some^^^ singular. They are
a fish of the whale kind, of about five tons (...), and produce oil, in the
same manner as a whale. When a (...) of them is discovered, which sometimes
consists of several hun^^^^, the inhabitants put off in boats, get without
them, and drive (...) like so many cattle, on to the shore and flats, where
they are (...) by the tide and fall an easy prey. The shore of the Cape, is in
many places, covered with the huge bones of these fish and of whales, which
remain unconsumed for many years. Many persons conjecture, that the Cape is
gradually wearing away, and that it will finally fall a sacrifice to the
ravages of the winds and the seas, and many circumstances favor such an
opinion. At Province Town harbor, stumps (...) are seen, which the sea now
covers in common tides. When the English first settled upon the Cape, there was
an island off Chatham, at three leagues distance, called Webb's Island,
containing twenty acres, covered with red cedar or savin. The inhabitants of
Nansucke^ (...) to carry wood from it. This island, has been wholly worn away
for almost a century. A large rock, that was upon the island, and which settled
as the earth washed away, now marks the place; it rises as much above the
bottom of the sea, as it used to rise above the surface of the ground. The
water is six fathoms deep on this spot. And in many places on the Cape, the sea
appears to be encroaching on the land.

The Cape is so exposed to winds in every direction, that fruit trees do not
thrive. There are few orchards, of any consequence, below Barnstable. There is
not a cider mill in the county. In many places, their forest trees, have more
the appearance of a prim hedge, than of timber.

The Cape is an healthy situation, except for those constitutions which are too
delicate for the piercing winds that come from the sea.

The inhabitants in general, live as long as in the other parts of the northern
States.

The winds, in every direction, come from the sea; and invalids, by visiting
the Cape, sometimes experience the same benefit as from going to sea.

The principal bays on the coast of Massachusetts are, Ipswich, Boston,
Plymouth, Cape Cod or Barnstable, and Buzzard's Bays. Many islands are
scattered along the coast* the most noted of which are Plumb Island, which is
about 9 miles in length, extending from Merrimack river on the north, to the
entrance of Ipswich river on the south, and is separated from the main land by
a narrow sound, called Plumb Island river, fordable in several places at low
water. It consists principally of sand, blown into curious heaps, and crowned
with bushes bearing the beach plumb. There is however a valuable property of
^alt marsh* and at the south end of the island are two or three good farms. On
the north end are the light houses before mentioned. On the sea shore of this
island, and on Salisbury beach, the marine society and other gentlemen of
Newburyport have humanely erected several small houses, furnished with fuel and
other conveniences for the relief of mariners who may be shipwrecked on this
coast.

Nantucket Island, lies south of Cape Cod. It contains, according to Douglass,
23,000 acres, including the beach. No mention is made of the discovery and
settlement of this island, under its present name, by any of our historians. It
is more than probable that this is the island which is usually called Nautican
by ancient voyagers. As the island is low and sandy it is calculated only for
those people who are willing to depend almost entirely on the watery element for
subsistence. The island of itself constitutes one county by the name of
Nantucket. It has but one town, called Sherburn See Massachusetts Magazine for
March, 1791.
containing 4620 inhabitants, and sends one representative to the general
assembly.

The inhabitants formerly carried on the most considerable whale fishery on the
coast, but the war almost ruined this business. They have since, however,
revived it again, and pursue the whales, even into the Great Pacific Ocean.
There is not a single tree on the island of natural growth; they have a place
called the woods, but it has been destitute of trees for these 60 years past.
The island was formerly well wooded. The people, especially the females, are
fondly attached to the island, and few wish to migrate to a more desirable
situation.

The inhabitants of this island are principally quakers; there is one society
of congregationalists. Forty years ago there were three congregations of
Indians, each of which had a house for worship and a ^^^cher. Their last Indian
pastor died 20 years since, and was a worthy, respectable character.

Martha's Vineyard, which lies a little to the westward of Nantucket, is about
21 miles in length and four in breadth. It contains three societies of
congregationalists, at Edgarton, Tisbury and Chilmark, two of Baptists, without
ministers, and three congregations of Indians, (...) of which is supplied by an
ordained Indian minister, and to the others, the Rev. Mr. Mayhew preaches in
rotation, and superintends the whole. This and the neighboring island
constitute Duke's county, containing 3265 inhabitants, between 400 and 500 of
which are Indians and mulattoes, subsisting by agriculture and fishing.

Edgarton, which includes the fertile island of Chabaquidick, three miles long
and one and a half broad, is the shire town. This little island joins to the
harbor and renders it very secure. Gayhead, the westernmost part of the
island, containing about 2400 acres, is very good tillage (...), and is wholly
occupied by Indians, but not well cultivated. One third of this tract is the
property of the English society for propagating the gospel in New England. The
principal productions of the island are corn, rye and oats. -- They raise sheep
and cattle in considerable numbers. There are 4 mill streams in Tisbury. The
inhabitants of this county send three representatives, and in conjunction with
Nantucket, one senator, to the general court.

The other islands of consideration are in Massachusetts Bay, which is
agreeably diversified by about 40 of various sizes. Seven of them only, are
within the jurisdiction of the town of Boston, and taxed with it. Cattle island
is about three miles from Boston and contains about 18 acres of land. The
buildings are the governor's house, a magazine, goal, barracks, and workshops.
In June 1792, there were confined on this island 77 convicts, who are employed
in the manufacture of nails, and guarded by a company of between 60 and 70
soldiers. The fort on this island commands the entrance of the harbor. Here
are mounted 50 pieces of cannon, and 44 others lie dismounted.

LIGHT HOUSES.] Within this state are the following Light Houses; (...) Plumb
island, near Newbury, are two, which we have already mentioned. On Thatcher's
island, off Cape Ann, two lights of equal height. Another stands on a rock on
the north side of the entrance of Boston harbor, with one single light. On the
north point of Plymouth harbor are two lights. On a point at the entrance of
the harbor on the island of Nantucket is one with a single light. This light
may be seen as far as Nantucket shoals extend. The island being low, the light
appears over it.

FACE OF THE COUNTRY.] See New England. By an admeasurement made by the
barometer at Princetown, in this State, about 45 miles N. W. from Boston, and
at Cambridge, in 1777, it appears that Princetown is 1332 feet higher than the
level of the sea. The top of Wac^^set mountain in Princetown, was found to be
2989 feet above the level of the sea. A hill of this height, in a clear
horizon, may be seen by miles.

SOIL AND PRODUCTIONS.] In Massachusetts are to be found all the varieties of
soil, from very good to very bad, capable of yielding all the different
productions common to the climate, such as Indian corn, rye, wheat, barley,
oats, hemp, flax, hops, potatoes, field beans and pe^s -- apples, pairs,
peaches, plumbs, cherries, etc. It has been observed that the effects of the
east winds extend farther inland than formerly, and injure the tender fruits,
particularly the peach, and ^^en the more hardy apple. The average produce of
the good lands, well cultivated, has been estimated as follows -- 40 bushels of
corn on an acre -- 30 of barley -- 20 of wheat -- 30 of rye -- 100 of potatoes
-- The staple commodities of this state, are fish, beef and lumber.

COMMERCE.] The following abstract of goods, wares and merchandise, exported
from this state, including the District of Main, from the first of October
1790, to the 31st of September, 1791, will give the (...) the best idea of
their articles of export, and the quantity of each.

EXPORTS from Massachusetts from October 1st 1790, to September 31st 1791.
Ash Pot tons 783.20 -- Pearl 1,159.50 Apples bbls. 1,131 Bricks number. 330,250
Smiths Bellows do. 2 Boats do. 75 Beer, Ale and Porter gal. 15,532 Boots pairs.
339 Brimstone lbs. 3,280 Blacking or Lampblack kegs 158 Cider bbls. 292 -- doz.
310 Chalk tons 10 Cotton lbs. 13,371 Coffee do. 68,^44 Cocoa do. 2,804
Chocolate boxes 331 Candles Myrtle do. 348 Wax do. 169 Tallow do. 1,106 Cables
and Cordage tons 32 -- cwt. 18 -- coils 16 Copp. Ore cwt. 20 Manufactured do.
1,480 Coals bush. 1,548 Cranberries do. 688 Canes and walking sticks 96 Cards,
cotton and wool doz. 25 Coaches, Chaises, Phaetons number. 16 Carts and Wagons
do. 4 Duck, American bolts 288 Drugs Glauber salts lbs. 1,220 Sassafrass root
tons 17 Earl. Ware Yel. or queens crates 92 Stone doz. 25 Flaxseod hhds. 6,056
Flax lbs. ^,700 Feathers do. (...) Flints number. 40,^^^ Fram. of Boats do. 20
Houses do. 180 Wind. and Doors do. 30 Furniture House Tables do. 37 Desks 23
Bureaus 16 Sophas ^5 Chests 705 Windsor and Rush Chairs 54 Fisheries. Fish
dried cwt. 326,560 do. Pickled bbls. 20,177 Oil Whale gall. 270,810 Oil
Spermaceti do. 70,266 Sper. Candles boxes 2,927 Whalebone lbs. 85,161 Gensang
lbs. 3,096 Grindstones number. 104 Glass Ware crates 21 Window boxes 13 Groeeries
Cassia and Cinna. lbs. 1,178 Pimento do. 5,58^ Pepper do. 9^ Brown Sugar do.
3,904 Raisins do. 10^ Grain and Fulse Wheat bush. 52 Rye do. 2,350 Barley do.
32 Indian Corn do. 69,0^4 Oats do. 447 Peace and Beans do. 3,746 Horns and
Horntips number. 71,281 Hats do. 376 Hops lbs. 650 Hay tons 53 from (...) A^es
number. 662 Scythes do. 48 Locks and Bolts do. 2,000 Shovels do. 247 Skimmers and
Ladles pr. 15 Anchors number. 66 Muskets do. 60 Cutlasses do. 72 Knives and Forks
do. 240 Chests of Carpenters Tools 4 (...) Pots, Kettles, etc. do. 702 Cannon
do. 25 Shot for Cannon do. 1,000 (...) Pig tons 173 Bar do. 36.18 Nail rods do.
1 Hoops do. 1 Indigo lbs. 1,238 Leather, tanned and (...) do. 1,240 -- sides 19
Li^^ bush. 456 (...) lbs. 2,553 Live Stock Horned cattle number. 652 Horses do.
324 Sheep do. 5,140 Hogs do. 619 Poultry doz. 999 Merchandise foreign packages
179 (...) gal. 11,421 Hi^^stones number. (...) lbs. 780 M^dder do. 1,034 Na^^s do.
20,000 Nankeens No. of pieces 3,594 Nuts bush. 692 (...)-Stores Pitch bbls. 552
Tar do. 2,824 Turpentine do. 4,266 Rosin do. 23 Old linseed gal. 90 Powder gun
lbs. 13,814 -- Hair do. 166 P^^^tum do. 45 Pai^^s do. 840 Provisions. Rice
tierces 810 Flour blbs. 21,236 Ship stuff do. 214 Indian meal do. 7,000 Rye do.
blbs. 252 Bread do. 2,285 Beef do. 30,499 Pork do. 3,174 Crackers kegs 1,812
Hams and Bacon lbs. 36,946 Venison and Mutton hams do. 200 Cheese do. 23,155
Lard do. 4,860 Butter firk. 3,873 Saysages lbs. 250 Fresh beef do. 92,269 Pork
do. 29,334 Careases of Mutton number. 561 Neats tongues blbs. 154 Oysters Pickled
Kegs kegs 214 Potatoes bush. 3,808 Onions do. 5,497 Spirits Rum Amer. gals.
298,257 Do. West India do. 2,734 Brandy do. 118 Gin cases 2,113 Cordials do. 69
Sadlery Saddles and Bridles No. 70 Carriage Harness sets 14 Shoes pairs 3,400
Soap boxes 477 Snuff lbs. 1,939 Steel bundles 27 Spruce essence of cases 31
Salt bush. 3,647 Seeds Hay lbs. 60 Skins and Furs Morocco number. 13^ Calf in hair
do. 290 Deer and Moose do. 90^ Bears, etc. do. 24 Deer and other Skins unknown,
hhds, casks and packages ^^ Tobacco hhds. 1,190 Do. Manufactured lbs. 71,108
Tallow do. 275,641 Twine cwt. ^,900 Tow Cloth yards 4,548 Toys for children
doz. 1^^ Tin manufactured doz. 14 Tras Bohea chests 6^ Souchong do. 108 Green
do. 178 Hyson do. 628^ Vinegar gal. 2,098 Wines Madeira do. 4,622 Other Wines
do. 3,940 Bottled doz. 6 Wax Bees lbs. 10,254 Myrtle do. 1,946 Whips No. 144
Wood Stav. and Head. No. 5,456,041 Shingles do. 12,325,600 Shooks and casks do.
29,895 Laths do. 15,500 Hoops and H. poles do. 511,764 Masts 219 Bowsprits 42
Booms 74 spars 3,243 Handspikes 13,126 pumps 23 Boxes and Brakes 56 Blocks
5,162 Oars and Rasters 33,920 Wood Trunnels 35,^^5 Cedar and Oak Knees 1,0^1
Carvings (...) Anchor Stocks (...) Oak Boards and Plank feet 568,^65 Pine
Boards and Plank do. 2^,136,10^ Other do. do. (...) Scantling (...) Oak and
Pine Timber 68,^^^ Oak and Pine do. tons (...) Oak and Pine pieces (...) Oak
and Pine, Hie'ry cords (...) Oak Bark do. (...) Oak do. ground hhds. (...) Mast
Hoops doz. (...) Yokes for (...) 96 Besides a variety of smaller articles

Value of Goods, Wares and Merchandise exported from Massachusetts, in the
above mentioned year. Dols. 2,445,975. Ct. 53

It must be noted that the foregoing abstract comprehends those articles only
which were exported to foreign ports; the domestic trade i^ not taken into the
account. Shoes, cards, hats, saddlery and various other manufactures, and
several articles of the produce of the country, to a great amount, were, the
same year, exported to the Southern States.

This State owns more than three times as many tons of shipping as any other of
the states, and more than one third part of the whole that belongs to the
United States. See page 232.
Upwards of 29,000 tons are employed in carrying on the fisheries; 46,000 in
the coasting business, and 96,564, in trading with almost all parts of the
world. Pot and pearl ash, staves, flaxseed, beeswax, etc. are carried chiefly
to Great Britain in remittance for their manufactures; masts and provisions to
the East Indies; fish, oil, beef, pork, lumber, candles, etc. are carried to
the West Indies, for their produce, and the two first articles, fish and oil,
to France, Spain and Portugal; roots, vegetables, fruits, and small meats to
Nova Scotia and New Brunswick; hats, saddlery, cabinet work, men's and women's
shoes, nails, tow cloth, barley, hops, butter, cheese, etc. to the southern
states. The Negr^ trade, was prohibited by law, in 1788, and there is not a
single slave belonging to the Commonwealth.

MANUFACTURES.] If we except printing types, stone wares, pitch, tar and
turpentine, and wine, most if not all the other articles enumerated in pages
246 and 247, are manufactured in a greater or less degree in this state. There
is a duck manufactory at Boston, from which 1700 bolts, of 40 yards each, said
to be the best duck ever before seen in America, have been sold in one year.
Manufactories of this kind have been begun in Salem, Haverhill and Springfield,
and are said to be in a promising way. Manufactories of cotton goods have been
established at Beverly and Worcester; and much (...) is due to the patriotic
gentlemen, who began them; although by their persevering exertions, they have
not been able to surmount the various obstacles in the way of success. At
Taunton, Bridgwater, Middleborough and some other places, nails have been made
in such (...) as to prevent in a great measure the importion of them from Great
Britain. In this state there are twelve paper mills, 5 on Ne^^^^et river, 5 on
Charles river, 1 at Andover, on Shawsheen river, (...) the other at Sutton in
Worcester county. Ten of these mills (...) two vats each, and when in action,
employ 10 men, and as many girls and boys, and produce at the rate of 60,000
reams of writing, printing and wrapping paper, annually. It is estimated that
twenty thousand pounds worth of paper is yearly made by these mills; and the
quantity is annually and rapidly increasing.

The principal card manufactory is in Boston, and belongs to Mr. (...)
Richards, and Co. in which are made yearly, about 7000 dozen of cotton and wool
cards* of the various kinds or numbers, which confine about a hundred casks of
wire, averaged at L.30, a cask and about 20,000 tanned calf, sheep and lamb
skins at 2s. each. The sticking of these cards employs not less that 1000
people, chiefly children, and about 60 men are fully occupied in manufacturing
card boards, card rocks, and finishing the cards. It is estimated that about
2000 do^en cards are made at the other manufactories in different parts of the
state.

The feat of the She manufacture is at Lynn, 8 miles to the northward of
Boston, in the county of Essex. It is not easy to six the number of shoes
annually made by the industrious inhabitants of this town* but it has been
estimated by those most competent 10 form an accurate judgment, that, besides
the home consumption, and the large numbers sent every week to Boston and other
places* several hundred thousand pa^^ (...) shipped to the different parts of
the United States. One man, Mr. A. Johnson, from his own workshop, in the
course of seven months, shipped 20,600 pa^^ of shoes, valued at L.4*979.^6,
exclusive of large numbers sold in the vicinity.

S^^k and thread lace, of an elegant texture, are manufactured by women and
children, in large quantities, in the town of Ipswich, in Essex county, and
^old for use and exportation in Boston, and other ^^cantile towns. This
manufacture, if properly regulated and encouraged might be productive of great
and extensive advantages. In the year 1790, no less than 41,0^0 yards were made
in this town* and the quantity, it is supposed, has since been considerably
increased.

A wire manufactory, has lately been erected, at a considerable expense, in
Dedham, in Suffolk county, for the purpose of drawing who for the use of the
fish book, and card manufacturers in Boston. The essays which have already been
made, promise success.

There are several snuff, oil, chocolate and powder mills in dis^^^^ parts of
the state -- and a number of iron works and ^^^tting (...), besides other
mills, in common use, in great abundance, for ^awing lumber, grinding grain,
and ^^lling cloth.

There are be distilleries in this State, employed in dis^^^^ing from foreign
materials. In these distilleries are 158 stills, which together (...) 102,173
gallions. Besides these there are (...) employed in distilling domestic
materials; but these are small, and the most of them very lately erected, and
some have never yet been worked. One million, nine hundred thousand gallons
have been distilled in one year, which, at a duty of eleven cents a gallon,
yield a revenue to the government of 209,000 dollars.

A brick pyramidical glass house was erected in Boston, by a company of
Gentlemen in 1789. But for want of workmen, skilled in the ^^^^ness, their
works were not put in operation effectually till November, 1792; and although
several of the first essays or meltings proved and successful, later essays
give the fullest ground to believe that this very important manufacture may be
prosecuted to the advantage of the proprietors, as well as to the great benefit
of the public. From the speci^^^^ of glass exhibited, it appears to be of the
best quality for clearness (...) goodness; and as there is an abundance of the
material for this manufacture at command, there can be little doubt of its
being carried to such an extent in the course of a few years, as to preclude
foreign importations, which will make a vast saving to our country. Ever friend
to his country must wish that the patriotic company which have established this
manufacture, might meet with such success as to have their expenses reimbursed,
which have already exceeded (...) sum of 16,000 dollars.

BRIDGES AND CANALS.] The Bridges that merit notice in this State are the
following, viz. Charles river bridge, built in in 1786-87, 1503 feet long, and
connecting Boston and Charlestown. It is built on 75 piers, with a convenient
draw in the middle, for the passage of vessels. Each pier is composed of seven
sticks of oak timber, united by a cap piece, strong braces and girts, and
afterward driven into the bed of the river, and firmly secured by a single
pile on each side, driven obliquely to a solid bottom. The piers are connected
to each other by large string pieces, which are covered with four inch plank.
The bridge is 43 feet in width, and on each side is accommodated with a passage
six feet wide, railed in for the safety of people on foot. The bridge has a
gradual rise from each end, so as to be two feet higher in the middle than at
the extremities. Forty elegant lamps are erected, at a suitable distance from
each other, to illuminate it when necessary. There are 4 strong, stone wharves
connected with three piers each, sunk in various parts of the river. The
machinery of the draw is simple, and requires but two men to raise it. At the
highest tides the water rises 12 or 14 feet; the floor of the bridge is then
about four feet above the water. The depth of the water in the channel, at low
tide, is 27 feet. This bridge was completed in 13 months; and while it exhibits
the greatest effect of private enterprise, of this kind in the United States,
it being the first bridge of considerable magnitude, that has been erected,
presents a most pleasing proof, how certainly objects of magnitude may be
attained by spirited exertions.

The success which attended this experiment led others to engage in similar
works of enterprise. Malden bridge across Mystic river, connecting Charlestown
with Malden, was begun in April, 1787, and was opened for passengers the
September following. This bridge, including the abutments, is 2420 feet long,
and 32 feet wide, it has a draw 30 feet wide. The deepest water at full tide is
23 feet. The expense of this bridge was estimated at L.5300.

Essex bridge, upwards of 1500 feet in length, with a well contrived draw, was
erected in 1789, and connects Salem with Beverly. The ^^^nse of this bridge is
said not to have exceeded one third part of (...) of Charles river bridge, yet
it is esteemed quite equal in (...), and is thought by travelers to be
superior in point of beauty.

(...) Rowloy, on the post road between Boston and Newburyport, is (...) across
Parker's river 870 feet long, and 26 feet wide, consisting of (...) (...) piers
and eight wooden arches. This bridge was built in the year 1758.

Bridge over Merrimack river in the county of Essex, about two (...) above
Newburyport, was lately completed. At the place where the bridge is erected, an
island divides the river into two branches. An (...) 160 feet diameter and 40
feet above the level of high water, (...) this island with the main on one
side. The channel on the other side is wider, but the center arch is but 140
feet diameter. (...) ingenuity is discovered in the construction of this
bridge, than (...) that have hitherto been built; and it is one among the vast
(...) of stupendous and useful works which owe their origin (...) confidence
between man and man, which has been created or (...) by the measures of the
general government.

Another ingeniously constructed bridge, has lately been completed (...) this
river at Pautucket falls, between Chelmsford and Dracut in the county of
Middlesex. These bridges are all supported by a toll.

Several other Bridges are contemplated in different parts of the state, and
(...) is actually begun, which, when completed, with connect the (...) part of
Boston with Cambridge, over Charles river, and will be (...) twice as long, and
attended with nearly twice the expense of any other that has yet been built in
this or in any of the United States.

This Legislature, in February 1792, were petitioned by a company (...) liberty
to build a bridge over Connecticut river, at Montague; which was granted.

The only Canals of importance which have been contemplated in this
Commonwealth, are one between Barnstable and Buzzard's Bay, and those necessary
to render Connecticut river navigable, both of (...) we have mentioned, and one
which shall open a communication between the town of Boston, and some part of
Connecticut river for which purpose General Knox, and others, were
incorporated, in 1792, by the name of "The Proprietors of the Massachusetts
(...)."

^^^^^ITIES.] In the north part of the township of Adams, in ^^^shire county,
not half a mile from Stamford in Vermont, is a natural curiosity which merits a
description. A pretty mill stream, called Hudson's Brook, which rises in
Vermont and falls into the (...) branch of Hoosuck river, has, for 30 or 40
rods, formed a very (...) channel through a quarry to white marble. The hill,
gradually ^^ending toward the south, terminates in a steep precipice, down
which, probably, the water once tumbled. But finding in some places (...)
chasms in the rocks, and in others wearing them away, as (...) from their
appearance, it has formed a channel which, in (...) places is more than 60 feet
deep. Over this channel, where (...) some of the rocks remain, and form a
natural bridge. From (...) of this bridge to the water it is 62 feet; its
length is about 12 (...) and its breadth about 10. Partly under this bridge,
and about (...) feet below it, is another, which is wider but not so long; for
at the east end they form one body of rock, 12 or 14 feet thick, and under this
the water flows. It is evident, from the appearance of the rocks, that the
water, in some places, formerly flowed 40 or 50 feet above its present bed.
Many cavities, of different figures and di^^sions, but generally circular, are
worn out in the rocks. One of (...) in the solid rock, is about 4 feet in
diameter, and 4 or 5 feet (...) the rock is on one side worn through at the
bottom. A little (...) the bridge, on the west side of the chasm, is a cave or
little (...) which has a convenient entrance at the north, and a passage (...)
east. From the west side of this cave, a chasm extends into the (...) but soon
becomes too narrow to pass. The rocks here, which (...) mostly white, though in
some places clouded on streaked with (...) colors, appear to be of that
species of coarse white marble which (...) common at Lanesborough, and in other
towns in Berkshire county.

In the town of Wrentham, about two miles S. E. of the (...) house, is a
curious cavern called Wampom's Rock, from an Indian (...) of that name who
resided in it for a number of years. It is (...) on the south side of a hill,
and is surrounded by a number of (...) rocks. It is nearly square, each side
measuring about 9 feet. The height is about 8 feet in front, but from the
center it lessens to (...) 4 feet. At present it serves only as a shelter for
cattle and sho^p, (...) do one or two other rocks or caves in the town,
formerly inhabited by Indians.

Under this article we mention the falls of Powow river, which rises in New
Hampshire, and falls into the Merrimack between Salisbury and Amesbury, in the
county of Essex. At these falls, (...) (...) scent of the water, in the
distance of 50 rods, is 100 feet, and in (...) passage carries one bloomery,
five saw mills, seven grist mills, (...) linseed oil mills, one fulling mill
and one snuff mill, besides (...) wheels, auxiliary to different labors. The
rap^^ fall of the (...) the dams at very short distances crossing the river --
the various (...) and mills arising almost immediately one over another -- and
the (...) irregular and grotesque situation of the houses and other buildings
(...) the adjoining grounds, give this place a romantic appearance, and (...)
ford in the whole, one of the most singular views to be found in (...) country.

Lynn Beach may be reckoned a curiosity. It is one mile in length and connects
the peninsula, called Nahant, with the main land. (...) is a place of much
resort for parties of pleasure from Boston, Charlestown, Salem and Marblehead,
in the summer season. The (...) used as a race ground, for which it is well
calculated, being (...) smooth and hard.

MINERALS, FOSSILS AND MINERAL SPRINGS.] Iron ore, in immense quantities, is
found in various parts of this State, particular^^ in the old colony of
Plymouth, in the towns of Middle^on^^^ Bridgewater, Taunton Attleborough,
Stoughton, and the towns in (...) neighborhood, which has in consequence
become the seat of the (...) manufactures. The slitting mills in this district,
it is said annually (...) 600 tons of iron; and one company has lately been
formed, (...) will annually manufacture into nails, of a quality equal to these
(...) ported, 500 tons of iron. The number of spikes and nails (...) this State
is supposed now to be twice as large as that made in (...) and is still
increasing, and will probably soon preclude all foreign, (...) portations; and,
from the abundance of the raw material, may (...) an article of export.

(...) ore is found at Leverett in the county of Hampshire, and (...) in the
county of Bristol -- Several mines of black lead (...) discovered in Brimfield
in Hampshire county -- and white (...) and yellow and red ochre, at Martha's
Vineyard. Alum (...) (...) has been found in some parts; and also ruddle or a
red (...) which has been used as a ground color for priming, instead of (...)
brown. In a quarry of lime stone, in the parish of Byefield, (...) (...) of
Essex, is found the Asbestos, or incombustible cotton, (...) called. Marble has
been found in the same vicinity. (...) (...) conjectured that there are
considerable beds of it. The spe^^^^ (...) it already exhibited have been
beautifully variegated in co^^^^ admit an admirable polish. A marble quarry at
Lanesborough (...) very good marble.

(...) mineral springs have been found in different parts of the (...)
particularly at Lynn, Wrentham, Menotomy Parish in Cambridge etc. but none are
celebrated as places of resort for in^^^^*

^^^ARY, HUMANE and other SOCIETIES.] These institu^^^^ Massachusetts, exhibit
a fair trait in the character of the in^^^^. Among the first literary
institutions in this state, is the (...) ACADEMY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES,
incorporated May (...). It is declared in the act, that the end and design of
the (...), is to promote and encourage the knowledge of the anti^^^^ of
America, and of the natural history of the country, and to (...) the uses to
which the various natural productions of the (...) may be applied. Also to
promote and encourage medical (...), mathematical disquisitions, philosophical
enquiries and (...); astronomical, meteorological and geographical observa^^^
improvements in agriculture, arts, manufacture, commerce and (...) cultivation
of every science that may tend to advance a free, in^^^^, and virtuous people.
There are never to be more than (...) members, nor less than forty. This
society has four stat^^^^ (...) meetings. They have a Committee, by the name of
"The (...) Committee," whose business it is to receive and communi^^^^ (...)
useful information on that subject.

(...) MASSACHUSETTS CHARITABLE SOCIETY, incorporated December 1779, is
intended for the mutual aid of themselves and families, (...) be distressed by
any of the adverse accidents of life, and for (...) and relieving of widows and
orphans of their deceas^^ (...). The members of this society meet annually, and
are not (...) (...) an hundred in number.

The BOSTON EPISCOPAL CHARITABLE SOCIETY, first instituted (...) and
incorporated February 12, 1784, has for its object, char^^^^ (...) as are of
the episcopal church, and to such others as the (...) shall think fit; but more
especially the relief of those who are (...) of, and benefactors to the
society, and afterward become (...) objects of its charity. The members of
this society meet an^^^^ and are not to exceed one hundred in number.

(...) MASSACHUSETTS MEDICAL SOCIETY, was incorporated November (...) 1781. The
design of this institution is, to promote medical (...) ^^^gical knowledge,
enquiries into the annual economy, (...) (...) properties and effects of
medicine, by encouraging a free in^^^^ with the gentlemen of the faculty
throughout the United States of America, and a friendly correspondence, with
the eminent in those professions throughout the world. The number of (...) who
are inhabitants of the state, cannot exceed seventy. ^^^^fent number is sixty
one, and thirteen have died since to ^^^^ment. The powers vested in the society
are -- To choose their (...) and enact any laws for their own government which
are not (...) to the laws of the Commonwealth -- To use a common Seal (...) be
sued -- To hold real estate of the annual income of (...) and personal estate
of the annual income of L600 -- To (...) suspend, expel or disfranch^^e any
fellows of the society -- (...) scribe and point out, from time to time, such a
mode of (...) ^^struction or education as they shall judge requisite for (...)
the practice of physic and surgery -- To examine all (...) shall offer
themselves for examination, respecting their (...) the profession -- And to
give letters testimonial of their (...) to all such as may be duly qualified to
practice. The (...) (...)


Committees are appointed in each county to receive (...) from, and to
correspond with their medical brethren who are (...) lows of the society; and
this has led to the formation or (...) medical associations, whose views are to
aid the laudable (...) this important institution.

Further to evidence their humanity and benevolence, a (...) the medical and
other gentlemen, in the town of Boston, (...) formed a society, by the name of
the HUMANE SOCIETY, for ^^^pose of recovering persons apparently dead, from
drowning (...) (...), strangling, and other accidents. This society, (...)
incorporated in 1791, have erected 7 huts, furnished with wood (...) cabbins,
^^nder boxes, blankets, etc. two on Lovel's Island, (...) Calf Island both in
Boston harbor two on Nantasket beach and (...) on S^^tuate beach near
Marshfield, for the comfort of (...) (...) seamen. Huts of the same kind are
erected on Plumb (...) Newbury, by the marine society of that place, already
(...) (...) there are also some contiguous to Hampton and Sal^sbury (...).

At their semiannual meetings, a public discourse is delivered (...) person
appointed by the trustees for that purpose, on (...) (...) subject connected
with the principal object of the society; (...) (...) to investigation, and a
reward of merit, a medal i^ (...) annually by the president and trustees, to
the person who (...) most approved dissertation.

THE SOCIETY FOR PROPAGATING THE GOSPEL (...) ^^dians and others in North
America, was incorporated November (...) 1787. They are enabled to receive
subscriptions of charitably (...) persons, and may take any personal estate in
^^^cession. (...) nations to the society either by subscriptions, legacy or
(...) excepting such as may be differently appropriated by the (...) make a
part of, or be put into the capital stock of the society, (...) to be put out
on interest on good security, or otherwise (...) the best advantage, and the
income and profits are to be (...) purposes aforesaid, in such manner as the
society shall (...) condu^^ve to answer the design of their institution. For
(...) past missionaries have been appointed and supported by the (...) to visit
the eastern parts of the District of Main, where ^^^^^ple are generally
destitute of the means of religious instruction (...) the summer months with
them. The success of these missions (...) highly satisfactory to the society.
Several thousand books of (...) kinds, suited to the state of the people, have
been purchased by (...) funds, and distributed among them and the Oneida
Indians. (...) of this society are a board of commissioners from the Scot's
so^^^^ promoting christian knowledge among the Indians in America. (...)
MASSACHUSETTS SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING ACRICULTURE, (...) incorporated in 1792, in
consequence of which the agricultural (...) of the Academy is dissolved. At a
late meeting of this society, (...), a very considerable sum of money was
subscribed, for establish^^ a (...) to defray the expense of premiums and
bounties, which (...) be voted by the society.

(...) society was established in this state in 1791, called the HISTOR^^^
SOCIETY, the professed design of which is to collect, preserve (...)
communicate materials for a complete history of this country (...) the
beginning of its settlement.

(...) to Pennsylvania, this state has the greatest number of societies (...)
promotion of useful knowledge and human happiness; and (...) are founded on the
broad basis of benevolence, patr^^tism and char^^^^ (...) cannot fail to
prosper. These institutions, which are fast increas^^^ in almost every state in
the union, are so many evidences of the (...) and advancing state of
civilization and improvement in this (...), and of the excellence of our
national government. They (...) likewise that a free republican government,
like ours, is the (...) happily calculated to promote a general diffusion of
useful know^^^^ and the most favorable to the benevolent and humane feelings
(...) human heart.

LITERATURE, COLLEGES, ACADEMIES, etc.] According to the (...) of this
Commonwealth, every town having fifty householders or (...), is to be provided
with one or more school masters to teach children and youth to read and write,
and instruct them in the English language, arithmetic, orthography and decent
behavior; and (...) any town has 200 families, there is also to be a grammar
school (...) therein, and some discreet person, well instructed in the Latin,
(...) and English languages, procured to keep the same, and be suitably (...)
by the inhabitants. The penalty for neglect of schools in towns (...) families
is 10l. those of 100 families 20l. -- of 150 30l.

(...) laws respecting schools, are not so well regarded in many (...) of the
state, as the wise purposes which they were intended to (...), and the
happiness of the people require.

(...) Boston there are seven public schools, supported wholly at the (...) of
the town, and in which the children of every class of citi^^^ (...) associate.
In the Latin grammar school the rudiments of the (...) and Greek languages are
taught, and boys qualified for the uni^^^^* into this school none are admitted
till ten years of age, (...) been previously well instructed in English
grammar. In the (...) English grammar schools, the children of both sexes, from
7 to 14 (...) of age, are instructed in spelling, accenting and reading the
English language both prose and verse, with propriety, also in English (...)
and composition, together with the rudiments of geography; (...) other three
the same children are taught writing and arithme^^^. These schools are attended
alternately, and each of them is fur^^^^ with an Usher or Assistant. The
masters of these schools (...) each a salary of 666^ dollars per annum, payable
quarterly.

They are all under the immediate care of a committee of twenty one gentlemen,
for the time being, chosen annually, whose duty it is "to visit the schools at
least once in three months, to examine the scholars in the various branches in
which they are taught, to devise the best methods for the instruction and
government of the schools, to give such advice to the masters as they shall
think expedient, and by all proper methods to excite in children a laudable
ambition so excel in a virtuous, amiable deportment, and in every branch of
useful knowledge." At the annual visitation in July 1792, there were present
470 miles and 720 boys. Besides these there are several private schools, for
instruction in the English, Lattin, and French languages -- in writing,
arithmetic and the higher branches of mathematics -- and also in music and
dancing. Perhaps there is not a town in the world, the youth of which more
fully enjoy the benefits of school education, than Boston. And when we consider
how inseparably the happiness and prosperity of our country, and the existence
of our present happy government, are connected with the education of children,
too much credit cannot be given to the enlightened citizens of this town, for
the attention they have paid to this important business, and the worthy example
they have exhibited for the imitation of others.

Next in importance to the grammar schools are the Academies, in which, as well
as in the grammar schools, young gentlemen are fitted for admission to the
University.

DUMMER ACADEMY, at Newbury, was founded as early as 1756, by means of a
liberal donation from the Honorable William Dummer formerly Lieutenant
Governor, and a worthy man, whose name is has ever since retained. It was
opened in 1763, and incorporated by an act of the general court, in 1784. By
the act the number of Trustees is not to exceed 15, who are to manage the funds
for the support of the instructors. This academy is at present in a flourishing
state.

PHILLIPS ACADEMY, in Andover, was founded and handsomely endowed April 21,
1778, by the Honorable Samuel Phillips, Esquire of Andover, in the county of
Essex, and commonwealth of Massachusetts lately deceased, and his brother, the
Honorable John Phillips L. L. D. of Exeter, in the state of New Hampshire. It
was incorporated October 4, 1780. It is under the direction of thirteen
Trustees of respectable characters, and the immediate care of a Principal, (who
is one of the Trustees ex off^^io) an Assistant, and a Writing Master. They are
accommodated with a large and elegant building, erected at the expense of the
founders, and their brother the Honorable William Phillips, Esquire. of Boston. It
is situated on a delightful eminence, near the mansion house of the Honorable
Samuel Phillips, Esquire. its distinguished patron, and son of the deceased founder
-- is encompassed with a salubrious air, and commands an extensive prospect.
The lower story contains a large school-room, with ample accommodation for an
hundred students, and two other apartments for a library, and other purposes;
the upper story consists of a spacious hall, sixty four feet in length, and
thirty-three feet in breadth, designed for exhibitions and other public
occasions.

The design of this foundation, according to its constitution, is, (...) The
promotion of true piety and virtue, the instruction of youth (...) the English,
Latin and Greek languages; together with writing, arithmetic, practical
geometry, music and oratory, logic and geography; and such other of the
liberal arts and sciences, of languages, (...) opportunity and ability may
hereafter admit, and the Trustees (...) direct."

^^^CESTER ACADEMY, in the township of Leicester, and county of Worcester, was
incorporated in 1784. For the encouragement of this institution, Ebenezer
Crafts and Jacob Davis, Esqr's* generously (...) a large and commodious mansion
house, lands and appurtenances, (...) Leicester.

In Williamstown, in Berkshire county, is another Academy. Col. ^phraim
Williams laid the foundation of it by a handsome donation in lands. In 1790,
partly by lottery and partly by the liberal donation of gentlemen in the town,
a brick edifice was erected, 82 feet by 42, and four stories high, containing
24 rooms for students* a large school (...); a dining hall and a room for
public speaking. It has a Precep^^^, an Usher and a Master of the English
school. The number of students is at present between 50 and 60, besides the
scholars of the (...) school. The languages and sciences usually taught in the
American colleges are taught here. Board, tuition and other expenses of
education are very low* and from its situation and other circumstances, it is
likely, in a short time, to become an institution of considerable utility and
importance.

An Academy at Taunton was incorporated in 1792.

At Hingham is a well endowed school, which in honor of its principal donor and
founder, is called DERBY SCHOOL.

These Academies are designed to disseminate virtue and true piety, to promote
the education of youth in the English, Latin, Greek and French languages, in
writing, arithmetic, oratory, geography, practical (...), logic, philosophy,
and such other of the liberal arts and sciences, or languages, as may be
thought expedient.

HARVARD UNIVERSITY takes its date from the year 1638. Two years before, the
general court gave four hundred pounds for the support of a public school at
Newtown, which has since been called Cambridge. This year (1638) the Rev. Mr.
John Harvard, a worthy (...) residing in Charlestown, died, and left a donation
of L779 for the use of the forementioned public school. In honor to the memory
of so liberal a benefactor, the general court the same (...), ordered that the
school should take the name of HARVARD COLLEGE.

In 1642, the College was put upon a more respectable footing, and the
governor, deputy governor, and magistrates, and the ministers of the fix next
adjacent towns, with the President, were erected into a corporation for the
ordering and managing its concerns. It received its first charter in 1650.

Cambridge* in which the university is situated, is a pleasant village, (...)
miles westward from Boston, containing a number of gentlemen's (...) which are
neat and well built. The university consists of four elegant brick edifices*
handsomely enclosed. They stand on a beautiful green which spreads to the
northwest, and exhibit a pleasing view*

The names of the several buildings are, Harvard Hall, Massachusetts (...),
Hollis, Hall and Holden Chapel. Harvard Hall is divided into (...) apartments
one of which is appropriated for the library, one for the museum, two for the
philosophical apparatus; one is used for a chapel, and the other for a dining
hall. The library, in 1791, (...) of upwards of 13,000 volumes; and will be
continually in^^^ from the interest of permanent funds, as well as from casual
^^^^tions. The philosophical apparatus, belonging to this university, (...)
between 1400 and L1500 lawful money, and is the most elegant and complete of
any in America.

Agreeable to the present constitution of Massachusetts, his excell^^y the
governor, lieutenant governor, the council and senate, the pre^^^^ of the
university, and the ministers of the congregational chu^^^^ (...) the towns of
Boston, Charlestown, Cambridge, Watertown, Roxbury, and Dorchester, are, ex
officiis, Overseers of the University.

The corporation is a distinct body, consisting of seven members, (...) whom is
vested the property of the university.

Harvard university has a President, Emeritus Professor of Divinity --
Hollisian Professor of Divinity -- Hancock Professor of Hebrew and other
oriental languages -- Hollis Professor of the mathematics and Natural
Philosophy -- Hersey Professor of anatomy and surgery -- ^^^sey Professor of
the theory and practice of physic -- E^ving Profess^^ of chemistry and materia
medica -- four Tutors, who teach the (...) and Latin languages, logic,
metaphysics and ethics, geography and the elements of geometry, natural
philosophy, astronomy and (...), and a preceptor of the French language.

This university, as to its library, philosophical apparatus and
professorships, is at present the first literary institution on this cont^^^^.
Since its first establishment, upwards of 3300 students have (...) honorary
degrees from its successive officers; about one third of (...) have been
ordained to the work of the gospel ministry. It has generally from 130 to 160
students.

This university is liberally endowed, and is frequently receiving donations
for the establishment of new professorships. For^^^^ there was an annual grant
made by the legislature, to the president and professors, of from four to five
hundred pounds, which for seven years past has been discontinued.

BANKS.] There are four incorporated Banks in this Commonwealth, of which the
Branch Bank in Boston, which is a part of the National Bank, is one. The
Massachusetts Bank in Boston was incorporated in 1784. It was designed as a
public benefit, and (...) particularly to accomodate the mercantile interest.
Its present capital consists of 800 shares of 500 dollars each, making in all
400,000 dollars. It is kept open every day in the year, except public days. The
an^^^ meeting for the choice of nine directors is on the first Wednesday (...)
January.

Essex Bank, at Salem, was incorporated 1792, and is under the management of a
president and six directors.

Union Bank, in Boston, was also incorporated in 179^, and has president and
eleven directors. Its capital consists of 100,000 (...) of eight dollars each,
so that when the payment of the shares shall (...) completed, the whole stock
will amount to 800,000 dollars.

CHIEF TOWNS.] BOSTON is the capital, not only of Massachusetts, but of New
England, and lies in lat. 42 23 N. It is (...) (...) a peninsula of an
irregular form, at the bottom of Massachusetts (...). The neck or isthmus which
joins the peninsula to the continent, (...) the south end of the town, and
leads to Roxbury. The length of (...) (...) itself i^ not quite two miles. Its
breadth is various. At the (...) from Roxbury it is narrow. The greatest
breadth is one (...) and ^39 yards. The buildings in the town cover about 1000
acres. (...) contains nearly 2000 dwelling houses and about 10,000 inhabitants.

(...) this town there are seventy nine streets, 38 lanes, and twenty one (...)
exclusive of squares and courts; and about eighty wharves and (...) very
convenient for vessels. The principal wharf extends 600 (...) (...) the sea,
and is covered on the north side with large and con^^^^ stores. It far exceeds
any other wharf in the United States.

(...) are 17 houses for public worship; of which nine are for (...)
^^^^tionalists, three for episcopalians, two for baptifts, one for the (...)
one for universalists, and one for Roman catholics.

(...) other public buildings are the state house, court house, goal, Fan^^^^
(...), an alms house, a work house, a bridewell and powder mag^^^^. That
building which was formerly the governor's house, is (...) (...) in its
several apartments, by the council, the treasur^^^^ the secretary; the two
latter hold their offices in it. Most of (...) buildings are handsome, and some
of them are elegant. The (...) irregularly built, but, as it lies in a circular
form around the (...), it exhibits a very handsome view as you approach it from
(...) (...). On the west side of the town i^ the mall, a very beautiful pub^^^
(...) adorned with rows of trees, and in view of the common; which is always
open to refreshing breezes. Beacon hill, on which a (...) monument,
commemorative of some of the most important (...) of the late war, has lately
been erected, overlooks the town (...) and affords a fine variegated prospect.

(...) harbor of Boston i^ safe, and large enough to contain 500 ships (...)
in a good depth of water; while the entrance is so narrow (...) scarcely to
admit two ships abreast. It is diversified, as we have al^^^^ observed, with 40
islands, which afford rich pasturing, hay and (...). About three miles from the
town is the castle, which com^^^^ the entrance of the harbor.

The market in this town is supplied with an abundance of beef, pork, (...),
lamb, veal and poultry, and of a quality equal to any in (...) world; and also
with (...) butter, cheese, roots, vegetables and (...) of various kinds, in
great plenty. The fish market is also ex^^^^ and not only furnishes the tables
of the rich with some of (...) dainties, but is also a singular blessing to the
poor.

(...) annual meeting in March, seven selectmen are chosen for the (...)
immediate government of the town; at the same time are elected a (...), a town
treasurer, 12 overseers of the poor, 12 firewards, (...) of the market, 12
scavengers, and 12 constables, besides (...) of other officers. Attempts have
been made to change the (...) of the town from its present form to that of a
city, but (...) form not being consonant to the democratic spirit of the (...)
of the people, it has been rejected.

(...) was settled as early as the year 1631, from Charlestown, (...) peninsula
was called, by the natives, Shzwmut; but the inhabitants of Charlestown, from
the view they had of three hills, called it (...). The new inhabitants,
however, named it Boston, out of (...) (...) the Rev. Mr. Cotton, formerly a
minister of Boston, in (...), who was expected to come over to New England. He
(...) minister of the first church.

(...) been computed, that during the siege in 1775, as many houses (...)
destroyed in Boston by the British troops, as were burnt in Charlestown. Since
the peace a spirit of repairs and improvement has diffused itself among the
inhabitants. The streets of late, have been lighted with lamps at the expense
of the town; and some (...) beginnings have been made toward improving the
streets by (...) ^^^^ing them, which it is hoped will stimulate to like
improvements (...) the town. The principal manufactures here are, rum, beer,
paper ^^^^ings of which 24,000 pieces are annually made, loaf sugar, (...)
cards, sail cloth, spermaceti and tallow candles glass -- there are 30
di^^^ries, 2 breweries, 8 sugar houses, and (...) ^^ope walks. A few (...)
^^nder the metropolis of Massachusetts a^ ^amed for arts, (...) and commerce,
as any city in the United States.

Salem, the second town for size in the Commonwealth, (...) (...) 928 houses
and 7921 inhabitants, and except Plymouth, the (...) was settled in 1628, by
governor Endicot, and was called by (...) ^^^dians Naumkeag. Here are a meeting
of quakers, an (...) church and five congregational societies. The town is
(...) (...) peninsula, formed by two small inlets of the sea, called (...)
south rivers. The former of these passes into Beverly harbod^^ (...) has a draw
bridge across it, built many years ago at private expe^^^. At this place some
part of the shipping of the town is fitted (...) the principal harbor and
place for business is on the other side of (...) town, at south river, if that
may properly be called a river (...) depends on the flowing of the sea for the
water it contains. So (...) is this harbor that vessels which draw more than
ten or twelve (...) water, must be laden and unladen at a distance from the
(...) by the assistance of lighters. This inconvenience, notwithstanding more
navigation is owned, and more trade carried on in (...) (...) in any port in
the Commonwealth, Boston excep^^d. The (...) the trade to the West Indies, to
Europe, to the coast of Africa, (...) East Indies, and the freighting business
from the southern states, (...) here all pursued with energy and spirit. The
enterprise of the ^^^chants of this place is equalled by nothing but their
indefatigable Industry and severe economy. This latter virtue forms a
distinguish^^ feature in the character of the people of this town. Some (...)
rank, in former times, having carried it to an unbecoming (...) a character to
the people in general of a disgraceful (...). But, whether this reproach was
ever justly applied in so (...) measure or not, nothing can be more injurious
than to contin^^^^ (...) the present time; fo^^ i^ may justly be (...) of the
inhabitants of (...) (...) this day, that, with a laudable attention to the
^quisition of (...) p^^ty, they exhibit a public spirit and hospitality, alike
honorable (...) themselves and their country. A general plainness and neatness
(...) buildings and equipage* and a certain stillness and gravity of (...)
perhaps in some degree peculiar to commercial people, distinguish^^ them from
the citizens of the metropolis. It is indeed to be (...) that the sober
industry here so universally practiced, may (...) ^^re extensive through the
union, and form the national (...) federal Americans.

A court house, built in 1786, at the joint expense of the county (...) (...)
forms a principal ornament, and is executed in a style of ^^^^lecture that
would add to the elegance of any city in the (...). Supreme Judicial court,
holds a term here the second Tuesday, (...) (...), the ^ourts of common pleas
and sessions, the second (...) March and September.

A manufactory of duck and sail cloth, was lately instituted here, (...) is
prosecuted with much spirit.

The melancholy delusion of 1692 originated in this town, in the (...) of the
Rev. Mr. Paris, the then minister, and here was the principal theater of the
bloody business. At the upper end of the town, (...) place called, from the
number of executions which took place (...) ^^llows hill, the graves of the
unhappy sufferers may yet be traced. Though this unfortunate and disgraceful
business was chiefly transact^^ (...), it is well known that the leading
people, both of church and (...) the colony, took an active part in it. Unjust
therefore and (...) it is to fix a peculiar odium on the town of Salem for
(...) was the general weakness or crime of the country. While the (...) ^^mile
is excited among the vain and unthinking, or the insulting (...) of illiberal
prejudice is unjustly thrown on this shocking (...), the serious cannot but
lament to find the human mind, subject (...) (...) deceptions, and the man of
candor will hasten to drop (...) on the dismal scene.

(...) from Salem, and at four miles distance from it, lies (...), containing
one episcopal and two congregational (...), besides a small society of
separatists. The chief attention of (...) is devoted to the bank fishery, and
more is done in that line (...) i^ any port in the government. The late war
putting to total (...) this business, and vast numbers of the men before
employed in (...) lost by land and water, the peace found those who sur^^^^ in
circumstances of great distress. Great exertions were made (...) the former
course of business, and it is lamented by every (...) industry and the
prosperity of the country, that these exertions (...) not been crowned with
more success; every thing here has more (...) the symptoms of decay. The great
number of widows and (...) caused by the war, and left at the close of it to
the charge of (...), are a melancholy burden under which nothing less than
^^^^mental aid can relieve it. A lottery has been granted by the (...) for the
double purpose of lessening the weight of this burden, and repairing the sea
wall, which protects the harbor; and which was (...) danger of giving way, to
the great detriment, if not (...) (...) of the port.

A peculiarity observable in our fishing towns may be worthy men^^^^. The
spring, summer and autumn, being entirely occupied in (...) pursuit of their
employment, leaves no time for amuse^^^^. In winter, every thing is different.
There are few calls to (...) and all are devoted to mirth and jollity. A
continual round of (...) and dissipation occupy the fisherman's time, until
returning (...) calls him to returning labor, which he now pursues as eagerly
(...) did just before his amusement.

(...) Port, originally part of Newbury, from which its incorpor^^^^ detached
it in 1764, and by which and Merrimack river it is (...) ^^^cled, is perhaps
the most limited in its extent of land, of any (...) in the commonwealth,
containing but about 640 acres. (...) (...) four houses for public worship,
viz. one Epistopalian, one (...) and two Congregational. It was formerly
remarkable (...) number of vessels annually built here; but since the commence
(...) the late war, this business has in a great degree failed, and ^^^^facture
of consequence has yet supplied its place. The con^^^^ frigates, Boston and
Hancock, were built here, besides many large private armed ships during the
war. The trade to the West Indies is carried on here with much spirit and to a
great amount. (...) quantities of rum are distilled, which is principally
exported to the southern states. Some vessels are employed in the freighting
business, and a few in the fishery. In November, 1790, there were (...) in this
port six ships, 45 brigantines, 39 schooners and 28 sloops, (...) in the whole
11,870 tons. A term of the courts of common plea^^^^ general sessions is held
here on the last Tuesday of September.

Ipswich, by the Indians called Agawam, in the county of (...) 32 miles N. N.
E. from Boston, is divided into 5 parishes (...) ^^^tains 4562 inhabitants. An
excellent stone bridge, across Ipswich river, composed of two arches, with one
solid pier in the bed of the river, connects the two parts of the town, and was
executed (...) the direction of the late Honorable Judge Choate, in a style of
strength and neatness, hitherto unequalled in this country. (...) was
heretofore a place of much more consideration than at (...). Its decline is
attributed to a barred harbor and shoal rivers. Its ^^^ural situation is very
pleasant, and on all accounts excellently well ^^^culated to be a large
manufacturing town. The supreme judicial court, the courts of common pleas and
sessions, are held here once in a year; and from its central situation, appears
to be the most convenient place for all the courts and public offices of the
county.

Charlestown, called by the aboriginal inhabitants, Mishaw^^^, lies (...) of
Boston, with which it is connected by Charles river bridge, and it the
principal town in Middlesex county. The town, properly so called, i^ built on a
peninsula, formed by Mystic river, on the east, and a (...), setting up from
Charles river on the west. It is very advantageous situated for health, In
three years, ending 1791, 80 persons died, 19 of whom were upwards of 60 year
old; to were upwards of 70; 4 upwards of So, and one 90.
navigation, trade, and manufactures of almost all the various kinds. A dam
across the mouth of the bay, which (...) up from Charles river, west of the
town, would afford a great number of mill seats for manufacturers. Bunker,
Breed's, and Cobble, now Barrell's, hills, are celebrated in the history of the
American Revolution; and no less so for the elegant and delightful prospects
which they afford of Boston, and its charmingly variegated harbor -- of
Cambridge and its Colleges, and of an extensive tract of highly cultivated
country.

The destruction of this town by the British, in 1775, we have mentioned in the
historical sketch we have given of the war. Before in destruction, several
branches of manufactures were carried on to (...) advantage, some of which have
been since revived; particularly (...) manufacture of pot and pearl ash, rum,
ships, leather in all its branches, silver, tin, brass, and pewter. See Note
page 116.


Cambridge and Concord, are the most considerable inlands towns in the County
of Middlesex, the former is 4 miles from Boston, and i^ a pleasant town, and
the seat of the University. The latter is 19 (...) N. W. of Boston, and is also
a pleasant, healthy, thriving (...) The Provincial Congress sat in Concord in
1774, and the general (...) have frequently held their sessions here when
contagious diseases have prevailed in the capital. This town is rendered famous
in history (...) its being the place where the first opposition was made to the
British troops, on the memorable 19th of April 1775. The public buildings
(...), a congregational church, a spacious stone goal, the best in New England,
and a county court house. The town is accommodated with (...) handsome bridges,
one of which is 208 feet long and 18 feet (...) supported by 12 piers, built
after the manner of Charles river (...). In 1791, there were 1^90 inhabitants,
in this town, 80 of (...) were upwards of 70 years old. For 13 years past the
average (...) of deaths has been 17, one in four of whom were 70 years (...)
and upwards.

(...), the principal town in the county of the same name, and (...) of the Old
colony, so called, is 42 miles S. E. of Boston, and (...) about 300 houses.
Before the war, the inhabitants of this (...) employed 90 sail of vessels,
chiefly in the fishing business. But (...) course of the war, they were mostly
taken or destroyed by the (...), and their seamen captivated, and many of the
inhabitants re^^^^ to indigence. They have since, in a great measure, emerged
(...) their distressed state. The harbor is spacious but the water is (...).
This town is famous for being the first place settled by the (...) ancestors of
the New Englanders, in 1620.

(...), the shire town of the county of the same name, is the (...) inland town
in New England, and is situated about 47 miles (...) of Boston. The public
buildings in this town, are two (...) churches, a court house, and a strong
stone goal. The (...) carry on a large inland trade, and manufacture pot and
(...) cotton and linen goods, besides some other articles.

^^^^ing, in its various branches, is carried on very extensively in this town,
by Isaiah Thomas, who, in the year 1791, carried through his presses two
editions of the Bible, the one the large royal quarto, the (...) of that kind
published in America, the other a large folio, with 50 cop^^^tes, besides
several other books of consequence. His printing apparatus consists of 10
printing presses, with types in proportion; and he (...) now making
preparations for the printing of Bibles of various smaller lands, which will
cause him to make a great addition to his works, of (...) presses and types.
This printing apparatus is now the largest in America.

(...) Connecticut river, in the county of Hampshire, there are a (...) of very
pleasant towns, among which are Springfield (...) Hadley, on the east side of
the river; Northampton, Hatfield and (...) on the west. Courts are held in all
these places in their (...) except Hatfield. Springfield is the oldest of these
towns, having (...) settled as early as 1636. Its public buildings are a
congregational ^^^^ch, court house, and goal. A large proportion of the
military (...) of the commonwealth are lodged here. A clear meandering (...)
runs through the town from north to south, and adds much to its (...) and
pleasantness.

suchbridge, Great Barrington, and Lenox, are the principal towns (...)
Berkshire county, and lie from 45 to 55 miles W. N. W. from Springfield.

MILITARY STRENGTH.] The active militia of Massachusetts is composed of all
able bodied, white male citizens from 16 to 40 years of (...), excepting
officers of government, and those who have held ^^^^issions, etc. The whole is
completely armed and organized, and is formed into nine divisions, each
commanded by a major general, nineteen brigades, consisting of seventy nine
regiments of instantly, eleven battalions of cavalry, and eight battalions of
artillery* together forming a well regulated body of 50,000 infantry, 2,000
(...)* and 1500 artillery men, with 60 pieces of field artillery. This ^^tive
military corpse is assembled by companies for discipline, in (...) respective
districts, four times a year; and once a year by regi^^^^ or brigades; at which
time they are reviewed and inspected.

Besides the military strength abovementioned, which may be ^^^^ered as the
active militia of the state, there are en^olled about (...) men from 40 to 60
years of age, who are obliged always to keep themselves completely; armed; and
they are required, under penalty (...) law, to exhibit their arms once a year
to their respective captain, (...) make returns thereof. This last corpse is
called the alarm list, and (...) properly distinguished as the Corpse de Reserve
of the Common (...).

RELIGION.] The religion of this Commonwealth is establish (...) their
excellent constitution, on a most liberal and tolerant (...) persons of
whatever religious profession or sentiments, may worship God agreeably to the
dictates of their own consciences, unmo^^^^^ provided they do not disturb the
peace.

The following statement, shows what are the several religious denominations in
this state, and their proportional numbers.

Denominations. Number of Congregations Supposed number of each denomination.
Congregationalists, 400 277,600 Baptists, 84 58,296 Episcopalians, 16 11,104
Friends or Quakers, 10 6,940 Presbyterians, 4 2,776 Universalists, 2 1,388
Roman Catholics 1 69^ Total 517 358,798

In this statement, it is supposed that all the inhabitants in the (...)
consider themselves as belonging to one or the other of the religious
denominations mentioned; and that each religious society, of every
denomination, is composed of an equal number of souls; that is, each i^
supposed to contain 694, which, if we reckon the number of inhabitants in the
state at 358,798, will be the proportion for each congregation.

Although this may not be an exact apportionment of the different sects, yet it
is perhaps as accurate as the nature of the subject will allow and sufficient
to give a general idea of the proportion which the several denominations bear
to each other.

The number of congregational churches in 1749 was 250.

In 1760, the number of inhabitants in this state, was about 268,^^ The
proportion of the sects was then nearly as follows, viz. (...).

Sects. Congregations Supposed number of souls of each (...)
Congregationalists, 306 225,^^6 Friends meetings, 22 16,192 Baptists, 20 14,70^
Episcopalians, 13 9,^^^ Prosbyterians, 4 2,944 Total 365 268,85^

POPULATION.] The population of the state is accurately stated (...) of
divisions. The counties of Essex, part of Suffolk, and (...) of Hampshire, are
the most populous parts of the state. Essex, (...) (...) as 135 inhabitants for
every square mile.

CHARACTER, MANNERS, etc.] See New England.

REVENUE AND TAXES.] The principal sources of revenue are land and (...) taxes
and the sales of new lands. Taxes are ^evied on all (...) between sixteen and
fifty, except such as are exempted by law -- al^^ (...) the number of acres of
improved and unimproved land -- on (...) houses and barns, ware houses, stores,
etc. These are all valued, (...) this valuation taxes are laid, so many pounds
for every L1000.

^^^TIONS AND IMPROVEMENTS.] Great improvements have of (...) made in several
manufacturing machines, by which those (...) of manufacture in which they are
employed, have been (...) facilitated in the execution, and fewer hands
required. But (...) ingenious improvement, or invention, and which most (...)
notice, is a complete and elegant Planetarium, 6 feet in (...), constructed by
Mr. Joseph Pope of Boston. This is (...) a work of original genius and
assiduous application, as (...) Pope never saw a machine of the kind till his
own was com^^^^. It exhibits a proof of great strength of mind, and really
(...) him much honor, both as a philosopher and a mechanic. This machine has
been purchased for the University at Cambridge, and is a very useful and
ornamental addition to the philosophical apparatus.

CONSTITUTION.] The constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
established in 1780, contains a declaration of rights and (...) of government.
The declaration asserts the natural freedom and equality of men -- Liberty of
conscience -- Freedom of the Press (...) by jury -- Sovereignty and
independence -- that all power is (...) the people -- that hereditary honors
and emoluments are inadmis^^^^ that every subject is entitled to protection of
life, liberty and (...) -- and, in return, must obey the laws and pay his
proportion (...) the common expense -- that he shall not be obliged to accuse
himself* but may be heard in his own defense -- that he may keep arms; (...)
(...) armies shall not be maintained in time of peace -- that no (...) be
^ev^ed without the consent of the people by their representatives -- that no
expost facto law shall be made -- that the martial (...) extend only to men in
actual military service -- that the legislative, executive, and judiciary
powers shall be kept distinct, etc. By the frame of government, the power of
legislation is lodged in a (...) court, consisting of two branches, viz. a
senate and a house of representatives, each having a negative upon the other.
They meet (...) on the last Tuesday in May. No act can be passed without
^^^^^bation of the governor, unless two thirds of both branches are i^ favor
of it after a revisal. Either branch, or the governor (...), may require the
opinion of the justices of the supreme judicial court, upon important
questions. Senators are chosen by (...) of which there cannot be less than
thirteen. The number of (...) and senators, for the whole Commonwealth, is
forty; the number of each district is in proportion to their public taxes;
(...) district shall be so large, as to have more than six. Sixteen senators
make a quorum. The representative* are chosen by the several towns, according
to their numbers of rateable polls. (...) 150 polls one is elected; and for
every addition of 225, an additional one. Their traveling expense, to and from
the general (...) (...) defrayed by the public, but their wages for attendance
are (...) their own towns. Impeachments, for misconduct in office, are (...) by
the representatives, and tried by the senate; but the (...) can go only to
removal from office and future disqualification. Money bills originate in the
house of representatives, but may be (...) by the senate. Representatives are
privileged from arrests on (...) process. Sixty members make a quorum. The
supreme executive authority is vested in a governor, who is elected annually
by the people, and has a council consisting of the lieutenant governor, and
nine gentlemen chosen out of the forty, who are returned for counselors and
senators. Five counselors make a quorum. The governor is commander of all the
military force of the Commonwealth* (...) may convene the general court, may
adjourn them, when the (...) branches disagree about the time, and in their
recess, may (...) them from time to time, not exceeding ninety days -- may
pardon ^^^^victs, but the legislature alone can grant pardons, before
conviction. He commissions all officers, and with the advice of the council,
appoints all judicial officers. Military officers are thus appointed; the
respective companies choose their captain and subalterns, who choose their
regimental officers, who choose their brigadiers. The major generals are
appointed by the general court. Justices of the (...) are commissioned for
seven years; all other judicial, and all executive and military officers,
continue during good behavior, yet (...) removeable by the governor, upon
address of the legislature. The salaries of the governor and justices of the
supreme court, (...) diminished, although they may be enlarged. Official
qualification are as follows -- for a voter, twenty one year's age, one year's
residence, a freehold of three pounds annual value or sixty pounds of any other
estate -- for a representative, L100 freehold or L200 other estate, and one
year's residence in the town -- for a senator, L300 freehold (...) L600 other
estate in the Commonwealth and five years residence (...) the district -- for
governor or lieutenant governor, L1000 (...) and seven years residence. Every
governor, lieutenant governor, counselor, senator, (...) representative,
must declare that he believes the christian religion, and has the legal
qualifications. A governor lieutenant governor, or justice of the supreme
court can hold (...) other office. No man s^all hold two of these offices,
judge of (...) sheriff, register. No justices of the supreme court, secretary,
(...) general, treasurer, judge of probate, instructor of Harvard College,
clerk, register, sheriff or custom officer can have a seat in the legislature.
The privilege of Habeas Corpus cannot be suspended more than a year at one
time. In 1795, if two thirds of the qualified voters desire ^t, a convention
shall be called to revise the constitution.

HISTORY.] See Hutchinson's History of Massachusetts -- (...) History of the
Insurrection in Massachusetts -- The Publications of the Historical Society, in
the American Apollo -- Hazard's Historical Collections -- Chalmer's Political
Annals, and Gough's History of the People called Quakers.

RHODE ISLAND, AND PROVIDENCE PLANTATIONS.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 68 Miles between 3 and 4 E. Long. Breadth 40 Miles 41 and 42 N. Lat.

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED north and east, by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts;
south, by the Atlantic; west, by Connecticut. These limits comprehend what is
(...) Rhode Island and Providence Plantations.

CIVIL DIVISIONS AND POPULATION.] This State is divided into (...) counties,
which are subdivided into 30 townships, as follows: Counties Towns No. Inb.
Slaves NEWPORT New Port 6716 223 14,300 Portsmouth 1560 17 New Shoreham 682 47
Jamestown 507 16 Middletown 840 15 Tivertown 2453 25 Little Compton 1542 23
PROVIDENCE Providence 6380 48 24,391 Smithfield 3171 5 S^^^ate 2315 6
Gloucester 4023 1 Cumberland 1964 Cranston 1877 10 Johnston 1320 3 North
Providence 1071 5 Foster 2268 4 WASHINGTON Westerly 2298 10 18,075 North
Kingston 2907 96 South Kingston 4131 175 Charlestown 2022 12 Exeter 2495 37
Richmond 1760 2 Hopkinton 2462 7 BRISTOL Bristol 1406 64 3,211 Warren 1122 22
Barrington 683 12 K^NT Warwick 2493 35 8,848 East Greenwich 1824 13 West
Greenwich 2054 10 Coventry 2477 5 Total five Thirty 67877 948 68825

No. in each Coun. The number of Inhabitants in Rhode Island and Providence
Plantations was in the year 1730 15,352 Whites 2,633 Blacks 1774 54,435 Whites
5,243 Blacks 1748 29,755 Whites 4,373 Blacks 1783 48,538 Whites 3,361 Blacks
1761 35,939 Whites 4,697 Blacks 1790 67,877 Whites 948 Blacks

BAYS, HARBORS AND ISLANDS.] Narraganset Bay makes up (...) south to north,
between the main land on the east and west. It embosoms many fertile islands,
the principal of which are Rhode Island, Canonnicut, Prudence, Patience, Hope,
Dyer's and (...) islands

The harbors are Newport, Providence, Wickford, Patuket, W^^ren and Bristol.

Rhode Island, from which the State takes half its name, is 13 (...) in length;
its average breadth is about 4 miles. It is divided (...) three townships,
Newport, Portsmouth and Middletown. This (...), in point of soil, climate, and
situation, may be ranked among the (...) and most charming in the world. In its
most flourishing state, it (...) called, by travelers, the Eden of America.
But the change (...) the ravages of war, and a decrease of business have
effected, is (...) and melancholy. Some of the most ornamental country seats
(...) destroyed, and their fine groves, orchards and fruit trees, want^^^^ cut
down; and the gloom of its present decayed state, is height (...) by its
charming natural situation, and by reflecting upon its for^^^^ glory. The
farming interest, suffered far less injury, than the commercial city of
Newport, and has nearly recovered its former state -- Between 30,000 and 40,000
sheep are fed on this island, besides (...) cattle and horses.

Canonnicut Island, lies west of Rhode Island, and is six miles in length, and
about one mile in breadth. It was purchased of the Indians in 1657, and
incorporated by act of assembly by the name of the Island of Jamestown, in 1678.

Block Island, called by the Indians Manisses, is 21 miles S. S. W. from
Newport, and is the southernmost land belonging to the State. It was erected
into a township, by the name of New-Shoreham in 1672. The inhabitants of this
Island were formerly noted for ^^^^ing good cheese. They catch considerable
quantities of Cod fish, round the ledges near the island.

Prudence Island is nearly or quite as large as Canonnicut, and lies north of
it, and is a part of the township of Portsmouth.

RIVERS.] Providence and Taunton rivers both fall into Narraganset Bay the
former on the west, the latter on the east side of RhodeIsland. Providence
river rises partly in Massachusetts, and is navigable as far as Providence for
ships of 900 tons, thirty miles from the sea. Taunton river is navigable for
small vessels to Taunton. Common tides rise about four feet.

Fall river is small, rising in Freetown, and passing through Tivertown. The
line between the states of Massachusetts and Rhode Island, passes Fall river
bridge. Patuxet river, rises in Mashapog Pond, and, 5 miles below Providence,
empties into Narraganset Bay. Pautucket river, called more northerly
Blackstone's river, empties into Seek honck river, 4 miles N. N. E. from
Providence, where are the falls hereafter described, over which is a bridge, on
the post road to Boston, and 40 miles from thence. The confluent stream empties
into Providence river, about a mile below* Waybossett, or the G^^^ Bridge.
Naspatucket river falls into the bay about 1 miles N. W. of Waybossett bridge.
Moshassuck river, falls into the same bay three fourths of a mile north of the
bridge. These rivers united form Providence river, which, a few miles below the
town, receives the name of Narraganset Bay, and affords fine fish, oysters and
lobsters in great plenty.

CLIMATE.] Rhode Island is as healthful a country as any part of (...) (...).
The winters, in the maritime parts of the state, are (...) in the inland
country; the air being softened by a sea va^^^^ also enriches the soil. The
summers are delightful, ef^^^^ Rhode Island, where the extreme heats, which
prevail in (...) of America, are allayed by cool and refreshing breezes (...).

(...) In the rivers and bays is plenty of sheeps-head, black^^^^ sha^^,
lobsters, oysters and clams; and around the shores (...) Island, besides those
already mentioned, are cod, halibut, (...) ^ass, had dock, etc. etc. to the
amount of more than seven^^^ kinds, so that in the seasons of fish, the markets
are alive (...) Travelers are agreed that Newport furnishes the best fish
(...) the world.

(...).] The constitution of the state admits of no religious ^^^^ents, any
further than depends upon the voluntary choice of (...). All men professing one
Supreme Being, are equally pro^^^^ the laws, and no particular sect can claim
pre-eminence* (...) ^imited liberty in religion is one principal cause why
there is (...) variety of religious sects in Rhode Island. The baptists are the
(...) numerous of any denomination in the state. These, as well as the (...)
(...) in New England, are chiefly upon the Calvinistic plan (...), and
independents in regard to church government, (...), however, some who profess
the Arminian tenets, and are (...) Arminian baptists. Others observe the Jewish
or Saturday (...) from a persuasion that it was one of the ten commandments,
(...) they plead are all in their nature moral, and were never abro^^^^ the New
Testament, and must at least be deemed of equal va^^^^ public worship as any
day particularly set apart by Jesus Christ and his apostles. These are called
sabbatarian, or seventh day (...). There are others who are called separate
baptists.

(...) other religious denominations in Rhode Island are congrega^^^^^, friends
or quakers, episcopalians, moravians and Jews. (...) these there is a
considerable number of the people who can (...) to no particular denomination.

(...) towns public worship is too much neglected by the greater (...) of the
inhabitants. They pay no taxes for the support of eccle^^^^ of any
denomination; and a peculiarity which distinguishes (...) from every other
protestant country in the known world is, (...) contract formed by the minister
with his people, for his salary (...) (...) law. So that ministers are
dependent wholly on the integrity (...) the people for their support, since
their salaries are not re^^ble by law. It ought in justice, however, to be
observed, that the (...) in general are liberally maintained, and none who
me^^t it have reason to complain for want of support.

LITERATURE.] The literature of this state is confined principally (...) the
towns of Newport and Providence. There are men of learning (...) abilities
scattered through other towns, but they are rare. The (...) of the inhabitants
in other parts of the state, are involved in (...) ignorance perhaps than in
most other parts of New England. As impartial history of their transactions
since the peace, ^^^^^rince the truth of the above observations.

Providence, is Rhode Island college. The charter for founding the (...) of
learning was granted by the general assembly of the (...) by the name of the
"Trustees and Fedows of the college o^ University, in the English colony of
Rhode Island and Providence Plantations," This name to be altered when any
generous Benefactor arises, who by his liberal donation shall entitle himself
to the honor of giving the college a name.
in 1764, in consequence of the petition of a large number of the most
respectable characters in the state. By the ch^^^^ the corporation of the
college consists of two separate branches, (...) distinct, separate and
respective powers. The number of trust^^^ thirty six, of whom twenty two are of
the denomination called baptists, five of the denomination of friends, five
episcopalians, and four congregationalists. The same proportion of the
different denomination to continue in perpetuum. The number of the fellows
(inclusive (...) the president, who is a fellow ex officio) is twelve, of whom
eight (...) baptists, the others chosen indiscriminately from any denomination.
The concurrence of both branches, by a majority of each, is ^^^^ry for the
validity of an act, except adjudging and conferring (...) which exclusively
belongs to the fellowship as a learned faculty. The president must be a
baptist; professors and other officers of instruction are not limited to any
particular denomination. There is annually a general meeting of the
corporation. On the first Wednesday in September, at which time the public
commencement is held.

This institution was first founded at Warren, in the county of Bristol, and
the first commencement held there in 1769.

In the year 1770, the college was removed to Providence, where a large,
elegant building was erected for its accommodation, by the generous donations
of individuals, mostly from the town of providence. It is situated on a hill to
the east of the town; and while its ele^^^ situation renders it delightful, by
commanding an extensive, variegated prospect, it furnishes it with a pure,
salubrious air. The edifice is of brick, four stories high, 150 feet long and
46 wide, with a projection of ten feet each side. It has an entry lengthwise
with rooms on each side. There are 48 rooms for the accommodation of students,
and eight larger ones for public uses. The roof is covered with state.

From December 1776, to June 1782, the college edifice was used by the French
and American troops for an hospital and barracks, so that the course of
education was interrupted during that period. No degrees were conferred from
1776 to 1786. From 1786 the college again became regular, and is now very
flourishing, containing upwards of sixty students.

This institution is under the instruction of a president, a professor of
divinity, a professor of natural and experimental philosophy, a professor of
mathematics and astronomy, a professor of natural history, and three tutors.
The institution has a library of between two and three thousand volumes,
containing a valuable philosophical apparatus. Newly all the funds of the
college are at interest in the treasury of the state, and amount to almost two
thousand pounds.

At Newport there is a flourishing academy, under the direction of a rector and
tutors, who teach the learned languages, English grammar, geography, etc.

SOCIETIES.] A marine society was established (...) Newport in 1732, for the
purpose of relieving distressed widows and orphans of maritime brethren and
such of their society as may need assistance.

The Providence Society for promoting the abolition of slavery, for the relief
of persons unlawfully held in bondage, and for improving the condition of the
African race, commenced in 1789, and was incorporated (...) the year following.
It consists of upwards of 150 members, (...) whom belong to the State of
Massachusetts.

MOUNTAIN.] In the town of Bristol is Mount Hope, or as some (...) (...) Haup,
which is remarkable only for its having been the (...) King Phillip, and the
place where he was killed.

RIVERS.] The great bridge, in the town of Providence, former^^^^ Weybo^et,
from a high hill of that name, which stood near the (...) of the bridge, but
which is now removed, and its base built (...) the only bridge of considerable
note in this state. It is 160 (...) and 22 feet wide, supported by two wooden
trussels, and two (...) (...). It unites the eastern and western parts of the
town, and is (...) of resort in summer, affording a pleasant prospect of all
vessels, (...) and leaving the harbor. This is not a toll bridge.

The bridge over Patucket fails, is a work of considerable magni^^^ and much
ingenuity.

The assembly of this state, in their session of May 1792, passed an act
incorporating three companies for the purpose of erecting three bridges -- one
over the upper, and another over the lower ferry of Seek honk (...) and a third
over Howland ferry, which would unite Rhode Island with Tiverton on the main;
the two former will greatly accom^^^^ the town of Providence -- the latter must
prove highly advanta^^^^ to the people of Newport and others on Rhode Island.
To (...) works of utility and enterprise every good man wishes success.

^^IL AND PRODUCTIONS.] This state, generally speaking, is a (...) for pasture
and not for grain. It however produces corn, rye, (...) oats, and in some parts
wheat sufficient for home consumption; (...) the various kinds of grasses,
fruits, and culinary roots and plants (...) abundance, and in good perfection;
cider is made for exhibition. The northwestern parts of the state, are but
thinly inhab^^^, and are more rocky and barren than the other parts. The tract
of ^^^try lying between South Kingston, and the Connecticut line, (...) the
Narraganset country, is excellent grazing land, and is in^^^^ by a number of
large and wealthy farmers, who raise some of (...) (...) neat cattle in New
England, weighing from 16 to 1800 weight. (...) keep large dairies, and make
butter and cheese of the best quality and in large quantities for exportation.
Narraganset has been (...) for an excellent breed of pacing horses* remarkable
for their (...) and ha^diness for enduring the fatigues of a journey; this
breed (...) has much depreciated of late, the best mares having been (...) by
people from the westward.

TRADE.] Before the war, the merchants in Rhode Island imported (...) Britain,
dry goods from Africa, slaves -- from the West Indies, su^^^^ and molasses --
and from the neighboring colonies, lumber and (...). With the bills which they
obtained, in Surrinam and other (...) West India islands, they paid their
merchants in England; their (...) carried to Holland; the slaves from Africa,
they carried to the (...) Indies, together with the lumber and provisions
procured from their (...); the rum distilled from the molasses, was carried to
Africa to (...) negroes; with their dry goods from England they trafficed (...)
neighboring colonies. By this kind of circuitous commerce, (...) (...) and
grew rich. But the war, and some other events, (...) (...) a great, and in most
respects, an injurious effect upon the (...) of this State. The slave trade,
which was a source of wealth to many of the people in Newport, and in other
parts of the State, has happily been abolished. The legislature have passed a
law prohibiting ships from going to Africa for slaves, and selling them in the
West India islands; and the oath of one seaman, belonging to the ship, is
sufficient evidence of the fact. This law is more favorable to the cause of
humanity, than to the temporal interests of the merchants who had been engaged
in this inhuman traffic. The town of Bristol carries on a considerable trade to
Africa, the West Indies, and to different parts of the United States. But by
far the greatest part of the commerce of this state, (...) at present carried
on by the inhabitants of the flourishing town of Providence. In June 1791,
there were, belonging to this port, Tons 95 parts 11 Ships, containing 3,066 54
35 Brigs 4,266 48 1 Snow 141 1 Polec^e 101 25 Schooners 1,320 21 56 Sloops
3,047 56 Total 129 sail, containing 11,942 84 Tons.

The present exports from the state are flaxseed, lumber, horses, cattle, beef,
pork, fish, poultry, onions, butter, cheese, barley, grain, spirits and cotton
and linen goods. The imports consist of European and West India goods, and
logwood from the Bay of Honduras. Upwards of 600 vessels enter and clear
annually at the different ports in this state. The amount of exports from this
state to foreign countries, for one year, ending the 30th of September 1791,
was 470,131 dollars 9 cents.

LIGHT HOUSE.] For the safety and convenience of sailing into the Naraganset
Bay and harbor of Newport, a light house was erected, in 1749, in Beavertail,
at the south end of Canonnicut island.

The diameter at the base, is 24 feet, and at the top 13 feet. The height from
the ground to the top of the cornice is 58 feet, round which is a gallery, and
within that stands the lanthorn, which is about 11 feet high, and 8 feet
diameter.

The ground the light house stands upon, is about 12 feet above the surface of
the sea at high water.

MANUFACTURES.] The inhabitants of this state are progressing rapidly in this
branch of business. A cotton manufactory has been erected at Providence, which
from present prospects will answer the expectations of the proprietors. The
warps are spun by water, with a machine which is an improvement of Mr. Ark
wright's; and strong, smooth and excellent yarn, is thus made both for warps
and stockings. The filling of the cotton goods is spun with jennies. In these
several works five carding machines are employed, and a calender constructed
after the European manner. Jeans, fustians, denims, thicksets, velvets, etc.
etc. are here manufactured and sent to the southern states. Large quantities of
linen and tow cloth are made in different parts of this state for exportation.
But the most considerable manufactures in this state are those of iron, such as
bar and sheet iron, steel, nail rods and nails, implements of husbandry,
stoves, pots and other household utensils, the iron work of shipping anchors,
bells etc. The other manufactures of this state are rum, corn, spirits,
chocolate, paper, wool and cotton cards, etc. beside domestic manufactures for
family use, which, in this, in common with the other states, amount to a vast
su^ which cannot be ascertained.

MINERALS. FOSSILS, etc.] Iron ore is found in great plenty in several parts of
the State. The iron works on Patuxet river, twelve miles from Providence, are
supplied with ore from a bed 4 miles and a half distant, which lies in a
valley, through which runs a brook. The brook is turned into a new channel, and
the ore pits are cleared of water by a steam engine, constructed and made at
the furnace, by, and under the direction, of the late Joseph Brown, Esquire. of
Providence, which continues a very useful monument of his mechanical genius. At
this ore bed are a variety of ores, curious stones and ochres.

At diamond hill, in the county of Providence, which is so called from its
sparkling and shining appearance, there are a variety of peculiar stones, more
curious than useful. Not far from this hill, in the township of Cumberland, is
a copper mine, mixed with iron strongly impregnated with load stone, of which
some large pieces have been found in the neighborhood. No method has yet been
discovered to work it to advantage.

An abundance of limestone is found in this state, particularly in the county
of Providence, of which large quantities of lime are made and exported. This
limestone is of different colors, and is the true marble, both of the white,
plain and variegated. It takes a fine polish and works equal to any in America.

There are several mineral springs in this state; to one of which, near
Providence, many people resort to bathe, and drink the water.

CHIEF TOWNS.] Newport and Providence are the two principal towns in the State.
Newport lies in lat. 41 35 This town was first settled by Mr. William
Coddingtons* afterward governor, and the father of Rhode Island, with
seventeen others, in 1639. Its harbor, which is one of the finest in the
world, spreads westward before the town. The entrance is easy and safe, and a
large fleet may anchor in it and ride in perfect security. It is probable this
may, in some future period, become one of the man of war ports, of the American
Empire. The town lies north and south upon a gradual ascent as you proceed
eastward from the water, and exhibits a beautiful view from the harbor, and
from the neighboring hills which lie westward upon the main. West of the town
is Goat Island, on which is a fort. Between this island and Rhode Island is the
harbor. Front or Water street is a mile in length.

Newport contains about 1000 houses, built chiefly of wood. It has nine houses
for public worship: three for the Baptists, two for Congregationalists, one for
Episcopalians, one for Quakers, one for Moravians, and a synagogue for the
Jews. The other public buildings are a State house, and an edifice for the
public library. The situation, form and architecture of the state house, give
it a pleasing appearance. It stands sufficiently elevated, and a long wha^f and
paved parade lead up to it from the harbor.

The prohibition of the slave trade, the destructive influence of paper money
(which has now however ceased to operate.) combined with the devastation of a
cruel way, have occasioned a stagnation of business, which is truly melancholy
and distressing. This city far famed for the beauty of its situation, the
salubrity of its climate, and the hospitality and politeness of its
inhabitants, and which was the place of resort for invalids from a great
distance, now wears the gloomy aspect of decay. Thousands of its inhabitants
are almost destitute of employment. This circumstance, together with that of
there being a great abundance of raw materials in the vicinity, strongly mark
out this city, as a convenient and proper situation for extensive manufactures.
Should the gentlemen of fortune turn their capitals into this channel, it is
thought that they would not only derive a profit to themselves, but be
instrumental in giving employment and bread, to thousands of now unhappy
people, and of reviving the former importance of their beautiful city.

The excellent accommodations and regulations of the numerous packets which
belong to this port, and which ply thence to Providence and New York, ought not
to pass unnoticed. They are said to be superior to any thing of the kind in
Europe. The appearance of the islands in Narraganset Bay, and of the
circumjacent country, in the spring and summer seasons, either from the land or
water, is extremely beautiful and charming.

Providence, situated in latitude 41 51 on both sides of Providence river, is
35 miles from the sea, and 30 N. by W. from Newport. It is the oldest town in
the state. Roger Williams, and his company, were its first settlers in 1636.

The town is divided into two parts, by the river, and connected by the bridge
already described. Ships of almost any size sail up and down the channel, which
is marked out by stakes, erected at points, shoals and beds lying in the river,
so that strangers may come up to the town without a pilot. A ship of 950 tons,
for the East India trade, was lately built in this town, and fitted for sea. In
1764 there (...) belonging to the county of Providence, 54 sail of vessels,
containing 4,320 tons. In 1791, they had 129 sail, containing 11,942 tons.

This town suffered much by the Indian war of 1675, when a number of its
inhabitants removed to Rhode Island for shelter. In the late war the case was
reversed; many of the inhabitants of that (...) and removed to Providence.

The public buildings are an elegant meeting house for Baptists, 80 feet
square, with a lofty and beautiful steeple, and a large bell, cast at the
Furnace Hope, in Situate -- a meeting house for friends or quakers, two for
congregationalists, an episcopal church, a handsome court house, 70 feet by 40,
in which is deposited a library for the use of the inhabitants of the town and
country -- a work house, a market house 80 feet long and 40 feet wide, and a
brick school house, in which four schools are kept. The college edifice we have
already mentioned. The houses in this town are generally built of wood, though
there are some brick buildings which are large and elegant. At a convenient
distance from the town a hospital for the small (...) and other diseases has
been erected. There are two (...) works, a number of distilleries, sugar houses
and other manufactures. Several forts were erected in and near Providence
during the late war, which however are not kept in repair. This town has an
extensive trade with Massachusetts, Connecticut and part of Vermont; and (...)
its advantageous situation, promises to be among the largest towns in New
England. It sends four representatives to the General Assembly -- the other
towns in the county send but two.

Bristol is a pleasant thriving town, about 16 miles north of Newport, on the
main. Part of the town was destroyed by the British, but it has since been
rebuilt. It has an episcopal and a congregational church. This town is noted
for raising large quantities of onions and other roots. A number of vessels are
owned by the inhabitants, and they carry on a considerable trade to Africa, the
West Indies, and (...) different parts of the United States.

Warren is also a flourishing town -- trades to the West Indies and other
places, and builds ships.

Little Compton, called by the Indians Seconnet, is said to be the best
cultivated township in the state, and affords a greater supply of provisions
for market, such as meats of the several kinds, butter, cheese, vegetables,
etc. than any other town of its size. The inhabitants, who are an industrious
and sober people, and in these respects an example worthy the notice and
imitation of their brethren in some other parts of the state, manufacture linen
and tow cloth, ^lannels, etc. of an excellent quality, and in considerable
quantities for sale.

East Greenwich and Warwick are noted for making good cider, and formerly for
raising tobacco for exportation.

INDIANS.] A few years since there were about 500 Indians in this state. The
greater part of them reside at Charlestown. They are peaceable and well
disposed toward government, and speak the English language.

CURIOSITIES.] About four miles northeast of Providence lies a small village,
called Pautucket, a place of some trade, and famous for lamprey cells. Through
this village runs Pautucket river, which empties into Se^khonk river at this
place. In this river is a beautiful fall of water, directly over which a bridge
has been built, which divides the Commonwealth of Massachusetts from the State
of Rhode Island. The fall, in its whole length, is upwards of fifty feet. The
water passes through several chasms in a rock which (...) diametrically across
the bed of the stream, and serves as a dam to the water. Several mills have
been erected upon these falls; and the (...) and channels which have been
constructed to conduct the streams to their respective wheels, and the bridge,
have taken very much from the beauty and grandeur of the scene; which would
otherwise have been indescribably charming and romantic.

In the town of Middletown, on Rhode Island, about two miles from Newport, is a
place called Purgatory. It joins to the sea on the east side of the island. It
is a large cavity or opening, in a high bed of rocks, about 12 feet in diameter
at top; and about 40 feet deep before you reach the water, of which, as it
joins the sea, it has always a large depth. The rocks on each side appear to
have been once united, and were probably separated by some convulsion in nature.

CONSTITUTION.] The constitution of this state is founded on the charter
granted by Charles II. in 1663; and the frame of government was not essentially
altered by the revolution. The legislature of the state consists of two
branches -- a senate or upper house, composed of ten members, besides the
governor and deputy governor, called, (...) the charter, assistants -- and a
house of representatives, composed of deputies from the several (...). The
members of the legislature are chosen twice a year; and there are two sessions
of this body annually, viz. on the first Wednesday in May, and the last
Wednesday in October.

The supreme executive power is vested in a governor, or in his absence, in
the deputy governor, who, with the assistants, secretary and general
treasurer, are chosen annually in May by the suffrages of the people. The
governor presides in the upper house, but has only a single voice in enacting
laws.

There is one supreme judicial court, composed of five judges, whose
jurisdiction extends over the whole state, and who hold two courts annually in
each county.

In each county, there is an inferior court of common pleas and general
sessions of the peace, held twice a year for the trial of causes not capital
arising within the county, from which an appeal lies to the supreme court.

HISTORY.] This state was first settled from Massachusetts. Motives of the same
kind with those which are well known to have occasioned the settlement of most
of the other United States, gave birth to this. This emigrants from England who
came to Massachusetts, though they did not perfectly agree in religious
sentiments, had been tolerably united by their common zeal against the
ceremonies of the church of England. But as soon as they were removed from
Ecclesiastical courts, and possessed of a patent allowing liberty of
conscience, they fell into disputes and contentions among themselves. And
notwithstanding all their sufferings and complaints in England, excited by the
principle of uniformity, such is human nature, the majority here were as fond
of this principle, as those from whole persecution they had fled.

The true grounds of religious liberty were not embraced or understood at this
time by any sect. While all disclaimed persecution for the sake of conscience,
a regard for the public peace and for the preservation of the church of Christ
from infection, together with the obstinacy of the Heretics, was urged in
justification of that, which stripped of all its disguises, the light of nature
and the laws of Christ, in the most solemn manner condemn.

Mr. Roger Williams, a minister who came over to New England in 1631, was
charged with holding a variety of errors, and was on that account forced to
leave his house, land, wife and children, at Salem, in the dead of winter, and
to seek a residence without the limits of Massachusetts. Governor Winthrop
advised him to pursue his course to Nehiganset, or Narraganset Bay, which he
did, and fixed himself at Secunk or Seekhonk now Rehoboth. But that place,
being within the bounds of Plymouth colony, Gov. Winslow, in a friendly manner,
advised him to remove to the other side of the river, where the lands were not
covered by any patent. Accordingly in 1636, Mr. Williams and four others,
crossed Seekhonk river, and landed among the Indians, by whom they were
hospitably received, and thus laid the foundation of a town, which from a sense
of God's merciful Providence to him, he called Providence. Here he was soon
after joined by a number of others, and though they were secured from the
Indians by the terror of the English, yet they, for a considerble time,
suffered much from fatigue and want: but they enjoyed liberty of conscience,
which has ever since been inviolably maintained in this state.

The unhappy divisions and contentions in Massachusetts still prevailed, and in
the year 1636, Gov. Winthrop strove to exterminate the opinions which he
disapproved. Accordingly a Synod was called at Newtown (now Cambridge) on the
30th of August, when eighty erroneous opinions were presented, debated, and
condemned; and a court holden in October following at the same place, banished
a few leading persons of those accused of these errors, and censured several
others; not, it seems, for holding these opinions, but for seditious conduct.
The disputes which occasioned this disturbance, were about the same points as
the five questions debated between the Synod and Mr. Cotton, which are thus
described by Dr. Mather: They were "about the order of things in our union to
our Lord Jesus Christ; about the influence of our says in the application of
his righteousness; about the use of our sanctification in evidencing our
justification; and about the consideration of our Lord Jesus Christ by men yet
under a covenant of works; briefly, they were about the points whereupon
depends the grounds of our assurance of blessedness in a better world. M^g. B.
7. P. 17.
"

The whole colony of Massachusetts, at this time, was in a violent ferment. The
election of civil officers was carried by a party spirit, excited by religious
dissension. Those who were banished by the court, joined by a number of their
friends, went in quest of a new settlement, and came to Providence, where they
were kindly entertained by Mr. R. Williams; who, by the assistance of Sir Henry
Vane, jun. procured for them, from the Indians, Aquidnick, now Rhode Island.
Here in 1638, the people, eighteen in number, formed themselves into a body
politic, and chose Mr. Coddington their leader, to be their judge or chief
magistrate. This same year the sachems signed the deed or grant of the island.
For which Indian gift, it is said, they paid very dearly by being obliged to
make repeated purchases of the same lands from several claimants.

The other parts of the state were purchased of the natives at several
successive periods.

In the year 1643, the people being destitute of a patent or any legal
authority* Mr. Williams went to England as agent, and by the assistance of Sir
Henry Vane, jun. obtained by the Earl of Warwick (then governor and admiral of
all the plantations) and his council, 'a free and absolute charter of civil
incorporation of Providence Plantations in Narraganset Bay.' This lasted until
the charter granted by Charles II, in 1663. by which the incorporation was
styled, 'the English colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations in New
England.' This charter, without any essential alteration, has remained the
foundation of their government ever since.

As the original inhabitants of this state were persecuted, at least in their
own opinion, for the sake of conscience, a most liberal and free toleration was
established by them. So little has the civil authority to do with religion
here, that, as has been already hinted, no contract between a minister and a
society (unless incorporated for that purpose) in of any force. It is probably
for these reasons that so many different sects have ever been found here; and
that the Sabbath and all religious institutions, have been more neglected in
this, than in any other of the New England states. Mr. Williams became a
Baptist in a few years after his settling at Providence, and was active in
forming a church of that persuasion in 1639, but ceased to walk with it the
following year. This church in 1653* disagreed about the rite of laying on of
hands, some holding it necessary to church communion, others esteeming it
indifferent; upon which the church divided. At Newport Mr. John Clark and some
others formed a church, in 1644, on the principles of the baptists; which
church was afterward divided like that at Providence.

In 1700, the Friends or Quakers meeting house was built in Newport. Their
yearly meeting. till Gov. Coddington's death, was held in his house, and he
died a member of that body in 1683.

In 1720, there was a congregational church gathered at Newport, and the Rev.
Nathaniel Clap was ordained its pastor. Out of this church another was formed
in 1728. The worship of God according to the rites of the church of England was
instituted here in 1706, by the society for propagating the gospel in foreign
parts. And in 1738, there were seven worshipping assemblies in this town, and a
large society of quakers at Portsmouth, at the other end of the island.

In 1630, the colony was filled with inhabitants; and chiefly by the natural
increase of the settlers. The number of souls in the state at this time was
17,935, of which no more than 985 were Indians, and 1648 negroes.

In 1738, there were above one hundred sail of vessels belonging to Newport.

The colony of Rhode Island, from its local situation, has ever been less
exposed to the incursions of the neighboring Indians, and from the French from
Canada, than their neighbors in Massachusetts and Connecticut. Many of the
colony have, from its first establishment, professed the principles of the
Quakers, which forbad them to fight. For these reasons, the colony has been
very little concerned in the old wars with the French and Indians. In the
expedition against Port Royal in 1710, and in the abortive attempt against
Canada in 1711, they had some forces. Toward the intended expedition against
Canada in 1746, they raised 300 men, and equipped a sloop of war with 100
seamen; but in their voyage to Nova Scotia, they met with misfortunes and
returned. Soon after, the design was dropped.

Through the whole of the late unnatural war with Great Britain, the
inhabitants of this state have manifested a patriotic spirit; their troops have
behaved gallantly, and they are honored in having produced the second general
in the held. General Green.


CONNECTICUT.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 82 Miles. between 41 and 42 2 N. Lat. Breadth 57 Miles. 1 50 and 3 20
E. Lon.

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED north, by Massachusetts; east, by Rhode Island; south, by
the found, which divides it from Long Island; west, by the state of New York.

The divisional line between Connecticut and Massachusetts, as settled in 1713,
was found to be about seventy two miles in length. The line dividing
Connecticut from Rhode Island, was settled in 1728, and found to be about 45
miles. The sea coast, from the mouth of Paukatux river, which forms a part of
the eastern boundary of Connecticut, in a direct southwesterly line to the
mouth of Byram river, is reckoned at about ninety miles. The line between
Connecticut and New York, runs from latitude 4^ to latitude 42 2; 72 miles.
Connecticut contains about 4,674 square miles; equal to about 2,640,000 acres.

CIVIL DIVISIONS.] Connecticut is divided into eight counties, and about 100
townships. Each township is a corporation, invested with power to hold lands,
choose their own town officers, to make prudential laws, the penalty of
transgression not to exceed twenty shillings, and to choose their own
representatives to the general assembly. The townships are generally divided
into two or more parishes, in each of which is one or more places for public
worship, and school houses at convenient distances.

The names of the counties, their chief towns, and population, in 1790, were as
follows.

Counties. Tot. No. Inhab. No. Fema. Slaves Chief Towns. Hartford 38,029 18,714
263 HARTFORD New Haven 30,830 15,258 433 NEW HAVEN New London 33,200 16,478 586
New London Norwich Fairfield 36,250 17,541 797 Fairfield Danbury Windham 28,921
14,406 184 Windham Litchfield 38,755 18,909 233 Litchfield Middlesex 18,855
9,632 221 Middleton Haddam Tolland 13,106 6,510 47 Tolland Total Eight 237,946
117,448 2,764

RIVERS.] The principal rivers in this state are Connecticut, Housatonick, the
Thames, and their branches. Under the heads of New Hampshire and Massachusetts,
we have already described Connecticut river, till it enters this state. Soon
after it enters the bounds of Connecticut, it passes over Enfield falls, to
render which navigable for boats, a company has been constituted, and a sum of
money raised by lottery. At Windsor it receives Windsor Ferry river* from the
west, which is formed by the junction of Farmingham and Poquabock rivers. At
Hartford it meets the tide, and thence flows, in a crooked channel, into Long
Island sound. It is from 80 to 100 rods wide, 130 miles from its mouth.

At its mouth is a bar of sand which considerably obstructs the navigation. Ten
feet water at full tides is found on this bar, and the same depth to Middleton.
The distance of the bar from this place as the river runs, is thirty six miles.
Above Middleton are several shoals which stretch quite across the river. Only
six feet water is found on the shoal at high tide, and here the tide ebbs and
flows but about eight inches. About three miles below Middleton, the river is
contracted to about 40 rods in breadth, by two high mountains. Almost every
where else the banks are low, and spread into fine, extensive meadows. In the
spring floods, which generally happen in May, these meadows are covered with
water. At Hartford the water sometimes rises twenty feet above the common
surface of the river, and having all to pass through the abovementioned
straight, it is sometimes two or three weeks before it returns to its usual
bed. These floods and nothing to the depth of water on the bar at the mouth of
the river; this bar lying too far off in the sound to be affected by them.

On this beautiful river, whose banks are settled almost to its source, are
many pleasant, neat, well built towns. On its western bank, from its mouth
northward, are the towns of Saybrook, Haddam, Middleton, Weathersfield,
Hartford, Windsor and Suffield. On its eastern bank, as you ascend the river
are, Lyme, East Haddam, Glastenbury, East Hartford, East Windsor, and Enfield.

The river is navigable to Hartford, upwards of fifty miles from its mouth, and
the produce of the country for two hundred miles above is brought thither in
boats. The boats which are used in this business are flat bottomed, long and
narrow, for the convenience of going up stream, and of so light a make as to be
portable in carts. They are taken out of the river at three different carrying
places, all of which make 15 miles. These obstructions, will, in a few years,
it is probable be all removed.

Sturgeon, salmon, and shad, are caught in plenty, in their season, from the
mouth of the river upwards, excepting sturgeon, which do not ascend the upper
falls; besides a variety of small fish, such as pike, carp, perch, etc.

From this river were employed in 1789, three brigs of one hundred and eighty
tons each, in the European trade; and about sixty sail, from sixty to one
hundred and fifty tons, in the West India trade; besides a few fishermen, and
forty or fifty coasting vessels.

One branch of the Housatonick An Indian name, signifying Over the Mountain.
rises in Lanesborough, the other in Windsor, both in Berkshire county in
Massachusetts. It passes through a number of pleasant towns, and empties into
the sound between Stratford and Milford. It is navigable twelve miles to Derby.
A bar of shells, at its mouth, obstructs its navigation for large vessels. In
this river, between Salisbury and Canaan, is a cataract, where the water of the
whole river, which is 150 yards wide, falls about sixty feet perpendicular, in
a perfect white sheet, exhibiting a scene exceedingly grand and beautiful.

Naugatuk is a small river, which rises in Torrington, and empties into the
Housatonick at Derby.

The Thames emp^^es into Long Island found at New London. It is navigable
fourteen miles, to Norwich Landing. Here it loses its name, and branches into
Shetucket, on the east, and Norwich or Little river, on the west. The city of
Norwich stands on the tongue of land between these rivers. Little river, about
a mile from its mouth, has a remarkable and very romantic cataract. A rock ten
or twelve feet in perpendicular height, extends quite across the channel of the
river. Over this the whole river pitches, in one entire sheet upon a bed of
rocks below. Here the river is compressed into a very narrow channel between
two craggy cliffs, one of which towers to a considerable height. The channel
descends gradually, is very crooked, and covered with pointed rocks. Upon these
the water swiftly tumbles, foaming with the most violent agitation, fifteen or
twenty rods, into a broad basin which spreads before it. At the bottom of the
perpendicular falls, the rocks are curiously excavated by the constant pouring
of the water. Some of the cavities, which are all of a circular form, are five
or six feet deep. The smoothness of the water above its descent -- the
regularity and beauty of the perpendicular fall -- the tremendous roughness of
the other, and the craggy, towering cliff which impends the whole, present to
the view of the spectator a scence indescribably delightful and majestic. On
this river are some of the finest mill seats in New England, and those
immediately below the falls, occupied by Lathrop's mills, are perhaps not
exceeded by any in the world. Across the mouth of this river is a broad,
commodious bridge, in the form of a wharf, built at a great expense.

Shetucket river, the other branch of the Thames, four miles from its mouth,
receives Quinnabogue, which has its source in Brimfield in Massachusetts;
thence passing through Sturbridge and Dudley in Massachusetts, it crosses into
Connecticut, and divides Pomfret from Killingly, Canterbury from Plainfield,
and Lisbon from Preston, and then mingles with the Shetucket. In passing
through this hilly country, it tumbles over many falls, two of which, one in
Thompson, the other in Brooklyn, are 30 feet each, and affords a vast number of
fine mill feats. In its course it receives a number of tributary streams, the
principal of which are Muddy Brook, and Five Mile river.

Shetucket river is formed by the junction of Willamantick and Mount Hope
rivers, which unite between Windham and Lebanon. In Lisbon it receives Little
river; and at a little distance farther the Quinnabogue, and empties as above.

These rivers are fed by numberless brooks from every part of the country. At
the mouth of Shetucket, is a bridge of timber 124 feet in length, supported at
each end by pillars, and held up in the middle by braces on the top, in the
nature of an arch.

Paukatuck river, is an inconsiderable stream, which heads in Stonington, and
empties into Stonington harbor. It forms part of the dividing line between
Connecticut and Rhode Island.

East, or North Haven river, rises in Southington, not far from a bend in
Farmington river, and passing through Wallingford and North Haven, falls into
New Haven harbor. It has been meditated to connect the source of this river
with Farmington river.

East and West rivers are inconsiderable streams, bounding the city of New
Haven on the east and west.

West of the Housatonick, are a number of small rivers which fall into the
sound. Among these is Byram river. noticeable only as forming a part of the
boundary between New York and Connecticut. But neither this, nor any of the
others, are considerable enough to merit particular descriptions.

HARBORS.] The two principal harbors are at New London and New Haven. The
former opens to the south. From the Light house, which stands at the mouth of
the harbor, to the town, is about three miles; the breadth is three quarters
of a mile^ and in some places more. The harbor has from five to six fathom
water -- a clear bottom -- tough, ooze, and as far as one mile above the town
is entirely secure, and commodious for large ships.

New Haven harbor is greatly inferior to that of New London. It is a bay which
sets up northerly from the found, about four miles. Its entrance is about half
a mile wide. It has very good anchorage, and two and an half fathom at low
water, and three fathom and four feet at common tides.

About a mile from the town, on the channel, a pier is erected, at which
vessels of such size as cannot come up to the wharf, ^ade and unlade. A sum of
money has lately been raised by lottery for the purpose of extending the long
wharf to this pier, and the work is partly accomplished. When completed, this
wharf will be the longest in the United States, and will be a vast benefit to
the town.

The whole of the sea coast is indented with harbors, many of which are safe
and commodious, but are not sufficiently used to merit a description.

CLIMATE, SOIL AND PRODUCTIONS.] Connecticut, though subject to the extremes of
heat and cold in their seasons, and to frequent sudden changes, is very
healthful. The northwest winds, in the winter season, are often extremely
severe and piercing, occasioned by the great body of snow which has concealed
from the dissolving influence of the sun, in the immense forests north and
north west. The clear and serene temperature of the sky, however, makes amends
for the severity of the weather, and is favorable to health and longevity.
Connecticut is generally broken land, made up of mountains, hills and valleys;
and is exceedingly well watered. Some small parts of it are thin and barren. It
lies in the fifth and sixth northern climates, and has a strong, fertile soil.
Its principal productions are Indian corn, rye, wheat in many parts of the
state, oats, and barley, which are heavy and good, and of late, buck wheat --
flax in large quantities -- some hemp, potatoes of several kinds, pumpkins,
turnips, peace, beans, etc. etc. Fruits of all kinds, which are common to the
climate. The soil is very well calculated for pasture and mowing, which enables
the farmers to feed large numbers of neat cattle and horses. Actual calculation
has evinced, that any given quantity of the best mowing land in Connecticut,
produces about twice as much clear profit, as the same quantity of the best
wheat land in the state of New York. Many farmers, in the eastern part of the
state, have lately found their advantage in raising mules, which are carried
from the ports of Norwich and New London, to the West India islands, and yield
a handsome profit. The beef, pork, butter and cheese of Connecticut, are equal
to any in the world.

TRADE.] The trade of Connecticut is principally with the West India islands,
and is carried on in vessels from sixty to an hundred and forty tons. The
exports consist of horses, mules, oxen, oak staves, hoops, pine boards, oak
plank, beans, Indian corn, fish, beef, pork, etc. Horses, live cattle and
lumber, are permitted in the Dutch, Danish, and French ports.

Connecticut has a large number of coasting vessels employed in carrying the
produce of the state to other states. -- To Rhode Island, Massachusetts and New
Hampshire, they carry pork, wheat, corn and rye -- ^o North and South Carolinas
and Georgia butter, cheese, salted beef, cider, apples, potatoes, hay, etc. and
receive in return, rice, Indigo and money. But as New York is nearer, and the
state of the markets always well known, much of the produce of Connecticut,
especially of the western parts, is carried there; particularly pot and pea^^
(...), flax seed, beef, pork, cheese and butter, in large quantities. Most of
the produce of Connecticut river from the parts of Massachusetts, New Hampshire
and Vermont, as well as of Connecticut, which are adjacent, goes to the same
market. Considerable quantities (...) the produce of the eastern parts of the
state, are marketed at Boston and Providence.

The value of the whole exported produce and commodities from this state,
before the year 1774, was then estimated at about L200 000 lawful money,
annually. In the year ending September 30th 1791, the amount of foreign exports
from this state was 710 340 dollars -- besides articles carried to different
parts of the United States, to a great amount. This state owns and employs in
the foreign and coasting trade, 32,867 tons of shipping.

MANUFACTURES.] The farmers in Connecticut and their families, are mostly
clothed in plain, decent, Homespun cloth. Their linens and woollens are
manufactured in the family way; and although they are generally of a coarser
kind, they are of a stronger texture, and much more durable than those imported
from France and Great Britain. Many of their cloths are fine and handsome.

A woollen manufactory has been established at Hartford. The legislature of the
state have encouraged it, and it bids fair to grow into importance. Mr.
Chittendon of New Haven, has invented a use^^^ machine for bending and cutting
card teeth. This machine is put in motion by a manderil twelve inches in
length, and one inch in di^^ter. Connected with the manderil are six parts of
the machine, (...) ^^^ependent of each other; the first, introduces a certain
length of (...) into the chops of the c^rone; the (...), shuts the chops and
(...) fast the wire in the middle until it is finished; the third, cuts of the
wire; the fourth, doubles the tooth in proper form; the fifth, (...) the last
bend; and the sixth, delivers the finished tooth from (...) machine. The
manderil is moved by a band wheel, five feet in diameter, turned by a crank.
One revolution of the manderil makes one tooth; ten are made in a second, and
36,000 in an hour. With one machine like this, teeth enough might be made to
fill cards sufficient for all the manufacturers in New England. In New Haven
are (...) and botton manufactories, which flourish. In Hartford are glass
works, a snuff and powder mill, and iron works* and a slitting (...). Iron
works are established also at Salisbury, Norwich, and other parts of the state.
At Stafford is a furnace at which are made large quantities of hollow ware, and
other ironmongery, sufficient to supply the whole state. Paper is manufactured
at Norwich, Hartford, New Havan and in Litchfield county. Nails, of every size,
are made (...) almost every town and village in Connecticut; so that
considerable quantities can be exported to the neighboring states, and at a
better rate than they can be had from Europe. Ironmongery, bats, candles,
leather, shoes and boots, are manufactured in this state. Oil mills, of a new
and very ingenious construction, have been erected in several parts of the
state. A d^ck manufactory has been established at S^ratlord, and it is said is
doing well.

POPULATION AND CHARACTER.] Connecticut is the most populous, in proportion to
its extent, of any of the Thirteen States. It is laid out in small farms from
fifty to three or four hundred acres each, which are held by the farmers in fee
simple; and are generally cultivated as well as the nature of the soil will
admit. The state is chequered with innumerable roads or high ways crossing each
other in every direction. A traveller, in any of these roads, even in the most
unsettled parts of the state, will seldom pass more than two or three miles
without finding a house or cottage, and a farm under such improvements as to
afford the necessaries for the support of a family. The whole state resembles a
well cultivated garden, which, with that degree of industry that is necessary
to happiness, produces the necessaries and conveniences of life in great
plenty.

In 1756 the number of inhabitants in Connecticut was 130,611. In 1774, there
were 197,856 souls. In 18 years the increase was 67,245. From 1774 to 1782, the
increase was but 11,294 persons. This comparatively small increase of
inhabitants may be satisfactorily accounted for from the destruction of the
war, and the numerous emigrations to Vermont, the western parts of New
Hampshire, New York* and the other States.

The inhabitants are almost entirely of English descent. There are no Dutch,
French, or Germans, and very few Scotch or Irish people in any part of the
state.

In addition to what has been already said under New England it may be
observed, that the people of Connecticut are remarkably fond of having all
their disputes, even those of the most trivial kind, settled according to law.
The prevalence of this litigious spirit, affords employment and support for a
numerous body of lawyers. The number of actions entered annually upon the
several dockets in the state, justifies the above observations. That party
spirit, however, which is the bane of political happiness, has not raged with
such violence in this state as in Massachusetts and Rhode Island. Public
proceedings have been conducted generally, and especially of late, with much
calmness and candor. The people are well informed in regard to their rights,
and judicious in the methods they adopt to secure them. The state enjoys a
great share of political tranquillity.

The clergy, who are numerous, and, as a body, very respectable, have hitherto
preserved a kind of aristrocratical balance in the very democratical government
of the state; which has happily operated as a check upon the overbearing spirit
of republicanism. It has been lamented that the unhappy religious disputes
which have too much prevailed among some of the clergy; and an inattention to
the qualifications of those who have been admitted to the sacred office, have,
heretofore, considerably diminished their influence. It is a pleasing
circumstance that the ^age for theological disputation is abating; and greater
strictness is observed in the admission of candidates to the ministry. Their
influence is on the increase; and it is no doubt to be attributed, in part to
their increasing influence, that an evident reformation in the manners of the
people of this state, has taken place since the peace.

RELIGION.] Such as is happily adapted to a republican government. As to the
mode of exercising church government and discipline, it might not improperly be
called a republican religion. Each church has a separate jurisdiction, and
claims authority to choose then own minister, to exercise judgment and to enjoy
gospel ordinances within itself. The churches, however, are not independent of
each other; they are associated for mutual benefit and convenience. The
associations have power to license candidates for the ministry, to consult for
the general welfare, and to recommend measures to be adopted by the churches,
but have to authority to enforce them. When disputes arise in churches,
councils are called, by the parties, to settle them; but their power is only
advisory. There are eleven associations in the state and they meet twice in a
year. These are all combined in one general association, who meet annually.

All religions that are consistent with the peace of society, are tolerated in
Connecticut; and a spirit of liberality and Catholicism is increasing. There
are very few religious sects in this State. The bulk of the people are
congregationalists. Besides these there are Episcopalians and Baptists; and
formerly there was a society of Sandimanians at New Haven; but they are now
reduced to a very small number. The Episcopalian churches are respectable, and
are under the superintendence of a bishop.

DAMAGES SUSTAINED IN THE LATE WAR.] After the establishment of the peace in
1783, a number of gentlemen were appointed by the general assembly to estimate
the damages done by the British troops, in the several towns which they
ravaged. The following is the result of their enquiries.

Amount of Losses. New London, (burnt by Benedict Arnold, September 6 1781.)
L145 788 15 ^ Groton, do. do. 23,217 6 Scattering towns, do. do. 9,806 9 ^
L178,812 10 8 Norwalk, (burnt by the British, 1779) L34,867 9 2 -- confiscated
property and other losses, 2,077 0 0 L36,944 9 2 Greenwich L6365 11 8 -- Losses
of men not on oath, 369 17 7 L6,735 9 3 Fairfield, (burnt 1779) L40,800 2 10
New Haven, ravaged by governor Tryon July 1779 L24,893 7 6 East Haven, do. do.
4,882 16 4 West Haven, do. do. 474 0 3 -- Other losses not before computed 586
0 1 L30,836 4 2 Amount of the losses in the whole State, in money, valued as in
1774. L294,235 16 ^

The foregoing estimate includes merchandise and public buildings. Exclusive of
these, the losses are estimated at L.167,000. To compensate the sufferers, the
general court, in May 1792, granted them 500,000 acres of the western part of
the reserved lands of Connecticut, which lie west of Pennsylvania.

CHIEF TOWNS.] There are a great number of very pleasant towns, both maritime
and inland, in Connecticut. It contains five cities, incorporated with
extensive jurisdiction in civil causes. Two of these, Hartford and New Haven,
are capitals of the state. The General Assembly is holden at the former in May,
and at the latter in October, annually.

HARTFORD (city) is situated at the head of navigation on the west side of
Connecticut river, about fifty miles from its entrance into the found. Its
buildings are a state house -- two churches for congregationalists -- a
distillery, besides upwards of 300 dwelling houses, a number of which are
handsomely built with brick.

The town is divided by a small river, with high romantic banks. Over this
river is a bridge connecting the two divisions of the town. Hartford is
advantageously situated for trade, has a very fine back country, enters largely
into the manufacturing business, and is a rich, flourishing, commercial town. A
Bank has lately been established in this city.

NEW HAVEN (city) lies round the head of a bay, which makes up about four miles
north from the sound. It covers part of a large plain, which is circumscribed
on three sides by high hills or mountains. Two small rivers bound the city east
and west. The town was originally la^d out in squares of sixty rods. Many of
these squares have been divided by cross streets. Four streets ^un northwest
and southeast, these are crossed by others at right angles -- Near the center
of the city is the public square; on and around which are the public buildings,
which are, a state house, college and chapel, three churches for
congregationalists and one for episcopalians. These are all handsome and
commodious buildings. The college, chapel, state house, and one of the churches
are of brick. The public square is encircled with rows of trees, which render
it both convenient and delightful. (...) beauty, however, is greatly diminished
by the burial ground, and several of the public buildings, which occupy a
considerable part of it.

Many of the streets are ornamented with two rows of trees, one on each side,
which gives the city a ^ural appearance. The prospect from the steeples is
greatly variegated and extremely beautiful. There are about 500 dwelling houses
in the city, principally of wood, and well built and some of them elegant. The
streets are sandy but neat and cleanly. Within the limits of the city, are 4000
souls. About one in 70 die annually; this proves the healthfulness of its
climate. Indeed as to pleasantness of situation and salubrity of air, New Haven
is not exceeded by any city in America. It carries on a considerable trade with
New York and the West India islands, and several kinds of manufactures, and is
flourishing.

NEW LONDON (city) stands on the west side of the river Thames, near its
entrance into the sound, in latitude 41 25. It has two places for public
worship, one for episcopalians and one for congregationalists, about 300
dwelling houses, and 4600 inhabitants. Its harbor is the best in Connecticut.
It is descended by fort Trumbull and fort Griswold, the one in New London, the
other in Groton. A considerable part of the town was burnt by the infamous
Benedict Arnold in 1781. It has since been rebuilt.

NORWICH (city) stands at the head of Thames river, 14 miles north from New
London. It is a commercial city, has a rich and extensive back country, and
avails itself of its natural advantages at the head of navigation. Its
situation upon a river which affords a great number of convenient seats for
mills and water machines of all kinds, render it very eligible in a
manufactural view.

The inhabitants are not neglectful of the advantages which nature has so
liberally given them. They manufacture paper of all kinds, stockings, clocks
and watches, chaises, buttons, stone and earthern ware, wire, oil, chocolate,
bells, anchors, and all kinds of forge work. The city contains about 450
dwelling houses, a court house, and two churches for congregationalists, and
one for episcopalians, and about ^000 inhabitants. The city is in three
detached, compact divisions; viz. Chelsea, at the landing, the town, and
Bean-hill; in the latter division is an academy; and in the town is a school
supported by a donation from Dr. Daniel Lathrop, deceased. The courts of law
are held alternately at New London and Norwich.

MIDDLETON (city) is pleasantly situated on the western bank of Connecticut
river, fifteen miles south of Hartford. It is the principal town in Middlesex
county -- has about 300 houses -- a court house -- one church for
congregationalists -- one for episcopalians -- a naval office -- and carries on
a large and increasing trade.

Four miles south of Hartford is WE^^^RSFIELD, a very pleasant town of between
two and three hundred houses, situated on a fine soil, with an elegant brick
church for congregationalists. A Fair is held here twice a year. This town is
noted for raising onions.

Windsor, Farmington, Litchfield, Milford, Stratford, Fairfield, Cuilford,
Stamford, Windham, Suffield and Enfield, are all considerable and very pleasant
towns.

CURIOSITIES. Two miles west of New Haven is a mountain, on the top of which is
a cave, remarkable for having been the residence of generals Whaley and Goffe,
two of the judges of Charles I. who was beheaded. They arrived at Boston, July
1660, and came to New Haven the following year, and retired and concealed
themseves behind West mountain, three miles from New Haven. They soon after
removed to Milford, where they lived concealed until October, 1664; when they
returned to New Haven, and immediately proceeded ^o Hadley, where they remained
concealed for about ten years, in which time Whaley died, and Goffe soon after
fled. In 1665, John Di^well, Esquire. another of the kings judges, visited them
while at Hadley, and afterward proceeded to New Haven, where he lived many
years, and was known by the name of John Davis. Here he died, and was buried in
the public burying place, where his gravestone is standing to this day, with
this inscription, "J. D. Esquire. deceased March 18th, in the 82d year of his age,
1688."

In the town of Pomsiet is a cave rendered remarkable by the humorous adventure
of General Putnam.

COLLEGES, ACADEMILS AND SCHOOLS.] In no part of the world is the education of
all ranks of people more attended to than in Connecticut. Almost every town in
the state is divided into districts, (...) has a public school kept in it a
greater or less (...). Somewhat more than one third of the moneys (...) ^ax on
the polls and rateable estate of the inhabitants, (...) to the support of
schools, in the several towns, for the (...) children and youth. The law
directs that a grammar (...) I shall be kept in every county town throughout
the state.

There is a grammar school at Hartford, and another at New Haven, supported by
a donation of governor Hopkins. This venerable and benevolent gentleman, in
his last will, dated 1657, left, in the hands of Theoph^ us Eaton, Esquire. and
three others, a legacy of 1324l. "as an encouragement, in these foreign
plantations, of breeding up hopeful youths both a the grammar school and
college." In 1664, the legacy was equally divided between New Haven and
Hartford; and grammar schools were erected, which have been supported ever
since.

Academies have been established at Greenfield, Plainfield, Norwich, Windham
and Pomfret, some of which are flourishing.

YALE COLLEGE was founded in 1700, and remained at Killingworth until 1707 --
then at Saybrook, until 1716, when it was removed and fixed at New Haven. Among
its principal benefactors was governor Yale, in honor of whom, in 1718, it
was named YALE COLLEGE. Its first building was erected in 1717, being 170 feet
in length, and 22 in breadth, built of wood. This was taken down in 178^. The
present college edifice, which is of brick, was built in 1750, under the
direction of the Rev. President Clap, and is 100 feet long, and 40 feet wide,
three stories high, and contains thirty-two chambers, and sixty four studies,
convenient for the reception of a hundred students. The college chapel, which
is also of brick, was built in 1761, being fifty feet by forty, with a steeple
125 feet high. In this building is the public library, consisting of about 2500
volumes; and the philosophical apparatus, which by a late handsome addition, is
now as complete as most others in the United States, and contains the machines
necessary for exhibiting experiments in the whole course of experimental
philosophy and astronomy.

The college museum, to which additions are constantly making, contains many
natural curiosities.

This literary institution was incorporated by the general assembly of
Connecticut. The first charter of incorporation was granted to eleven
ministers, under the denomination of trustees, 1701. The powers of the trustees
were enlarged by the additional charter, 1723. And by that of 1745, the
trustees were incorporated by the name of "The President and Fellows of Yale
college, New Haven." By an act of the general assembly "for enlarging the
powers and increasing the funds of Yale college;" passed in May 1792, and
accepted by the corporation, the governor, lieutenant governor, and the six
senior assistants in the council of the state, for the time being, are over
hereafter, by virtue of their offices, to be trustees and fellows of the
college, in addition to the former corporation. The corporation are empowered
to hold estates, continue their succession, make academic laws, elect and
constitute all officers of instruction and government, (...) in universities,
and confer all learned degrees. The immediate executive government is in the
hands of the president and tutors. The present officers and instructors of the
college are, a president, who is also professor of ecclesiastical history, a
professor of divinity, and three tutors. The number of students on an average
is about 130, divided into four classes. It is worthy of remark, that as many
as five ^^ths of those who have received their education at this university,
were natives of Connecticut.

The funds of this college received a very liberal addition by a grant of the
general assembly in the act of 1792, before mentioned -- which will enable the
corporation to erect a new building for the accommodation of the students -- to
support several new professorships -- and to make a handsome addition to the
library.

The course of education, in this university, comprehends the whole circle of
literature. The three learned languages are taught, together with so much of
the sciences as can be communicated in four years.

In May and September, annually, the several classes are critically examined in
all their classical studies. As incentives to improvement is composition and
oratory, quarterly exercises are appointed by the president and tutors, to be
exhibited by the respective classes in rotation. A public commencement is held
annually, on the second Wednesday in September, which calls together a more
numerous and brilliant assembly, than are convened by any other anniversary in
the state.

About 2200 have received the honors of this university; of whom nearly 760
have been ordained to the work of the gospel ministry. Accessus. A. D.
Presidents. Exitus. A. D. 1701 Abraham Pie^son, 1707 1719 Timothy Cutler, S. T.
D. 1722 1726 El sha Williams, 1739 1739 Thomas Clap, 1766 1777 Ezra Styles, S.
T. D. L. L. D.




MINERALS AND FOSSILS.] On the the bank of Connecticut river, two miles from
Middleton, is a lead mine, which was wrought during the war, at the expense of
the state, and was productive. It is too expensive to work in time of peace.
Copper mines have been discovered and opened in several parts of the state, but
have proved unprofitable, and are much neglected. Iron ore abounds in many
parts of the state. Talks of various kinds, white, brown, and chocolate
colored crystals, zink or spelter, a semi-metal, and several other fossils and
metals have been found in Connecticut.

MODE OF LEVYING TAXES.] All freeholders in the state are required by law, to
give in lists of their polls and rateable estate, Its Connecticut, horses,
horned cattle, cultivated and uncultivated land, (...), shipping, all sorts of
riding carriages, clocks and watches, silver plate and money at interest, are
rateable estate. All males between sixteen and seventy years of age, unless
exempted by law, are subjects of taxation.
to persons appointed in the respective towns to receive them, on o^ before the
20th of August annually. These are valued according to law, arranged in proper
order, and sent to the general assembly annually in May.

The sum total of the list of the polls and rateable estate of the inhabitants
of Connecticut, as brought into the general assembly in May, 1787, was as
follows.

Sum total of the single list, L1,484,901 6 4 (...); Assessments 47,790 2 9 One
quarter of the four-folds, 1,176 9 4 Total. L1,533,867 18 5 (...)

On this sum taxes are levied, so much on the pound, according to the sum
proposed to be raised. A tax of two pence on a pound, would raise L12,782. 4^.

The ordinary annual expenses of the government before the war, amounted to
near 4000l. sterling, exclusive of that which was appropriated to the support
of schools. The expenses have since increased.

MINERAL SPRINGS.] At Stafford is a medicinal spring, which is said to be a
sovereign remedy for scorbutic, cutaneous and other disorders.

CONSTITUTION AND COURTS OF JUSTICE.] The constitution of Connecticut is
founded on their charter, which was granted by Charles II. in 1662, and on a
law of the state. Contented with this form of government, the people have not
been disposed to run the hazard of framing a new constitution since the
declaration of independence.

Agreeable to this charter, the supreme legislative authority of the state is
vested in a governor, lieutenant governor, twelve assistants or counselors,
and the representatives of the people, styled the General Assembly. The
governor, lieutenant governor and assistants are annually chosen by the
freemen in the month of May. The representatives (their number not to exceed
two from each town) are chosen by the freemen twice a year, to attend the two
annual sessions, on the second Thursdays of May and October. This assembly has
power to erect judicatories, for the trial of causes civil and criminal, and to
ordain and establish laws for settling the forms and ceremonies of government.
By these laws the general assembly is divided into two branches, called the
upper and lower houses. The upper house is composed, of the governor,
lieutenant governor and assistants. The lower house, of the representatives of
the people. No law can pass without the concurrence of both houses. The judges
of the superior court hold their offices during the pleasure of the general
assembly. The judges of the county courts, and justices, are annually
appointed. Sheriffs are appointed by the governor and council, without
limitation of time. The governor is captain general of the militia, the
lieutenant governor lieutenant general. All other military officers are
appointed by the assembly and commissioned by the governor.

The mode of electing the governor, lieutenant governor, assistants,
treasurer and secretary, is as follows: The freemen in the several towns meet
on the Monday next after the first Tuesday in April, annually, and give in
their votes for the persons they choose for the said offices respectively, with
their names written on a piece of paper, which are received and sealed up by a
constable in open meeting, the votes for each office by themselves, with the
name of the town and office written on the outside. These votes, thus sealed,
are sent to the general assembly in May, and there counted by a committee from
both houses. All freemen are eligible to any office in government. In choosing
assistants, twenty persons are nominated, by the vote of each freeman, at the
freeman's meeting for choosing representatives in September annually. These
votes are sealed up, and sent to the general assembly in October, and are there
counted by a committee of both houses, and the twenty persons who have the most
votes stand in nomination; out of which number the twelve who have the greatest
number of votes, given by the freemen at their meeting in April are, in May,
declared assistants in the manner above mentioned. The qualifications of
freemen are, quiet and peaceable behavior -- a civil conversation, and
freehold estate to the value of forty shillings per annum, or forty pounds
personal estate in the list, certified by the selectmen of the town; it is
necessary, also, that they take the oath of fidelity to the state. Their names
are enrolled in the town clerk's office, and they continue freemen for life,
unless disfranchised by sentence of the superior court, on conviction of
misdemeanor.

The courts are as follows: The justices of the peace, of whom a number are
annually appointed in each town by the general assembly, have authority to hear
and determine civil actions, where the demand does not exceed four pounds. If
the demand exceeds forty shillings, ^^apptal to the county is allowed. They
have cognizance of small (...), and may punish by fine, not exceeding forty
shillings, or whipping not exceeding ten stripes, or sitting in the stocks.
There are eight county courts in the state, held in the several counties by
(...) judge and four justices of the quorum, who have jurisdiction of all
criminal cases, arising within their respective counties, where the punishment
does not extond to life, limb or banishment. They have original jurisdiction of
all civil actions which exceed the jurisdiction of a justice. Either party may
appeal to the superior court, if the de^^^^ exceeds twenty pounds, except on
bonds or notes vouched by (...) witnesses.

There are several courts of probate, in each county, consisting of (...)
judge. The peculiar province of this court, is the probate of (...) granting
administration on intestate estates, ordering distribution of them, and
appointing guardians for minors, etc. An appeal lies (...) any decree of this
court to the superior court.

The superior court consists of five judges. It has authority in all criminal
cases extending to life, limb, or banishment, and other high (...) and
misdemeanors, to grant divorces, and to hear and determine all civil actions
brought by appeal from the county courts, or the court of probate, and to
correct the errors of all inferior courts. This is a circuit court, and has two
stated sessions in each county annually. The superior and county courts try
matters of fact by jury, or without if the parties will agree.

There is a supreme court of errors, consisting of the lieutenant government,
and the twelve assistants. Their sole business is to determine write of error,
brought on judgments of the superior court, where the (...) complained of
appears on the record. They have two stated (...) annually, viz. on the
Tuesdays of the weeks preceding the (...) sessions of the general assembly.

The county court is a court of chancery, empowered to hear and (...) cases in
equity, where the matter in demand does not exceed one hundred pounds. The
superior court has cognizance of all cases where the demand exceeds that sum.
Error may be brought from the county, to the superior court, and from the
superior court to the supreme court of errors, on judgment in cases of equity
as well as of law.

The general assembly only have power to grant pardons and reprieves -- to
grant commissions of bankruptcy -- or protect the persons and estates of
unfortunate debtors.

The common law of England, so far as it is applicable to this country, is
considered as the common law of this state. The reports of adjudication in the
courts of king's bench, common pleas and chancery, are read in the courts of
this state as authorities; yet the judges do not consider them as conclusively
binding, unless founded on solid reasons which will apply in this state, or
sanctioned by concurrent, adjudications of their own courts.

The feudal system of descents was never adopted in this state. All the real
estate of intestates is divided equally among the children, males and females,
except that the eldest son has a double potion. And all estates given in tail,
must be given to some person then in being o^ to their immediate issue, and
shall become fee simple estates to the issue of the first donee in tail. The
widow of an intestate is entitled to a third part of the personal estate
forever, and to has ^^^er, or third part of the houses and lands belonging to
the intestate at the time of his death, during her life.

PRACTICE OF LAW.] The practice of law in this state has (...) simplicity, but
less precision, than in England. Assistants and judges are empowered to issue
writs through the state, and justices, (...) their respective counties. In
these writs the substance of the ^^^plaints or the declarations must be
contained, and if neither of the parties show good reason for delay, the causes
are heard and determined the same term to which the writs are returnable. Few
of the ^^^ions of law so common in the English practice, are know a in this
state. The plaintiff always has his election to attach or (...) on the
d^^^dant. Attorneys are admitted and qualified by the county (...). Previous to
their admission to the bar, they must study two years with a practicing
attorney in the state, if they have had a college education, and three years if
they have not; their morals must be good, and their characters unblemished, and
they must^sustain an examination by the attorneys of the court of the county
where they are admi^^ed, and be by them recommended to the court. When admitted
^o the county court, they can practice, without other qualifications, in any
court in the state. There are upon an average, about fifteen attorneys to each
county, one hundred and twenty in the state; a very great proportion for the
real exigencies, of the people. Yet from the religious spirit of the citizens,
the most of them find employment and support. There is no attorney general, but
there is one attorney to the stat^^^ each county.

NEW INVENTIONS.] Early in the war, Mr. David (...), of Saybrook, invented a
machine for submarine navigation, altogether different from any thing hitherto
devised by the art of (...) (...) machine was so constructed as that it could
be rowed horizontally, at any given depth, under water, and could be raised or
depressed at pleasure. To this machine, called the American Turtle, was
attached (...) magazine of powder, which was intended to be fastened under the
bottom of a ship, with a driving screw, in such a way as that the same stroke*
which disengaged it from the machine should put the internal clock work in
motion. This being done, the ordinary operation of a gun lock, at the distance
of half an hour, or any determinate time, would cause the powder to explode and
leave the effects to the common laws of nature. The simplicity, yet combination
discovered in the mechanism of this wonderful machine, have been acknowledged
by those skilled in physics, and particularly Hydraulics, to be not less
ingenious than novel. Mr. Bushnel invented, several other curious machines for
the annoyance of the British shipping, but from accidents, not militating
against the philosophical principles, on which their success depended, they but
partially succeeded. He destroyed a vessel in the charge of commodore Symmonds.
One of his kegs also demolished a vessel near the Long Island shore. About
Christmas ^^77, he committed to the Delaware river a number of kegs, distined
^o fall among the British fleet at Philadelphia; but this squadron of (...),
having been separated and retarded by the ice, demolished but a (...) boat.
This catastrophe, however, produced an alarm, unprece^^^^ed, in its nature and
degree; which has been so happily described by the late Hon. Francis Hopkinson,
in a song, styled "The Battle of the Kegs, See Hopkinson's Works, lately
published in Philadelphia.
" that the event it celebrates will not be forgotten, so long as mankind shall
continue to be delighted with works of humor and (...).

Mr. Hanks, of Litchfield, has invented a method of winding up (...) by means
of air or wind only, which is ingenious, and practiced upon in New York and
other places.

Mr. Culver, of Norwich, has constructed a Dock Drudge, which is (...) for
clearing docks and removing bars in rivers; a very ingenious and useful
machine. Its good effects have already been experienced in the navigation of
the river Thames, the channel of which (...) been considerably deepened. This
machine will no doubt be productive of very great advantages to navigation
throughout the United States.

The Rev. Joseph Badger, while a member of Yale College in 1785, constructed an
ingenious planetarium, (without ever having seen one of the kind) which is
deposited in the library of that university.

HISTORY.] As there is no particular history of this state to which the reader
can be referred, the author will no doubt be indulged, in so far deviating from
his general plan, as to relate the following particulars, collected with great
pains, relative to the settlement and progress of things in this state.

The present territory of Connecticut, at the time of the first arrival of the
English, was possessed by the Pequot, the Mohegan, Po^^^^, and many other
smaller tribes of Indians.

The Pequots were numerous and warlike. Their country extended along the sea
coast from Pauka^uck, to Connecticut river. About the year 1630, this powerful
tribe extended their conquests over a considerable part of Connecticut, over
all Long Island and part of ^^raganest. SASSACUS, who was the grand monarch of
the whole country, was king of this nation. The seat of his dominion was at New
London; the ancient Indian name of which was Pequot.

The Mohegans were a numerous tribe, and their territory extensive. Their
ancient claim, comprehended most of New London county, almost the whole of the
county of Windham. and a part of the counties of Tolland and Hartford. UNCUS,
distinguished for his friendship to the English, was the Sachem of this tribe.

The Podunks inhabited East Hartford, and the circumjacent country. The first
sachem of this tribe, of whom the English had any knowledge, was Tatanimoo. He
was able to bring into the field more than 200 fighting men.

The first grant of Connecticut was made, by the Plymouth council, to the Earl
of Warwick, in 1630, and confirmed by his majesty in council the same year.
This great comprehended "all that part of New England which lies west from
Narraganset river, 120 miles on the sea coast, from thence, in latitude and
breadth aforesaid, to the south sea." The year following, the Earl assigned
this grant to Lord Say and Seal, Lord Brook and nine others.

No English settlements were attempted in Connecticut until the year 1633, when
a number of Indian traders, having purchased of Zequasson and Natawanut, two
principal Sachems, a tract of land at the mouth of Little river in Windsor,
built a house and fortified it, and ever after maintained their right of soil
upon the river.

The same year, a little before the arrival of the English, a company of Dutch
traders came to Hartford, and built a house which they called the Hirse of Good
Hope, and erected a small fort, in which they planted two cannon. The remains
of this settlement are still visible on the bank of Connecticut river. This was
the only settlement of the Dutch in Connecticut in these ancient times. The
Dutch, and after them the Province of New York, for a long time claimed as far
(...) as the western bank of Connecticut river. It belongs to the professed
historian to prove or disprove the justice of this claim. (...) says, "The
partition line between New York and Connecticut as established December 1,
1664, run from the mouth of Memoron^^^ river, (a little west from Byram river,)
N. N. W. and was the (...) easterly limits of New York, until November 23,
1683, when they line was run nearly the same as it is now settled." Douglass
Sum. Vol. II. P. 161.


In 1634, Lord Say and Seal, etc. sent over a small number of men, who built a
fort at Saybrook, and held a treaty with the Pequot, Indians, who in a formal
manner, gave to the English their right in Connecticut river and the adjacent
country.

In 1635, the Plymouth council granted to the Duke of Hamilton, till lands
between Narraganset and Connecticut rivers, and back into the country as far as
Massachusetts south line. This covered a part of the Earl of Warwick's patent,
and occasioned some disputes in the colony. There were several attempts to
revive the Hamilton claim, but were never prosecuted.

In October of this year, about sixty persons, from Newtown, Dorchester, and
Watertown, in Massachusetts, came and settled Hartford, Wethers^^eld and
Windsor in Connecticut; and the June following the famous Mr. Hooker, and his
company, came and settled at Hartford, and was a friend and father to the
colony till his (...).

The first court held in Connecticut was at Hartford, April 26th, 1636; and the
next year was distinguished by the war with the Pequots.

The English obtained the country east of the Dutch settlements, by right of
conquest. The pursuit of the Indians led to an acquaintance with the lands on
the sea coast, from Saybrook to Fairfield. It was reported to be a very fine
country. This favorable report induced Messrs. Eaton and Hopkins, two very
respectable London merchants, and Mr. Davenport, a man of distinguished piety
and abilities, with their company, who arrived this year (1637) from London, to
think of this part of the country as the place of their settlement. Their
friends in Massachusetts, sorry to part with so valuable a company, dissuaded
them from their purpose. Influenced, however, by the promising prospects which
the country afforded, and flattering themselves that they should be out of the
jurisdiction of a general governor, with which the country was from time to
time threatened, they determined to proceed. Accordingly in March 1638, with
the consent of their friends of Connecticut river, they settled at New Haven,
and laid the foundation of a flourishing colony, of which Quinipink, now New
Haven, was the chief town. The first public worship, in this new plantation,
was attended on Lord's day April 18th, 1638, under a large spreading oak. The
Rev. Mr. Davenport preached from Matt. iii. 1. on the temptations of the
wilderness. Both colonies, by voluntary compact, formed themselves into
distinct commonwealths and remained so until their union in 1665.

In 1639, the three towns on Connecticut river, already mentioned, ^^^ing
themselves without the limits of any jurisdiction, formed themselves into a
body politic, and agreed upon articles of civil government. These articles were
the foundation of Connecticut charter, which was granted in 1662. The substance
of the articles, so far as they respect the holding of assemblies, the time and
manner of electing Magistrates and other civil officers, (except that in the
old confederation no person was to be chosen governor more than once in two
years) and the extent of legislative powers, was transferred into, and
established in said charter.

The first church was gathered in New Haven this year, and consisted of seven
members. These were chosen by the settlers after Mr. Davenport had preached
from the words of Solomon, 'Wisdom (...) builded her house, she has hewed out
her seven pillars.' These men were indeed the pillars of the church, to whom
the rest were added as they became qualified. They were also the court to try
all civil actions.

The first settlers in New Haven had all things common; all purchases were made
in the name and for the use of the whole plantation, and the lands were
apportioned out to each family, according to their ^^^ber and original stock.

At their first election, in October 1639, Mr. Theophilus Eaton was chosen
governor for the first year. Their elections, by agreement, were to be annual,
and the word of God their only rule in conducting the affairs of government in
the plantation.

In 1643, articles of confederation between the four New England colonies were
unanimously adopted by the colonies of New Haven and Connecticut.

The general court of New Haven, this year established it as a fundamental
article not to be disputed. That none be admitted as free burgesses but church
members, and that none but such should vote at elections. They also ordained,
That each town choose from among themselves judges (church members) to be a
court, to have cognizance of all civil actions not exceeding twenty pounds; and
of criminal cases, where the punishment was sitting in the stocks, whipping and
fining not exceeding five pounds. There was liberty of appeal from this court
to the court of magistrates. The court of magistrates, consisted of all the
magistrates throughout the colony, who were to meet twice a year, at New Haven
for the trial of all capital causes. Six made a quorum.

The general court was to consist of the governor, deputy governor, magistrates
and two representatives from each town. The annual election of officers of
government was at this time established, and has ever since continued.

The unsettled state of the colony, had hitherto prevented their establishing a
code of laws. To supply this defect, the general court ordered, 'That the
judicial laws of God as they were delivered to Moses, and as they are a fence
to the moral, being neither typical (...) ceremonial, nor having any reference
to Canaan, shall be accounted of moral equity and generally bind all offenders,
and be a rule to all the courts in this jurisdiction in their proceedings
against offenders, until they be branched out into particulars hereafter.'

About this time a war broke out between the Mohegan and Narraganset Indians. A
personal quarrel between Onkus, sachem of Mohegan, and Sequesson, sachem of
Connecticut, was the foundation of the war. See Winthrop's Journal, P. 303,305.


In consideration of the success and increase of the New England colonies, and
that they had been of no charge to the nation, and in prospect of their being
in future very serviceable to it, the English parliament, March 10th, 1643,
granted them an exemption from all customs, subsidies and other duties, until
further order.

In 1644, the Connecticut adventurers purchased of Mr. Fenwick, agent for lords
Say and Seal, and lord Brook, their right to the colony of Connecticut, for
1600l.

The colony of Connecticut expressed their disapprobation of the use of
tobacco, in an act of their general assembly at Hartford, in 1647, wherein it
was ordered, 'That no person under the age of twenty years, nor any other that
has already accustomed himself to the use thereof, shall take any tobacco,
until he shall have brought a certificate, from under the hand of some who are
approved for knowledge and skill in physic, that it is useful for him; and also
that he has received a license from the court, for the same. All others who
had addicted themselves to the use of tobacco were, by the same court,
prohibited taking it in any company, or at their labors, or on their travels,
unless they were ten miles at least from any house, or more than once a day,
though not in company, on pain of a fine of six pe^^ for each time; to be
proved by one substantial evidence. The constable in each town to make
presentment of such transgressions to the particular court, and upon
conviction, the fine to be paid without gainsaying.'

Massachusetts and New Haven colonies were more cruel toward the Quakers than
either Connecticut or Plymouth. Of the four, Connecticut was the most moderate.
The general court of New Haven, 1658, passed a severe law against the Quakers.
They introduced their law, which was copied from the act of the commissioners
of the colonies, with this preamble.

'Whereas there is a cursed sect of heretics lately sprung up in the world,
commonly called Quakers, who take upon them that they are immediately sent from
God, and infallibly assisted by the spirit, who yet speak and write blasphemous
opinions, despise government, and the order of God in church and commonwealth,
speaking evil of dignities, etc.

Ordered -- that whosoever shall bring, or cause to be brought, any known
Quaker or Quakers, or other blasphemous heretics, shall forfeit the sum of
50l. Also,

If a Quaker come into this jurisdiction on civil business the time of his stay
shall be limited by the civil authority, and he shall not use any means to
corrupt or seduce others. On his first arrival, he shall appear before a
magistrate and from him receive license to pass on his business; and (for the
better prevention of hurt to the people) have one or more to attend upon them
at their charge, etc. The penalties in case of disobedience were whipping,
imprisonment, labor and a deprivation of all converse with any person.'

For the second offense the person was to be branded in the hand with the
letter H -- to suffer imprisonment -- and be put to labor. For the third to be
branded in the other hand, imprisoned, etc. as before. For the fourth the
offender was to have his tongue bored through with a red hot iron -- imprisoned
-- and kept to labor, until sent away at their own charge.

Any person who should attempt to defend the sentiments of the Quakers, was,
for the third offense, to be sentenced to banishment.

Had the pious framers of these laws paid a due attention to the excellent
advice of that sagacious doctor of the law Gamaliel, they would, perhaps, have
been prevented from they adoption of such severe and unjustifiable measures.
This wife man, when his countrymen were about to be outrageous in persecuting
the apostles, addressed them in the following words, which merit to be engraved
in letters of gold; 'Rejrain from these men, and let them alone; for if this
counsel or this work be of men, it will come to naught: but if it be of God. ye
cannot overthrow it; left happily ye be found even to fight against God.' Acts. v
Chap.
This divine maxim was but little attended to in times of persecution. Our
ancestors seem to have left it to posterity to make the important discovery,
that persecution is the direct method to multiply its objects.

But these people, who have been so much censured and ridiculed, had, perhaps
as many virtues as their posterity. And it would be wise in the moderns, who
stand elevated upon the shoulders of their ancestors, with the book of their
experience spread before them, to improve their virtues and veil their faults.

The colonies of Connecticut and New Haven, from their first settlement,
increased rapidly; tracts of land were purchased of the Indians, and new towns
settled from Stamford so Stonington, and far back into the country, when in
1661, Major John Mason, as agent for the colony, bought of the natives all
lands which had not before been purchased by particular towns, and made a
public surrender of them to the colony, in the presence of the general
assembly. Having done these things, the colonists petitioned king Charles II.
for a charter, and their petition was granted. His Majesty on the 23d of April,
1662, issued his letters patent under the great seal, ordaining that the colony
of Connecticut should, forever hereafter, be one body corporate and politic, in
fact and in name, confirming to them their ancient grant and purchase, and
fixing their boundaries as follows, viz. 'All that part of his Majesty's
dominions in New England, in America, bounded east by Narraganset river,
commonly called Narraganset bay, where the river falls into the sea; and on
the north by the line of Massachusetts plantation, and on the south by the sea,
and in, longitude as the line of the Massachusetts colony running from east to
west, that is to say, from the said Narraganset bay on the east, to the south
sea on the west part, with the islands thereunto belonging.' This charter has
ever since remained the basis of the government of Connecticut.

Such was the ignorance of the Europeans, respecting the geography of America,
that their parents extended they knew not where, many of them were of doubtful
construction; and very often covered each other in part, and have produced
innumerable disputes and mischiefs in the colonies, some of which are not
settled to this day. It is not my business to touch upon these disputes. I have
only to observe, that Connecticut construed her charter as authorizing them to
pass over New York, which was then in possession of the subjects of a christian
Prince, and claimed, in latitude and breadth mentioned therein, to the south
sea. Accordingly purchases were made of the Indians on the Delaware river, west
of the western bounds of New York, and within the supposed limits of
Connecticut charter, and settlements were made thereon by people from, and
under the jurisdiction of Connecticut. The charter of Pennsylvania granted to
William Penn, in 1681, covered these settlements. This laid the foundation for
a dispute which for a long time was maintained with warmth on both sides. The
matter was at fast submitted to gentlemen chosen for the purpose, who decided
the dispute in favor of Pennsylvania. Many however still assert the justice of
the Connecticut claim.

The state of Connecticut have ceded to Congress all their lands west of
Pennsylvania, except a reserve bounded east by Pennsylvania and extending in
length, 120 miles west, and in breadth from latitude 4^ to 42 2 north. This
cession, Congress have accepted.

The colony of New Haven, though unconnected with the colony of Connecticut,
was comprehended within the limits of their charter, and, as they concluded,
within their jurisdiction. But New Haven remonstrated against their claim, and
refused to unite with them, until they should hear from England. It was not
until the year 1665, when it was believed that the king's commissioners had a
design upon the New England charters, that these two colonies formed an union,
which has ever since amicably subsisted between them.

In 1672, the laws of the colony were revised, and the general court ordered
them to be printed; and also, 'that every family should buy one of the law
books -- such as pay in silver to have a book for twelve pence, such as pay in
wheat, to pay a peck and a half a book; and such as pay in peace, to pay two
shillings a book, the peace at three shillings the bushel.' Perhaps it is owing
to this early and universal spread of law books, that the people of Connecticut
are to this day so fond of the law.

In 1750, the laws of Connecticut were again revised, and published in a small
folio volume of 258 pages. Dr. Douglass observes, 'that they were the most
natural, equitable, plain and concise code of laws, for plantations, hitherto
extant.'

There has been a revision of them since the peace of 1783, in which they were
greatly and very judiciously simplified.

The years 1673 and 1676, were distinguished by the wars wi^^ Phillip and his
Indians, and with the Narragansets, by which the colony was thrown into great
distress and confusion. The inroads of the enraged savages were marked with
cruel murders, and with fire and devastation.

In 1684, the charter of Massachusetts bay and Plymouth were taken away, in
consequence of Quo warrantos which had been issued against them. The charter of
Connecticut was saved by an artful expedient.

Connecticut has ever made rapid advances in population. There have been more
emigrations from this than from any of the other states, and yet it is at
present full of inhabitants. This increase may be ascribed to several causes.
The bulk of the inhabitants are industrious, sagacious husbandmen. Their farms
furnish them with all the necessaries, most of the conveniences and but few of
the luxuries of life. They of course must be generally temperate, and if they
choose, can subsist with as much independence as is consistent with happiness.
The subsistence of the farmer is substantial, and does not depend on incidental
circumstances, like that of most other professions. There is no necessity of
serving an apprenticeship to the business, nor of a large stock of money to
commence it to advantage. Farmers, who deal much in barter, have less need of
money than any other class of people. The ease with which a comfortable
subsistence is obtained, induces the husbandman to marry young. The cultivation
of his farm makes him strong and healthful. He toils cheerfully through the day
-- eats the fruit of his own labor with a gladsome heart -- at night devoutly
thanks his bounteous God for his daily blessings -- retires to rest, and his
sleep is sweet. Such circumstances as these have greatly contributed to the
amazing increase of inhabitants in this state.

Besides, the people live under a free government, and have no fear of a
tyrant. There are no overgrown estates, with rich and ambitious landlords, to
have an undue and pernicious influence in the election of civil officers.
Property is equally enough divided, and must continue to be so, as long as
estates descen^ as they now do. No person qualified by law is prohibited from
voting. He who has the most merit, not he who has the most money, is generally
chosen into public office. As instances of this, it is to be observed, that
many of the citizens of Connecticut, from the humble walks of life, have arisen
to the first offices in the state, and filled them with dignity and reputation.
That base business of electioneering, which is so directly calculated to
introduce wicked and designing men into office, is yet but little known in
Connecticut. A man who wishes to be chosen into office, acts wisely, for that
end, when he keeps his desires to himself.

A thirst for learning prevails among all ranks of people in the state. More of
the young men in Connecticut, in proportion to their numbers, receive a public
education, than in any of the states.

Some have believed, and with reason, that the fondness for academic and
collegiate education is too great -- that it induces too many to leave the
plough. If men of liberal education would return to the farm, and use their
knowledge in improving agriculture, and encouraging manufactures, there could
not be too many men of learning in the state; but this is too seldom the case.

Connecticut had but a small proportion of citizens who did not join in
opposing the oppressive measures of Great Britain, and was active and
influential, both in the field and in the cabinet, in bringing about the
revolution. Her soldiers were applauded by the commander in chief, for their
bravery and fidelity.

What has been said in favor of Connecticut, though true when generally
applied, needs to be qualified with some exceptions. Dr. Douglass spoke the
truth when he said that 'some of the meaner sort are villains.' Too many are
idle and dissipated, and much time is unprofitably and wickedly spent at
taverns, in law suits and petty arbitrations. The public schools, in some parts
of the state, have been too much neglected, and in procuring instructors, too
little attention is paid to their moral and literary qualifications.

The revolution, which so essentially affected the governments of most of the
colonies, produced no very perceptible alteration in the government of
Connecticut. While under the jurisdiction of Great Britain, they elected their
own governors, and all subordinate civil officers, and made their own laws, in
the same manner, and with as little control as they now do. Connecticut has
ever been a republic, and perhaps as perfect and as happy a republic as has
ever existed. While other states, more monarchical in their government and
manners, have been under a necessity of undertaking the difficult task of
altering their old, or forming new constitutions, and of changing their
monarchical for republican manners, Connecticut has uninterruptedly proceeded
in her old track, both as to government and manners; and, by these means, has
avoided those convulsions which have rent other states into violent parties.

At the anniversary election of governor and other public officers, which is
held yearly at Hartford on the second Thursday in May, a sermon is preached,
which is published at the expense of the state. Would it not answer many
valuable purposes, if the gentlemen, who are annually appointed to preach the
election sermons, would furnish a sketch of the history of the state for the
current year, to be published at the close of their sermons? Such a sketch,
which might easily be made, would render election sermons much more valuable.
They would then be a very authentic despositum of facts for future historians
of the state -- they would be more generally and more eagerly purchased and
read -- they would serve to disseminate important knowledge, that of the
internal affairs of the state, which every citizen ought to know, and might, if
judiciously executed, operate as a check upon party spirit, and upon ambitious
and designing men.

The Rev. Mr. Benjamin Trumbull of North Haven, has for several years, with
indefatigable industry, been making collections for a history of Connecticut.
His abilities as a writer, and his accuracy as a historian, the public already
know. It is hoped the public will shortly be favored with his history. Through
his indulgence in permitting me to select from his manuscripts, I am enabled to
publish many of the above facts.


On these occasions a vast concourse of respectable citizens, particularly of
the clergy, are collected from every part of the state; and while they add
dignity and solemnity to the important and joyful transactions of the day,
serve to exterminate party spirit and to harmonize the civil and religious
interests of the state.

Connecticut has been highly distinguished in having a succession of governors,
eminent both for their religious and political accomplishments. With the
following list of their names, I shall conclude my account of Connecticut.

Colony of Connecticut.
Accessus Names Exitus 1639 John Haynes, Esquires. 1640 1640 Edward Hopkins,
1641 1641 John Haynes, 1642 1642 George Wyllis, 1643 1643 John Haynes, 1644
1644 Edward Hopkins, 1645 1645 John Haynes, 1646 1646 Edward Hopkins, 1647 1647
John Haynes, Esquires. 1648 1648 Edward Hopkins, 1649 1649 John Haynes, 1650
1650 Edward Hopkins, 1651 1651 John Haynes, 1652 1652 Edward Hopkins, 1653 1653
John Haynes, 1653 died. 1654 Edward Hopkins, 1655 1655 Thomas Wells, 1656 1656
John Webster, 1657 1657 John Winthrop, 1658 1658 Thomas Wells, 1659 1659 John
Winthrop, 1670 1676 William Leet, 1680 1680 Robert Treat, 1696 1696 John
Winthrop, 1707 1707 Gurdon Saltonstall, 1724 1724 Joseph Talcott, 1741 1741
Jonathan Law, 1751 1751 Roger Woolcot, 1754 1754 Thomas Fitch, 1766 1766
William Pitkin, 1769 1769 Jonathan Trumbull, 1784 1784 Matthew Griswold, 1785
1785 Samuel Huntington,

Colony of New Haven.
Accessus Names Exitus 1639 Theop. Eaton, Esquires. 1658 died. 1659 Fra.
Newman, 1661 died. 1662 William Leet, 1665.

This year (1665) the colonies of New Haven and Connecticut united, and
governor Winthrop was governor of both, and governor Leet deputy governor.

MIDDLE STATES
We now come to the SECOND GRAND DIVISION of the UNITED STATES, comprehending
NEW YORK NEW JERSEY PENNSYLVANIA DELAWARE TERRITORY N. W. of OHIO.
BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED north, by Upper Canada, from which it is separated by the
Lakes; east, by the New England States; south, by the Atlantic Ocean, Maryland,
Virginia, and the Ohio river, which separates it from Kentucky; west, by the
Mississippi river.

RIVERS AND BAYS.] The principal rivers in this District are the Hudson, the
Delaware, the Susquehannah, the Ohio, the Mississippi and their branches. York,
Delaware, and part of Chesapeak Bays are in this District.

CLIMATE.] The climate of this Grand Division, lying almost in the same
latitudes, various but little from that of New England. There are no two
successive years alike. Even the same successive seasons and months differ from
each other every year. And there is perhaps but one steady trait in the
character of this climate, and that is, it is uniformly variable. The changes
of weather are great and frequently sudden. The range of the quicksilver in
Farenheit's thermometer, according to Dr. Mitchill, is between the 24th degree
below, and the 105th degree above cipher; and it has been known to vary 50
degrees in the course of 26 hours. Such alterations are much more considerable
along the coast, than in the interior and midland parts of the country; and,
wherever they prevail, are accompanied with proportionate changes in the air,
from calms towinds, and from moisture to dryness Storms and hurricanes,
sometimes happen, which are so violent as to overset vessels, demolish fences,
uproot trees and unroof buildings. Droughts of six weeks or two months
continuance, occur now and then. Rain has been known to fall in such abundance
that the earth by measurement, has received 6,5 inches on a level, in the short
space of four hours. Dr. Mitchill,
The quantity of water which falls in rain and snow, one year with another,
amounts to from 24 to 36 inches. Dr. Rush.
In the northern parts of this district the snow falls in larger quantities,
lies longer, and the cold is more steady and intense, by many degrees than in
the southern; hence the climate of the former is more agreeable in winter, and
that of the latter in summer. The warmest weather is generally in the month of
July; but intensely warm days are often felt in May, June, August and
September. -- Dr. Rittenhouse says, that during his residence in the country,
in the state of Pennsylvania, he never had passed a summer without discovering
frost in every month in the year, except July. The greatest degree of heat upon
record in Philadelphia in 1789, was 90 -- The standard temperature of air in
Philadelphia is 52 which is the temperature of their deepest wells, and the
mean heat of their common spring water. There are seldom more than four months
in the year, in which the weather is agreeable without a fire. In winter, the
winds generally come from the N. W. in fair, and from the N. E. in wet weather.
The N. W. winds are uncommonly dry as well as cold.

The climate on the west side of the Allegany mountains, differs materially
from that on the east side, in the temperature of the air, and the effects of
the wind upon the weather, and in the quantity of rain and snow which fall
every year. The S. W. winds, on the west side of the mountain, are accompanied
by cold and rain. The temperature of the air is seldom so cold or so hot by
several degrees as on the east side of the mountain.

On the whole it appears that the climate of this division of the United States
is a compound of most of the climates in the world -- It has the moisture of
Ireland in the spring -- the heat of Africa in summer -- the temperature of
Italy in June -- the sky of Egypt in autumn -- the snow and cold of Norway, and
the Ice of Holland, in winter -- the tempests (in a certain degree) of the West
Indies in every season, and the variable winds and weather of Great Britain in
every month in the year.

From this account of the climate of this District it is easy to ascertain what
degrees of health, and what deseases prevail. As the inhabitants have the
climates, so they have the acute diseases of all the countries that have been
mentioned. Although it might be supposed, that with such changes and varieties
in the weather, there would be connected epidemical diseases and an unwholesome
climate, yet on the whole, it is found in this District to be as healthy as any
part of the United States. The foregoing remarks are grounded on the
authorities of Dr. Rush and Dr. Mitchill, who have published the result of
their enquiries in Mr. Carey's Mukum, Vols. 6th and 7th.


NEW YORK.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 350 Miles. between 40 40 and 45 North Latitude. Sq. Miles 41,000
Breadth 300 Miles. 5 W. and 1 30 East Longitude. Sq. Miles. 41,000

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED southeastwardly, by the Atlantic ocean; east, by
Connecticut, Massachusetts and Vermont; north, by the 45th degree of latitude,
which divides it from Canada; northwestwardly, by the river Iroquois, or St.
Lawrence, and the lakes Ontario and Erie; southwest and south, by Pennsylvania
and New Jersey.

CIVIL DIVISIONS.] The State is divided into 19 counties, which by an act of
the legislature, passed in March 1783, were subdivided into townships.

Counties No. Tow. No. Inha. Chief Towns. No. I^h. New York 1 33131 New York
City 32328 Albany 20 75736 Albany 3498 Suffolk 8 16440 East Hampton 3260
Huntington 1497 Queens 6 16014 Jama^at 1675 Kings 6 4495 Flat Bush 941 Brooklyn
1603 Richmond 4 3835 Westfield 1^51 West Chester 21 24003 Bedford 2470 Orange 6
18492 Goshen 2448 Orange 1^75 Ulster 14 29397 Kingston 3929 Duchess 12 45266
Poughkeepsie 25^9 Fishkill 5941 Columbia 8 ^7732 Hudson 2584 Kinderhook 466^
Ransselaer formed since the census. Lansinburg Washington 9 14042 Salem 2186
Clinton 4 1614 Plattsburg 458 Montgomery 11 28848 divided since the census into
three counties. Ontario 1075 Canadaque 130 340120 Total number of inhabitants
in the State, according to the census of 179^. New Counties Herkemer 3 14000
1792 German Flats 1400 Otsego 12000 Cooperstown Tyoga 7000 Chenango Union Town

These three last mentioned counties have been separated from Montgomery since
the census, and have acquired the greater part of their inhabitants subsequent
to that period, most of whom emigrated from the New England States. The county
of Herkemer is composed of the towns of German Flats, Herkemer, and Whitestown
(which in 179^, was divided into several other towns) and contained, in 17^^,
according to the census, 4723 inhabitants; since which, this number has been
increased to upwards of 14000.

The townships, into which the counties are divided, are corporations invested
with certain privileges. The act directs, that the freeholders in the several
townships shall assemble in town meetings (...) the first Tuesday in April
annually, and choose their town offices viz. one supervisor, one town clerk,
from three to seven assessors, (...) or more collectors, two overseers of the
poor, commissioners of highways, constables, fence viewers, pound-masters, etc.
These are to (...) their respective offices one year, or until others be
chosen. This (...) which appears to have originated from a spirit of pure
republica^^^ came in force the first day of April 1789. It has a happy tende^^^
to disseminate through the state such information and such prin^^^^ as are
calculated to cherish the spirit of freedom, and to support (...) republican
government. The frequent collection of people in (...) meetings makes them
acquainted with each other, and assimilates (...) ideas and their manners:
Their being invested with power, makes them feel their importance, and rouses
their ambition -- Their town meetings will be a school, in which all the free
citizens of the state may learn how to transact public business with propriety,
and in which they may qualify themselves for the higher offices of the state --
The number of public offices will be increased, without increasing the expenses
of the state; and as the desire of promotion is innate in human nature, and as
ambition to possess the requisite qualifications commonly accompanies this
desire, the probability is, that the number of persons qualified for public
office will be increased, and of course the number of good citizens
proportionably multiplied, and the subordinate civil affairs of the state more
faithfully and more regularly transacted.

RIVERS AND CANALS.] Hudson's river is one of the largest and finest rivers in
the United States. It rises in the mountainous country between the lakes
Ontario and Champlain. In its course southeasterly it approaches within 6 or 8
miles of Lake George; then, after a short course east turns southerly, and
receives the Socondaga from the S. W. which heads in the neighborhood of
Mohawk river. The course of the river thence to New York, where it empties into
York Bay, is very uniformly south, 12 or 15 west. Its whole length is about 250
miles. From Albany to Lake George, is sixty five miles. This distance, the
river is navigable only for batteaux, and has two portages, occasioned by
falls, of half a mile each.

The banks of Hudson's river, especially on the western side, as far as the
Highlands extend, are chiefly rocky cliffs. The passage through the Highlands,
which is sixteen miles, affords a wild romantic scene. In this narrow pass, on
each side of which the mountains tower to a great height, the wind, if there be
any, is collected and compressed, and blows continually as through a bellows.
Vessels, in passing through it, are often obliged to lower their sails. The bed
of this river, which is deep and smooth to an astonishing distance, through a
hilly, rocky country, and even through ridges of some of the highest mountains
in the United States, must undoubtedly have been produced by some mighty
convulsion in nature. The tide flows a few miles above Albany, which is 160
miles from New York. It is navigable for sloops of 80 tons to Albany, and for
ships to Hudson. Ship navigation to Albany is interrupted by a number of
islands, 6 or 8 miles below the city, called the Overslaugh. It is in
contemplation to confine the river to one channel, by which means the channel
will be deepened, and the difficulty of approaching Albany with vessels of a
larger size, be removed. About 60 miles above New York the water becomes fresh.
The river is stored with a variety of fish, which ^^^ders a summer passage to
Albany, delightful and amusing to those who are fond of angling.

The advantages of this river for carrying on the fur trade with Canada, by
means of the lakes, have been already mentioned. Its convenience for internal
commerce are singularly great. The produce of the remotest farms is easily and
speedily conveyed to a certain and profitable market, and at the lowest
expense. In this respect, New York has greatly the advantage of Philadelphia. A
great proportion of the produce of Pennsylvania is carried to market in
wagons, over a great extent of country, some of which is rough; hence it is
that Philadelphia is crowded with wagons, carts, horses and their drivers, to
do the same business that is done in New York, where all the produce of the
country is brought to market by water, with much less show and parade. But
Philadelphia has other advantages, which will be mentioned in their proper
place, to compensate for this natural defect. The increasing population of the
fertile lands upon the northern branches of the Hudson, must annually increase
the amazing wealth that is conveyed by its waters to New York. Added to this
the ground has been marked out, the level ascertained, a company incorporated,
by the name of "The President, Directors and Company of the Northern Inland
Lock Navigation, in the state of New York," and funds subscribed, for the
purpose of cutting a canal from the nearest approximating point of Hudson's
river to South Bay, which empties into the south end of Lake Champlain. The
distance is 18 miles. The difference of level and the face of the country are
such as to justify a belief that the opening of this canal will not be less
practicable than useful.

Saranac river, passes through Plattsburg into Lake Champlain. It has been
explored nearly 30 miles, and there found equal in size to the mouth. In this
river is the greatest abundance of fish, such as salmon, bass, pike, pickerel,
trout, etc.

Sable river, not far from the Saranac, is scarcely 60 yards wide. On this
stream are remarkable falls. The whole descent of the water is about 200 feet,
in several pitches, the greatest of which is 40 feet, perpendicular. At the
foot of it the water is unfathomable. A large pine, has been seen in a freshet,
to pitch over endwise, and remain several minutes under water. The stream is
confined by high rocks on either side, a space of 40 feet, and the banks at the
falls, are, at least, as many feet high. In a freshet the stood wood frequently
lodges, and in a few minutes, the water rises to full banks, and then bursts
away its obstructions, with a most tremendous crashing. The Big and Little
Chazy rivers are in the township of Champlain, which borders on the Canada
line. Both are navigable some miles, the former 6 or 7 affording good mill
seats -- Several mills are already erected. The British have a post, and
maintain a small garrison at Point-au-fer, in this township.

The river Boquet passes through the town of Willsborough, in Clinton county,
and is navigable for boats about two miles, and is there interrupted by falls,
on which are mills. At this place are the remains of an intrenchment, thrown up
by General Burgoyne. Here he gave his famous war feast to his "numerous hosts
of savages," and here probably he first conceived that celebrated proclamation
which he afterward brought forth.

Black river rises in the high country, near the sources of Canada Creek, which
falls into Mohawk river, and takes its course N. W. and then N. E. till it
discharges itself into Cataraqua or Irequois river, not far from Swegauchee. It
is said to be navigable for batteaux up to the lower falls, 60 miles, which is
distant from the flourishing settlement of Whitestown, 25 miles. The whole
length of this river is reckoned at 112 miles.

Onondago river rises in the Oneida lake, runs westwardly into Lake Ontario at
Oswego. It is boatable from its mouth to the head of the lake, 74 miles,
(except a fall which occasions a portage of twenty yards) thence batteaux go up
Wood Creek almost to Fort Stanwix, 40 miles; whence there is a portage of a
mile to Mohawk river. Toward the head waters of this river salmon are caught in
great quantities.

Mohawk river rises to the northward of Fort Stanwix, about 8 miles from Black
river, and runs southwardly 20 miles, to the sort; then eastward 110 miles,
into the Hudson. The produce that is conveyed down this river is landed at
Skenectady, and is thence carried by land sixteen miles, over a barren shrub
plain, to Albany. Except a portage of about a mile, occasioned by the little
falls, 56 miles above Skenectady, the river is passable for boats, from
Skenectady, nearly or quite to its source. The perpendicular descent of these
falls is estimated at 42 feet, in the course of one mile; and it is supposed
they might be locked so as to be rendered passable for boats carrying 5 tons
for about L15,000 currency. The Cohoez, in this river, are a great curiosity.
They are three miles from its entrance into the Hudson. The river is about 100
yards wide -- the rock, over which it pours as over a mill dam, extends almost
in a line from one side of the river to the other, and is about thirty feet
perpendicular height. Including the descent above, the fall is as much as sixty
or seventy feet. The rocks below, in some places, are worn many feet deep by
the constant friction of the water. The view of this tremendous cataract is
diminished by the height of the banks on each side of the river. About a mile
below the falls the river branches and forms a large island; but the two mouths
may be seen at the same time from the opposite bank of the Hudson. The branches
are fordable at low water, but are dangerous. A company by the name of "The
President, Directors and Company of the Western Inland Lock Navigation, in the
State of New York" were incorporated by the legislature of New York, in March
1792, for the purpose of opening a lock navigation from the now navigable part
of Hudson's river, to be extended to Lake Ontario, and to the Seneca Lake. This
rout has been surveyed, and found practicable, the expense estimated, and the
funds subscribed, and the work is to be executed with all possible dispatch.
The opening of this navigation would be a vast acquisition to the commerce of
this state. A shore of at least 1000 miles in length would, in consequence of
it, be washed by boatable waters, exclusive of all the great lakes, and many
millions of acres, of excellent tillage land, rapidly settling, would be
accommodated with water communication for conveying their produce to market.

Delaware river rises in Lake U^stayantho, lat. 42 25 and takes its course
southwest, until it crosses into Pennsylvania in latitude 42. Thence
southwardly, dividing New York from Pennsylvania, until it strikes the
northwest corner of New Jersey, in latitude 41 24; and then passes off to sea,
through Delaware bay, having New Jersey on the east side, and Pennsylvania and
Delaware on the west.

Susquehannah E. Branch river has its source in lake Otsego, lat. 42 55 from
which it takes a southwest course. It crosses the line, which divides New York
and Pennsylvania, three times, the last time near Tyoga point, where it
received Tyoga river. Batteaux pass to its source -- thence to Mohawk river is
but twenty miles, capable of good roads.

Tyoga river rises in the Allegany mountains, in about latitude 42, runs
eastwardly, and empties into the Susquehannah at Tyoga point, in latitude 41
57. It is boatable about 50 miles.

Seneca river rises in the Seneca country, and runs eastwardly, and in its
passage receives the waters of the Seneca and Cayuga lakes, (which lie north
and south, ten or twelve miles apart, each is between thirty and forty miles in
length, and about a mile in breadth) and empties into the Onondago river, 14
miles above the falls, at a place called Three Rivers. From Three river point
to Onondago Lake, up Seneca, river, is 12 miles. Within half a mile of this
lake a salt spring issues from the ground, the water of which is salter than
that of the ocean. It constantly emits water in sufficient quantity for works
of any extent. It is probable the whole country will be supplied from this
spring, and at a very cheap rate. This spring is the property of the state.
This river is boatable from the lakes downwards.

Chenessee river rises near the source of the Tyoga, and runs northwardly by
the Chenessee castle and flats, and empties into Lake Ontario eighty miles east
of Niagara fort. On this river is one set of large falls, not far from its
junction with Lake Ontario. The inhabitants improve these falls to good
purpose, by the erection of mills upon them.

The northeast branch of the Allegany river, heads in the Allegany mountains,
near the source of the Tyoga, and runs directly west until it is joined by a
larger branch from the southward, which rises near the west branch of the
Susquehannah. Their junction is on the line between Pennsylvania and New York,.
From this junction, the river pursues a northwest course, leaving a segment of
the river of about fifty miles in length, in the state of New York, thence it
proceeds in a circuitous southwest direction, until it crosses into
Pennsylvania. From thence to its entrance into the Mississippi, it has already
been described.

There are few fish in the rivers, but in the brooks are plenty of trout; and
in the lakes, yellow perch, sunfish, salmon trout, catfish, and a variety of
others.

From this account of the rivers, it is easy to conceive of the excellent
advantages for conveying produce to market from every part of the state.

The settlements already made in this state, are chiefly upon two narrow
oblongs, extending from the city of New York, east and north. The one east, is
Long Island, which is 140 miles long, and narrow, and surrounded by the sea.
The one extending north is about forty miles in breadth, and bisected by the
Hudson. And such is the intersection of the whole state, by the branches of the
Hudson, the Delaware, the Susquehannah, and other rivers which have been
mentioned, that there are few places, throughout its whole extent, that are
more than fifteen or twenty miles from some boatable or navigable stream.

BAYS AND LAKES.] York bay, which is nine miles long and four broad, spreads to
the southward before the city of New York. It is formed by the confluence of
the East and Hudson's rivers, and embosoms several small islands. of which
Governor's island is the principal. It communicates with the ocean through the
Narrows, between Staten and Long Islands, which are scarcely two miles wide.
The passage up to New York, from Sandy Hook, the point of land that extends
farthest into the sea, is safe, and not above twenty miles in length. The
common navigation is between the east and west banks, in about twenty two feet
water. There is a light house at Sandy Hook, on a peninsula from the Jersey
shore.

South bay lies 12 or 15 miles north of the northern bend in Hudson's river. At
its north end it receives Wood Creek from the south, which is navigable several
miles, and lined with fine meadows. Soon after it mingles its waters with East
bay, which stretches eastward into Vermont. At the junction of these bays,
commences another bay or lake, from half a mile to a mile wide, whose banks are
steep hills, o^ cliffs of rocks, generally inaccessable. At Ticonderoga, this
bay receives the waters of Lake George, from the southwest, through a large
brook, which rolls down a gentle declivity, at the foot of which were formerly
a set of saw mills. The waters of Lake George are 100 feet higher than those of
the bay.

Oneida Lake lies about twenty miles west of Fort Stanwix, and extends westward
about 30 miles.

Salt Lake is small, and empties into Seneca river, soon after its junction
with the Onondago river, about 12 miles from Three river point. This lake is
strongly impregnated with saline particles, which circumstances gave rise to
its name. The Indians make their salt from it.

Lake Otsego, at the head of Susquehannah river, is about nine miles long, and
narrow, perhaps not more than a mile wide. The land on the banks of this lake
is very good, and the cultivation of it easy.

Caniaderago Lake is nearly as large as Lake Otsego, and six miles west of it.
A stream, by the name of Oaks Creek, issues from it, and sails into the
Susquehannah river, about five miles below Otsego. The best cheese in the state
of New York is said to be made upon this Creek.

Chatoque Lake is the source of Conawongo river, which empties into the
Allegany. The lower end of it, whence the river proceeds, is in latitude 42 10;
from thence to its head, is about twenty-five miles. From the northwest part of
this to lake Lake Erie, is nine miles, and was once a communication used by the
French.

On the north side of the mountains, in Orange county, is a very valuable tract
called the Drowned Lands, containing about 40 or 50 000 acres. The waters,
which descend from the surrounding hills, being but slowly discharged by the
river issuing from it, cover these vast meadows every winter, and render then
extremely fertile; but they expose the inhabitants in the vicinity to
intermittents. The Wallkill river, which passes through this extensive
amphibious tract, and empties into Hudson's river, is, in the spring, stored
with very large ^els in great plenty. The bottom of this river is a broken
rock: and it is supposed, that for 2000'. the channel might be deepened so as
to let off all the waters from the meadows, and thereby redeem from the floods
a large tract of rich land, for grass, hemp, and Indian corn.

ROADS.] The roads in this state have been in general but ^illy attended to
till within the two or three last years. The legislature, convinced of the
importance of attending to the matter, and perhaps stimulated by the
enterprizing and active Pennsylvanians, who are competitors for the trade of
the western country, have lately granted very liberal sums, toward improving
those roads that traverse the most settled parts of the country, and opening
such as lead into the western and northern parts of the state, uniting as far
as possible the establishments on the Hudson's river, and the most populous
parts of the interior country by the nearest practicable distances. A post
regularly rides from Albany to the Chenesee river, once a fortnight through
Whitestown, Geneva, Canadaqua, Canawargus and W^^^iamsburgh on the Chenesee
river. By this establishment a safe and direct conveyance is opened between the
most interior parts of the United States, to the west, and the several states
in the union.

A grand road was opened through Clinton county, which bo^ders upon Canada, in
the year 1790, under the direction of a Mr. Rogers, of Duchess county, and
after him called Rogers' road. This road adds greatly to the convenience and
safety of traveling between the state of New York, and Canada, especially in
the winter, when passing the Lakes on ice is often dangerous and always
uncomfortable.

A road also has been lately cut from Katt's Kill, on the Hudson, westwardly,
which passes near Owasco Lake.

BRIDGES.] A Bridge called Staat's Bridge, 250 feet long and of a sufficient
width to admit two carriages abreast has lately been thrown across Abram's
Creek, which falls into Hudson's river, near the city of Hudson, by which a
communication with the country, in a new direction, is opened from the city of
Hudson; and a distance saved of 4 or 5 miles in the main post road from New
York to Albany.

Skaticook bridge, in the town of that name, 10 miles from Lansinburgh, is an
ingenious structure, built at the private expenses of an enterprizing and
liberal gentlemen. It cost 1400l. currency.

The legislature of the state here granted 3000l. to build a bridge over the
sprouts of Mohawk river, whenever the sum of 1000l. shall be subscribed and
paid. This bridge will be one of the longest in America, and will open a direct
communication to a very extensive country, progressing fast in population, in
the northwestern parts of the state.

FACE OF THE COUNTRY, MOUNTAINS, SOIL AND PRODUCTIONS.} The state, to speak
generally, is intersected by ridges of mountains running in a northeast and
southwest direction. Beyond the Allegany mountains, however, the country is a
dead level, of a fine, rich soil, covered in its natural state, with maple,
beach, birch, cherry, black walnut, locust, hickory, and some mulberry trees.
On the banks of Lake Erie, are a few chestnut and oak ridges. Hemlock swamps are
interspersed thinly through the country. All the creeks that empty into Lake,
Erie, have falls, which afford many excellent mill seats.

The lands between the Seneca and Cayuga Lakes, are represented as uncommonly
excellent, being most agreeably diversified with gentle risings, and timbered
with lofty trees, with little underwood. The legislature of this state, have
granted one million and a half acres of land, as a gratuity to the officers and
soldiers of the line of this state. This tract is bounded west, by the east
shore of the Seneca Lake, and the Massachusetts lands in the new county of
Ontario; north by part of Lake Ontario near Fort Oswego; south, by a ridge of
the Allegany mountains and the Pennsylvania line; and east, by the Tuscaroro
creek (which falls nearly into the middle of the Oneida lake) and that part of
Montgomery which has been settling by the New England people very rapidly since
the peace.

This pleasant country is divided into twenty-five townships of 6^,000 acres
each, which are again subdivided into 100 convenient farms, of 600 acres,
making in the whole 2,500 farms.

East of the Allegany mountains, the country is broken into hills with rich
intervening valleys. The hills are clothed thick with timber, and when cleared
afford line pasture -- the valleys, when cultivated, produce, wheat, hemp,
flax, peace, grass, oats, indian corn.

Besides the trees already mentioned, there are, in various parts of the state,
the several kinds of oak, such as white, red, yellow, black and chestnut oak;
white, yellow, spruce, and pitch pines; cedar, fir tree, butternut, aspin,
commonly called popular, white wood, which in Pennsylvania is called poplar,
and in Europe the tulip tree, rock maple, the linden tree which, with the
whitewood, grows on the low rich ground, the buttonwood, shrub cranberry, the
fruit of which hangs in clusters like grapes as large as cherries; this shrub
too grows on low ground. Besides these is the sumach, which bears clusters of
red berries; the Indians chew the leaves instead of tobacco; the berries are
used in dies. Of the commodities produced from culture, wheat is the staple. Of
this article in wheat and flour, equivalent to one million bushels, are yearly
exported. Indian corn and peace, are likewise raised for exportation; and rye,
oats, barley, etc. for home consumption.

In some parts of the state large dairies are kept which furnish for the market
butter and cheese. The best lands in this state, which lie along the Mohawk
river, and north of it, and west of the Allegany mountains, are yet mostly in a
state of nature, but are most rapidly settling.

The county of Clinton, in the most northern part of the state, on Lake
Champlain, and Lake George, lies about midway between Quebec and New York, and
from 230 to 240 miles from each, and is settled by about 2000 inhabitants. A
great proportion of the lands in this county are of an excellent quality, and
produce in abundance the various kinds of grain, cultivated in other parts of
the state. The inhabitants manufacture, earthen ware -- pot and pearl ash, in
large quantities, which they export to New York or Quebec -- Their wool is of a
better quality than that which is produced in more southern climates, their
beef and pork is second to none; and the price of stall fed beef in Montreal
(distant 60 miles from Plattsburg) is such as to encourage the farmers to drive
their cattle to that market. Their forests supply them with sugar and molasses,
as every family, with no more implements than are necessary for common use, can
make a sufficiency for its own consumption, and that at a season when the
farmer can be no otherwise employed. The soil is well adapted to the culture of
hemp. The land carriage, from any part of the country, in transporting their
produce to New York, does not exceed 18 miles. The carrying place at
Ticonderoga is one mile and a half; and from Fort George at the south end of
the lake of the same name, to Fort Edward, is but 14 miles; after which there
are two or three small obstructions by falls, which are about to be removed by
the proprietors of the northern canal. From this county to Quebec are annually
sent large rafts; the rapids at St. John's and Chamblee being the only
interruption in the navigation, and those not so great but that, at some
seasons, batteaux with sixty bushes of salt can ascend them. At this distance
from the sea, salt is fold at half a dollar a bushel.

In the northern and unsettled parts of the state, are a plenty of moose, deer,
bears, some beavers, martins, and most other inhabitants of the forest, except
wolves. Ducks, growse, pigeons, and fish of many kinds, and particularly
salmon, are taken in great abundance in different parts, and especially in the
county of Clinton. At the mouth of Saranac river, which falls into Champlain,
the salmon are found in such plenty, that it is usual to take 4 or 500 in a day
with spears and small scoop nets. They are caught from May till November, and
make excellent salted provisions, and every cottager, by spending an hour in
the evening, may obtain a sufficient supply for his family.

POPULATION AND CHARACTER.] For the population of this state, according to the
census of 1790, the reader is referred to the table of divisions. In 1786, the
number of inhabitants was 238,897, of which 18,889 were blacks. In 1756, there
were 96,775 inhabitants, including 13,542 blacks. The average annual increate
of inhabitants in this state, from 1756, to 1786, was 4.554. The annual
increase for the 4 years succeeding 1786, was upwards of 25,000. A great
proportion of this increase consists of emigrants from the New England states.
The population for every square mile, including the whole state, is nearly
eight, which shows that a great part of the state is yet unsettled.

The effects of the revolution have been as greatly, and as happily felt by
this, as by any of the United States. The accession of inhabitants within a few
years has been great, even beyond calculation; and so long as lands can be
obtained upon advantageous terms, and with a good title, and the general
government continues to protect industry and encourage commerce, so long they
will continue to increase. The new settlements that are forming in the northern
and western parts of the state, are principally by people from New England. It
is remarkable that the Dutch enterprise few or no settlements. Among all the
new townships that have been settled since the peace, (and they have been
astonishingly numerous) it is not known that one has been settled by the Dutch.
Although they are as 'intent upon gain' as other people, they had rather rest
secure of what they possess, than hazard all or even a part, in uncertain
attempts to increase it.

The English language is generally spoken throughout the state, but is not a
little corrupted by the Dutch dialect, which is still spoken in some counties,
particularly in King's, Ulster, Albany, and that part of Orange which lies
south of the mountains. But as Dutch schools (...) almost, if not wholly
discontinued, that language, in a few generati^^^ will probably cease to be
used at all. And the increase of Eng^^^^ schools has already had a perceptible
effect in the improvement of English language.

The manners of the people differ as well as their language. (...) ancestors of
the inhabitants in the southern and middle parts of (...) Island, were either
natives of England, or the immediate descends (...) of the first settlers of
New England, and their manners and cust^^^ are similar to those of their
ancestors. The counties inhabited by the Dutch, have adopted the English
manners in a great degree, but still retain many modes, particularly in their
religion, which are peculiar to the Hollanders. They are industrious, next and
economical in the management of their farms and their families. Whatever
business they pursue, they generally follow the old track of their forefathers,
and seldom invent any new improvements in agriculture, manufactures or
mechanics. They were the first settlers of this state, and were particularly
friendly to the English colony that settled at Plymouth in New England, in
1620; and continued to be amicably disposed toward the English colonies east
of them, until the unhappy dispute arose concerning the lands on Connecticut
river.

The revolution and its consequences, have had a very perceptible influence in
diffusing a spirit of liberality among the Dutch, and in dispelling the clouds
of ignorance and national prejudice. Schools, academies and colleges are
established and establishing for the education of their children, in the
English and learned languages, and in the arts and sciences, and a literary and
scientific spirit is evidently increasing. If such are the buddings of
improvement in the dawn of our empire, what a rich harvest may we expect in its
meridian.

The city of New York is inhabited principally by merchants, physicians,
lawyers, mechanics, shop keepers and tradesmen, composed of almost all nations
and religions. They are generally respectable in their several professions, and
sustain the reputation of honest, punct^l, fair dealers.

The manners and character of the inhabitants of every colony or state, will
take their coloring, in a greater or less degree, from the peculiar manners of
the first settlers. It is much more natural for emigrants to a settlement to
adopt the customs of the original inhabitants, than the contrary, even though
the emigrants should, in length of time, become the most numerous. Hence it is
that the neatness, parsimony and industry of the Dutch were early imitated by
the first English settlers in the province, and, until the revolution, formed a
distinguishing trait in their provincial character. It is still discernible,
though in a much less degree, and will probably continue visible for many years
to come.

Besides the Dutch and English already mentioned, there are in this states many
emigrants from Scotland, Ireland, Germany, and some few from France. Many
Germans are settled on the Mohawk, and some Scots people on the Hudson, in the
county of Washington. The principal part of the two former settled in the city
of New York; and retain the manners, the religion, and some of them the
language of their respective countries. The French emigrants settled
principally at New Rochelle and on Staten island, and their descendants,
several of them, now fill some of the highest offices in the United States.

CHIEF TOWNS.] There are three incorporated cities in this state; New York.
Albany and Hudson. New York is the capital of the state, and stands on the
southwest point of Manhattan, commonly called New York island, at the
confluence of the Hudson and east rivers. The principal part of the city lies
on the east side of the island, although the buildings extend from one river to
the other. The length of the city on East River is about two miles; but falls
much short of that distance on the banks of the Hudson. Its breadth on an
average is nearly three fourths of a mile; and its circumference may be four
miles. The plan of the city is not perfectly regular, but is laid out with
reference to the situation of the ground. The ground which was unoccupied
before the peace of 1783, was laid out in parallel streets of convenient width,
which has had a good effect upon the parts of the city lately built. The
principal streets run nearly parallel with the rivers. These are intersected,
though not at right angles, by streets running from river to river. In the
width of the streets there is a great diversity. Water street and Queen street,
which occupy the banks of East river, are very conveniently situated for
business, but they are low and too narrow; not admitting, in some places, of
walks on the sides for foot passengers. Broad street, extending from the
Exchange to City hall, is sufficiently wide. This was originally built on each
side of the creek, which penetrated almost to the city hall. This street is
low, but pleasant. But the most convenient and agreeable part of the city is
the Broadway. It begins at a point which is formed by the junction of the
Hudson and East rivers -- occupies the height of land between them, upon a true
meridional line -- rises gently to the northward -- is near 70 feet wide --
adorned, where the fort formerly flood, (which has lately been levelled) with
an elegant brick edifice for the accommodation of the Governor of the state,
and a public walk from the extremity of the point, occupying the ground of the
lower battery, which is now demolished -- also with two Episcopal Churches and
a number of elegant private buildings. It terminates, to the northward, in a
triangular area, fronting the bridewell and alms house, and commands from any
point, a view of the Bay and Narrows.

Since the year 1788, that part of the city which was buried in ruins during
the war, has been rapidly rebuilding -- the streets widened, straitened, raised
in the middle under an angle sufficient to carry off the water to the tide
gutters, and foot ways of brick made on each side. At this time, the part that
was destroyed by fire is almost wholly covered with elegant brick houses.

Wall street is generally 50 feet wide and elevated, and the buildings elegant.
Hanover square and Dock street are conveniently situated for business, and the
houses well built. William street is also elevated and convenient, and is the
principal market for retailing dry goods. Many of the other streets are
pleasant, but most of them are irregular and narrow.

The houses are generally built of brick, and the roofs tiled. There are
remaining a few houses built after the old Dutch manner; but the English taste
has prevailed almost a century.

Upon the southwest point of the land, a fort with four bastions, formerly
stood, and also a battery below. The area of the fort contained an elegant
house for the accommodation of the royal governors, and was consume by fire in
Gov. Tryon's time. This fort and battery were removed in the year 1791.

The most magnificent edifice in this city is Federal hall, situated at the
head of Broad street, where its non^ appears to great advantage. The basement
story is Tuscan, and is pierced with seven openings; four massy pillars in the
center, support four Doric columns and a pediment. The freeze is ingeniously
divided, to admit 13 stars in metopes; these with the American Eagle, and other
insignia in the pediment, and the tablets over the windows, flied with the 13
arrows and the olive branch united, mark it as a building designated for
national purposes. After entering from the Broad street, we find a plainly
finished square room, flagged with stone, and to which the citizens have free
access: from this we enter the vestibule in the center of the pile, which leads
in front to the floor of the Representatives room, or real Federal Hall, and
through two arches on each side by a public stair case on the left, and by a
private one on the right, to the senate chamber and lobbies.

This vestibule is paved with marble -- is very lofty and well finished; the
lower part is of a light rustle, which supports a handsome iron gallery; the
upper half is in a lighter style, and is finished with a sky light of about 12
by 18 feet, which is decorated with a profusion of ornament in the richest
tame. The representatives' room is a spacious and elegant apartment, 61 feet
deep, 58 wide and 36 high, a coved ceiling of about 10 feet high not included.
This room is of an octangular form; four of its sides are rounded in the manner
of nitches, and give a graceful variety to the whole. The windows are large,
and placed 16 feet from the floor; all below them is finished with plain
wainscot, interrupted only by four chimmes; but above these a number of lonick
columns and pilasters with their proper entablature are very judiciously
disposed and give great elegance. In the pannels between the windows, trophies
are carved, and the letters U. S. to a cipher surrounded with laurel. The
speaker's chair is opposite the great door and raised by several steps; the
chairs for the members are ranged semicircularly, in two rows in front of the
speaker. There are two galleries, for the accommodation of spectators.

On the left of the vestibule is a lobby 19 by 48 feet, finished with Tuscan
pilasters. This leads to the senate chamber, which is 40 feet long, 30 wide,
and 20 high, with an arched ceiling. It has 3 windows in front and 3 back.
Those in front open into a gallery, 12 feet deep guarded by an elegant iron
railing. In this gallery our beloved PRESIDENT, attended by the Senate and
House of Representatives, took his oath of office, in the face of Heaven, and
in presence of a large concourse of people assembled in front.

The senate chamber is decorated with pilasters, of an order invented by Major
(...) Enfant the architect, which have a magnificent appearance. The marble
which is used in the chimneys is American; and for beauty of shades and polish,
is equal to any of its kind in Europe. Besides these there are several other
rooms for use and convenience; a library, lobbies and committee rooms above,
and guard rooms below. The building on the whole does much credit to the
ingenuity and abilities of the architect.

The other public buildings, in the city are three houses for public worship
for the Dutch Reformed church -- four presbyterran churches -- three Episcopal
churches; two for German Lutherans and Calvinists -- two Friends' meeting
houses -- two for Baptists -- two for methodists -- one for Moravians -- one
Roman Catholic church -- one French protestant church, out of repair, and a
Jews' synagogue. Besides these there is the Governor's house, already
mentioned, a most elegant building -- the college, goal, and several other
buildings of less note. The city is accommodated with four markets in different
parts, which are furnished with a great plenty and variety of provisions in
neat and excellent order.

The government of the city (which was incorporated in 1696) is now in the
hands of a mayor, aldermen and common council. The city is divided into seven
wards, in each of which there is chosen annually by the people an alderman and
an assistant, who together with there corder, are appointed annually by the
council of appointment.

The mayor's court, which is held from time to time by adjournment, is in high
reputation, as a court of law.

A court of sessions is likewise held for the trial of criminal causes.

The situation of the city is both healthy and pleasant. Surrobunded on all
sides by water, it is refreshed with cool breezes in summer, and the air in
winter is more temperate than in other places under the same parallel. York
island is fifteen miles in length, and hardly one in breadth. It is joined to
the main by a bridge called king's bridge. The channels between Long and Staten
Islands, and between Long and York Islands are so narrow as to occasion an
unusual rapidity of the tides, which is increased by the confluence of the
waters of the Hudson and East River. This rapidity in general prevents the
obstruction of the channel by ice, so that the navigation is clear, except for
a few days in seasons when the weather is uncommonly severe. There is no basin
or bay for the reception of ships; but the road where they lie in East river,
is defended from the violence of the sea by the islands which interlock with
each other; so that except that of Rhode Island, and Portland in the District
of Main, the harbor of New York, which admits ships of any burden, is the
best in the United States.

This city is esteemed the most eligible situation for commerce in the United
States. It almost necessarily commands the trade of one half New Jersey, most
of that of Connecticut, and part of that of Massachusetts, and almost the whole
of Vermont, besides the whole fertile interior country, which is penetrated by
one of the largest rivers in America. This city imports most of the goods
consumed between a line of thirty miles east of Connecticut river, and twenty
miles west of the Hudson, which is 130 miles, and between the ocean and the
confines of Canada, about 400 miles; a considerable portion of which is the
best peopled of any part of the United States, and the whole territory contains
at least 800,000 people, of one fifth of the inhabitants of the union. Besides
some of the other states are partially supplied with goods from New York. But
in the staple commodity flour, Pennsylvania and Maryland have exceeded it --
the superfine flour of those states commanding a higher price than that of New
York; not that the quality of the grain is worse, but because greater attention
is paid in those states to the inspection and manufacture of that article.

In the manufacture likewise of iron, paper, cabinet works, etc. Pennsylvania
exceeds not only New York, but all her sister states. In times of peace,
however, New York will command more commercial business than any town in the
United States. In time of war it will be insecure, without a marine force; but
a small number of ships will be able to defend it from the most formidable
attacks by sea.

A want of good water is a great inconvenience to the citizens; there being few
wells in the city. Most of the people are supplied every day with fresh water,
conveyed to their doors in casks, from a pump near the head of Queen Street,
which receives it from a spring almost a mile from the center of the city. This
well is about 20 feet deep and four feet diameter. The average quantity drawn
daily from this remarkable well, is 110 hogsheads of 130 gallons each. -- In
some hot summer days 216 hogsheads have been drawn from it; and what is very
singular, there is never more or less than about 3 feet water in the well. The
water is sold commonly at three pence a hogshead at the pump. Several proposals
have been made by individuals to supply the citizens by pipes; but none have
yet been accepted.

New York is the gayest place in America. The ladies, in the richness and
brilliancy of their dress, are not equalled in any city in also United States;
not even in Charleston (S. C.) which has heretofore been called the center of
the Beau Monde. The la^^i^^, however, are not solely employed in attentions to
dress. There are many who are studious to add to the brilliant external
accomplishments, the more brilliant and lasting accomplishments of the mind.
Nor have they been unsuccessful; for New York can boast of great numbers of
refined taste, whose minds are highly improved, and whose conversation is as
inviting as their personal charms. Tinctured with a Dutch education, they
manage their families with good economy and singular neatness.

In point of sociability and hospitality, New York is hardly exceeded by any
town in the United States. If, however, in regard to these agreeable
characteristics, the preference must be given to any one place, it decidedly
belongs to Charleston (S. C.) Some travelers have, to these respects, given
Boston the preference to New York.

An enquirer, who would wish to acquaint himself with the state of the people
of New York, their manners and government, would naturally ask the citizens for
their societies for the encouragement of sciences, arts, manufactures, etc? For
their public libraries? For their patrons of literature? Their well regulated
academies? For their female academy for instructing young ladies in geography,
history, belles lettres, etc? Such enquiries might be made with propriety, but
could not at present, be answered satisfactorily. From the spirit of
improvement, however, which has of late appeared, there is reason (...) believe
that this trait in the character of the citizens of New York, will give place
to one distinguished for a preference for these things.

On a general view of this city, as described thirty years ago, and in its
present state, the comparison is flattering to the present age; particularly
the improvements in taste, elegance of manners, and that only unaffected
civility and politeness which form the happiness of social intercourse.

It is found, by a memorandum in one of the old registers, that the number of
inhabitants in the city, taken by order of the King in the year 1697, was as
follows: Whites. Men 946 Negroes. Men 20^ Women 1018 Women 205 Young men and
boys 864 Boys and girls 161 Young women and girls 899 Total 3727 575

The number of inhabitants in the city and county of New York in 1756, was
10,881: 1771 -- 21,863; 1786 -- 23,614; 1790 -- 33,131.

The city of Albany is situated upon the west side of Hudson's river, the ^60
miles north of the city of New York, in latitude 42 36, and i^ by charter
granted in 1686, one mile upon the river, and 16 miles, bac^^* It contains
upwards of 1000 houses, built mostly by treading people on the margin of the
river. The houses stand chiefly upon Pearl, Mark (...) and Water streets, and
six other streets or lanes which cross them at right angles. They are mostly
built in the old Dutch Gothi^ stil^^ with the gable end to the street, which
custom the first settlers (...) with them from Holland. The gable end is
commonly of brick, with the heavy molded ornament of flaunting with notches,
like stairs, and an iron horse, for a weathercock, at top. The houses are
seldom more than one story and a half high, and have but little conveniences,
and less elegance; but they are kept very neat, being rubbed, with a mop almost
every day, and scoured every week. Many new, houses however, have lately been
built in this city, all in the modern (...) the inhabitants are paving the
streets in the New York plan, with (...) ways, and making other improvements.

They city of Albany contains about 4000 inhabitants, collected from various
parts. As great a variety of languages are spoken in Albany as in any town in
the United States, but the English predominates, and the use of every other is
constantly lessening. Adventurers in pursuit of wealth, the led here by the
advantages for trade which this place affords.

Albany is unrivalled in its situation. It stands on the bank of one of the
finest rivers in the world, at the head of sloop navigation. It enjoys a
salubrious air, as is evinced by the longevity of its inhabitants. It is the
natural Emporium of the increasing trade of a large extent of country west and
north -- a country of an excellent soil, abounding in every article for the
West India market -- plentifully watered with navigable lakes, creeks and
rivers, as yet only partially peopled, but settling with almost unexampled
rapidity, and capable of affording subsistence and affluence to millions of
inhabitants. No part of America, affords a more eligible opening for emigrants
than this. And when the contemplated locks and canals are completed, the bridge
over the Mohawk river erected, and convenient roads opened into every part of
the country, all which will, it is expected, be (...) complished in a few
years, Albany will probably increase and flourish beyond almost every other
city or town in the United States.

The well water in this city is extremely bad, scarcely drinkable by those who
are not accustomed to it. It oozes through a stiffiblu^ clay and it imbibes in
its passage, the fine particles common to that kind of soil. This discolors it,
and when exposed any length of time to the air, it acquires a disagreeable
taste. Indeed all the water for cooking is brought from the river, and many
families use it to drink. The water in the wells is unwholesome, being full of
little insects, resembling, except in size, those which we frequently see in
stagnated rain water. But the inhabitants are about to remedy this
inconvenience by constructing water works, to convey good water into the city.

The public buildings are a Low Dutch church, one for Presbyterians, one for
Germans or High Dutch, one for Episcopalians -- a Hospital, the City Hall, and
a handsome brick Goal.

The city of Hudson has had the most rapid growth as any places in America, if
we except Baltimore, in Maryland. It is situated on the east side of Hudson's
river, in latitude 42 23 and is 130 miles north of New York; thirty miles south
of Albany, and four miles west from old Claverack town. It is surrounded by an
extensive and Fertile back country, and in proportion to its size and
population, carries on a large trade.

No longer ago than the autumn of 1783, Messrs. Seth and Thomas J^nkins, from
Providence, in the state of Rhode Island, having first reconnoitered all the
way up the river, fixed on the unsettled spot where Hudson now stands, for a
town. To this spot they found the river was navigable for vessels of any size.
They purchased a tract of about a mile square, bordering on the river, with a
large bay to the southward, and divided it into thirty parcels or shares. Other
adventurers were admitted to proportions, and the town was laid out in squares,
formed by spacious streets, crossing each other at right angles. Each square
contains thirty lots, two deep, divided by a twenty feet alley; each lot is
fifty feet in front and 120 feet in depth.

In the spring of 1784, several houses and stores were erected. The increase of
the town from this period to the spring of 1786, two years only, was
astonishingly rapid, and reflects great honor upon the enterpriaing and
persevering spirit of the original founders. In the space of time just
mentioned, no less than 150 dwelling houses, besides shops, barns, and other
buildings, four warehouses, several wharves, spermaceti works, a covered rope
walk, and one of the best distilleries in America, were erected, and 1500 fouls
collected on a spot, which, three years before, was improved as a farm, and but
two years before began to be built. Its increase since has been very rapid; a
printing office has been established, and several public buildings have been
erected, besides dwelling houses, stores, etc. The inhabitants are plentifully
and conveniently supplied with water, brought to their cellars in wooden pipes,
from a spring two miles from the town.

It stands on an eminence from which are extensive and delightful views to the
northwest, north, and round that way to then southeast, consisting of hills and
valleys, variegated with woods and orchards, cornfields and meadows, with the
river, which is in most places a mile over, and may be seen a considerable
distance to the northward, forming a number of bays and creeks. From the
southeast to the southwest, the city is screened with hills at different
distances, and west, afar off over the river and a large valley, the prospect
is bounded by a chain of stupendous mountains, called the Katts-kill, running
to the west north west, which add a magnificence and sublimity to the whole
scene.

Upwards of twelve hundred sleighs entered the city daily, for several days
together, in February, 1786, loaded with grain of various kinds, boards,
shingles, staves, hoops, iron ware, stone for building, firewood, and sundry
articles of provision for the market, from which some idea may be formed of the
advantage of its situation, with respect to the country adjacent, which is
every way extensive and fertile, particularly westward. The original
proprietors of Hudson offered to purchase a tract of land adjoining the south
part of the city of Albany, and were constrained, by a refusal of the
proposition, to become competitors for the commerce of the northern country,
when otherwise they would have added great wealth and consequence to Albany.

Poughkeepsie is the shire town of Duchess county, and is situated upon the
east side of Hudson's river, and north of Wapping kill or creek. It is a
pleasant little town, and has frequently been the seat of the state government.

Lansinburgh, formerly called the New City, stands on the east side of the
Hudson, just opposite the south branch of Mohawk river, and 9 miles north of
Albany. It is a very flourishing place, pleasantly situated on a plain at the
foot of a hill.

Kingston is the county town of Ulster. Before it was burnt by the British, in
1777, it contained about 200 houses, regularly built on an elevated dry plain,
at the mouth of a little pleasant stream, called Eusopus kill or creek, that
empties into the Hudson; but is nearly two miles west from the river. The town
has been rebuilt.

S^enectady is sixteen miles northwest of Albany, in Albany county, situated on
the banks of the Mohawk river. The town is compact and regular, built of brick,
and, excepting a few, in the old Dutch style, on a rich flat of low land,
surrounded with hills. The windings of the river through the town, and the
fields, which are often overflowed in the spring, afford a beautiful prospect
about harvest time. As it is at the foot of navigation on a long river, which
passes through a very fertile country, one would suppose it to embrace much of
the commerce of it: but originally knowing no other than the fur trade, since
the revolution the place has decayed, and no advantage been taken of its happy
situation.

Plattsburgh is an extensive township in Clinton county, situated on the west
margin of Lake Champlain. From the south part of the town the mountains trund
away wide from the lake, and leave a charming tract of excellent land, of a
rich loam, well watered, and about an equal proportion suitable for meadow and
for tillage. The land rises in a gentle ascent for several miles from the lake,
of which every farm will have a delightful view. Seven years ago, this township
and the whole county indeed, which at present contains several thousand
inhabitants, was a wilderness; now they have a house for public worship, a
court house and goal, the courts to common pleas and general sessions of the
peace, sit here twice in a year; they have artizans of almost every kind among
them, and furnish among the themselves all the materials for building, glass
excepted. Polite circles may here be found, and the genteel traveller be
entertained with the luxuries of a seaport, a tune on the harpsicord, and a
philosophical conversation. This, with many other instances of the kind, serve
to verify a prophetic remark, in a letter of Congress to their constituents,
written in a time of gloomy despondency, to the following purport: "Vast lakes
and rivers, scarcely known or explored, whole waters have rolled for ages in
silence and obscurity to the ocean, and extensive wildernesses of fertile soil,
the dwelling place of savage beasts, shall yet hear the din of industry, become
subservient to commerce, and boast delightful villas, gilded spires and
spacious cities, rising on their banks, and fields loaded with the fruit of
cultivation."

AGRICULTURE AND MANUFACTURES.] New York is considerably behind her neighbors
in New England, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania, in point of improvements in
agriculture and manufactures. Among other reasons for this deficiency, that of
want of enterprise in the inhabitants is not the least. Indeed their local
advantages have been such as that they have grown rich without enterprise.
Besides, lands have hitherto been cheap, and farms of course large, and in
requires much less ingenuity to raise 1000 bushels of wheat upon 60 acres of
land, than to raise the same quantity upon 30 acres. So long therefore as the
farmer in New York can have 60 acres of land, to raise 1000 bushels of wheat,
he will never trouble himself to find out how he can raise the same quantity
upon half the land. It is population alone that stamps a value upon lands, and
lays a foundation for high improvements in agriculture. When a man is obliged
to maintain a family on a small farm, his invention is exercised to find out
every improvement that may render it more productive. This appears to be the
great reason why the lands on Delaware and Connecticut rivers, produce to the
farmer twice as much clear profit, as lands in equal quantity and of the same
quality upon the Hudson. If the preceding observations be just, improvements
will keep pace with population and the increasing value of lands. Another cause
which has heretofore operated in preventing agricultural improvements in this
state, has been their government, which, in the manner it was conducted until
the revolution, was extremely unfavourable to improvements of almost every
kind, and particularly in agriculture. The governors were many of them land
jobbers, bent on making their fortunes; and being invested with power to do
this, they either engrossed for themselves, or patented away to their
particular favorites, a very great proportion of the whole province. This, as
has been before observed, proved an effectual bar to population, and of course,
according to our present hypothesis, has kept down the price of lands, and so
prevented improvements in agriculture. It ought to be observed, in this
connection, that these overgrown estates could be cultivated only by the hands
of tenants, who, having no right in the soil, and no certain prospect of
continuing upon the farm which they held at the will of their landlord, had no
motives to make those expensive improvements, which, though not immediately
productive, would prove very profitable in some future period. The tenant,
dependent on his landlord for his annual support, confines his views and
improvements to the present year; while the independent freeholder, secure of
his estate for himself and his successors, carries his views into futurity, and
early lays the foundation for growing improvement. But these obstacles have
been removed, in a great measure, by the revolution. The genius of the
government of this state, however, still favors large monopolies of lands,
which have, for some years back been granted, without regard either to quantity
or settlement. The fine fertile country of the Mohawk, in Montgomery county,
which was formerly possessed by Sir William Johnson, and other land jobbers,
who were enemies to their country, has been forfeited to the state, and is now
split up into freehold estates, and settling with astonishing rapidity.

The foregoing observations will in a great measure account for the great
neglect of manufactural improvements. Mr. Smith in his history of New York,
more than thirty years ago, observed, "It is much owing to the disproportion
between the number of our inhabitants, and the vast tracts still remaining to
be settled, that we have not as yet, entered upon scarcely any other
manufactures, than such as are indispensably necessary for our home
convenience." This same cause has operated ever since, in the same way, though
not, of late, in the same degree.

Great improvements in agriculture can not be expected (unless they are made by
a few individuals who have a particular genius for that business) so long as
lands are plenty and cheap; and improvements in manufactures never precede, but
invariably follow improvements in agriculture. These observations apply more
particularly to the country. The city of New York, contains a great number of
people, who are employed in various kinds of manufactures. Among many other
articles manufactured in this city are wheel carriages of all kinds, loaf
sugar, bread, beer, shoes and boots, saddlery, cabinet work, cutlery, hats,
wool cards, clocks, watches, potters ware, umbrellas, all kinds of mathematical
and musical instruments, ships and every things necessary for their equipment.
Glass works, and several iron works, have been established in different parts
of the country, but they never till lately have been very productive, owing
solely to the want of workmen, and the high price of labor; its necessary
consequence. The internal resources and advantages for these manufactories,
such as ore, wood, water, hearth stone, proper situations for bloomeries,
forges and all kinds of water works, are immense. There are several paper mills
in the state, which are worked to advantage. The manufacture of maple sugar,
within a few years past, has become an object of great importance. As many as
300 chests of 400lb. each, were made in the thinly inhabited county of Otsego,
in the year 1791; besides large quantities, sufficient for home consumption, in
other newly settled parts of the state.

TRADE.] The situation of New York, with respect to foreign markets, has
decidedly the preference to any of the states. It has at all seasons of the
year, a short and easy access to the ocean. We have already mentioned that it
commands the trade of a great proportion of the best settled, and best
cultivated parts of the United States. New York has not been unmindful of her
superior local advantages, but has availed herself of them to their full extent.

Their exports to the West Indies are, biscuit, peace, Indian corn, apples,
onions, boards, staves, horses, sheep, butter, cheese, pickled oysters, beef
and pork. But wheat is the staple commodity of the state, of which no less than
677,700 bushels were exported in the year 1775, besides 2,555 tons of bread,
and 2,828 tons of flour. Inspectors of flour are appointed to prevent
impositions, and to see that none is exported but that which is deemed by them
merchantable. West India goods are received in return for these articles.
Besides the above mentioned articles, are exported flaxseed, cotton wool,
sarsaparilla, coffee, indigo, rice, pig iron, bar iron, pot ash, pearl ash,
furs, deer skins, log wood, fustic, mahogany, bees wax, oil, Madeira wine, rum,
tar, pitch, turpentine, whale finds, fish, sugars, molasses, salt, tobacco,
lard, etc. but most of these articles are imported for re-exportation. The
trade of this state has greatly increased since the revolution, and the balance
is almost constantly in its favor. The exports to foreign parts, for the year
ending Sept. 30th 1791, consisting principally of the articles above
enumerated, amounted to 2,516,197 dollars. This state owns 46,626 tons of
shipping, besides which the finds employment for about 40,000 tons of foreign
vessels.

MEDICINAL SPRINGS.] The most noted springs in this state are snore of
Saratoga. They are eight or nine in number, situated in the margin of a marsh,
formed by a branch of Kayadarossora Creek, about twelve miles west from the
confluence of Fish Creek, and Hudson's river. They are surrounded by a rock of
a peculiar kind, formed by petrefactions. One of them, however, more
particularly attracts the attention; it rises above the surface of the earth
five or six feet, in the form of a pyramid. The aperture in the top, which
discoveres the water, is perfectly cylindrical, of about nine inches diameter.
In this the water is about twelve inches below the top, except at the time of
its annual discharge, which is commonly in the beginning of summer. At all
times it appears to be in as great agitation as if boiling in a pot, although
it is extremely cold. The same appearances obtain in the other springs, except
that the surrounding rocks are of different figures, and the water flows
regularly from them.

By observation and experiment, the principal impregnation of the water is
found to be a fossile acid, which is predominant in the taste. It is also
strongly impregnated with a saline substance, which is very discernible in the
taste of the water, and in the taste and smell of the petrified matter about
it. From the corrosive and dissolving nature of the acid, the water acquires a
chalybeate property, and receives into its composition a portion of calcareous
earth, which, when separated, resembles an impure magnesia. As the different
springs have no essential variance in the nature of their waters, but the
proportions of the chalybeate impregnation, it is rendered probable that they
are derived from one common source, but flow it, separate channels, where they
have connection with metalic bodies, in greater or less proportions. The
stomachs of some females however, are so delicate, as to perceive a difference
in the effect and operation of the different springs.

The prodigious quantity of air contained in this water, makes another
distinguishing property of it. This air, striving for enlargement, produces the
fermentation and violent action of the water before described. After the water
has stood a small time in an open vessel (no tight one will contain it) the air
escapes, the water becomes vapid, and looses all that life and pungency which
distinguish it when first taken from the pool. The particles of dissolved earth
are deposited as the water flows off, which, with the combination of the salts
and fixed air, concrete and form the rocks about the springs.

As to the quality of these medicinal springs, to most people who drink the
waters, they are at first very disagreeable, having a strong, brackish, briny
taste; but use in a great measure takes off the nauseousness, and renders them
palatable, and to many, very grateful. Upon a sew they operate as an emetic:
upon most as cathartic and diuretic. They may be taken in very large quantities
without sensible injury, or disagreeable operation.

The following curious experiments made on these waters, are extracted from Dr.
Mitchell's Journal.

"A young turkey held a few inches above the water in the crater of the lower
spring, was thrown into convulsions in less than half a minute, and gasping,
showed signs of approaching death; but on removal from that place, and exposure
to the fresh air, revived and became lively. On immersion again for a minute in
the gas, the bird was taken out languid and motionless.

A small dog put into the same cavity, and made to breathe the contained air,
was, in less than one minute, thrown into convulsive motions -- made to pant
for breath, and safely to loss entirely the power to cry or move; when taken
out, he was too weak to stand, but soon, in the common air, acquired strength
enough to rise and stagger away.

A trout recently caught, and briskly swimming in a pail of brook water, was
carefully put into a vessel just filled from the spring; the fish was instantly
agitated with violent convulsions, gradually loft the capacity to move and
poise itself, grew stupid and insensible, and in a few minutes was dead.

A candle repeatedly lighted and let down near the surface of the water, was
suddenly extinguished, and not a vestige of light or fire remained on the wick.

A bottle filled with the water and shaken, emits suddenly a large quantity of
aerial matter, that either forces out the cork, or makes a way beside or
through it, or bursts the vessel.

A quantity of wheaten flour, moistened with this water and kneaded into dough,
when made into cakes and put into a baking pan, rose, during the application of
heat, into light and soungy bread, without the aid of yeast or leaven.

From which it appears that the air extricated from the water is precisely
similar to that produced by ordinary fermentation.

Some lime water, made of stalactites brought from the subterranean cave at
Rhinebec, became immediately turbid on mixture with the spring water, but when
the water had been lately drawn, the precipitate was quickly re-dissolved.

Some of the rock surrounding the spring, on being put into the fire, calcined
to quick lime, and slacked very well.

When the aerial matter has evaporated, the water loses it transparency and
lets fall a calcarious sediment.

Whence it is true, that the gas is aerial acid, that the rock is limestone,
and that by (...) of the former the water becomes capable of dissolving and
conveying the latter.

Great numbers of people, under a variety of maladies, resort to these springs,
and many find relief, and a considerable number a complete cure, particularly
in bilious disorders, salt rheum, and relaxations. But as the waters are
unfriendly and even fatal in some disorders, they ought to be used under the
direction of a physician thoroughly acquainted with the qualities of the
waters, and the diseases of the patients. Ignorant of the suitableness of the
waters to their complaints, many have imprudently thrown away their lives in
the use of them.

New Lebanon springs are next in celebrity to those of Saratoga. New Lebanon,
is a pleasant village, situated partly in a vale, and partly on the declivity
of hills. The pool is situated on a commanding eminence, overlooking the
valley, and surrounded with a few houses which afford but indifferent
accommodations for the valetudinarians who resort here in search of health. The
waters have an agreeable temperature, and are not unpleasant to the taste. From
the experiments of Dr. Mitchill, it appears that the water contains no iron, no
lime, no neutral salt, no fixed air no other acid -- that soap, unites very
well with the water, and makes a good lather, and is excellent for bleaching
cloths -- that the spring is a Tharmoe, and has a plenty of limestone in its
neighborhood. Its warmth is so considerable that during the coolness of the
morning, even in August, copious vapors are emitted by the pool and the stream
which issues from it, for a considerable distance. But the evaporated matter
has no peculiar odor. From all which particulars, taken together, this theory
rationally results -- A quantity of iron and brimstone, somewhere within the
mountain, are, by reason of their chemical affinity, in the act of combining
into martial pyrites. During their action upon each other, heat is produced,
and pure air absorbed. The water running in the neighborhood of this bed of
pyrites, borrows some of its heat, and receives also that part of the
atmospheric fluid which remains after the consumption of the pure air, to wit,
soul or azotic gas. But as the heat is excited in the bowels of a calcarious
mountain, it happens that by the combination of the lime stone with a very
small portion of the sulphur, a calcarious hepar is formed, which flying off in
the form of hepatic gas, gives an exceedingly flight tincture to the water of
the pool. These waters are used with success it is said, in scorbutic and
rheumatic diseases, salt rheums, etc. but are pernicious to consumptive persons.

In the new town of Renssalaer, nearly opposite the city of Albany, a medicinal
spring has lately been discovered, combining most of the valuable properties of
the celebrated waters of Saratoga. Should further experiments confirm the
favorable opinion already entertained of this spring, it will prove a
fortunate discovery for the city of Albany and for the country adjoining, as
well as for the invalids who annually resort to Saratoga, under many
inconveniences and at a great expense.

The salt springs we have already mentioned. The weight of a bushel of the salt
made of these waters is 56lb. and is equal in goodness to that imported from
Turks Island.

MINERALS AND FOSSILS.] This state embosoms vast quantities of iron ore.
Naturalists have observed that ore, in swamps and pondy ground, vegetates and
increases. There is a silver mine at Phillipsburg, which produces virgin
silver. Lead is found in Herkemer country, and sulphur in Montgomery. Spar,
zink or spelter, a semi metal, magnez, used in glazings, pyrites, of a golden
hue, various kinds of copper ore, and lead and coal mines, are found in this
state. Also petrified wood, plaster of Paris, ising glass in sheets, tales and
crystals of various kinds and colors, stint, asbestos, and several other
fossils. A small black stone has also been found, which vitrifies with a small
heat, and it is said makes excellent glass.

LITERARY AND HUMANE SOCIETIES.] There are very few societies for improvement
in knowledge or humanity in this state; and these few are in the city of New
York. The first is 'The society for promoting useful knowledge.' This society
in upon an establishment similar to other philosophical societies in Europe and
America, but is not incorporated. The members meet once a month. Secondly. 'The
society for the manumission of slaves and protecting such of them as have been
or may be liberated.' This society meets once a quarter. Both these societies
consist of gentlemen of the first character in the city, and of some in other
parts of the state. Besides these there is a marine society, a society for the
relief of poor debtors confined in goal -- A Manufacturing society, an
Agricultural society lately established, of which the members of the
legislature, are, ex offi^^^s members, and a Medical society.

LITERATURE, COLLEGES, ACADEMIES, etc.] Until the year 1754, there was no
college in the province of New York. The state of literature, at that time, I
shall give in the words of their historian.

"Our schools are in the lowest order; the instructors want instruction, and
through a long and shameful neglect of all the arts and sciences, our common
speech is extremely corrupt, and the evidences of a bad taste, both as to
thought and language, are visible in all our proceedings, public and private."
This may have been a just representation at the time when it was written; but
much attention has since been paid to education. There are eight incorporated
academies in different parts of the state; but many parts of the country are
yet either unfurnished with schools, or the schools which they have are kept by
low, ignorant men, which are worse than none; for children had better remain in
ignorance than be illy taught. We are happy to add that the legislature have
lately patronized collegiate and academic education, by granting a large
gratuity to the college and academies in this state, which, in addition to
their former funds, renders their endowments handsome, and adequate to their
expenditures.

Kings college, in the city of New York, was principally founded by the
voluntary contributions of the inhabitants of the province, assisted by the
general assembly, and the corporation of Trinity church; in the year 1754, a
royal charter (and grant of money) being then obtained, incorporating a number
of gentlemen therein mentioned, by the name of "The governors of the college of
the province of New York, in the city of New York, in America;" and granting to
them and their successors forever, amongst various other right and privileges,
the power of conferring all such degrees, as are usually conferred by either of
the English universities.

By the charter it was provided that the president shall always be a member of
the church of England, and that a form of prayer collected from the liturgy of
that church, with a particular prayer for the college, shall be daily used,
morning and evening, in the college chapel; at the same time, no test of their
religious persuasion was required from any of the fellows, professors or
tutors; and the advantages of education were equally extended to students of
all denominations.

The building (which is only one third of the intended structure) consists of
an elegant stone edifice, three complete stones high, with four stair cases,
twelve apartments in each, a chapel, hall, library, museum, anatomical theater,
and a school for experimenal philosophy.

The college is situated on a dry gravelly soil, about 150 yards from the bank
of Hudson's river, which it overlooks; commanding a most extensive and
beautiful prospect.

Since the revolution, the legislature passed an act constituting twenty-one
gentlemen (of whom the governor and lieutenant governor, for the time being,
are members ex off^ciis) a body corporate and politic, by the name and style of
'The regents of the university of the state of New York.' They are entrusted
with the care of literature in general in the state, and have power to grant
charters of incorporation for erecting colleges and academies throughout the
state -- are to visit these institutions as often as they shall think proper,
and report their state to the legislature once a year.

King's college, which we have already described, is now called COLUMBIA
COLLEGE. This college, by an act of the legislature passed in the spring of
1787, was put under the care of 24 gentlemen, who are a body corporate, by the
name and style of 'The Trustees of Columbia College, in the city of New York.'
This body posses all the powers vested in the governors of Kings college,
before the revolution, or in the regents of the university, since the
revolution, so far as their power respected this institution. No regent can be
a trustee of any particular college or academy in the state. They regents of
the university have power to confer the higher degrees, and them only.

The college edifice has received no additions since the peace. The funds,
exclusive of the liberal grant of the legislature, amount to between twelve and
thirteen thousand pounds currency, the income of which is sufficient of present
exigencies.

This college is now in a thriving state, and has about 100 students is the
four classes, besides medical students. The officers of instruction and
immediate government, are a president, professor of mathematics and natural
philosophy, a professor of logic and geography, and a professor of languages. A
complete medical school has been lately annexed to the college, and able
professors appointed by the trustees in every branch of that important science,
who regularly teach their respective branches, with reputation. The number of
medical students is about 50, and increasing; the library and museum were
destroyed during the war. The philosophical apparatus is new and complete.

Of the eight incorporated academies, one is at Flatbush, in Kings county, on
Long Island, four miles from Brooklyn-ferry. It is situated in a pleasant,
healthy village. The building is large, handsome and convenient, and is called
Erasmus hall. The academy is flourishing, under the care of a principal and
other subordinate instructors.

There is another at East Hampton, on the east and of Long Island; by the name
of CLINTON ACADEMY. The other are in different parts of the state. Besides
these there are schools established and maintained by the voluntary
contributions of the parents. A spirit for literary improvement, is evidently
diffusing its influence throughout the state.

RELIGION.] The constitution of this state provides for 'the free exercise and
enjoyment of religious profession and worship, without discrimination or
preference, within the state, for all mankind. Provided that the liberty of
conscience hereby granted, shall not be so construed as to excuse acts of
licentiousness, or justify practices inconsistent with the peace and safety of
the state.'

The various religious denominations in this state are the following, English
Presbyterians, Dutch reformed, Baptists, Episcopalians, Friends or Quakers,
German Lutherans, Moravians, Methodists, Roman Catholics, Jews, Shakers, and a
few of the followers of Jamima Wilkinson. The shakers are principally settled
at New Lebanon, and the followers of Jemima Wilkinson at Geneva, about twelve
miles S. W. of the Cayoga lake. For the peculiar sentiments of these various
religious sects see the general account of the United States, under the article
Religion.

In April 1784, the legislature of this state passed and act enabling all
religious denominations to appoint trustees, ^ot less than three or more than
nine, who shall be a body corporate, for the purpose of taking care of the
temporalities of their respective congregations, and for the other purposes
therein mentioned.

The ministers of every denomination in the state, are supported by the
voluntary contributions of the people, raised, generally, by subscription, or
by a tax upon the pews; except the Duch churches in New York, Skenectady and
Kingston, which have, except the two last, large estates confirmed by a
charter. The Episcopal church also in New York possesses a very large estate in
the and near the city.

CONSTITUTION AND COURTS OF JUSTICE.] The present constitution of the state was
established by convention authorized for the purpose, April 20, 1777.

The supreme legislative power of the state are vested in two branches, a
Senate and Assembly. The members of the senate are elected by the freeholders
of the state, who posses freehold estates to the value of 100l. clear of debts.
For the purpose of electing senators, the state is divided into four great
districts, each of which chooses a certain number, viz.

Southern District, including the counties of New York, Nine Senators. Suffolk,
West Chester, Kings, Queens, Richmond, Middle District. Duchess, Six Ulster,
Orange, Western District Albany, Six, Montgomery, Eastern District Washingtion,
Three. Cumberland, Gloucester,

The senators are divided by lot into four classes, six in each class, and
numbered, first, second, third, and fourth. The seats of the first class are
vacated at the expiration of one year -- the second, at the expiration of the
next, etc. and their place filled by new elections. Thus a small change is made
in the senate every year; but three fourths of the members remaining, preserve
a knowledge of the business of a former session. A majority of the senate is
necessary to do business, and each branch of the legislature has a negative
upon the other.

The legislature can at any time alter this division of the state for the
choice of senators; and an increase of electors in any district, to the amount
of one twenty fourth of the electors in the whole state, entitles the district
to another senator. But the number of senators can never exceed one hundred.

The assembly of the state is composed of representatives from the several
counties, chosen annually in May in the following proportion*

For the city and county of New York, nine.

For the city and county of Albany, seven.

For Duchess, 7 west Chester, 6 Ulster, 6 Suffolk, 5 Queens, 4 Orange, 4
Kings, 2 For Richmond, 2 Montgomery, 6 Washington, and Clinton, 4 Columbia, 3
Cumberland, 3 Gloucester, 2

By the constitution, however, it is ordered, that at the end of seven years
after the termination of the late war, a census of the electors and inhabitants
shall be taken, and the representation apportioned according to the number of
electors in each county.

Every male inhabitant of full age, who has resided in the state six months
preceding the day of election, and possessing a freehold to the value of twenty
pounds, in the country where he is to give his vote; or has rented a tenement
therein of the yearly value of forty shillings, and has been rated and actually
paid taxes, is entitled to vote for representatives in assembly. The freedom of
the cities of New York, and Albany, likewise entitles a person to the privilege
of voting for members of assembly in the city or county where he resides. The
method of voting is now by ballot, but subject to alteration by the
legislature. The house of assembly, a majority of which is necessary to proceed
to business, chooses its own speaker, and is a judge of its own privileges.

In all debates on great questions, the house resolves itself into a committee
of the whole -- the speaker leaves the chair, and a chairman is appointed for
the occasion. After the business is completed, the committee rises -- the
speaker takes the chair -- and the chairman reports to the house the
proceedings of the committee. How far this imitation of the British house of
commons is supported by good reasons it may not be easy to determine. Certain
it is, that in other legislatures, the proceedings are equally well conducted
without this formality.

The number of representatives is limited to three hundred. The present number
is sixty five.

The supreme executive power of the state is vested in a governor, (in whose
absence a deputy governor is appointed to serve) chosen once in three years by
the freemen of the state; the lieutenant governor is, by his office, president
of the senate; and, upon and equal division of voices, has a casting vote: but
has no voice on other occasions. The governor has not a seat in the
legislature; but as a member of the council of revision and council of
appointment, he has a vast influence in the state.

The council of revision is composed of the chancellor, the judges of the
supreme court, or any of them, and the governor. This council is empowered to
revise all bills which have passed the two houses of the legislature, and if it
shall appear to the council that such bills ought not to pass into laws, they
shall be returned to the house in which they originated, with the objections of
the council, in writing. The house shall then proceed to reconsider the bills,
with the objections, and if not withstanding, two thirds of the house shall
agree to the bills, they shall be sent to the other house* where they shall be
reconsidered and the assent of two thirds of the members pass them into laws.
But if a bill is not returned in ten days, it becomes a law of course.

The subordinate officers of the state are appointed by the council of
appointment, which is composed of one senator from each district, to be chosen
annually by the legislature, with the governor, or in his absence, the
lieutenant governor or the president of the senate, who has a calling vote only.

All military officers hold their commissions during pleasure. The chancellor,
the judges of the supreme court, and the first judge of each county court, hold
their offices during good behavior. These officers can hold no other office at
the same time* except that of delegate to congress.

Sheriffs and coroners are appoined annually, and can serve but four years
successively.

A court of errors and impeachment is instituted, composed of the president of
the senate, the senate, chancellor and judges of the supreme court, or the
major part of them, under the regulation of the legislature. The power of
impeachment if vested in the house of representatives, and the members on trial
must be sworn.

Besides the court of errors and impeachment, there is first, a Court of
Chancery, consisting of a chancellor, appointed by the council of appointment,
who holds his office during good behavior, or until ^e arive at the age of
sixty years. Secondly, a Supreme Court, the judges of which are appointed in
the same manner and for the same time as the chancellor. This is a circuit
court. Thirdly, County Courts, held in each county, the judges of which are
appointed in the manner above mentioned, and the first judge holds his office
during good behavior, or until he arrive at at the age of 60 years. Besides
these, there are the justices' courts, court of probates, court of admiralty,
court of exchequer, and court of oyer and ter^niner and general goal delivery,
and court of quarter sessions.

This practice in the supreme court, to which an appeal lies from the courts
below, is in imitation of the courts of common pleas and king's bench in
England.

All free governments abound with lawyers. Where men have the privilege of
thinking and acting for themselves, they will involve themselves in debt and
quarrel with their neighbors. In proportion to the debts and disputes of the
people, lawyers will multiply. Of these America furnishes a plentiful growth,
and New York has its share, as it contains not less than 120 licensed
attorneys. In this state, the practice of law is conformed to the English mode,
and is perhaps better regulated than in the other states. The several degrees
in the posession -- the number of critical examinations that candidates are
obliged to pass through before they can be admitted as counselors in the
higher courts; together with the time of study required by the rules of
admission, render and access to the first honors of the bar so difficult as to
preclude ignorant pretenders to the important science of law. New York can
boast of many eminent characters in all the learned professions, and has
furnished America with some of her most able legislators. It is, however, to be
feared that a too rigid adherence to the forms of legal process in England, has
sometimes perplexed the road to justice, and prevented valuable improvements in
the practice, not only of this but of most of the other States.

MILITARY STRENGTH.] By official returns of the militia of this State, made to
the governor by the adjutant general, it appears that the total number in 1789,
was 42,679; 1790 -- 44,259; 1791 -- 50,399. Besides these there are as many as
5000 or 6000 of the militia in the new settlements, who are not yet organized.

FORTS, etc.] These are principally in ruins. The demolition of the fort in the
city of New York has been mentioned. Remains of the fortifications on Long
Island, York Island, White Plains, West Point and other places, are still
visible. Fort Stanwix, built by the British in 1758, at the expense, it is said
of 60,000l. is 107 miles westward of Skenectaday, on an artificial eminence
bordering on the M^hawk river, and in traveling this distance, you pass Fort
Hunter, Fort Anthony, Fort Plain, Fort Herkeme^ and Fort Schuyler. As (...)
proceed westward of Fort Stanwix, you pass Fort Bull, and Fort Breweton, at the
west end of Oneida Lake. Fort George is at the south end of Lake George. At the
point where Lake George communicates with Lake Champlain, is the famous post of
Ticonderoga, by which word the Canadians understand noisy. The works, at this
place, are in such a state of delapidation, that a stranger can scarcely from
an idea of their construction. They are, however, situated on such high ground
as to command the communication between the lakes George and Champlain.
Opposite, on the south side of the water that empties out of Lake George, is
mountain, to appearance inaccessable, called Mount Defiance, where General
Burgoyne in the late war, with a boldness, secrecy and dispatch almost
unparalleled, conveyed a number if cannon, stores and troops. The cannon were
raised by large brass t^cles from tree to tree, and from rock to rock, over
dens of rattle snakes, to the summit, which entirely commands the works of
Ticonderoga. This circumstance, must ever be considered as a full justification
of General Sinclair's sudden retreat with the American army, and the
observation which he made, on his trial, in his own defense, that, "though he
had lost a post he had saved a States," was afterward verified.

Crown Point is 15 miles north of Ticonderoga on Lake Champlain. The fort at
this place, in which a British garrison was always ^^pt, from the reduction of
Canada, till the American Revolution, was the most regular, and the most
expensive of any ever constructed, and supported by the British government in
N. America. The walls a^^ of wood and earth, about 16 feet high, and 20 feet
thick, and nearly 150 yards square; surrounded by a deep and broad ditch, cut
though a solid rock. It stands on a rising ground perhaps 200 yards from the
Lake, with which there was a covered way, by which the garrison could be
supplied with water in time of a siege. The only gate op^^^ on the north
toward the lake, where there was a draw bridge. On the right and left, as you
enter the fort, are a row of stone bar^^^ not inelegantly built, sufficient to
contain 1500 or 2000 troops; the ^^^de is between them, and is a flat smooth
rock. There were several (...) works, which are now in ruins, as is the
principal fort, except the walls, and the walls of the barracks, which still
remain.

BANKS.] There are two or three incorporated Banks in the city of New York,
besides a branch of the national bank, and one has lately (...) established in
the city of Albany.

MADE OF RAISING INTERNAL TAXES.] The legislature six upon the sum to be
raised, and apportion it among the several counties. This being done, the
supervisors, one from each township in the respective counties, assemble and
assign to each township its proportion of the quota of the county. The
supervisor and assessors in each ^^^^ship, then apportion their quota among the
individuals of the ^^^^ship, according to the value of their real and personal
estates. The tax, thus laid, is collected by the collector of the township, and
lodged with the county treasurer, who transmits it to the treasurer of the
State.

FINANCES.] A variety of circumstances have conspired to fill the (...) of this
state; and wholly to supersede the necessity, of taxation for several years
past; first, confiscations and economical management of that property --
Second, sales of unappropriated lands; and third, a duty on imports previous to
the establishment of the Federal Government. -- The two former were sold for
continental certificates, at a time when the credit of the state was perhaps
above the p^r of the Union, which was the cause of getting a large sum of the
public debt into the treasury of the state at a depreciated value. These
certificates, since the funding system came into operation, added to the
assumed state debt, a vast quantity of which was also in the treasury, forms an
enormous mass of property, yielding and annuity of upwards of 100,000 dollars;
and when the deferred debt shall become a 6 per cent. stock this annuity will
be increased to upwards of 200,000 dollars.

The ability of the state, therefore, is abundantly competent to aid public
institutions of every kind, to make roads, erect bridges, open canals, and to
push every kind of improvement to the most desirable length. It could be
wished, that those citizens who were exiled during the war, and whose property
was exposed during its continuance to wanton depredations, could be thought of
by a legislature possessing so fully the means of discriminating this unhappy
class of sufferers, and making them compensation for their voluntary sacrifices.

CURIOSITIES.] In the county of Montgomery is a small, rapid stream, emptying
into Scroon Lake, west of Lake George; it runs under a hill, the base of which
is 60 or 70 yards diameter, forming a most curious and beautiful arch in the
rock, as white as snow. The fury of the water and the roughness of the bottom,
added to the territic noise within, has hitherto prevented any person from
passing through the chasm.

In the township of Willsborough in Clinton county, is a curious Split Rock. A
point of a mountain, which projected about 50 yards into Lake Champlain,
appears to have been broken by some violent shock of nature. It is removed from
the main rock or mountain about 20 feet, and the opposite sides so exactly suit
each other, that one needs no other proof of their having been once united. The
point broken off contains about half an acre, and is covered with wood. The
height of the rock* on each side the fissure is about 12 feet. Round this point
is a spacious bay, sheltered from the southwest and northwest winds by the
surrounding hills and woods. On the west side are four of five finely
cultivated farms, which altogether, at certain seasons, and in certain
situations, forms one of the most beautiful land capes imaginable. "Sailing
under this coast for several miles before you come to Split Rock, the mountains
rude and barren, see^^^ hang over the passenger and threaten destruction. -- A
water, bound^^^ to the sight, lies before him -- man feels his own littleness,
and insi^^^^y itself pays an unwilling homage to the creator. -- Instantly and
unexpectedly the scene changes, and peeping with greedy eye, through the
fissure, nature presents to the view a silver basin, a verdant lawn -- a humble
cottage -- a golden harvest -- a majestic forest -- a lofty mountain, an azure
sky, rising one above another "in just gradation to the amazing whole." Mr. M.
L. Woolsey of Plattsburgh. To this ingenious gentleman, the author is indebted
for much valuable information concerning Clinton county.


"A few months ago a very extraordinary cavern, at a place, called by the
Indians, Sepascot, on the estate of the Miss Rutsens, at Ryhabeck, in Duchess
county, was discovered. A lad, by chance, passing (...) its entrance, which lay
between two huge rocks on the declivity of a sheep hill, on prying into the
gloomy recess, saw the top of a ladder, by which he descended about ten feet,
and found himself in a ^^^^^raneous apartment, more capacious than he then
chose to invest^^^. -- He found, however, that it had been the abode of
persons, (...) probably during the war not daring to be seen openly, had taken
(...) there, as bits of cloth, and pieces of leather were scattered about its
floor. He then left the place, and little more was thought (...) (...), until
three weeks ago, the writer of this account made one of a large party who went
from the seat of a gentleman in the neighborhood, on purpose to examine it. We
found its entrance much (...) than we expected, and with some difficulty gained
the ladder, by means of which the remaining descent was made tolerably easy.
Two young ladies were with us, who had heroism enough to make the (...) tour
with us. We had six candles to scrutinize the recesses of the apartment, where,
perhaps, light, for upwards of five thousand years before, had never gleamed.
We found the cave divided by a narrow passage into two divisions; the first
being about seventeen feet in length and solow that a child of eight years old
could but just walk upright in it -- the breadth is about eight or ten feet.
The second between twelve and fourteen feet in length, but much higher and
broader than the first. In this last room we found that three bats had taken up
their winter quarters, and hung suspended from the roof, as it were, by the
very tips of their wings. But what makes the cave peculiarly worthy of notice
is the petrifying quality of the water, that by a (...) oozing, continually
drops from every part of the ceiling, the (...) of which exactly resembles a
mill gutter in a frosty morning. with a thousand isicles impending. These
concretions are formed by the water, and probably are constantly increasing.
They have in almost every respect the appearance of isicles, and may be broken
off by the (...) if not more than two inches in circumference. They appear of
^^^^stence much like indurated lime, almost transparent, and are all (...)
quite through the whole length, with a hole of the size of (...) his tobacco
pipe, through which aperture the water unremit^^ drops, although very slow.
When a person is in the remotest (...) and the lights are removed into the
first, those pendant drops of (...) make an appearance more splendid than can
be well imagined. (...) of those stony isicles have at length reached the
bottom of the (...) now form pillars, some of more than two feet in girth, of
the appearance if marble and almost as hard. They put one in mind of (...)
Jachin and Boaz -- imagination very easily giving them (...) and chapiters and
even wreathen work.

But what we most admired, was the skeleton of a large snake, turned in (...)
stone by the petrifying quality of the water before mentioned. It was with some
difficulty torn up with an axe from the rock it lay up^^^^ of which adhered to
it) and is now in the possession of the re^^^.

We found the in most recesses of this cavern very warm, and experienced the
want of free air, by a difficult respiration, although the candles (...) very
clear. Massachusetts Magazine for Nov. 1792.
"

INDIANS.] The body of the Six Nations, inhabit in the western parts of this
state. The principal part of the Mohawk tribe reside on Grand river, in Upper
Canada; and there are two villages of Senecas on the Allegany river, near the
north line of Pennsylvania, and a few Delawares and Skawaghkees, on Buffaloe
Creek. Including these, and the Stockbridge and Mohegan Indians, who have
migrated and settled in the vicinity of Oneida, there are, in the Six Nations,
according to an accurate estimate lately made by the Rev. Mr. Kirkland,
missionary among them, 6330 souls. He adds, that among these there is
comparatively but very few children.

The following extract of a letter from Mr. Kirkland to the Author, will give
the reader an idea of the characters, which according to Indian tradition, are
excluded from the happy country. "The region of pure spirits, the Five Nations
call Eskanane. The only characters which, according to their traditions, cannot
be admitted to participate of the pleasures and delights of this happy country,
are reduced to three, viz. suicides -- the disobedient to the counsels of the
chiefs, and such as put away their wives on account of pregnancy. According to
their tradition there is a gloomy, fathomless gulf, near the borders of the
delightful mansions of Eskanane, over which all good and brave spirits pass
with safety, under the conduct of a faithful and skilful guide, appointed for
that purpose; but when a suicide, or any of the above mentioned characters,
approaches this gulf, the conductor, who possesses a most penetrating eye,
instantly discovers their spiritual features and character, and denies them his
aid, assigning his reasons. They will however attempt to cross upon a small
pole, which, before they reach the middle, trembles and shakes, till presently
down they fall with horrid shrieks. In this dark and dreary gulf, they suppose
resides a great dog, some say a dragon, infected with the itch, which makes him
perpetually restless and spiteful. The guilty inhabitants of this miserable
region, all catch this disease of the great dog, and grope and roam from side
to side of their gloomy mansion in perpetual torments. Sometimes they approach
to near the happy fields of Eskanane, that they can hear the songs and dances
of their former companions. This only serves to increase their torments, as
they can discern no light, nor discover any passage by which they can gain
access to them. They suppose idiots and dogs go into the same gulf, but have a
more comfortable apartment, where they enjoy some little light." Mr. Kirkland
adds, that several other nations of Indians with whom he has conversed on the
subject, have nearly the same traditionary notions of a future state. They
almost universally agree in this, that the departed spirit is ten days in its
passage to their happy clysium, after it leaves the body; some of them suppose
its course a toward the south; others that it ascends from some lofty maintain.

The Oncidas inhabit on Oneida Creek, twenty-one miles west of Fort Stanwix.

The Tuscaroras migrated from North Carolina and the frontiers of Virginia, and
were adopted by the Oneidas, with whom they have ever since lived. They were
originally of the same nation.

The Senecas inhabit on the Chenesee river, at the Chenesee castle. They have
two towns of sixty or seventy souls each, on French Creek, in Pennsylvania: and
another town on Buffaloe Creek, attached to the British; two small towns on
Allegany river, attached to the Americans. Obeil or Coraplanter, one of the
Seneca chiefs, resided here.

The Mohawks were acknowledged by the other tribes, to use their own
expression, to be 'the true old heads of the confederacy;' and were formerly a
powerful tribe, inhabiting on the Mohawk river. As they were strongly attached
to the Johnson family, on account of Sir William Johnson, they emigrated to
Canada, with Sir John Johnson, about the year 1776. There is now only one
family of them in the state, and they live about a mile from Fort Hunter. The
father of this family was drowned in the winter of 1788.

All the confederated tribes, except the Oneidas and Tuscaroras, sided with the
British in the late war, and fought against the Americans.

The Onond^as live near the Onondaga Lake, about twenty-five miles from the
Oneida Lake. In the spring of 1779, a regiment of men were sent from Albany, by
General J. Clinton, against the Onondagas. This regiments surprised their town
-- ^ook thirty three prisoners -- killed twelve of fourteen, and returned
without the loss of a man. A party of the Indians were at this time ravaging
the American frontiers.

There are very few of the Delaware tribe in this state.

The five confederated Nations were settled along the banks of the su^quehanah,
and in the adjacent country, until the year 1779, when General Sullivan, with
an army of 4,000 men, drove them from their country to Niagara, but could not
bring them to action. They waited, but waited in vain, for the assistance of
the elements, or as they expressed themselves, for the assistance of the Great
Spirit. Had heavy rains fallen while General sullivan's army was advanced into
their country, perhaps few of his soldiers would have escaped, and none of
their baggage, ammunition or artillery. This expedition had a good effect.
General Sullivan burnt several of their towns and destroyed their provisions.
Since this irruption into their country, their former habitations have been
mostly dele^ted, and many of the have gone to Canada.

On the 13th of November, 1787, John Livingston, Esquire and four others, obtained
of the Six Nations of Indians a lease for 999 years, on a yearly rent reserved
of 2000 dollars, of all the country included in the following limits, viz.
Beginning at a place commonly known by the name of Canada Creek, about seven
miles west of Fort Stan^^^^, now Fort Shuyler, thence northeastwardly to the
line of the pe^^ince of Quebec; thence along the said line to the Pennsylvania
(...); thence east on the sand line or Pennsylvania line, to the line of
property, so called by the state of New York; thence along the said (...) of
property to Canada Creek aforesaid. And on the 8th Jan. 17^^, the same persons
obtained a lease, of the oneida Indians, for 999 years, on a sent reserved for
the first year, of 1200 dollars, and increasing it at the rate of 100 dollars a
year, until it amount to 1500 dollars, of all the tract of land commonly called
the Oneida country, except a reservation of several tracts specified in the
lease. (...) these leases having been obtained without the consent of the
legislature of the state, the senate and assembly, in their session. March
(...) resolved, "That the said leases are purchases of lands, and therefore
that by the constitution of this state, the said leases are not binding on the
said Indians, and are not valid." Since this a treaty has been concluded with
the said Indians -- the bargain of the lea^ees annulled, and all the country
purchased of the natives, except a reservation to the Oneidas, Cayugas and
Onondagas, defined by certain marks and boundaries.

ISLANDS.] There are three islands of note belonging to this state; viz. York
Island, which has already been described, Long Island and Staten Island.

Long Island extends 140 miles, and terminates with Montauk point. It is not
more than ten miles in breadth, on a medium, and is separated from Connecticut
by Long Island found. The island is divided into three counties; Kings, Queens
and Suffolk.

Kings county lies at the west end of Long Island, opposite New York, and is
not above ten miles long, and eight broad. The inhabitants are principally
Dutch, and live well. It contains a number of pleasant villages, of which
Flatbush, Brooklyn, and Bedford, are the principal.

Queens county lies next to Kings as you proceed eastward. It is about thirty
miles long and twelve broad. Jamaica, Newtown, Hampstead, in which is a
handsome court house, and Oysterbay, are the principal villages in this county.

Suffolk county is about 100 miles long and ten broad, and comprehends all the
eastern part of the island, and several little islands adjoining; viz. Shelter
Island, Fishers Island, Plumb Island and the Isle of White. Its principal towns
are Huntington, Southampton, Smithtown, Brook Haven, East Hampton, in which is
the academy, Southhold and Bridge Hampton.

The south side of the island is flat land, of a light sandy soil, bordered on
the sea coast with large tracts of salt meadow, extending from the west point
of the island to Southampton. This soil, however, is well calculated for
raising grain, especially Indian corn. The north side of the island is hilly,
and of a strong soil -- adapted to the culture of grain, hay and fruit. A ridge
of hills extends from Jamaica to Southhold. Large herds of cattle feed upon
Hamstead plain, and on the salt marshes upon the south side of the Island.

Hampstead plain, in Queens county, is a curiosity. It is sixteen miles in
length, east and west, and seven or eight miles wide. The soil is black; and to
appearance rich, and yet it was never known to have any natural growth, but a
kind of wild grass, and a few shrubs. It is frequented by vast numbers of
plover -- Rye grows tolerably well on some parts of the plain. The most of it
lies common for cattle, horses and sheep. As there is nothing to impede the
prospect in the whole length of this plain, it has a curious but tiresome
effect upon the eye, not unlike that of the ocean.

East of this plain, on the middle of the island, is a barren health, overgrown
with shrub oaks and pines, in which, it is supposed there are several thousand
deer. It is frequented also by a great number of growse, a very delicious bird.
Laws have been passed for the preservation of these birds and the deer.

It is remarkable that on Montauk point, at the east end of the island, there
are no flies. Between this point and East Hampton is a beach, three quarters of
a mile wide, in the center of which was found, about fifty years ago, under a
sand hill which was blown up by the wind, the entire skeleton of a large whale,
nearly half a mile from the water.

There are very few rivers upon the island. The largest is Peakonok, which
rises about ten miles west of a place called River-head, where the court house
stands, and runs easterly into a large bay dividing Southhold from Southampton.
In this bay are Robin and Shelter Islands.

The south side of the island is indented with numerous streams, of various
sizes, which fall into a large bay, two or three miles over, formed by a beach,
about eighty rods wide, which appears like a border to the island, extending
from the west end of it to Southampton. Through this beach, in various places,
are inlets of such depth as to admit of vessels of sixty or seventy tons. This
bay was formerly fresh water. Oysters, clams, and fish of various kinds, are
caught with ease, and in great plenty in this bay, with seines, during the
winter season. It is not uncommon to see forty or fifty vessels here loading
with oysters at the same time. And what is almost incredible, though I was told
of it by two gentlemen of truth, and who were well informed as to the matter,
thirty wagon loads of bass have been caught in this bay at one draught.

Rockonkama pond, lies about the center of the island, between Smithtown and
Islip, and is about a mile in circumference. This pond has been found by
observation, to rise gradually for several years, until it had arrived to a
certain height, and then to fall more rapidly to its lowest bed; and thus it is
continually ebbing and flowing. The cause of this curious phenomenon has never
been investigated. Two miles to the southward of this pond is a considerable
stream, called Connecticut river, which empties into the bay.

There are two whale fisheries; one from Sagg harbor which produces about 1000
barrels of oil annually. The other is much smaller, and is carried on by the
inhabitants in the winter season, from the south side of the island. They
commonly catch from three to seven whales in a season, which produce from
twenty-five to forty barrels each of oil. This fishery was formerly a source of
considerable wealth to the inhabitants, but through a scarcity of whales, it
has greatly declined of late years.

There is a considerable trade carried on from Sagg harbor, whence is exported
to the West Indies and other places, whale oil, pitch-pine boards, horses,
cattle, flaxseed, beef, etc. The produce of the middle and western parts of the
island, is carried to New York. The island contains 36,949 inhabitants.

Staten Island lies nine miles southwest of the city of New York, and forms
Richmond county. It is about eighteen miles in length, and, at a medium, six or
seven in breadth, and contains 3,835 inhabitants. On the south side is a
considerable tract of level, good land; (...) the island in general is rough,
and the hills high. Richmond is the only town of any note on the island, and
that is a poor, inconsiderable place. The inhabitants are principally
descendants of the Dutch and French.

HISTORY.] See Smith's History of New York, published by ^^thew Carey -- and
Hazard's collection of state papers.

In 1787, the legislature of this state, ceded to the commonwealth of
Massachusetts, all the lands, within their jurisdiction, west of a meridian
that shall be drawn from a point in the north boundary line of Pennsylvania,
eighty two miles west from the Delaware; (excepting one mile along the east
side of Niagara river) and also ten townships between the Chenengo and Owegy
rivers, reserving the jurisdiction to the state of New York. This cession was
made to satisfy a claim of Massachusetts founded upon their original charter.

A list of Governors from the year 1664 to the present time.
Names. Began to govern. Nicolls 1664 Lovelace 1668 Andross 1674 Brockhust 1682
Dongan 1683 Slaughter 1690 Ingoldsby 1691 Fletcher 1692 Bellemont School Nanfan
1699 Bellemont 1700 Depeyster 1700 Smith 1700 Nanfan 1701 Cornbury 1702
Lovelace 1708 Schuyler 1709 Ingoldsby 1709 Beekman 1710 Hunter 1710 Burnet 1720
Montgomerie 1728 Vandam 1731 Crosby 1732 Clarke 1735 Clinton 1743 Osborn 1753
De Lancey 1753 Sir Charles Hardy 1755 De Lancey 1757 Colden (President) 1760
Monckton 1761 Colden 1761 Monckton 1762 Colden 1763 Sir Henry Moore 1765 Colden
1769 Dunmore 1770 Tryon 1771 Clinton 1778

NEW JERSEY.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 160 Miles. between 39 and 41 24 North Latitude. Breadth 52 Miles. The
body of the state lies between them ridian of Philadelphia, and 1 East
Longitude.

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED east, by Hudson's river and the sea; south, by the sea;
west, by Delaware bay and river, which divide it from the states of Delaware
and Pennsylvania; north, by a line drawn from the mouth of Mahakkamak river, in
latitude 41 24 to a point on Hudson's river in latitude 41. Containing about
8320 square miles, equal to 5,324,800 acres.

CIVIL DIVISIONS, POPULATION, etc.] New Jersey is divided into 13 counties,
which are subdivided into 94 townships or precincts, as follows, TABLE.
Counties. Principal towns. Len. Bred. Total No. Inhabitants. No. Slav. These 7
counties lie from (...) to N. on Delaware river. Cape-May* and Gloucester
extend across to the sea. Cape May. None. 30 9 571 141 Cumberland. Bridgetown.
50 20 8,248 120 Salem. Salem. 10,437 172 Gloucester. Woodbury and Gloucester.
30 22 13,360 191 Burlington. Burlington and Bordentown. 60 30 18,095 Hunterdon.
Trenton. 37 12 20,253 1,301 Sussex. Newtown 19,500 439 These 4 counties ^e from
N. (...) S. on the Eastern side on the State. Bergen. Hackinsak. 12,601 2,301
Essex. Newark and Elizabethtown 17,785 1,171 Middleses. Amboy and pt. of
Brunswick. 15,956 1,318 Monmouth. Freehold. 80 30 16,918 1,596 Somerset.
Boundbrook and pt. Brunswick. 12,296 1,810 Morris. Morristown. 25 20 16,216 636
Total Thirteen 184,139 11,423

BAYS, PONDS, RIVERS AND CANALS.] New Jersey is washed, on the east and
southeast, by Hudson's river and the ocean; and on the west by the river
Delaware.

The most remarkable bays are, Arthur Kull, or Newark bay, formed by the union
of Passaik and Hackinsak rivers. This bay opens to the right and left and
embraces Staten Island. There is a long bay formed by a beach, four or five
miles from the shore, extending along the coast northeast and southwest, from
Manasquand river, in Monmouth county, almost to Cape May. Through this beach
are a number of inlets, by which the bay communicates with the ocean.

On the top of a mountain, in Morris county, is a lake or pond, three miles in
length, and from a mile to a mile and an half in breadth, from which proceeds a
continual stream. It is in some places deep. The water is of a sea green
color; but when taken up in a tumbler, is* like the water of the ocean, clear
and of a crystaline color.

The rivers in this state, though not large, are numerous. A traveller, in
passing the common road from New York to Philadelphia, c^^sses three
considerable rivers, viz. the Hackinsak and Passaik, between Bergen and Newark,
and the Raritan by Brunswick. The Hackinsak rises in Bergen county, runs a
southwardly course, and counties into Newark bay. -- At the ferry, near its
mouth, it is 460 yards wide, and is navigable fifteen miles.

Passaik is a very crooked river. It rises in a large swamp in Morris county.
Its general course is from W. N. W. to E. S. E. until it mingles with the
Hackinsak at the head of Newark bay. It is navigable about ten miles, and is
230 yards wide at the ferry. The cataract (or Great Falls) in this river, is
one of the greatest natural curiosities in the state. The river is about forty
yards wide, and moves in a slow gentle current, until coming within a short
distance of a deep, cleft in a rock, which crosses the channel, it descends and
falls above seventy feet perpendicularly, in one entire sheet. One end of the
cleft, which was evidently made by some violent convulsion in nature, is
closed; at the other, the water rushes out with incredible swiftness, forming
an acute angle with its former direction, and is received into a large basin,
whence it takes a winding course through the rocks, and spreads into a broad
smooth stream. The cleft is from four to twelve feet broad. The falling of the
water occasions a cloud of vapor to arise, which by floating amidst the sun
beams, presents to the view rainbows, that add beauty to the tremendous scene.
The new manufacturing town of Paterson is erected upon the Great Falls in this
river. The western bank of the river, between Newark and the falls, affords one
of the pleasantest roads for a party of pleasure in New Jersey. The bank being
high, gives the traveller an elevated and extensive view of the opposite shore,
which is low and fertile, forming a landscape picturesque and beautiful. Many
handsome country seats adorn the sides of this river; and there are elegant
situations for more: Gentlemen of fortune might here display their taste to
advantage. The fish of various kinds with which this river abounds, while they
would furnish the table with an agreeable repast, would afford the sportsman an
innocent and manly amusement.

Raritan river is formed by two considerable streams called the north and south
branches; one of which has its source in Morris, the other in Hunterdon county.
It passes by Brunswick and Amboy, and mingles with the waters of the Arthur
Kull Sound, and helps to form the fine harbor of Amboy. It is a mile wide at
its mouth, 250 yards at Brunswick, and is navigable about sixteen miles. It is
supposed that this river is capable of a very steady lock navigation, as high
as the junction of the North and South branches; and thence up the south branch
to Grandin's Bridge in Kingwood. Thence to Delaware river is 10 or 12 miles. It
is supposed a portage will be here established by a turnpike road: Or the
waters of the Raritan, may be united with those of the Delaware, by a canal
from the south branch of the Raritan to Musconetcony river, which empties into
the Delaware -- or from Capoolong creek, a water of the Raritan, emptying at
Grandin's Bridge, and Necessackaway, a water of the Delaware. It is supposed
also that an inland navigation from Philadelphia to New York, may be effected
by proceeding up the Asanpink, (a water of the Delaware, emptying at Trenton)
toward Princeton; and from thence by a canal to the Millstone, a water of the
river to New Brunswick.

At Raritan hills, through which this river passes, is a small cascade, where
the water falls fifteen or twenty feet, a very romantically between two rocks.
This river opposite to Brunswick, it so shallow that it is fordable at low
water with horses and carriages, but a ti^^e below it deepens to fast that a
twenty gun ship may ride securely at any time of tide. The tide, however, rises
so high that large shallops pass a mile above the ford; so that it is no
uncommon thing to set vessels of considerable burden riding at anchor, and a
number of large river craft lying above, some dry and others on their beam
(...) for want of water, within gunshot of each other.

Bridges have lately been erected, and are now nearly or qu^^e completed
(agreeably to laws of the state passed for that purpose) over the Passaick,
Hackinsak and Raritan rivers, on the post road between New York and
Philadelphia. These bridges will greatly facilitate the intercourse between
these two great cities.

Besides these are Cesarea river, on Cohansey creek, which rises in Salem
county, and is about thirty miles in length, and navigable for vessels of an
hundred tons to Bridgetown, twenty miles from its mouth.

Mulicus river divides the counties of Gloucester and Burlington, and is
navigable twenty miles for vessels of sixty tons.

Maurice river rises in Gloucester county, runs southwardly about forty miles,
and is navigable for vessels of an hundred tons, fifteen miles, and for
shallops ten miles farther.

Alloway creek, in the county of Salem, is navigable sixteen miles for
shallops, with several obstructions of drawbridges. Ancocus creek, in
Burlington county, is also navigable sixteen miles. These, with many other
smaller streams, empty into the Delaware, and carry down the produce which
their fertile banks and the neighboring country afford.

That part of the state which borders on the sea, is indented with a great
number of small rivers and creeks, such as Great Egg harbor, and Little Egg
harbor rivers, Navesink, Shark, Matiticung, and Forked rivers, which as the
country is flat, are navigable for small craft, almost to their sources.

Paulin's Kiln, in Sussex county, is navigable for craft 15 miles; and the
Musconetcony, which divides Hunterdon from Sussex, is capable of beneficial
improvement, as is the Pequest of Paquasset, between the two last mentioned
rivers.

This state is remarkable for mill seats, eleven hundred of which, are already
improved; 500 with flour mills, and the rest with saw mills, fulling mills,
forges, furnaces, slitting and rolling mills, paper, powder and oil mills.

Sandy Hook, or point, is in the township of Middletown; and on this point
stands a light house, 100 feet high, built by the citizens of New York.

FACE OF THE COUNTRY, MOUNTAINS, SOIL AND PRODUCTIONS.} The counties of Sussex,
Morris, and the northern part of Bergen, are mountainous. The south Mountain,
which (...) ridge of the great Allegany Range, crosses this state in about
latitude 41. This mountain embosoms such amazing quantities of iron ore, that
it may not improperly be called the Iron Mountain. The Kittatinny ridge passes
through this state north of the South mountain. Several spurs from these
mountains are projected in a southern direction. One passes between Springfield
and Chatham. Another runs west of it, by Morristown, Barkinridge and Vealtown.
The interior country (...) in general, agreeably variegated with hills and
valleys. The southern counties which he along the sea coast are pretty
uniformly flat and sandy. The noted Highlands of Navesink, and center Hill, are
almost the only hills within the distance of many miles from the (...) mast.
The Highlands of Navesink are on the sea coast near sandy ^look, in the
township of Middletown, and are the first lands that are discovered by
mariners, as they come upon the coast. They rise about 600 feet above the
surface of the water.

The much as five eighths of most of the southern counties, or one (...) fourth
of the whole state, is almost a sandy barren, unfit in many parts for
cultivation. The land on the sea coast in this, like that (...) the more
southern states, has every appearance of made ground. The soil is generally a
light sand; and by digging, on an average, about fifty feet below the surface,
(which can be done, even at the distance of twenty or thirty miles from the
sea, without any impediment from rocks or stones) you come to salt marsh. The
gentleman who gave this information adds, 'I have seen an oyster shell that
would hold a (...) which was dug out of the marsh, at fifty feet deep, in
digging a (...) 'About seven years since,' continues my informer, 'at Long
(...), in the county of Monmouth, in the banks of the Atla^t, which were
greatly torn by a great rise of the sea in a violent easterly ^torm, was
discovered the skeleton of some huge carnivorous animal. The country people who
first saw it had so little curiosity, as to suffer it to be wholly destroyed,
except a jaw tooth which I saw. This was about two and an half inches wide,
five inches long and as many deep. The person who helped to take it out of the
bank, assured me there was one rib seven feet four inches, and another four
feet long.' The bones of another of these animals, has lately been discovered,
in a meadow, in the county of Gloucester, on the river Delaware, by a negro,
who was digging a ditch 3 or 4 feet deep. Part of these bones were sent to
Philadelphia. -- To account for these curious phenomena is not my business.
This is left for the ingenious naturalist, who has abilities and leisure to
compare facts and appearances of this kind, and who probably may thence draw
conclusions which may throw much light on the ancient history of this country.

This state has all the varieties of soul from the worst to the best kind. It
has a great proportion of barrens. The good land in the southern counties lies
principally on the banks of rivers and creeks. The soil, on these banks, is
generally a still clay; and while in a state of nature, produces various
species of oak, hickory, poplar, chestnut, ash, gum, etc. The barrens produce
little else but shrub oaks and yellow pines. These sandy lands yield an immense
quantity of bog iron ore, which is worked up to great advantage in the iron
works in these counties. There are large bodies of salt meadow along the lower
part of the Delaware river and Bay, which afford a plentiful pasture for cattle
in summer, and hay in winter; but the flies and musketoes frequent these
meadows in large swarms, in the months of June, July, and August, and prove
very ^^oublesome both to man and beast. ^n Gloucester and Cumberland counties
are several large tracts of banked meadow. Their vicinity to Philadelphia
renders them highly valuable. Along the sea coast the inhabitants subsist
principally, by seeding cattle on the salt meadows, and by the fish of various
kinds, such as rock, drum, shad, perch, etc. black turtle, crabs and oysters,
which the sea, rivers, and creeks afford in great abundance. They raise Indian
corn, rye, potatoes, etc. but not for exportation. Their swamps afford lumber,
which is easily conveyed to a good market. The sugar maple tree is common in
Sussex county upon the Delaware.

In the hilly and mountainous parts of the state, which are not too rocky for
cultivation, the soil is of a stronger kind, and covered in its natural state
with stately oaks, hickories, chestnuts, etc. and when cultivated produces
wheat, rye, Indian corn, buck wheat, oats, barely, flax, and fruits of all
kinds common to the climate. The land in this hilly country is good for
grazing, and farmers feed great numbers of cattle for New York and Philadelphia
markets; and many of them keep large dairies, as there are large tracts of fine
meadows between the hills.

The orchards in many parts of the state equal any in the United States, and
their cider is said, and not without reason, to be the best in the world. It is
pretty certain that it cannot be surpassed in goodness.

The markets of New York and Philadelphia receive a very considerable
proportion of their supplies from the contiguous parts of New Jersey. And it is
worthy of remark that these contiguous parts are exceedingly well calculated,
as to the nature and fertility of their soils, to afford these supplies; and
the intervention of a great number of navigable rivers and creeks renders it
very convenient to market their produce. These supplies consist of vegetables
of many kinds, apples, (...), peaches, plumbs, strawberries, cherries and other
fruits -- cider in large quantities and of the best quality, butter, cheese,
beef, pork, mutton, and the lesser meats.

TRADE.] The trade of this state is carried on almost solely with and from
those two great commercial cities, New York on one side, and Philadelphia on
the other; though it wants not good ports of its own. Severed attempts have
been made by the legislature, to secure to the state its own natural
advantages, by granting extraordinary privileges to merchants, who would settle
at Amboy and Burlington, two very commodious ports. But the people having long
been accustomed to fend their produce to the markets of Philadelphia and New
York, and of course having their correspondencies established, and their mode
of dealing fixed, they find it difficult to turn their trade from the old
channel. Besides, in these large cities, where are so many able merchants, and
so many wants to be supplied, credits are more easily obtained, and a better
and quicker market is found for produce, than could be expected in towns less
populous and flourishing. These and other causes of the same kind, have
hitherto rendered abortive the encouragements held out by the legislature.

The articles exported, besides those already mentioned, are wheat, flour,
horses, live cattle, hams, which are celebrated as being among the best in the
world, lumber, flaxseed, leather, iron, in great quantities, in pigs and bars,
and formerly copper ore; but the mines have not been worked since the
commencement of the late war. The imports consist chiefly of West India goods.

MANUFACTURES AND AGRICULTURE.] The manufactures of this state have hitherto
been very inconsiderable, not sufficient to supply its own consumption, if we
except the articles of iron, nails and sea th^^. A spirit of industry and
improvement, particularly in manufactures, has however greatly increased in the
two last years. Most of the families in the country, and many in the populous
towns, are clothed in strong, decent homespun; and it is a happy circumstance
for our country, that this plain AMERICAN dress is every day growing more
fashionable, not only in this, but in all the states.

In Trenton Newark and Elizabethtown, are several very valuable ^anyards, where
leather, in large quantities and of an excellent quality, is made and exported
in the neighboring markets. Steel was manufactured at Trenton in the time of
the war, but not considerably since. In Gloucester county is a glass house.
Paper mills, and nail manufactories are erected and worked to good advantage in
several parts of the state. Wheat also is manufactured into flour, and Indian
corn into meal to good account, in the western counties, where wheat is the
staple commodity. But the iron manufacture is, of all others, the greatest
source of wealth to the state. Iron works are erected in Gloucester,
Burlington, Sussex, Morris and other counties. The mountains in the county of
Morris, give rise to a number of streams necessary and convenient for these
works, and at the same time furnish a copious supply of wood and ore of a
superior quality. In this county alone are a less than seven rich iron mines,
from which might be taken ore sufficient to supply the United States; and to
work at into iron are two furnaces, two rolling and slating mills, and about
thirty forges, containing from two to four fires each. These works produce
annually about 510 tons of bar iron, 800 tons of pigs, besides large quantities
of hollow ware, sheet iron, and nail rods. In the whole state, it is supposed
there is yearly made about 1200 tons of bar iron, 1200 do. of pigs, 80 do. of
nail rods, exclusive of hollow ware, and various other castings, of which vast
quantities are made.

Early in the late war, a powder mill was erected in Morristown by Col. Ford,
who was enabled, by the ample supply to saltpetre furnished by the patriotic
inhabitants, to make a considerable quantity of that valuable and necessary
article, at a time when it was most needed. And when the enemy were at the
door, it afforded a timely supply.

A manufacturing company was incorporated, in 1791, by the legislature of this
state, and favored with very great privileges. The better to encourage every
kind of manufacture, a subscription was opened, under the patronage of the
Secretary of the Treasury of the United States, for this important purpose.
Each subscriber promised to pay, for every share annexed to his name, 400
dollars to the Trustees appointed to receive it. A sum of upwards of 500,000
dollars was almost immediately subscribed, and the directors of the association
have since taken the proper measures to carry into effect their extensive plan.
They have fixed on the Great falls, in Passaick river, and the ground
adjoining, for the erection of the mills and the town, which they call
PATTERSON, in honor of the present Governor of New Jersey. Every advantage
appears to be concentrated in this delightful situation, to make it one of the
most eligible, in the United States, for the permanent establishment of
manufactures. Already a large sum of money has been expended, and the works are
in forwardness.

Although the bulk of the inhabitants in this state are farmers yet agriculture
has not been improved (a ^ew instances excepted) to that degree which from long
experience, we might rationally expect, and which the fertility of the soil in
many places, seems to encourage. A great part of the inhabitants are Dutch,
who, although they are in general neat and industrious farmers, have very
little enterprise, and seldom adopt any new improvements in husbandry, because,
through habits and want of education to expand and liberalize their minds, they
think their and modes of tilling the best. Indeed this is the case with the
great body of the common people, and proves almost an in^^mountable obstacle to
agricultural improvements.

MINES AND MINERALS.] This state embosoms vast quantities of Iron and copper
ore. The iron ore is of two kinds; one is capable of being manufactured into
malleable iron, and is found in mountains and in low barrens; the other, called
bog ore, grows in rich bottoms; and yields iron of a hard, brittle quality, and
is commonly manufactured into hollow ware, and used sometimes instead of stone
in building.

A number of copper mines have been discovered in different parts of the state.
One is in Bergen county, which when worked by the Schuysers, to whom it
belonged) was considerably productive; but they have for many years been
neglected.

The following account of a copper mine at New Brunswick, is given by a
gentleman of distinction, well informed upon the subject.

"About the years 1748, 1749, 1750, several lumps of virgin copper from five to
thirty pounds weight, (in the whole upwards of 200 pounds) were plowed up in a
field, belonging to Phillip French, Esquire within a quarter of a mile of New
Brunswick. This induced Mr. Elias Boudinot, of the city of Philadelphia, to
take a lease of Mr. French of this land, for ninety nine years, in order to
search for copper ore, a body of which he concluded must be contained in this
hill. He took in several partners, and about the year 1751 opened a pit in the
low grounds, about 2 or 300 yards from the river. He was led to this spot by a
friend on his, who, a little before, passing by at three o'clock in the
morning, observed a body of flame arise out of the ground, as large as a common
sized man, and soon after die away. He drove a stake on the spot. About fifteen
feet deep, Mr. Boudinor cane on a vein of bluish stone, about two feet thick,
between two perpendicular loose bodies of red rock, covered with a sheet of
pure virgin copper, a little thicker than gold leaf. This bluish stone was
f^^^ed with sparks of virgin copper, very much like copper filings, and now and
then a large lump of virgin copper from five to thirty pounds weight. He
followed this vein almost thirty feet, when, the water coming in very fast, the
expense became too great for the company's capital. A stamping mill was
erected, when by reducing the bluish stone to a powder, and washing it in large
tubs, the stone was carried off, and the fine copper preserved, by which means
many tons of the purest copper was sent to England without ever passing through
the fire; but labor was to high to render it possible for the company to
proceed. Sheets of copper about the thickness of two pennies, and three feet
square, on an average, have been taken from between the rocks, within four feet
of the surface, in several parts of the hill. At about fifty or sixty feet
deep, they came to a body of fine solid ore, in the midst of this bluish vein,
but between rocks of a white flinty spar, which, however, was worked out in a
few days. These works lie now wholly neglected, although the vein when left was
richer than ever it had been. There was also a very rich vein of copper ore
discovered at Rocky hill, in Somerset county, which has also been neglected
from the heavy expense attending the working of it. There have been va^^^^
attempts made to search the hills beyond Boundbrook, known by the name of Van
Horne's mountain, but for the same reason is now neglected. This mountain
discovers the greatest appearance of copper ore, of any place in the state. It
may be picked up on the surface of many parts of it. A smelting furnace was
erected, before the revolution, in the neighborhood, by two Germans, who were
(...) very considerable profit on their work, until the British destroyed, in
the beginning of the war. The inhabitants made it worth the^^ while, by
collecting the ore from the surface and by partially diggi^^^ into the hill, to
supply the furnace. Besides a company opened a very large shaft on the side of
the hill, from which also a great dea^ (...) valuable ore and some virgin
copper were taken. Two sumps of virgin copper were found here in the year 1754,
which weighed (...) pounds."

A lead mine has been discovered in Hopewell township, four miles from Trenton.
There is said to be coal on Raritan river, below Brunswick, and at Pluckemin,
and turf in Bethlehem, at the hea^^ (...) its south branch; and also at
Springfield on Raway river, which is remarkable for mill seats.

CURIOUS SPRINGS.] In the upper part of the county of Mor^^, is a cold mineral
spring, which is frequented by valetudinarians, (...) its waters have been used
with very considerable success. In the township of Honover, in this county, on
a ridge of hills, are a number of wells, which regularly ebb and flow about six
feet, twice in every twenty four hours. These wells are nearly forty miles from
the sea, in a straight line. In the county of Cape May, is a spring of fresh
water, which boils up from the bottom of a salt water creek, which runs nearly
dry at low tide; but a flood tide, is covered with water directly from the
ocean to the depth of three or four feet; yet in this situation, by letting
down a bottle well corked, through the salt water into the spring, and
immediately drawing the cork with a string prepared for the purpose, it may be
drawn up full of fine, untainted fresh water. There are springs of this kind in
other parts of the state. In the county of Hunterdon, near the top of
Muskonercong mountain, is a noted medicinal spring, to which invalids resort
from every quarter. It issues from the side of a mountain, and is conveyed into
all artificial reservoir for the accommodation of those who wish to (...) in,
as well as to drink, the waters. It is a strong chalybeate and very cold. These
waters have been used with very considerable success but perhaps the exercise
necessary to get to them, and the purity of the air in this lofty situation,
aided by a lively imagination, have (...) great efficacy in curing the patient
as the waters.

A curious spring has been discovered, about 200 yards from the south branch of
Raritan river, from which, even in the dryest ^eas^^^ a small stream issues,
except when the wind continues to blow from the north west for more than two
days successively, when it ceases to run; and if the water be taken out of the
cask placed in the ground, it will remain empty until the wind changes, when it
is again (...) and flows as usual.

CAVES, MONUMENTS, etc.] In the township of Shrewsbury, (...) Monmouth county,
on the side of a branch of Navesink river, is a remarkable cave, in which there
are three rooms. The cave is about (...) feet long, and fifteen feet broad.
Each of the rooms are arched, (...) center of the arch is about five feet from
the bottom of the cave; (...) sides not more than two and an half. The mouth of
the cave is (...) the bottom is a loose lard; and the arch is formed in a soft
(...), through the pores of which, the moisture is slowly ^xudated, and falls
in drops on the land below.

On Sandy Hook, about a mile from the light house, is a monument, which was
erected to commemorate a very melancholy even that (...) place just at the
close of the late war. The following inscription, (...) is upon a marble plate
on one side of the monument, will af^^^ sufficient information of the matter.

There lies the remains of the honorable Hamilton Douglass Halliburton, son of
Sholto Charles Earl of Morton, and heir of the an^^^ family of Halliburton of
Pitcurr in Scotland; who perished on (...) p^ast with twelve more young
gentlemen, and one common sailor, in the spirited discharge of duty, the 30th
or 31st of December, 1783: (...) October 10th 1763; a youth who, in contempt of
hardship (...) danger, though possessed of an ample fortune, served seven (...)
in the British navy with a manly courage. He seemed to be ^^ying of a better
fate. To his dear memory, and that of his un^^unate companions, this monumental
stone is erected by his unhapply ^^ther Katharine, Countess Dowager of Morton.

^ame Champion, Lieutenant of Marines. Alexander Johnson, Midshipmen. George
Paddy, Robert Heywood, Charles Gascoigne, Young Gentlemen. ^ndrew Hamilton,
William Scott, David Reddie, Young Gentlemen. William ^omlinson, John M'Chair,
W^^^am Sproy, Robert Wood.

George Towers, Sailor.

(...), away in pursuit of deserters; all found dead, and buried in this gave.

Of his Britanic Majesty's ship Assistance, MR. HALLIAURTON, First Lieutenant."

POPULATION.] According to the census of 179^, as given in the table, (...)
were in this state 184,130 inhabitants, of whom 11,423 were slaves.(...)
average population for every square mile is nearly 23. The number (...)
inhabitants in this state, was in 1738 -- 47,369, including 3,981 slaves; (...)
-- 61,403, including 4,606 slaves; 1784 -- 140,435, including 1,939 (...). This
year there were 10,501 blacks, of which 1,939 only were ^^^ed as slaves.

The average annual increase since 1738 has been 2,630, exclusive of ^^^tions,
which, since 1783, have been numerous, to the country (...) of the Allegany
Mountains. These emigrations will lesson in proportion as the inhabitants turn
their attention to manufactures.

CHARACTER, MANNERS AND CUSTOMS.] Many circumstances (...) to render these
various in different parts of the state. The inhabitants are a collection of
Low Dutch, Germans, English, Scotch, Irish, and New Englanders, or their
descendants. (...) attachment, and mutual convenience, have generally in^^^
these several kinds of people to settle together in a body, and in (...) their
peculiar national manners, customs and character are ^^^^eryed, especially
among the poorer class of people, who have (...) intercourse with any but those
of their own nation. Religion, (...) its tendency is to unite people in those
things that are essential to happiness, occasions wide differences as to
manners, customs, and even character. The Presbyterian, the Quaker, the
Episcopalian, the Baptist, the German and Low Dutch Calvinist, the Methodist
and the Moravian, have each their distinguishing characteristics, either in
their worship, their discipline, or their dress. There is still another
characteristical difference, distinct from either of the others, which arises
from the intercourse of the inhabitants with different states. The people in
West Jersey trade to Philadelphia, and of course imitate their fashions, and
imbibe their manners. The inhabitants of East Jersey trade to New York, and
regulate their fashions and manners according to those in New York. So that the
difference in regard to fashions and manners between East and West Jersey, is
nearly as great as between New York and Philadelphia. -- Add to all these the
differences common in all countries, arising from the various occupations of
men, such as the Civilian, the Divine, the Lawyer, the Physician, the Mechanic,
the clownish, the decent, and the respectable Farmer, all of whom have
different pursuits, or pursue the same thing differently, and of course must
have different ideas and manners; -- when we take into view all these
differences, (and all these differences exist in New Jersey, and many of them
in all the other states) it cannot be expected that many general observations
will apply. It may, however, in truth be said, that the people of New Jersey
are generally industrious, frugal and hospitable. There are, comparatively, but
few men of learning in the state, nor can it be said that the people in general
have a taste for the sciences. The poorer class, in which may be included a
considerable proportion of the inhabitants of the whole state, are inattentive
to the education of their children, who are but too generally left to grow up
in ignorance. There are, however, a number of gentlemen of the first rank in
abilities and learning in the civil offices of the state, and in the several
learned professions.

It is not the business of a geographer to compliment the ladies; nor would we
be thought to do it when we say, that there is at least as great a number of
industrious, discreet, amiable, genteel and handsome women in New Jersey, in
proportion to the number of inhabitants, as in any of the thirteen states.

RELIGION.] There, are in this state, about fifty Presbyterian congregations,
subject to the care of three Presbyteries, viz. That of New York, of New
Brunswick, and Philadelphia. A part of the charge of New York and Philadelphia
Presbyteries lies in New Jersey, and part in their own respective states.

Besides these there are upwards of 40 congregations of Friends -- 30 of the
Baptists -- 25 of Episcopalians -- 28 of Dutch Reformed, besides Methodists --
and a settlement of Moravians. All these religious denominations live together
in peace and harmony; and are allowed, by the constitution of the state, to
worship Almighty God agreeably to the dictates of their own consciences; and
are not compelled to attend or support any worship contrary to their own faith,
and judgment. All Protestant inhabitants, of peaceable behavior, are eligible
to the civil offices of the state.

COLLEGES, ACADEMIES, AND SCHOOLS.] There are tow colleges in New Jersey; one
at Princetown, called Nassau Hall, the other at Brunswick, called Queens
College. The college at Princetown was first founded by charter from John
Hamilton, Esquire: President of the council, about the year 1738, and enlarged by
Governor Belcher in 1^^7. The charter delegates a power of granting to "the
students of said college, or to any others thought worthy of them, all such
degrees as are granted in either of our universities or any other college in
Great Britain." It has twenty-three trustees. The governor of the state, and
the president of the college are, ex officiis, two of them. It has an annual
income of about 900l. currency; of which 200l. arise, from funded public
securities and lands, and the rest from the fees of the students.

The president of the college, is also professor of eloquence, criticism, and
chronology. The vice president is also professor of divinity and (...)
philosophy. There is also a professor of mathematics, and natural philosophy,
and two masters of languages. The four classes in college contain commonly from
70 to 100 students. There is a grammar school, of about 20 scholars, connected
with the college, under the superintendance of the president, and taught
sometimes by a senior scholar, and sometimes by a graduate.

Before the war this college was furnished with a Philosophical apparatus worth
500l. which (except the elegant Orrery constructed by Mr. Rittenhouse) was
almost entirely destroyed by the British army in the late war, as was also the
library, which now consists of between (...) and 3000 volumes.

The college edifice is handsomely built with stone, and is 180 feet in length,
54 in breadth, and 4 stories high; and is divided into forty two convenient
chambers for the accommodation of the students, besides a dining hall, chapel,
and room for the library. Its situation is elevated and exceedingly pleasant
and heathful. It is remarkable, that since the removed of the college to
Princeton in 1756, there have been but 5 or 6 deaths among the students. The
view from the college balcony is extensive and charming.

The college has been under the care of the succession of presidents eminent
for piety and learning; and has furnished a number of Civil^^^, Divines, and
Physicians of the first rank in America. Accessus. Presidents. ^xitus. 1746
Rev. Jonathan Dickinson, 1747 1748 Rev. Aaron Burr, 1757 1758 Rev. Jonathan
Edwards, 175^ 1758 Rev. Samuel Davies, 1760 1761 Rev. Samuel ^^^ley, D. D. 1766
176^ Rev. John Withenpoo^, D. D.


The charter for Queens college, at Brunswick, was granted just before the war,
in consequence of an application from a body of the (...) church. Its funds,
raised wholly by free donations, amounted, (...) after its establishment, to
four thousand pounds; but they were considerably diminished by the war. The
grammar school, which is connected with the college, consists of between thirty
and forty students, under the care of the trustees. This college at present, is
not in a very flourishing state.

There are a number of good academies in this state. One at Freehold, in the
county of Monmouth -- Another at Trenton, in which are about eighty students in
the different branches. It has a fund of about one hundred any fifty pounds per
annum, arising from the interest on public securities. Another in Hackkinsak,
in the county of Bergen, of upwards of an hundred scholars. Instruction and
board are said to be cheaper here than in any other part of the state. There is
another flourishing academy at Orangedale, in the county of Esse^, consisting
of nearly as many scholars as any of the others, furnished with able
instructors and good accommodations. Another has lately been opened at
Elizabethtown, and consists of upwards of twenty students in the languages, and
is increasing. An academy, by the name of Burlington academy, has lately been
established at Burlington, under the direction of seven trustees, and the
instruction of two preceptors. The system of education adopted in this academy,
is designed to prepare the scholars for the study of the more difficult
classics and the higher branches of science in a college or university. As
Newark, an Academy was founded in June 1792, and promises to be a useful
institution. Besides these, there are grammar schools at Springfield,
Morristown, Bordentown and Amboy. There are no regular establishments for
common schools in the state. The usual mode of education is for the inhabitants
of a village or neighborhood to join in affording a temporary support for a
schoolmaster, upon such terms as are mutually agreeable. But the encouragement
which these occasional teachers meet with, is generally such, as that no person
of abilities adequate to the business, will undertake it; and of course, little
advantage is derived from these schools. The improvement in these common
schools is generally in proportion to the pay of the teacher. It is therefore
much to be regretted that the legislature do not take up this subject and adopt
some such method of supporting public schools as has been practiced upon with
visible good success in some of the New England States.

CHIEF TOWNS.] There are a number of towns in this state, nearly of equal size
and importance, and more that has more than about two hundred houses compactly
built. TRENTON is one of the largest towns in New Jersey and the capital of the
state. It is situated on the northeast side of the river Delaware, opposite the
falls, nearly in the center of the states, from north to south, in lat. 40 15,
and about 20' east of the meridian of Philadelphia. The river is not navigable
above these falls, except for boats which will carry from five to seven hundred
bushels of wheat. This town, with Lamberton, which joins it on the south,
contains upwards of two hundred houses, and about 2000 inhabitants. Here the
legislature statedly meets, the supreme court sits, and most of the public
offices are kept. The inhabitants have lately erected a handsome court house
100 feet by 50, with a semi-hexagon at each end, over which is to be a
ballustrade. In the neighborhood of this pleasant town, are several
gentlemen's feats, finely situated on the banks of the Delaware, and ornamented
with taste and elegance. This town, being a thoroughfare between the eastern
parts of the state and Philadelphia, has a considerable inland trade.

BURLINGTON (city) extends three miles along the Delaware, and one mile back,
at right angles, into the county of Burlington, and ^^-twenty miles above
Philadelphia by water, and seventeen by land. The island, which is the most
populous part of the city, is a mile and a quarter in length, and three
quarters of a mile in breadth. It has four entrances over bridges and
causeways, and a quantity of bank meadow adjoining. On the island are about one
hundred and (...) houses, 1000 white and 100 black inhabitants. But few of the
^^roes are slaves. The main streets are convenietly spacious, and ^^^tly
ornamented with trees in the fronts of the houses, which are regularly
arranged. The Delaware, opposite the town, is about a mile wide; and under the
shelter of Mittinnicunk and Burlington Islands, affords a safe and convenient
harbor. It is commodiously situated (...) trade, but is two near the opulent
city of Philadelphia to admit of (...) considerable increase of foreign
commerce. There are two houses (...) public worship in the town, one for the
Friends or Quakers, who (...) the most numerous, and one for Episcopalians. The
other public buildings are two market houses, a court house, and the best goal
in the state. Besides these, there is an academy, already mentioned, a free
school, a nail manufactory, and an excellent distill^^y if that can be called
excellent which produces a poison both of ^^^th and morals.

The city was a free port under the state. The mayor, recorder, and ^^dermen
hold a commercial court, when the matter in controversy is between foreigners
and foreigners, or between foreigners and citi^en^. The island of Burlington
was laid out, and the first settlements made as early as 1677. In 1682, the
island of Mittinnicunk, or Free School island, was given for the use of the
island of Burlington; the yearly profits arising from it (which amount to one
hundred and eighty pounds) are appropriated for the education of poor children.

PERTH AMBOY (city) took its name from James Drummond, earl of Perth; and Ambo,
the Indian word for point, and stands on a neck of land included between
Raritan river and Arthur Kull sound. Its situation is high and healthy. It lies
open to Sandy Hook, and has one of the best harbors on the continent. Vessels
from sea may enter it in one tide, in almost any weather. Great efforts have
been made, and legislative encourrgements offered, to render it a place of
trade, but without success. This town was early incorporated with city
privileges, and continued to send two members to the general assembly until the
revolution. Until this event, it was the capital of (...) Jersey; and the
legislature and supreme court used to sit here and at Burlington alternately.

BRUNSWICK (city) was incorporated in 1784, and is situated on the southwest
side of Raritan river, over which a fine bridge has lately (...) built, twelve
miles above Amboy. It contains about two hundred houses, and nearly 2000
inhabitants, one half of whom are Dutch. (...) situation is low and unpleasant,
being on the bank of the river, and ^^der a high hill which rises back of the
town. The ice, at the making up of the river in winter, frequently lodges on
the shallow ^^ding place, just opposite the town, and forms a temporary dam,
which occasions the water to rise many feet above its usual height, and
sometimes to overflow the lower floors of those houses which are (...) guarded
against this inconvenience, by having their foundations ^^ated. The streets are
raised and paved with stone. The water (...) the springs and wells is generally
bad. The inhabitants are beginning to build on the hill above the town, which
is very pleasant, and ^^^ands a pretty prospect. The citizens have a
considerable inland (...), and several small vessels belonging to the part.

PRINCECTON, is a pleasant village, of about 80 houses, 52 miles from New York,
and 42 from Philadelphia. Its public buildings are a large college edifice of
stone, already described, and a presbyterian church built of brick. Its
situation is remarkably healthy.

ELIZABETHTOWN (borough) is fifteen miles from New York. Its situation is
pleasant, and its soil equal in fertility to any in the state. In the compact
part of the town, there are about one hundred and fifty houses. The public
buildings are a very handsome presbyterian brick church, lately built, Their
former church, which was very elegant, was burnt in 1780, by a refugee, who was
a native, and an inhabitant of Elizabethtown.
an episcopal church, also of brick, and an academy. This is one of the oldest
towns in the state. It was purchased of the Indians as early as 1664, and was
settled soon after.

NEWARK is seven miles from New York. It is a handsome, flourishing town, about
the size of Elizabethtown, and has two presbyterian churches, one of which is
of stone, and is the largest and most elegant building in the state. Besides
these there is an episcopal church, a court house and goal. This town is
celebrated for the excellence of its cider, and is the seat of the largest shoe
manufactory in the state. The average number made daily, throughout the year,
is estimated at about 200 pair.

PRACTICE OF PHYSIC.] There is a 'Medical Society' in this state, consisting
of about thirty of their most respectable physicians, who meet twice a year. No
person is admitted to the practice of physic, without a license from the
supreme court, founded on a certificate from this society, or at least two of
its members, testifying his still and abilities. It is remarkable that in the
country of Cape May, no regular physician has ever found support. Medicine has
been administered by women, except in some extraordinary cases.

PRACTICE OF LAW.] No person is permitted to practice as an attorney in any
court without a license from the governor. This cannot be obtained, unless the
candidate shall be above twenty-one years of age, and shall have served a
regular clerkship with some licensed attorney, for four years, and have taken a
degree in some public college, otherwise he must serve five years. This
regulation is considered by some as a depreciation of rights in regard to
citizens of other states, and a bar to the progress of knowledge. He must also
submit to an examination by three of the most eminent counselors in the state,
in the presence of the judges of the supreme court. After three years practice
as an attorney, he becomes a candidate for a counsellor's license, which is
granted on a like examination. Many of the people here, however, as in other
states, think (because perhaps they are instruments is obliging them to pay
their debts) that the lawyers know too much. But their knowledge will not
injure those who are innocent, and who will let them alone. Experience has
verified this observation in the county of Cape May. No lawyer lives within
sixty miles of that country, and it is seldom that they attend their courts.

CONSTITUTION.] The government of this state, agreeable to their constitution,
is vested in a governor, legislative council, and general assembly. The
governor is chosen annually, by the council and assembly jointly, and is
styled, "Governor and commander in chief in and over the state of New Jersey,
and the territories thereunto belonging, chancellor and ordinary in the same."
The legislative council is composed of one member from each country, chosen
annually by the people. They must be worth one thousand pounds in real and
personal estate within the county, and have been freeholders and inhabitants of
the counties they represent for one year. The general assembly is composed of
three members from each county chosen as above; each of them must be worth five
hundred pounds, in real and personal estate within the county, and have been
freeholders and inhabitants as above. Each of these, on taking his seat in the
legislature, must swear "that he will not assent to any law, vote or
proceeding, which shall appear to him injurious to the public welfare of the
state, or that shall annul or repeal that part of the constitution which
establishes annual elections, nor that part respecting trial by jury, nor that
part which secures liberty of conscience."

The governor sits in, and presides over the legislative council, and (...) a
casting vote in their debates. His privy or executive council, i^ composed of
any three members of the legislative council; and the governor and any seven
members of the council are a court of appeals in the last resort, as to points
of law in civil cases, and posses and power of pardoning criminals in all cases
whatsoever. The council chus^ one of their members to be vice president, who,
when the governor is absent from the state, possesses the supreme executive
power. The council may originate any bills, excepting preparing and altering
any money bill, which is the sole prerogative of the assembly. In every other
respect their powers are equal. Every bill is read three times in each house.
None of the judges of the supreme court, or other courts, sheriffs, or any
person possessed of any post of profit under the governor, except justices of
the peace, is entitled to a seat in the assembly. The estate of a suicide is
not forfeited for his offense.

COURTS OF JUSTICE, LAWS, etc.] The courts of justice in this state are, first,
Justices courts. A competent number of persons are appointed in each county by
the council and assembly, in joint meeting, who are called justices of the
peace, and continue in office five years, who, besides being conservators of
the peace, agreeably to the English laws, are authorized to hold courts for the
trial of causes under twelve pounds. From this court, persons aggrieved, may
appeal to the quarter sessions. Secondly, Courts of quarter sessions of the
peace, are held quarterly in every county, by at least three of the justices.
This court takes cognizance of breaches of the peace, and is generally
regulated by the rules of the English law.

Thirdly, Court of common pleas, which are held quarterly, by judges appointed
for that purpose, in the same manner as the justices of the peace, and who are
commonly of their number, and hold their commissions five years. This court may
be held by a single judge, and has cognizance of demands to any amount, and is
constructed on, and governed by the principles of the English laws.

Fourthly, Supreme courts, which are held four times in a year, at Trenton, by
three judges appointed for that purpose, who hold their (...) three years, but
one judge only is necessary to the holding this (...). This court has
cognizance of all actions, both civil and criminal throughout the state, having
the united authority of the courts of kings bench, common pleas and exchequer
in England. The courts of over and terminer and nist prius, commonly held once
a year in each county, for the trial of causes arising in the county, and
brought to issue in the supreme court, are properly branches of this court, and
are hold by one of the judges of it, except that in the courts of oyer and
terminer, some of the gentlemen of the county are always added in the
commission as assistants to the judge; but they cannot hold the court without
him.

(...) Orphan's courts, lately established by act of assembly, are held by the
judges of the court of common pleas, ex officiis, and have cognizance of all
matters relating to wills, administration, etc.

Sixthly, Court of Chancery, held by the governor ex officio, always open. It
is a court of law and equity, founded on the same principles, and governed by
the same rules as the court of chancery in England.

Seventhly, High Court of Errors and Appeals, composed of the governor, and
seven of the council, and is a court of appeals in the last resort, in all
cases of law.

All the English laws which had been practiced upon in the state, and which are
not repugnant to revolution principles, were adopted by the constitution, and
very few alterations of consequence have since been made, except in the descent
of the real estates, which instead of descending to the eldest son, agreeable
to the old feudal system, as formerly, are now divided (where there is no will)
two shares to each son, and one share to each daughter; i. e. the sons, have
double the daughter's portions, but all the sons have equal portions and all
the daughters.

MILITARY STRENGTH.] The military strength of New Jersey, consists of a
militia, of between 30,000 and 40,000 men.

HISTORY.] See Smith's History of New Jersey -- and Hazard's State Papers.

This state was the feat of war for several years, during the bloody contest
between Great Britain and America. Her losses both of men and property, in
proportion to the population and wealth of the state, was greater than of any
other of the thirteen states. When General Washington was retreating through
the Jersies, almost forsaken by all of ore, her militia were are all times
obedient to his orders; and for a considerable length of time, composed the
strength of his army. There is hardly a town in the state that lay in the
progress of the British army, that was not rendered signal by some enterprise
or exploit. At Trenton the enemy received a check which may be said with
justice to have turned the tide of the war. At Princeton, the feat of the
muses, the received another, which, united, obliged them to retire with
precipitation, and take refuge in disgraceful winter quarters. But whatever
honor this state might derive from the relation, it is not our business to
give a particular description of battles or sieges; we leave this to the pen of
the historian, and only observe in general, that the many military achievements
performed by the Jersey soldiers, give this state one of the first ranks among
her sifted in a military view, and entitle her to a share of praise in the
accomplishment of the late glorious revolution, that bears no proportion (...)
her size.

A MAP OF PENNSYLVANIA with Part of the Adjacent STATES. from the latest Surveys
A. Carleton, del


GOVERNORS of NEW JERSEY, from the surrender of tithe Government by the
PROPRIETORS in 1702, to the present me.
Edward, viscount Cornbury, 1702 to 1708, removed and succeeded by John, lord
Lovelace, 1708 to 1709, died and the government devolved to Lt. Gov. Richard
Ingoldsby, 1709 to 1710, when came in Brigader Robert Hunter, 1710 to 1720, who
resigned in favor of William Burnet, 1720 to 1727, removed and succeeded by
John Montgomery, 1728 to 1731, died and was succeeded by William Crosby, 1731
to 1736, died and the government devolved to

John Anderson, President of the Council 1736, by whose death about two weeks
after the government devolved to John Hamilton, President of the Council 1736
to 1738 Those marked were Governors in chief, and down to this time were
Governors of Newyork and New Jersey, but from 1738 forward, New Jersey has had
a separate governor.

Lewis Morris, 1738 to 1746, died and the government devolved to John Hamilton,
President, 1746 -- by whose death it devolved to John Reading, President, 1746
to 1747. Jonathan Belcher, 1717 to 1757, died and the government again devolved
to John Reading, President, 17^7 to 17^8,

Thomas Powna^l, then Governor of Massachusetts, being Lieutenant Governor,
arrived on the death of Governor Belcher, but continued in the province a few
days only.

Francis Bernard, 1758 to 1760, removed to Boston and succeeded by Thomas
Boon, 1760 to 1761, removed to S. Carolina and succeeded by Josiah Hardy, 1761
to 1763, removed and succeeded by William Franklin, 1763 to 1776, removed and
succeeded by William Livingston, 1776 to 1790, died and succeeded by William
Patterson, 1791 --

PENNSYLVANIA.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 288 Miles. between 0 20 E. and 5 W. Lon. Square Miles. 44,900 Breadth
156 Miles. 39 43 and 42 N. Lat.

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED east, by Delaware river, which divides it from New
Jersey; north, by New York, and a territory of about 202,000 acres, on lake
Erie, purchased of congress by this state; northwest, by a part of Lake Erie,
where there is a good port; west, by the Western Territory, and a part of
Virginia; south, by a part of Virginia, Maryland and Delaware. The state lies
in the form of a parallelogram.

CIVIL DIVISIONS.] Pennsylvania is divided into twenty-two counties, which,
with their county towns, situation, etc. are mentioned in the following table,
as also the various kinds of mines and minerals in the state.

Counties. No. I^^. Chief Tow. Situation. Se^^ Mines, etc. Philadelphia 54,391
Philadelphia On Delawar. R All Chester 27,937 W. Chester On Delawar. R All Iron
ore. Delaware 9,483 Chester On Delawar. R All Bucks 25,401 Newtown On Delawar.
R All I. ore and lead. Montgomery 22,929 Norriston On Schuylk. R All Iron ore.
Lancaster 36,147 Lancaster On Susqueh. R All I ore and cop. Dauphin 18,177
Harisburgh On Susqueh. R Iron ore. Berks 30,179 Reading On Schuylk. R I. ore,
coal mi. Northampton 24,250 Easton On Delawar. R Iro. ore [etc. Luzerne 4,904
Wilksburgh On Susqueh. R I ore, c. min. York 37,747 York On Susqueh. R Ir. ore.
[etc. Cumberland 18,243 Carlisle On Susqueh. R I. ore, le, mi. Northumberland
17,161 Sunbury On W. bran. Su. A very large proportion of the v^cant lands in
the state are in this county, (Northumberland) to the amount of about eight
millions of acres.
1/10 I. ore. salt sp. Franklin 15,655 Chamberston On Susqueh. R Iron ore.
Bedford 13,124 Bedford On Juniata R Ir. min. etc. Huntington 7,565 Huntingdon
On Juniata R Co. and l. mi. Misslin 7,562 Lewisburgh On Juniata R Iron ore.
Westmoreland 16,018 Greensburg On Allegany R Coal mines. Fayette 13,3^5 Union
On Mononga. Co. and ir. mi. Washington 23,866 Washington S. W. co^^. state. Co.
and ir. mi. Allegany 10,309 Pittsburg On Allegany R Co. and ir. mi. Total
434,373

RIVERS, CANALS, etc.] There are six considerable rivers which, with their
numerous branches, peninsulate the whole state, viz. The Delaware, Schuylkill,
Susquehannah, Youghiogeny, Mor ongahela, and Allegany. The bay and river
Delaware are navigable from the sea up to the great or lower falls at Trenton,
155 miles; and are accommodated with a light house, on Cape Henlopen, and with
buoys and piers for the direction and safety of ships. The distance of
Philadelphia from the sea, is about 60 miles across the land in a S. W. course,
to the New Jersey coast, and 120 miles by the ship channel of the Delaware. So
far it is navigable for a 74 gun ship. Sloops go 35 miles farther, to Trenton
falls. The river is navigable for boats that carry eight or nine tons, an
hundred miles further, and for Indian canoes, except several small falls or
portages, one hundred and fifty miles. At Easton, it receives the Lehigh from
the west, which is navigable thirty miles. The tide sets up as high as Trenton
Falls, and at Philadelphia rises generally about five or six feet. A northeast
and east wind raises it higher.

Between Cape Henlopen and Cape May, is the entrance into the Delaware bay. The
entrance into the river is twenty miles further up, at Bombay Hook, where the
river is four or five miles wide. From Bombay Hook to Reedy Island is twenty
miles. This island is the rendezvous of outward bound ships in autumn and
spring, waiting for a favorable wind. The course from this to the sea is S. S.
E. so that a N. W. wind, which is the prevailing wind in these seasons, is fair
for vessels to put out to sea. This river is generally frozen one or two months
in the year at Philadelphia so as to prevent navigation, but vessels may, at
all times, make a secure harbor at Port Penn, at Reedy Island, where piers
have been erected by the State. Vessels are generally from 12 to 24 hours in
ascending this beautiful river to Philadelphia; and the navigation is safe, and
in the milder seasons, especially in the summer, is indescribeably pleasant.

From Chester to Philadelphia, 20 miles by water and 15 by land, the channel of
the river is narrowed by islands of marsh, which are generally banked and
turned into rich and immensely valuable meadows.

Billingsport, twelve miles below Philadelphia, was fortified in the late war
for the defense of the channel. Opposite this fort, several large frames of
timber, headed with iron spikes, called chevaux de ^^i^es, were sunk to prevent
the British ships from passing. Since the peace, a curious machine has been
invented in Philadelphia, to raise them.

The Schuylkill rises north west of the Kittatinny mountains, through which it
passes, into a fine champaign country, and runs, from its source, upwards of
one hundred and twenty miles in a south east direction, and passing through the
limits of the city of Philadelphia falls into the Delaware opposite Mud Island.
6 or 7 miles below the city. It is navigable from above Reading, eighty five or
ninety miles to its mouth. There are 4 floating bridges thrown across it, made
of logs fastened together, and lying upon the water, in the vicinity of
Philadelphia.

The N. E. branch of the Susquehannah river rises in lakes Otsego and Otego, in
the state of New York, and runs in such a winding course as to cross the
boundary line between New York and Pennsylvania three times. It receives Tyoga
river, one of its principal branches, in lat. 41 57, three miles south of the
boundary line. The Susquehannah branch is navigable for batteaux to its source,
whence, to Mohawk river, is but twenty miles. The Tyoga branch is navigable
fifty miles, for batteaux; and its source is but a few miles from the
Chenessee, which empties into lake Ontario. From Tyoga point, the river
proceeds southeast to Wyoming, without any obstruction by falls, and then
southeast, over Wyoming falls, till at Sunbury, in about lat. 41, it meets the
west branch of Susquehannah, which is navigable 90 miles from its mouth, and
some of the branches of it are navigable ^0 miles, and approach very near some
of the boatable branches of the Allegany river. This noble river is passable to
Middletown. (below Harris ferry) with boats, carrying several hundred bushels,
and with rafts of boards etc. from the state of New York, as well as down the
Tyoga, and Juniata branches, several hundred miles, in their different
windings, but it is attended with difficulty and danger on account of the
numerous falls below Middletown. About fifteen miles above Harrisburg, it
receives the Juniata, from the north west, proceeding from the Allegany
mountains, and flowing through a mountainous, broken, yet cultivable country.
This river is navigable, 120 miles from its mouth.

The Swetara, which falls into the Susqueehannah from the northeast, is
navigable fifteen miles. About half a mile from the mouth of this river, and a
mile from Middletown, is a gr^^t mill which merits particular notice. It is a
very large and handsome stone building, has four pair of stones, and is perhaps
in every respect one of the most complete in the state. But the most remarkable
circumstance relative to it, is the race, which is a canal from 20 to 30 feet
wide, and carried with such a degree of boldness to a length of 476 rods or
perches, through rocks and hills, and every obstacle in its course, as cannot
fail to excite a very high idea of the enterprise, and persevering industry of
Mr. George Frey, the undertaker and owner.

From Swetara to the Tulpehoken branch of Schuylkill, a canal and lock
navigation is undertaken, and the works commenced, by an incorporated company
whole capital is 400,000 dollars. This leads through the Schuylkill to
Philadelphia. When this shall be effected, a passage will be open to
Philadelphia from the Juniata, the Tyoga, and the east and west branches of the
Susquehannah, which water at least 15,000,000 of acres. From this junction, the
general course of the Susquehannah is about southeast until it falls into the
head of Chesapeak bay at Havre de Grace. It is above a mile wide at its mouth,
and is navigable for sea vessels but about five miles, on account of its
rapids. The banks of this river are very romantic, particularly where it passes
through the mountains. This passage has every appearance of having been forced
through by the pressure of the water, or of having been burst open by some
convulsion in nature.

The several branches of the Youghiogeny river rise on the west side of the
Allegany mountains. After running a short distance, they unite and form a large
beautiful river, which, in passing some of the most western ridges of the
mountains, precipitates itself over a level ledge of rocks, lying nearly at
right angles to the course of the river. These falls, called the Ohiopyle
falls, are about twenty feet in perpendicular height, and the river is perhaps
eighty yards wide. For a considerable distance below the falls, the water is
very rapid, and boils and foams vehemently, occasioning a continual mist to
rise from it, even at noon day, and in fair weather. The river at this place
runs to the southwest, but presently winds round to the northwest, and
continuing this course for thirty or forty miles, it loses its name by uniting
with the Monongahela, which comes from the southward, and contains perhaps,
twice as much water. There united streams, shortly after their junction mingle
with the waters of the Allegany at Pittsburgh, and together form the grand
river Ohio.

The Monongahela has been already particularly described, and some observations
made on the navigation of the Allegany. In addition it may be observed, that
the junction of French Creek (which comes from the northwest) with the
Allegany, are the remains of a British fortification; and about a mile above is
fort Franklin, built in 1787, and then guarded by a company of American
soldiers. The Pennsylvania north line, crosses French Creek about three miles
above Le Boeuf, where there was formerly a fort. From Le Boeuf to Presqueisle,
15 or 16 miles, is an old wagon road, cut by the French in the war of 1755.
The lands on French Creek are very rich, and mostly cleared, which is an
evidence that its former Indian inhabitants were numerous. Fourteen miles from
the mouth of this creek is a gentle rapid, thence to its mouth, it is slow,
deep and smooth.

There is said to be a practicable communication between the southern branch of
the Tyoga and a branch of the Allegany, the head waters of which, are but a
short distance from each other. The Seneca Indians say they can walk four times
in a day, from the boatable waters of the Allegany, to those of the Tyoga, at
the place now mentioned. And between the Susquehannah, just before it crosses
into Pennsylvania the first time, and the Delaware, is a portage of only twelve
miles. Rafts of timber, plank, boards and staves, with other articles upon
them, can be brought down the Delaware from the counties of Montgomery and
Otsego in New York, 200 miles above the city by the course of the river. Some
money was expended by the government and landholders in improving the
navigation up toward the source, before the revolution, and there has been a
survey since made, for the purpose of proceeding in the improvement of this and
the other principal rivers of Pennsylvania, and for making communications by
canals in the improved part, and by roads in the improved part of the state.
Great progress has already been made in these improvements, and the exertions
for their completion are still continued. The Pennsylvanians are much inclined
to such enterprises, having found great benefit from them. On the completion of
the present plans, the state will be as conveniently intersected by roads as
any other of its size in the union, which will greatly facilitate the
settlement of its new lands. A slight view of the map of Pennsylvania will show
how finely this state is watered by the Delaware and its branches, the
Schuylkill, the Juniata, the Susquehannah and its branches, the Ohio, Allegany,
Youghiogeny, and Monongahela. The Patomak and lake Erie also afford prospects
of considerable benefit from their navigation. Nature has done much for
Pennsylvania in regard to inland water carriage, which is strikingly
exemplified by this fact, that although Philadelphia and lake Erie are distant
from each other above 300 miles, there is no doubt but that the rivers of the
state may be so improved, as to reduce the land carriage between them nine
tenths. In the same way the navigation of Pittsburg, after due improvement, may
be used instead of land carriage for the whole distance, except 23 miles. -- By
these routs it is clear, that a large proportion of the foreign articles used
on the western waters must be transported, and their furs, skins, ginseng,
hemp, flax, pot ash, and other valuable commodities brought to Philadelphia.
The hemp and oak timber for the Russian navy is transported by inland
navigation 1200 miles, and yet hemp is shipped from that kingdom on lower terms
than from any other part of the known world. Russia, long since the settlement
of Pennsylvania by civilized and enlightened people, was in a state of absolute
barbarism, and destitute of these improvements. Much therefore is to be
expected from the continued exertions of the prudent, industrious and sensible
inhabitants of Pennsylvania, in the course of the present century.

One remark must not be omitted here, and that is, that in all the back country
waters of this state, even in those high up in the mountains, marine
pe^^esactions are found in great abundance.

SWAMPS.] The only swamps worth noticing, are, the Great Swamp, between
Northampton and Luzerne counties, and Buffaloe swamp in the northwestern parts
of Northumberland county, near the head waters of the west branch of the
Susquehannah. These swamps, on examination and survey, are found to be bodies
of farm land, thickly covered with beach and sugar maple.

MOUNTAINS, FACE OF THE COUNTRY, SOIL AND NATURAL ADVANTAGES.} A considerable
proportion of this state may be called mountainous; particularly the counties
of Bedford, Huntingdon, Cumberland, part of Franklin, Dauphin, and (...) of
Bucks and Northampton, through which pass, under various (...) the numerous
ridges and spurs, which collectively form wh^^ (...) choose to call, for the
sake of clearness. THE GREAT RANGE OF ALLEGANY MOUNTAINS. The principal ridges
in this range, in Pennsylvania, are the Kittatinny, or Blue mountains, which
pass north of Nazareth in Northampton county, and pursue a southwest cou^^
(...) cross the Lehigh, through Dauphin county, just above Harrisburg thence on
the west side of the Susquehannah through Cumberland and Franklin counties.
Back of these, and nearly parallel with th^^ are Peter's, Tuscarora, and
Nescopek mountains, on the east of (...) Susquehannah; and on the west,
Shareman's hills, Sideling (...) Ragged, Great Warriors, Evits and Wills'
mountains; th^n the (...) Allegany ridge, which being the largest, gives its
name to the whole range; west of this are the Chestnut ridges. Between the
Juniata and the west branch of the Susquehannah are Jacks, Tussys, Nittiny and
Bald Eagle mountains. The vales between these mountains and generally of a
rich, black soil, suited to the various kinds of grain and grass. Some of the
mountains will admit of cultivation almost to (...) tops. The other parts of
the state are generally level, or agreeably variegated will hills and valleys.

In this connection, I beg leave to introduce the remarks of Mr. Charles
Thompson, the late secretary of congress, which were suggested on his reading
Mr. Jefferson's description of the passage of the Patomak through the blue
ridge. 'The reflections I was led into on viewing this passage of the Patomak
through the blue ridge were, that this country must have suffered some violent
convulsion, and that the face of it must have been changed from what it
probably was some centuries ago; that the broken and ragged faces of the
mountain on each side of the river; the tremendous rocks, which are left with
one end fixed in the precipice, and the other jutting out and seemingly ready
to fall for want of support; the bed of the river for several miles below
obstructed, and filled with the loose stones carried from this mound; in short,
every thing on which you cast your eye evidently demonstrates a disrupture and
breach in the mountain, and that, before this happened, what is now a fruitful
vale, was formerly a great lake or collection of water, which possibly might
have here formed a mighty cascade, or had its vent to the ocean by the
Susquehannah, where the Blue ridge seems to terminate. Besides this, there are
other parts of this country which bear evident traces of a like convulsion.
From the best accounts I have been able to obtain, the place where the Delaware
now flows through the Kittatinny mountain, which is a continuation of what is
called the North ridge, or mountain, was not its original course, but that it
passed through what is (...) called 'the Wind-gap', a place several miles to
the westward, (...) above an hundred feet higher than the present bed of the
river. This wind-gap is about a mile board, and the stones in it such as seem
to have been washed for ages by water running over them. Should this have been
the case, there must have been a large lake behind that mountain and by some
uncommon swell in the waters, or by some convulsion of nature, the river must
have opened its way through a different part of (...) mountain, and meeting
there with less obstruction, carried away (...) the opposing mounds of earth,
and deluged the country below (...) the immense collection of waters to which
this new passage gave (...). There are still remaining, and daily discovered,
innumerable (...) of such a deluge on both sides of the river, after it passed
the (...) above the falls of Trenton, and reached the champaign. On the (...)
Jersey side, which is flatter than the Pennsylvania side, all the (...) below
Croswick hills seems to have been overflowed to ^^^^stance of from ten to
fifteen miles back from the river and (...) acquired a new soil by the earth
and clay brought down (...) mixed with the native sand. The spot on which
Philadelphia ^^ends evidently appears to be made ground. The different (...)
through which they pass in digging to water, the ^corns, leaves (...) sometimes
branches, which are found above twenty feet below (...) face, all seem to
demonstrate this. I am informed that at York (...) Virginia, in the bank of
York river, there are different strata (...) and earth, one above another,
which seem to point out that country there has undergone several changes; that
the sea has, for ^^^^ssion of ages, occupied the place where dry land now
appears; (...) that the ground has been suddenly raised at various periods.
What a (...) would it make in the country below, should the mountains at
^^gara, by any accident, be cleft asunder, and a passage suddenly op^^^^ to
drain off the waters of Erie and the Upper Lakes! While ^^^^^ting on those
subjects, I have often been hurried away by fan^^^ and led to imagine, that
what is now the bay of Mexico, was once campaign country; and that from the
point or cape of Florida, (...) was a continued range of mountains through
Cuba, Hispaniola, (...), Rico, Martinique, Gaudaloupe, Barbados, and Trinidad,
till it (...) the coast of America, and formed the shores which bounded (...)
ocean, and guarded the country behind: That, by some convulsion (...) shock of
nature, the sea had broken through these mounds, (...) deluged that vast plain,
till it reached the foot of the Andes; (...) being there heaped up by the trade
winds, always blowing from (...) quarter, it had found its way back, as it
(...) to do, through (...) gulf between Florida and Cuba, carrying with it the
loom and (...) it may have scooped from the country it had occupied, part of
which it may have deposited on the shores of North America, and (...) part
formed the banks of Newfoundland. -- But these are only the visions of fancy.

The soil of Pennsylvania is of various kinds; in some parts it is (...); a
great proportion of the state is good land, and no inconsiderable part is very
good. Perhaps the proportion of first rate land is not greater in any of the
thirteen states. The richest part of the (...) that is settled is Lancaster
county, and the valley through Cumberland, York and Franklin. The richest that
is unsettled, is between (...) river and Lake Erie, in the northwest corner of
the state, (...) the country on the heads of the eastern branches of the
Allegany (...). Of this fine tract, 100,000 acres, lying on, and near French
(...) are for sale by the state. The convenient communications (...) this creek
into the Allegany, and from the Allegany, through (...) creeks and rivers to
the Susquehannah and Patomak, have al^^^^ been mentioned. (...) Jefferson's
Notes on Virginia Appendix No. II.


The south side of Pennsylvania is the best settled land throughout, owing
entirely to the circumstance of the western road having been run by the armies,
prior to 1762, through the towns of Lancaster, Carlisle and Bedford, and thence
to Pittsburg. For the purpose of turning the tide of settlers from this old
channel into the unsettled parts of the state, the government and landed
interest of Pennsylvania have been, and are still busy in cutting convenient
roads. During the summer of 1788 they run a road north, from the former roads
beyond Bethlehem, to the north portage between Delaware and Susquehannah; and
thence north 80 degrees west to the mouth of the Tyoga, the first seventy
miles, and the last above sixty. It is now in contemplation to cut a road from
Sunbury, at the forks of the east and west branches of Susquehannah; west, 150
miles, to the mouth of Toby's creek, which empties into the Allegany river,
from the east. This road will be through a tract of rich land, now for sale by
the state. A road is also cut from the mouth of the Tyoga, southward, to the
mouth of Loyal, a branch of the west branch of Susquehannah. Another road is
cut from Huntingdon town, on Franks town branch of the Juniata, westward thirty
miles, to Conemagh, a navigable branch of the Allegany.

Thus the well judged policy of this state, is paving the way for the
settlement of all their waste lands. And to evidence their benevolence, and
their wishes to have the advantages of education increased and more extensively
enjoyed, they have allotted 60,000 acres of these waste lands for the use of
public schools; and above 60,000 more have been granted for that purpose, and
to the societies established for the promotion of knowledge, the arts,
religion, etc. A considerable part of the lands of this state remain at present
for sale, by the public. The Pennsylvanians having no disputes with the Indians
about boundaries, and all the lands within the State, being purchased at a fair
and open treaty, and their being some settlements westward of the Pennsylvania
line, there is little apprehension of the Indians any where, and inmost parts
of the state no danger at all.

Among the natural advantages of Pennsylvania, her almost innumerable mill
seats ought not to be omitted. They are conveniently distributed by Providence
throughout the state, and afford the means of establishing every species of
mill work and labour-saving machines, to meet the produce and raw materials
almost at the farmers doors. In the present situation of this country, wanting
hands for farming, and in the present state of manufactures, when ingenious
machanism is every day and every where invented to lessen the necessity for
manual labor, this natural advantage must appear of inestimable importance.
Hemp and flax are among the most profitable productions of the rich midland and
new counties, the Cream of which is yet to be skimmed. It is therefore a most
pleasing fact, that they have in this state the full sized and complete
movements or works of a water mill and machinery, to sliver, rove and spin flax
and hemp into threads or yarns, fit for linen of 30 cuts to the pound, or any
coarser kind, sheetings, toweling, sail cloth, ^znabrigs, twine, and the strans
or yarns for cordage. The same machinery is calculated for the roving or
preparing, and spinning of combed wool into worsted yarn. They have also the
movements and complete machinery of Sir Richard A^kwright's water mill for
spinning yarns of cotton. And though the climate of the state is not fit for
cultivating that raw material, yet cotton can be raised with profit in every
state in the Union southward of Pennsylvania, and imported from the East and
West Indies.

It is certain that this extraordinary capacity of our country for mechanical
works has either called forth, in an unusual degree, the mechanical powers of
the human mind, or that Providence has bestowed upon the people of this and our
sister states an uncommon portion of this talent, which its nature and
situation require. Rittenhouse and Franklin stand unrivalled in mechanical
philosophy; and those who know our country are well informed, tha^ to these two
great names we could add a considerable list of philosophical and practical
mechani^i^^s, in a variety of branches.

So many of the necessary and convenient arts and trades depend upon the plenty
and cheapness of fuel* that it appears proper to take notice of this article.
Till the revolution, the dependence of the people was almost entirely upon wood
fuel, of which, in the most populous places, there is still a great abundance,
and in all interior situations immense quantities; but the increase of
manufactures has occasioned them to turn their attention to coal. Of this
useful fossile Providence has given them very great quantities in the middle
and western country. In the vicinity of Wyoming, on the Susquehannah, is one
bed of the open burning kind, and of the most intense heat. On the head waters
of Schuylkill and Lebigh are some considerable bodies. At the head of the
western branch of Susquehannah is a most extensive body, which stretches over
the country southwestwardly, so as to be found in the greatest plenty at
Pittsburgh, where the Allegany and Youghiogeny unite, and form the head of the
Ohio. All the coal has hitherto been accidentally found on the surface of the
earth, or discovered in the digging of common cellars or wells, so that when
the wood fuel shall become scarce, and the European methods of boring shall be
skilfully pursued, there can be no doubt of its being found in many other
places. At present, the ballasting of ships from (...) countries abroad, and
the coal mines in Virginia, which he convenient to ship navigation, occasion a
good deal of coal to be brought ^o the Philadelphia market. From this great
abundance and variety of fuel it results, that Pennsylvania, and the United
States in general, are well suited to all manufactories, that are effected by
fire, such as furnaces, foundaries, forges, glass houses, breweries,
distilleries, steel works, smiths shops, and all other manufactories in metal,
soap boiling, chandlers shops, pot ash works, sugar and other refineries, etc.
etc.

Ship building is a business in which the port of Philadelphia exceeds most
parts of the world. Masts, spars, timber and plank, not only from their own
state and the other states on the Delaware, are constantly for sale in their
market, but the mulberry of the Chesapeak, and the evergreen or live oak and
red cedar of the Carolinas and Georgia, are so abundantly imported, that nine
tenths of their vessels are built of them. No vessels are better than these. A
live oak and cedar ship of 200 tons, carpenter's measurement, can be fitted to
take i^ a cargo for 14l. currency per ton; and there is not a port in Europe in
which an oak ship can be equally well built and fitted for 20l. (...) ton
currency, or 12l. sterling. This fact may appear doubtful or extraordinary, but
it is certainly true; and it is greatly in favor of the ship carpenters and
other tradesmen employed in fitting and building ships, as well as merchants
and farmers, whose interests are so much connected with navigation.

The distance of Philadelphia from the sea has been made an objection by some,
and the closing of the river by the ice, which happens almost every winter.
Amsterdam, the greatest port in Europe, is inaccessible in the winter. But it
is a fact, that, notwithstanding these objections, their vessels make as many
West India voyages as those of the two other principal sea ports of the middle
states; and though the river is frozen from three to nine weeks almost every
winter, yet there are occasional openings, which give opportunities for fleets
of merchantmen to go out and come in. The fine corn and provision country which
lies near Philadelphia, enables the merchants to load their vessels in the
winter, and the market is regularly supplied with flour, pork, beef, lumber,
staves, iron, and many other of their principal articles of exportation. Little
time is therefore lost, and their trade increases. The crop of 1789, and other
exports from the harvest of that year to that of 1790, it was supposed, would
load 1200,00 tons of shipping. A very extensive back country; and many large
bodies of new lands, are settling fast, which must send their produce to the
Philadelphia market.

PRODUCTIONS, MANUFACTURES, AGRICULTURE, EXPORTS, etc.} We mention these
articles together, because it is difficult to separate them. Under the
foregoing head, we have anticipated some things, that might be naturally
mentioned here. The produce, manufactures and exports of Pennsylvania are very
many and various; viz. wheat, flour, middlings, ship stuff, bran, shorts, ship
bread, white water biscuit, rye, rye flour, Indian corn or maize, Indian meal,
buckwheat, buck wheat meal, bar and pig iron, steel, nail rods, nails, iron
hoops, rolled iron, tire, gunpowder, cannon ball, iron cannon, muskets, ships,
boats, oars, handspikes, masts, spars, ship timber, ship blocks, cordage,
square timber, scantling, plank, boards, staves, h^^ding* shingles, wooden
hoops, tanners bark, corn fans, coopers wa^^, bricks, coarse earthen or potters
ware, a very little ordinary stone ware, glue, parchment, shoes, boots, foal
leather, upper leather, dressed (...) and sheep skins, and gloves and garments
of the same, fine hats, many common, and a few coarse; thread, cotton, worsted
and yarn hosiery, writing, wrapping, blotting, sheathing and hanging paper,
stationery, playing cards, copper, silver and gold, clocks and watches, musical
instruments, snuff, manufactured tobacco, chocolate, mustard seed and mustard,
starch, hairpowder, flaxseed, flaxseed oil, flax, hemp, wool and cotton cards,
pickled beef, pork, shad, herrings, tongues and sturgeon, hams and other bacon,
tallow, hogs lard, butter, cheese, candles, soap, bees wax, loaf sugar, pot and
pearl ash, rum and other strong waters, beer, porter, hops, winter and summer
barley, oats, spelts, onions, potatoes, turnips, cabbages, carrots, parsnips,
red and white clover, timothy, and most European vegetables and grasses,
apples, peaches, plumbs, pears, apricots, grapes, both native and imported, and
other European fruits, working and pleasurable carriages, horses, black cattle,
sheep, hogs, wood for cabinet makers, limestone, coal, freestone and marble.

Some of these productions are fine, some indifferent; some of the manufactures
are considerable, for a young country circumstanced (...) this has been, some
inconsiderable; but they are enumerated, to show the general nature of the
state, and the various pursuits of the inhabitants. In addition to them we may
mention, that a lead mine and two or three salt springs have been discovered in
the new country, which will no doubt be worked, as soon as the demand for these
articles to the westward increases. We ought also to notice the great forests
for making pot and pearl ash. Marble is found in many parts of the state.

The manufactures of Pennsylvania have increased exceedingly within a few
years, as well by master workmen and journeymen from abroad, as by the
increased skill and industry of their own citizens. Household or family
manufactures have greatly advanced, and valuable acquisitions have been made of
implements and machinery to save labor, either imported, or invented in the
United States. The hand machines for carding and spinning cotton have been
introduced by foreigners, and improved upon; but they have lately obtained the
water mill for spinning cotton, and a water mill for flax, which is applicable
also to spinning hemp and wool. These machines promise an early establishment
of the cotton, linen and hempen branches, and must be of very great service in
the woolen branch. Additional employment for weavers, dyers, bleachers and
other manufacturers must be the consequence. Paper mills, gunpowder mills,
steel works, rolling and flitting mills, printing figured goods of paper, linen
and cotton, coach making, book printing, and several other branches, are
wonderfully advanced, and every month seems to extend the old manufactures, or
to introduce new ones. There are upwards of 50 paper mills in Pennsylvania
which work materials of no intrinsic value. The manufactures from the mills are
computed at 250,000 dollars. The hands employed in them, do not exceed 300. It
is calculated that their paper mills alone indemnify them for five eighths of
their quota of the expenses of the general government, and the interest of the
public debt.

The advancement of the agriculture of Pennsylvania is the best proof (...) can
be given of the comfort and happiness it affords to its farming, manufacturing
and trading citizens. In the year 1786 their exports of flour were 150,000
barrels (exclusive of many other articles;) in 1787 they were 202,000 barrels;
in 1788 they were 220,000 barrels; and in 1789 they were 369,618 barrels; which
exceeds any export ever made in the times of the province or in the times of
the Commonwealth. The produce of flax in increased in a much greater degree,
and that of wool is considerably more than it was before the revolution. A new
article is likely to be added to the list of their productions, which is a well
tasted and wholesome sugar, made of the Maple Tree. It has been proved by many
fair and careful experiments, that it is in the power of a substantial farmer,
that has a family about him, easily to make twelve hundred weight of this sugar
every season, without hiring any additional hands, or any utensils, but those
that are necessary for his family and farm use. The time is which it can (...)
made is from the middle of February to the end of March, when ^^mers in this
country have very little to do, as it is too early to though or dig. The price
of sugar being lower here than in Europe, this article may be reckoned at 100
Mexican dollars per annum to very careful and skilful farmer, that owns land
bearing the sugar people. Of these there are some millions of acres in
Pennsylvania and (...) adjacent states, and at least one or two millions
belonging to this state, for sale. It seems also highly probable that this
valuable tree may be transplanted, and thus be obtained by almost any farmer in
the state, and that men of property, who will purchase kettles and hire hands
for the above short period, may make large quantities.

No difficulty lies in the way of any person, who desires to become a free and
equal citizen. On the day of his landing he may buy a farm, a house,
merchandise, or raw materials; he may open a work shop, a counting house, an
office, or any other place of lawful business, and pursue his calling without
any hindrance, or the payment of any sum of money to the public. The right of
electing and being elected (which does not affect his business or his safety)
is not granted till the expiration of two years, which prudence requires.

A privilege, almost peculiar to this state, has been granted to foreigners by
the legislature -- that of buying and holding lands and houses within this
commonwealth, without relinquishing their allegiance to the country in which
they were born. They can sell on bequeath the lands, receive the rents, and, in
short, have every territorial and pecuniary right, that a natural born
Pennsylvanian has; but no civil right. As they profess to owe allegiance to a
foreign prince or government, and reside in a foreign country, where they of
course have civil rights, they cannot claim them, nor ought they to desire them
here; since no man can serve two masters. If they choose, at any time after
purchase, to come out to this country, and make themselves citizens; of if they
choose to give their estate to a child, or other person, who will do so; either
of them may become citizens to all intents and purposes.

Such is the present situation of things in Pennsylvania which is more or less
the same in several other of the American states, viz. District of Main, New
Hampshire, Vermont, New York, Virginia, the Carolinas and Georgia; but though
not so in the ^est, the principal difference is, that they are so fully people
that there are few new lands of any value unsold, and farming lan^^, that are
improved, are of course dearer. In those states, however, agriculture,
commerce, manufactures, the fisheries, and navigation afford comfortable
subsistence and ample rewards of profit to the industrious and well disposed,
amidst the blessings of civil and religious liberty.

POPULATION AND CHARACTER.] The population of this (...) is mentioned in the
table. It is nearly 10 for every square miles. The number of militia is
estimated at upwards of 90,000, between (...) and 53 years of age.

The inhabitants are principally the descendants of the English, Irish, and
Germans, with some Scotch, Welsh, Swedes, and a few Dutch* There are also many
of the Irish and Germans, who emigrated wh^^ young, or middle aged. The Friends
and Episcopalians are chiefly of English extraction, and compose about one
third of the inhabitants. They live principally in the city of Philadelphia,
and in the count (...) of Chester, Philadelphia, Bucks and Montgomery. The
Irish are mostly Presbyterians, but some Catholics. Their ancestors came from
the north of Ireland, which was originally settled from Scotland hence they
have sometimes been called Scotch Irish, to denote their double descent. But
they are commonly and more properly called Irish, or the descendants of people
from the north of Ireland. They inhabit the western and frontier counties, and
are numerous.

The Germans compose about one quarter of the inhabitants of Pennsylvania. They
are most numerous in the north parts of the city of Philadelphia, and the
counties of Philadelphia, Montgomery, Bucks, Dauphin, Lancaster, York and
Northampton; mostly in the four last, and are spreading in other parts. They
consist of Lutherans, (who are the most numerous sect) Calvinists or Reformed
Church, Mo^avians* Catholics, Mennonists* Tunkers (corruptly called Dunkers)
and Zwingfelters, who are a species of Quakers. These are all distinguished for
their temperance, industry and economy.

The Germans have usually fifteen of sixty nine members in the assembly; and
some of them have arisen to the first honors in the state, and now fill a
number of the higher offices. Yet the body of them want education. A literary
spirit has however of late been increasing among them.

The Baptists (except the Mennonist and Tunker Baptists, who are Germans) are
chiefly the descendants of emigrants from Wales, and are not numerous. A
proportionate assemblage of the national prejudices, the manners, customs,
religions and political sentiments of all these, will form the Pennsylvanian
character. As the leading traits in this character, thus constituted, we may
venture to mention industry, fru^^lity, bordering in some instances on
parsimony, enterprise, a taste and ability for improvements in mechanics, in
manufactures, in agriculture, in public buildings and institutions, in commerce
and in the ^^^ral sciences; temperance, plainness and simplicity in dress and
manners; pride and humility in their extremes; inoffensiveness and intrigue;
and in regard to religion, variety and harmony. Such appear to be the
distinguishing traits in the collective Pennsylvanian character.

RELIGION.] The situation of religion and religious rights and liberty in
Pennsylvania, is a matter that deserves the attention of all ^^ber and well
disposed people, who may have thoughts of this country. This state always
afforded an asylum to the persecuted sects of Europe. No church or society ever
was established here, no tithes or tenths can be demanded; and though some
regulations of the crown of England excluded two churches from a share in the
government of the province, these are now done away with regard to every
religious society whatever, except the Hebrew church. But a convention of
special representatives of the citizens of Pennsylvania have had under
consideration all the errors that have inadvertently crept into their
constitution and frame of government, and, in the act they have published for
the examination of the people, they have rejected the half^^y doctrine of
TOLERATION, and have established, upon firm and per^^^ly equal ground, all
denominations of religious men. By the pro^^^^ of the new code* a Protestant, a
Roman Catholic and a He^^^^ may elect or be elected to any office in the state,
and pursue any (...) calling, occupation or profession.

LITERARY, HUMANE, AND OTHER USEFUL SOCIETIES.] These (...) more numerous and
flourishing in Pennsylvania, than in any of the (...) States. The names of
these improving institutions, the times when they were established, and a
summary of the benevolent de^^^ they were intended to accomplish, will be
mentioned in their or^^^.

1. THE AMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY, HELD AT PHILADELPHIA, FOR PROMOTING
USEFUL KNOWLEDGE. This society was formed January 2d, 1769, by the union of two
other literary societies that had subsisted for some time in Philadelphia; and
were created one body corporate and politic, with such powers* privileges, and
immunities as are necessary for answering the valuable purposes which the
society had originally in view, by a charter granted by the commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, on the 15th of March, 1780. This society have already published
two very valuable volumes of their transactions; one in 1771, the other in 1786.

In 1771, this society consisted of nearly 300 members; and upwards of 120 have
since been added; a large proportion of which, are foreigners of the first
distinction in Europe.

Their charter allows them to hold lands, gifts, etc. to the amount of the
clear yearly value of ten thousand bushels of wheat. The number of members is
not limited.

2. THE SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING POLITICAL EXQUIRIES; consisting of fifty members,
instituted in February, 1787.

3. THE COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS, instituted in 1787, for the promotion of
medical, anatomical and chemical knowledge, incorporated by act of Assembly,
March, 17^9.

4. THE PENNSYLVANIA HOSPITAL, a humane institution, which was first meditated
in 1750, and carried into effect by means of a liberal subscription of about
3000l. and by the assistance of the assembly, who, in 1751, granted as much
more for the purpose. The present building was begun in 1754, and finished in
1756. This hospital is under the direction of twelve managers, chosen annually,
and is visited every year by a committee of the assembly. The accounts of the
managers are submitted to the inspection of the legislature. Six physicians
attend gratis, and generally prescribe twice or three times in a week, in their
turns. This hospital is the general receptacle of lunatics and madmen, and of
those affected with other disorders, and are unable to support themselves. Here
they are humanely treated and well provided for.

5. THE PHILADELPHIA DISPENSARY, for the medical relief of the poor. This
benevolent institution was established on the 12th of April 1786, and is
supported by annual subscriptions of thirty five shillings each person. No less
than 1800 patients were admitted, with^^ sixteen months after the first opening
of the dispensary. It is under the direction of twelve managers, and six
physicians, all of whom attend gr^tis. This institution exhibits an application
of something like the mechanical powers, to the purposes of humanity. The
greatest quantity of good is produced this way with the least money. Five
hundred pounds a year defrays all the expenses of the institution. The poor are
taken care of in their own houses, and provide every thing for themselves,
except medicines, cordial drinks* etc.

6. THE PENNSYLVANIA SOCIETY for promoting the ABOLITI^^ OF SLAVERY, and the
relief of FREE NEGROES unlawfully held in (...) age. This society was begun in
1774, and enlarged on the 23d of April, 1787. The officers of the society
consist of a president, two vice-presidents, two secretaries, a treasurer, four
counselors, an electing committee of twelve, and an acting committe^ of six
members; all of whom, except the last, are to be chosen annually be ballot, on
the first Monday in January. The society meet quarterly, and each member
contributes ten shillings annually, in quarterly payments, toward defraying
its contingent expenses.

The legislature of this state, have favored the humane designs of this
society, by "An Act for the gradual Abolition of Slavery;" passed on the first
of March, 1780, wherein, among other things, it is ordained that no person born
within the state, after the passing of the act, shall be considered as a
servant for life; and all perpetual slavery, is by this act, forever abolished.
The act provides, that those who would, in case this act had not been made,
have been born servants or slaves, shall be deemed such, till they shall attain
to the age of twenty-eight years; but they are to be treated in all respects as
servants bound by indenture for four years.

7. THE SOCIETY OF THE UNITED BRETHREN for propagating the gospel among the
heathens, instituted in 1787, to be held statedly at Beth^^hem. An act,
incorporating this society, and investing it with all necessary powers and
privileges for accomplishing its pious designs, was passed by the legislature
of the state, on the 27th of February, 1788. They can hold lands, houses, etc.
to the annual amount of two thousand pounds.

These pious Brethern, commonly called Moravians, began a mission among the
Mahikan, Wampano, Delaware, Shawanoe, Nantikok and other Indians, about fifty
years ago, and were so successful as to add (...) than one thousand souls to
the christian church by baptism. (...) hundred of these have died in the
christian faith; about 300 live with the missionaries near Lake Erie, and the
rest are either dead, or apostates in the wilderness.

8. THE PENNSYLVANIA SOCIETY for the encouragement of manufactures and useful
arts* instituted in 1787, open for the reception of every citizen in the United
States, which will fulfill the engagements of a member of the same. The society
is under the direction of a president, four vice-presidents* and twelve
managers, besides subordinate officers. Each member, on his admission, pays ten
shillings at least (...) the general fund; and the same sum annually, till he
shall cease to (...) a member.

^^^^sides these, a very respectable Insurance Company has lately been
established in Philadelphia, with a capital of 600,000 dollars, who have
commenced business to advantage -- There is also a SOCIETY (...) ALLEVIATING
THE MISERIES O^ PRISONS; and a HUMANE SOCIETY, for the recovering and restoring
to life the bodies of drown^^^ persons; instituted in 1770, under the direction
of thirteen managers. And a SOCIETY for the aid and protection of Irish
emigrants.

Also, an Agricultural Society; a Society for German emigrants; a Marine
^^^ery, consisting of Captains of vessels; a Charitable Society for (...)
support of widows and families of Presbyterian clergymen; and St. George's,
(...) Andrew's and the Hibernian charitable Societies. Most of these so^^^ies
are in the city of Philadelphia.

COLLEGES, ACADEMIES AND SCHOOLS.] From the enterprizing and literary spirit of
the Pennsylvanians, we should naturally conclude, (...) is fact, that these are
numerous.

In Philadelphia is the University of Pennsylvania, founded and endowed by the
legislature during the war. Professorships are established in all the liberal
arts and sciences, and a complete course of education may be pursued here from
the first rudiments of literature to the highest branches of science.

The college and academy of Philadelphia, was founded by charter between 30 and
40 years ago, and endowed, by subscriptions of liberal minded persons. Though
this institution was interrupted in its progress for several years during the
late war, yet being re-established since the peace, it has rapidly recovered
its former state of prosperity, and to the bench of professors has lately been
added one of common and federal law, which renders it in reality, though not in
name, a university. An act to unite these two institutions has passed the
legislature. By their union they will constitute one of the most respectable
seminaries of learning in the United States.

DICKINSON COLLEGE, at Carlisle, 120 miles westward of Philadelphia, was
founded in 1783, and has a principal, three professors, a philosophical
apparatus, a library consisting of nearly 3000 volumes, four thousand pounds in
funded certificates, and 10,000 acres of land; the last, the donation of the
state. In 1787, there were eighty students belonging to this college. This
number is annually increasing. It was named after his Excellency John
Dickinson* author of the Pennsylvania Farmer's letters, and formerly president
of the supreme executive council of this state.

In 1787, a college was founded at Lancaster, 66 miles from Philadelphia, and
honored with the name of FRANKLIN COLLEGE, after his Excellency Dr. Franklin.
This college is for the Germans; in which they may educate their youth in their
own language, and in conformity to their own habits. The English language,
however, is taught in it. Its endowments are nearly the same as those of
Dickinson college. Its trustees consist of Lutherans, Presbyterians, Calvinists
and English; of each an equal number. The principal is a Lutheran, and the vice
principal is a Calvinist.

The Episcopalians have an academy at Yorktown, in York county. There are also
academies at Germantown, at Pittsburg, at Washington, at Allen's town, and
other places; these are endowed by donations from the legislature, and by
liberal contributions of individuals.

The schools for young men and women in Bethlehem and Nazareth, under the
direction of the people called Moravians, are upon the best establishment of
any schools in America. Besides these, there are private schools in different
parts of the state; and to promote the education of poor children, the state
have appropriated a large tract of land for the establishment of free schools.
A great proportion of the laboring people among the Germans and Irish, are,
however, extremely ignorant.

CHIEF TOWNS.] The city of Philadelphia, capital of the state of Pennsylvania,
and the present seat of government of the United States of America, lies in
latitude 39 56 North, and longitude 73 West from the meridian of London, upon
the western bank of the river Delaware, which is here but a mile in breadth,
about 120 miles from the Atlantic Ocean, by the course of the bay and river,
and about 55 or 60 miles from the sea, in a south eastward direction.

It was laid out by William Penn, the first proprietary and founder (...) the
province, in the year 1683, and settled by a colony from England, which arrived
in that and the preceding years, and was increased, by a constant and regular
influx of foreigners, to so great a degree, that in less than a century, and
within the life time of the first person born within it of European parents, it
was computed to contain 6,000 houses and 40,000 inhabitants in the city and
suburbs.

The ground plot of the city is an oblong square, about one mile North and
South, and two miles East and West, lying in the narrowest part of the isthmus
between the Delaware and Schuylkill rivers, about five miles in a right line
above their confluence. The plain is so nearly level, except upon the bank of
the Delaware, that art and labor were necessary to dig common sewers and water
courses in many places to drain the streets. In the beginning of this
settlement it was expected, that the fronts on both rivers would be first
improved for the convenience of trade and navigation, and that the buildings
would extend gradually in the rear of each, until they would meet and form one
town extending from east to west; but experience soon convinced the settlers
that the Delaware front was alone sufficient for quays and landing places, and
that the Schuylkill lay at too great a ^^stance (...) form part of the town on
its banks; whence it followed that the town increased northward and southward
of the original plot, on the Delaware front, and now occupies a space near
three miles in length, north and south, while the buildings in the middle,
where they are most extended, do not reach a mile from the Delaware.

The city has been twice incorporated, and the limits thereof restrained to the
oblong, originally laid out by William Penn, without including the Northern or
Southern suburbs. This plot is intersected by a number of streets at right
angles with each other, nine of which run East and West from Delaware to
Schuylkill, and twenty three North and South, crossing the first at right
angles, forming one hundred and eighty four squares of lots for buildings. The
streets ^^^ning East and West are named (except High Street near the middle of
the city) from the trees found in the country upon the arrival of the colony;
Vine, Sa^^a^ras, Mulberry, High, Chestnut, Walnut, Spruce, Pine and Cedar
Streets, and those running North and South from their numeral order, Front,
Second, Third, Fourth, etc. (...) Broad Street, which is midway between the two
rivers. In deeds and other descriptive writings which require exactness, these
streets have the Delaware or Schuylkill prefixed to their numeral names, to
distinguish to which front they belong; as Delaware Second Street, etc. but as
there ^e very few buildings Westward of Broad Street, this addition is never
made in common conversation, but when they (...) named they are understood of
the Delaware front, unless Schuylkill be added.

Of these, High Street is 100 feet, Broad Street 113, Mulberry 60, and all the
others 30 feet wide. Within the improved parts of the (...) they are paved, in
the middle with pebble stones, for carts and ^^^riages, (...) usually contains
three fi^ths of the whole breadth, (...) (...) each side with bricks for foot
passengers; between the brick and stone pavements, are gutters, paved with
brick, to carry off the water, and the foot ways are defended from the approach
of carriages, by rows of posts placed without the gutters, at the distance of
10 or 12 feet from each other.

Besides the forementioned main streets, there are many others not originally
laid down in the plot, the most public of which are Water Street and Dock
Street. Water Street is 30 feet wide, running below the bank, at the distance
of about 40 feet Eastward from and parallel to Front Street, extending from the
North line of the city, Southward to the bridge over the Dock, which was
formerly a draw bridge, and retains that name in common use, although it was
converted into a stone arch above 30 years since; from the bridge it is 40 feet
wide in a right line to Pine Street, and leaves a row of houses without yards,
on the bank, in its whole length, between it and Front Street; Southward of
Pine Street, there is an offset of about 80 feet Eastward, and the street from
thence to Cedar Street is 45 feet wide and called Penn Street. This street, in
the original plan, was intended only for a call way to accommodate the wharves
and stores to be erected under the bank and not to rise more than four feet
above it, so as to leave the river open to the view from the west side of Front
Street; but the inhabitants were soon convinced that the ground, on both
streets, was too valuable to be kept unimproved, in any degree, merely for the
^ake of a prospect, and it is closely built with lofty houses (except a very
few vacancies here and there) throughout the whole front on both sides, and
commodious wharves are extended into the river, at which the largest ships that
use the port, can lie in safety to discharge and receive their cargoes, and are
defended from the ice in winter by the piers, made of logs extending into the
river, sunk with stone and filled with earth, so as to be equally firm with the
main land.

Dock Street is the only crooked street in the city; beginning at the bridge in
Front Street, and extending Northwestward in a serpentine tract, through two
squares, across Second and Walnut Streets, and terminates at Third Street;
another branch of it extends South Westward across Spruce Street, and
terminates at Second Street. The ground occupied by this street, and by an open
space between it and Spruce street, below the bridge, was formerly a swamp, and
was given by William Penn to the corporation for the use of the city; it was
intended as a place to dig a basin and docks to shelter the shipping, but
experience proved that ships could be defended from the ice by the piers
extended into the river, and that the dock could not be kept clean but at an
expense far beyond its utility, wherefore it was neglected till it became a
nuisance offensive to the smell and injurious to the health of the inhabitants,
and was by act of assembly, ordered to be arched over and covered with earth,
whereby the city acquired a beautiful street more than 100 feet in breadth
toward the water, and not less than 90 feet in the narrowest part.

The number of the streets, lanes and alleys, laid out by the owners of the
lots before they were built on, is too great to be enumerated here, there being
scarce a square that is not intersected by one or more of them, some of them,
continued in a right line through several squares, and so spacious as to be
easily mistaken for main streets, others only through one square.

The city was first incorporated by charter under the great seal of the
province, in the year 1701: before that period it was called the town of
Philadelphia. By this charter William Penn nominated the first mayor, recorder,
aldermen and common councilmen, and granted them, among other privileges and
franchises, that of electing others to supply vacancies, and even to increase
their own number at pleasure; the public grounds were granted to them by the
name of the (...) and commonalty of the city of Philadelphia, but the common^^y
had no share in the government or estate of the city, the whole body being self
elective, and not accountable to the citizens in any re^^^ct. It would be
difficult to account for so extraordinary a charter (...) the wisdom of William
Penn, did not tradition inform us that among the first settlers were a
considerable number from the city of Bristol in England, whose charter, granted
at an early period, before the rights of the commonalty were well understood,
had been familiarized by habit, which induced them to request a similar one; a
copy of the Bristol charter was accordingly procured, and with little variation
adopted. It was not long however, before the commonalty beg^n to be
dissatisfied with it, and to make frequent complaints to the assembly, of the
abuses that were practiced under it; many of which appear upon the minutes of
the house. At at an early period after the charter, the legislative powers of
this corporation were very limited, they could not levy a shilling by taxes,
for any use whatever, and could employ the income of the city estates only for
the use and embolishment of the city; wherefore we see few monuments raised to
preserve the memory of that corporation. Although the first men for integrity
and abilities to be found in the city were elected into the office of the body
politic, yet such is the nature of unlimited power, not accountable to the
people, that it will divert the best men from purposes, which, before they were
invested with the power, they would have highly approved. The jealousy which
the citizens ^^^^^tained of the corporation, pervaded the general assembly of
the province, and when the lighting, watching and paving the city became a
desirable object, the representatives of the freemen would not en^^^^ the
corporation alone with the power of raising or expending the ^^^ey necessary
for these purposes; they could not however cast such a reflection on the
respectable characters of which that body was composed as wholly to vest these
powers with others; they pursued a middle line, and constituted two separate
bodies by the names of city wardens and street commissioners, to the former of
whom the lighting and watching, and to the latter the paving of the streets was
committed; the mayor or recorder and four of the aldermen concurring with each
body, in laying the taxes and prescribing the mode of expending them; thus the
city legislation for these purposes became a ^^^pounded of two branches, the
wardens and commissioners immediately elected by the people, in the same manner
as their representatives in assembly, constituted the democratic, and the mayor
and aldermen the aristocratic branch. These bodies, thus compounded, conducted
the business committed to them, with great harmony, nor is there the ^^st
recollection of any disagreement between them; the taxes were (...) with
equality, collected with moderation, and expended for the (...) use and
improvement of the city; one complaint only had foundation, which arose from
the nature rather than from any abuse of the powers; the number of wardens and
street commissioners was (...) great, as at very moderate wages, to render
those boards too expensive.

For the honor of the late corporation it ought not to be emitted, that the
mayor's court was always filled with an able lawyer for the recorder, and
another for the prosecution of criminal offenses; and such was the orderly and
upright administration of justice in it, that no court in the province, or
perhaps in any other country, exceeded it.

The prejudices under which the old corporation labored from its original
constitution, were so strong, that upon the revolution, the general assembly
declared by an act passed during their first session, "That the powers and
jurisdiction hitherto exercised by the mayor, recorder and aldermen of the city
of Philadelphia, were not founded on the authority of the people, and are
therefore become null and void." Wherefore by that and several subsequent acts,
the powers of the corporation were distributed between the supreme executive
council, the city magistrates, and the wardens and street commissioners, who
exercised them from the year 1777, to 1789. The prejudices, which had no
foundation as against corporations in general, but only against the
constitution of the late corporation of the city, were however so strong, that
it was with difficulty the people could be prevailed upon to submit to a new
incorporation of the city. The defects in the administration of justice and
governing the police of the city at length became so glaring, that they were
seen by all classes of people, and their minds prepared for an act of
incorporation. The general assembly, in the winter sessions of 1789, favoring
the wishes of the citizens, passed an act, entitled, an act to incorporate the
city of Philadelphia, which, with a supplement passed in 1790, constitutes the
present city charter. By these acts

The common council consists of two branches; fifteen aldermen are chosen by
the freeholders to continue in office for seven years, they choose a recorder
from the citizens at large, for seven years, and a mayor from their own number
for one year. Thirty common councilmen are chosen by the citizens at large,
entitled to vote for representatives in assembly, to continue in office for
three years; these were intended to form a balanced government, upon the
principle that the choice by freeholders, and for a longer term, would produce
a more select body of aldermen, and that the citizens at large would choose
characters fitter to represent and form the popular branch of city government.
Eight aldermen and sixteen common councilmen form a quorum or board, to
transact business, at which the mayor or recorder presides; they sit and
deliberate together, but no act is legal, unless a majority of the aldermen, a
majority of the common councilmen present, and the mayor or recorder concur.

There is not perhaps in the world a more liberal plan of city government;
every class of citizens have an opportunity of representing and being
represented. The body is sufficiently numerous to contain some of every
description, and of every species of talents and information necessary for
deliberation and execution, and yet not so large as to be encumbered with its
own weight; it possesses the powers of legislation and taxation in all cases
necessary for the well governing and improving the city, except in
contradiction to acts of the general assembly; and from the many improvements
already introduced, there is reason to hope that its police will be equal to
that of any modern city.

A city court is held by the mayor, recorder and aldermen four times a year,
and holds cognizance of all crimes and misdemeanors committed within the city.

A court of aldermen, having cognizance of debts above forty shillings, and not
exceeding ten pounds, is held every week, beginning on Monday morning, and
setting by adjournments until the business of the week is finished.

Each alderman has separate cognizance of debts under forty shillings.

The number of inhabitants within the city and suburbs (including the district
of Southwark and the compactly built part of the Northern Liberties, which to
every purpose but as to their government, are considered as parts of the city)
is found by the late census to be 42,520, and the number of houses 6,65^, and
stores or work shops 415.

The houses for public worship are numerous, and are as follows: The Friends
or Quakers* have 5 One of these houses is for those Quakers who took up arms in
desence of their ^^^^try, in the late war, contrary to the established
principles of the Friends. They call themselves Free Quakers.
The Swedish Lutherans, 1 This is the oldest church, in or near the city, and
ha^ lately been annexed to (...) Episcopal order.
The Presbyterians, and Seceders, 6 The Moravians, 1 The Episcopalians, 3 The
Baptists, 1 The German Lutherans, 2 The Universal Baptists, 1 The German
Calvinists, 1 The Methodists, 1 The Catholics, 4 The Jews. 1

The other public buildings in the city, besides the university and college,
already mentioned, are the following, viz.

(...) state house and offices, Two incorporated banks, The city court houses,
A house of correction, A county court house, A dramatic theater, A carpenters
hall, A public observatory, A philosophical society's hall, A medical theater
and elabaratory, A dispensary, Three brick market houses, A hospital, and
offices, A fish market, (...) alms house, A public gaol,

The state house is in Chestnut street, between fifth and sixth streets, and was
erected as early as 1735. The building is rather magnificent (...) elegant* but
when it is remembered that it was built within 53 years after the first
European cabin was erected in Pennsylvania, its architecture is justly admired.
The state house yard is a neat, elegant and spacious public walk, ornamented
with rows of trees; but a high brick wall, which encloses it, limits the
prospect.

In 1787, an elegant court house was erected on the left of the state house;
and on the right, the town hall or ^ew court house, and a philosophical hall.
These add much to the beauty of the square.

South of the state house is the public goal, built of stone. It has a ground
half story, and two stories above it. Every apartment is arched with stone
against fire and force. It is a hollow square, 100 feet in front, and is the
neatest and most secure building of the kind in America. To the gaol is annexed
a work house, with yards to each, to separate the sexes, and criminals from
debtors. There have lately been added apartments in the yards for solitary
confinement of criminals according to the new penal code. Of 4060 debtors, and
4000 criminals, in the whole 8060 who were confined in this new gaol, between
the 28th of September 1780, and the 5th of September 1790, 12 only died a
natural death, in the gaol.

The hospital and poor house, in which are upwards of 300 poor people, whether
we consider the buildings, or the designs for which they were erected, are
unrivalled in America.

The German church, lately erected, is one of the most elegant churches in
America. Mr. D. Taneberger, one of the united brethren's society at Litiz, a
great mechanical genius, has completed and erected a large organ, for this
church.

The market house in High street is acknowledged by Europeans, to exceed any
thing they have seen of the kind, in extent, neatness, variety and abundance of
provisions. That at Callow Hill, at the north and of the city, and that at the
north end, do honor to the citizens and their police.

The city is provided with a number of public and private charitable
institutions; the principal of which are, the house of employment, a large
commodious building, where the poor of the city and some adjoining townships
are supported and employed in coarse manufactures to aid in defraying their
expenses, under the care of the overseers and guardians of the poor, who are a
corporate body created for this purpose by act of assembly, with power to lay
taxes for its further support.

The Pennsylvania hospital, already mentioned.

The Quaker's alms house is supported by that society for the use of their own
poor; it is divided into a number of separate houses and rooms for families or
single persons who have fallen into decay; most of them contribute by their
industry toward their own support, but are supplied with whatever their
industry falls short of procuring, by, a committee of the society, and live
more comfortably than many who in full health and unhurt by accident, provide
for their own subsistence; there is a considerable garden belonging to this
house, from which the city is supplied, at very moderate prices, with every
kind of medicinal herbs common to the climate.

A house founded by the late Dr. John Kearsley the elder, for the support of
twelve elderly widows of the Protestant Episcopal communion, in which a number
of persons of that description, who have seen better days, are very comfortably
and decently provided for.

The humane society for recovering persons supposed to be dead by drowning,
established upon similar principles with those of the same name in most sea
ports in Europe; it is under the care of twelve managers, annually chosen by
the subscribers; the physicians afford their aid to this institution gratis, a
number of these being appointed for the purpose by the managers.

Almost every religious society has a fund under proper direction, some of
which are incorporated for the relief of the widows and children of their
clergy or other distressed members of their communion.

There are also societies formed for the relief of particular descriptions of
persons, with funds raised by subscriptions or otherwise, for the purpose, such
as the sea captains society, the Delaware pilots society, separate societies
for the relief and assistance of emigrants and other distressed persons, from
England, Scotland, Ireland, Germany, (...) some of which are incorporated, ^o
that there can scarce happen an instance of individual distress, for which a
mode of advice, assistance or relief is not provided without resort to public
beg^^g.

Seminaries of learning are established upon the most enlarged and liberal
principles, of which the principal are, the university of Pennsylvania and
college of Philadelphia already noticed.

Almost every religious society have one or more schools under their immediate
direction, for the education of their own youth of both sexes, as well of the
rich, who are able to pay, as of the poor, who are ^^ught and provided with
books and stationary gratis; besides which, there are a number of private
schools under the direction of masters and mistresses, independent of any
public body; and there are several private academies for the instruction of
young ladies in all the branches of polite literature, suitable to the sex, and
there is no individual, whose parents or guardians, masters or mistresses will
take the ^^^ble to apply, but will be admitted into some one of these schools,
and if they are unable to pay, will be taught gratis; it ought not to
^^^mitted, that there is a school for the Africans of every shade or color,
kept under the care and at the expense of the Quakers, into which are admitted
gratis, slaves as well as free persons of whatever age, of both sexes, and
taught reading, writing, arithmetic, knitting, sewing and other useful female
accomplishments; this school (...) originally instituted by private
subscriptions of the society, with (...) to prepare that degarded race for a
better situation in civil life; (...) the will of the late Antony Benezet, of
benovelent memory, a considerable donation from the society in England, and
some other ^^^able devises, have provided funds adequate to its future support,
(...) it will no longer be burdensome to individuals.

^^nday schools, for the instruction of children who would otherwise ^end that
day in idleness or mischief, have lately been instituted, and (...) i^ to be
hoped will tend to amend the morals and conduct of the rising generation.

The public library of Philadelphia is a most useful institution; it contains
near ten thousand volumes, well selected, for the information and improvement
of all ranks of the citizens; they are deposited ^n (...) elegant building
lately erected, in a modern style, and are accessable every day in the week,
except Sunday. Here the man of learning may consult the work of the remotest
ages, and trace histories, arts (...) sciences from their infancy to this
present state of improvement, (...) the mechanic, the labourer, the student or
apprentice may be sup^^^^ with books to improve their minds or amuse them in
their va^^^^ hours at home. The company consists of some hundreds of
proprietors, incorporated by charter, who pay ten shillings annually (...) the
purchase of new books and defraying incidental expenses; ^^^lve directors are
annually chosen, who manage the concerns of the company and keep a
correspondence with Europe, from whence they are regularly supplied with new
publications of reputation and merit.

The corporation have lately ordered the streets, lanes and alleys to be marked
at every intersection of each other, and the houses to (...) numbered. The
names painted on boards, with an index hand pointing to the progression of the
numbers, are already affixed at the corners of the streets, so that with the
aid of the directory, a stranger may find without difficulty, any house whose
street and number is known.

The city within a few years past has experienced a very remarkable revolution
in respect to the healthiness of its inhabitants; the bill of mortality proves
that the number of deaths has considerably decreased since the year 1783,
notwithstanding the great increase of its population; this change in favor of
health and life is ascribed by physicians to the cooperation of the following
causes. 1st, The arching the dock, whereby a very noxious and offensive
nuisance was removed. 2d, The cultivation of the lots adjoining and partly
surrounding the city, whereby another extensive source of putrid exhalations is
dried up. 3d, An increased care in cleansing the streets. 4th, An increase of
horticulture, and consequently greater consumption of vegetable aliments. 5th,
The institution of the dispensary, which has extended medical and to many
hundreds in a year, who either perished for the want of it or were sacrificed
by quacks. 6th, The more improved state of physic, whence several diseases
formerly fatal in most instances are better understood and treated, and
therefore more generally cured. And 7th, From a general diffusion of knowledge
among all classes of people, from their libraries, their numerous societies,
monthly, weekly and daily publications, whence the people at large are better
acquainted than formerly with the means of preserving their health, as may be
exemplified in one instance; there was but one death in the summer of 1792 from
drinking cold water, whereas some years ago twenty has not been an uncommon
number from this single cause.

No city can boast of so many useful improvements in manufactures, in the
mechanical arts, in the art of healing, and particularly in the science of
humanity* as Philadelphia. The tradesmen and manufacturers have become so
numerous, that they are beginning to associate for mutual improvement, and to
promote regularity and uniformity in their several occupations. The carpenters,
the cordwainers, the tailors, the watch makers, the joiners and hair dressers,
have already associated, and others are forming into companies upon the same
plan.

The Philadelphians have exerted their endeavors with happy and growing
success, to prevent the intemperate use of spirituous liquors. In accomplishing
this benevolent purpose, on which so much of the prosperity and glory of our
empire depend, every good citizen in the union ought cheerfully to send his aid
and influence. As one important step toward effecting their design, they are
encouraging breweries which are fast increasing. There are 14 already in the
city and 7 or 8 in the country. The increase of the consumption of beer, in the
course of a few years past* in every part of America, and particularly in
Pennsylvania, has been astonishing. It has become a fashionable drink, and it
is not improbable but that in a few years, it will (...) into universal use
among all classes of people. In proportion (...) the use of beer increases, in
the same proportion will the use of (...) liquors decrease. This will be a
happy change. The Philadelphia porter, which is exported to various parts, is
reckon^^ equal to that which is manufactured in London.

In short, whether we consider the local situation, the size the beauty, the
variety and utility of the improvements, in mechanics, in agriculture and
manufactures, or the industry, the enterprise* the humanity and the abilities
of the inhabitants of the city of Philadelphia, it merits to be viewed as the
capital of the flourishing EMPIRE OF UNITED AMERICA.

The borough of LANCASTER is the largest inland town in the United States. It
is the seat of justice in Lancaster county, and stands on C^^^^oga creek, 66
miles, a little to the north of the west from Philadelphia. Its trade is
already large; and must increase in proportion at the surrounding country
populates. It contains about 7 or 800 ^^ses, besides a most elegant court
house, a number of handsome ^^^rches and other public building, and about 5000
souls, a great proportion of whom are manufacturers.

CARLISLE is the seat of justice in Cumberland county, and is 120 ^^es westward
of Philadelphia. It contains upwards of 1500 inhabitants, who live in more than
300 stone houses, and worship in three ^^^ches. They have also a court house
and a college. Thirty eight years ago, this spot was a wilderness, and
inhabited by Indians and (...) beasts. A like instance of the rapid progress of
the arts of civ^^^ life is scarcely to be found in history.

PITT^^UGH, on the western side of the Allegany mountains, 320 (...) westward
of Philadelphia, is beautifully situated on a large (...), which is the po^^t
of land between the Allegany and Mononga^^^ river, and about a quarter of a
mile above their confluence, in (...) 40 26 north. It contains about 200
houses, stores and shops, (...) 8 or 900 inhabitants, who are chiefly
Presbyterians and Episcopalians. The surrounding country is very hilly, but
good land, ^^d well (...) with excellent coal. The rivers abound with fine
fish, such as (...), perch* and cat fish, which are all much larger than the
same spe^^^ on the eastern side of the mountains.

This town is laid out on Penn's plan, and is a thoroughfare for the (...) from
the eastern and middle states, to the settlements on the (...).

SUMBURY, the shire town of Northumberland county, is situated on the east side
of Susquehannah river, just below the junction of the E. and W. branches, in
about latitude 40 53 and about 120 miles ^. W. from Philadelphia, and contains
about 100 houses.

BET^LEHEM is situated on the river Lehign* a western branch of (...) (...)
are, fifty three miles north of Philadelphia* in latitude 40 (...). The town
being built partly on high rising ground, and partly (...) (...) lower banks of
the Manakes, (a fine creek, which affords trout (...) other ^^sh) has a very
pleasant and healthy situation, and is frequently visited in the summer season
by gentry from different parts. (...) prospect is not extensive, being bounded
very near by a chain of the Lehigh hills. To the northward is a tract of land
called the dry (...).

In the year 1787, the number of inhabitants amounted to between 500 and 600,
and the houses were about sixty in number, mostly (...) strong buildings of
limestone. The town has since considerably increased.

Besides the church public meeting-hall, there are three large ^^^cious
building, viz.

1. The single brethren's or young men's house, facing the (...) street or
public road. Here the greatest part of the single (...) journeymen and
apprentices of the town are boarded at a moderate, under the inspection of an
elder and warden, and have, be^^^^ the public meetings, their house for
devotions, morning and eve^^^^ prayers. Different trades are carried on in the
house for the benefit of the same.

2. The single sister's, or young women's house, where they live under the care
of female inspectors. Such as are not employed in private families, earn their
bread mostly by spinning, sewing, fine (...) work, knitting and other female
occupations.

Though this house has its particular regulations to preserve (...) and
decorum, and may perhaps bear some resemblance to a nu^^ery* (being sometimes
improperly so called) yet the plan is very different. The ladies are at liberty
to go about their business in the town, or to take a walk for recreation; and
some are employed in private famili^^ or live with their parents; neither are
they bound to remain in the single state, for every year some of them enter
into the (...) state.

As to their almost uniform dress, the women in general for the sake of
avoiding extravagance, and the follies of fashion, have hitherto kept to a
particular simple dress, introduced among them in Germany many years ago.

3. The house for the widow women; where such as have not a house of their own,
or means to have their own house furnished, (...) nearly in the same way as do
the single sisters. Such as are poor, in firm and superannuated, are assisted
or maintained by the congregation, as is the case with other members of the
same, that are not (...) to obtain subsistence for themselves.

There is, besides, an institution of a society of married men, begun since the
year 1770, for the support of their widows. A considerable fund or principal
has been raised by them, the interest of which, as well as the yearly
contributions of the members, is regularly divided among the widows, whose
husbands have been members of the institution.

In the house adjoining the church, is the school for girls; and (...) the year
1787, a boarding school for young ladies from different part* who are
instructed in reading and writing, (both English and German) grammar,
arithmetic, history, geography, needle work, ^^^^sic, etc.

The minister of the place has the special care and inspection of this as well
as of the boys school, which is kept in a separate house, (...) to that
purpose, and are taught reading and writing in both language* the rudiments of
the Latin tongue, arithmetic, etc. These schools, especially that for the young
ladies, are deservedly in very high (...) and scholars more than can be
accommodated, are offered from all (...) of the United States.

Besides the different houses for private tradesmen, mechanics and (...), there
is a public tavern at the north end of the town, with good ^^^modations; also a
store, with a general assortment of goods; ^^^^thecary's shop; and large
farm-yard; and on the lower part, on ^^^^kes creek, is a large tanyard, a
carriers and dyers shop, a grist (...) fulling mill, oil mill and saw mill; and
on the banks of the (...), a brewery.

(...) town is supplied with good water from a spring, which being in ^^wer
part of the town, is raised up the hill by a machine of a my ^^ple
construction, to the height of upwards of 100 feet, into (...), whence it is
conducted by pipes into the several streets and (...) buildings of the town.

The ferry across the river is of such particular contrivance, that (...) large
enough to carry a team of six houses, runs on a strong (...) fixed and
stretched across; and, by the mere force of the (...), without any other
assistance, crosses the river backwards and ^^^ds; the flat always being put in
an oblique direction, with its (...) end verging toward the line described by
the rope.

The greater part of the inhabitants, as well as the people in the
neighborhood, being of German extraction, this language is more in (...) the
English. The latter, however, is taught in the schools, (...) divine service
performed in both languages.

NAZARETH is ten miles north from Bethlehem, and sixty three (...) from
Philadelphia. It is a tract of good land, containing about (...), purchased
originally by the Rev. Mr. George Whitfield, (...), and sold two years after to
the brethren. The town was laid (...) almost in the center of this tract, in
1772. Two streets cross each (...) at right angles, and form a square, in the
middle, of 340 by 200 (...). The largest building is a stone house, erected in
1755, named (...) Hall, 98 feet by 46 long, and 54 in height. In the lower^^
story is a spacious meeting-hall, or church; the upper part of (...) is chiefly
fitted for a boarding school, where youth, from ^^^ent parts, are under the
care and inspection of the minister of (...) and several tutors, and are
instructed in the English, German Latin and French languages; in history
geography, book keep^^^ mathematics, music, drawing and other sciences. The
front of the (...) faces a large square open to the south, adjoining a fine
piece of (...) ground, and commands a most beautiful and extensive pros^^^.
Another elegant building on the east side of Nazareth Hall is ^^^ited by single
sisters, who have the same regulations and way of (...) as those in Bethlehem.
Besides their principal manufactory for (...) and twisting cotton, they have
lately begun to draw wax (...).

At the southwest corner of the aforesaid square, in the middle of the (...) in
the single brethren's house, and on the east southeast corner a (...). On the
southermost end of the street is a good tavern. The (...) are, a few excepted,
built of lime stone, one or two stories high, (...) by tradesmen and mechanics
mostly of German extraction. (...) inhabitants are supplied with water conveyed
to them by pipes (...) fine spring near the town. The place is noted for having
an ^^^ngly pleasant situation, and enjoying a pure and salubrious air. ^^^mber
of inhabitants in the town and farms belonging to it, (...) included)
constituting one congregation, and meeting for divine service on Sundays and
holidays at Nazareth hall, was, (...) that year 1788, about 450.

LITIZ is in Lancaster county, and Warwick township; eight miles from
Lancaster, and seventy miles west from Philadelphia. This settlement was begun
in the year 1757. There are now, besides (...) elegant church, and the houses
of the single brethren and single (...) which form a large square, a number of
houses for private (...) with a store and tavern, all in one street. There is
also a good farm and several mill works belonging to the place. The number of
inhabitants, including those that belong to Litiz congregation, living (...)
(...) farms in the neighborhood, amounted, in 1787, to upwards of (...).

The three last mentioned towns are settled chiefly by Moravians, (...) the
United Brethren.

HARRISBURGH, as it is commonly called, but legally styled Louisburgh, is the
principal town in Dauphin county, is a very flourishing (...) about 100 miles
W. by N. from Philadelphia. It contained in (...) 130 dwelling houses, a stone
goal, and a German church. At that period it had been settled but about three
years.

Washington, 300 miles west of Philadelphia, and beyond the (...) has been
settled since the war, and is remarkable for the variety of (...) manufactures,
for so young and interior a town. It has 32 manufacturers of 22 different kinds.

CURIOUS SPRINGS.] In the neighborhood of Reading, it a spring about fourteen
feet deep, and about 100 feet square. A (...) mill stream issues from it. The
waters are clear and full of (...). From appearances it is probable that this
spring is the outlet of (...) considerable river, which a mile and an half or
two miles abov^^^ place, sinks into the earth, and is conveyed to this outlet
in a (...) ^anean channel.

In the northern parts of Pennsylvania there is a creek called (...) creek,
which empties into the Allegany river. It issues from a sp^^^ on the top of
which floats an oil, similar to that called Barbados (...) and from which one
man may gather several gallons in a day. The troops sent to guard the western
posts, halted at this spring, coll^^^^ some of the oil, and bathed their joints
with it. This gave (...) great relief from the rheumatic complaints with which
they were affected. The waters, of which the troops drank freely, operated
(...) a gentle cathartic.

REMARKABLE CAVES.] There are three remarkable grott^^ (...) caves in this
state; one near Carlisle, in Cumberland county; (...) in the township of
Durham, in Bucks county, and the other at Swetata, in Lancaster county. The
latter is on the east bank of Swetata river, about two miles above its
confluence with the Susquehannah. (...) aperture is under a pretty high bank,
and from fifteen to twenty feet wide, and from seven to ten in height. You
enter, by a gradual descent, so low as that the surface of the river is rather
higher than the bottom of the cave, and in your progress pass through a number
(...) passages and apartments of various dimensions, some low and (...) others
very high and spacious, vaulted by magnificent canopies, ^^^ted with a variety
of depending petrifactions, some of which are (...) to a great length by means
of the constant exudation and accretion of petrifying matter, till solid
pillars have been gradually formed. These appear as supports to the roof, which
is of solid limestone, perhaps (...) (...) thick. Thirty years ago there were
ten such pillars, each six inches in diameter, and six feet high; all so ranged
that the place (...) enclosed resembled a sanctuary in a Roman church. No royal
(...) ever exhibited more grandeur than this lusus naturoe. The re^^^tances of
several monuments are found indented in the walls on (...) sides of the cave,
which appear like the tombs of departed heroes. ^^^^ded from the roof is 'the
bell' (which is nothing more than a (...) projected in an unusual form) so
called from the sound it occa^^^ ^hen struck, which is similar to that of a
bell.

(...) of the stalactites are of a color like sugar candy, and others (...)
loaf sugar; but their beauty is much defaced by the smoke of the torches which
are frequently employed in conducting the cu^^^^ traveller though this gloomy
recess. The water which is exu^^^^ through the roof, runs down the declivity,
and is both pleasant wholesome to drink. There are several holes in the bottom
of (...), descending perpendicularly, perhaps, into an abyss below, (...)
renders it dangerous to walk without a light. At the end of (...) is a pretty
brook, which, after a short course, looses itself a^^^^ the rocks. Beyond this
brook is an outlet from the cave by a (...) narrow aperture. Through this the
vapors continually pass (...) with a strong current of air and ascend,
resembling, at night, (...) smoke of a furnace. Part of these vapors and fogs
appear, on (...), to be condensed at the head of this great alembic, and the
(...) ^^atile parts to be carried off through the aperture communication with
the exterior air before mentioned, by the force of the air in (...).

^^UITIES.] On a high hill, near the Tyoga river, a little to ^^^ward of the
line which divides New York from Pennsylvania (...) to be seen the remains of
an ancient fortification. The form (...) ^^^cular, and it is encompassed with
an entrenchment. The ^^^^ment only remains. The Indians are entirely ignorant
of the (...) of these works. The hill is an excellent situation for a fort,
^^^^ands a delightful view of the country around it, which is (...) fertile.
There is a fortification, of a similar kind, at Unadil^^ in the flat lands, and
they are numerous in the western coun^^^.

CONSTITUTION.] The supreme executive power of the common^^^ i^ vested in a
governor; the legislative, in a general assembly, (...) of a senate and a
house of representatives. The governor (...) for three years, but cannot hold
his office more than nine (...) twelve. A plurality of votes makes a choice.
The represen^^^ are elected for one year; the senators for four. The latter
(...) into four classes. The time of one class expires each (...) whose seats
are then filled by new elections. Each county (...) its representatives
separately. The senators are chosen in dis^^^ formed by the legislature. There
is to be an enumeration of the (...) once in seven years. The number of
senators and repre^^^s, i^, after each enumeration, to be fixed by the
legislature, ^^portioned among the several counties and districts, according
(...) number of taxable inhabitants. There can be never fewer than (...) more
than one hundred representatives. The number of (...) cannot be less than one
fourth, nor greater than one third of representatives. The elections are made
on the second Tuesday of October. The general assembly meets on the first
Tuesday of December, in each year, unless sooner convened by the governor. A
majority of each house makes a quorum to do business, and a less number may
adjourn from day to day and compel the attendance of ^^^bers. Each house
chooses its speaker and other officers, judges the qualifications of its
members, and establishes the rules of (...) ^^^ceedings. Impeachments are made
by the house of representatives and tried by the senate. All bills for raising
revenue origi^^^ (...) the lower house, but the senate may propose amendments.
(...) senators and representatives are free from arrests, while (...) public
business, except in cases of treason, felony and breach (...) peace; and are
not liable to be questioned concerning any thing (...) in public debate. They
are compensated out of the public (...) from which no money can be drawn but in
consequence of ^^^^ation by law. The journals of both houses are published
(...) their doors kept open, unless the business require secrecy. All (...)
which have passed both houses, must be presented to the gover^^^^. If he
approve he must sign them, but if he does not approve (...) (...) return them
within ten days, with his objections, to the house in (...) they originated. No
bill, so returned, shall become a law, unless (...) repassed by two thirds of
both houses. The governor is (...) in chief of the military force; may remit
fines and forfeit^^^ (...) grant reprieves and pardons, except in cases of
impeachment (...) require information from all executive officers; may, on
extra^^^^ry occasions, convene the general assembly, and adjourn it, (...) term
not exceeding four months, in case the two branches (...) (...) on the time
themselves. He must inform the general assembly (...) state of the
commonwealth; recommend such measures as (...) judge expedient; and see that
the laws are faithfully exec^^^ case of vacancy in the office of governor, the
speaker of the (...) exercises that office. -- The judicial power is vested in
a (...) inferior court, the judges of which, and justices of the peace,
appointed by the governor, and commissioned during good (...) but are
removeable on the address of both houses. The other (...) of the state are
appointed, some by the governor, some by the ^^^^al assembly, and some by the
people. -- The qualifications for (...) (...) are 21 years of age, 2 years
residence, and payment of taxes* (...) are privileged from arrests in civil
actions, while attending (...) Those for a representative are, 21 years of age,
and three years (...) ^^^^^itancy. For a senator, 25 years of age, and 4 years
inhabitant (...) a governor, 30 years of age and 7 years inhabitancy. The
(...) can hold no other office. The senators and representatives (...) of
attorney at law, and in the militia. No person, holding (...) (...) of ^rust,
or profit, under the United States, can hold any (...) state, to which a salary
is by law annexed. All the officers (...) state are liable to impeachment, and
are bound by oath, or (...) to support the constitution, and perform the duties
of ^^^^sices.

The declaration of rights asserts the natural freedom and (...) of all;
liberty of conscience; freedom of elections, and of the (...) subordination of
the military to the civil powers; trial by ^^ry ^^^curity from unreasonable
searches and seizures; a right to (...) distribution of justice; to be heard in
criminal prosecutions; to (...) (...) for the redress of grievances; to bear
arms; and to emigrate from (...). It declares that all power is inherent in the
people, and (...) they may, at any time, alter their form of government; that
no (...) shall be obliged ^o maintain religious worship, or support any (...)
that all persons believing in the being of a God, and a fu^^^ of rewards and
punishments, are eligible to office; that laws (...) be suspended but by the
legislature; that all persons shall be baila^^ ^^^ess for capital offenses,
when the proof is evident, or presumption (...) th^^ every deotor shall be
released from prison, on delivering (...) to his creditors, according to law,
except there be strong ^^^^tion of ^raud; that the privileges of the writ of
habe^s corpus (...) be suspended but in time of rebellion, or public danger;
that (...) law shall be made; that no person shall be attainted by ^^^ature, or
forfeit his estate for longer term than his own life; (...) title of nobility,
or hereditary distinction, shall ever be (...).

^^^egoing constitution was ratified in 1790.

(...) other useful laws of this state, of a public nature, are, one (...) all
rivers and creeks to be high ways -- a law for the (...) of negroes, already
mentioned -- a bankrupt law, nearly model of the bankrupt laws of England -- a
law commuting (...) for a long term of years, for death, as a punishment for
(...) which are made capital by the laws of England. Mur^^^, and one or two
other crimes, are yet punished with death.

INVENTIONS.] These have been numerous and useful. (...) others are the
following: A new model of the planetary (...) Mr. Rittenhouse, commonly, but
improperly called an or^^^ quadrant, by Mr. Godfrey, called by the plagiary
name of (...) quadrant -- a steam boat, so constructed, as that by the
assist^^^ steam, operating on certain machinery within the boat, it (...) with
considerable rapidity against the stream, without the aid (...) M^ssrs. Fitch
and Rumsay, contend with each other, for (...) of this invention. Besides these
there have been invent^^^ manufacturing machines, for carding, spinning,
winnowing, (...) perform an immense deal of work with very little manual (...)

(...).] Pennsylvania was granted by king Charles II. to Mr. (...) Penn, son of
the famous admiral Penn, in consideration of (...) services to the crown. (...)
debt was due from the crown to Mr. Penn, a part of which he (...) on condition
he obtained his grant. This, whatever benev^^^ are held out to the world, must
have been a principal consider* (...) the king in making the grant.
Mr. Penn's petition for the (...) presented to the king in 1680; and after
considerable delays, (...) by Lord Baltimore's agent, who apprehended it might
in^^^ with the Maryland patent, the charter of Pennsylvania receiv^^ (...)
signature on the 4th of March 1681. To secure his title (...) claims and
prevent future altercation, Mr. Penn procured (...) deed from the duke of York,
of all the lands, covered by (...), to which the duke could have the least
pretensions. (...) hearts date, August 21, 1682. On the 24th of the same month,
(...) from the duke, by deed of fooffment, Newcastle, with twelve miles of the
adjacent territory, and the lands south to the H^^^ kills. In December
following, Mr. Penn effected a union of the ^^^er counties with the province of
Pennsylvania. See Dr. Franklin's historical review of the constitution and
govern^^^ of Pennsylvania, page 16.


The first frame of government for Pennsylvania, is dated in, (...). By this
form, all legislative powers were vested in the governor (...) freemen of the
province, in the provincial council, and a gen^^^ assembly. The council was to
consist of seventy two members, (...) by the freemen; of which the governor or
his deputy was (...) president, with a treble vote. One third of this council
went (...) office every year, and their seats were supplied by new elections.

The general assembly was at first to consist of all the freemen ^^^wards of
two hundred, and never to exceed five hundred.

In 1683, Mr. Penn offered another frame of government, in (...) the number of
representatives was reduced, and the governor (...) a negative upon all bills,
passed in assembly. By several (...) ^^^guments the people were persuaded to
accept this frame of gove^^^^.

Not long after, a dispute between Mr. Penn and Lord Balti^^^ ^^quired the
former to go to England, and he committed the ad^^^^tion of government to five
commissioners, taken from the (...) In 1686, Mr. Penn required the
commissioners to dissolve the (...) of government; but not being able to effect
his purpose, he (...) appointed Capt. John Blackwell his deputy. From this
(...) proprietors usually resided in England, and administered the ^^^^ment by
deputies, who were devoted to their interest. (...) arose between the people
and their governors, which never (...) the late revolution. The primary cause
of these jealousies, (...) ^^tempt of the proprietary to extend his own power,
and (...) the assembly; and the consequence was, incessant disputes (...)
sensions in the legislature.

In 1689, governor Blackwell, finding himself opposed in his (...) had recourse
to artifice, and prevailed on certain members (...) council to withdraw
themselves from the house; thus defe^^^^ measures of the legislature. Two
instances of a secession of members from the assembly, with (...) views, have
taken place since the revolution, and seem to have been (...) from the example
in 1689.
The house voted this to be (...) and addressed the governor on the occasion.

In 1693, the king and queen assumed the government into the (...) hands. Col.
Fletcher was appointed governor of New York (...) Pennsylvania by one and the
same commission, with equal (...) both provinces. By this commission, the
number of coun^^^^ Pennsylvania was reduced.

Under the administration of governor Markham in 1696, (...) form of government
was established in Pennsylvania. The (...) the council and assembly now became
annual, and the legislature their powers and forms of proceeding, was new
modelled.

In 1699, the proprietary arrived from England and (...) reins of government.
While he remained in Pennsylvania (...) charter of privileges or frame of
government, which continued (...) revolution, was agreed upon and established.
This was (...) and delivered to the people by the proprietary, October 28,
17^^, to his embarking for England. The inhabitants of the Territory, as it
(...) th^n called, or the lower counties, refused to accept this charter, (...)
(...) separated themselves from the province of Pennsylvania. They afterward
had their own assembly, in which the governor of Pennsylvania used to preside.

(...) September 1700, the Susquehannah Indians granted to Mr. Pennsylvania
lands on both sides the river. The Susquehannah, Shawan^^ (...) Patomak
Indians, however, entered into articles of agreement (...) Mr. Penn, by which,
on certain conditions of peaceable and (...) (...) behavior, they were
permitted to settle about the head of (...) (...), in the province of
Pennsylvania. The Conostoga chiefs al^^^, ratified the grant of the
Susquehannah Indians, made the (...) year.

(...) Mr. Penn obtained from the Sachems of the country, a ^^^^tion of the
grants made by former Indians, of all the lands (...) (...) creek to the
mountains, and from the Delaware to the ^^^^^anah. In this deed, the Sachems
declared that 'they had (...) heard read diverse prior deeds which had been
given to Mr. (...) by former chiefs.'

(...) Mr. Penn was in America, he erected Philadelphia into a ^^^^tion. The
charter was dated October 25,1701; by which (...) of the city was vested in a
mayor, recorder, alderman and (...) council, with power to enquire into
treasons, murders and (...); and to enquire into and punish smaller crimes. The
^^^^tion had also extensive civil jurisdiction; but it was dissolved (...)
revolution, and Philadelphia was governed like other coun^^^ the state, till
1789, when it was again incorporated.

(...) the favorable terms which Mr. Penn offered to settlers, and an (...)
toleration of all religious denominations, the population of (...) was
extremely rapid. Notwithstanding the attempts of ^^^^etary or his governors to
extend his own power, and accu^^^ property by procuring grants from the people,
and exempting (...) from taxation, the government was generally mild, and the
(...) of the people by no means oppressive. The selfish de^^ the proprietaries
were vigorously and constantly opposed by the (...), whose firmness preserved
the charter rights of the province. (...) the revolution, the government was
abolished. The proprie^^^^^ were absent, and the people by their
representatives, formed a (...) ^^ituation on republican principles. The
proprietaries were (...) from all share in the government, and the legislature
offered (...) one hundred and thirty thousand pounds in lieu of all quit rents,
(...) was finally accepted. The proprietaries however still possess in
Pennsylvania many large tracts of excellent land.

(...) to be regretted that among all the able writers in this important (...)
none has yet gratified the public with its interesting history. As (...) not
professedly the province of a geographer, a more particular (...) of historical
facts, than has already been given, will not be ex^^^. We shall therefore
conclude with the following list of gov^^^.

A List of the several PROPRIETORS, GOVERNORS, LIEUTENANT GOVERNORS, and
PRESIDENTS of the Province, with the times of their respective administration.
PROPRIETORS.
The Honorable William Penn, born 1644, died 1718. Thomas Penn, and Richard
Penn, died 1771. John Penn, sen. and John Penn, jun.

GOVERNORS, etc.
Lieut. Governor, William Penn, Propr. from Oct. 1682, to Aug. 16^^ President,
Thomas Lloyd, Aug. 1684. to Dec. (...) Dept. Lt. Governor, John Blackwell, Dec.
1688, to Feb. 1689-90 President and council governed, Feb. 1689-90 to April 26,
(...) Dept. Governor, Benjamin Fletcher, 26 April 1693, to 3 June 169^ Lt.
Governor, William Markham, 3 June 1693, to Dec. 16^^ Lt. Governor, William
Penn. Prop. 3 Dec. 1699 to 1 Nov. 1701 Dept. Lt. Governor Andrew Hamilton, 1
Nov. 1701, to Feb. 1702-3 President and Council, governed, Feb. 1702-3 to Feb.
1703-4 Dept. Lt. Governor, John Evans, Feb. 1703-4, to Feb. 17^^-^ Charles
Gookin, March 1708-9. to 1717 Sir William Keith, Bart. 1717 to June 17^^
Patrick Gordon, June, 1726 to 173^ George Thomas, 1738 to 17^^ President.
Anthony Palmer, 1747 to 17^^ Dept. Lt. Governor. James Hamilton, 1748 to Oct.
1754 Robert Hunter Morris, Oct. 1754 to 19 Aug. 1756 William Denny, 19 August
1756 to 17 Nov. 175^ James Hamilton 17 Nov. 1759 to 31 Oct. 17^^ John Penn, 31
Oct. 1763 to 6 May 1771 President. James Hamilton, 6 May 1771 to 16 Oct. 177^
Lt. Governor. Richard Penn, 16 Oct. 1771. Presidents of the Supreme Executive
Council of the State of Pennsylvania. Thomas Wharton, March 1777, to April 17^^
Joseph Reed, Oct. 1778 to Oct. 17^^ William Moore, Nov. 1781 to Nov. 17^^ John
Dickinson, Nov. 1782 to Oct. 17^^ Benjamin Franklin, Oct. 1785 to Oct. 17^^
Thomas Mifflin, Oct. 1788 to Oct. 17^^ Governor. Thomas Mifflin, Oct. 1790

DELAWARE.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 92 Miles. between 38 30 and 40 N. Lat. Square Miles. 2,000 Breadth 24
Miles. 0 and 1 45 W. Lon. Square Miles. 2,000

BOUNDARIES AND NAME.] BOUNDED on the east, by the river and bay of the (...)
name, and the Atlantic ocean; on the south, by a line (...) Fenewick's Island,
in latitude 38 29 30, drawn west till it inter^^^ what is commonly called the
tangent line, dividing it from the state (...) Maryland; on the west, by the
said tangent line, passing north^^^^ up the peninsula, till it touches the
western part of the territo^^ circle; and thence on the north, by the said
circle, described (...) a radius of twelve miles about the town of Newcastle.

This state appears to have derived its name from Lord Delawar, who ^^^^cted
the settlement of Virginia.

CIVIL DIVISIONS.] This state is divided into three counties, which are
subdivided into hundreds.

Counties. No. Inhab. Slaves. Chief Towns. NEW CASTLE 19,686 2562 Newcastle
(...) 18,920 2300 DOVER (...) 20,488 4025 Jews Total 59,091 8887

Before the revolution this district of country was denominated, The three
tower counties."

RIVERS AND CREEKS.] The eastern side of the state is indented (...) a large
number of creeks, or small rivers, which generally have (...) course, soft
banks, numerous shoals, and are skirted with ve^^ ^^^ensive marshes, and empty
into the river and bay of Delaware. The southern and western parts of this
state, spring the head waters ^^comoke, Wicomico, Nanticoke, Choptank, Chester,
Sassafras (...) Bohemia rivers, all falling into Chesapeak bay, and some of
them (...) navigable 20 or 30 miles into the country, for vessels of 50 or 60
(...)*

PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.] Just before the commencement of the (...), a work of
considerable importance was begun at Jews, in the Southern part of the state,
viz. the erection of a bridge and causeway (...) the town, over the creek and
marsh to the opposite cape. This ^^^ensive work was just completed when the
British ships first came (...) the road of Jews. In order to prevent too easy
a communication, they partially removed it; and it being afterward neglected,
it (...) in complete ruins at the close of the war. A bridge upon the ^^^plan,
but upon a new foundation, has lately been erected, at the (...) expense of
individuals. It extends about a quarter of a mile, from the town to the beach,
over a wide creek and marsh. The inhabitants are compensated for their expense,
by the facility of the communication between the town and the cape.

Several canals in different parts of this state, are contemplated, one of
which is down the waters of the Brandywine.

FACE OF THE COUNTRY, SOIL AND PRODUCTIONS.] The state of Delaware, the upper
parts of the county of Newcastle excepted, is, to speak generally, extremely
low and level. Large quantities of stagnant water, at particular seasons of the
year, overspreading a great proportion of the land, render it equally unfit for
the purposes of agriculture, and injurious to the health of the inhabitants.
The spine, or highest ridge of the peninsula, runs through the state of
Delaware, inclined to the eastern of Delaware side. It is designated in Suffax,
Kent, and part of Newcastle county, by a remarkable chain of swa^^^^, from
which the waters descend on each side, passing, on the east, to the Delaware,
and on the west to the Chesapeak. Many of the shrubs and plants, growing in
these swamps, are similar to those seconds on the highest mountains.

Delaware is chiefly an agricultural state. It includes a very (...) tract of
country; and scarcely any part of the union can be selected more adapted to the
different purposes of agriculture, or in which a greater variety of the most
useful productions can be so conveniently and plentifuly reared. The foil along
the Delaware river, and from 8 to 10 miles into the interior country, is
generally a rich clay, producing large timber, and well adapted to the various
purposes of agriculture. From thence to the swamps above mentioned, the soil is
light, sandy and of an inferior quality.

The general aspect of the country is very favorable for cultivation.
Excepting some of the upper parts of the county of Newcastle, the surface of
the state is very little broken or irregular. The heights of Christiana are
lofty and commanding; some of the hills of Brandywine are rough and stony; but
descending from these, and a (...) others, the lower country is so little
diversified as almost to form one extended plain. In the county of New castle,
the soil consists of a strong clay; in Kent, there is a considerable mixture of
sand; and in S^ssex, the quantity of sand altogether predominates. Wheat is the
staple of this state. It grows here in such perfection as not only to be
particularly sought by the manufacturers of flour throughout the union, but
also to be distinguished and preferred, for its superior qualities, in foreign
markets. This wheat possesses an uncommon softness and whiteness, very
favorable to the manufacture of superfine flour, and in other respects, far
exceeds the hard and flinty grains raised in general on the high lands. Besides
wheat, this state generally produces plentiful crops of Indian corn, barley,
rye, oats, flax, buckwheat, and potatoes. It abounds in natural and artificial
meadows containing a large variety of grasses. Hemp, cotton, and silk, if
properly attended to, doubtless would flourish very well.

The county of S^ssex, besides producing a considerable quantity of grain,
particularly of Indian corn, possesses excellent grazing lands. This county
also exports very large quantities of lumber, obtained chiefly from an
extensive swamp, called the Indian River or Cypress Swamp, lying partly within
this state, and partly in the state of Maryland. This morass extends six miles
from the east to west, and nearly twelve from north to south, including an area
of nearly fifty thousand acres of land. The whole of this swamp is a high and
level basin, very wet, though undoubtedly the highest land between the sea and
the (...), whence the Pokomoke descends on one side, and Indian River and St.
Martin's on the other. This swamp contains a great variety of plants, trees,
wild beasts, birds and reptiles.

CHIEF TOWNS.] DOVER, in the county of Kent, is the seat of government. It
stands on Jones' creek, a few miles from the Delaware river, and consists of
about 100 houses, principally of brick. (...) streets intersect each other at
right angles, whose incidencies form ^^^^cious parade, on the east side of
which is an elegant state house of brick. The town has a lively appearance and
drives on a considerable trade with Philadelphia. Wheat is the principal
article of export. The landing is five or six miles from the town of Dover.

NEWCASTLE is 35 miles below Philadelphia, on the west bank of Delaware river.
It was first settled by the Swedes, about the year say, and called Stockholm.
It was afterward taken by the Dutch, and called New Amsterdam. When it fell
into the hands of the English, it was called by its present name. It contains
about 60 houses which have the aspect of decay, and was formerly the feat of
government. -- This is the first town that was settled on Delaware river.

WILMINGTON is situated a mile and a half west of Delaware river, of Christiana
creek, 28 miles southward from Philadelphia. It is much the largest and
pleasantest town in the state, containing upwards of ^00 houses, which are
handsomely built upon a gentle ascent of an ^^tnence, and show to great
advantage as you sail up the Delaware. (...) contains about 2400 inhabitants.
In this town are a Presbyterian (...) -- a Swedish Episcopal church -- a
Baptist and a Quaker (...) -- and a few methodists. There is also a flourishing
academy of about 40 or 50 scholars, who are taught the languages, and some of
the sciences. This academy, in proper time, is intended to be erected (...) a
college. There is another academy at Newark, in this county, which was
incorporated in 1769. These academies were interrupted sharing the war, and
their funds ruined by the depreciation of Conti^^^ paper money. Since the peace
learning seems to revive and (...)

^ILFORD, is situated at the source of a small river, 15 miles from Delaware
bay, and 150 southward of Philadelphia. This town, which contains about 80
houses, has been built, except one house, (...) evolution. It is laid out with
much good taste, and is by no means disagreeable. The inhabitants are
Episcopalians, Quakers and Methodists.

DUCK ^REEK CROSS ROADS, is 12 miles northwest from Dover, and has 80 or 90
houses, which stand on one street. It carries on a considerable trade with
Philadelphia, and is one of the largest wheat markets in the state. Kent is
also a place of considerable trade.

JEWS is situated a few miles above the light house, on Cape Hen^^^. It
contains about 150 houses, built chiefly on a street which (...) more than
three miles in length, and extending along a creek which separates the town
from the pitch of the cape. The situation is high, and commands a full prospect
of the light house, and the sea. The court house and goal are commodious
buildings, and give an air of importance to the town. The situation of this
place, must at some (...) time render is considerably important. Placed at the
entrance of a bay, which is crowded with vessels from all parts of the world,
and which is frequently closed with ice a part of the winter season, necessity
seems to require, and nature seems to suggest, the forming this port into a
harbor for shipping. Nothing has prevented this heretofore, but the deficiency
of water in the creek. This want can be cheaply and easily supplied by a small
canal, so as to afford a passage for the waters of Rehoboth into Jews creek,
which would ^^^sure an adequate supply. The circumjacent country is beautifully
diversified with hills, wood, streams and lakes, forming an agreeable contrast
to the naked sandy beach, which terminates in the cape; but it is greatly
infested with musketoes and sand flies.

TRADE AND MANUFACTURES.] We have already mentioned wheat as the staple
commodity of this state. This is manufactured into flour and exported in large
quantities. The exports from the part of Wilmington, where a number of square
rigged vessels are owned, for the year 1786, in the article of flour, was
20,783 barrels superfine, 457 do. common, 256 do. middlings, and 346 do. ship
stuff. The manufacture of flour is carried to a higher degree of perfection in
this state, than in any others in the Union. Besides the well constructed mills
on Red clay and white clay creeks, and other streams in different parts of the
state, the celebrated collection of mills at Brandywine merit a particular
description. Here are to be seen, at one view, 12 merchant mills (besides a saw
mill) which have double that number of pairs of stones, all of superior
dimensions, and excellent construction. These mills are 3 miles from the mouth
of the creek on which they stand, half a mile from Wilmington, and 27 from
Philadelphia, on the post road from the eastern to the southern states. They
are called the Brandywine mills, from the stream on which they are erected.
This stream rises near the Welsh mountains in Pennsylvania, and after a winding
course of 30 or 40 miles through falls, which furnish numerous seats (130 of
which are already occupied) for every species of water works, empties into
Christiana creek, near Wilmington. The quantity of wheat manufactured at these
mills, annually, is not accurately ascertained. It is estimated, however, by
the best informed on the subject, that these mills can grand 400,000 bushels in
a year. But although they are capable of manufacturing this quantity yearly,
yet from the difficulty of procuring a permanent supply of grain, the
instability of the flour market and other circumstances, there are not commonly
more than from about 290 to 300,000 bushels of wheat and corn manufactured here
annually. In the fall of 1789, and spring of 1790, there were made at the
Brandywine mills 50,000 barrels of superfine flour, 1354 do. of common, 400 do.
middlings, as many of ship stuff, and 2000 do. corn meal. The quantity of wheat
and corn ground, from which this flour etc. was made, was 308,000 bushels,
equal to the export in those articles, from the port of Philadelphia for the
same year.

These mills give employment to about 200 persons, viz. about 40 to tend the
mills, from 50 to 70 coopers, to make casks for the flour, a sufficient number
to man 12 sloops of about 30 tons each, which are employed in the
transportation of the wheat and flour, the rest in various other occupations
connected with the mills. The navigation quite to these mills is such, that a
vessel carrying 1000 bushels of wheat may be laid along side of any of these
mills; and beside some of them the water is of sufficient depth to admit
vessels of twice the above size. The vessels are unloaded with astonishing
expedition. There have been instances of 1000 bushels being carried to the
height (...) stories in 4 hours. It is frequently the case that vessels with
1000 (...) of wheat come up with flood tide, unlade and go away the suc^^^ing
ebb with 300 barrels of flour on board. In consequence of the machines
introduced by the ingenious Mr. Oliver Evans, three quar^^^ of the manual
labor before found necessary is now sufficient for (...) purpose. By means of
these machines, when made use of in the full extent proposed by the inventor,
the wheat will be received on the shallop's deck -- thence carried to the upper
loft of the mill -- and a considerable portion of the same returned in flour on
the lower some, ready for packing, without the assistance of manual labor but
in a very small degree, in proportion to the business done. The transportation
of flour from these mills to the port of Wilmington, does not require half an
hour, and it is frequently the case that a cargo is taken (...) the mills and
delivered at Philadelphia the same day. The situation of these mills is very
pleasant and healthful -- The first mill was (...) here about 50 years since.
There is now a small town of 40 houses, principally stone and brick, which,
together with the mills and the vessels loading and unloading beside them,
furnish a charming prospect from the bridge, from whence they are all in full
view.

Besides the wheat and flour trade this state exports lumber and various other
articles. The amount of exports for the year ending September 30th 1791, was
199,840 dollars.

LIGHT HOUSE.] The Light House, near the town of Lowes, was (...) in 1777.
Since the war it has been completed and handsomely (...). It is a fine stone
structure, 8 stories high; the annual ex^^^ of which is estimated at about
650l. currency.

RELIGION.] In this state there is a variety of religious denomina^^^^. Of the
Presbyterian sect, there are 24 churches -- of the Episcopal, 14 -- of the
Baptist, 7 -- of the Methodist, a considerable number, especially in the two
lower counties of Kent and Sussex, the number of their churches is not exactly
ascertained. Besides these there (...) Swedish Church at Wilmington, which is
one of the oldest church^^^ the United States.

POPULATION.] See table of divisions.

MINERALS.] In the county of Sussex, among the branches of the ^^^ticoke river,
large quantities of bog iron ore are to be found. Before the revolution, this
ore was worked to considerable extent; it was thought to be of a good quality,
and peculiarly adapted to the purposes of castings. These works have chiefly
fallen to decay.

CONSTITUTION.] The constitution of this state begins by declaring some of the
rights of the people, and enumerates nearly the some that are mentioned in the
declaration of rights of Pennsylvania. It then delegates the legislative power
to a general assembly consisting of a senate and a house of representatives;
and the executive, to a governor. All these are chosen by the people on the
first Tuesday of October -- the governor for 3 years; but he is not eligible
for the next above. He must be thirty years old, and have been an inhabitant of
the state 6 years, and of the United States 12 years. A plurality, of votes
makes a choice. The Senators are chosen for 3 years, must be 27 years old,
freeholders of 200 acres of land, or possessed of 100l. property, and have been
inhabitants of the state 3 years. They are divided into 3 classes, the time of
one class expiring each year, and their found being filled by new erections. --
The representatives are chosen (...) one year, must be 24 years old,
freeholders, and have been ^^^^tants 3 years. The constitution provides that
there shall be 7 representatives and 3 senators chosen by each county; but the
general ^^^bly has power to increase the number, where two thirds of each (...)
shall think it expedient; provided the number of senators shall (...) (...) be
greater than one half, nor less than one third, of the number (...)
representatives. The general assembly meets on the first Tuesday of January
annually, unless sooner convened by the governor. Each branch has all the
powers necessary for a branch of the legislative of a free and independent
state. A majority of each constitution quorum to do business, and a less number
may adjourn from day (...) day and compel the attendance of members. They are
(...) from arrests while attending on public business, except in (...) treason,
felony and branch of the peace, and for things said in (...) (...) bate, are
not questionable elsewhere. They are compensated out of the public treasury,
from which no money can be drawn but in ^^^quence of appropriation by law.
Impeachments are made by the ^^er house, and tried by the senate. Revenue bills
originate (...) (...) house for representatives, but the senate may propose
alteration (...) journal is kept of their proceedings, and published at the and
of (...) session, and the doors of both houses are kept open unless the (...)
require secrecy. -- The governor is commander in chief of the (...) force; may
remit fines and forfeitures and grant reprieves and (...) except in cases of
impeachment; may require information from all (...) ^^^tive officers, may
convene the general assembly on extraordinary ^^^sions, and adjourn them to any
time not exceeding 3 months, (...) (...) cannot agree on the time themselves.
He must inform them of (...) concerning the state, recommend to them such
measures as (...) judge expedient, and see that the laws are faithfully
executed. (...) speaker of the senate, and after him, the speaker of the house
(...) representatives, shall exercise the office of governor, in case of (...)
-- The Judicial power is vested in a court of chancery, and (...) common law
courts. The judges are appointed by the government, (...) commissioned during
good behavior, and the justices of the (...) for 7 years; all removable on the
address of two thirds of both (...) of assembly. The other officers of the
state are appointed, some by the governor, some by the general assembly, and
some by the people. No ^^^son concerned in any army or navy contract, or
holding any (...), ^^^cept the attorney general, officers usually appointed by
the courts of justice, attorneys at law, and officers in the militia, can be a
senate (...) representative. The governor can hold no other office. No ^^^al
officer can hold an office in this state to which a salary is by (...) annexed.
The clergy are excluded from all civil offices. All (...) are impeachable and
are bound by oath or affirmation to support (...) constitution, and perform the
duties of their officers. All free ^^^men, 21 years old, having been (...)
years inhabitants, and paid (...) are electors; and are privileged from arrests
in civil actions (...) ^^tending elections. The general assembly, with the
approbation (...) (...) governor, have a right under certain regulations and
restrictions (...) make amendments to this constitution. A convention may also
(...) ^^ed where a majority of the people shall signify their wish for it.

The foregoing constitution was ratified on the 12th of June, 179^.

HISTORY.] The reader will find a well written sketch of the his^^^^ of this
state in the American Edition of the Encyclopedia, ^^^shing by Thomas Dobson,
in Philadelphia.

TERRITORY N. W. OF THE OHIO.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 900 Miles. between 37 and 50 N. Lat. Square Miles. 411,000 Breadth 700
Miles. 6 and 23 W. Lon. Square Miles. 411,000.

BOUNDARIES.] THIS extensive tract of country is bounded north, by part of the
northern boundary (...) of the United States; east, by the lakes and
Pennsylvania; south, (...) the Ohio river; West, by the Mississippi. Mr.
Hutchins, the (...) geographer of the United States, estimates that this tract
contains ^^^^40,000 acres, of which 43,040,000 are water; the deducted, (...)
will remain 220,000,000 of acres, belonging to the federal government, to be
sold for the discharge of the national debt; except a (...) strip of land
bordering on the south of Lake Erie, and stretch^^^^ (...) miles west of the
western limit of Pennsylvania, which be^^^ to Connecticut.

(...) a small proportion of these lands is yet purchased of the na^^^^, and to
be disposed of by congress. Beginning on the meridian (...) which forms the
western boundary of Pennsylvania, seven rang^^^^ townships have been surveyed
and laid off by order of congress. (...) a north and south line strikes the
Ohio in an oblique direction, the ^^^^tion of the 7th range falls upon that
river, 9 miles above (...) Muskingum, which is the first large river that falls
into the Ohio. (...) this junction 172 miles below Fort Pit, including the
wind^^^^ of the Ohio, though in a direct line it is but 90 miles.

The lands in which the Indian title is extinguished, and which are (...)
purchasing under the United States, are defined within the lim^^^^ mentioned
page 148, to which the reader is referred. On these (...) several settlements
are commencing, one at Marietta, at the (...) of Muskingum, under the direction
of the Ohio company -- (...) between the Miami rivers, under the direction of
Colonel (...); and a French Settlement at Galliopolis. There are several other
tracts, delineated on the map, which have been granted by con^^^^ to particular
companies, and other tracts for particular uses, which (...) without any
English settlements.

CIVIL DIVISIONS.] That part of this territory in which the In^^^^ title is
extinguished, and which is settling under the government of the United States,
is divided into four counties as follows, Counties. When erected. Washington
1788 July 26th Hamilton 1790 Jan. 2d St. Clair 1790 April 27th Knox 1790 June
20th

These counties have been organized with the proper civil and military
officers. The county of St. Clair is divided into three districts, viz. the
district of Cahokia, the district of Prairie-du-rochers, and the district of
Kaskaskias. Courts of general quarter sessions of the peace, county courts of
common pleas, and courts of probate, to be held in each of these districts, as
if each was a distinct county; the officers of the county to act by deputy,
except in the district where they reside.

RIVERS.] The Muskingum is a gentle river, confined by banks so high as to
prevent its overflowing. It is 250 yards wide at its confidence with the Ohio,
and navigable by large batteaux and barges to the Three Legs; and, by small
ones, to the lake at its head. From thence, by a portage of about one mile, a
communication is opened to Lake Erie, through the Cayahoga, which is a stream
of great utility, navigable the whole length, without any obstruction from
falls. From Lake Erie, the avenue is well known to the Hudson, in the state of
New York.

The Hockhocking resembles the Muskingum, though somewhat inferior in size. It
is navigable for large boats about 70 miles, and for small ones much further.
On the banks of this very useful stream are found inexhaustible quarries of
free stone, large (...) iron ore, and some rich mines of lead. Coal mines and
salt (...) are frequent in the neighborhood of this stream, as they are in
every part of the western territory. The salt that may be obtained from those
springs will afford an inexhaustible store of that necessary article. Beds of
white and blue clay, of an excellent quality, are likewise found here, suitable
for the manufacture of glass, crockery and other earthen wares. Red bole and
many other useful fossils have been observed on the branches of this river.

The Scioto is a larger river, than either of the preceding, and opens a more
extensive navigation. It is passable for large barges for (...) miles, with a
portage of only 4 miles to the Sandusky, a good navigable stream that falls
into the Lake Erie. Through the Sandusky and Scioto lies the most common pass
from Canada to the Ohio and Mississippi; one of the most extensive and useful
communications that are to be found in any country. Prodigious extensions of
territory are here connected; and, from the rapidity with which the western
parts of Canada, Lake Erie and the Kentucky countries are settling, we may
anticipate an immense intercourse between them. The lands on the borders of
these middle streams, from this circumstance alone, aside from their natural
fertility, must be rendered vastly valuable. The flour, corn, flax, hemp, etc.
raised for exportation in that great country between the Lakes Huron and
Ontario, will find an outlet through Lake Erie and these rivers, or down the
Mississippi. The Ohio merchant can give a higher price than those of Quebec,
for these commodities; as they may be transported from the former to Florida
and the West India islands, with less expense, risk and insurance, than from
the latter; while the expense from the place of growth to the Ohio will not be
one fourth of what it would be to Quebec, and much less than even to the Oneida
lake. The stream of Scioto is gentle, no where broken by falls: At some places,
in the spring of the year, it overflows its banks, providing for large natural
rice plantations. Salt springs, coal mines, white and blue clay, and free
stone, abound in the country adjoining this river.

The Little Miami is too small for batteaux navigation. Its banks are good
land, and so high as to prevent, in common, the overflowing of the water.

The Great Miami has a very stoney channel, and a swift stream, but no falls.
It is formed of several large branches, which are passable for boats a great
distance. One branch comes from the west, and (...) in the Wabash country:
Another rises near the head waters of Miami river, which runs into Lake Erie;
and a short portage divides another branch of Sandusky river. It also
interlocks with the Scioto.

The Wabash in a beautiful river, with high and fertile banks. It empties into
the Ohio, by a mouth 270 yards wide, 1020 miles below fort Pit. In the spring,
summer and autumn, it is passable with batteaux drawing three feet water, 412
miles, to Ouitanon, a small French settlement, on the west side of the river;
and for large canoes 197 (...) further, to the Miami carrying place, 9 miles
from Miami village. This village stands on Miami river, which empties into the
northwest part of Lake Erie. The communication between Detroit, and the
Illinois, and Ohio countries, is up Miami river to Miami village, thence, by
land, 9 miles, when the rivers are high -- and from 18 to 30 when they are low,
through a level country to the Wabash, and through the various branches of the
Wabash to the places of destination.

A ^lver mine has been discovered about 28 miles above Quiatanon, (...) the
northern side of the Wabash. Salt springs, lime, freestone, (...), yellow and
white clay, are found in plenty upon this river.

The rivers A Vase and Kaskaskias empty into the Mississippi from the
northeast; the former is navigable for boats 60, and the latter about 130
miles. They both run through a rich country, which has extensive ^^^adows.

Between the Kaskaskias and Illinois rivers, which are 84 miles apart, is an
extensive tract of level, rich land, which terminates in a high ridge, about 15
miles before you reach the Illinois river. In this delightful vale are a number
of French villages which, together with those of St. Genevieve and St. Louis,
on the western side of the Mississippi, contained in 1771, 1273 fencible men.

One hundred and seventy six miles above the Ohio, and 18 miles above the
Missouri, the Illinois empties into the Mississippi from the northeast by a
mouth about 400 yards wide. This river is bordered with fine meadows, which in
some places extend as far as the eye can reach: This river furnishes a
communication with Lake Michigan, by the Chicago river, between which and the
Illinois, are two portages, the longest of which does not exceed four miles. It
receives a number of rivers which are from 20 to 100 yards wide, and navigable
for boats from 15 to 180 miles. On the northwestern side of this river is a
coal mine, which extends for half a mile along the middle of the back of the
river, and about the same distance below the coal mine are the salt ponds, 100
yards in circumference, and several feet in depth. The water is stagnant, and
of a yellowish color; but the French and natives make good salt from it. The
soil of the Illinois country it, in general, of a superior quality -- Its
natural growth consists of (...), hicory, cedar, mulberry, etc. hops, dying
drugs, medicinal plants of several kinds, and excellent wild grapes. In the
year 1769, the French settlers made 110 hogsheads of strong wine from these
grapes.

These are many other rivers of equal size and importance with those we have
been describing, which are not sufficiently known for accurate descriptions.

POPULATION.] The number of souls in this large tract of country has not been
ascertained. From the best data the Author has received, the population may be
estimated as follows.

Indians, (suppose) 65,000 The tribes who inhabit this country are the
Piantias, on both sides the Missisippi -- the Casquerasquias, on the Illinois
-- the Plankashaws and other tribes on the Wabash -- the Shawanese, on the
Scoita -- the Delawares -- the Miamis -- the Quiscons, Mascontens, Sakies,
Sioux, Mekekouakis -- the (...), Powtowatamis, Messaques, Ottawas, Chiqewas and
Wiandots. The whole amounting to the above number.
1792. Ohio Company purchase, 2,500 Do. Col. Symmes' settlements, 2,000 Do.
Galliopolis, (French settlement) opposite the Kanhawa river, 1,000 Do.
Vincennes and its vicinity, on the Wabash, 1,500 Do. Kaskaskias and Cahokia,
680 1790. At Grand Ruisseau, village of St. Phillip and Prairie-du-rochers, 240
Do. Total 72,820

In 1790, there were, in the town of Vincennes, about 40 American families, and
31 slaves; and on the Missisippi 40 American families and 73 slaves, all
included in the above estimate. On the Spanish or western side of the
Missisippi, there were in 1790, about 1800 souls, principally at Genevieve and
St. Louis.

FACE OF THE COUNTRY, SOIL AND PRODUCTIONS.{ To the remarks on these heads,
interspersed in the description of the rivers, we will add some observations
from an annonymous pamphlet published not long since, which we presume are the
most authentic, respecting that part of that country which has been purchased
of the Indians, of any that have been given.

'The undistinguished terms of admiration, that are commonly used in speaking
of the natural fertility of the country on the western waters of the United
States, would render it difficult, without acc^^^ attention in the surveys, to
ascribe a preference to any particular part; or to give a just description of
the territory under consideration, without the hazard of being suspected of
exaggeration: But in this we have the united opinion of the geographer, the
surveyors, and every traveller that has been intimately acquainted with the
country, and marked every natural object with the most scrupulous exactness --
That no part of the federal territory unites so many advantages, in point of
health, fertility, variety of production, and foreign intercourse, as that
tract which stretches from the Muskingum to the Scioto and the Great Miami
rivers. A Gentleman who has visited this country supposes this account is a
little too highly embellished. He acknowledges that it is a very fine country,
but thinks that there are other parts of the western unsettled country which
(...) at least as many if not more advantages, than the tract abovementioned.


'Colonel Gordon, in his journal, speaking of a much larger range of country,
in which this is included, and makes unquestionably the finest part, has the
following observation: -- The country on the Ohio is every where pleasant, with
large level spots of rich land; and remarkably healthy. One general remark of
this nature will serve for the whole tract of the globe comprehended between
the western skirts of the Allegany mountains; thence running southwestwardly to
the distance of 500 miles to the Ohio falls; then crossing them northerly to
the heads of the rivers that empty themselves into the Ohio; thence last along
the ridge that separates the lakes and Ohio streams, to French Creek -- This
country may, from a proper knowledge, be af^^^ed to be the most healthy, the
most pleasant, the most commodious and most fertile spot of earth, known to the
European people."

"The lands on the various streams abovementioned, which fall into the Ohio,
are now more accurately known, and may be described with confidence and
precision. They are interspersed with all the variety of soil which conduces to
pleasantness of situation, and lays the foundation for the wealth of an
agricultural and manufacturing people. Large level bottoms, or natural meadows,
from 20 to 50 miles in circuit, are every where found bordering the rivers, and
variegating the country in the interior parts. These afford as rich a soil as
and be imagined, and may be reduced to proper cultivation with very little
labor. It is said, that in many of these bottoms, a man may clear an acre a
day, fit for planting with Indian corn; there being no under wood; and the
trees, growing very high and large, but not thick ^^^ther, need nothing but
girdling.

"The prevailing growth of timber and the more useful trees are, (...) or sugar
tree, sycamore, black and white mulberry, black and white walnut, butternut,
chestnut; white, black, Spanish and chestnut (...), hiccory, cherry, buckwood or
hearse chestnut, honey locust, (...) cucumber tree, lynn tree, gum tree, iron
wood, ash, as^^^^, sassafras, crab apple tree, paupaw or custard apple, a
variety of (...) trees, nine bark spice, and leather wood bushes. General
Par^^^ measured a black walnut tree, near the Muskingum, whose circum^^^encee,
at five feet from the ground, was 22 feet. A sycamore, near (...) same place,
measured 44 feet in circumference, at some distance from the gound. White and
black oak, and chestnut, with most of (...) abovementioned timbers, grow large
and plenty upon the high (...). Both the high and low lands produce vast
quantities of (...) grapes of various kinds, of which the settlers universally
make a sufficiency for their own consumption of rich red wine. It (...)
asserted in the old settlement of St. Vincent, where they have had opportunity
to try it, that age will render this wine preferable to most (...) the European
wines. Cotton is the natural production of this country, and grows in great
perfection.

"The sugar maple is a most valuable tree for an inland country. Any number of
inhabitants may be forever supplied with a sufficiency of (...), by preserving
a few trees for the use of each family. A tree (...) yield about ten pounds of
sugar a year, and the labor is very (...): The sap is extracted in the months
of February and March, and granulated, by the simple operation of bo^ling, to a
sugar equal in (...) and whiteness to the best Muscovado.

"Springs of excellent water abound in every part of this territory; (...)
small and large streams, for mills and other purposes, are actually ^^^^^ersed,
as if by art, that there be no deficiency in any of the ^^^eniences of life.

"Very little waste land is to be found in any part of this (...) country.
There are no swamps but such as may be readily (...) and made into arable and
meadow land; and though the hills are (...) ^^quent, they are gentle and
swelling, no where high or incap^^^^ tillage. They are of a deep, rich soil,
covered with a heavy (...) of timber, and well adapted to the production of
wheat, rye, (...) tobacco, etc.

"The communications between this country and the sea, (...) principally in the
four following directions.

"1. The route through the Scioto and Muskingum to Lake (...) so to the river
Hudson; which has been already described.

"2. The passage up the Ohio and Monongahela to the (...) ^^bovementioned,
which leads to the navigable waters of the (...). This portage is thirty miles,
and will probably be rendered (...) (...) by the execution of the plans now on
foot for opening the nav^^^ of those waters.

"3. The Great Kanhaway, which falls into the Ohio from (...) Virginia shore,
between the Hockhocking and the Scioto, (...) (...) extensive navigation from
the southeast, and leaves but 18 miles (...) age from the navigable waters of
James river, in Virginia. This (...) ^^munication, for the country between
Muskingum and Scioto, (...) probably be more used than any other, for the
exportation of (...) ^^factures, and other light and valuable articles; and,
especially, (...) importation of foreign commodities, which may be brought
(...) Chesapeek to the Ohio, much cheaper than they are now carried (...)
Philadelphia to Carlisle, and the other thick settled back (...) Pennsylvania.
A gentleman of much observation, and a great traveller in this (...) it of
(...) communication or route, is chimerical.


"4. But the current down the Ohio and Missisippi, for heavy ^^^^cles that suit
the Florida and West India markets, such as corn (...) beef, lumber, etc. will
be more frequently loaded than any (...) earth. The distance from the Scioto to
the Missisippi is 800 (...) from thence to the sea is 900. This whole course is
easily run (...) days; and the passage up those rivers is not so difficult as
has (...) been represented. It is found, by late experiments, that fails are
(...) to great advantage against the current of the Ohio: And it is (...) of
observation, that in all probability stream beats will be found (...) infinite
service in all our extensive river navigation.

"The design of Congress and of the Ohio Company is, (...) (...) settlements
shall proceed regularly down the Ohio; and north^^^ (...) Lake Erie. And it is
probable that not many years will elapse ^^^fore the whole country above Miami
will be brought to that (...) cultivation, which will exhibit all its latent
beauties, and justify (...) descriptions of travelers which have so often made
it the garden (...) the world, the seat of wealth, and the center of a great
empire."

ANIMALS, etc.] "No country is better stocked with wild (...) of every kind:
Innumerable herds of deer, and wild cattle, (...) ^^tered in the groves, and
fed in the extensive bottoms that every (...) abound: an unquestionable proof
of the great fertility of (...) Turkies, geese, ducks, swans, teal, pheasants,
partridges, etc. (...) observation, believed to be in greater plenty here, than
the tam^ (...) try are in any part of the old settlements in America.

(...) are well stored with fish of various kinds, and many (...) of an
excellent quality. They are generally large, though of (...) sites. The cat
fish, which is the largest, and of a delicious (...) weighs from 6 to 80
pounds."

^^^^ITIES AND CURLO^IT^ES.] The number of old forts, (...) the Kentucky
country, are the admiration of the curious, and (...) of much speculation. They
are mostly of an oblong form, (...) strong, well chosen ground, and contiguous
to water. (...) whom, and for what purpose, these were thrown up, is un^^^^
(...) they are undoubtedly very ancient, as there is not the least visi^^^^ in
the age or size of the timber growing on or within (...) and that which grows
without; and the oldest natives have (...) tradition respecting them. Dr.
Cutler, who has accurately ex^^^^ the ones on these forts, and which he thinks,
from appearan^^^^^ (...) second growth, is of opinion that they must have been
(...) upwards of 1000 years ago. They must have been the efforts of (...)
church more devoted to labor than our present race of In^^^^ it is difficult
to conceive how they could be constructed (...) use of iron tools. At a
convenient distance from these (...) stands a small mound of earth, thrown up
in the form of a (...), and seems in some measure proportioned to the size of
its adja^^^^ ^^casion. On examination, they have been found to con^^^^ (...)
substance, supposed to be bones, and of the human kind. (...) (...) this head
we may mention the extensive meadows, or as the (...) them Prairie, which
answer to what, in the southern states, (...). They are a rich plain, without
trees and cover^^^^ grass. Some of these, between St. Vincennes and the Mis^^^
30 or 40 miles in extent. In passing them, as far as the eye (...) there is not
a tree to be seen; but there is plenty of deer, (...) little, bears, and
wolves, and innumerable flocks of turkies; these, (...) green grass, form a
rich and beautiful prospect.

(...).] The posts established for the protection of the frontiers, (...)
Franklin, on French Creek -- Harmar, at the mouth of (...) -- Stub^n, at the
rapids of the Oirio -- Fayette, Hamilton, (...), St. Clair, Marietta, and St.
Vincennes.

^^^^^NMENT. etc.] By an ordinance of congress, passed on the (...) July 1787,
this country, for the purposes of temporary gov^^^^ was erected into one
district, subject, however, to a division, (...) circumstances shall make it
expedient.

(...) same ordinance it is provided, that congress shall appoint a (...),
whose commission shall continue in force three years, unless (...).

(...) governor must reside in the district, and have a freehold es^^^^, in
1000 acres of land, while in the exercise of his office. (...), from time to
time, are to appoint a secretary, to con^^^^ office four years, unless sooner
removed, who must reside (...) district, and have an estate of 500 acres of
land, while in (...).

(...) of the secretary is, to keep and preserve the acts and (...)
legislature, and the public records of the district, and the (...) (...)
governor, in his executive department; and to (...) (...) copies of such acts
and proceedings, every six (...) in the secretary of congress.

The ordinance provides that congress shall appoint three judges, possessed
each of 500 acres of land in the district in which they are to reside, and to
hold their commissions during good behavior, any two of whom shall form a
court, which shall have a common law jurisdiction. The governor and judges are
authorized to adopt and publish in the district, such laws of the original
states, criminal and civil, as may be necessary and best suited to the
circumstances of the district, and report them to congress, and, if approved,
they shall continue in force, till the organization of the general assembly of
the district, who shall have authority to alter them. The governor is to
command the militia, and appoint and commission their officers, except general
officers, who are to be appointed and commissioned by congress.

Previously to the organization of the assembly, the governor is to appoint
such magistrates and civil officers, as shall be deemed necessary for the
preservation of peace and order.

So soon as there shall be 5000 free male inhabitants of full age, in the
district, they shall receive authority to elect representatives, one for every
500 free male inhabitants, to represent them in the general assembly; the
representation to increase progressively with the number of free male
inhabitants till there be 25 representatives; after which the number and
proportion of the representatives shall be regulated by the legislature. A
representative must possess, in fee simple, 200 acres of land, and be a
resident in the district -- and must have been a citizen of the United States,
or a resident in the district, three years preceding his election. An elector
must have (...) acres of land in the district, must have been a citizen of one
of the states, and must be a resident in the district, or must possess the same
freehold and have been two years a resident in the district. The
representatives, when duly elected, are to continue in office two years.

The general assembly, or legislature, shall consist of the governor,
legislative council and house of representatives. The legislative council shall
consist of five members, to continue in office five years, unless sooner
removed by congress. Three make a quorum. The council are to be thus appointed:
The governor and representatives, when met, shall nominate ten persons,
residents in the district, and each possessed of a freehold in 500 acres of
land, and return their names to congress, who shall appoint and commission five
of them to serve as aforesaid.

All bills passed by a majority in the house, and in council, shall be referred
to the governor for his assent; but no bill, or legislative act whatever, shall
be of force without his assent. The governor shall have power to convene,
prorogue, and dissolve the general assembly, when, in his opinion, it shall be
expedient.

The legislature, when organized, shall have authority, by joint ^^^lot, to
elect a delegate to congress, who shall have a seat in congress with a right of
debating, but not of voting, during this temporary government.

And for extending the fundamental principles of civil and religion liberty,
which form the basis whereon these republics, their laws and constitutions,
are erected; to fix and establish those principles as the basis of all laws,
constitutions and governments, which forever hereafter shall be formed in the
said territory; to provide also for the establishment of state and permanent
government thereof, and for their admission to share in the federal councils on
an equal footing with (...) original states, at as early periods as may be
consistent with the general interest:

It is hereby ordained and declared by the authority aforesaid, That the
following articles shall be considered as articles of compact, between the
original states and the people, and states in the said territory, and forever
remain unalterable, unless by common consent, to wit:

Article 1st, No person, demeaning himself in a peaceable and orderly manner,
shall ever be molested on account of his mode of worship or religious
sentiments in the said territory.

Article 2d. The inhabitants of the said territory shall always be articled to
the benefits of the writ of habeas corpus, and of the trial by jury, of a
proportionate representation of the people in the legislature, and of judicial
proceedings, according to the course of the common law: all persons shall be
bailable unless for capital offenses, where the proof shall be evident or the
presumption great: all fines shall be moderate, and no cruel or unusual
punishment shall be inflicted; no man shall be deprived of his liberty or
property but by the judgment of his peers, or of the law of the land; and
should the public exigences make it necessary for the common preservation to
take any person's property, or to demand his particular services, full
compensation shall be made for the same; and in the just preservation of the
rights and property, it is understood and declared, that no law ought ever to
be made, or have force in the said territory, that shall in any manner whatever
interfere with, or affect private contracts or engagements bona fide and
without fraud previously formed.

Article 3d. Religion, morality and knowledge, being necessary to good
government and the happiness of mankind, schools and the (...) of education
shall forever be encouraged; the utmost good faith shall always be observed
toward the Indians; their lands and properly shall never be taken from them
without their consent; and in their property, rights and liberty, they shall
never be invaded or disturbed, unless in just and lawful wars authorized by
congress; but laws founded in justice and humanity shall from time to time be
made, for preventing wrongs being done to them, and for preserving peace and
friendship with them.

Article 4th. The said territory, and the States which may be formed therein,
shall forever remain a part of this confederacy of the United States of
America, subject to the articles of confederation, and to such alterations
therein as shall be constitutionally made; and to all the acts and ordinances
of the United States, in congress assembled, ^^formable thereto. The
inhabitants and settlers in the said territory, shall be subject to pay a part
of the federal debts contracted, or to be contracted, and a proportionable part
of the expenses of government, to be apportioned on them by congress, according
to the same common rule and measure, by which apportionments thereof shall be
made on the other states, and the taxes for paying their proportion, shall be
laid and levied by the authority and direction of the legislation of the
district or districts, or new states, as in the original (...), within the time
agreed upon by the United States, in congress ^^^bled. The legislatures of
those districts, or new states, shall never interfere with the primary disposal
of the soil by the United States, (...) congress assembled, nor with any
regulations congress may find necessary for securing the title in such soil to
the bona side purchase (...) (...) tax shall be imposed on lands the property
of the United States, (...) (...) no case shall nonresident proprietors be
taxed higher than (...) (...). The navigable waters leading into the Missisippi
St. (...) (...) the carrying places between the same, shall be common high ways
(...) forever free, as well to the inhabitants of the said territory; (...)
^^^izens of the United States, and those of any other states that may (...)
^^mitted into the confederacy, without any ^^x, import or (...) (...).

Article 5th. There shall be formed in the said (...) than three, nor more than
five states; and the boundaries (...) as soon as Virginia shall alter her act
of (...) and consents (...) same, shall become fixed and established as
follows, viz. That (...) state in the said territory, shall be bounded on the
Missisippi (...) (...) and Wabash rivers; a direct line drawn from the Wabash
(...) (...) Vincents due north to the territorial line between the United
States and Canada, and by the said territorial line to the Lake of the (...)
and Missisippi. The middle state shall be bounded by (...) line, the Wabash
from Post Vincents to the Ohio (...) by a direct line drawn due north from the
mouth of (...) Miami to the said territorial line, and by the said territorial
(...). The eastern state shall be bounded by the last (...) line, the Ohio,
Pennsylvania, and the said territorial line: (...) however, and it is further
understood and declared, (...) boundaries of these three states, shall be
subject so (...) that if congress hereafter shall find it expedient, they (...)
thority to form one, or two states, in that part of the (...) which lies north
of an east and west line drawn through the (...) bend or extreme of lake
Michigan; and when any (...) shall have 60,000 free inhabitants therein, such
state shall be (...) (...) by its delegates into the congress of the United
States, on an (...) with the original states in all respects whatever; and
shall (...) liberty to form a permanent constitution and state government (...)
^^vided the constitution and government (...) to be formed, shall be
^^^^^lican, and in conformity to the principles contained in (...) ^^cles, and
so far as it can be consistent with the general (...) confederacy, such
admission shall be allowed at an earlier (...) (...) when there may be a less
number of free inhabitants in the (...) 60,000.

Article 6th. There shall be neither slavery nor involuntary (...) ^^vitude in
the said territory, otherwise than in the punish^^^ (...) crimes, whereof the
party shall have been only convicted (...) always, that any person escaping
into the same, from without (...) service is lawfully claimed in any one of the
original staves, (...) ^^^ive may be lawfully reclaimed and conveyed to the
person (...) or her labor or service as aforesaid.

Such is the present government of the Western Territory, (...) the political
obligations of the adventures into this fertile and ^^^^ful part of the United
States.

In the ordinance of congress, for the government of the (...) it is provided,
that after the said territory acquires a (...) population, it shall be divided
into states. The eastern state, (...) (...) thus provided to be made, is
bounded on the Great Miami (...) west, and by the Pennsylvania line on the
east. The (...) state will fall between the Scioto and the Hockhocking. At the
(...) (...) of these rivers will probably be the seat of government for this
(...): And, if we may indulge the sublime contemplation of behold^^^^ whole
territory of the United States settled by an enlightened (...), and continued
under one extended government -- on the river (...) and not far from this spot,
will be the seat of empire for the (...) ^^minion. This is central to the
whole; it will best accom^^^^^ every part; it is the most pleasant, and
probably the most (...)!

(...) settlement of this country has been checked, for several years (...) the
unhappy Indian war, an amicable termination of which (...) (...) wished, might
speedily take place.

SOUTHERN STATES.
THIRD, and much the largest GRAND DIVISION of the UNITED STATES comprehends.
MARYLAND, VIRGINIA, KENTUCKY, NORTH CAROLINA, TERRITORY SOUTH of OHIO, SOUTH
CAROLINA, and GEORGIA.

(...) extensive division is bounded north, by Pennsylvania and the (...)
river; west, by the Missisippi; south, by East and West Flor^^^^ (...), by the
Atlantic ocean and the Delaware state. It is inter^^^^ (...) a N. E. and S. W.
direction by the range of Allegany (...) (...) which give rise to many noble
rivers, which fall either (...) Atlantic, on the east, or the Missisippi on the
west. From (...) (...) coast, 60, 80, and in some parts 100 miles back toward
the (...) (...), the country, generally speaking, is nearly a dead level, and
(...) large proportion of it is covered, in its natural state, with pitch
(...). In the neighborhood of stagnant waters, which abound in (...) country,
the inhabitants are sickly. In the back, hilly and (...) (...) country, they
are as healthy as in any part of (...).

(...) district of the Union contains upwards of one (...) nine (...) thousand
inhabitants, of whom 648,439 are slaves, which is (...) fourteenths of the
whole numbers of slaves in the United (...). The influence of slavery has
produced a very distinguishing (...) (...) the general character of the
inhabitants, which, though (...) (...) to their disadvantage, has been softened
and (...) by the benign effects of the revolution, and the progress of lib^^^^
humanity.

(...) following may be considered us the principal productions of (...) (...)
-- tobacco, rice, indigo, wheat, corn, cotton, tar, pitch, (...) and lumber.

(...) district is fixed the permanent seat of the general government.

MARYLAND.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 134 Miles. between 37 56 and 39 44 N. Lat. Sq. Miles. 14,000 one fourth
of which is water. Breadth 110 Miles. 0 and 4 30 W. Lon. Sq. Miles. 14,000 one
fourth of which is water.

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED north, by Pennsylvania; east, by Delaware state, and the
Atlantic ocean; south and west, by Virginia.

CIVIL DIVISIONS AND POPULATION.] This state is divided into 19 counties, 11 of
which are on the Western, and 8 on the Eastern shore of Chesapeek Bay.

Counties. No. Inhabitants. Western Shore. Harford 14,976 Baltimore 25,434 Do.
Town and Precincts 13,503 Ann Arundel, 22,598 Frederick 30,791 Allegany 4,809
Washington 15,822 Montgomery 18,003 Prince George 21,344 Calvert 8,652 Charles
20,613 St. Mary's 15,544 Total 212,089

Counties No. Inhabitants. Eastern Shore. Cecil 13,625 Kent 12,836 Queen A^n
15,463 Caroline 9,500 Talbot 13,084 Somerset 15,610 Dorchester 15,875 Worcester
11,640 Eastern Shore 107,639 Western Shore 212,089 Total in the state 319,728

Number of Slaves in the state 103,036.

Each of the counties sends four representatives to the house of delegates,
besides which the city of Annapolis, and town of Baltimore, send each two.

BAYS AND RIVERS.] Chesapeek Bay, as we have already hinted, divides this state
into the eastern and western divisions. This bay, which is the largest in the
United States, was particularly described in the general account of the United
States. It affords many good fisheries, and is remarkable for the excellence of
its crabs, and also for a particular species of wild duck, called, "Canvas
back". In a commercial view, it is of immense advantage to the state. It
receives a number of large rivers. From the eastern shore in Maryland, among
other smaller ones, it receives Pokomoke, Nanticoke, Choptank, Chester and Elk
rivers. From the north, the rapid Susquehannah; and from the west, Patapsco,
Severn, Patuxent and Patomak, half of which is in Maryland, and half in
Virginia. Except the Susquehannah and Patomak, these are small rivers. Patapsco
river is but about 30 or 40 yards wide at the ferry, just before it empties
into the basin upon which Baltimore stands. Its source is in York county in
Pennsylvania. Its course is southwardly, till it reaches Elk ridge landing,
about 8 miles westward of Baltimore; it then turns eastward, in a broad baylike
stream, by Baltimore, which it leaves on the north, and passes into the
Chesapeek.

The entrance into Baltimore harbor, about a mile below Fell's Point, is
hardly pistol shot across, and of course may be easily defended against naval
force.

Severn is a short, inconsiderable river, passing by Annapolis, which it leaves
to the south, emptying, by a broad mouth, into the Chesapeek.

Patuxent is a larger river than the Patapsco. It rises in Ann Arundel county,
and runs southeastwardly, and then east into the bay, 15 or 20 miles north of
the mouth of Patomak. There are several small rivers, such as Wighcocomico,
Eastern Branch, Monocasy and Contogcheague, which empty into Patomak river from
the Maryland side.

FACE OF THE COUNTRY, CLIMATE, SOIL AND PRODUCTIONS.} East of the blue ridge of
mountains, which stretches across the western part of this state, the land,
like that in all the southern states, is generally level and free of stones;
and appears to have been made much in the same way; of course the soil must be
similar, and the natural growth not remarkably different.

The ground is uniformly level and low in most of the counties on the eastern
shore, and consequently covered in many places with stagnant water, except
where it is intersected by numerous creeks. Here also are large tracts of
marsh, which, during the day, load the atmosphere with vapor, that falls in
dew, in the close of the summer and salt seasons, which are sickly. The spring
and summer are most healthy.

The soil of the good land in Maryland, is of such a nature and quality as to
produce from 12 to 16 bushels of wheat, or from 20 to 30 bushels of Indian corn
per acre. The bushels of wheat, and 15 bushels of corn per acre, may be the
annual average crops in the state at large.

Wheat and tobacco are the staple commodities. Tobacco is generally cultivated
in sets, by negroes, in the following manner: The (...) is sown in beds of fine
mould, and transplanted the beginning of May. The plants are set at the
distance of 3 or 4 feet from each other, and are hilled and kept continually
free of weeds. When as many leaves have shot out as the soil will nourish to
advantage, the up of the plant is broken off, which prevents its growing
higher. It a carefully kept clear of worms, and the suckers, which put out
between the leaves, are taken off at proper times, till the plant arrives at
perfection, which is in August. When the leaves turn of a brownish color, and
begin to be spotted, the plant is out down and hung up to dry, after having
sweat in heaps one night. When it can be handled without crumbling, which is
always in most weather, the leaves are stripped from the stalk, and tied in
bundles, and packed for exportation in hogsheads containing 800 or 900 pounds.
No suckers nor ground leaves are allowed to be merchantable. An industrious
person any manage 6000 plants of tobacco, (which yield a 1000 lb.) and four
acres of Indian corn.

In the interior country, on the uplands, considerable quantities of hemp and
flax are raised. As long ago as 1751, in the month of October, no less than 60
wagons, loaded with flaxseed, came down to Baltimore from the back country.

Two articles are said to be peculiar to Maryland. viz. the genuine white,
wheat, which grows in Kent, Queen Anns and Talbot counties, on the eastern
shore, and which degenerates in other places -- and the bright ^ate's foot
tobacco, which is produced at Elkridge, on the Patuxent, on the Western Shore.

Among other kind, of timber is the oak, of several kinds, which is of a strait
grain and easily rives into staves, for exportation. The black walnut is in
demand for cabinets, tables, and other furniture. The apples of this state are
large, but mealy; their peaches plenty and good. From these the inhabitants
distill cider brandy and peach brandy.

The forests abound with nuts of various kinds, which are collectively called
mast. On this mast vast numbers of swine are fed, which run wild in the woods.
These swine, when fatted, are caught, killed, barrelled and exported in great
quantities. This traffic formerly was carried on to a very considerable extent.
Douglas, says, that "in the year 1733, which was a good masting year, one
gentleman, a pla^^^ and merchant, in Virginia, salted up 3000 barrels of pork".

POPULATION AND CHARACTER.] The population of this state is exhibited in the
foregoing table. By that it appears that the ^^ber of inhabitants in the state,
including the negroes, is 319.728; which is nearly 23 for every square mile.
The inhabitants, except in the populous towns, live on their plantations, often
several miles distant from each other. To an inhabitant of the middle, and
especially of the eastern states, which are thickly populated, they appear to
live very retired and unsocial lives. The effects of thus comparative solitude
are visible in the countenances, as well as in the manners and dress of many of
the country people. You observe comparatively little of that cheerful
sprigtliness of look and action, which as the invariable and genuine offspring
of social intercourse. Nor do you find that attention paid to dress, which is
common, and which decency and propriety have rendered necessary, among people
who are liable to receive company almost every day. Unaccustomed, in a great
measure, to frequent and friendly visits, they often suffer too much negligence
in their dress. As the negroes perform all the manual labor, their masters are
left to saunter away life in sloth, and too often in ignorance. These
observations, however, must in justice be limited to the people in the country,
and to those particularly, whose poverty or parsimony prevents their spending a
part of their time in populous towns, or otherwise mingling, with the world.
And with these limitations, they will equally apply to all the southern states.
The inhabitants of the populous towns, and those from the country who have
intercourse with them, are in their manners and custom genteel and agreeable.

That pride which grows on slavery, and is habitual to those, who, from their
infancy, are taught to believe and to feel their superiority, is a visible
characteristic of the inhabitants of Maryland. But (...) this characteristic we
must not fall to connect that of hospitality to strangers, which is equally
universal and obvious. Many of the women possess all the amiable, and many of
the elegant accomplishments of their sex.

The inhabitants are made up of various nations of many different religious
sentiments; few general observations, therefore, of a characteristical kind
will apply. It may be said, however, with great (...), that they are in general
very federal, and friends to good government. They owe little money as a state,
and are willing and able to discharge their debts. Their credit is very good;
and although they have so great a proportion of slaves, yet a number of
influenc^al gentlemen, have evinced their humanity and their disposition to
abolish so disreputable a traffic, by forming themselves into a society for the
^^^ition of negro slavery.

CHIEF TOWNS.] ANNAPOLIS (city) is the capital of Maryland, and the wealthiest
town of its size in America. It is situated at the mo^th of Severn river, on a
healthy spot, 30 miles south of Baltimore. It is a place of little note in the
commercial world. The houses, about 260 in number, are generally large and
elegant, indicative of great wealth. The number of inhabitants does not exceed
2000. The de^^^^ of those who planned the city. was to have the whole in the
form in a circle, with the streets like radii, beginning at the center where
(...) House stands; and thence diverging in every direction. The principal part
of the buildings are arranged agreeably to this awk^^^^ plan. The State House
is an elegant building.

BALTIMORE has had the most rapid growth of any town on the eminent, and is the
fourth in size and the fifth in trade in the United States, In point of size,
the towns in the United States may be ranked in this or^^ -- Philadelphia, New
York, Boston, Baltimore, Charlesion, etc. In point (...) New York,
Philadelphia, Boston, Charleston, Ba^^^ (...) etc.
It lies in lat. 39 21, on the north side of Pitapsco river, round what is
called the Bacon, in which the water at common tides, is about five or six feet
deep. Baltimore is divided into the town and Fell's point, by a (...) over
which are two bridges; but the houses extend, in a soa^se (...) on, from one to
the other. At Fell's wint the water is deep enough for ships of burden; but
small vessels only go up to the town. The situation of the town is low and was
(...) unhealthy; but the increase of houses, and of course, of smoke, the
tendency or which is to destroy or to dispel damp and (...) wholesome vapors,
and the improvements that have been made, particularly that of passing the
sheets, have rendered it tolerably ^^lthy. The houses were numbered in 1787,
and found to be 1955; about 1200 of which were in the town, and the rest at
Fell's point. The present number is about 2300. The number of ware houses and
(...) is 164, and of churches nine, which belong to German ^^^inists and
Lutherans, Episcopalians, Presbyterians, Roman Cath^^^^ks, Baptists,
Methodists. Quakers, Nicolites, or New Quakers. The number of inhabitants in
the town and precincts, according to the (...) of 1790 was 13,503. There are
many very respectable fami^^^ in Baltimore, who five genteely -- are hospitable
to strangers, and contain a friendly and improving intercourse with each other;
but (...) of the inhabitants, recently collected from almost all quarters of
(...) world -- bent on the pursuit of wealth -- varying in their habits, their
^^^ners and their religions, have yet their general character to form. Market
street is the principal street in the town, and runs nearly (...) and west, a
mile in length, parallel with the water. This is cros^^^ by several other
streets leading from the water, a number of which, particularly Calvert, South
and Gay streets, are well built. North and east of the town the land rises and
affords a fine prospect of the town and bay. Belvidera, the seat of Col.
Howard, exhibits a fine landscape. The town -- the point -- the shipping both
in the basin and at Fell's point -- the bay as far as the eye can reach --
rising ground on the right and left of the harbor -- a grove of trees on the
declivity at the right -- a stream of water breaking over the rocks at the foot
of the hill on the left, all conspire to complete the beauty and grandeur of
the prospect.

GEORGETOWN stands on the bank of the River Patomak, about 160 miles from its
entrance into Chesapeek Bay. The ground on which it stands is very broken,
being a cluster of little hills, which, though at present elevated considerably
above the surface of the river, were probably, at some former period
overflowed, as at the depth of 8 or 10 feet below the surface, marine shells
have been found. Dr. Martin, concludes an account of the climate and diseases,
of this town, in the following words --

"Upon the whole, Georgetown and its vicinity may be considered as a healthy
part of America; and in any disputes about the propriety of the seat of the
general government being fixed here, no objection can be urged against it on
account of its diseases."

FREDERICKTOWN is a fine flourishing inland town, of upwards of 300 houses,
built principally of brick and stone, and mostly on one broad street. It is
situated in a fertile country, about 4 miles south of Catokton mountain and is
a place of considerable trade. It has four places for public worship, one for
Presbyterians, two for Dutch Lutherans and Calvinists, and one for Baptists;
besides a public goal and a brick market house.

HAGARSTOWN is but little inferior to Fredericktown, and is situated in the
beautiful and well cultivated valley of Conegocheague, and carries on a
considerable trade with the western country.

ELLTON is situated near the head of Chesapeek bay, on a small river which
bears the name of the town. It enjoys great advantages from the carrying trade
between Baltimore and Philadelphia. The tides ebb and flow to this town.

The city of WASHINGTON, in the territory of COLUMBIA, was ceded, by the states
of Virginia and Maryland, to the United States, and by them established as the
seat of their government, after the year 1800. This city, which is now
building, stands at the junction of the rivers Patomak and the Eastern branch,
latitude 38 53 North, extending nearly four miles up each, and including a
tract of territory, exceeded, in point of convenience, salubrity, and beauty,
by none in America. For although the land in general, appears level, yet by
gentle and gradual swellings, a variety of elegant prospects are produced, and
a sufficient descent formed for conveying off the water occasioned by rain.
Within the limits of the city are a great number of excellent springs; and by
digging wells, water of the best quality may readily be h^d. Besides, the never
failing streams, that now run through that territory, may also be collected for
the use of the city. The waters of Reedy branch, and of Tiber creek, may be
conveyed to the President's house. The source of Tiber creek is elevated about
236 feet above the level of the tide in said creek. The perpendicular height of
the ground on which the capital is to stand, is 78 feet above the level of the
tide in Tiber creek. The water of Tiber creek, may, therefore, be conveyed to
the capital, and, after watering that part of the city, may be destined to
other useful purposes.

The Eastern branch is one of the safest and most commodious harbors in
America, being sufficiently deep for the largest ships, for about four miles
above its mouth, while the channel lies close along the bank adjoining the
city, and affords a large and convenient harbor -- The Patomak, although only
navigable for small craft, for a considerable distance from its banks next to
the city (excepting a^^^ half a mile above the junction of the rivers) will
nevertheless afford a capacious summer harbor; as an immense number of ships
by ride in the great channel, opposite to, and below the city.

The situation of this metropolis is upon the great post road, equi^^ant from
the northern and southern extremities of the Union, and nearly so from the
Atlantic and Pittsburg, upon the best naviga^^^, and in the midst of a
commercial territory, probably the richest, and commanding the most extensive
internal resources of any is America. It has therefore many advantages to
recommend it, as is eligible place for the permanent seat of the general
government; (...) as it is likely to be speedily built, and otherwise improved,
by the public spirited enterprise of the people of the United States, and (...)
by foreigners, it may be expected to grow up with a degree of ^^^lity hitherto
unparalleled in the annals of cities.

The plan of this city appears to contain some important improvements upon that
of the best planned cities in the world, combining, in a remarkable degree,
convenience, regularity, elegance of prospect, and a free circulation of air.
-- The positions for the different public (...), and for the several squares
and areas of different shapes as lay are laid down, were first determined on
the most advantageous stand, commanding the most extensive prospects, and from
their ^^^tion, susceptible of such improvements as either use or ornament (...)
hereafter require. The Capitol will be situated on a most beautiful eminence,
commanding a complete view of every part of the ci^^^ and of a considerable
part of the country around. The Presr^^^'s house will stand on a rising ground,
possessing a delightful wa^^ prospect, together with a commanding view of the
Capitol, and the most material parts of the city. Lines, or avenues, of direct
communication, have been devised to connect the most distant and important
objects. These transverse avenues, or diagonal streets, are laid (...) on the
most advantageous ground for prospect and convenience, (...) are calculated not
only to produce a variety of charming pros^^^, but greatly to facilitate the
communication throughout the ci^^^ -- North and south lines, intersected by
others running due east and west, make the distribution of the city into
streets, squares, etc. and those lines have been so combined as to meet at
certain given ^^ints, with the divergent avenues, so as to form, on the spaces
first strained, the different squares or areas. -- The grand avenues, and (...)
streets as lead immediately to public places, are from 130 to 160 feet wide,
and may be conveniently divided into footways, a walk (...) with trees on each
side, any a paved way for carriages. The (...) streets are from 90 to 110 feet
wide.

In order to execute this plan, Mr. Elhcott draw a true meridionad (...) by
celestial observation, which passes through the area intended (...) the
Capitol. This line he crossed by another, running due east and west, which
passes through the same area. These lines were ac^^ely measured, and made the
bases on which the whole plan was ^^^ted. He ran all the lines by a transit
instrument, and determined the acute angles by actual measurement, leaving
nothing to the uncertainly of the compass. See Universal Asylum or Columbian
Magazine for March, 1792, which contains a plan of the city. Also the
Massachusetts Magazine for May, 179^, which contains the same.


MINES AND MANUFACTURIES.] Mines of iron ore, of a superior quality, abound in
many parts of the state. Furnaces for running this ore into pigs and hollow
ware, and forges to refine pig iron into bars, are numerous, and worked to
great extent and profit. This is the only manufacture of importance carried on
in the state, except it be that of wheat into flour and curing tobacco.

TRADE.] The trade of Maryland is principally carried on from Baltimore, with
the other states, with the West Indies, and with some parts of Europe. To these
places they send annually about 30,000 hogsheads of tobacco, besides large
quantities of wheat, flour, pig iron, lumber and corn -- beans, pork and flax
seed in smaller quantities (...) and receive in return, clothing for themselves
and negroes, and other dry goods, wines, spirits, sugars and other West India
commodities. The balance is generally in their favor.

The total amount of exports from Baltimore Dols. Cts. from Oct. 1, 1739, to
Sept. 30, 1790, was 2,027,777 64 Value of imports for the same time, 1,945,899
55 Exports from Oct. 1, 1790, to Sept. 30, 1791. 3,131,227 55

During the last mentioned period, the quantity of wheat exported was 205,571
bushels -- Indian corn 205,643 do. -- buck wheat 4,286 do. peace, 10,619 do.
besides 151,445 barrels of wheat flour, 4,325 do. Indian meal, 6,761 do. bread,
and 3,10 kegs of crackers.

RELIGION.] The Roman Catholics, who were the first settled i^ Maryland, are
the most numerous religious sect. Besides these the^^ are Protestant
Episcopalians, English, Scotch and Irish Presbyterians, German Calvinists,
German Lutherans, Friends, Baptists, Methodist, Mennonists, Nicolites or new
Quakers; who all enjoy liberty of conscience.

SEMINARIES OF LEARNING, etc.] Washington academy, in So^^erset county, was
instituted by law in 1779. It was founded and is supported by voluntary
subscriptions and private donations, and is authorized to receive gifts and
legacies, and to hold 2000 acres of land. A supplement to the law, passed in
1784, increased the number of trustees from eleven to fifteen.

In 1782, a college was instituted at Chestertown, in Kent county, and was
honored with the name of WASHINGTON COLLEGE, after President Washington. It is
under the management of 24 visitors or governors, with power to supply
vacancies, and hold estates whose yearly value shall not exceed 6000l. current
money. By a law enacted in 1787, a permanent fund was granted to this
institution of 1250l. a year, currency, out of the moneys arising from marriage
licenses, fines and forfeitures on the Eastern Shore.

St. John's College was instituted in 1784, to have also 24 trustees, with
power to keep up the succession by supplying vacancies, and to receive an
annual income of 9000l. A permanent fund is assigned this college, of 1750l. a
year, out of the moneys arising from marriage licenses, ordinary licenses.
fines and forfeitures on the Western Shore. This college is to beat Annapolis,
where a building is now prepared for it. Very liberal subscriptions were
obtained toward founding and carrying on these seminaries. The two colleges
constitute one university, by the name of 'the University of Maryland,' whereof
the governor of the State, for the time being, is chancellor, and the principal
of one of them, vice chancellor, either by seniority or by election, as may
^^easter be provided for by rule or by law. The chancellor is em^^ered to call
a meeting of the trustees, or a representation of men of each, and two of the
members of the faculty of each, (the principal being one) which meeting is
styled 'The Convocation of the university of Mary land,' who are to frame the
laws, preserve university of manners and literature in the colleges, confer the
higher (...) determine appeals, etc.

The Roman Catholics have also erected a college at Georgetown, ^^^^mak river,
for the promotion of general literature.

In 1^85, the Methodists instituted a college at Abington, in Harford (...) by
the name of Cokesbury college, after Thomas Coke, and (...) Asbury, bishops of
the Methodist Episcopal Church. The (...) edifice is of brick, handsomely
built, on a healthy spot; enjoy^^^ a fine air, and a very extensive prospect.

The students, who are to consist of the sons of traveling preachers, (...)
sons of annual subscribers, the sons of the members of the Method (...) ^^ciety
and orphans, are instructed in English, Latin, Greek, Logic, ^^^^ric, History,
Geography, Natural Philosophy and Astronomy; (...) when the finances of the
college will ad^^^, they are to be taught (...) Hebrew, French and German
languages.

(...) college was erected and is supported wholly by subscription (...)
voluntary donations.

The students have regular hours for rising, for prayers, for their meals,
^^udy and for recreation. They are all to be in bed precisely at (...) o'clock.
Their recreations, (for they are to be 'indulged in (...) which the world calls
play') are gardening walking, riding (...) bathing without doors; and within
doors, the carpenters, joiners (...) makers or turners' business. Suitable
provision is made for the several occupations, which are to be considered, not
as masters ^^ugery and constraint, but as pleasing and healthful recreations,
(...) for the body and mind. Another o^ their rules, which though (...) and
singular, is favorable to the health and vigor of the body (...) mind, is,
that the students shall not sleep on feather beds, but on ^^^resses, and each
one by himself. Particular attention is paid to (...) morals and religion of
the students.

There are a few other literary institutions, of inferior note, in different
parts of the state, and provision is made for free schools in most of the
counties; though some are entirely neglected, and very few (...) on with any
success: so that a great proportion of the lower (...) of people are ignorant;
and there are not a few who cannot write (...) names. But the revolution, among
other happy effects, has (...) the spirit of education, which is salt spreading
its salutary influence over this and the other southern states.

^^TURAL CURIOSITIES.] There are several remarkable caves in ^^^^estern part of
this state, but particular and accurate descriptions ^^em, have not been
received.

EXPENSES OF GOVERNMENT AND TAXES.} The annual expenses of government are
estimated at about 20,000l. currency. The revenue arises chiefly from taxes on
real and personal property.

CONSTITUTION.] The legislature is composed of two district branches, a Senate
and house of Delegates, and styled The General assembly of Maryland. The
senators are elected in the following manner. On the first of September, every
fifth year, the freemen choose two men in each county to be electors of the
senate, and the elector for the city of Annapolis, and one for the town of
Baltimore. These electors must have the qualifications necessary for county
(...) gates. These electors meet at Annapolis, or such other place on (...) be
appointed for convening the legislature, on the third Monday (...) September,
every fifth year, and elect by ballot fifteen senators one of their own body or
from the people at large. Nine of these must (...) residents on the western
shore, and six on the eastern -- they must (...) more than twenty five years of
age -- must have resided in the (...) more than three years next preceding the
election, and have (...) (...) personal property above the value of a thousand
pounds. The ^^^ate may originate and bills, except money bills, to which they
can ^^^ly give their assent of dissent. The senate choose their president (...)
ballot. The house of delegates is composed of four members for each county,
chosen annually the first Monday in October. The (...) of Annapolis and town of
Baltimore send each two delegates. The qualifications of a delegate, are, full
age, one year's residence in (...) county where be is chosen, and real and
personal property above the value of five hundred pounds. Both houses choose
their own (...) and judge of the election of their members. A majority of (...)
(...) quorum. The election of senators and delegates is viva voce, and ^^^iffs
the returning officers, except in Baltimore town, where the (...) missioners
superintend the elections and make returns. The (...) session of the
legislature is on the first Monday in November. -- The qualifications of a
freeman are full age, a freehold estate of fifty (...) of land, and actual
residence in the county where he offers to (...) property to the value of
thirty pounds in any part of the (...) and a year's residence in the county
where he offers to vote.

On the second Monday in November, annually, a governor is appointed by the
joint ballot of both houses, taken in each house respectively, and deposited in
a conference room; where the boxes (...) examined by a joint committee of both
houses, and the number (...) votes severally reported. The governor cannot
continue in offi^^^ longer than three years successively, nor be reelected
until the expiration of four years after he has been out of office. -- The
qualification for the chief magistracy, are twenty five years of age, five
years ^^^^dence in the state, next preceding the election, and real and
persb^^^^ estate above the value of five thousand pounds, one thousand on which
must be freehold estate. -- On the second Tuesday of November, annually, the
senators and delegates elect by joint ballot, five able (...) discreet men,
above twenty five years of age, residents in the (...) three years next
preceding the election, and possessing a freehold (...) lands and tenements
above the value of a thousand pounds, to be (...) council for assisting the
governor in the duties of his office. -- Senators delegates and members of
council, whilst such, can hold no other office of profit, nor receive the
profits of any office exercised by another. -- The governor with the advice of
his council, appoints the chancellor (...) all judges and justices, the
attorney general, naval and militia (...), registers of the land office,
surveyors, and all other civil offi^^^ except constables, assessors and
overseers of the roads. -- A (...) of appeals is established for the final
determination of all causes, (...) may be brought from the general court In
some of the eastern states the legislature is called the General court. In
(...) of the southern, the General court is the Supreme Judicial Court.

(...) George Calvert, lord Baltimore, the founder of Maryland, born in (...)
was educated at Oxford university -- was knighted in 1617, by James I. (...)
two years after was appointed one of the principal secretaries of state, which
(...) be discharged with great industry and fidelity, and was rewarded by the
(...) with a pension of a thousand pounds a year. Having enjoyed this office
(...) five years, he resigned it in 1624, freely owning to his majesty, that he
become a Roman Catholic. This honest confession so affected the king, (...)
continued him privy counselor during his reign, and in 1625, created (...) by
the name of Sir George Calvert, of Danbywiske in Yorkshire, knight) (...) of
Baltimore, in the county of Longford, in Ieland. While he was ^^^tary, he
obtained a patent of the Province of Ava^on in Newfoundland, (...) he built an
house, and spent 25,000l. in advancing this new plantation; ^^^ding it exposed
to the French, was obliged at last to abandon it.

(...) this he came over to Virginia, and having taken a view of the country
(...) to England, and obtained from Charles I. who was his friend, a pa^^^ to
him and his heirs, for Maryland. (...) a copy of this patent in Hazard's
Historical Collections, page 327.
He died in London, April 15, 1642. ^^ough he was a Roman Catholic yet he kept
himself sincere and disengag^^^ all interests; and was the only statesman,
that, being engaged to a de^^^ party, managed his business, with that great
respect for all sides, that all ^^^new him applauded him; and none who had any
thing to do with him ^^^ained of him." He was a man of great abilities and
candor. Judge (...), and lord Baltimore, though agreed in the public design of
foreign ^^^^ions, differed in the manner of managing them. The former was for
(...) the original inhabitants, the latter for converting them -- The one (...)
vicious and profligate, the other the sober and virtuous, to the plan^^^ -- one
was for present profit, the other for reasonable expectation, wish^^ have but
few governors, and those not interested merchants, but disin^^^ gentlemen --
granting liberties with great caution -- and leaving every (...) to provide for
himself by his own industry, and not out of a common (...)


of admiralty, or of ^^^^ery

This constitution was established by a convention of delegates, at (...),
August 14, 1776.

HISTORY.] Maryland was granted by king Charles I. to George (...), See Carey's
Museum, Vol. 6. Page 403.
baron of Baltimore, in Ireland, June 20, 1632. The government of the province,
was by charter, vested in the proprietary; (...) it appears that he either
never exercised these powers alone, or but ^^ort time; for we find that in
1637, the freemen rejected a body (...) drawn up in England, and transmitted by
his lordship, in or^^^ be passed for the government of the province. In the
place of (...) they proposed forty two bills to be enacted into laws, by the
(...) of the proprietary. These were however never enacted; at (...) they are
not on record.

(...) Honorable Leonard Calvert, Esquire Lord Baltimore's brother, (...) first
governor, or lieutenant general. In 1638, a law was (...), constituting the
first regular House of Assembly, which was to consist of such representatives,
called (...), as should be elected pursuant to writs issued by the governor.
These burgesses possessed all the powers of the persons electing them; but any
other freemen, who did not assent to the election, might take their seats in
person. Twelve burgesses or freemen, with the lieutenant general and secretary,
constituted the assembly or legislature. This assembly sat at St. Mary's, one
of the southern counties, which was the first settled part of Maryland.

In 1642, it was enacted that 10 members of the assembly, of whom the governor
and six burgesses were to be 7, should be a house; and (...) sickness should
prevent that number from attending, the members present should make a house.

In 1644* one Ingle excited a rebellion, forced the governor to fly to Virginia
for aid and protection, and seized the records and the great seal; the last of
which, with most of the records of the province, were lost or destroyed. From
this period, to the year 1647, when order was restored, the proceedings of the
provinces are involved in obscurity.

In July, 1646, the house of assembly, or more properly the burgesses requested
that they might be separated into two branches -- the burgesses by themselves,
with a negative upon bills. This was not granted by the lieutenant general at
that time; but in 1650, an act was passed dividing the assembly into two
houses. The governor, secretary, and any one or more of the council, formed the
Upper House; the delegated from the several hundreds, who now represent the
freemen, formed the Lower House. At this time there were in the province but
two counties, St. Mary's and the Isle of Kent; but Ann Arundel was added the
same session. This was during the administration of governor Stone.

In 1654, during Cromwell's usurpation in England, an act was passed,
restraining the exercise of the Roman Catholic religion. The must have been
procured by the mere terror of Cromwell's power for the first and principal
inhabitants were Catholic. Indeed the power of Cromwell was not established in
Maryland without force and bloodshed. His friends and foes came to an open
rupture, an engagement ensued, governor Stone was taken prisoner and condemned
(...) be shot. This sentence however was not executed, but he was ke^^ a long
time confinement.

In March, 1658, Josiah Fendall, Esquire was appointed lieutenant general of
Maryland by commission from Oliver Cromwell. He dissolved the upper house, and
surrendered the powers of government in to the hands of the delegates.

Upon the restoration in 1660, the Honorable Phillip Calvert, (...) was
appointed governor; the old form of government was revived Fendall, and one
Gerrard, a counselor, were indicted, found guilty and condemned to banishment,
with the loss of their estates; but up on petition they were pardoned.

In 1689, the government was taken out of the hands of Lord Baltimore by the
grand convention of England; and in 1692 (...) ^opley was appointed governor by
commission from William (...) Mary.

In 1692, the Protestant religion was established by law.

In 1699, under the administration of governor Blackiston, it (...) enacted
that Annapolis should be the seat of government.

In 1716, the government of this Province was restored to the proprietary, and
continued in his hands till the late revolution, when, ^^ough a minor, his
property in the lands was confiscated, and the government assumed by the
freemen of the province, who formed the constitution now existing. At the close
of the war, Henry Harford, Esquire the natural son and heir of Lord Baltimore,
petitioned the legislature of Maryland for his estate; but his petition was not
granted. (...) Harford estimated his loss of quit-rents, valued at twenty years
^^^chase and including arrears, at L259,488:5:0, dollars at 7^6 -- and the
value of his manors and reserved lands at L327,441 of the (...) money.

LIST of GOVERNORS, with the date of their appointments.
(...) Leonard Calvert. Esquire appointed Governor, 1637 Thomas Green, Esquire 1647
William Stone, Esquire 1649 The government remained in the hands of the parliament
commissioners during the time of Oliver Cromwell's usurpation 1654 The
commissioners, by certain articles of agreement then en^^^ed into, delivered up
the government into the hands of Josiah Fendale, Esquire then governor 1658 (...)
Phillip Calvert made Governor 1660 Charles Calvert, Esquire 1662 Upon the death of
Cecilius, the government descended to Charles, Lord Baltimore, who came into
the province 1675 ^^^mas Notly, Esquire Governor 1678 Who continued till his
Lordship returned a second time to (...) province in 1681 King William and
Queen Mary took upon them the government, and appointed Lyonel Copley, Esquire
Governor 1692 ^^^ncis Nicholson, Esquire 1694 Upon the death of Queen Mary, the
government was altogether in the hands of King William the III. 1696 Daniel
Blackiston, Esquire Governor 1699 By the death of King William III. Queen Ann took
upon (...) the government -- and the same governor was continued 1701-2 ^^^mas
Finch, Esquire President 1703 (...) Seymour, Esquire Governor 1704 ^^^ard Lloyd, Esquire
President 1704 (...) Heart, Esquire Governor 1714 Upon the death of Queen Ann, King
George the I. took (...) him the government -- and the same governor was
con^^ed 1715 The government was restored to Charles, Lord Baltimore, (...)
issued a new commission to John Heart, Esquire 1716 ^^rles Calvert, Esquire Governor
1720 ^^^edict Leonard Calvert, Esquire Governor 1727 (...) Proprietor came into the
province in 1733 (...) returned to England 1734 (...) Ogle, Esquire Governor 1737
(...) Bladen, Esquire Governor 1742 (...) Ogle, Esquire Governor 1747 By the Death of
Charles, Lord Baltimore, the province descended to his son Frederick. --
Governor Ogle died the same year 1752 Benjamin Tasker, Esquire President 1751
Horatio Sharp, Esquire Governor 1753 Robert Eden, Esquire Governor 1769 Frederick, Lord
Baron of Baltimore, died 1771 Robert Eden, Esquire Governor 1773

Some of the governors since the revolution have been --

Thomas Johnson, Jun. William Paca Thomas Sim Lee William Smallwood John Eager
Howard George Plater
VIRGINIA. In the following description of this state the Author has made a
free use of Mr. Jefferson's celebrated 'Notes on Virginia.'

SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 446 Miles. between 0 and 8 W. Lon. Square Miles. 70,000 Breadth 224
Miles. 36 30 and 40 30 N. Lat. Square Miles. 70,000

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED north, by Maryland, part of Pennsylvania and Ohio river;
west, by Kentucky; south, by North Carolina; east, by the Atlantic ocean.

CIVIL DIVISIONS AND POPULATIONS.] This state is divided into 82 counties, (and
by another division into parishes) which, with the number of inhabitants,
according to the census of 1790, are mentioned in the following table.

TABLE.
Counties. Slaves. Tot. Inhab. West of the Blue Ridge. Ohio 281 5212 Monongalia
154 4768 Washington 450 5625 Montgomery 2087 23752 With Botetourt Greenbria^
319 6015 Kanawa Hampshire 454 7346 Berkley 2932 19713 Frederick 4250 19681
Shenendoah 512 10510 Rockingham 772 7449 Augusta 1222 10886 Rockbridge 682 6548

MAP of the States of VIRGINIA NORTH CAROLINA SOUTH CAROLINA and GEORGIA
Comprehending the Spanish Provinces of EAST and WEST FLORIDA Exhibiting the
boundaries between the United States and Spanish Dominions as fixed by the
Treaty of Paris in 1783 Comp^^ed from (...) Observations
By Joseph Purrell


Counties Slaves Total Inhab. (...) Loudoun 4030 18962 Fauquier 6642 17892
Culpepper 8226 22105 Spotsylvania 5933 11252 Orange 4421 9921 Louisa 4573 8467
Goochland 4656 9053 Flavania 1466 3921 Albemarle 5579 12585 Amherst 5296 13703
Buckingham 4168 9779 Bedford 2754 10531 Henry 1551 8479 Pittsylvania 2979 11579
Halifax 5565 14722 Charlotte 4816 10078 Prince Edward 3986 8100 Cumberland 4434
8153 Powhatan 4325 6822 Amelia 11307 18097 Nottaway Lunenburg 4332 8959
Mecklenburg 6762 14733 Brunswick 6776 12827 (...) Greensville 3620 6362
Dinwiddie 7334 13934 Chesterfield 7487 14214 Prince George 45^9 8173 Surry 3097
6227 Sussex 5387 10554 Southampton 5993 12864 Isle of Wight 3867 9028 Nansemond
3817 9010 Norfolk 5345 14524 Princess Ann 3202 7793 (...) Henrico 5819 12000
Hanover 8223 14754 New Kent 3700 6239 Charles City 3141 5518 James City 2405
4070 Williamsburg 2760 5233 York Warwick 990 1690 Elizabeth City 1876 3450
Caroline 10292 17489 (...) King William 5151 8128 King and Queen 5143 9377
Essex 5440 9122 Middlesex 2558 4140 Gloucester 7063 13498 Between Rappahannoc
and Patomak rivers. Fairfax 4574 12320 Prince William 4704 11615 Stafford 4036
9588 King George 4157 7366 Richmond 3984 6985 Westmoreland 4425 7722
Northumberland 4460 9163 Lancaster 3236 5638 East shore Accomac 4262 13959
Northampton 3244 6889

The following are new counties.

Counties. Slaves. Total Inhab. Camphell 2488 7685 Franklin 1073 6842 Harrison
67 2080 Randolph 19 951 Hardy 369 7336 Pendleton 73 2452 Russell 190 3338 Total
amount 292,627 454,983

The whole number of Inhabitants 747,610

Kentucky, which till lately belonged to this state, contains 73,677
inhabitants, which, added to 747,610, makes 821,287.

In the year 1781, a very inaccurate census was taken, several counties made no
return: but supplying by conjecture the deficiencies, the population of
Virginia was then computed at 567,614 -- The increase then is 258,673, and is
as 9 to 13 in 10 years.

The increase of slaves, during those 10 years, has been less than it had been
observed for a century before -- The reason is, that about 30,000 slaves
perished with the small pox or camp fever caught from the British army, or went
off with them while Lord Cornwallis was roving over that state.

CLIMATE.] In an extensive country, it will be expected that the climate is not
the same in all its parts. It is remarkable that, proceeding on the same
parallel of latitude westwardly, the climate becomes colder in like manner as
when you proceed northwardly. This continues to be the case till you attain the
summit of the Allegany, which is the highest land between the ocean and the
Missisippi. From thence, descending in the same latitude to the Missisippi, the
changes reverses; and, if we may believe travelers, it becomes warmer there
than it is in the same latitude on the sea side. Their testimony is
strengthened by the vegetables and animals which submit and multiply there
naturally, and do not on the sea coast. Thus catalpas grow spontaneously on the
Missisippi, as far as the latitude of 37, and feeds as far as 3^. Parroquets
even winter on the Scioto, in the 39th degree of latitude.

The S. W. winds, east of the mountains, are most predominant. Next to these,
on the sea coast, the N. E. and at the mountains, the N. W. winds prevail. The
difference between these winds is very great. The N. E. is loaded with vapor,
insomuch that the salt manufacturers have found that their chrystals would not
shoot while that blows; it occasions a distressing chill, and a heaviness and
depression of the spirits. The N. W. is dry, cooling, elastic and animating.
The E. and S. E. breezes come on generally in the afternoon. They have advanced
into the country very sensibly within the memory of people now living. Mr.
Jefferson reckons the extremes of heat and cold to be 98 above, and 6 below 0,
in Farenheit's Thermometer.

That fluctuation between heat and cold, so destructive to fruit, prevails less
in Virginia than in Pennsylvania, in the spring season; nor is the overflowing
of the rivers in Virginia so extensive or so frequent at that season, as those
of the New England states; because the snows in the former do not lie
accumulating all winter, to be dissolved all at once i^ the spring, as they do
sometimes in the latter. In Virginia, below the mountains, snow seldom lies
more than a day or two, and seldom a (...); and the large rivers seldom freeze
over. This fluctuation on of ^^^ther, however, is sufficient to render the
winters and spring^ very an wholesome, as the inhabitants have to walk in
almost perpetual (...).

The months of June and July, though often the hottest, are the must healthy in
the year. The weather is then dry and less liable to change than in August and
September, when the rain commences, and sudden variations take place.

On the sea coast, the land is low, generally within 12 feet of the level of
the sea, intersected in all directions with salt creeks and rivers, the heads
of which form swamps and marshes, and fenny ground, covered with water, in wet
seasons. -- The uncultivated lands are covered with large trees, and thick
underwood. The vicinity of the sea, and salt creeks and rivers, occasion a
constant moisture and warmth of the atmosphere, so that although under the same
latitude, 100 or 150 miles in the country, deep snows, and frozen rivers
frequently happen, for a short season, yet here such occurrences are considered
as phenomena for these reasons, the trees are often in bloom as early as the
last of February; from this period, however, till the end of April, the
inhabitants are incommoded by cold rains, piercing wind, and sharp frosts,
which subjects them to the inflammatory diseases, known (...) under the names
of pleurisy and peripneumony.

RIVERS AND CANALS.] An inspection of the map of Virginia, will give a better
idea of the geography of its rivers, than any description (...) writing. Their
navigation may be imperfectly noted.

Roanoke, so far as it lies within this state, is no where navigable, but for
canoes, or light batteaux; and even for these, in such detached parcels as to
have prevented the inhabitants from availing themselves of it at all.

James River, and its waters, afford navigation as follows. The whole of
Elizabeth River, the lowest of those which run into James River, is a harbor,
and would contain upwards of 300 ships. The channel is from 150 to 200 fathoms
wide, and at common flood tide, affords 18 feet water to Norfolk. The
Strafford, a 60 up ship, went there, lightening herself to cross the bar at
Sowell's point. The (...) Rodrigue, pierced for 64 guns, and carrying 50, went
there without lightening. Craney island, at the mouth of this river, commands
the channel tolerably well.

Nansemond River is navigable to Sleepy Hole, for vessels of 250 tons; (...)
Suffolk, for those of 100 tons; and to Milner's, for those of 25. Pagan Creek
affords 8 or 10 feet water to Smithfield, which admits vessels of 20 tons.
Chickahominy has at its mouth a bar, on which is only 12 feet water at common
flood tide. Vessels passing that, may go 8 miles up the river; those of ten
feet draught may go four miles further, and those of 6 tons burden, 20 miles
further.

Appamattox may be navigated as far as Broadways, by any vessel which has
crossed Harrison's bar in James river; it keeps 8 or 9 feet water a mile or two
higher up to Fisher's bar, and four feet on that and upwards to Petersburg,
where all navigation ceases.

James river itself affords harbor for vessels of any size in Hampton Road,
but not in safety through the whole winter; and there is navigable water for
them as far as Mulberry island. A forty gun ship goes to Jamestown, and,
lightening herself, may pass to Harrison's bar, on which there is only 15 feet
water. Vessels of 250 tons may go to Warwick; those of 125 go to Rocket's, a
mile below Richmond; from thence is about seven feet water to Richmond; and
about the center of the town, four feet and a half, where the navigation is
interrupted by falls, which in a course of six miles descend about 80 feet
perpendicular: Above these it is resumed in canoes and batteaux, and is
prosecuted safely and advantageously to within 10 miles of the Blue Ridge; and
even through the Blue Ridge a ton weight has been brought; and the expense
would not be great, when compared with its object, to open a tolerable
navigation up Jackson's river and Carpenter's creek, to within 25 miles of
Howard's creek of Green Briar, both of which have then water enough to float
vessels into the Great Kanhaway. In some future state of population, it is
possible that its navigation may also be made to interlock with that of
Patomak, and through that to communicate by a short portage with the Ohio. It
is to be noted, that this river is called in the maps James river, only to its
confluence with the Rivanna; thence to the Blue Ridge it is called the
Fluvanna, and thence to its source; Jackson's river. But in common speech it is
called James river to its source.

The Rivanna a branch of James river, is navigable for canoes and batteaux to
its intersection with the South West mountains, which is about 22 miles; and
may easily be opened to navigation through those mountains, to its fork above
Charlottesville.

York River, at Yorktown, affords the best harbor in the state for vessels of
the largest size. The river there narrows to the width of a mile, and is
contained within very high banks, close under which the vessels may ride. It
holds four fathom water at high tide for 25 miles above York to the mouth of
Po^opotank, where the river is a mile and a half wide, and the channel only 75
fathom, and passing under a high bank. At the confluence of Pamunkey and
Mattapony, it is reduced to three fathom depth, which continues up Pamunkey to
Cumberland, where the width is 100 yards, and up Mattapony to within two miles
of Frazier's ferry, where it becomes two and a half fathom deep, and holds that
about five miles. Pamunkey is then capable of navigation for loaded flats to
Brockman's bridge, 50 miles above Hanover town, and Mattapony to Downer's
bridge, 70 miles above its mouth.

Piankatank, the little rivers making out of Mobjack Bay and those of the
Eastern shore, receive only very small vessels, and these can but enter them.
Rappahannok affords 4 fathom water to Hobb's Hole, and two fathom from thence
to Fredericksburg, 110 miles.

Patomak is 7 miles wide at the mouth; 4frac12; at Nomony Bay; 3 at Aq^ia; 1 at
Halloing Point; 1 at Alexandria. Its soundings aro, 7 fathom at the mouth; 5 at
St. George's Island; 4 and a half at lower Matchodic; 3 at Swan's Point, and
thence up to Alexandria; thence 10 feet water to the falls, which are 13 miles
above Alexandria. The tides in the Patomak are not very strong, excepting after
great rains, when the ebb is pretty strong -- then there is little or no flood
-- and there is never more than 4 or 5 hours flood, except with long and strong
south winds.

The distance from the Capes of Virginia to the termination of the tide water
in this river is above 300 miles; and navigable for ships of the greatest
burden, nearly that distance. From thence this river, obstructed by four
considerable falls, extends through a vast tract of inhabited country toward
its source. These falls are, 1st, The Little folk, three miles above tide
water, in which distance there is a fall of of feet: 2d, The Great Falls, six
miles higher, where is a fall of 76 feet in one mile and a quarter: 3d, The
Seneca Falls, six miles above the former, which form short, irregular rapids,
with a fall of about 10 feet; and 4th, the Shenandoah Falls, 60 miles from the
Seneca, where is a fall of about 30 feet in three miles: From which last, Fort
Cumberland is about 120 miles distant. The obstructions, which are opposed to
the navigation above and between these falls, are of little consequence

Early in the years 1785, the legislature of Virginia and Maryland passed acts
to encourage opening the navigation of this river. It was estimated that the
expense of the works would amount to 50,000l. sterling and ten years were
allowed for their completion. The president and directors of the incorporated
company have since supposed that (...) would be adequate to the operation, and
that it will be accomplished in a shorter period than was stipulated. Their
calculations as sounded on the progress already made, and the summary mode
established for enforcing the collection of the dividends, as the money may
become necessary.

According to the opinion of the president and directors, locks A lock is a
basin placed lengthwise in a river or canal, lined with walls of masonary on
each side, and terminated by two gates, placed where there is a cascade or
natural fall of the country; and so constructed that the basin being filled
with water by an upper sluice, to the level of the waters above, a vessel may
ascend through the upper gate; or the water in the lock being reduced to the
level of the water at the bottom of the cascade, the vessel may ascend through
the lower gate; for when the waters are brought to a level on either side, the
gate on that side may be easily opened. But as the lower gate is ^^^ned in
proportion to the depth of water it supports when the perpendicular height of
the water exceeds twelve or thirteen feet, more locks than one become
necessary. Thus if the fall be 17 feet, two locks are required, each having 8
feet fall; and if the fall be 26 feet three locks are necessary, each having 8
feet 8 inches fall. The side walls of the locks ought to be very strong. Where
the natural foundation is bad they should be founded on piles, and platforms of
^ood: they should likewise slope outward, in order to resist the pressure of
the earth from behind.
will be necessary at no more than two places -- the Great and the Little
Falls: Six at the former, and three at the latter. At the latter nothing had
been attempted in 1789. At the Great Falls, where the difficulties were judged
by many to be insurmountable, the work is nearly or quite completed. At the
Seneca Falls, the laborious parts of the business is entirely accomplished, by
removing the obstacles and making the descent more gradual; so that nothing
remained, in 1789, but to finish the channel for this gentle current in a
workmanlike manner. At the Shenandoah, where the river breaks through the Blue
Ridge, through (...) prodigious quantity of labor has been bestowed, yet the
passage is not yet perfected. Such proficiency has been made, however, that an
avenue for a partial navigation has been opened from Fort Cumberland to the
Great Falls, which are within nine miles of a shipping port. The author has
been disappointed in receiving an account of the present state of the Virginia
canals and improvements.


As soon as the proprietors shall begin to receive toll, they will doubtless
find an ample compensation for their pecuniary advances. By an estimate made
many years ago, it was calculated that the amount, in the commencement, would
be at the rate of 11,875l. Virginia currency, per annum. The toll must every
year become more productive; as the quantity of articles for exportation will
be augmented is a rapid ratio, with the increase of population and the
extention of settlements. In the mean time the effect will be immediately seen
in the agriculture of the interior country; for the multitude of horse now
employed in carrying produce to market, will then be used altogether for the
purpose of tillage. But, in order to form just conceptions of the utility of
this inland navigation, it would be requisite to notice the long rivers which
empty into the Patomak, and even to take a survey of the geographical position
of the western waters.

The Shenandoah, which empties just above the Blue Mountains, may, according to
report, be made navigable, at a trifling expense, more than 150 miles from its
confluence with the Patomak; and will receive and bear the produce of the
richest part of the state. Commissioners have been appointed to form a plan,
and to estimate the expense of opening the channel of this river, if on
examination it should be found practicable. The South Branch, still higher, is
navigable i^ its actual condition nearly or quite 100 miles, through
exceedingly fertile lands. Between these, on the Virginia side, are several
smaller rivers, that may with ease be improved, so as to afford a passage for
boats. On the Maryland side are the Monocasy, Antietam, and co^egocheague, some
of which pass through the state of Maryland, and have their sources in
Pennsylvania.

From Fort Cumberland, (or Wills' Creek) one or two good wagon roads may be
had (where the distance is said by some to be 35 and (...) other 40 miles) to
the Youghiogany, a large and navigable branch of the Monongahela, which last
forms a junction with the Allegany at Fort Pit.

But, by passing farther up the Patomak, than Fort Cumberland, which may very
easily be done, a portage by a good wagon road to Cheat river, another large
branch of the Monongahela, can be obtained through a space which some say is
20, others 22, others 25, and none more than 30 miles.

When we have arrived at either of these western waters, the navigation through
that immense region is opened by a thousand directions, and to the lakes in
several places by portages of less than 10 miles; and by one portage, it is
asserted, of not more than a single mile.

Notwithstanding it was sneeringly said by some foreigners, at the beginning of
this undertaking, that the Americans are fond of engaging in splendid projects
which they could never accomplish; yet it is hoped the success of this first
essay toward improving their in^^^ navigation, will, in some degree, rescue
them from the reproach ^^^^ded to have been fixed upon their national
character, by the unmarked imputation.

The Great Kanhawa is a river of considerable note for the fertility of its
lands, and still more, as leading toward the head waters of James river.
Nevertheless, it is doubtful whether its great and nume^^^^ rapids will admit a
navigation, but at an expense to which it will require ages to render its
inhabitants equal. The great obstacles be^^^ at what are called the Great
Falls, 90 miles above the mouth, be^^^ which are only five or six rapids, and
these passable, with some difficulty even at low water. From the falls to the
mouth of Green (...) is 100 miles, and thence to the lead mines 120. It is 280
yards (...) at its mouth.

The Little Kanhawa is 250 yards wide at the mouth. It yields a navigation of
10 miles only. Perhaps its northern branch, called ^^^^us' Creek, which
interlocks with the western waters of Monongahela, may one day admit a shorter
passage from the latter into the Ohio.

MOUNTAINS.] It is worthy notice, that the mountains are not ^^^tary and
scattered confusedly over the face of the country; but ^^^^^ence at about 150
miles from the sea coast, are disposed in ridges (...) behind another, running
nearly parallel with the sea coast, though (...) approaching it as they advance
northeastwardly. To the southwest as the tract of country between the sea coast
and the Missisippi becomes narrower, the mountains converge into a single
ridge, which, (...) it approaches the Gulf of Mexico, subsides into plain
country, (...) gives rise to some of the waters of that Gulf, and particularly
(...) a river called Apalachicola, probably from the Apalachies, an In^^^
nation formerly residing on it. Hence the mountains giving rise (...) river,
and seen from its various parts, were called the Apalachian mountains, being in
fact the end or termination only of the great ridges ^^^^ing through the
continent. European geographers, however, ex^^ed the name northwardly as far as
the mountains extended; (...) giving it after their separation into different
ridges, to the Blue (...), others to the North Mountains, others to the
Allegany, others to the Laurel Ridge, as may be seen in their different maps.
But none of these ridges were ever known by that name to the inhabitants,
either native or emigrant, but as they saw them so called in European maps. In
the same direction generally are the veins of lime stone, coal and other
minerals hitherto discovered; and so range the falls of the great rivers. But
the courses of the great rivers are at right angles with these. James and
Patomak penetrate through all the ridges of mountains eastward of the Allegany,
that is broken by no water course. It is in fact he spine of the country
between the Atlantic on one side, and the Missisippi (...) St. Lawrence on the
other. The passage of the Patomak through (...) blue ridge is perhaps one of
the most stupendous scenes in nature. (...) stand on a very high point of land.
On your right comes up the ^^^^nandoah, having ranged along the foot of the
mountain an hundred miles to seek a vent. On Your left approaches the Patomak,
inquest of a passage also. In the moment of their junction they rush together
against the mountain, rend it asunder, and pass off to the sea. The first
glance of this scene hurries our senses into the opinion, that this earth has
been created in time, that the mountains were formed first, that the rivers
began to flow afterward, that in this place particularly they have been dammed
up by the Blue ridge of mountains, and have formed an ocean, which filled the
whole valley; that continuing to rise they have at length broken over at this
spot, and have torn the mountain down from its summit to its base. The piles of
rock on each hand, but particularly on the Shenandoah, the evident marks of
their disruption and avulsion from their beds by the most powerful agents of
nature, corroborate the impression. But the distant finishing which nature has
given to the picture, is of a very different character. It is a true contrast
to the fore ground. It is as placid and delightful, as that is wild and
tremendous. For the mountain, being cloven asunder, presents to the eye,
through the cleft, a small catch of smooth blue horizon, at an infinite
distance, in the plain country, inviting you, as it were, from the riot and
tumult roaring around, to pass through the breach and participate of the clam
below. Here the eye ultimately composes itself; and that way too, the road
actually leads. You cross the Patomak above the junction, pass along its side
through the base of the mountain for three miles, its terrible precipices
hanging in fragments over you, and within about twenty miles reach
Fredericktown and the fine country round that. This scene is worth a voyage
across the Atlantic. Yet here, as in the neighborhood of the Natural Bridge,
are people who have passed their lives within half a dozen miles, and have
never been to survey these monuments of a war between rivers and mountains,
which must have shaken the earth itself to its center. -- The height of the
mountains has not yet been estimated with any degree of exactness. The Allegany
being the great ridge which divides the waters of the Atlantic from those of
the Missisippi, its summit is doubtless more elevated above the ocean than that
of any other mountain. But its relative height, compared with the base on which
it stands, is not so great as that of some others, the country rising behind
the successive ridges like the steps of stairs. The mountains of the Blue
Ridge, and of these, the Peaks of Otter, are thought to be of a greater height
measured from their base, than any others in Virginia, and perhaps in North
America. From data, which may found a tolerable conjecture, we suppose the
highest peak to be about 4000 feet perpendicular, which is not a fifth part of
the height of the mountains of South America, nor one third of the height which
would be necessary in our latitude to preserve ice in the open air unmelted
through the year. The ridge of mountains next beyond the Blue Ridge, called the
North Mountain, is of the greatest extent; for which reason they are named by
the Indians the Endless Mountains.

The Ouasioto mountains, are 50 or 60 miles wide at the Gap. These mountains
abound in coal, lime and free stone; the summits of them are generally covered
with a good soil, and a variety of timber; and the low, intervale lands are
rich and remarkably well watered.

FACE OF THE COUNTRY, SOIL, PRODUCTIONS, etc.} The whole country below the
mountains, which are about 150, some say 200 miles from the sea, is level, and
seems from various appearances to have been once washed by the sea. The land
between York and James rivers is very level, and its surface about 40 feet
above high water mark. It appears from observation, to have arisen to its
present height, at different periods far distant from each other, and (...) at
these periods it was washed by the sea; for near Yorktown, (...) the banks are
perpendicular, you first see a stratum, intermixed with small shells resembling
a mixture of clay and sand, and about five feet thick; on this lies
horizontally, small white shells, cockle, (...), etc. an inch or two thick;
then a body of earth similar to that first mentioned, 18 inches thick; then a
layer of shells and another (...) of earth; on this a layer of 3 feet of white
shells mixed with sand, on which lay a body of oyster shells 6 feet thick,
which were (...) with earth to the surface. The oyster shells are so united by
a very strong cement that they fall, only when undermined, and then in large
bodies from 1 to 20 tons weight. They have the appearance of large rocks on the
shore. General Lincoln.


These appearances continue in a greater or less degree in the banks of James
river, 100 miles from the sea; the appearances then vary, (...) the banks are
filled with sharks' teeth, bones of large and small (...), petrified, and many
other petrifactions, some resembling the (...) of land and other animals,
others vegetable substances. These appearances are not confined to the river
banks, but are seen in various places in gullies at considerable distances from
the rivers. In one part of the state for 70 miles in length, by sinking a well,
you apparently come to the bottom of what was formerly a water course. And even
^s high up as Botetourt county, among the Allegany mountains, there is a tract
of land, judges to be 40,000 acres, surrounded on every side by mountains,
which is entirely covered with oyster and cockle shells, and, from some
gullies, they appear to be of considerable depth. A plantation at Day's Point,
on James river, of as many as 1000 acres, appears at a distance as if covered
with snow, but on examination the white appearance is found to arise from a bed
of clam shells, which by rep^^ed plowing have become fine and mixed with earth.

The soil below the mountains, seems to have acquired a character for goodness
which it by no means deserves. Though not rich it is well suited to the growth
of tobacco and Indian corn, and parts of it, for wheat. Good crops of cotton,
flax and hemp are also raised; and i^ some counties they have plenty of cider,
and exquisite brandy, dis^^^^ from peaches, which grow in great abundance upon
the numerous rivers of the Chesapeak.

The planters, before the war, paid their principal attention to the culture of
tobacco, of which there used to be exported, generally, 55,000 hogs^^^ds a
year. Since the revolution they are turning their attention more to the
cultivation of wheat, Indian corn, barley, flax and hemp. It is expected that
this state will add the article of rice to the list of her ^^^^rts; as it is
supposed, a large body of swamp in the easternmost (...), is capable of
producing it.

(...) or neat cattle are bred in great numbers in the western ^^^^ties of
Virginia, as well as in the states south of it, where they (...) an extensive
range, and mild winters, without any permanent (...). -- They run at large, are
not housed, and multiply very fast. -- 'In the lower parts of the state a
disease prevails among the neat cat^^^ which proves fatal to all that are not
bred there. The oxen, from the more northern states, which were employed at the
siege of Yorktown in October 1781, almost all died, sometimes 40 of them in a
night, and often suddenly dropped down dead in the roads. It is said that the
seeds of this disease were brought from the Havanna to South Carolina or
Georgia in some hides, and that the disease has progressed northward to
Virginia. Lord Dunmore imported some cattle from Rhode Island, and kept them
confined in a small pasture, near his seat, where no cattle had been for some
years, and where they could not intermix with other cattle, and yet they soon
died.' General Lincoln.


The gentlemen, being fond of pleasure, have taken much pains to raise a good
breed of horses, and have succeeded in it beyond any of the States. They will
give 1000l. sterling for a good seed horse. Horse racing has had a great
tendency to encourage the breeding of good horses, as it affords an opportunity
of putting them to the trial of their speed. They are more elegant, and will
perform more service, than the horses of the northern states.

An intelligent gentlemen, and inhabitant of Virginia, informs, that caves
among the mountains, have lately been discovered which yield salt petre in such
abundance, that he judges 500,000 pounds of it might be collected from them
annually.

This state does not abound with good fish. Sturgeon, shad, and herring are the
most plenty -- perch, sheepshead, drum, rock fish and trout, are common --
Besides these they have oysters in abundance, crabs, shrimps, etc.

CASCADES, CURIOSITIES AND CAVERNS.] The only remarkable cascade in this state
is that of Falling Spring, in Augusta. It is a water of James river, where it
is called Jackson's river, risi ROLE="label"ng in the warm spring mountains
about 20 miles southwest of the warm spring, and flowing into that valley.
About three quarters of a mile from i^ source, it falls over a rock 200 feet
into the valley below. The sheet of water is broken in its breadth by the rock
in two or three places, but not at all in its height. Between the sheet and
rock, at the bottom, you may walk across dry. This, cataract will bear no
comparison with that of Niagara, as to the quantity of water composing it; the
sheet being only 12 or 15 feet wide above, and somewhat more spread below; but
it is half as high again.

In the lime stone country, there are many caverns of very considerable extent.
The most noted in called Madison's cave, and is on the north side of the blue
ridge, near the intersection of the Rockingham and Augusta line with the south
fork of the southern river of Shenandoah. It is in a hill of about 200 feet
perpendicular height, the ascent of which, on one side, is so steep that you
may pitch a biscuit from its summit into the river which washes its base. The
entrance of the cave is, in this side, about two thirds of the way up. It
extends into the earth about 300 feet, branching into subordinate caverns,
sometimes ascending a little, but more generally descending, and at length
terminates in two different places, at basins of water of unknown extent, and
which appear to be nearly on a level with the water of the river. It is
probably one of the many reservoirs with which the interior parts of the earth
are supposed to abound, and which yield supplies to the fountains of water,
distinguished from others only by (...) being accessible. The vault of this
cave is of solid lime stone, from (...) to 40 or 50 feet high, through which
water is continually exudati^^. This, trickling down the sides of the cave, has
incrusted them over i^ the form of elegant drapery; and dripping from the top
of the vault, ^^^^rates on that, and on the base below, stalactites of a
conical form, (...) of which have met and formed massive columns.

Another of these caves is near the North Mountain, in the county of Frederick.
The entrance into this is on the top of an extensive ridge^^^ descend 30 or 40
feet, as into a well, from whence the cave then (...), nearly horizontally, 400
feet into the earth, preserving a (...) of from 20 to 50 feet, and a height of
from 5 to 12 feet. -- After entering this cave a few feet, the mercury, which
in the open (...) was at 50, rose to 57 of Farenheit's thermometer.

At the Panther gap, in the ridge which divides the waters of the (...) and the
Calf pasture, is what is called the Blowing cave. It is i^ the side of a hill,
is of about 100 feet diameter, and emits constantly a current of air of such
force, as to keep the weeds prostrate to the distance of twenty yards before
it. This current is strongest in dry (...) weather, and in long spells of rain
weakest. Regular inspirations and expirations of air, by caverns and fissures,
have been probably enough accounted for, by supposing them combined with
inter^^^ing fountains, as they must of course inhale the air while the
reservoirs are emptying themselves, and again emit it while they are (...). But
a constant issue of air, only varying in its force as the ^^ther is drier or
damper, will require a new hypothesis. There is ^^^ther blowing cave in the
Cumberland mountain, about a mile from (...) it crosses the Carolina line. All
we know of this is, that it is ^^constant, and that a fountain of water issues
from it.

The Natural Bridge, is the most sublime of nature's works. It is (...) the
ascent of a hill, which seems to have been cloven through its (...) by some
great convulsion. The fissure, just at the bridge, is (...) admeasurements, 270
feet deep, by others only 205. It is a^^^ 45 feet wide at the bottom, and 90
feet at the top; this of course ^^^^ines the length of the bridge, and its
height from the water ^^^readth in the middle is about 60 feet, but more at the
ends, and the thickness of the mass at the summit of the arch, about 40 feet. A
(...) of this thickness is constituted by a coat of earth, which gives (...) to
many large trees. The residue, with the hill on both sides, (...) rock of lime
stone. The arch approaches the semi elliptical (...) but the larger axis of the
ellipsis, which would be the cord of (...) each, is many times longer than the
transverse. Though the side of this bridge are provided in some parts with a
parapet of fixed ^^cks, yet few men have resolution to walk to them and look
over into the abyss. You involuntarily fall on your hands and feet, creep to
the parapet and peep over it. If the view from the top be painful and
intolerable, that from below is delightful in an equal extreme. (...)
impossible for the emotions arising from the sublime, to be felt (...) what
they are here: so beautiful an arch, so elevated, so light, (...) springing as
it were up to Heaven, the rapture of the spectator is (...) indescribable! The
fissure continuing narrow, deep and straight (...) considerable distance above
and below the bridge, opens a short (...) very pleasing view of the North
mountain on one side, and (...) Ridge on the other, at the distance each of
them of about five (...). This bridge is in the county of Rockbridge, to which
it has given name, and affords a public and commodious passage over a valley,
which cannot be crossed elsewhere for a considerable distance. The stream
passing under it is called Cedar creek. It is a water of James river, and
sufficient in the driest seasons to turn a grist mill, though its fountain is
not more than two miles above. Don Ulloa mentions a break, similar to this, in
the province of Angar^^^y in South America. It is from 16 to 22 feet wide, 111
deep, and of 1 miles continuance, English measure. Its breadth at top is not
sensibly greater that at bottom.
There is a natural bridge similar to the above over Stock creek, a branch of
Peleson river, in Washington county.

MINES AND MINERALS.] Virginia is the most pregnant with minerals and fossils
of any state in the union. A single lump of gold ore has been found, near the
falls of Rappahannock river, which yielded 17 dwt. of gold, of extraordinary
ductility. No other indication of gold has been discovered in its neighborhood.

On the great Kanhawa, opposite to the mouth of Cripple creek, and also about
25 miles from the southern boundary of the state, in the country of Montgomery,
are mines of lead. The metal is mixed, sometimes with earth, and sometimes with
rock, which requires the force of gunpowder to open it; and is accompanied with
a portion of silver, too small to be worth separation under any process
hitherto attempted there. The proportion yielded is from 50 to 80 lb. of pure
metal from 100 lb. of washed ore. The most common is that of 60 to the 100 lb.
The veins are at sometimes most flattering; at others they disappear suddenly
and totally. They enter the side of the hill, and proceed horizontally. Two of
them have been wrought by the public. These would employ about 50 laborers to
advantage. Thirty men, who have at the same time raised their own corn, have
produced 60 tons of lead in the year; but the general quantity is from 20 to 25
tons. The present furnace is a mile from the ore bank, and on the opposite side
of the river. The ore is first waggoned to the river, a quarter of a mile, then
laden on board of canoes and carried across the river, which is there about 200
yards wide, and then again taken into wagons and carried to the furnace. This
mode was originally adopted, that they might avail themselves of a good
situation on a creek, for a pounding mill; but it would be easy to have the
furnace and pounding mill on the same side of the river, which would yield
water, without any dam, by a canal of about half a mile in length. From the
furnace the lead is transported 130 miles along a good road leading through the
peaks of Otter to Lynch's ferry or Winston's on James river, from whence it is
carried by water about the same distance to Westham. This land carriage may be
greatly shortened, by delivering the lead on James river, above the Blue Ridge,
from whence a ton weight has been brought in two canoes. The Great Kanhawa has
considerable falls in the neighborhood of the mines. About seven miles below
are three falls, of three or four feet perpendicular each; and three miles
above is a rapid of three miles continuance, which has been compared in its
descent to the great fall of James river. Yet it is the opinion, that they may
be laid open for useful navigation, so as to reduce very much the portage
between the Kanhawa and James river.

A mine of copper was opened in the county of Amherst, on the (...) of James
river, and another in the opposite county, on the (...). However, either from
bad management or the poverty of (...) they were discontinued. A few years ago
there were six (...) worked in this state. Two of them made about 150 tons
(...) each -- the others made each from 600 to 1600 tons of pig iron (...).
Besides these, a forge at Fredericksburgh, made about 300 (...) of bar iron,
from pigs imported from Maryland; and a (...) Neapsco of Patomak, worked in the
same way. The indi^^^^ of iron in other places are numerous, and dispersed
through (...) middle country. The toughness of the cast iron of some of (...)
^^ces is very remarkable. Pots and other utensils, cast thin^^^^ usual, of this
iron, may be safely thrown a into or out of the (...) in which they are
transported. Salt pans made of the same, (...) longer wanted for that purpose,
cannot be broken up in order (...) melted again, unless previously drilled in
many parts.

(...) the western part of the state, we are ^old of iron mines on Ches^^^^ a
branch of the Great Kanhawa^, near where it crosses the (...) ^^ne; and in
other places.

(...) considerable quantities of black lead are taken occasionally for (...).
Winterham, in the county of Amelia. There is no (...) established at it, those
who want, going and procuring it for (...).

(...) country on both sides of James river, from 15 to 20 miles above (...),
and for several miles northward and southward, in replete (...) coal of a very
excellent quality. Being in the hands (...) proprietors, pits have been opened
and worked to an ex^^^^ to the demand. The pits which have been opened, lie 150
(...) feet above the bed of the river, and have been very little in^^^^ with
water. The first discovery of the coal, is said to (...) made by a boy, digging
after a cray fish; it has also been (...) she bottom of trees blown up. In many
places it lies with^^^^ 4 feet of the surface of the ground. It is conjectured
that (...) bushels might be raised from one pit in 12 months.

(...) western country coal is known to be in so many places, as (...) induced
an opinion, that the whole tract between the Laurel (...), Missisippi, and
Ohio, yields coal. It is also known in ma^^^^ on the north side of the Ohio.
The coal at Pittsburgh is of (...) superior quality. A bed of it at that place
has been a fire (...) year 1765. Another coal hill on the Pil^e Run of
Monon^^^^ has been a fire ten years; yet it has burnt away about 20 yards (...).

(...) known one instance, says Mr. Jefferson, of an emerald found (...)
country. Amethysts have been frequent, and chrystals (...); yet not in such
numbers any of them as to be worth (...).

(...) is very good marble; and in very great abundance, on James (...) at the
mouth of Rockfish. Some white and as pure as one (...) expect to find on the
surface of the earth; but generally vari^^^^ with red, blue and purple. None of
it has ever been worked. (...) a very large precipice, which hangs over a
navigable part of (...).

But one vein of lime stone is known below the Blue Ridge. Its first appearance
is in Prince William, two miles below the Pignut ridge of mountains; thence it
passes on nearly parallel with that, and crosses the Rivanna about five miles
below it, where it is called the southwest Ridge. It then crosses Hardware,
above the mouth of Hudson's creek, James river at the mouth of Rockfish, at the
marble quarry before spoken of, probably runs up that river to where it appears
again at Ross's iron works, and so passes off southwestwardly by Flat creek of
Otter river. It is never more than 100 yards wide. From the Blue ridge
westwardly the whole country seems to be founded on a rock of lime stone,
besides infinite quantities on the surface, both loose and fixed. This is cut
into beds, which range, as the mountains and sea coast do, from southwest to
northeast.

MEDICINAL SPRINGS.] There are several medicinal springs, some of which are
indubitably efficacious, while others seem to owe their reputation as much to
fancy, and change of air and regimen, as to their real virtues. None of them
have undergone a chemical analysis in skilful hands, nor been so far the
subject of observations as to have produced a reduction into classes of the
disorders which they relieve; it is in my power to give little more than an
enumeration of them.

The most efficacious of these are two springs in Augusta, near the sources of
James river, where it is called Jackson's river. They (...) near the foot of
the ridge of mountains, generally called the Warm spring mountain, but in the
maps Jackson's mountains. The one is distinguished by the name of the Warm
Spring, and the other of the Hot Spring. The Warm Spring issues with a very
bold stream, sufficient to work a grist mill, and to keep the waters of its
basin, which is 30 feet in diameter, at the vital warmth, viz. 96 of
Farenheit's thermometer. The matter with which these waters is allied in very
volatile; its small indicates it to be sulphurous, as also does the
circumstance of turning silver black. They relieve rheumatisms. Other
complaints also of very different natures have been removed of lessened by
them. It rains here four or five days in every week.

The Hot Spring is about six miles from the Warm, is much smaller, and has been
so hot as to have boiled an egg. Some believe its degree of heat to be
lessened. It raises the mercury in Farenheit's thermometer to 112 degrees,
which is fever heat. It sometimes relieves where the Warm Spring fails. A
fountain of common water issuing within a few inches of its margin, gives it a
singular appearance. Comparing the temperature of these with that of the hot
springs of Kanschatka, of which Krachininnikow gives an account, the difference
is very great, the latter rising the mercury to 200 degrees, which is within 12
degrees of boiling water. These springs are very much resorted to in spite of a
total want of accommodation for the sick. Their waters are strongest in the
hottest months, which occasions their being visited in July and August
principally.

The Sweet Springs are in the county of Botetourt, at the eastern foot of the
Allegany, about 42 miles from the warm springs. They are still less known.
Having been found to relieve cases in which the others had been ineffectually
tried, it is probable their composition is different. They are different also
in their temperature, being as cold as common water; which is not mentioned,
however, as a proof of a distinct impregnation. This is among the first sources
of James (...).

(...) Patomak river, in Berkeley county, above the North Mountain, (...)
Medicinal springs, much more frequented than those of Augusta. (...) powers,
however, are less, the waters weakly mineralized, and (...) warm. They are more
visited, because situated in a fertile, (...), and populous country, provided
with better accommo^^^^, always safe from the Indians, and nearest to the more
popu^^^^ states.

(...) Louisa county, on the head waters of the South Anna branch of (...)
river, are springs of some medicinal virtue. They are however (...) much used.
There is a weak chalybeate at Richmond; and (...) others in various parts of
the country, which are of too lit^^^ north, or too little note to be enumerated
after those before men^^^^.

We are told of a Sulphur Spring on Howard's creek of Green Bri^^^^ in the low
grounds of the Great Kanhaway, 7 miles above the (...) of Elk river, and 67
above that of the Kanhaway itself, is a (...) in the earth of the capacity of
30 or 40 gallons, from which is^^^ constantly a bituminous vapor in so strong
a current, as to give (...) sand about its orifice the motion which it has in a
boiling spring^^^ presenting a lighted candle or torch within 18 inches of the
hole, (...) up in a column of 18 inches diameter, and four or five feet (...)
height, which sometimes burns out in 20 minutes, and at other times (...) known
to continue three days, and then has been left burn^^^^. The flame is unsteady,
of the density of that of burning spirits, (...) smells like burning pit coal.
Water sometimes collects in the ba^^^ which is remarkably cold, and is kept in
ebullition by the vapor (...) through it. If the vapor be fired in that
state, the water soon (...) so warm that the hand cannot bear it, and
evaporates wholly (...) short time. This, with the circumjacent lands, is the
property of ^^^^dent Washington and of General Lewis.

There is a similar one on Sandy river, the flame of which is a column (...)
about 12 inches diameter, and 3 feet high. General Clarke kind^^^^ vapor,
staid about an hour, and left it burning.

The mention of uncommon springs leads to that of Siphon foun^^^^. There is one
of these near the intersection of the lord Fair^^^^ boundary with the North
mountain, not far from Brock's gap, on the stream of which is a grist mill,
which grinds two bushels of (...) at every flood of the spring. Another near
the Cow pasture (...), a mile and a half below its confluence with the Bull
pasture (...), and 16 or 17 miles from the Hot Springs, which intermits (...)
in every twelve hours. One also near the mouth of the North Hol^ton.

After these may be mentioned the Natural Well, on the lands of a (...). Lewis
in Fredertick county. It is somewhat larger than a com^^^^ well; the water
rises in it as near the surface of the earth as in (...) neighboring
artificial well (...) and is of a depth as yet unknown. (...) said there is a
current in it tending sensibly downwards. If this (...) true, it probably feeds
some fountain, of which it is the natural re^^^^, distinguished from others,
like that of Madison's cave, by being ^^ssible. It is used with a bucket and
windlass as an ordinary well.

POPULATION.] See table.

MILITIA.] Every able bodied freeman, between the ages of 16 and 50 is enrolled
in the militia. Those of every county are formed into companies, and these
again into one or more battalions, according to the numbers in the county. They
are commanded by colonels, and other subordinate officers, as in the regular
service. In every county is a county lieutenant, who commands the whole militia
in has county, but ranks only as a colonel in the field. They have no general
officers always existing. These are appointed occasionally, when an invasion or
insurrection happens, and their commission determines with the occasion. The
governor is head of the military as well as civil power. The law requires every
militia man to provide himself with the arms usual in the regular service. But
this injunction was always indifferenly complied with, and the arms they had
have been so frequently called for to arm the regulars, that in the lower parts
of the country they are entirely disarmed. In the middle country a fourth or
fifth part of them may have such firelocks as they had provided to destroy the
noxious animals which infest their farms; and on the western side of the Blue
Ridge they are generally armed with rifles.

The intersection of Virginia by so many navigable rivers, renders it almost
incapable of defense. As the land will not support a great number of people, a
force cannot soon be collected to repel a sudden invasion. If the militia bear
the same proportion to the number of inhabitants now, as in 1782, they amount
to about 68,000.

CHIEF TOWNS.] They have no townships in this state, nor any towns of
consequence, owing probably to the intersection of the country by navigable
rivers, which brings the trade to the doors of the inhabitants, and prevents
the necessity of their going in quest of it to a distance.

Williamsburgh, which till the year 1780 was the seat of government, never
contained above 1800 inhabitants, and Norfolk, the most populous town they ever
had in Virginia, contained but 6000. The towns, or more properly villages or
hamlets, are as follows.

On James river and its waters, Norfolk, Portsmouth, Hampton, Suffolk,
Smithfield, Williamsburg, Petersburg, Richmond the seat of government,
Manchester, Charlottesville, New London. -- On York River and its waters, York,
Newcastle, Hanover. -- On Rappahannock, Urbanna, Port Royal, Fredericksburg,
Falmouth. -- On Patomak and its waters, Dumfries, Colchester, Alexandria,
Winchester, St^^ton.

There are places, at which, like some of the foregoing, the (...) have said
there shall be towns; but nature has said there shall (...) and they remain
unworthy of enumeration. Norfolk will probably become the emporium for all the
trade of the Chesapeak Bay and its waters; and canal of 8 or 10 miles, which is
contemplated, and will probably soon be completed, with bring it to all that of
^^^marle sound and its waters. Secondary to this place, are the towns of the
head of the tide waters, to wit, Petersburg on Appamattox, Richmond on James
river, Newcastle on York river, Fredericksburgh (...) Rappahannock, and
Alexandria on Patomak. From these the distribution will be to subordinate
situations of the country. Accidental circumstances however may control the
indications of nature, and in (...) instances do they do it more frequently
than in the rise and fall of to^^^.

To the foregoing general account, we add the following more particular
descriptions.

ALEXANDERIA stands on the south bank of Patomak river in Fair^^^^ county. Its
situation is elevated and pleasant. The soil is clay. The original settlers,
anticipating its future growth and importance, (...) out the streets upon the
plan of Philadelphia. It contains about (...) ^^ses, many of which are
handsomely built, and nearly 3000 inhabitants. This town, upon opening the
navigation of Patomak river, (...) consequence of its vicinity to the city of
Washington, will (...) be one of the most thriving commercial places on the
continent.

^OUNT VERNON, the celebrated seat of President Washington, ^^^^santly situated
on the Virginia bank of the river Patomak, (...) it is nearly two miles wide,
and is about 280 miles from the sea, (...) 127 from point Look out, at the
mouth of the river. It (...) miles below Alexandria, and four above the
beautiful seat of (...) Col. Fairfax; called Bellevoir. The area of the mount
is (...) feet above the surface of the river, and, after furnishing a lawn
(...) acres in front, and about the same in rear of the buildings, falls ^^^ber
abruptly on those two quarters. On the north end it sub^^^^ gradually into
extensive pasture grounds; while on the south it (...) more steeply, in a
shorter distance, and terminates with -- the (...) house, stables, vineyard and
nurseries. On either wing is a (...) grove of different, flowering forest
trees. Parallel with them, (...) land side, are two spacious gardens, into
which one is led by (...) serpentine gravel walks, planted with weeping willows
and shady (...). The Mansion house itself (though much embellished by, yet
(...) perfectly satisfactory to the chaste taste of the present possessor)
ap^^^^ venerable and convenient. The superb banqueting room has (...) finished
since he returned home from the army. A lofty portico, (...) in length,
supported by eight pillars, has a pleasing effect when (...) from the water;
the whole assemblage of the green house, (...) house, offices and servant's
halls, when seen from the land side, (...) a resemblance to a rural village --
especially as the lands on that (...) are laid out somewhat in the form of
English gardens, in meadows (...) grass grounds, ornamented with little copses,
circular clumps and (...) trees. A small park on the margin of the river, where
the En^^^ fallow deer, and the American wild deer are seen through the (...),
alternately with the vessels as they are sailing along, add a (...) and
picturesque appearance to the whole scenery. On the ^^^^site side of a small
creek to the northward, an extensive plain, ^^^^ting cornfields and cattle
grazing, affords in summer a luxuriant (...); while the blended verdure of
woodlands and cultivated (...), on the Maryland shore, variegates the prospect
in a charm^^^ manner. Such are the philosophic shades to which the late Com^^^^
in chief of the American Armies retired from the tumultuous (...) of a busy
world, and which he has since left to dignify, by his ^^^^alled abilities, the
most important office in the gift of his fellow (...).

FREDERICKSBURGH, in the county of Spotsylvania, is situated on (...) side of
Rappahannock river, 110 miles from its mouth; and (...) about 200 houses,
principally on one street, which runs near^^ ^^^llel with the river, and 1500
inhabitants.

RICHMOND, in the county of Henrico, is the present seat of government, and
stands on the north side of James river, just at the foot of the falls, and
contains between 400 and 500 houses, and nearly 4000 inhabitants. Part of the
houses are built upon the margin of the river, convenient for business; the
rest are upon a hill which overlooks the lower part of the town, and commands
an extensive prospect of the river and adjacent country. The new houses are
well built. A large state house or capitol, has lately been erected on the
hill. The lower part of the town is divided by a creek, over which is a
convenient bridge. A bridge between 300 and 400 yards in length, has lately
been thrown across James river at the foot of the fall, by Col. Mayo. That part
from Manchester to the island is built on 15 boats. From the island to the
rocks was formerly a floating bridge of rafts; but Col. Mayo has now built it
of framed log piers, filled with stone. From the rocks to the landing at
Richmond, the bridge is continued on framed piers filled with stone. This
bridge connects Richmond with Manchester; and as the passengers pay toll, it
produces a handsome revenue to Col. Mayo, who is the sole proprietor.

The falls above he bridge are seven miles in length. A noble canal is cutting
and nearly completed on the north side of the river, which is to terminate in a
basin of about two acres, in the town of Richmond. From this basin to the
wharves in the river, will be a land carriage of about a mile. This canal is
cutting under the direction of a company, who have calculated the expense at
30,000l. pounds, Virginia money. This they have divided into 500 shares of 60l.
each. The opening of this canal promises the addition of much wealth of
Richmond.

PETERSBURG, 25 miles southward of Richmond, stands on the south side of
Appamattox river, and contains upwards of 300 houses in two divisions; one is
upon a clay cold soil, and is very dirty, the other upon a plain of sand or
loam. There is no regularity and very little el^gance in Petersburg, it is
merely a place of business. The Free Masons have a hall tolerably elegant. It
is very unhealthy, It is asserted as an undoubted fact, by a number of
gentlemen well acquainted (...) this town, that, in 1781, 'one child only born
in it had arrived to manhood, and (...) a^^^pple.'
being shut out from the access of the winds by high hills on every side. This
confined situation has such an effect upon the constitutions of the
inhabitants, that they very nearly resemble those of hard drinkers; hence, in
the opinion of physicians, they require a considerable quantity of stimulating
aliments and vinous drinks, to keep up a balance between the several functions
of the body.

About 2200 hogsheads of tobacco are inspected here annually. Like Richmond,
Williamsburg, Alexandria and Norfolk, it is a corporation; and what is
singular, Petersburg city comprehends a part of three counties. The celebrated
Indian queen, Pocahonta, from whom descended the Randolph and Bowling families,
formerly resided at this place. Petersburg and its suburbs contain about 3000
inhabitants.

WILLIAMSBURGH is 60 miles eastward of Richmond, situated between two creeks;
one falling into James, the other into York (...). The distance of each landing
place is about a mile from the (...) which, with the disadvantage of not being
able to bring up large vessels, and want of enterprise in the inhabitants, are
the reasons why ^t never flourished. It consists of about 200 houses, going
fast to (...) (...) has about 1400 inhabitants. It is regularly laid out in
parallel (...), with a square in the center, through which runs the principal
(...), E. and W. about a mile in length, and more than 100 feet wide. A^ the
ends of this street are two public buildings, the college and (...). Besides
these there is an Episcopal church, a prison, a hospital for lunatics, and the
palace; all of them extremely indifferent. In the capital is a large marble
statue, in the likeness of Narbone Berk^^^, Lord Botetourt, a man distinguished
for his love of piety, literature and good government, and formerly governor of
Virginia. It (...) erected at the expense of the state, sometime since the year
1771. The capitol is little better than in ruins, and this elegant statue is
exposed to the rudeness of negroes and boys, and is shamefully de^^^^.

Every thing in Williamsburgh appears dull, forsaken and melancholy no trade --
no amusements, but the infamous one of gaming -- no industry, and very little
appearance of religion. The unprosperous (...) of the college, but principally
the removal of the seat of government, have contributed much to the decline of
this city.

YORKTOWN, 13 miles eastward from Williamsburgh, and 14 from Monday's point at
the mouth of the river, is a place of about 100 (...), situated on the south
side of York river, and contains about (...) inhabitants. It was rendered
famous by the capture of Lord ^^^^wallis and his army, on the 19th of October,
1781, by the united (...) of France and America.

COLLEGES, ACADEMIES, etc.] The college of William and Ma^^^ was founded in the
time of king William and queen Mary, who (...) to it 20,000 acres of land, and
a penny a pound duty on cer^^^ tobaccoes exported from Virginia and Maryland,
which had (...) levied by the statute of 25 Car. 2. The assembly also gave it,
(...) temporary laws, a duty on liquors imported, and skins and furs ex^^^^.
From these resources it received upwards of 3000l. The buildings are of brick,
sufficient for an indifferent accommodation of perhaps 100 students. By its
charter it was to be under the government of 20 visitors, who were to be its
legislators, and to have a president and six professors, who were incorporated.
It was allowed a representative in the general assembly. Under this charter, a
professorship of the Greek and Latin languages, a professorship of mathematics,
one of moral philosophy, and two of divinity, were established. To these were
annexed, for a sixth professorship, a considerable dona^^^ by a Mr. Boil of
England, for the instruction of the Indians, and their conversion to
christianity. This was called the professorship of Brafferton, from an estate
of that name in England, purchased (...) the moneys given. The admission of the
learners of Latin and (...) filled the college with children. This rendering it
disagreeable (...) degrading to young gentlemen already prepared for entering
on (...) sciences, they were discouraged from resorting to it, and thus the
(...) for mathematics and moral philosophy, which might have (...) of some
service, became of very little. The revenues too were ^^^sted in accommodating
those who came only to acquire the ru^^^ts of science. After the present
revolution, the visitors, having (...) power to change those circumstances in
the constitution of the (...) which were fixed by the charter, and being
therefore confin^^^ the number of professorships, undertook to change the
objects of the professorships. They excluded the two schools for divinity, and
that for the Greek and Latin languages, and substituted others; so that at
present they stand thus -- A professorship for law and police, -- anatomy and
medicine -- natural philosophy and mathematics -- mo^ral philosophy, the law of
nature and nations, the fine arts -- modern languages -- for the Brafferton.

Measures have been taken to increase the number of professorships* as well for
the purpose of subdividing those already instituted, (...) of adding others for
other branches of science. To the professorships usually established in the
universities of Europe, it would seem proper to add one for the ancient
languages and literature of the north, on account of their connection with our
own language, laws, customs, and history. The purposes of the Brafferton
institution would be better answered by maintaining a perpetual mission among
the Indian tribes, the object of which, besides, instructing them in the
principles of christianity, as the founder requires, should be to-collect their
traditions, laws, customs, languages, and other circumstances which might lead
to a discovery of their relation to one another, or descent from other nations.
When these objects are accomplished with one tribe, the missionary might pass
on to another.

The college edifice is a huge, misshapen pile. 'Which but that it has a roof,
would be taken for a brick kiln.' In 1787, there were about 30 young gentlemen
members of this college, a large proportion of which were law students. The
Academy in Prince Edward county has been erected into a college by the name of
'Hampden Sy^ney College.' It has been a flourishing seminary, but is now said
to be on the decline.

There are several academies in Virginia -- one at Alexandria -- one at Norfolk
-- one at Hanover, and others in other places.

Since the declaration of independence, the laws of Virginia have been revised
by a committee appointed for the purpose, who have reported their work to the
assembly; one object of this revisal was (...) diffuse knowledge more generally
through the mass of the people. The bill for this purpose 'proposes to lay off
every county into small districts of five or six miles square, called hundreds,
and in each of them to establish a school for teaching reading, writing, and
arithmetic. The tutor to be supported by the hundred, and all persons in it
entitled to send their children 3 years gratis, and as much longer as they
please, paying for it. These schools to be under a visitor, who is annually to
choose the boy of best genius in the school, of those whose parents are too poor
to give them further education, and to send him forward to one of the grammar
schools, of which twenty are proposed to be erected in different parts of the
country, for teaching Greek, Latin, geography, and the higher branches of
numerical arithmetic. Of the boys thus sent in any one year trial is to be m^de
at the grammar schools one or two years, and the best genius of the whole
selected and continued six years, and the residue dismissed* by this means
twenty of the best geniusses will be raked from the rub^^^ annually, and
instructed, at the public expense, so far as the grammar schools go. At the end
of six years instruction, one half are to be discontinued (from among whom the
grammar schools will probably be supplied with future masters,) and the other
half, who are to be chosen for the superiority of their parts and disposition,
are to be sent (...) continued three years in the study of such sciences as
they shall (...), at William and Mary college, the plan of which is pro^^^ to
be enlarged, as will be hereafter explained, and extended (...) the useful
sciences. The ultimate result of the whole scheme of (...) would be the
teaching all the children of the state reading, (...), and common arithmetic;
turning out ten annually of superior (...) well taught in Greek Latin,
geography, and the higher branches (...) arithmetic; turning out ten others
annually, of still superior parts, (...) ^o those branches of learning, shall
have added such of the scien^^ their genius shall have led them to; the
furnishing to the (...) part of the people convenient schools, at which their
children may be educated, at their own expense -- The general objects of (...)
are to provide an education adapted to the years, to the ca^^^y, and the
condition of every one, and directed to their freedom ^^ppiness. Specific
details were not proper for the law. These (...) be the business of the
visitors entrusted with its execution. The (...) of this education being the
schools of the hundreds, wherein (...) mass of the people will receive their
instruction, the princi^^^ foundations of future order will be said here. The
first elements ^^^^^lity may be instilled into their minds; such as, when
further ^^dopted as their judgments advance in strength, may teach them how
(...) their own greatest happiness, by showing them that it does (...) on the
condition of life in which chance has placed them, (...) always the result of a
good conscience, good healthy occupation, (...) freedom in all just pursuits.
Those whom either the wealth of (...) parents or the adoption of the state
shall destine to higher degrees (...), will go on to the grammar schools, which
constitute the (...) ^^age, there to be instructed in the languages. As soon as
they (...) a sufficient age, it is supposed they will be sent on from the (...)
schools to the university, which constitutes the third and (...), there to
study those sciences which may be adapted to (...) views. By that part of the
plan which prescribes the selection (...) youths of genius from among the
classes of the poor, the state (...) itself of those talents which nature has
sown as liberally a^^^^ the poor as the rich, but which perish without use, if
not sought (...) and cultivated. But of all the views of this law none is more
im^^^t, none more legitimate, than that of rendering the people the (...) as
they are the ultimate, guardians of their own liberty. For this (...), the
reading in the first stage, where they will receive their (...) education, is
proposed, as has been said, to be chiefly historical. ^^ry, by apprising them
of the past, will enable them to judge of the (...); it will avail them of the
experience of other times and other (...); it will qualify them as judges of
the actions and designs of (...); it will enable them to know ambition under
every disguise it (...) assume; and knowing it to defeat its views. In every
govern^^^ (...) earth is some tra^e of human weakness, some germ of cor^^^ and
degeneracy, which cunning will discover, and wickedness (...) open, cultivate
and improve. Every government degener^^^ when trusted to the rulers of the
people alone. The people them^^^^ therefore are its only safe depositories. And
to render even (...), their minds must be improved to a certain degree. This
in^^^ (...) not all that is necessary, though it be essentially necessary.
(...) influence over government must be shared among all the people.

If every individual which composes their mass participates of the ^^^^mate
authority, the government will be safe; because the corrupting the whole mass
will exceed any private resources of wealth; and public ones cannot be provided
but by levies on the people. In this (...) every man would have to pay his own
price. The government of Great Britain has been corrupted, because but one man
in ten has a right to vote for members of parliament. The sellers of the
government therefore get nine tenths of their price clear.

The excellent measures for the diffusion of useful knowledge, which the
forementioned bill proposes, have not yet been carried into off (...). And it
will be happy if the great inequality in the circumstances of the citizens --
the pride, the independence, and the indolence of (...) class -- and the
poverty and depression of the other, do not pro^e (...) superable difficulties
in the way of their universal operation.

RELIGION.] The first settlers in this country were emigrants from England, of
the English church, just at a point of time when it was flushed with complete
victory over the religious of all other persuasions Possessed, as they became,
of the powers of making, administering and executing the laws, they showed
equal intolerance in this country with their Presbyterian brethren, who had
emigrated to the northern government. The Quakers were flying from persecution
in England. They cast their eyes on these new countries, as asylums of civil
and religious freedom; but they found them free only for the reigning sect.
Several acts of the Virginia assembly of 1659, 1662, and 166^ had made it penal
in their parents to refuse to have their children baptized; had prohibited the
unlawful assembling of Quakers; had made it penal for any master of a vessel to
bring a Quaker into the state; had ordered those already here, and such as
should come thereafter, to be imprisoned till they should abjure the country;
provided a milder punishment for their first and second return, but (...) for
the third; had inhibited all persons from suffering their (...) in or near
their houses, entertaining them individually, or disposing of books which
supported their tenets. If no capital execution (...) place here, as did in New
England, it was not owing to the moderation of the church, or spirit of the
legislature, as may be inferred from the law itself; but to historical
circumstances which have not been handed down to us. The Episcopalians retained
full possession of the country about a century. Other opinions began to creep
in; and the great care of the government to support their town church, having
begotten an equal degree of indolence in its clergy, two thirds of the people
had become dissenters at the commencement of the present revolution. The laws
indeed were still oppressive on them, but the spirit of the one party had
subsided into moderation, and of the other had risen to a degree of
determination which commanded respect.

The present denominations of christians in Virginia are, Presbyterians, who
are the most numerous, and inhabit the western parts of the state;
Episcopalians, who are the most ancient settlers, and occu^^ the eastern and
first settled parts of the state. Intermingled with (...) are great numbers of
Baptists and Methodists.

CHARACTER, MANNERS AND CUSTOMS.} Virginia prides itself in being. "The Ancient
Dominion." It has produced some of the most distinguished and influential men
that have been active in effecting the two late grand and important revolutions
in America. Her political and military character will rank among the (...) in
the page of history. But it is to be observed that this character has been
obtained for the Virginians by a few eminent men, who (...) taken the lead in
all their public transactions, and who in (...) govern Virginia; for the great
body of the people do not con^^^ themselves with politics -- so that their
government, though nom^^^ republican, is, in fact, oligarchal or
aristrocratical.

The Virginians, who are rich, are in general sensible, polite and hos^^ble,
and of an independent spirit. The poor are ignorant and ab^^ -- and all are of
an inquisitive turn. A considerable proportion of the people are much addicted
to gaming, drinking, swearing, horse ^^ing, cock fighting, and most kinds of
dissipation. There is a much ^^^er disparity between the rich and the poor, in
Virginia, than in any of the northern states. The native inhabitants are too
generally (...) acquainted with business, owing to their pride, and false
notions of ^^^ness. Before the revolution they considered it as beneath a
^^ntleman to attend to mercantile matters, and devoted their time prin^^^y to
amusement. By th^^e means the Scotch people, and other ^^^^ners who came among
them, became their merchants, and suddenly grew rich. The influence of slavery
here is equally pernicious to (...) morals of the citizens as in the other
southern states.

CONSTITUTION, COURTS AND LAWS.] The executive powers (...) lodged in the hands
of a governor, chosen annually, and incapa^^ of acting more than three years in
seven. He is assisted by a coun^^ of eight members. The judiciary powers are
divided among sev^^^^ courts, as will be hereafter explained. Legislation is
exercised by (...) houses of assembly, the one called the house of delegates,
composed of two members from each county, chosen annually by the citizens,
^^^ssing an estate for life in 100 acres of uninhabited land, or 25 a^^^ with a
house on it, or in a house or lot in some town; the other (...) the senate,
consisting of 24 members, chosen quadrennially by (...) same electors, who for
this purpose are distributed into 24 districts. The concurrence of both houses
is necessary to the passing of a law. (...) have the appointment of the
governor and council, the judges of the superior courts, auditors, attorney
general, treasurer, register of the land office, and delegates to Congress.

This constitution was the first that was formed in the whole United (...).

There are three superior courts, to which appeals lie from the courts (...),
to wit, the high court of chancery, the general court, and (...) of admiralty.
The first and second of these receive appeals (...) the county courts, and also
have original jurisdiction where the ^^^ject of controversy is of the value of
ten pounds sterling, or where it concerns the title or bounds of land. The
jurisdiction of the admiralty is original altogether. The high court of
chancery is com^^^ of three judges, the general court of five, and the court of
admiralty of three. The two first hold their sessions at Richmond at stated
(...), the chancery twice in the year, and the general court twice for ^^^ness
civil and criminal, and twice more for criminal only. The (...) of admiralty
^its at Williamsburg whenever a controversy arises. There is one supreme court,
called the Court of Appeals, composed of the judges of the three superior
courts, assembling twice a year at (...) times at Richmond. This court receives
appeals in all civil cases from each of the superior courts, and determines
them finally. But it has no original jurisdiction.

All public accounts are settled with a board of auditors, consisting of three
members, appointed by the general assembly, any two of whom may act. But an
individual, dissatisfied with the determination of that board, may carry his
case into the proper superior court.

In 1661, the laws of England were expressly adopted by an act of the assembly
of Virginia, except so far as 'a difference of condition' render them
inapplicable. To these were added a number of acts of assembly, passed during
the monarchy, and ordinances of convention, and acts of assembly since the
establishment of the republic. The following variations from the British model
are worthy of notice.

Debtors unable to pay their debts, and making faithful delivery of their whole
effects, are released from their confinement, and their persons forever
discharged from restraint for such previous debts: But any property they may
afterward acquire will be subject to their creditors. -- The poor, unable to
support themselves, are maintained by an assessment on the titheable persons in
their parish. -- A foreigner of any nation, not in open war, becomes
naturalized by removing to the state to reside, and taking an oath of fidelity;
and thereby acquires every right of a native citizen. -- Slaves pass by descent
and dower as lands do. -- Slaves as well as lands, were entailable during the
monarchy: But, by an act of the first republican assembly, all donees in tail,
present and future, were vested with the absolute dominion of the entailed
subject. Gaming debts are made void, and moneys actually paid to discharge such
debts (if they exceed 40 shillings) may be recovered by the payer within three
months, or by any other person afterward. -- Tobacco, flour, beef, pork, tar,
pitch and turpentine, must be inspected by persons publicly appointed before
they can be exported.

In 1785, the assembly enacted that no man should be compelled to support any
religious worship, place or minister whatsoever, nor be enforced, restrained,
molested or burdened in his body or goods, nor otherwise suffer on account of
his religious opinions or belief; but that all men should be free to profess,
and by argument to maintain their opinion, in matters of religion; and that the
same should in no wise diminish, enlarge or affect their civil capacities.

In October 1786, an act was passed by the assembly prohibiting the importation
of slaves into the commonwealth, upon penalty of the forfeiture of the sum of
1000l. for every slave. And every slave imported contrary to the true intent
and meaning of this act, becomes free.

MANUFACTURES AND COMMERCE.] Before the war, the inhabitants of this state paid
but little attention to the manufacture of their own clothing. It has been
thought they used to import as much as seven eighths of their clothing, and
that they now manufacture three quarters of it. We have before mentioned that
considerable quantities of iron are manufactured in this state. -- To these we
may add the manufacture of lead; besides which they have few others of
consequence. The people are much attached to agriculture, and prefer foreign
manufactures.

Before the war this state exported, communibus annis, according to the best
information that could be obtained, as follows: Articles. Quantity. Amo. in
dols. Tobacco 55,000 hhds. of 1000 lb. 1,650,000 Wheat 800,000 bushels
666,666(...) Indian corn 600,000 bushels 200,000 Shipping 100,000 Ma^ts,
planks, skantling, shingles, staves 66,666(...) Tar, pitch, turpentine 30,000
barrels 40,000 Paltry, viz. skins of deer, beavers, otters, musk rats, racoons,
foxes 180 hhds. of 600 lb. 42,000 lark 4,000 barrels 40,000 Flaxseed, hemp,
cotton 8,000 Pitcoal, pig iron 6,666 (...) 5,000 bushels 3,333(...) (...) 1,000
barrels 3,333 ^^geon, white shad, herring 3,333 ^^andy from peaches and apples,
and whiskey 1,666(...) ^^rses 1,666 2,833,333

This sum is equal to 850,000l. Virginia money, 657,142 guineas.

The amount of exports from this state in the year succeeding October 2, 1790,
consisting chiefly of articles mentioned in the foregoing table, was 3,131,227
dollars. About 40,000 hogsheads of tobacco only were exported this year.

In the year 1758 this state exported seventy thousand hogsheads of tobacco,
which was the greatest quantity ever produced in this country in (...) year.
But its culture has fast the declined since the commencement of the war, and
that of wheat taken its place. The price which it commands at market will not
enable the planter to cultivate it. Were the apply still to depend on Virginia
and Maryland alone, as its culture (...) more difficult this price would rise,
so as to enable the planter (...) surmount those difficulties and to live. But
the western country (...) the Missisippi, and the midlands of Georgia, having
fresh and fertile lands in abundance* and a hotter sun, are able to undersell
these (...) states, and will oblige them in time to abandon the raising tobacco
altogether. And a happy obligation for them it will be. It is a culture
productive of infinite wretchedness. Those employed in it are (...) continued
state of exertion beyond the powers of nature to support. Little food of any
kind is raised by them; so that the men and animals (...) these farms are badly
fed, and the earth is rapidly impoverished. The cultivation of wheat is the
reverse in every circumstance. Besides clothing the earth with herbage, and
preserving its fertility, it feeds the laborers plentifully, requires from
them only a moderate toil, except in the season of harvest, raises great
numbers of animals for food (...) service, and diffuses plenty and happiness
among the whole. It is easier to make an hundred bushels of wheat than a
thousand weight of tobacco, and they are worth more when made.

It is not easy to say what are the articles either of necessity, comfort, or
luxury, which cannot be raised here, as every thing hardier than the olive, and
as hardy as the fig, may be raised in the open air. Sugar, coffee and tea,
indeed, are not between these limits; and habit having placed them among the
necessaries of life with the wealthy, an long as these habits remain, they must
go for them to those countries which are able to furnish them.

HISTORY.] We have already given a brief historical account of the first
settlement of Virginia, till the arrival of Lord Delaware in 1610. His arrival
with a fresh supply of settlers and provisions, revived the drooping spirits of
the former company, and gave permanency and respectability to the settlement.

In April 1613, Mr. John Rolf, a worthy young gentleman, was married to
Pocahontas, the daughter of Powhatan, the famous Indian chief. This connection,
which was very agreeable both to the English and Indians, was the foundation of
a friendly and advantageous commerce between them.

In 1616, Mr. Rolf, with his wife Pocahontas, visited England, where she was
treated with that attention and respect which she had merited by her important
services to the colony in Virginia. She died the year following at Gravesend,
in the 22d year of her age, just as she was about to embark for America. She
had embraced the christian religion; and in her life and death evidenced the
sincerity of her profession. She left a little son, who, having received his
education in England, came over to Virginia, where he lived and died in
affluence and honor, leaving behind him an only daughter. Her descendants are
among the most respectable families in Virginia.

Tomocomo, a sensible Indian, brother in law to Pocahontas, accompanied her to
England; and was directed by Powhatan to bring him an exact account of the
numbers and strength of the English. For this purpose, when he arrived at
Plymouth, he took a long stick, intending to cut a notch in it for every person
he should see. This he soon found impracticable, and threw away his stick. On
his return, being asked by Powhatan, how many people there were, he is said to
have replied, 'Count the stars in the sky, the leaves on the trees, and the
sands on the sea shore; for such is the number of the people in England'.

In pursuance of the authorities given to the company by their several
charters, and more especially of that part in the charter of 1609, which
authorized them to establish a form of government, they, on the 24th July,
1621, by charter under their common seal, declared, That from thenceforward
there should be two supreme councils in Virginia, the one to be called the
council of state, to be placed and displaced by the treasurer, council in
England, and company, from time to time, whose office was to be that of
assisting and advising the governor; the other to be called the general
assembly, to be convened by the governor once yearly, or oftener, which was to
consist of the council of state, and two burgesses out of every town, hundred,
or plantation, to be respectively chosen by the inhabitants. In this all
matters were to be decided by the greater part of the votes present ^^^serving
to the governor a negative voice; and they were to have ^^wer to treat, consult
and conclude all emergent occasions concerning the public weal, and to make
laws for the behoof and government of the colony, imitating and following the
laws and policy of ^ngland as nearly as might be: Provided that these laws
should (...) no force till ratified in a general quarter court of the company
(...) England, and returned under their common seal, and declaring that, (...)
the government of the colony should be well framed and settled, (...) orders of
the council in England should bind the colony unless (...) by the said general
assembly. The King and company quar^^^^d, and by a mixture of law and force,
the latter were ousted of (...) their rights, without retribution, after having
expended 100,000l. (...) establishing the colony, without the smallest aid from
government. (...) James suspended their powers by proclamation of July 15,
1624, (...) Charles I. took the government into his own hands. Both sides (...)
their partisans in the colony: But in truth the people of the col^^^ in general
thought themselves little concerned in the dispute. (...) being three parties
interested in these several charters, what (...) between the first and second
it was thought could not affect the (...). If the King seized on the powers of
the company, they only (...) into other hands, without increase or diminution,
while the (...) of the people remained as they were. But they did not re^^^^ so
long. The northern parts of their country were granted a^^^ to the Lords
Baltimore and Fairfax, the first of these obtaining also the rights of separate
jurisdiction and government. And (...) 1650 the parliament, considering itself
as standing in the place of their deposed king, and as having succeeded to all
his powers, without (...) well as within the realm, began to assume a right
over the col^^^^, passing an act for inhibiting their trade with foreign
nations. This succession to the exercise of the kingly authority gave the first
col^^^ for parliamentary interference with the colonies, and produced (...)
fatal precedent which they continued to follow after they had re^^^^^, in other
respects, within their proper functions. When this (...), therefore, which
still maintained its opposition to Cromwell and the parliament, was induced in
1651 to lay down their arms, the^ ^^^ously secured their most essential rights
by a solemn conven^^^.

This convention, entered into with arms in their hands, they sup^^^^ had
secured the ancient limits of their country -- its free trade -- its exemption
from taxation but by their own assembly, and ex^^^^^ of military force from
among them. Yet in every of these (...) was this convention violated by
subsequent kings and parliaments, and other infractions of their constitution,
equally dangerous, committed. The general assembly, which was composed of the
coun^^ of state and burgesses, sitting together and deciding by plurality of
(...), was split into two houses, by which the council obtained a (...)
negative on their laws. Appeals from their supreme court, which had been fixed
by law in their general assembly, were arbitrari^^^ (...) to England, to be
there heard before the king and council. (...) of 400 miles on the sea coast,
they were reduced, in the space (...) years, to about 100 miles. Their trade
with foreigners was to^^^ ^^ppressed, and, when carried to Great Britain, was
there load^^^ imposts. It is unnecessary, however, to glean up the several
instances of injury, as scattered through American and British history; and the
more especially, as, by passing on to the accession of the present king, we
shall find specimens of them all, aggravated, multiplied and crowded within a
small compass of time, so as to evince a fixed design of considering the rights
of the people, whether natural, conventional o^ chartered, as mere nul^^ties.
The colonies were taxed internally; their essential interests sacrificed to
individuals in Great Britain; their legislatures suspended; charters annulled;
trials by juries taken away; their persons subjected to transportation across
the Atlantic, and to trial before foreign judicatories; their supplications for
redress thought beneath answer; themselves published as cowards in the councils
of their mother country and courts of Europe; armed troops sent among them to
enforce submission to these violences; and actual hostilities commenced against
them. No alternative was presented but resistance or unconditional submission.
Between these could be no hesitation. They closed in the appeal to arms. They
declared themselves independent states. They confederated together into one
great republic; thus securing to every state the benefit of an union of their
whole force. They fought -- they conquered -- and obtained an honorable and
glorious peace.

LIST of PRESIDENTS and GOVERNORS of VIRGINIA, from its first settlement to the
year 1624. Smith brings down the history of Virginia no farther than this
period. A List of the governors since has not been received.

Edward Maria Wingfield, from May, 1607, to Sept* 1607. John Ratcliffe, Sept.
1607, to July, 1608. Mat. S^^ivener, Vice President, July, 1608, to Sept. 1608.
John Smith, Sept. 1608, to Sept. 1609. George Percy, Governor, Sept. 1609, to
May, 1610. Sir Thomas Gates, May, 1610, to June, 1610. Lord Delaware, June,
1610, to March, 1611. George Percy, March, 1611, to May, 1611. Sir Thomas Dale,
May, 1611, to Aug. 1611. Sir Thomas Gates, August 1611, to 1614. Sir Thomas
Dale, 1614, to 1616. George Yeardley, 1616, to 1617. Samuel Argall, 1617, to
1619. George Yeardley, 1619, to Nov. 1621. Sir Francis Wyat, Nov. 1621, to
1624.

INDIANA
INDIANA, so called, is a tract of land lying on the Ohio river, in the state
of Virginia, ceded to William Trent and twenty two others, by the Six Nations
and the Shawanese, Delaware and Huron tribes, (...) a compensation for the
losses they had sustained by the depredations of the latter, in the year 1763.
This session was made in a ^^gress of the representatives of the Six Nations,
at Fort Stanwix, by an indenture, signed the 3d of November, 1768, witnessing,
'That for and in consideration of L85,916:10:8, York currency, (the same being
the amount of the goods seized and taken by said Indians from said Trent, etc.)
they did grant, bargain, sell, etc. to his majesty, his (...) and successors,
for the only use of the said William Trent, etc. all that tract or parcel of
land, beginning at the southerly side of the (...) Kanhaway creek, where it
empties itself into the river Ohio; and running thence southeast to the Laurel
Hill; thence along the (...) Hill until it strikes the river Monongahela;
thence down the (...) of the said river, according to the several courses
thereof, to the southern boundary line of the province of Pennsylvania; thence
westwardly along the course of the said province boundary line as far (...) the
same shall extend; thence by the same course to the river Ohio, and then down
the river Ohio to the place to beginning, inclusively. This indenture was
signed by six Indian chiefs, in presence of Sir William Johnson, Governor
Franklin of New Jersey, and the Commissioners from Virginia, Pennsylvania, etc.
making twelve in the whole.

Since the Indians had an undisputed title to the above limited territory,
either from pre-occupancy or conquest, and their right was ex^^^ly acknowledged
by the above deed of cession to the crown, it is very evident that Mr. Trent,
in his own right, and as attorney for the ^^ders, has a good, lawful and
sufficient title to the land granted by the said deed of conveyance.

This matter was laid before congress in the year 1782, and a committee
appointed to consider it, who, in May, reported as follows: 'On the whole, your
committee are of opinion that the purchases of (...) Croghan and the Indian
company, were made bona fide for a valuable consideration, according to the
then usage and customs of purchasing Indian lands from the Indians, with the
knowledge, con^^^ and approbation of the crown of Great Britain, the then
government of New York and Virginia, and therefore do recommend (...) it be

Resolved, That if the said lands are finally ceded or adjudged to the United
States in point of jurisdiction, that congress will confirm to (...) of the
said purchasers who are, and shall be, citizens of the United States, or either
of them, their respective shares and propor^^^ of said lands, making a
reasonable deduction for the value of (...) (...) rents reserved by the crown
of England.'

Notwithstanding this report of the committee, the question could never
^^^^ught to a decision before congress. The federal constitution has, (...),
made provision for the determination of this business before the (...) federal
court. But previous to an appeal to this court, the proprietors thought proper,
by their agent, Colonel Morgan, (who is also a proprietor) to present a
memorial to the legislature of Virginia, setting forth their claims, and
praying that the business might be equitably settled. This memorial was
presented in November, 1790; and thus the Indiana business rests for the
present.

KENTUCKY.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 230 Miles. between 80 and 15 W. Lon. Square Miles. 5,000 Breadth 200
Miles. 360 30' and 39 30 N. Lat. Square Miles. 5,000

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED northwest, by the river Ohio; west, by Cumberland river;
south, by North Carolina; east, by Sandy river, and a line drawn due south from
its source, till it strikes the northern boundary of North Carolina.

CIVIL DIVISIONS.] Kentucky was originally divided into two counties, Lincoln
and Jefferson. It has since been subdivided into nine, which follow: Counties.
No. Inhab. Chief Towns. No. Inhab. Jefferson, 4,565 LOUISVILLE, 200 Fayette,
17,576 LEXINGTON, 834 Bourbon, 7,837 Mercer, 6,941 Danville, 150 Nelson, 11,099
Beardstown, 216 Madison, 5,772 Lincoln, 6,548 Woodford, 9,210 Mason, 2,267
Washington, 462 Total 73,677 of whom 12,430 are slaves.

As most of these counties are very large, it is probable that subdivisions
will continue to be made, as population increases.

RIVERS.] The river Ohio washes the northwestern side of Kentucky, in its whole
extent. Its principal branches, which water this fertile tract of country, are
Sandy, Licking, Kentucky, Salt, Green and Cumberland rivers. These again branch
in various directions, into rivulets of different magnitudes, fertilizing the
country in all its parts. At the bottoms of these water courses the limestone
rock, which is common to this country, appears of a greyish color; and where
it lies exposed to the air, in its natural state, it looks like brown
freestone. On the banks of these rivers and rivulets, this stone has the
appearance of fine marble, being of the same texture, and is found in the
greatest plenty.

Sandy, Licking and Kentucky rivers rise near each other, in the Cumberland
mountains. Of these, Sandy river only breaks through the mountain. This river
constitutes a part of the eastern boundary of Kentucky.

Licking river runs in a northwest direction, upwards of 100 miles, (...) is
about 100 yards broad at its mouth.

Kentucky is a very crooked river, and after running a course of more than 200
miles, empties into the Ohio by a mouth 150 yards broad.

Salt river rises at four different places near each other. The windings of
this river are curious. The four branches, after a circuitous course round a
fine tract of land, unite; and after running about 15 miles, empty into the
Ohio, 20 miles below the falls. Its general course is westward -- its length
about 90 miles -- and at its mouth is 80 yards wide.

Green river pursues a western course upwards of 150 miles, and by a mouth 80
yards wide, falls into the Ohio, 120 miles below the rapids:

Cumberland river interlocks with the northern branch of Kentucky, and rolling
round the other arms of Kentucky, among the mountains in a southern course, 100
miles -- then in a southwestern course for above 200 more -- then in a southern
and southwestern course for about 250 more, finds the Ohio, 413 miles below the
falls. At Nashville, this river is 200 yards broad, and at its mouth 300. The
river in about half its course, passes through North Carolina.

These rivers are navigable for boats almost to their sources, without rapids,
for the greatest part of the year. The little rivulets which checker the
country, begin to lessen in June, and quite disappear in the months of August,
September and October. The autumnal rains, however, in November replenish them
again. The method of getting a supply of water in the dry season is by sinking
wells, which are easily dug, and afford excellent water. The want of water in
autumn, is the great complaint. Mills that may be supplied with water eight
months in a year, may be erected in a thousand different places. Wind mills and
horse mills may supply the other four months.

The banks of the rivers are generally high and composed of lime (...). After
heavy rains, the water in the rivers rises from 10 to 30 feet.

SPRINGS.] There are five noted salt springs or licks in this country; viz. the
higher and lower Blue Springs, on Licking river, from (...) of which, it is
said, issue streams of brinish water -- the Big Bone lick, Drennon's licks; and
Bullet's lick, at Salisburgh. The last of these licks, though in low order, has
supplied this country and Cumberland with salt at 20 shillings he bushel,
Virginia currency; and (...) is exported to the Illinois country. The method of
procuring (...) from these licks, is by sinking wells from 30 to 40 feet deep.
The water drawn from these wells is more strongly impregnated with (...) than
the water from the sea. A strait road, 40 feet wide, has (...) cut from
Saltsburgh to Louisville, 24 miles.

FACE OF THE COUNTRY, SOIL AND PRODUCE.} This whole country, as far as has yet
been discovered, lies upon a bed (...) stone, which in general is about six
feet below the furface, except in the valleys, where the soil is much thinner.
A tract of about (...) miles wide, along the banks of the Ohio, is hilly,
broken land, interspersed with many fertile spots. The rest of the country is
^^^ably uneven, gently ascending and descending at no great distances. The
angles of ascent are from eight to twenty four degrees, and sometimes more. The
valleys in common, are very narrow, and the soil in them is very thin, and of
an inferior quality; and that along the ascending ground is frequently not much
better; for where you see a tree blown up, you find the roots clinging to the
upper parts of the rock. The soil, on these agreeable ascents, (for they cannot
be called hills) is sufficiently deep, as is evident from the size of the
trees. The soil is either black, or tinged with a lighter or deeper vermillion,
or is of the color of dark ashes. In many places there are appearances of
potter's clay, and coal in abundance. The country promises to be well supplied
with wholesome, well tasted water. In Nelson county, northwest of Rolling fork,
a branch of Salt river, is a tract of about 40 miles square, mostly barren,
interspersed with plains and strips of good land, which are advantageous
situations for raising cattle, as the neighboring barrens, as they are
improperly styled, are covered with grass, and afford good pasturage. The lands
east of Nolin creek a branch of Green river, are in general of ^n inferior
quality; but the banks of Green river afford many desirable situations.

Toward the head waters of Kentucky river, which interlock with the waters of
Cumberland and Sandy rivers, and the whole country eastward and southward as
far as the Holstein river, is broken, mountainous and almost impenetrable; and
from the description given by hunters* it is much doubted whether it will even
be practicable to make a passable road from Kentucky across to Winchester, in
Virginia, on the east side of the mountains, which, on a straight line, is not
perhaps more than 400 miles, and the way now traveled is 600. No country will
admit of being thicker settled with farmers, who confine themselves to
agriculture, than this.

Elkhorn river, a branch of the Kentucky, from the southeast, waters a country
fine beyond description. Indeed, the country east and south of this, including
the head waters of Licking river, Hickman's and Jessamine creeks, and the
remarkable bend in Kentucky river, may be called an extensive garden. The soil
is deep and black, and the natural growth, large walnuts, honey and black
locust, poplar, elm, oak, hickory, sugar tree, etc. Grape vines run to the tops
of the trees; and the surface of the ground is covered with clover, blue grass
and wild rye. On this fertile tract, and the Licking river, and the head waters
of Salt river, are the bulk of the settlements in this country. The soil within
a mile or two of Kentucky river is generally of the third and fourth rates; and
as you advance toward the Ohio, the land is poor and hilly.

Dick's river runs through a great body of first rate land, abounding with
cane, and affords many excellent mill seats. Salt river has good lands on its
head waters, except that they are low and unhealthy, but for 25 miles before it
empties into the Ohio, the land on each side is level and poor, and abounds
with ponds.

Cumberland river, so much of it as passes through Kentucky, traverses, some
parts excepted, a hilly poor country.

Green river overflows its banks a considerable way up, at the season when the
Ohio swells, which is in April. This swell in Green river o ccasions several of
its branches to overflow, and cover the low grounds with water, leaves and
vegetable substances, which, in summer, become noxious and unhealthy. Its banks
are fine and fertile. There is a great body of good land near the falls and
rapids in the Ohio, called Bare grass; but the climate is rendered unhealthy by
ponds of stagnant water, which may be easily drained.

This country in general is well limbered. Of the natural growth which is
peculiar to this country, we may reckon the sugar, the coffee, the papaw and
the cucumber tree. The two last are soft wood, and (...) a fruit of the shape
and size of a cucumber. The coffee tree resembles the black oak, and bears a
pod, which encloses a feed, of which a drink is made not unlike coffee. Besides
these there is the (...) locust, black mulberry, wild cherry, of a large size.
The buck^^^, an exceedingly soft wood, is the horse chestnut of Europe. The
^^^olia bears a beautiful blossom of a rich and exquisite fragrance, ^uch is
the variety and beauty of the flowering shrubs and plants which grow
spontaneously in this country, that in the proper season the wilderness appears
in blossom.

The accounts of the fertility of the soil in this country, have, in some
instances, exceeded belief; and probably have been exaggerated. -- That some
parts of Kentucky, particularly the high grounds, are remarkably good, all
accounts agree. The lands of the first rate are (...) rich for wheat, and will
produce 50 and 60, and in some instances, it is affirmed, 100 bushels of good
corn, and acre. In common, the (...) will produce 30 bushels of wheat or rye an
acre. Barley, oats, cotton, flax, hemp, and vegetables of all kinds common in
this climate, yield abundantly. The old Virginia planters say, that if the
climate does not prove 100 moist, few soils known, will yield more (...) better
tobacco. Experience has proved, that the climate is not 100 moist. Great
quantities of this article have been exported to France and Spain, through New
Orleans; and it is a well known (...) that Philadelphia is a profitable market
for the Kentucky planter, notwithstanding all the inconveniences and expenses
of reshipment a New Orleans, under a Spanish government. What advantages (...)
may not this country expect from a free navigation of the Missisippi,
unrestrained by Spanish policy!

In the rivers are plenty of buffalo, pike and catfish of uncommon (...),
salmon, mullet, rock, perch, garfish, eel, sucke^s, sunfish, etc. -- (...) have
not been caught in the western waters.

Swamps are ra^e in Kentucky; and of course the reptiles which they produce,
such as snakes, frogs, etc. are not numerous. The hon^y be may be called a
domestic infect, as it is said not to be found but in civilized countries. This
is confirmed by a saying which is common among the Indians, when they see a
swarm of bees in the (...), 'Well brothers, it is time for us to decamp, for
the white people are coming.' Nevertheless bees, of late years, have abounded,
to their amazement, even 200 miles N. and N. W. of the Ohio.

The quadrupeds, except the buffalo, are the same as in Virginia and the
Carolinas.

CLIMATE.] Healthy and delightful, some few places in the neighborhood of
ponds and low grounds excepted. The inhabitants do not experience the extremes
of heat and cold. Snow seldom falls (...), or lies long. -- The winter, which
begins about Christmas, is (...) longer than three months, and is commonly but
two, and is so (...) as that cattle can subsist without fodder.

CHIEF TOWNS.] LEXINGTON, which stands on the head waters of Elkhorn river, is
reckoned the capital of Kentucky. Here the courts are held, and business
regularly conducted. In 1786, it contained about 100 houses, and several
stores, with a good assortment of dry goods. It has greatly increased since,
and contains about 900 inhabitants.

WASHINGTON, the shire town of Mason county, is the second town in this state,
containing about 500 inhabitants.

LEESTOWN is west of Lexington, on the eastern bank of Kentucky river. It is
regularly laid out, and is flourishing. The banks of Kentucky river are
remarkably high, in some places 3 and 400 feet, composed generally of
stupendous perpendicular rock; the consequence is, there are few crossing
places. The best is at Leestown, which is a circumstance that must contribute
much to its increase.

LOUISVILLE, is at the rapids of the Ohio, in a fertile country, and promises
to be a place of great trade. It has been made a port of entry. Its
unhealthiness, owing to stagnated waters back of the town, has considerably
retarded its growth. Besides these there is Beardstown, in Nelson county, and
Harrodsburg, in Mercer county, both on the head waters of Salt river; Danville,
Boonsborough and Granville are also increasing towns.

POPULATION AND CHARACTER.] The population of this state in 1790, is given in
the preceding table. In 1783, in the county of Lincoln This county, it is to be
remembered, has since been divided, and subdivided.
only, there were, on the militia rolls, 3570 men, chiefly emigrants from the
lower parts of Virginia. In 1784, the number of inhabitants were reckoned at
upwards of 30,000. It is asserted that at least 20,000 migrated here in the
year 1787. These people, collected from different states, of different manners,
customs, religions, and political sentiments, have not been long enough
together to form a uniform national character. Among the settlers there are
many gentlemen of abilities, and many genteel families, from several of the
states, who give dignity and respectability to the settlement. They are, in
general, more regular than people who generally settle new countries.

RELIGION.] The Baptists are the most numerous religious sect in Kentucky.
There are several large congregations of Presbyterians, and some few of other
denominations.

CONSTITUTION.] By the constitution of this state, formed and adopted in 1792,
the powers of government are divided into 3 distinct departments; legislative,
executive, and judiciary. The legislative power is vested in a general
assembly, consisting of a senate and house of representatives; the supreme
executive, in a governor; the judiciary, in the supreme court of appeals, and
such inferior courts as the legislature may establish. The representatives are
chosen annually, by the people; the senators and governor are chosen four
years, by electors appointed for that purpose; the judges are appointed during
good behavior, by the governor, with advice of the senate. An enumeration of
the free male inhabitants, above 21 years old, is to be made once in four
years. After each enumeration, the number of senators and representatives is to
be fixed by the legislature, and apportioned among the several counties,
according to the number of inhabitants. There can never be fewer than 40, nor
more than 100 representatives. The senate at first consisted of 11 members; and
for the addition of every four representatives, one senator is to be added. The
representatives must be 24 years old; the senators 27; the governor 30, and all
of them must have been inhabitants of the state two years. The governor can
hold no other office. The members of the general assembly none, but those of
attorney at law, justice of the peace, coroner, and in the militia. The judges,
and all other officers, must be inhabitants of the counties for which they are
appointed. The governor, members of the general assembly, and judges, receive
stated salaries out of the public treasury, from which no money can be drawn
but in consequence of appropriation by law. All officers take an oath of
fidelity to discharge the duties of their offices, and are liable to
impeachment for misconduct. Elective officers must swear that they have not
used bribery in obtaining their elections. All free male citi^^ns 21 years old,
having resided in the state 2 years, or in the county where they offer to vote,
one year, have a right to vote for representatives, and for electors of
senators and governor, and are privileged from arrest, in civil actions, while
attending that business. The general assembly meets on the first Monday in
November, in each year, unless sooner convened by the governor. Each house
chooses its speaker and other officers, judges of the qualifications of its
members, and determines the rules of its proceedings, of which a journal i^
kept and published weekly, unless secrecy be requisite. The doors of both
houses are kept open. The members of the legislature, while attending the
public business, are privileged from arrests in civil actions, and may not be
questioned elsewhere for any thing said in public debate. Impeachments are made
by the lower house, and tried by the upper. All revenue bills originate in the
house of representatives, and are amendable by the senate, like other bills.
Each bill passed by both houses is presented to the governor, who must sign it
if he approve it; if not, he must return it within ten days, to the house in
which it originated; if it be not returned, or if, when returned, it be
repassed by two thirds of both houses, it is a law without his signature. The
governor has power to appoint most of the executive officesd of the state; to
remit fines and forfeitures, and grant reprieves an pardons, except in cases of
impeachment; to require information from executive officers; to convene the
general assembly on extraordinary occasions, and adjourn them in case they
cannot agree on the time themselves. He must inform the legislature, of the
state of the commonwealth; recommend to them such measures as he shall judge
expedient; and see that the laws are faithfully executed. The speaker of the
senate exercises the office of governor in case of vacancy. The legislature has
power to forbid the farther importation of slaves, but not to emancipate those
already in the state, without the consent of the owner, or paying an
equivalent. Treason against the commonwealth consists only in levying war
against it, or in adhering to its enemies, giving them aid and comfort.

The declaration of rights asserts the civil equality of all; their right to
alter the government at any time; liberty of conscience; freedom of elections
and of the press; trial by jury; the subordination of the military to the civil
power; the rights of criminals to be heard in their own defense; the right of
the people to petition for the redress of grievances, to bear arms, and to
emigrate from the state. It prohibits unreasonable searches and seizures;
excessive bail; confinement of debtors, unless there be presumption of fraud;
suspension of habeas corpus writ, unless in rebellion or invasion; ex post
facto laws; attainder by the legislature; standing armies; titles of nobility
and hereditary distinction.

LITERATURE AND IMPROVEMENTS.] The legislature of Virginia, while Kentucky
belonged to that state, made provision for a college in it, and endowed it with
very considerable landed funds. The Rev. John Todd gave a very handsome library
for its use. Schools are established in the several towns, and in general,
regularly and handsomely supported. They have a printing office, and publish a
weekly ^azette. They have erected a paper mill, an oil mill, fulling mills, saw
mills, and a great number of valuable grift mills. Their salt works are more
than sufficient to supply all their inhabitants, at a low price. They make
considerable quantities of sugar from the sugar trees. Laborers, particularly
tradesmen, are exceedingly wanted here.

CURIOSITIES.] The banks, or rather precipices, of Kentucky and Dick's river,
are to be reckoned among the natural curiosities of this country. Here the
astonished eye beholds 300 or 400 feet of solid perpendicular rock, in some
parts, of the lime stone kind, and in others of fine white marble, curiously
checkered with strata of astonishing regularity. These rivers have the
appearance of deep artificial canals. Their high rocky banks are covered with
red cedar groves.

Caves have been discovered in this country of several miles in length, under a
fine lime stone rock, supported by curious arches and pillars. Springs that
emit sulphurous matter have been found in several parts of the country. One is
near a salt spring, in the neighborhood of Boonsborough. There are three
springs or ponds of bitumen near Green river, which do not form a stream, but
empty themselves into a common reservoir, and when used in lamps, answer all
the purposes of the best oil. Copperas and alum are among the minerals of
Kentucky. Near Lexington are found curious ^^^^chres full of human skeletons.
It has been asserted that a man, in or near Lexington, having dug 5 or 6 feet
below the surface of the ground, came to a large flat stone, under which was a
well of common depth, regularly and artificially stoned.

HISTORY.] See our general account of the discovery and settlement of North
America, page 117 and 118.

NORTH CAROLINA.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 300 Miles. between 1 and 6 30 W. Long. Sq. Miles. 34,000 Breadth 120
Miles. 33 50 and 36 30 N. Lat. Sq. Miles. 34,000.

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED north, by Virginia; east, by the Atlantic ocean; south,
by South Carolina and Georgia; west, by a chain of Mountains a few miles to the
west^^^ of the great Appalachian mountain. This chain of mountains, (...) the
whole for a part, has occasionally been called the great Iron (...). All that
vast country which lies on the west of the Iron (...) was surrendered to the
United States by the State of North (...) in the year 1789. It has since been
erected into a separate ^^^nment, commonly called the Territory South of Ohio,
or the (...) government. The charter limits of North Carolina are a line,
beginning on the sea side, (...) stake, at or near the mouth of a little river,
(being the southern ex^^^y of Brunswick county) and running thence a northwest
course through (...) boundary house, in lat. 33 56 to lat. 35, and on that
parallel west as far ^^^^^tioned in the charter of King Charles II. to the
original proprietors (...), viz. to the South Sea. Their northern line begins
on the sea (...) in lat. 36 30, and runs due west to the termination of the
southern line. (...) (...) strikes the Missisippi 15 miles below the mouth of
the Ohio. These (...) were ascertained and confirmed agreeably to an order of
George II. in (...) in the year --. Great Britain, by the treaty of 1763, which
was made (...) France and Spain, surrendered her claim to all the territory
westward of (...) Missisippi, and those nations by the same treaty granted to
Great Britain the (...) ^^^igation of the Missisippi. By the treaty of 1783,
between Spain and (...) Britain, his Catholic majesty expressly confirms the
former treaty of 1763, (...) such parts as are there excepted; consequently he
confirms to Great Britain the navigation of the Missisippi; and Great Britain,
on her part, yields the United States her entire right to the navigation of the
Missisippi. But (...) ^pain now claims the exclusive navigation of the
Missisippi, which she (...) formerly surrendered, it is very probable that the
United States, to whom (...) Carolina has ceded her western territory, may
claim the lands on the (...) side of the Missisippi, which were within the
original charter bounds of (...) state.


CIVIL DIVISIONS.] This state is divided into eight districts, which are
subdivided into 54 counties, as follows: TABLE
Districts. Counties. These 3 distr. are on the se^ coast, extend. from the
Virgin. line southward to S. Carolina. EDENTON. 9 counties, 53.770 inhabitants.
Chief town, Edenton. Chowan, Currituck, Camden, Pasquotank, Perquimins, Gates,
Hertford, Bertie, Tyrrel, WILMINGTON. 5 counties. 26,035 inh. Chapter town
Wilmingt. N. Hanover, Brunswick, Duplin, Biaden, Onslow, NEWBERN. 9 counties,
55 540 inhabitants. Chief town, Newbern. Craven, Beaufort, Carteret, Johnston,
Pit, Dobbs, Wayne, Hyde, Jones, These 5 districts, beginning on the Virginia
line, cover the whole state west of the 3 mar^time districts before mentio.;
and the greater part of them extend quite across the state from N. to S.
HALIFAX. 7 counties, 64630 inh. Chapter Town Halifax. Halifax, Northampton Martin,
Edgecomb, Warren, Franklin, Nash, HILLSBORO' 6 coun. 59,983 inh. Chapter town
Hillsborough. Orange, Chatham, Granville, Caswell, Wake, Randolf, SALISBURY. 8
coun. 66,480 inh. Chief town Salisbury. Rowan, Mecklenburg, Rockingham,
Iredell, Surry, Montgomery, Stokes, Guilford, MORGAN 4 counti. 33,293 inhab.
Burke, Ruthford, Linclon, Wilkes, Cumberland, FAYETTE. 6 coun. 340^0 inh. Chapter
town Fayetteville. Moore, Richmond, Robison, Sampson, Anson,

RIVERS.] Chowan river is formed by the confluence of three rivers, viz. the
Meherrin, Nottaway and Black rivers; all of which rise in Virginia. It falls
into the northwest corner of Albemarle sound, and is three miles wide at its
mouth, but narrows fast as you ascend it.

Roanoke is a long rapid river, formed by two principal branches, Staunton
river, which rises in Virginia, and Dan river, which rises in North Carolina.
The low lands on this river are subject to in^^dations. It is navigable only
for shallops, nor for these, but about 60 or 70 miles, on account of falls,
which in a great measure obstruct the water communication with the back
country. It empties, by several mouths, into the southwest end of Albemarle
sound. The planters on the banks of this river are supposed to be the
wealthiest in North Carolina. One of them, it is said, raises about 3000
barrels of corn, and 4000 bushels of peace, annually.

Cushal is a small river, which empties into Albemarle found between Chowan and
the Roanoke.

Pamlico or Tar river opens into Pamlico sound. Its course is from northwest to
southeast. It is navigable for vessels drawing nine feet water to the town of
Washington, about 40 miles from its mouth; and for scows or flats, carrying 30
or 40 hogsheads, 50 miles further, to the town of Tarborough. Beyond this place
the river is inconsiderable and is not navigable.

Nous river empties into Pamlico sound below Newbern. It is navigable for sea
vessels about 12 miles above the town of Newbern; for scows 50 miles, and for
small boats 200 miles.

Trent river, from the southwest, falls into the Neus at Newbern. It is
navigable for sea vessels about 12 miles above the town, and for boats thirty.

There are several other rivers of less note, among which are the Pasq^otank,
Perquimins, Little river, Alligator, etc. which discharge themselves into
Albemarle sound. All the rivers in North Carolina, and, it may be added, in
South Carolina, Georgia, and the Floridas, which empty into the Atlantic ocean,
are navigable by any vessel that can pass the bar at their mouth. While the
water courses continue ^ide enough for vessels to turn round, there is
generally a sufficient depth of water for them to proceed.

Cape Fear, more properly Clarendon river, opens into the sea at Cape Fear, in
about lat* 33 45. As you ascend it, you pass Brunswick on the left, and
Wilmington on the right. The river then divides into northeast and northwest
branches, as they are called. It is navigable for large vessels to Wilmington,
and for boats to Fayetteville, near 90 miles further. This river affords the
best navigation in North Carolina. Yadkin river rises in this state, and
running southeastwardly, crosses into South Carolina, where it takes the name
of Pe^^e, and passes to sea below Georgetown.

This state would be much more valuable, were it not that the rivers are barred
at their mouths, and the coast furnishes no good harbors. These circumstances
will prevent the state from building large ships, for which they have an
abundance of excellent timber. Several causes have been assigned for all the
harbors and rivers being barred, south of the Chesapeak. Some suppose the bars
are formed by the current of the long rivers, throwing up the sands where their
rapidity terminates -- Others say that a bank is thrown up by the Gulf Stream,
which runs near these shores.

The banks of the rivers in this, and the other neighboring states, often
overflow after great rains; which does much damage to the plantations. A
gentleman on the spot asserts, that he has seen the water 30 feet below the
banks of the river, just after it had been 10 feet above them. This is owing to
the narrowness of the mouths of the rivers, which do not afford a sufficient
channel for the waters, accu^^lating every mile, to discharge themselves into
the ocean.

SOUNDS, CAPES, INLETS, etc.] Pamlico sound is a kind of lake (...) inland sea,
from 10 to 20 miles broad, and nearly 100 miles in length. It is separated from
the sea, in its whole length, by a beach of sand hardly a mile wide, generally
covered with small trees or bushes. Through this bank are several small inlets,
by which boats may pass. But Ocrecok inlet is the only one that will admit
vessels (...) burden into the districts of Edenton and Newbern. This inlet is
in latitude 35 10, and opens into Pamlico sound, between Ocrecok island and
Core bank; the land on the north is called Ocrecok; and on the south
Portsmouth. A bar of hard sand crosses this inlet, on which, at low tide, there
are 14 feet water. Six miles within this bar, is a hard sand shoal, called the
Swash, lying across the channel. On each side of the channel are dangerous
shoals, sometimes dry. There is from 8 to 9 feet water at full tide, according
to the winds, on the Swash. Common tides rise 18 inches on the bar, and ten on
the Swash. Between the bar and the Swash is good anchoring ground, called the
Upper and Lower anchorages. Ships drawing 10 feet water do not come farther
than the first anchorage, till lightened. Pew mariners, though acquainted with
the inlets, choose to bring in their own vessels, as the bar often shifts
during their absence on a voyage. North of Pamlico sound, and communicating
with it, is Albemarle sound, 60 miles in length, and from 8 to 12 in breadth.

Core sound lies south of Pamlico, and communicates with it. These sounds are
so large when compared with their inlets from the sea, that no tide can be
perceived in any of the rivers which empty into them; nor is the water salt
even in the mouths of these rivers.

Cape Hatteras is in latitude 35 15. At the time of Sir Walter Raleigh's
approaching the American shores, the shoals in the vicinity of Hatteras were
found to be extremely dangerous, and no vessels, in that latitude, ventured
within 7 leagues of the land. From a survey of the ancient drafts of this part
of the coast, there can be no doubt but the fears of former navigators were not
without foundation, as these shoals are laid down very large in extent, and in
many places covered with not more than 5 or 6 feet water, at a great distance
from the land.

The constant experience of the coasting trade of the United States
demonstrates, either that the ancient drafts were purposely falsified in order
to deter seamen from venturing too near a coast, with which they had as yet a
very slender acquaintance, or (which is the most probable) that by the strong
currents hereabouts, which are only counter currents of the Gulf Stream, the
sands, which were originally heaped up in this part of the ocean by some
ancient convulsion of nature, have been gradually wearing away, and diminishing
to what we find them to be at this time.

At present the out shoals, which lie about 14 miles southwest of the Cape* are
but of 5 or 6 acres extent, and where they are really dangerous to vessels of
moderate draught, not more than half that number of acres. On the shoalest part
of these is, at low water, about 10 feet, and here at times the ocean breaks in
a tremendous manner, spouting, as it were, to the clouds, from the violent
agitations of the Gulf Stream, which touches the eastern edge of the banks,
from whence the declivity is sudden, that is to say, from ten fathoms to no
soundings. On the spot abovementioned, which is firm sand* it has been the lot
of many a good vessel to strike, in a gale of wind, and to go to pieces. In
moderate weather, however, these shoals may be passed over, if necessary, at
full tide, without much danger, by vessels not drawing more than 8, 9, or 10
feet water.

From this bank, which was formerly of vast extent, and called the Full Moon
Sh^al, a ridge runs the whole distance to the Cape, about a N. W. course: This
ridge, which is about half a mile wide, has on it at low tide generally 10, 11,
and 12 feet water, with gaps at equal intervals, affording good channels of
about 15 or 16 feet water. The most noted of these channels, and most used by
coasting vessels, is about one mile and an half from the land, and may easily
be known by a range of breakers which are always seen on the west side, and a
br^^ker head or two on the eastern side, which however are not so constant,
only appearing when the sea is considerably agitated. This channel is at least
two and an half miles wide, and might at full sea be ^^^^ly passed by the
largest ships. These, however, rarely attempt it. The common tides swell about
6 feet, and always come from the S. E. A little north of the Cape is good
anchoring in 4 or 5 fathoms, and with the wind to the westward, a boat may land
in safety, and even (...) off casks of fresh water, plenty of which is to be
found every (...) on the beach, by digging a foot or two, and putting a barrel
into the (...).

Cape Lookout is south of Cape Hatteras, opposite Core sound, and (...) already
been mentioned as having had an excellent harbor en^^^ly filled up with land
since the year 1777.

Cape Fear is remarkable for a dangerous shoal called, from its form, the
Frying pan. This shoal lies at the entrance of Cape Fear river, the south part
of it, 6 miles from Cape Fear pitch, in latitude 33 32.

SWAMPS.] There are two swamps that have been called Dismal. Great Dismal is on
the dividing line between Virginia and North Carolina. It is chiefly owned by
two companies. The Virginia company, of whom the President of the U. States is
one, own 100,000 acres. The North Carolina company owns 40,000 acres. In the
midst of this dismal there is a lake about seven miles long, called Drummond's
(...). The waters of that lake in rainy seasons discharge themselves to the
southward into Pasquotank of North Carolina, and to the north and eastward into
the branches of the Nansemond, Elizabeth river, and a river which runs into
Currituck found; a navigable canal is to be dug from the head of Pasquetank to
the head of Elizabeth river in Virginia, the distance about 14 miles. This
canal will pass about a mile to the eastward of Drummond's pond, and will ^^ive
water from that lake: To pass through the lake would not be (...) for low sided
vessels. The company by whom this canal is to be cut, (...) been incorporated
by the concurring laws of Virginia and North Carolina. In September, 1791, the
subscription being nearly full, the ^^^pany chose their directors and other
officers. By the canal the ^^ports of Norfolk must be greatly increased.

The other dismal is in Currituck county on the south side of Albemarle sound.
This dismal had not drawn the public attention as a object of importance before
the end of the late war, at which time it was chiefly taken up. It is now
supposed to contain one of the most ^^^able rice estates in America. In the
midst of this dismal there is ^^lake of about 11 miles long, and 7 miles broad.
In the year 1785, (...) 1786, Josiah Collins, Esquire of Edenton, in company with
Messrs. Al^^^ and Dickinson of that place, having taken up near 100,000 acres
of land round the lake, resolving to make a navigable canal from the (...) to
the head of Skuppernong river: The distance five and a half miles. This canal,
20 feet wide, was finished in 1790, and the company in 1791 raised above 120
acres of rice on the margin. The (...) channel by which the lake used to
discharge its waters is now stopped, and the waters pass off by the canal.
About 500 yards (...) the lake: The company have erected several saw mills. The
(...) in the lake is higher than the surface of the ground for about half (...)
from the lake on both sides of the canal; whence it follows that (...) company,
can at any time, lay under water about ten thousand (...) of a rich swamp,
which proves admirably fitted for rice.

PRINCIPAL TOWNS.] Newbern, Edenton, Wilmington, (...) Hillsborough, Salisbury
and Fayetteville, each in their turns have (...) the seat of the general
assembly. At present they have no (...). According to the constitution of this
state, the general assembl^^^ (...) to meet at any place they think fit on
their own adjournments* (...) effect of this power was such as might be
expected, in a state (...) there is no very large city or town nearly central;
it was the (...) of constant intrigue and disquietude. The assembly seldom sat
(...) in succession in the same place. The public officers were (...) over
every part of the country. You could seldom visit the govern^^^^^ the
secretary, the treasurer or the comptroller, in less riding than (...) or three
hundred miles. Hence records were loft, accounts were ^^^ly kept, and the state
from that single misfortune is supposed to (...) lost more than a million of
dollars. It was equally clear to all parties that the government should not be
itinerant, and the convention which met in the year 1788, to consider of the
new federal constitution, according to their instructions, took this part of
their own constitution into their consideration, and by a very small majority
resolved that the seat of government should be fixed at some place to (...)
agreed on by commissioners, within ten miles of Wake court (...). This is a
healthy and central situation. But an act of the legislat^^^ became necessary
to give effect to this ordinance, and in subsequent assemblies, there has
generally been a similar majority, that is to (...) majority of one or two to
oppose the ordinance. The profits that might arise to a few publicans and shop
keepers at some other town in which the assembly might meet, occasioned more
activity and procured more votes than the patriotic desire of terminating
disputes and securing a quiet orderly and good government. For the honor of
reason, by which we should be governed rather than by passion, it is to be
wished that other legislatures, in similar circumstances, had not acted in a
similar manner.

The general assembly of the state, at their session in December 1791, passed a
law for carrying the ordinance into effect, and appropriated 10,000l. toward
erecting public buildings.

NEWBERN is the largest town in the state. It is stands on a flat, sandy point
of land, formed by the confluence of the rivers Neus on the north, and Trent on
the south. Opposite the town, the Neus is about a mile and a half, and the
Trent three quarters of a mile wide. The town contains about 400 houses, In
September 1791, near one third part of this town was consumed by fire.
all built of wood, excepting the palace, the church, the goal and two dwelling
houses, which are of brick. The palace is a building erected by the province
before the revolution, and was formerly the residence of the governors. It is
large and elegant, two stories high, with two wings for offices, a little
advanced in front toward the town; these wings are connected with the
principal building by a circular arcade. This once handsome and (...) ^^^ished
building is now much out of repair. One of the halls (...) for a dancing, and
another for a school room -- which are the, (...) present uses of this palace.
The arms of the king of the Great Brit^^ appear in a pediment in front of the
building. The Episco^^^ is a small brick building, with a bell. It is the only
house (...) public worship in the place. A rum distillery has lately been (...)
in this town. It is the county town of Craven county, and (...) house and gaol.
The court house is raised on brick arches (...) render the lower part a
convenient market place; but the (...) marketing is done with the people in
their canoes and boats (...) river side.

^^^^NTON is situated on the north side of Albemarle Sound; and (...) 150
indifferent wood houses, and a few handsome buildings. (...) a brick church for
Episcopalians, which for many years has (...) neglected, and serves only to
show that the people once (...) regard, at least, for the externals of
religion. Its local situation ^^^tageous for trade, but not for health. It is
the county town ^^ow an county, and has a court house and goal. In or near the
(...) lived the proprietary, and the first of the royal governors.

WILMINGTON is a town of about 180 houses, situated on the east (...) of the
eastern branch of Cape Fear or Clarendon river, 34 miles (...) the sea. The
course of the river, as it passes by the town, is (...) north to south, and is
about 150 yards wide.

In 1786 a fire broke out, supposed to have been kindled by ne^^^, and consumed
about 25 or 30 houses. The town is rebuilding (...).

HILLSBOROUGH is an inland town, situated in a high, healthy and (...) country,
180 miles north of the west from Newbern. It is settled by about 60 or 70
families.

SALISBURY is agreeably situated, about 5 miles from Yadkin river, (...)
contains about 90 dwelling houses.

HALIFAX is a pretty town, and stands on the western bank of the Ro^^^, about 6
miles below the falls, and has about 30 or 40 dwelling (...).

FAYETTEVILLE stands on the west side of Clarendon, commonly called Cape Fear
river, and about a mile from its banks. It is well built on both sides of a
creek, from which the town was formerly called Cross Creek. Two small creeks
unite near the town, and an island, just below the junction, divides the creek.
Some person took it into his head that the creeks crossed each other without
mixing their waters; and the strangeness or improbability of the thing, as
(...) many other cases, seems to have been the reason, why it was be^^ved.
Since the peace, this town has flourished, but a considerable part of it was
burnt in 1792. It is situated in a settlement of Scotch ^^^ghlanders.

WASHINGTON is situated in the county of Beaufort, on the north (...) of Tar
river, in latitude 35 30, distant from Ocrecok inlet 90 miles. From this town
is exported tobacco of the Petersburgh quan^^^ pork, beef, Indian corn, peace,
beans, pitch, tar, turpentine, rosin, (...) and pine boards, shingles and oak
staves. About 130 vessels en^^ annually at the custom house in this town.

G^^ENRVILLE, so called after Major General Nathaniel Green, is situated in
Pit county, on the south bank of Tar river, in latitude 35 35, distant from
Ocrecok inlet 110 miles. At this town there is an academy established, called
the Pit Academy.

TARBOROUGH is situated in the county of Edgecomb, on the south bank of Tar
river, in latitude 35 45, distant from Ocrecok inlet 14^ miles. At this town
large quantities of tobacco of the Petersburgh quality, pork, beef, and Indian
corn, are collected for exportation.

FACE OF THE COUNTRY, SOIL AND PRODUCTIONS.} North Carolina, in its whole
width, for 60 miles from the (...) is a dead level. A great proportion of this
tract lies in forest, and is barren. On the banks of some of the rivers,
particularly of the Roa^ok^, the land is fertile and good. Interspersed through
the other parts, (...) glades of rich swamp, and ridges of oak land, of a
black, fertile soil. In all this champagne country, marine productions are
found by digging (...) or 20 feet below the surface of the ground. The sea
coast, the sounds, inlets and the lower parts of the rivers, have uniformly a
muddy, soft bottom. Sixty or eighty miles from the sea, the country rises into
hills and mountains, as described under this head is South Carolina and Georgia.

Wheat, rye, barley, oats and flax grow well in the black hilly country. Indian
corn and pulse of all kinds in all parts. Ground peace run on the surface of the
earth, and are covered by hand with a light mould, and the pods grow under
ground: They are (...) raw or roasted, and taste much like a hazlenut. Cotton
and hemp are also considerably cultivated here, and might be raised in much
greatly plenty. The cotton is planted yearly: The stalk dies with the f^^st.
The labor of one man will produce 1000 pounds in the seeds, or 230^^ for
manufacturing. The country is generally friendly to the raising of sheep, which
yield from (...) to 2 pounds of wool, which is short and not very fine.

It is no uncommon thing for the farmer to mark from 500 to 1000 calves in a
year. No farther attention is paid to them till they are fit for slaughter;
then they are taken up, killed, barrelled and sent to the West India market.
Their pork is raised with as little trouble, large quantities of which, before
the war, were sent to New England, particularly to Boston and Salem.

TARDE.] A great proportion of the produce of the back country, consisting of
tobacco, wheat, Indian corn, etc. is carried to market is South Carolina and
Virginia. The southern interior countries, carry their produce to Charleston;
and the northern to Petersburgh in Virginia. The exports from the lower parts
of the state, are tar, pitch, turpentine, rosin, Indian corn, boards,
scantling, staves shingles, furs, tobacco, pork, lard, tallow, beeswax, myrtle
wax, and a few other articles, amounting in the year, ending September 30th
1791, to 524,54^ dollars. Their trade is chiefly with the West Indies and the
northern states. From the latter they receive flour, cheese, cider, apples,
potatoes, iron wares, cabinet wares, hats and dry goods of all kinds, imported
from Great Britain, France and Holland, teas, etc. From the West Indies, rum,
sugar and coffee.

CLIMATE, DISEASES, etc.] In the flat country, near the sea coast, the
inhabitants, during the summer and autumn, are subject to intermitting fevers,
which often prove fatal, as bilious or nervous symptoms prevail. These fevers
are seldom immediately dangerous to the natives who are temperate, or to
strangers who are prudent. They, however, if suffered to continue for any
length of time, bring on other disorders, which greatly impair the natural
vigor of the mind, debilitate the constitution, and terminate in death. The
countenances of the inhabitants during these seasons, have generally a pale
yellowish (...), occasioned by the prevalence of bilious symptoms. They have
very little of the bloom and freshness of the people in the northern states.

It has been observed that more of the inhabitants, of the men specially, die
during the winter, by pleurisies and peripn^umonies, (...) during the warm
months by bilious complaints. These pleurisies are brought on by intemperance,
and by an imprudent exposure to (...) weather. Were the inhabitants cautious
and prudent in these ^^pects, it is alleged by their physicians, that they
might in general (...) the danger of these fatal diseases. The use of flannel
next to (...) skin during the winter, is reckoned an excellent preventative of
the ^^^^ses incident to this climate. The western hilly parts of the (...) are
as healthy as any of the United States. That country is fer^^, full of springs
and rivulets of pure water. The air there is ^^^^ene a great part of the year,
and the inhabitants live to old (...), which cannot so generally be said of the
inhabitants of the flat country. Though the days in summer are extremely hot,
the nights (...) cool and refreshing. Autumn is very pleasant, both in regard
to the temperature and serenity of the weather, and the richness and variety of
the vegetable productions which the season affords. The ^^^^ers are so mild in
some years, that autumn may be said to continue (...) spring. Wheat harvest is
the beginning of June, and that of Indian corn early in September.

NATURAL HISTORY, MANUFACTURES, etc.] The large natural growth of the plains in
the low country, is almost universally pitch pine, which is a tall, handsome
tree, far superior to the pitch pine of the northern states. This tree may be
called the staple commodity of ^^^th Carolina. It affords pitch, tar,
turpentine, and various kinds of ^^^ber, which together, constitute at least
one half of the exports of this state. This pine is of two kinds, the common
and the long ^^ved. The latter has a leaf shaped like other pines, but is
nearly half a yard in length, hanging in large clusters. No country produces
finer white and red oak for staves. The swamps abound with ^^prus and bay
trees. The latter is an evergreen, and is food for the cattle in the winter.
The leaves are shaped like those of the peach tree, but larger. The most common
kinds of timber in the (...) country, are, oak, walnut and pine. A species of
oak grows in the ^^ist, sandy soil, called black jack. It seldom grows larger
than 8 or (...) inches diameter. It is worthy of remark, that the trees in the
low country, near the sea coast, are loaded with vast quantities of a long
species of moss, which, by absorbing the noxious vapor that is exhal^^^ from
stagnated waters, contributes much, it is supposed, to the healthiness of the
climate. This hypothesis is confirmed by experience, since it is commonly
observed, that the country is much less healthy for a few years after having
been cleared, that while in a state of nature.

The Missletoe is common in the back country. This is a shrub which differs in
kind, perhaps, from all others. It never grows out of the earth, but on the
tops of trees. The roots (if they may be so called) run under the bark of the
tree, and incorporate with the wood. It is an evergreen, resembling the garden
box wood.

The principal wild fruits are plums, grapes, strawberries and blackberries.

The country is generally covered with herbage of various kinds, and a species
of wild grass. It abounds with medicinal plants and roots. Among others are the
ginseng; Virginia snake root; Seneca snake root, an herb of the emetic kind,
like the epicacuana; Lions heart, which is a sovereign remedy for the bite of a
serpent. A species of the sensitive plant is also found here; it is a sort of
brier, the stalk of which dies with the frost, but the root lives through the
winter, and shoots again in the spring. The lightest touch of a leaf causes it
to turn and cling close to the stalk. Although it so easily takes the alarm,
and apparently shrinks from danger, in the space of two minutes after it is
touched, it perfectly recovers its former situation. The mucipula veneris is
also found here. The rich bottoms are overgrown with canes. The leaves are
green all the winter, and afford an excellent food for cattle. They are of a
sweetish taste, like the stalks of green corn, which they in many respects
resemble.

There is a long ridge of lime stone, which, extending in a southwesterly
direction, crosses the whole state of N. Carolina. It crosses Dan river to the
westward of the Saw^o towns, crosses the Yadkin about 50 miles N. W. from
Salisbury, and thence proceeds by the way of Kings mountain to the southern
states. No limestone has been found to the eastward of that ridge. A species of
rock has been found in several places, of which lime is made, which is
obviously a concretion of marine shells. The state is traversed nearly in the
same direction by another stratum of rocks which passes near Warrenton. It is a
circumstance worthy of observation that the springs of water on the northwest
side of the ridge are apt to fail in dry seasons; on the southwest side they
seldom fail.

The river Yadkin, where it passes Salisbury, is about 400 yards broad, but it
is reduced between two hills, about 25 miles to the southward of that town, to
the width of 80 or 100 feet. For 2 miles it is narrow and rapid, but the most
narrow and most rapid part is not above half a mile in length. In this narrow
part, shad are caught in the spring of the year, by hoop nets, in the eddies,
as fast as the strongest men are able to throw them out. Perhaps there is not
in the United States a more eligible situation for a large manufacturing town.
Boats with 40 or 50 hogsheads pass easily from these rapids to Georgetown.

The late war, by which North Carolina was greatly convulsed, put a stop to
several iron works. At present there are four or five furnaces in the state
that are in blast, and a proportionable number of forges. There is one in
Guilford county, one in Surry, and one in Wilkes, all on the Yadkin -- and one
in Lincoln. The quality of the iron is excellent.

One paper mill has lately been erected at Salem by the Moravians to great
advantage.

RELIGION.] The western parts of this state, which have been settled within the
last 40 years, are chiefly inhabited by Presbyterians from Pennsylvania, the
descendants of people from the North of Ireland, and are exceedingly attached
to the doctrines, disciplines and usages of the church of Scotland. They are a
regular industrious people. Almost all the inhabitants between the Catawba and
Yadkin rivers are of this denomination, and they are in general well supplied
with a sensible and learned ministry. There are interspersed some settlements
of Germans, both Lutherans and Calvinists, but they have may few ministers.

The Moravians have several flourishing settlements in this state. In (...),
they purchased of Lord Granville one hundred thousand acres of (...) between
Dan and Yadkin rivers, about 10 miles south of Pilot mountain, in Surry county,
and called it Wachovia, after an estate of ^ount Zinzendorf, in Austria. In
1755, this tract, by an act of assembly, was made a separate parish by the name
of Dobb's parish. The first settlement, called Bethabara, was begun in 1753, by
a number of the brethren from Pennsylvania, in a very wild, uninhabited
country, which, from that time; began to be rapidly settled by farmers from the
middle states.

In 17^9, Bethany, a regular village, was laid out and settled. In 1766, Salem,
which is now the principal settlement, and nearly in the center of Wachovia,
was settled by a collection of tradesmen. The same constitution and regulations
are established here, as in other regular settlements of the united brethren.
Besides, there are i^ Wachovia three churches, one in Friedland, one in
Friedburg, and another at Hope, each of which has a minister of the brethren's
church. These people, by their industry and attention to various branches of
manufacture; are very useful to the country around (...).

The Friends or Quakers have a settlement in New Garden, in Guilford county,
and several congregations at Perquimins and Pasquotank. The Methodists and
Baptists are numerous and increasing. Besides in denominations already
mentioned, there is a very numerous body of people, in this, and in all the
southern states, who cannot properly (...) classed with any sect of christians,
having never made any profession of christianity.

The inhabitants of Wilmington, Newbern, Edenton and Halifax districts, making
about three fifth of the state, once professed themselves of the Episcopal
church. The clergy, in these districts, were ^^^^ly missionaries; and in
forming their political attachments, at the commencement of the late war,
personal safety, or real interest, or perhaps a conviction of the impolicy of
opposing Great Britain, from whence they received their salaries, induced them
almost universally (...) declare themselves in favor of the British
government, and to emi^^te. There may be one or two of the original clergy
remaining, (...) at present they have no particular pastoral charge. Indeed the
inhabitants in the districts abovementioned seem now to be making the
experiment, whether christianity can exist long in a country have where there
is no visible christian church. The Baptists and Methodists have sent a number
of missionary preachers into these districts; (...) some of them have pretty
large congregations. It is not improbable that one or the other of these
denominations, and perhaps both, (...) acquire consistency, and establish
permanent churches.

COLLEGES AND ACADEMIES.] The general assembly of North (...), in December,
1789. passed a law incorporating 40 gentlemen, 5 from each district, as
Trustees of the University of North Carolina. To this university they gave, by
a subsequent law, all the debts due to the state, from sheriffs or other
holders of public money, and which had been due before the year 1783. They also
gave it all escheated property within the state. Whenever the trustees shall
have collected a sufficient sum of the old debts, or from the sale of escheated
property, the value of which is considerable, to pay the expense of erecting
buildings, they are to fix on a proper place, and proceed to finish the
buildings. A considerable quantity of land has already been given to the
university. The general assembly in December, 1791, loaned five thousand pounds
to the trustees, to enable them to proceed immediately with their buildings.

There is a very good academy at Warrenton, another at Williamsborough in
Granville, and three or four others in the state, of considerable note.

POPULATION, CHARACTER, MANNERS AND CUSTOMS.] From the Marshals return, it
appears that the number of inhabitants in the year 1791, was 393,751, of whom
293,179 were citizens. Perhaps there are few instances of such a rapid increase
of inhabitants as we find in this state. In the year 1710, we are well assured
that the number of inhabitants in North Carolina did not exceed six thousand.
This extraordinary increase must arise, in a great measure, from the migration
of inhabitants from other states, or from distant countries; but this will not
fully account for the present state of population in North Carolina. By
examining the return, we find there are 147.494 white male inhabitants; we also
find that the number of males under 16 years exceeds the number above 16 by
7518, which i^ about one nineteenth of the whole. This is a very remarkable
fact, as it respects the increase of the human species. We find a small
difference in the states of Delaware, Virginia and Georgia, in favor of those
under 16. The difference in Kentucky is similar to that in North Carolina. In
the other states, the number above 16 is greatest, and in the several kingdoms
in Europe, as far as our information reaches, the inhabitants above 16 are
universally much more numerous than those under that age. The great difference
that appears in North Carolina in favor of children, cannot be explained by
supposing that the climate is sickly; for we know that such climates are
equally fatal to young and old. The idea too of a sickly climate, does not
accord with the prodigious increase of inhabitants in this state, nor with
another fact, viz. that there is a considerable proportion of very old
inhabitants in the state. To explain this we must observe that the human
species, and all other animals, are found of increase in proportion to the
comforts of life, and the ease with which they can support their progeny.
Remove the rigors of an inhospitable climate, and the more uniform dissuasive
to matrimony, the apprehended difficulty of supporting a family, and the human
species would double, not in 20, but in 15 years. In North Carolina, neither
the cold of winter, not the heat of summer, are in the back country, at all
disagreeable; land continues to be plenty and cheap; grain is raised with so
much ^^se, and the trouble of providing for cattle in winter so trifling, that
a man supports his family with half the labor that is required in the cold
climates. Under these advantages, we are not to wonder that people in all ranks
of life should marry very young. We have heard of grandmothers in that state
who were not more than 27 years old.

The North Carolinians are mostly planters, and live from half a mile to 3 and
4 miles from each other, on their plantations. They have a plentiful country --
no ready market for their produce -- little intercourse with strangers, and a
natural fondness for society, which induce them to be hospitable to travelers.

The general topics of conversation among the men, when cards, the bottle, and
occurrences of they day do not intervene, are negroes, the prices of indigo,
rice, tobacco, etc. They appear to have little (...) for the sciences.
Political inquiries, and philosophical disquisitions are attended to but by a
few men of genius and industry, and (...) too laborious for the minds of the
people at large. Less attention (...) respect are paid to the women here, than
in those parts of the United States where the inhabitants have made greater
progress in the arts of civilized life. Indeed, it is a truth, confirmed by
observation, that in proportion to the advancement of civilization, in the same
proportion will respect for the women be increased; so that the progress of
civilization in countries, in states, in towns and in families, may be marked
by the degree of attention which is paid by husbands to their wives, and by the
young men to the young women.

Temperance and industry are not to be reckoned among the virtues of the North
Carolinians. The time which they waste in drinking, (...) and gambling, leaves
them very little opportunity to improve their plantations or their minds. The
improvement of the former is (...) to their overseers and negroes; the
improvement of the latter is too often neglected. Were the time, which is thus
wasted, spent in cultivating the soil, and in treasuring up knowledge, they
might be (...) wealthy and learned; for they have a productive country, and are
by no means destitute of genius.

Time that is not employed in study or useful labor, in every country, is
generally spent in hurtful or innocent exercises, according in the custom of
the place or the taste of the parties. The citizens of North Carolina, who are
not better employed, spend their time in drinking, or gaming at cards and dice,
in cock fighting or horse racing.

We are told that a strange and very barbarous practice prevailed among the
lower class of people before the revolution in the back parts of Virginia,
North and South Carolinas, and Georgia; it was ^^^ed gouging, and was neither
more nor less than a man, when boxing, putting out the eye of his antagonist
with his thumb. How quick, under a mild government, is the reformation of
manners. We have lately been told that in a particular county, where, at the
quarterly court 20 years ago, a day seldom passed without 10 or 15 boxing
^^^^ches, it is now a rare thing to hear of a fight.

North Carolina, as already observed, has had a rapid growth. In the year 1710,
it contained but about 1200 fencible men. It is now, in point of numbers, the
fourth state in the union. During this ^^^^ing progress in population, which
has been greatly aided by immigrations from Pennsylvania, Virginia and other
states, while each has been endeavoring to increase his fortune, the human
mind, like an ^^weeded garden, has been suffered to shoot up in wild disorder.
But when we consider, that, during the late revolution, this state produced
many distinguished patriots and politicians, that she sent her thousands to the
defense of Georgia and South Carolina, and gave ^^easional succors to Virginia
-- when we consider too the difficulties she has had to encounter from a
mixture of inhabitants, collected from different parts, strangers to each
other, and intent upon gain, we shall find many things worthy of praise in her
general character.

CONSTITUTION.] By the constitution of this state, which was ratified in
December, 1776, all legislative authority is vested in two distinct branches,
both dependent on the people, viz. a Senate and House of Commons, which when
convened for business, are styled the General Assembly.

The senate is composed of representatives, one for each county, chosen
annually by ballot.

The house of commons consists of representatives chosen in the same way, two
for each county, and one for each of the towns of Edenton, Newbern, Wilmington,
Salisbury, Hillsborough, Halifax and Fayetteville.

The qualifications for a senator, are one year's residence immediately
preceding his election, in the county in which he is chosen, and 300 acres of
land in fee.

A member of the house of commons must have usually resided in the county in
which he is elected, one year immediately preceding his elecction, and for six
months shall have possessed, and continue to possess, in the county which he
represents, not less than 100 acres of land in fee, or for the term of his own
life.

A free man of 21 years of age, who-has been an inhabitant in the state twelve
months immediately preceding the day of any election, and who had possessed a
freehold of fifty acres of land within the county for six months next before,
and at the day of election, is entitled to vote for a member of the senate.

All freemen of 21 years of age, who have been inhabitants of the state the
year next before the election, and have paid public taxes, may vote for members
of the house of commons.

The senate and house of commons, when convened, choose each their own speaker,
and are judges of the qualifications and elections of their members. They
jointly, by ballot, at their first meeting after each annual election, choose a
governor for one year, who is not eligible to that office longer than three
years, in six successive years; and who must posses a freehold of more than
1000l. and have been an inhabitant of the state above five years. They, in the
same manner, and at the same time, elect seven persons to be a council of state
for one year, to advise the governor, in the execution of his office. They
appoint a treasurer or treasures for the state. They triennially choose a state
secretary. They jointly appoint judges of the supreme courts of law and equity
-- judges of admiralty, and the attorney general, who are commissioned by the
governor, and hold their offices during good behavior. They prepare bills --
which must be read three times in each house, and be signed by the speaker of
both houses, before they pass into laws.

Judges of the supreme court -- members of the council -- judges of admiralty
-- treasurers -- secretaries -- attorney generals for the state -- clerks of
record -- clergymen -- persons denying the being of a God, the truth of the
protestant religion, or the divine authority of the old and New Testament --
receivers of public moneys, whose accounts are unsettled -- military officers
in actual service, are all ineligible to a sent either in the senate or house
of commons -- justices of the peace, being recommended by the representatives,
are commissioned by the governor, and hold their offices during good behavior.
The constitution allows of no religious establishment, the legislature are
authorized to regulate entails so as to prevent perpetuities. A majority of
both houses is necessary to do business.

HISTORY.] The history of North Carolina is less known than that of any of the
other states. From the best accounts that history affords, the first permanent
settlement in North Carolina was made about the year 1710, by a number of
Palatines from Germany, who had been reduced to circumstances of great
indigence, by a calamitous war. The proprietors of Carolina, knowing that the
value of their lands depended on the strength of their settlements, determined
to give every possible encouragement to such grants. Ships were accordingly
provided for their transportation -- and instructions were given to governor
Tynte to allow an hundred acres of land for every man, woman and child, free of
quit rents, for the first ten years; but at the expiration of that term, to pay
one penny per acre, annual ^^nt forever, according to the usages and customs of
the province. Upon their arrival, governor Tynte granted them a tract of land
in North Carolina, since called Albemarle and Bath precincts, where they
settled, and flattered themselves with having found, in the hideous wilderness,
a happy retreat from the desolations of a war which then raged in Europe.

In the year 1712, a dangerous conspiracy was formed by the Coree and Tuscorora
tribes of Indians, to murder and expel this infant colony. The foundation for
this conspiracy is not known. Probably they were offended at the encroachments
upon their hunting ground. They managed their conspiracy with great cunning and
profound secrecy. They surrounded their principal town with a breast work to
secure their families. Here the warriors convened to the number of 1200. From
this place of rendezvous they sent out small parties, by different roads, who
entered the settlement under the mask of friendship. At the change of the full
moon all of them had agreed to begin their murderous operations the same night.
When the night came, they entered the houses of the planters, demanding
provisions, and pretending to be offended, fell to murdering men, women and
children without mercy or distinction. One hundred and thirty seven settlers,
among whom were a Swiss baron, and almost all the poor Palatines that has
lately come into the country, were slaughtered the first night. Such was the
secrecy and dispatch of the Indians in this expedition, that none knew what had
befallen his neighbor, until the barbarians had reached his own door. Some
few, however, escaped and gave the alarm. The militia assembled in arms, and
kept watch day and night, until the news of the sad disaster had reached the
province of South Carolina. Governor Craven lost no time in sending a force to
their relief. The assembly voted 4000l. for the service of the war. A body of
600 militia, under the command of colonel Barnwell, and 366 Indians of
different tribes, with different commanders, marched with great expedition,
through a hideous wilderness, to their assistance. In their first encounter
with the Indians, they killed 300 and took 100 prisoners. After this defeat,
the Tuscororas retreated to their fortified town -- which was shortly after
surrendered to colonel Barnwell. In this expedition it was computed that near a
thousand Tuscororas were killed, wounded and taken. The remainder of the tribe
soon after abandoned their country, and joined the Five Nations, with whom they
have ever since remained. After this, the infant colony remained in peace, and
continued to flourish under the general government of South Carolina, till
about the year 1729, when seven of the proprietors, for a valuable
consideration, vested their property and jurisdiction in the crown, and the
colony was erected into a separate province, by the name of North Carolina, and
its present limits established by an order of George II. From this period to
the revolution in 1776, the history of North Carolina is unpublished, and of
course unknown, except to those who have had access to the records of the
province. Some of the most important events that have since taken place, have
been already mentioned in the general history of the United States.

TERRITORY S. OF OHIO. OR THE TENNESSEE GOVERNMENT.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 360 Miles. between 6 20 and 16 30 W. Lon. Breadth 105 Miles. 35 and 36
30 N. Lat.

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED north, by Kentucky and part of Virginia; east, by the
Stone, Yellow, Iron and Bald mountains, which divides it from North Carolina;
south, by South Carolina and Georgia; west, by the Missisippi. About seven and
a half millions of acres of this tract, only has been yet purchased by the
Indians.


CIVIL DIVISIONS AND POPULATION.] This extensive district is divided into the
following counties:

Counties. No. Inhab. WASHINGTON district. Washington, 5872 Sullivan, 4447
Green, 7741 Hawkins, 6970 South of French Broad 3619 MERO district. Davidson,
3459 Summer, 2196 Tennessee, 1387 Total 35691

The above is according to the returns made by the governor of this territory,
in 1791. Owing to imperfect returns made to him, it does not comprehend the
whole number of inhabitants. We have no data, on which to calculate the
probable deficiency. In 1788, the number of inhabitants were reckoned at about
40,000. They must have greatly increased since that period. In 1765, there were
but about 10 families, settled west of the Kanhaway. So many had joined them,
in 1773, that the settlement west of the Kanhaway was erected into a county,
and in 1776, subdivided into three counties.

The inhabitants of this district emigrated chiefly from Pennsylvania, and that
part of Virginia that lies west of the Blue Ridge. The ancestors of these
people were generally of the Scotch nation, some of whom emigrated first to
Ireland, and from thence to America. A few Germans and English are intermixed.
-- The proportion of the whites to the blacks in this district, judging from
the foregoing imperfect census, is as ten to one. In 1788, it was thought there
were ^o white persons to one negroe. The erection of this territory into a
separate government, it is believed, will tend to lessen the negroe population.

CLIMATE.] Moderate and healthy. In the tract lying between the Great Island,
as it is called, and the Kanhaway, the summers are remarkably cool, and the air
rather moist. Southwest of this as far as the Indian towns, the climate is much
warmer, and the soil better adapted to the productions of the southern states.

The diseases to which the adult inhabitants are most liable, are preu^^sies,
rheumatisms, and rarely agues and severs. So healthy have been the inhabitants,
that from the first settlement of the country, to 1788, not a single physician
had settled among them. It is to the inhabitants a real advantage, that they
are almost beyond the reach of those luxuries which are enjoyed, and those
epidemical diseases which are consequently frequent, in populous towns on the
sea coast. An in habitant of this district writes, "Our physicians are, a fine
climate, healthy robust mothers and fathers, plain and plentiful diet, and
enough of exercise. There is not a regular bred physician residing in the whole
district."

RIVERS AND MOUNTAINS.] The Tennessee, called also the Cherokee, and absurdly
the Hogohege river, is the largest branch of the Ohio. It rises in the
mountains of Virginia, latitude 37 and pursues a course of about 1000 miles
south and southwest, nearly to latitude 34, receiving from both sides a number
of large tributary streams. It then wheels about to the north, in a circuitous
course, and mingles with the Ohio, nearly 60 miles from its mouth. From its
entrance into the Ohio, to the Muscle shoals, 250 miles, the current is very
gentle, and the river deep enough, at all seasons, for the largest row boats.
The Muscle shoals are about 20 miles, in length. At this place the river
spreads to the width of 3 miles, and forms a number of islands, and is of
difficult passage, except when there is a swell in the river. From these shoals
to the whirl or suck, the place where the river breaks through the Great ridge,
or Cumberland mountain, is 250 miles, the navigation all the way excellent.

The Cumberland mountain, in its whole extent, from the Great Kanhaway to the
Tennessee, consists of the most stupendous piles of craggy rocks of any
mountain in the western country. In several parts of it, for miles, it is
inaccessible even to the Indians on foot. In one place particularly, near the
summit of the mountain, there is a most remarkable ledge of rocks, of about 30
miles in length, and 200 feet thick, showing a perpendicular face to the S. E.
more noble and grand than any artificial fortification in the known world, and
apparently equal in point of regularity. Through this stupendous pile,
according to a modern hypothesis, had the waters of all the upper branches of
the Tennessee to force their way. The attempt would have been impracticable at
any other place than the one mentioned, for more than 100 miles eastwardly.
Here then seems to have been the chasm, left by the Creator, to convey off
those waters, which must otherwise have overflowed, and rendered useless a vast
tract of ^^^able country, encompassed within the mountains.

The Whirl, as it is called, is in about latitude 35. It is reckoned a greater
curiosity than the bursting of the Patomak through the Blue Ridge, which is so
inimitably described by Mr. Jefferson. The river, which a few miles above is
half a mile wide, is here compressed to the width of about 100 yards. Just as
it enters the mountain, a large rock projects from the northern shore, in an
oblique direction, which renders the bed of the river still narrower, and
causes a sudden bend; the water of the river is of course thrown with great
rapidity against the southern shore, whence it rebounds around the point of the
rock, and produces the whirl, which is about 80 yards in circumference. Canoes
have often been carried into this whirl, and escaped by the dexterity of the
rowers, without damage. -- In less than a mile below the whirl, the river
spreads into its common width, and, except Muscle shoals, already mentioned,
flows beautiful and placid, till it mingles with the Ohio.

Six miles above the whirl are the Chiccamogga towns, on the banks of the
river, and of a large creek of the same name. From these towns of the mouth of
the Hiwassee, is 60 miles by water, and about 40 by land. This river is a south
branch of the Tennessee, and navigable till it penetrates the mountains on its
south side. Up this river, in these mountains, a mine has been discovered, and
ore taken, from which it is said gold was extracted by an artist, while the
British were in possession of Georgia. It is ce^^n but few Indians know the
spot, and those who do are very anxious to keep it a secret. The gentlemen who
gave the author this information, has been within view of the place. The
mountain is very high and barren, and has several of the appearances described
by minera^^sts. The discovery was made by means of the river's undermining the
base of a large cliff or spur of the mountain, which occasioned a great column
of the earth or rock to tumble into the river. This disrupture discovered the
vein of yellow metal at a great depth. This climate, the fine springs, and
fertile plains, render the banks of this river a most delightful place of
settlement. From a branch of the Hiwassee, called Amoia, there is but a short
portage to a branch of the Mobile, and the road all the distance firm and level.

Passing up the Tenessee, sixty miles from the mouth of the Hiwassee, you come
to the mouth of Peleson or Clinch river, from the north, which is large and
navigable for boats upwards of 200 miles, receiving in its course, besides
inferior streams, Powell's river, which is nearly as large as the main river,
and boatable 100 miles. This last mentioned river runs through Powell's valley,
an excellent tract of country, abounding with fine springs.

From the Peleson to the junction of the Holstein and Tennessee, is computed 40
miles. This last is the branch which formerly gave its name to the main river,
not from its size, but from its notoriety, having on its banks a vast number of
Indian villages, and the Chief town of the Cherokee Indians, called Chota, and
was therefore called (...) river; but the name of Tennessee has of late
obtained. It crosses the valley at nearly right angles with the mountains, and
has on its banks a number of beautiful plains, which are chiefly improved as
corn fields by the Indians. In 1788, the whites had advanced their settlements
within 10 miles of the Indian villages. Forty miles from the (...), up the
Holstein branch, comes in Frank river, vulgarly called French Broad, 4 or 500
yards wide; thence, pursuing the Holstein, 200 miles, you come to Long Island,
which is the highest navigation yet used -- thence about 100 miles is the
source of the river. The miles below Long Island comes in North Holstein; and
20 miles ^^^re it, the Wattago; the former is 100 yards wide at its mouth, and,
with a small expense, might be made navigable to Campbell's Salmes, (...) miles
further up. On the banks of the Holstein are many mines (...) iron ore, of the
best kind, some of which have been opened and (...) to advantage; and enough
might be made to supply the whole ^^^stern country; and these mines are the
more valuable, as there is (...) to be none of this ore near the Missisippi,
and very little north of (...) Ohio. In the Tennessee and its upper branches,
are great numbers of fish, some of which are very large and of an excellent
flavor.

The head waters of the Great Kanhaway, are in the western part of North
Carolina, in the most eastern ridge of the Allegany or Ap^^^chian mountains,
and south of the 36th degree of latitude. Its (...) branches encircle those of
the Holstein, from which they are ^^^^rated by the Iron mountain, through which
it passes, 10 miles above the lead mines; thence steering its course along the
foot of the (...) any mountain, until it receives Little river from the east,
it turns (...) the north, which is its general course till it meets the Ohio.
About (...) miles from Little river, it receives Green Briar river, from the
east, which is the only considerable tributary stream in all that distance.
About forty miles below the mouth of Green Briar river, (in Virginia) in the
Kanhaway, is a remarkable cataract. A large rock, a little ^evated in the
middle, crosses the bed of the river, over which the water shoots and falls
about 50 feet perpendicularly, except at one side, where the descent is more
gradual.

The Shawanee, now called Cumberland river, of the southern (...) of the Ohio,
is next in size to the Tennessee, and extends eastward nearly as far, but runs
a much more direct course. It is navigable for small craft as far as Nashville.
From the south it receives Harper's, Convey, Obey's and Clear Fork rivers; and
from the north, Red and Rock Castle rivers, besides many smaller streams.

It would take a volume to describe particularly the mountains of this
territory, above half of which is covered with those which are ^^inhabitable.
Some of these mountains, particularly the Cumberland, or Great Laurel Ridge,
are the most stupendous piles in the United States. They abound with ginseng,
and stone coal. Clinch mountain is south of these; in which Burk's Garden and
Morris ^^ob, might be described as curiosities.

The Iron mountain, which constitutes the boundary between this district and
North Carolina, extends from near the lead mines, on the Kanhaway, through the
Cherokee country, to the south of Chota, and terminates near the sources of the
Mobile. -- The caverns and cascades in these mountains are innumerable.

ANIMALS.] A few years since, this country abounded with large ^^ds of wild
cattle, improperly called buffaloes; but the improvident or ill disposed among
the first settlers, have destroyed multitudes of them out of mere wantonness.
They are still to be found on some of the south branches of Cumberland river.
Elk or moose, are seen in many places, chiefly among the mountains. The deer
are become comparatively scarce; so that no person makes a business of hunting
them for their skins only. Enough of bears and wolves yet remain. Beavers and
otters are caught in plenty in the upper branches of Cumberland and Kentucky
rivers.

The mammoth, the king of the land animals, was formerly as inhabitant of this
country, as appears from his bones, which have been dug up by laborers, at
Campbell's Salines, on North Holstein, when sinking salt pits. They were from
three to seven feet below the surface of the earth.

SALINES, MINES, SPRINGS, etc.] Campbell's Salines, just mentioned, are the
only ones that have yet been discovered on the upper branches of the Tennessee
and on this side the wilderness, though (...) search has been made for them.
The tract which contains these salines is a great natural curiosity. It was
discovered by Capt. Charles Campbell, about 1745, who was one of the first
explorers of the western country. In 1753, he procured a patent for it from the
governor of Virginia. -- His son the late Genesis William Campbell, the same who
behaved so gallantly in the American war in the years 1780 and 1781, became
owner of it on his death. But it was not till the time of his death, when salt
was very scarce and dear, that salt water was discovered and salt made by a
poor man. Since that time, under the direction of Col. Arthur Campbell, it has
been improved to a considerable extent, and many thousands of inhabitants are
supplied from it, with salt of a superior quality, and at a low price. The
tract consists of about 300 acres of flat marsh land, of as rich a soil as can
be imagined. In this flat, pits are sunk, in order to obtain the salt water.
The best is found from 30 to 40 feet deep; after passing through the rich soil
or mud, from six to ten feet, you come to a very brittle lime stone rock, with
cracks or chasms, through which the salt water issues into the pits, whence it
is drawn by buckets, and put into the boilers, which are placed in furnaces
adjoining the pits. The hills that surround this flat are covered with fine
timber, and not far distant a coal mine has been discovered.

On Frank river, about 30 miles in a direct line from its mouth, a large,
clear, medicinal spring has lately been discovered, which, on experiment, has
been found to relieve various complaints of the human body. Its temperature
rather exceeds blood heat.

On the same river, nearer its mouth, a valuable lead mine has lately been
discovered.

COMMERCE.] This country furnishes many valuable articles of export, such as
fine wagon and saddle horses, beef, cattle, ginseng, deer skins and furs,
cotton, hemp and flax, which may be transported by land; also, iron, lumber,
pork and flour, which might be exported in great quantities, if the navigation
of the Missisippi were opened; but there are few of the inhabitants who
understand commerce, or are possessed of proper capitals; of course it is badly
managed. The wicked practice of land jobbing engrosses too much of the
attention of the inhabitants. The degraded state of commerce has rendered
necessary a general attention to home manufactures; and it is to be hoped that
the eyes of the people will soon be opened to their true interest, and
agriculture, commerce and manufactures, each receive proper attention.

RELIGION.] The presbyterians are the prevailing denomination (...) christians
in this district. They have a presbytery, called the Abingdon Presbytery,
established by act of synod, which, in 1788, con^^^^ of 23 large congregations,
who were then supplied by only six misters. There are also some of the Baptist
and Methodist denominations.

ACADEMY AND SOCIETY.] The inhabitants of this district have (...) been
inattentive to the interests of science. An academy and (...) grammar schools
have been established; and a society, who (...) themselves, "A Society for
promoting Useful Knowledge." It is (...) modern date, but much good is expected
from it. A taste for ^^^ture is increasing among them.

GOVERNMENT.] Similar to that established by congress, in the territory of the
United States Northwest of the Ohio. The gov^^^ is the executive (and in his
absence, the secretary) and the gov^^^ and three judges the legislative power,
in the district.

CHARACTER, MANNERS AND DRESS.] There is nothing in the ^^^^cter of this
people, that distinguishes them from the settlers of (...) countries of
general. Among the bulk of the inhabitants a (...) simplicity of manners
prevails. Duplicity or the etiquette of (...) and populous places is unknown
among them. If a man de^^^^ another, he is deemed and called a liar; and it
frequently hap^^^^ that 'a bloody nose' is the consequence. Wrestling, jumping,
^^^^ing foot races, and playing at ball, are the common diversions. ^^^eing is
coming into fashion. Card playing is a rare amusement. The hunting shirt is
still worn by the militia on duty, and by hunt^^^ in pursuit of game. At home
and at public assemblies, they dress (...) the Virginians.

DAMAGE BY THE WAR.] Great was the damage sustained by the inhabitants of this
district, during the war, occasioned by the incursions of the Indians; and it
is much to the honor of this patriotic people, that when they were offered
protection by the British, in the only stage of the war, they nobly refused it.

PRINCIPAL TOWNS.] Nashville, the shire town of Davidson ^^^ty, is the largest
town in the territory. The courts are held have; and it has two houses for
public worship, and a handsomely ^^dowed academy, established in 1786.

Abingdon is the county town of Washington county. It contained, in 1788, about
20 houses, and was rapidly increasing. It is about 260 miles from Richmond in
Virginia, in a direct line, and 310 to as the road (...), bearing a little to
the south of west, latitude 36 30.

MILITIA.] In 1788, the militia of this district amounted to between 7 and 8000
effective men, who were principally armed with rises. It is supposed that their
number is increased nearly one half since that period.

REVENUE.] The public revenue amounts to about 5 or 6000 pounds, raised chiefly
by a tax on slaves, lands and horses.

ROADS.] The following are the distances on the new road from Nashville, in
Davidson county, to Fort Campbell, near the junction of ^^^^in river with the
Tennessee.

Miles. From Nashville to Stony river 9 Big Spring 6 Cedar Lick 4 Little Spring
6 Barton's creek 4 Spring creek 5 Martin's Spring 5 Blair's Spring 5 Buck
Spring 12 Fountains 8 Smith's creek 6 Coney river 11 Mine Lick 9 Falling creek
9 War Path 7 Bear creek 18 Camp creek 8 King's Spring 16 From Grovet's creek 7
The foot of Cumberland Mountain 2 Through the mountain to Emmery's river, a
branch of the Peleson 11 To the Pappa Ford of the Peleson or Clinch river 1^ To
Campbell's station near Holstein 10 To the Great Island 100 To Abingdon in
Washington county 35 To Richmond in Virginia 310 Total 635

By this new road, a pleasant passage may be had to the western country with
carriages, as there will be only the Cumberland mountain to pass; and that is
easy of ascent -- and beyond it, the road is generally level and firm,
abounding with fine springs of water.

INDIANS.] The Indian tribes within and in the vicinity of this district are
the Cherokees and Chicasaws. The Cherokees have been a warlike and numerous
nation; but by continual wars, in which it has been their destiny to be
engaged, with the northern Indian tribes, they were reduced at the commencement
of the last war to about 2000 fighting men; since which they have been reduced
more than one half, and have become weak and pusillanimous.

The Chicasaws, of all the Indian tribes within the limits of the United
States, merit the most from the Americans, having at all times maintained a
brotherly attachment to them. They glory in saying that they never shed the
blood of an Anglo American. There is so great and affinity between the Chicasaw
and Choctaw languages, that the common people can converse together, each
speaking in his own dialect. They are a personable people, and have an openness
in their countenances and behavior, uncommon among savages. These nations say
they are the remnant of a great nation that once lived far to the west, which
was destroyed by the Spaniards, for whom they still retain an hereditary
hatred. Would it not be the policy of congress to treat with these nations? and
might not their friendship be greatly serviceable to the Union?

HISTORY.] The eastern parts of this district, were explored by Cols. Wood,
Patton, Buchanan, Capt. Charles Campbell, and Dr. T. Walker, (each of whom were
concerned in large grants of land from the government) as early as between the
years of 1740 and 1750. In 1754, at the commencement of the French war, not
more than 50 families had settled here, who were either destroyed or driven off
by the Indians before the close of the following year. It remained uninhabited
till 1765, when the settlement of it recommenced, and in 1773, (such was the
vast accession of emigrants) the country as far west as the Long Island of
Holstein, an extent of more than 120 miles in length from east (...) west, was
well peopled.

In 1774, a war broke out with the northern Indians, over the Ohio, which
issued in their suing for peace, which was granted them on (...) terms.

The year 1776 was signalized by a formidable invasion of the Cherokees,
contrived by the British superintendant, Mr. Steuart. Their intention was to
depopulate the country as far as the Kanhaway, because this brave people had
rejected, with a noble firmness and ^^ignation, the proposals of Henry Steuart
and Alexander Camer^^^^ for joining the British standard, and were almost
unanimous in their resolution to support the measures of congress. This
invasion ^^ued in a total defeat of the Indians.

In 1780, the tor^es of the western parts of North Carolina and Virginia,
emboldened by the reduction of Charleston by the British, embodied in armed
parties, and proceeded toward the lead mines on the Kanhaway, to take
possession of some lead stores at that place, but were defeated in their
attempt by the vigilance of Col. A. Campbell and Col. Chockett.

Various other movements took place in the course of this year, but the most
interesting and brilliant was the battle of King's mountain, which was fought
and won by about 900 Mountaineers, (as the vete^^^ sons of this district were
called) commanded by the brave Genesis William Campbell, against a party of the
British under the command of Col. Ferguson. Upwards of 1100 of the enemy were
either killed, ^^^^nded or taken; among the former was Col. Ferguson, and
officer of distinguished merit. See Ramsay's Revol. South Carolina, vol. II.
page 181.
In arousing the inhabitants, issuing orders, collecting the forces, and in
arranging and animating the men, at the place of rendezvous, previous to this
successful expedition, much was done by the activity and decision of Col.
Arthur Campbell, the senior officer of the district, to whom much praise is due.

Soon after this, to defeat a meditated invasion of the Cherokee Indians, which
was discovered by Nancy Ward, an Indian woman, called, from this circumstance,
the western Pocahonta, Col. A. Campbell, with 700 Mountaineers, well mounted,
penetrated far into the Cherokee country; introduced the new and successful
mode of fighting In^^^ on horseback; accomplished his designs, and returned in
Jan. 1781.

In the celebrated battle at Guilford, March 15, 1781, the Mountaineers, under
Genesis W. Campbell, who on that day commanded with great applause the left wing
of the army, behaved with their usual gallantry. This nearly closed the active
part which the Mountain men took in the American war.

In 1782, the legislature of North Carolina appointed commissioners to explore
the western part of the state, (by which is meant as well (...) lands included
in Davidson county, as those between the south boundary of this county and
those between the rivers Missisippi and Tennessee) and report to the succeeding
legislature, which part was best for the payment of the bounty promised to the
officers and soldiers of the continental line of that state; and they
accordingly did explore in the before described tract of country, and reported
to the legislature in the spring of the year 1783. -- Although this country was
not established by law before the last mentioned period, yet a few families had
settled in the year 1780, principally under the guidance of Col. James
Robertson, on Cumberland river, and called the place Nashville, in honor of
brigadier general Francis Nash, who fell at Germantown; in the year 1777; but
he had but few followers until the year 1783, after the peace had taken place,
and after an act had passed directing the military or bounty warrants of the
officers and soldiers to be located in this county. These circumstances induced
many officers and soldiers to repair immediately thither, to secure and settle
their lands; and such as did not choose to go, sold their warrants to citizens
who did go: In consequence of this, many people from almost every state in the
union became purchasers of these military warrants, and are since become
residents of this county; and many valuable and opulent families have removed
to it from the Natches. -- Col. Robertson, when he settled at Nashville, was
upwards of 200 miles distant (to the westward) from any other settlement in his
own state, and was equally distant from the then settled parts of Kentucky.
Hence it will readily be supposed that himself and party were in danger every
hour of being cut off by the Indians, against whom his principal security was,
that he was as far distant from them as from the white people; and slender as
this security may appear, his party never sustained any damage from the Indians
but what was done by parties of hunters, who happened to and out his
settlements. -- The face of this country is in general level, and the soil very
rich, equal to any other part of America, and produce in abundance every thing
that can be expected from so temperate a climate and so rich a soil. It is
common for the planter to gather from his fields, upon an average, sixty
bushels of Indian corn per acre. This county is well watered by the rivers
Tennessee and Cumberland, and their branches. Both of these rivers empty into
the Ohio shortly after they pass the north boundary of the state. As the waters
of the Cumberland from Nashville, and of the Tennessee from this Muscle shoals
to the Ohio, are navigable to the Ohio and Missisippi, the people of course,
who live in this county or the adjacent country, have the same advantages of
water conveyance for trade, as those who live on the Ohio or Missisippi, to New
Orleans or elsewhere.

Besides, there is another probable avenue through which trade will be carried
on with this county and the adjacent country, which is from Mobile, up the
waters of the Mobile river as far as it is navigable, thence by a land carriage
of about 50 miles (at most) to Ocochapp^ creek, which empties into the
Tennessee at the lower end of the Muscle shoals. The mouth of this creek, is
the center of a piece of ground, the diameter of which is 5 miles, ceded by the
southern Indians at the treaty of Hopwell, on Keeowee, to the United States,
for the establishment of trading posts.

In 1785, in conformity to the resolves of congress of April 23, 1784, the
inhabitants of this district essayed to form themselves into a body politic, by
the name of the "State of Frankland;" but, differing among themselves as to the
form of government, and about other matters, in the issue of which some blood
was shed; and being opposed by some leading characters in the eastern parts,
the schemes was given up, and the inhabitants remained in general peaceable
until 1790, when congress established their present government. Since this
period, some late incursions of the Indians excepted, the inhabitants have been
peaceable and prosperous.

SOUTH CAROLINA.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 200 Miles. between 4 and 9 W. Long. Sq. Miles. 20,000 Breadth 125
Miles. 32 and 35 N. Lat. Sq. Miles. 20,000

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED north, by North Carolina, and the Tennessee Government;
east, by the Atlantic ocean; south, and southwest, by Savannah river, and a
branch of its head waters, called Tugulo river, which divides this (...) from
Georgia. See page 607, note.


CIVIL DIVISIONS AND POPULATION.] The proprietors who (...) sent settlers to
Carolina, divided it into counties and parishes. The counties are generally
named after the proprietors. No county q^^ts, however, were established, and
this division, though for a long (...) kept up in the province, became in a
great measure obsolete pre^^^ to the revolution. Since the revolution, county
courts have (...) established, where a majority of the inhabitants have
petitioned (...) them, and the state is now divided into districts and
counties; and (...) counties are subdivided, in the lower country, into
parishes; and i^ the upper country, into smaller or voting districts.

There are 7 districts, in which are 36 counties, as follows:

Districts. Counties. (...) 18,753 inhabitants. Hilton, Lincoln, Granville,
Shrewsbury. (...) inhabitants. Charleston, Washington, Marion, Berkley,
Colleton, Bartholomew. ORANGEBURGH, district, west of-Beauf^rt district. Chief
town ORANGEBURGH. 18,513 inhab. Lewisburgh, Orange, Lexington, Winton. CAMDEN
district, west of Georgetown district. Chief town CAMDEN. 38,065 inhabitants.
Clarendon, Richland, Fairfield, Claremont, Lancaster, York, Chester. GEORGETOWN
district, between S^ntee river and North Carolina Chief town GEORGETOWN. 22,122
Inhabitants. Winyah, Williamsburgh, Kingston, Liberty. NINETY SIX district,
comprehend (...) other parts of the state, not included in the other district.
Chapter Town, CAMBRIDGE. 73,729 inhabitants. Abbeville, Edgefield, Newbury, Union,
Laurens, Spartanburgh, Greenville, Pendleton, (...) district, west of
Georgetown district. Chapter town -- 10,706 inhabitants. Marlborough, Chesterfield,
Darlington,

Total number of inhabitants in 1791 249,073, of whom 107,094 were slaves.

The committee, appointed by act of assembly to divide the districts into
counties, were directed to lay them as nearly 40 miles square as was
practicable, due regard being paid to situations, natural boundaries, etc.

As the lower country was originally sfettled by people from Europe under the
proprietary government and influence, all the then counties were divided into
parishes. And even now, although the old counties are done away, the boundaries
altered, and new ones established, the division of parishes subsists in the
three lower districts, the people choose their senators and representatives by
parishes, as formerly. But in the middle and upper districts, which were
settled by people of various nations from Europe, but principally by northern
emigrants, parishes are hardly known, except perhaps in Orangeburgh district.
In these districts the people vote in small divisions, as convenience dictates.

CLIMATE.] The climate is different in different parts of the state. Along the
sea coast bilious diseases and severs of various kinds are prevalent between
July and October. The probability of dying is much greater between the 20th of
June and the 20th of October, than in the other 8 months in the year.

One cause of these diseases is, a low marshy country, which is overflowed for
the sake of cultivating rice. The exhalations from these stagnated waters, from
the rivers, and from the neighboring ocean, and the profuse perspiration of
vegetables of all kinds, which cover the ground, fill the air with moisture.
This moisture falls in frequent rains and copious dews. From actual observation
it has been found that the average annual fall of rain for ten years was 42
inches; without regarding the moisture that fell in fogs and dews. The great
heat of the day relaxes the body, and the agreeable coolness of the evening
invites to an exposure to these heavy dews.

The disagreeable effects of this climate, experience has proved, might in a
great measure be avoided, by those inhabitants whose circumstances will admit
of their removal from the neighborhood of the rice, swamps, to healthier
situations, during the months of the July, August, September and October; and
in the worst situations, by temperance and care. Violent exercise on horseback,
chiefly, exposure to the meridian rays of the sun, sudden showers of rain, and
the night air, are too frequently the causes of fevers and other disorders.
Would the sportsmen deny themselves, during the fall months, their favorite
amusements of hunting and fishing, or confine themselves to a very few hours,
in the morning or evening -- would the industrious planter visit his fields
only at the same hours -- or would the poorer class of People pay due attention
to their manner of living, and observe the precautions recommended to them by
men of knowledge and experience, much sickness and many distressing events
might be prevented. The upper country, situated in the medium between extreme
heat and cold, is as healthful as any part of the United States.

RIVERS.] This state is watered by four large, navigable rivers, besides a
great number of smaller ones, which are passable in boats. The river Savannah
washes it in its whole length from southeast to northwest. The Edisto rises in
two branches from a remarkable ridge in the interior part of the state. These
branches unite below Orangeburgh, which stands on the North Fork, and form
Edisto river, which, having passed Jacksonsburgh, leaving it on the south,
branches and embraces Edisto island.

Santee is the largest and longest river in this state. It empties into the
ocean by two mouths, a little south of Georgetown. About 120 miles in a direct
line from its mouth, it branches into the Congaree and Wateree; the latter or
northern branch passes the Catabaw nation of Indians, and bears the name of the
Catabaw river from this settlement to its source. The Congaree branches into
Saluda and Broad rivers. Broad river again branches into Enoree, Tiger and
Pacolet rivers; on the latter of which are the celebrated Pacolet Springs.

Pedee river rises in North Carolina, where it is called Yadkin river. In this
state, however, it takes the name of Pedee, and, receiving the waters of
Lynches creek, Little Pedee, and Black river, it joins the Wakkamaw river, near
Georgetown. These united streams, with the accession of a small creek, on which
Georgetown stands, form Winyaw bay, which about 12 miles below communicates
with the ocean. All the forementioned rivers, except Edisto, rise from various
sources in that ridge of mountains which divides the waters which flow into the
Atlantic Ocean from those which fall into the Missisippi.

The rivers of a secondary size, as you pass from N. to S. are Wakkamaw, Black
river, Cooper, Ashepoo, and Combahee. These rivers afford to the proprietors of
their banks a considerable quantity of tide swamp, or rice land, flowable from
the rivers, except in extraordinary droughts.

In the third class are comprehended those rivers which extend but a short
distance from the ocean, and serve, by branching into numberless creeks, as
drains to take off the quantity of rain water, which (...) down from the large
inland swamps; or are merely arms of the sea. Of this kind, are Ashley, Stono,
Coosaw, Broad, Colleton, May, New, and Right's rivers. The tide, in no part of
the state, flows more than 25 miles from the sea.

CANAL.] A company has been incorporated for the purpose of connecting Cooper
and Santee rivers by a Canal of 21 miles in length. The sum supposed to be
necessary to complete this extensive work is 55,620l. sterling. Twenty five per
cent. are allowed by the legislature in tolls for all moneys advanced by
stockholders. The advantage of a canal at this place, to one who inspects a map
of the Carolinas, must appear to be great, both to the public and to the
proprietors.

MOUNTAINS.] Except the High Hills of Santee, the Ridge, and some few other
hills, this country is like one extensive plain, till you reach the Tryon and
Hogback mountains, 220 miles northwest of Charleston. The elevation of these
mountains above their base, is 3840 feet, and above the sea coast 4640. There
is exhibited from the top of these mountains an extensive view of this state,
North Carolina and Georgia. And as no object intervenes to obstruct the view, a
man with telescopic eyes might discern vessels at sea. The mountains west and
northwest rise much higher than these, and form a ridge, which divides the
waters of Tennessee and Santee rivers.

HARBORS.] The only harbors of note are those of Charleston, Port Royal, and
Georgetown. Charleston harbor is spacious, convenient and safe. It is formed
by the junction of Ashley and Cooper rivers. Its entrance is guarded by Fort
Johnson. Twelve miles from the city is a bar, over which are four channels: One
by the name of Ship Channel, has 18 feet water; another 16, the other two are
for smaller vessels. The tides rise from 5 to 8 feet. Port Royal has an
excellent harbor, of sufficient extent to contain the largest floot in the
world.

The bar at the entrance of Winyaw bay, which leads to Georgetown, does not
admit of vessels drawing more than. 11 feet water; and is in many respects a
very dangerous place. This circumstance has proved injurious to the growth of
Georgetown, which is otherwise exceedingly well situated, for all the purposes
of an extensive trade.

ISLANDS.] The sea coast is bordered with a chain of fine sea islands, around
which the sea flows, opening an excellent inland navigation, for the conveyance
of produce to market.

North of Charleston harbor, lie Bull's Dewee's, and Sullivan's islands, which
form the north part of the harbor. James island lies on the other side of the
harbor, opposite Charleston, containing about 50 families. Farther S. W. is
John's island, larger than James; Stono river, which forms a convenient and
safe harbor, divides these islands. Contiguous to John's island, and connected
with it, by a bridge, is Wadmeiaw; east of which are the small isles of Keywaw
and Simmon. Between these and Edisto island, is N. Edisto inlet, which also
affords a good harbor for vessels of easy draft of water. South of Edisto
island, is S. Edisto inlet, through which enter, from the northward, all the
vessels bound to Beaufort, Asheepoo, Combahac^ and Coosaw.

On the S. W. side of St. Helena island, lies a cluster of islands, one of the
largest of which is Port Royal. Adjacent to Port Royal lie St. Helena, Ladies
Island, Paris Island, and the Hunting Islands, 5 or 6 in number, bordering on
the ocean, so called from the number of deer and other wild game sound upon
them. All these islands and some others of less note belong to St. Helena
parish.

Crossing Broad river, you come to Hilton Head, the most southern sea island in
Carolina. West and southwest of Hilton Head, lie Finckney's, Bulls, Dawfuskies
and some smaller islands, between which and Hilton Head, are Calibogie river
and sound, which form the outlet of May and New rivers.

The soil on these islands, is generally better adapted to the culture of
indigo than the main, and less suited to rice. Cotton grows very well upon
them. The natural growth is the live oak, which is so excellent for ship
timber, and the palmetto or cabbage tree, the utility of which, in the
construction of forts, was experienced during the late war.

CHIEF TOWNS.] CHARLESTON is the only considerable town in South Carolina. It
is situated on the tongue of land which is formed by the confluence of Ashley
and Cooper rivers, which are large and navigable. These rivers mingle their
waters immediately below the town, and form a spacious and convenient harbor,
which communicates with the ocean just below Sullivan's island, which it leaves
on the north, seven miles southeast of the town. In these rivers the tide
rises, in common about 6 feet. It is worthy of remark that the tide uniformly
rises considerably higher in the night than in the day; often from 10 to 12
inches. The fact is certain (...) the ^^^se is unknown.
The continued agitation which this occasions in the waters which almost
surround Charleston -- the refreshing sea breezes which are regularly felt, and
the smoke rising from so many chimneys, render Charleston more healthy than any
part of the low country in the southern states. On this account it is the
resort of great numbers of gentlemen, invalids from the West India islands, and
of the rich planters from the country, who come and here to spend the sukly
months, as they are called, in quest of health and of the social enjoyments
which the city affords. And is no part of America are the social blessings
enjoyed more rationally and liberally than in Charleston. Unaffected
hospitality -- affability -- ^^se in manners and address -- and a disposition
to make their guests welcome, easy and pleased with themselves, are
characteristics of the respectable people in Charleston.

The land on which the town is built is flat and low, and the water brackish
and unwholesome. The streets from east to west extend from river to river, and,
running in a straight line, not only open beautiful prospects each way, but
afford excellent opportunities, by means of subterranean drains, for removing
all nuisances, and keeping the city clean and healthy. These streets are
intersected by others, nearly at right angles, and throw the town into a number
of squares, with dressing houses in front, and office houses and little gardens
behind. ^^me of the streets are conveniently wide, but most of them are much
(...) narrow, especially for so populous a city, in so warm a climate. (...)
their being a nursery for various diseases from their confined (...), they have
been found extremely inconvenient in case of fires, the destructive effects of
which have been frequently felt in this city. The houses, which have been
lately built, are brick, with tiled roofs. Some of the buildings in Charleston
are elegant, and most of them are neat, airy and well furnished. The public
buildings are, an exchange, state house, lately rebuilt, armoury, poor house,
two large churches for Episcopalians, two for Congregationalists or
Independents, one for Scotch Presbyterians, one for Baptists, one for German
Lutherans, two for the Methodists, (a large house for worship, being lately
finished by them) -- one for French Protestants -- besides a meeting house for
Quakers, a Roman Catholic chapel, and a Jewish synagogue.

But little attention is paid to the public markets. A great proportion of the
most wealthy inhabitants have plantations, from which they receive supplies of
almost every article of living. The country abounds with poultry and wild
ducks. Their beef, mutton and veal, are not of the best kind. Few fish are
brought to market.

In 1787, it was computed that there was 1600 houses in this city, and 9600
white inhabitants, and 5400 negroes; and what evinces the healthiness of the
place, upwards of 200 of the white inhabitants were above 60 years of age. In
1791, there were 16,859 inhabitants, of whom 7684 were slaves.

Charleston was incorporated in 1783, and divided into 13 wards, which choose
as many wardens, from among whom the citizens elect an Intendant of the city.
The Intendant and wardens form the city council, who have power to make and
enforce bye laws for the regulation of the city.

BEAUFORT, on Port Royal Island, is a pleasant little town, of about 50 or 60
houses, and, 200 inhabitants, who are distinguished for their hospitality and
politeness. The courts which were formerly held here, are now held at
Coosawhatchie.

GEORGETOWN, the seat of justice in Georgetown district, stands, on a spot of
land near the junction of a number of rivers, which, when united in one broad
stream, by the name of Winyaw, fall into the ocean 12 miles below the town.

COLUMBIA, which has lately been made the seat of government, by the
legislature, stands, just below the junction of Saluda and Broad rivers, on the
Congaree. The public offices have, however, in some instances been divided, for
the accommodation of the inhabitants of the lower counties, and a branch of
each retained in Charleston.

CAMDEN, on the Wateree, N. W. of Santee Hills, 130 miles west of north from
Charleston, is regularly built, upon a good plan; but a small part of it is yet
executed.

PURYSBURGH is a hilly village, about 20 miles above Savannah, on the north
bank of the river of the same name. It was early settled by foreigners, with a
view to the culture of silk, which for a while they attended to with spirit.
The mulberry trees are yet standing, and some attention is still paid to the
making of silk. But the profits of the rice and indigo, soon diverted the
original planters from almost every other; pursuit. Besides these, are
Jacksonborough, Orangeburgh, Wynnsborough and Cambridge, which are all
inconsiderable villages of from 30 to 60 dwelling houses.

GENERAL FACE OF THE COUNTRY.] The whole state, to the distance of 80 miles
from the sea, is level, and almost without a stone. In this distance, by a
gradual ascent from the sea coast, the land rises about 190 feet. Here, if you
proceed in a W. N. W. course from Charleston, commences a curiously uneven
country. The traveller is constantly ascending or descending little sand hills,
which nature seems (...) have disunited in a frolic. If a pretty high sea were
suddenly arrested, and transformed into sand hills, in the very form the waves
^^isted at the moment of transformation, it would present they eye with just
such a view as is here to be seen. Some little herbage, and a few small pines
grow even on this soil. The inhabitants are few, and have but a scanty
subsistence on corn and sweet potatoes, which grow here tolerably well. This
curious country continues for 60 miles, till you arrive at a place called The
Ridge, 140 miles from Charleston. This (...) is a remarkable tract of high
ground, as you approach it from the sea, but level as you advance northwest
from its summit. It is a fine high, healthy belt of land, well watered, and of
a good soil, and extends from the Savannah to Broad river, in about 6 30 west
longitude from Philadelphia. Beyond this ridge, commences a country ^^tactly
resembling the northern states. Here hills and dales, with all their verdure
and variegated beauty, present themselves to the eye. Wheat fields, which are
rare in the low country, begin to grow common. Here Heaven has bestowed its
blessings with a most bounteous hand. The air is much more temperate and
healthful, than nearer to the sea. The hills are covered with valuable woods --
the valleys watered with beautiful rivers, and the fertility of the soil is
equal to every vegetable production. This, by way of distinction, is called the
upper country, where are different modes and different articles of cultivation;
where the manners of the people, and even their language, have a different
tone. The land still rises by a gradual ascent; each succeeding hill overlooks
that which immediately precedes it, till, having advanced (...) miles in a
northwest direction from Charleston, the elevation of the land above the sea
coast is found by mensuration to be 800 feet. Here commences a mountainous
country, which continues rising to the western terminating point of this state.

SOIL AND PRODUCTIONS.] The soil may be divided into four kinds; first, the
pine barren, which is valuable only for its timber. Interspersed among the pine
barren, are tracts of land free of timber, and every kind of growth but that of
grass. These tracts are called Savannah, constituting a second kind of soil,
good for grazing. The third kind is that of the swamps and low grounds on the
rivers, which is a mixture of black loam and fat clay, producing naturally
canes is great plenty, cypress, bays, loblolly pines, etc. In these swamps rice
is cultivated, which constitutes the staple commodity of the state. The high
lands, commonly known by the name of oak and hiccory lands, constitute the
fourth kind of soil. The natural growth is oak, hiccory, walnut, pine and
locust. On these lands, in the low country, are cultivated Indian corn
principally; and in the back country, besides these, they raise tobacco in
large quantities, wheat, rye, barley, oats, hemp, flax, cotton and silk. But
the nature of the soil more particularly described under this head in the
description of Georgia.


There is little fruit in this state, especially in the lower parts of it. They
have oranges, which are chiefly sour, and figs in plenty, a few li^^es and
lemons, pomegranates, pears and peaches; apples are scarce, (...) are imported
from the northern states, Melons, (especially the water melon) are raised here
in great perfection.

The river swamps, in which rice can be cultivated with any tolerable degree of
safety and success, do not extend higher up the rivers than the head of the
tides; and in estimating the value of this species of rice land, the height
which the tide rises is taken into consideration, those lying where it rises to
a proper pitch for overflowing the swamps being the most valuable. The best
inland swamps, which constitute a second species of rice land, are such as are
furnished with reserves of water. These reserves are formed by means of Tares
banks thrown up at the upper parts of the swamps, whence it is conveyed, when
needed, to the fields of rice.

At the distance of about 110 miles from the sea, the river swamps terminate,
and the high lands extend quite to the rivers, and form banks, in some places,
several hundred feet high from the surface of the water, and afford many
extensive and delightful views. These high banks are interwoven with layers of
leaves and different colored earth, and abound with quarries of free stone,
pebbles, flint, chrystals, iron ore in abundance, silver, lead, sulphur and
coarse diamonds.

The swamps above the head of the tide, are occasionally planted with corn,
cotton and indigo. The soil is very rich, yielding from 40 to 50 bushels of
corn an acre.

It is curious to observe the gradations from the sea coast to the upper
country, with respect to the produce, the mode of cultivation, and the
cultivators. On the islands upon the sea coast, and for 40 or 50 miles back
(and on the rivers much farther) the cultivators are all slaves. No while man,
to speak generally, ever thinks of settling a farm and improving it for himself
without negroes. If he has no negroes, he hires himself as overseer to some
rich planter, who has more than he can or will attend to, till he can purchase
for himself. The articles cultivated are corn and potatoes, which, with the
small rice, are food for the negroes; rice, indigo and cotton, for exportation.
The culture of this last article, is capable of being increased equal to almost
any demand. The soil was cultivated, till lately, almost wholly by manual
labor. The plough, till since the peace was scarcely used. Now, the plough and
harrow and other improvements are introduced into the rice swamps with great
success, and will no doubt become general. In the middle settlements, negroes
are not so numerous. The master attends personally to his own business. The
land is not properly situated for rice. It produces moderately good indigo
weed, and some tobacco is raised for exportation. The farmer is contented to
raise corn, potatoes, oats, rye, poultry, and a little wheat. -- In the upper
country, there are but sew negroes; generally speaking, the farmers have none,
and depend, like the inhabitants of the northern states, upon the labor of
themselves and families for subsistence; the plough is used almost wholly.
India corn in great quantities, wheat, rye, potatoes, andC. are raised for
food, and much tobacco and some wheat, cotton and indigo for exportation.

MODE OF CULTIVATING RICE.] Rice ground is prepared only by effectually
securing it from the water, except some higher parts of it, which are sometimes
dug up with a hoe, or mellowed by a plough or harrow. When the rice is young
the overflowing of the water does not prevent its growth. Those who have water
in reserve, commonly let it in upon their rice, after first going through with
the hoe, while it is young, though it is deemed best to keep out the grass
without this aid, by the hoe only. The water is commonly kept on the rice eight
or ten days after hoeing. When the ear is formed, the water is continued on
till it is ripe. It is hoed three or four times. When the grass is very thick,
a negroe cannot hoe more than one six^^ch of an acre in a day. From three pecks
to a bushel is sown an (...). It produces from 50 to 80 bushels of rough rice
an acre -- 120 (...) of rough rice have been produced on one acre; 20 bushels
of which make about 500 pounds, or eight and a quarter bushels clean (...) for
market. After it is threshed, it is winnowed, and then (...) in a mill,
constructed of two blocks in a simple manner -- then ^^owed by a fan
constructed for that purpose -- then beat in a mor^^ by hand, or now generally
by horse or water machines -- then sifted to separate the whole rice from that
which is broken and the flour. (...) whole rice is then barrelled in casks of
about 500 pounds, or eight (...) a quarter bushels. -- The small rice serves
for provisions, and the (...) for provender, the chaff for manure, and the
straw for fodder. The blade is green and fresh while the ear is ripe. The price
is (...) ^^4 to 10S6 a hundred -- dollars 4S8.

MANUFACTURES.] In the middle, and especially in the upper country, the people
are obliged to manufacture their own cotton and we^llen clothes, and most of
their husbandry tools; but in the lower country, the inhabitants, for these
articles, depend almost entirely on (...) merchants. Late accounts from the
interior parts of this state inform, that the inhabitants manufacture, entirely
in the family way, as much as they have occasion for; that cotton, hemp and
flax are plenty; that they have a considerable stock of good sheep; that (...)
exertions are made, and much done in the household way; that may have long been
in the habit of doing something in family manufactures, but within a few years
past great improvements have been made. The women do the weaving and leave the
men to attend to agriculture.

This state furnishes all the materials, and of the best kind, for his
building. The live oak, and the pitch and yellow pines, are of imperior
quality. Ships might be built here with more ease, and to much greater
advantage, than in the middle and eastern states. A (...) of seamen, is one
reason why this business is not more generally attended to.

So much attention is now paid to the manufacture of indigo, in this (...),
that it bids fair to rival that of the French. It is to be regret^^^, that it
is still the practice of the merchants concerned in the Car^^^ trade, to sell
at foreign markets, the Carolina indigo of the first p^^lity, as French.

CONSTITUTION.] The legislative authority is vested in a general assembly,
consisting of a senate and house of representatives. There are (...)
representatives, and 35 senators appointed among the several districts. The
representatives are chosen for two years, must be free white men, 21 years old,
and have been inhabitants of the state three years. If resident in the
district, they must have a freehold of 500 (...) of land, and ten negroes, or
real estate worth 150l. sterling, dept of debt; if nonresident, must have a
freehold in the district w^^th 500l. sterling, clear of debt. The senators are
chosen for four years, and divided into two classes, one class being chosen
every second year. They must be free white men, 30 years old, and have been
inhabitants five years. If resident in the district, they must have a freehold
worth 300l. sterling, clear of debt; if nonresident, a free hold worth 1000l.
sterling, clear of debt. Every free white man, 21 years old, having been an
inhabitant of the state two years, and been a freeholder of 50 acres of land,
or a town lot, six months, or having been resident in the district six months,
and paid a tax of (...) sterling has a right to vote for members of the
legislature. The general assembly is chosen on the second Monday of October,
and meets (...) the fourth Monday in November annually. Each house chooser its
own officers, judges of the qualifications of its members, and (...) negative
on the other. A majority of each makes a quorum from (...) to day, and compel
the attendance of members. They are protec^^^, in their persons and estates,
during the sessions, and ten days before and after; except in cases of treason,
felony, and breach of the pence. They are paid out of the public treasury, from
which no money (...) drawn but by the legislative authority. Revenue bills
originate in the lower house, but may be altered or rejected by the senate.
Army and navy contractors, and all officers excepting officers in the militia,
justices of the peace, and justices of the county courts which have no
salaries, are excluded from the general assembly. The clergy are excluded from
civil offices. The executive authority is vested in a governor, chosen for two
years, by both houses of assembly jointly; but he cannot be reelected till
after four years. He must be thirty years old, have been an inhabitant of the
state ten years, and have as estate in it worth 1500l. sterling, clear of debt.
He can hold no other office, except in the militia. A lieutenant governor is
chosen in the same manner, for the same time, and possessing the same
qualifications; and holds the office of governor in case of vacancy. The
governor is commander in chief of the military force; has power to remit fines
and forfeitures, and grant reprieves and pardons, except in cases of
impeachment; to require information of executive officers; to convene the
general assembly on extraordinary occasions, and to adjourn them to any time
not beyond the fourth Monday in November next ensuing, in case they cannot
agree on the time themselves. His must inform the general assembly of the
condition of the state; recommend such measures as he shall judge expedient;
and take care that the laws are faithfully executed in mercy. The legislature
has power to vest the judicial authority in such courts as it shall think
proper. The judges hold their commission during good behavior. Those of the
superior courts are elected by the joint ballot of both houses of assembly;
have a stated salary, and can hold no other office. All officers take an oath
of fidelity to their duty, and to the constitution of this state, and of the
United States; and, for malconduct, may be impeached by the house of
representatives, and tried by the senate. -- This constitution asserts the
supreme power of the people; liberty of conscience; trial by jury; and
subordination of the military to the civil power. It excludes ex post facto
laws; bills of attainder; excessive bail; and titles of nobility and hereditary
distinction.

The legislature has power, under certain regulations, to make amendments to
the constitution. And a convention may be called by vote of two thirds of both
branches of the whole representation.

This constitution was ratified June 3d, 1790.

LAWS.] The laws of this state have nothing in them of a particular nature,
excepting what arises from the permission of slavery. The evidence of a slave
cannot be taken against a white man; and the neither who kills his slave is not
punishable otherwise than by a pe^^^iary mulct, and 12 months imprisonment.

A committee was appointed, at the session of the legislature in 1792, to put
in train the business of revising and amending the negro act, or the their for
governing the slaves. The issue we hope will meliorate the ^^tition of the
slaves, and afford an evidence to the world of the en^^ened policy, and
increasing humanity, of the citizens of this state. (...) anticipate an issue
of this nature the rather, because a dispo^^^^ to soften the rigors of slavery
has of late been manifested, by drawing them fish, tobacco and summer clothing,
which formerly was not customary.

A ^aw, altering the mode of the descent of intestate estates, which (...)
descended according to the laws of England, was passed in 1792. According to
the present law, a more equal partition takes place and were conformable to a
republican government, and to the dictates of natural affection.

By a late regulation, the judges of the court, who before had a salary of
500l. each, and fees, have now 600l. and no fees. The chief justice has 800l.

STATE or LITERATURE.] Gentlemen of fortune, before the late (...), sent their
sons to Europe for education. During the war and since, they have generally
sent them to the middle and north^^^^ states. Those who have been at this
expense in educating their (...), have been but comparatively few in number, so
that the litera^^^ of the state is at a low ebb. Since the peace, however, it
has be^^^^ to flourish. There are several respectable academies in Charles^^^
-- one at Beaufort, on Port Royal island -- and several others in different
parts of the state. Three colleges have lately been incorporated by law -- one
at Charleston -- one at Winnsborough, in the district of Camden -- the other at
Cambridge, in the district of Ninety Six. The public and private donations for
the support of these three colleges, were originally intended to have been
appropriated jointly, for the erecting and supporting of one respectable
college. The division of these donations has frustrated this design. Part of
the (...) barracks in Charleston has been handsomely fitted up, and converted
into a college, and there are a number of students; but it does not yet merit a
more dignified name than that of a respectable academy. The Mount Sion college,
at Winnsborough, is supported by a respectable society of gentlemen, who have
long been incorporated. This institution flourishes and bids fair for
usefulness. The college at Cambridge is no more than a grammar school. That the
literature of this state might be put upon a respectable footing, nothing is
wanting but a spirit of enterprise among its wealthy inhabitants.

CHARITABLE AND OTHER SOCIETIES.] These are the South Carolina, Mount Sion,
Library and St. Cecillia Societies -- a society for the relief of the widows
and orphans of clergymen, a Medical society lately instituted in Charleston,
and a musical society. At Beaufort and on St. Helena are several charitable
societies, incorporated with funds to a considerable amount, designed
principally for the education of poor children, and which promise, at a future
day, to be of great public utility. What are called Jockey clubs, have
increased within a few years.

INDIANS.] The Catabaws are the only nation of Indians in this state. They have
but one town, called Catabaw, situated on Catah^^^ river, in latitude 34 49, on
the boundary line between North and South Carolinas, and contains about 450
inhabitants, of which th^^ 150 are fighting men.

It is worthy of remark, that this nation was long at war with the six nations,
into whose country they often penetrated, which it is said no other Indian
nation from the south or west ever did. The (...) Nations always considered
them as the bravest of their enemies, (...) they were surrounded by the
settlements of white people, whole neighborhood, with other concurrent cause,
have rendered them corrupt and nerveless.

RELIGION.] Since the revolution, by which all denomination were put on an
equal footing, there have been no disputes between different religious sects.
They all agree to differ.

The upper parts of this state are settled chiefly by Presbyterians Baptists
and Methodists. From the most probable calculations, it is supposed that the
religious denominations of this state, as to numbers may be ranked as follows:
Presbyterians, including the Congregations and Independent churches --
Episcopalians, Baptists, Methodists, etc.

CHARACTER.] There is no peculiarity in the manners of the inhabitants of this
state, except what arises from the mischievous influence of slavery; and in
this, indeed, they do not differ from the inhabitants of the other southern
states. Slavery, by exempting great numbers from the necessities of labor,
leads to luxury, dissipating and extravagance. The absolute authority, which is
exercised other their slaves, too much favors a haughty supercilious behavior
(...) disposition to obey the christian precept, 'Do to others as you would
that others should do unto you,' is not cherished by a daily exhib^^ion of many
made for one. The Carolinians sooner arrive at maturity, both in their bodies
and minds, than the natives of colder climates. They possess a natural
quickness and vivacity of genius, superior in the inhabitants of the north; but
too generally want that enterpti^^ and perseverance, which are necessary for
the highest seize in the arts and sciences. They have, indeed, few
motives to enterprise. Inhabiting a fertile country, which, by the labor of
the slaves, produces plentifully, and creates affluence -- in a climate which
favor indulgence, ease, and a disposition for convivial pleasures, they too
generally rest contented with barely knowledge enough to transact the common
affairs of life. There are not a few instances, however, in this state, in
which genius has been united with application, and the effects of their union
have been happily experienced, not only by this state, but by the United States.

The wealth produced by the labor of the slaves, furnishes their proprietors
with the means of hospitality; and no people in the world use these means with
more liberality. Many of the inhabitants spare as pains nor expense in giving
the highest polish of education to their children, by enabling them to travel,
and by other means unattainable by those who have but moderate fortunes.

The Carolinians are generally affable and easy in their manners, and polite
and attentive to strangers. The ladies want the bloom of the north, but have an
engaging softness and delicacy in their appearance and manners, and many of
them possess the polite and elegant accomplishments.

Munting is the most fashionable amusement in this state. At (...) the country
gentlemen are extremely expert; and with sur^^ting dexterity pursue their game
through the woods. Gaming of all kinds is more discountenanced among
fashionable people in this, (...) in any of the southern states. Twice a year,
statedly, a class of active gentlemen, in this and the neighboring states,
have their (...) races. Bets of terror fifteen hundred guineas have been
some^^^ said on these occasions.

There is no instance, perhaps, in which the richer class of people (...) more
on the rules of propriety than in the mode of conducting their funerals. That a
decent respect be paid to the dead, is the (...) dictate of the refined
humanity; but this is not done by sumptu^^^ expensive entertainments, splendid
decorations and pompous (...), which a misguided fashion has here introduced
and rende^d necessary. In Charleston and other parts of the state, no persons
(...) a funeral any more than a wedding, unless particularly invited. Wine,
punch and all kinds of liquors, tea, coffee, cake, etc. in pro^ection, are
handed round on these solemn occasions. In short, one would suppose that the
religious proverb of the wise man, 'It is between to go to the house of
mourning than to the house of feasting,' would be unintelligible and wholly
inapplicable here, as it would be (...) to distinguish the house of mourning
from the house of feasting.

MILITARY STRENGTH.] There are between 20,000 and 30,000 ^^^ting men in this
state. About 10 men are kept to guard Fort (...), on James island, at the
entrance of Charleston harbor, by (...) no vessel can pass, unless the' master
or mate make oath that there is no malignant distemper on board. The militia
laws, enacting (...) every freeman between 16 and 50 years of age shall be
prepared (...) war, have been but indifferently obeyed since the peace. An
un^sful degree of military spirit, however, seems lately to have arisen (...)
the citizens of Charleston. Noless than eight volunteer uniform de^^^nies have
lately formed in this city, besides a troop of horse, and the ancient battalion
of artillery.

PUBLIC REVENUE AND EXPENSES.] The public Revenue of this state is, nominally,
90,000l. sterling. But a great part of this is (...) not collected, or paid in
securities, which are much depre^^ted. The expenses of government are about
16,000l. sterling.

MUDE OF LEVYING TAXES.] The great bulk of the revenue of the state is raised
by a tax on lands and negroes. The lands, for the purpose of being taxed
according to their value, are divided into their grand divisions; the first
reaches from the sea coast to the ex^^^ of the flowing of the tides; the
second, from these points to the (...) of the rivers; and thence to the utmost
verge of the western settlement makes the third. These grand divisions, for the
sake of more ^^acty ascertaining the value of the lands, are subdivided into 21
(...) species. The most valuable of which is estimated at six (...), and the
least valuable at one shilling per acre. One per cent. on the value thus
estimated, is levied from all granted lands in the (...). The collection of
taxes is not annexed to the office of sheriff, but is committed to particular
gentlemen appointed for that purpose, who are allowed two and a half per cent.
in Charleston, and five per cent. in the other parts of the state, on all they
collect.

BANES.] Besides a branch of the national bank, a bank by the name of the South
Carolina bank, was established in 1792, in Charleston.

DAMAGE BY THE ^ATE WAR.] The damages which this states sustained in the late
war are thus estimated -- The three entire crops of 1779, 1780 and 1781, all of
which were used by the British -- The crop of 1782, taken by the Americans --
About 25,000 negroes -- Many thousands of pounds worth of plate, and household
furniture in abundance -- The villages of Georgetown and Camden burnt. -- The
loss to the citizens directly by the plunderings and devastations of the
British army -- and indirectly by American impressments, and by the
depreciation of the paper currency, together with the heavy d^bt of 1,200,000l.
sterling, incurred for the support of the war, in own aggregate view, make the
price of independence to South Carolina, exclusive of the blood of its
citizens, upwards of 3,000,000l. sterling.

COMMERCE.] The little attention that has been paid to manufactures, occasions
a vast consumption of foreign imported articles; but the quantities and value
of their exports generally leave a balance in favor of the state, except when
there are large importations of negroes.

The amount of exports from the port of Charleston, in the year, ending
November 1787, was then estimated, from authentic documents, at L.505,279:19:5
sterling money. The number of vessels cleared from the custom house the same
year, was 947, measuring 62,118 tons; 735 of these, measuring 41,531 tons, were
American; the others belonged to Great Britain, Spain, France, the United
Netherlands and Ireland.

The principal articles exported from this state, are rice, indigo, tobacco,
skins of various kinds, beef, pork, cotton, pitch, tar, rosin, turpentine,
myrtle wax, lumber, naval stores, cork, leather, pink (...), snake root,
ginseng, etc. In the most successful seasons, there have been as many as
140,000 barrels of rice, and 1,300,000 pounds of indigo, exported in a year.
From the 15th Dec. 1791, to September, 1798, 108,567 tierces of rice, averaging
550 lb. nett weight each, were exported from Charleston. In the year ending
September, 30th, 1791, exclusive of two quarters for which no returns were
made, the amount of exports from this state was 1,866,0^1 dollars.

PRACTICE OF LAW, COURTS, etc.] From the first settlement of this country in
1669, to the year 1769, a single court, called the Court of Common Pleas, was
though sufficient to transact the judicial business of the state. This court
was invariably held at Charleston, where all the records were kept, and all
civil business transacted. As the province increased, inconveniences arose, and
created uneafina^^ among the people.

To remedy these inconveniences an act was passed in 1769, by which the
province was divided into seven districts, which have been mentioned. The court
of common pleas (invested with the powers of the same cour in England) sat four
times a year is Charleston. By the abovementioned act, the judges of the court
of common pleas were empowered to fit as judges of the court of sessions,
invested with the powers of the court of king's bench, in England, in the
criminal jurisdiction. The act likewise directed the judges of the courts of
common pleas and sessions, in Charleston district, to divide, and two of the
judges to proceed on what is called the northern circuit, and the ^^her two on
the southern circuit, distributing justice in their progress. This was to be
done twice in the year. This mode of administering jus^^ ^^nti^^ed till 1785,
when, by the unanimous exertions of the two (...) districts, an act was passed,
establishing county courts in all the ^^^ties of the four districts of Camden,
Ninety Six, Cheraws, and ^^^geburgh. The county courts are empowered to sit
four times in (...). Before the establishment of county courts, the lawyers all
(...) at Charleston, under the immediate eye of government; and (...) Carolina
bar was as pure and genteel as any in the United States. (...) this
establishment, lawyers have flocked in from all quarters, ^^^s^ttled in
different parts of the country, and law suits have been ^^^plied beyond all
former knowledge.

^^^TORY.] The reformation in France occasioned a civil war be^^^ the
Protestant and Catholic parties in that kingdom. During (...) domestic troubles
Jasper de Coligni, a principal commander of the Protestant army, fitted out two
ships, and sent them with a colony America, under the command of Jean Ribaud,
for the purpose of spring a retreat from prosecution. Ribaud landed at the
mouth of (...) now called Albemarle river, in North Carolina. This colony,
(...), enduring incredible hardships, were extirpated by the Spaniards. I^
further attempts were made to plant a colony in this quarter, till the ^eign of
Charles II. of England. Mention is, however, made of (...) Robert Health's
having obtained a grant of Carolina, from Charles (...) in 1630; but no
settlements were made in consequence of this grant.

In 1662, after the restoration of Charles II. Edward, earl of Clar^^^, and
seven others, obtained a grant of all lands lying between the (...) and 36th
degrees of north latitude.

A second charter, given two years after, enlarged their boundaries, and
comprehended all that province, territory, etc. extending east^^^ as far as the
north end of Currituck inlet, upon a straight line ^^derly to Wyonoke creek,
which lies within or about latitude 36 (...) end so west, in a direct line as
far as the South Sea; and south and westward as far as 29 north latitude,
inclusive, and so west in ^^rect lines to the South Sea. Various causes have
rendered it expedient to divide this extensive territory: In 1728, North
Carolina was erected into a separate province. In 1732, (...) II. granted to
certain trustees therein mentioned, and to their succes^^^, a charter of all
that part of Carolina, lying between the most northern stream of Savannah
river; along the sea coast, to the most southern stream of (...) river (...)
westward, from the heads of these rivers, respectively in (...) ^i^es to the
South Sea, inclusively, with all islands within 20 leagues of the same.

In 1762, the governor of South Carolina, conceiving that the lands lying (...)
of Alatamaha river belonged to South Carolina, granted several tracts of (...)
(...). Upon complaint being made by the government of Georgia, of this supposed
encroachment on their territory, his majesty issued a proclamation in 1768,
annexing to Georgia all the lands lying between the rivers. Alatamaha and St.
Mary's, but did not by this annul the Carolina grants. The bounda^^ line,
dividing the two provinces (now states) of South Carolina and Georgia, had long
been the subject of controversy; the former claiming the lands lying between
the North Carolina line, and a line to run due west from the month of (...) and
Keowee rivers; consequently that that spot was the head of ^a^^^ river; the
latter contended that the source of Keowee river, was to be considered as the
head of Savannah river.

For the purpose of settling this controversy, commissioners were (...) in
April, 1787, by the contending states -- vested with full powers to (...) the
controverted boundary, which they fixed as follows:

'The most northern branch o^ stream of the river Savannah, from the (...)
mouth of such stream, to the fork or confluence of the rivers now called Tugulo
and Keowee, and from thence the most northern branch or stream of (...) said
river Tugulo, till it intersects the northern boundary line of South Carolina,
if the said branch of Tugulo extends so far north, reserving all the (...)
lands in the said rivers Savannah and Tugulo to Georgia -- but if the (...)
branch of stream of Tugulo does not extend to the north boundary line (...)
South Carolina, then a west line to the Missisippi to be drawn from the head
spring or source of the said branch of Tugulo river, which extends to the
highest northern latitude, shall forever hereafter form the fer^arnting limit
and boundary between the states of South Carolina and Georgia.'

It is supposed, in the map of this state, that the most northern branch of
(...) Tugulo river, intersects the northern boundary of South Carolina, which
(...) be tact, brings the state to a point in latitude 35, and about and 35'
west longitude from Philadelphia, but it is not yet ascertained whether this
^ill he the case. If it shall be found that the most northern source of the
Tugulo does (...) extend to latitude 35, then South Carolina, or the United
States by her nes^signment, will claim a strip of country extending from the
meridian western the Missisippi, in ^adth from the most northern source of the
Tugulo to latitude 35, unless the treaties subsisting between the United States
and the Creek ^^dians shall interfere and bound them as they do Georgia.

It ought to be here noted, that South Carolina, in the forementioned ^^^caty
with Georgia, gave up a claim which it had till when retained, to the lands
south of the Alatamaha, as a return to Georgia for agreeing that the boundary
between the two states should be the most northern branch of the Tugulo,
instead of the Keowee, as had been originally insisted on by the state of
Georgia. This confirms to the state of South Carolina a very rich tract of
country, which had been reserved by that state for the officers and soldiers of
the law army.


Of this large territory, the king constituted these eight persons absolute
Lords Proprietors -- investing (...) with all necessary powers to settle and
govern the same.

Nothing was successfully done toward the settlement of this country till
1609. At this time, the proprietors, in virtue of their powers, engaged the
famous Mr. Lock to frame for them a constitution and body of laws. This
constitution, consisting of 120 articles, was aristocratical, and though
ingenious in theory, could never be successfully reduced to practice.

Three classes of nobility were to be established, (viz.) barons, enssrq^^^^
and landgraves. The first to possess twelve -- the second twenty (...) -- the
third forty eight thousand acres of land, which was to be (...) enable.

In 1669, William Sail, being appointed first governor of (...) country,
embarked with a colony, and settled on the neck of (...) where Charleston now
stands.

During the continuance of the proprietary government, a period (...) 50 years
(reckoning from 1669 to 1719) the colony was involved of perpetual quarrels.
Oftentimes they were harassed by the (...) -- sometimes infested with p^rates
-- frequently invaded by the (...) and Spanish fleets -- constantly uneasy
under their injudi^^ous government -- and quarrelling with their governors. --
But their most (...) dissensions were respecting religion. The Episcopalians
being (...) numerous than the dissenters, attempted to exclude the latter (...)
(...) seat in the legislature. These attempts were so far succeeded, as that
the church of England, by a majority of votes, was established by law. This
illiberal act threw the colony into the utmost confusion, and was followed by a
train of evil consequences, which proved to be the principal cause of the
revolution which soon followed. Notwithstanding the act establishing the church
of England was repealed, tranquillity was not restored to the colony. A change
of government was generally desired by the colonists. They found that they were
not sufficiently protected by their proprietory constitution, and effected a
revolution about the year 1719, and the government became regal.

In 1728, the proprietors accepted 22,500l. sterling from the crown, for the
property and jurisdiction, except Lord Granville, who reserved his eighth of
the property, which has never yet been formally ^^en up. At this time the
constitution was new modelled, and the ^^ritory, limited by the original
charter, was divided into North and South Carolinas.

From this period the colony began to flourish. It was protected by a
government formed on the plan of the English constitution. Under the fostering
care of the mother country, its growth was astonishingly rapid. Between the
years 1763 and 1775, the number of inhabitants was more than doubled. No one
indulged a wish for a ^^ange in their political constitution, till the
memorable stamp act, (...) in 1765.

From this period till 1775, various attempts were made by Great Britain to tax
her colonies without consent. These attempts were ^^^riably opposed. The
congress, who met at Philadelphia this year, ^^nimously approved the
opposition, and on the 19th of April war ^^^^enced.

During the vigorous contest for independence, this state was a great sufferer.
For three years it was the seat of the war. It feels and la^^nts the loss of
many respectable citizens. Since the peace, it has been ^^^ging from that
melancholy confusion and poverty, in which it was generally involved by the
devastations of a relentless enemy. The inhabitants are fast multiplying by
immigrations from other states -- the agricultural interests of the state are
reviving -- commerce is flourishing -- economy is becoming more fashionable --
and science begins to (...) her salutary influences among the citizens. And
under the op^^ion of the present government, this state, from her natural,
commercial and agricultural advantages, and the abilities of her leading
characters, promises to become one of the richest in the union.

See Ramsay's Hist. Revol. in S. Carolina, and Hist. of Carolina and Georgia,
anonymous, supposed to be by Hewet^.

GEORGIA.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 600 Miles. between 5 and 16 W. Lon. Breadth 250 Miles. 31 and 35 N.
Lat.

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED east, by the Atlantic ocean; south, by East and West
Floridas; West, by the river Missisippi: north and northeast, by South
Carolina, and by lands ceded to the United States by South Carolina.

CIVIL DIVISIONS AND POPULATION.] That part of the state which has been laid
out in counties, is divided into three districts, which are subdivided into 11
counties, which, with the number of inhabitants, are as follows: Districts.
Counties. Chapter Towns. Lower district. 21,566 Inhabitant. Camden, St. Patrick's,
Glyn, Brunswick, Liberty, Sunbury, Chatham, SAVANNAH, Essingham. Ebenezer.
Upper district. 37,946 inhabi. Wilkes, Washington, Franklin, Green.
Greensburgh. Middle district. 25,336 Inhabitants. Richmond, AUGUSTA, Burke,
Wayne^bo. Louisville, Washington. Golphinton.

Total number of inhabitants in the state, 82,548, of whom 29,264 are slaves.

Before the revolution, Georgia, like all the southern States, was divided into
parishes; but this mode of division is now abolished, and that of counties has
succeeded in its room.

FACE OF THE COUNTRY.] The eastern part of the state, between the mountains and
the ocean, and the rivers Savannah and St. Mary's, a tract of country more than
120 miles from north to south, and 40 or 50 east and west, is entirely level,
without a hill or stone. At the distance of about 40 or 50 miles from the sea
board, or salt marsh, the lands begin to be more or less uneven. The ridges
gradually rise one above another into hills, and the hills successively
increasing in height, till they finally terminate in mountains. That vast chain
of mountains which commences with the Katts Kill, near Hudson's river, in the
state of New York, known by the names of the Allegany and Apalachian mountains,
terminate in this state, about 60 miles south of its northern boundary. -- From
the foot of this mountain, spreads a wide extended plain, of the richest soil,
and in a latitude and climate well adapted to the cultivation of most of the
East India productions.

CLIMATE, DISEASES, etc.] In some parts of this state, at particular seasons of
the year, the climate cannot be esteemed salubrious. In the low country near
the rice swamps, bilious complaints and fevers of various kinds are pretty
universal during the months of July, August and September, which, for this
reason, are called the sickly months.

The disorders peculiar to this climate originate partly from the badness of
the water, which in the low country, except in and about Savannah and some
other places, where good springs are found, is generally brackish, and partly
from the noxious putrid vapors which are exhaled from the stagnant waters in
the rice swamps. Besides, the long continuance of warm weather produces a
general relaxation of the nervous system, and as a great proportion of the
inhabitants have no necessary labor to call them to exercise, a large share of
indolence is the natural consequence; and indolence, especially amongst a
luxurious people, is ever the parent of disease. The immense quantities of
spirituous liquors, which are used to correct the brackishness of the water,
form a species of intemperance which too often proves minous to the
constitution. Parents of infirm, sickly habits, often, in more senses than one,
have children of their own likeness. A considerable part of the diseases of the
present inhabitants may therefore be considered as hereditary.

Before the sickly season commences, many of the rich planters of this state
remove with their families to the sea islands, or some ele^ated healthy
situation, where they reside three or four months, for the benefit of the fresh
air. In the winter and spring, pleurisies, pe^^^umonies and other inflammatory
disorders, occasioned by sudden and violent colds, are considerably common and
frequently fatal. Consumptions, epilepsies, cancers, palsies and apoplexies,
are not so common among the inhabitants of the southern as northern climates.

The winters in Georgia are very mild and pleasant. Snow is seldom or never
seen. Vegetation is not frequently prevented by severe frosts. Cattle subsist
tolerably well through the winter, without any other food than what they obtain
in the woods and savannas, and are fatter in that season than in any other. In
the hilly country, which begins about 50 and in some places 100 miles from the
sea, the air is pure and salubrious, and the water plenty and good. From June
to September, the mercury in Farenheit's thermometer commonly flucta^tes from
76 to 90 -- in winter, from 40 to 60. -- The most prevailing winds, are S. W.
and E -- in winter, N. W. The east wind is warmest in winter and coolest in
summer. The south wind, in summer and fall particularly, is damp, sultry,
unelastic, and of course unhealthy.

In the southeast parts of this state, which lie within a few degrees of the
torrid zone, the atmosphere is kept in motion by impressions from the trade
wines. This serves to purify the air, and render if fit for respiration; so
that it is found to have a very advantageous effect (...) persons of
consumptive habits.

RIVERS.] Savannah river divides this state from South Carolina. Its course is
nearly from northwest to southeast. It is formed principally of two branches,
by the names of Tugulo and Keowee, which (...) from the mountains, and unite 15
miles N. W. of the northern boundary of Wilkes county. It is navigable for
large vessels up to Savannah, and for boats of 100 feet keel as far as Augusta.
After rising a fall just above this place, it is passable for boats to the
month of Tugulo river. After it takes the name Savannah, at the confluence of
the Tugulo and Keowee, it receives a number of tributary streams, from the
Georgia side, the principal of which is Broad river, which rises in the county
of Franklin, and runs S. E. through part of Wilkes county, and mingles with
Savannah at the town of Petersburgh, and might, with a trifling expense, be
made boatable 25 or 30 miles through the best settlement in Wilkes county.
Tybee bar, at the entrance of Savannah river, in lat. 31 57, has 16 feet water
at half tide.

Ogeechee river, about 18 miles south of the Savannah, is a smaller river, and
nearly parallel with it in its course.

Alatamaha, Pronounced O^tamawhaw.
about 60 miles south of Savannah river, has its source in the Cherokee
mountains, near the head of Tugulo, the great west branch of Savannah, and,
before it leaves the mountains, is joined and augmented by innumerable
rivulets; thence it descends through the hilly country, with all its collateral
branches, and winds rapidly amongst the hills two hundred and fifty miles, and
then enters the flat, plain country, by the name of the Oakmulge; thence
meandering 150 miles, it is joined on the east side by the Ocone, which
likewise heads in the lower ridges of the mountains. After this confluence,
having now gained a vast acquisition of waters, it assumes the name of
Alatamahs, when it becomes a large majestic river, flowing with gentle windings
through a vast plain forest, near 100 miles, and enters the Atlantic by several
mouths. The north channel, or entrance, glides by the height, of Darien, on the
east bank, about ten miles above the bar, and running from thence with several
turnings, enters the ocean between S^pello and Wolf islands. The south channel,
which is esteemed the largest and deepest, after its separation from the north,
descends gently, winding by M^lntosh's and Broughton islands; and lastly, by
the west coast of St. Simon's island, enters the ocean, through St. Simon's
Sound, between the south end of the island of that name and the north end of
Jekyl island. On the west banks of the south channel, ten or twelve miles above
its month, and nearly opposite Darien, are to be seen the remains of an ancient
fort, or fortification; it is now a regular tetragon terrace, about four feet
high, with bastions at each angle; the area may contain about an acre of
ground, but the fosse which surrounded it is nearly filled up. There are large
live oaks, pines, and other trees, growing upon it, and in the old fields
adjoining. It is supposed to have been the work of the French or Spaniards. A
large swamp lies betwixt it and the river, and a considerable creek runs close
by the works, and enters the river through the swamp, a small distance above
Broughton island. About 70 or 80 miles above the confluence of the Oakmulge and
Ocone, the trading path from Augusta to the Creek nation, crosses these fine
rivers, which are there forty miles apart. On the east banks of the Oakmulge,
this treading road runs nearly two miles through ancient Indian fields, which
are called the Oakmulge fields; they are the rich low lands of the river. On
the heights of these low grounds are yet visible monuments or traces of an
ancient town, such as artificial mounts or terraces, squares and banks,
encircling considerable areas. Their old fields and planning land extend up and
down the river, fifteen or twenty miles from this site. And, if we are to give
credit to the account the Creeks (...) of themselves, this place is remarkable
for being the first town (...) settlement, when they sat down (as they term it)
or established themselves, after their emigration from the west, beyond the
Missisippi, (...) original native country.

Besides these, there is Turtle river, Little Sitilla or St. Ille, Great
Sitilla, Crooked river, and St. Mary's, which forms a part of the (...)
boundary of the United States. St. Mary's river has its (...) from a vast lake,
or rather marsh, called Ouaquaphenogaw, (...) described, and flows through a
vast plain and pine forest, about 150 miles to the ocean, with which it
communicates between the points of Amelia and Talbert's islands, lat. 30 44,
and is naviga^^^ vessels of considerable burden for 90 miles. Its banks afford
(...) quantities of fine timber, suited to the West India market. (...) this
river, every four or five miles, are bluffs convenient for (...) to haul to and
load.

The rivers in the middle and western parts of this state are, Apal^^cols,
which is formed by the Chatahouchee and Flint rivers, Mo^^^ pascagoula and
Pearl rivers. All these running southwardly, (...) into the Gulf of Mexico. The
forementioned rivers abound (...) a great variety of fish, among which are the
mullet, whiting, (...), cat, rock, trout, drum, bass, brim, white, shad and
stur^^^. The bays and lagoons are stored with oysters, and other shell (...)
crabs, shrimps, etc. The clams, in particular, are large, their (...) white,
tender and delicate. The shark and great black stingray, ^^^tiable cannibals,
and very troublesome to the fishermen.

(...) AND SWAMPS.] The lake, or rather marsh, called Ouaqua^^gaw, lies between
Flint and Oakmulge rivers, and is nearly 300 (...) in circumference. In wet
seasons it appears like an inland sea, (...) several large islands of rich
land; one of which the present (...) of Creek Indians represent as the most
blissful spot on (...). They say it is inhabited by a peculiar ^ace of Indians,
whose (...) are incomparably beautiful. They tell you also that this ter^^^
paradise has been seen by some enterprising hunters, when in (...) of their
game, who being lost in inextricable swamps and bogs, (...) on the point of
perishing, were unexpectedly relieved by a com^^^ of beautiful women, whom they
call daughters of the Sun, who (...) gave them such provisions as they had with
them, consisting ^^uit and corn cakes, and then enjoined them to fly for safety
to (...) own country, because their husbands were fierce men and cruel ^^^gers.
They further say that these hunters had a view of their ^^^ents, situated on
the elevated banks of an island, in a beautiful (...); but that in their
endeavors to approach it, they were involved ^^petual labyrinths, and, like
enchanted land, still as they imag^^^ they had just gained it, it seemed to fly
before them. They de^^^ined at length to quite the delusive pursuit, and with
much difficul^^sted a retreat. When they reported their adventures to their
countrymen, the young warriors were inflamed with an irresistible (...) to
invade and conquer so charming a country, but all their at^^^ had hitherto
proved fruitless, they never being able again to (...) spot. They tell another
story concerning this sequestered (...), which seems not improbable, which is,
that the inhabitants the posterity of a fugitive remnant of the ancient
Yamases, who (...) massacre after a bloody and decisive battle between them and
the Creeks, (who, it is certain, conquered and nearly exterminated that once
powerful people) and here found an asylum, remote and secure from the fury of
their proud conquerors.

The rivers St. Mary, Sitilla or St. Ille, and the beautiful Little St. Juan,
which empties into the Bay of Appalachi at St. Mark's, are said to flow from
this lake. Bartram's Travels.


About 16 miles from the mouth of Broad river, on its south side, is what is
called the Goosepond, a tract of about 180 acres, covered with living water
about two feet deep. It discharges into the river, and is fed by two springs.

CHIEF TOWNS.] The present seat of government in this state is AUGUSTA. It is
situated on the southwest bank of Savannah river, which is here about 500 yards
wide, about 144 miles from the sea, and 127 northwest of Savannah. The town,
which in 1787 contained 200 houses, is on a fine large plain, at the foot of
the first falls in the river, which in a dry season are 4 to 5 feet in height;
and as it enjoys the best soil, and the advantage of a central situation
between the upper and lower counties, is rising fast into importance. In 1782
there were but 3 or 4 houses in the town.

SAVANNAH, the former capital of Georgia, stands on a high sandy bluff, on the
south side of the river of the same name, and 17 miles from its mouth. The town
is regularly built in the form of a parallellogram, and, including its suburbs,
contained, in 1787, 227 dwelling houses, one Episcopal church, a Presbyterian
church, a Synagog^^ and Court house. The number of its inhabitants, exclusive
of the blacks, amounted at that time to about 830, 70 of whom were Jews.

In Savannah, and within a circumference of about 10 miles from it, there were,
in the summer of 1787, about 2300 inhabitants. Of these 192 were above 50 years
of age, and all in good health. The ages of a lady and her six children, then
living in the town, amounted to 385 years. This computation, which was actually
made, serves to show that Savannah is not really so unhealthy as has been
commonly represented.

SUNBURY is a sea port town, favored with a safe and very convenient harbor.
Several small islands intervene, and partly obstruct a direct view of the
ocean; and, interlocking with each other, render the passage out to sea
winding, but not difficult. It is a very pleasant, healthy town, and is the
resort of the planters from the adjacent places of Midway and Newport, during
the sickly months. It was burnt by the British in the late war, but has since
been rebuilt. An academy was established here in 1788, which, under an able
instructor, has proved a very useful institution.

BRUNSWICK, in Glynn county, latitude 31 10, is situated at the mouth of Turtle
river, at which place this river empties itself into St. Simon's sound.
Brunswick has a safe and capacious harbor; and the bar, at the entrance into
it, has water deep enough for the largest vessel that swims. The town is
regularly laid out, but not yet built. From its advantageous situation, and
from the fertility of the back country, it promises to be hereafter one of the
first trading towns in Georgia.

FREDERICA, on the island of St. Simon, is nearly in latitude 31 15. It is the
first town that was built in Georgia, and was founded by General Oglethorpe.
The fortress was regular and beautiful, constructed chiefly with brick, and is
now in ruins. The town contains but few houses, which stand on an eminence, if
considered with regard to the marshes before it, upon a branch of Alatamaha
river, which washes the west side of this agreeable island, and forms a bay
before the town, affording a safe and secure harbor for vessels of the largest
burden, which may lie along the wharf.

WASHINGTON, the chief town in the county of Wilkes, is situated in latitude 33
22, about 50 miles northwest of Augusta. It had, in 1788, a court house, gaol,
34 dwelling houses, and an academy, whose funds amounted to about 800l.
sterling, and the number of students to between 60 and 70.

The town of LOUISVILLE, which is designed as the future seat of government in
this state, has been laid out on the bank of Ogeechee river, about 70 miles
from its mouth, but is not yet built.

SOIL, PRODUCTIONS, etc.] The soil and its fertility are various, according to
situation and different improvement. The islands on the sea board, in their
natural state, are covered with a plentiful growth of pine, oak, and hiccory,
live oak, (an uncommonly hard and a very valuable wood,) and some red cedar.
The soil is a mixture of sand and black mould, making what is commonly called a
gray soil. A considerable part of it, particularly that whereon grow the oak,
hiccory, and live oak, is very rich, and yields, on cultivation, good crops of
indigo, cotton, corn and potatoes. These islands are surrounded by navigable
creeks, between which and the main land is a large extent of salt marsh,
fronting the whole state, not less, on an average, than 4 or 5 miles in
breadth, intersected with creeks in various directions, admitting, through the
whole, an inland navigation, between the islands and main land, from the
northeast to the southeast corners of the state. The east sides of these
islands are, for the most part, clean, hard, sandy beaches, exposed to the wash
of the ocean. Between these islands are the entrances of the rivers from the
interior country, winding through the low salt marshes, and delivering their
waters into the sounds, which form capacious harbors of from three to eight
miles over, and which communicate with each other by parallel salt creeks. The
principal islands are Skidaway, Wassaw, Ossah^w, St. Catharine's, Sapelo,
Frederica, Jekyl, Cumberland and Amelia.

The soil of the main land, adjoining the marshes and creeks, is nearly of the
same quality with that of the islands; except that which borders on those
rivers and creeks which stretch far back into the country. On these,
immediately after you leave the salts, begin the valuable rice swamps, which,
on cultivation, afford the present principal staple of commerce. The most of
the rice lands lie on rivers, which, as far as the tide flows, are called tide
lands; or on creeks and particular branches of water, flowing in some deeper or
lower parts of the lands, which are called inland swamps, and extend back in
the country from 15 to 25 miles, beyond which very little rice is planted,
though it will grow exceedingly well, as experiment has proved, 120 miles back
from the sea. The intermediate lands, between these creeks and rivers, are of
an inferior quality, being of a gray soil, covered chiefly with pine, and a
sort of wild grass and small reads, which afford a large range of feeding
ground for stock both summer and winter. Here and there are interspersed oak
and hiccory ridges, which are of a better soil, and produce good crops of corn
and indigo, but these are very little elevated above the circumjacent lands.
The lands adjoining the rivers, and, for an hundred miles in a direct line from
the sea, continue a breadth from 2 to 3 or 4 miles, and wherever, in that
distance, you find a piece of high land that extends to the bank of the river
on one side, you may expect to find the lower or swamp ground proportionably
wide on the opposite side of the river. This seems to be an invariable rule
till you come to that part where the river cuts and mountains.

The soil between the rivers, after you leave the sea board and the edge of the
swamps, at the distance of 20 or 30 miles, changes from a gray to a red color,
on which grows plenty of oak and hiccory, with a considerable intermixture of
pine. In some places it is gravelly, but fertile, and so continues for a number
of miles, gradually deepening the reddish color of the earth, till it changes
into what is called the Mulatto soil, consisting of a black mould and red
earth. The composition is darker or lighter according as there is a larger or
smaller portion of the black or red earth in it. The mulatto lands are
generally strong, and yield large crops of wheat, tobacco, corn, etc. To this
kind of land succeeds by turns a soil nearly black and very rich, on which grow
large quantities of black walnut, mulberry, etc. This succession of different
soils continues uniform and regular, though there are some large veins of all
the different soils intermixed; and what is more remarkable, this succession,
in the order mentioned, stretches across this state nearly parallel with the
sea coast, and extends through the several states, nearly in the same
direction, to the banks of Hudson's river. In this state are produced, by
culture, rice, indigo, cotton, silk, (though not in large quantities) Indian
corn, potatoes, oranges, figs, pomegranates, etc. Rice, at present, is the
staple commodity; and as a small proportion only of the rice ground is under
cultivation, the quantity raised in future must be much greater than at
present. But the rapid increase of the inhabitants, chiefly by immigrations,
whose attention is turned to the raising of tobacco, and the vast extent of
land, with a richness of soil suited to the culture of that plant, renders it
probable, that tobacco will shortly become the staple in this state. Cotton was
formerly planted only by the poorer classes of people, and that only for family
use. They planted of two kinds, the annual and the West Indian; the former is
low and planted every year. The balls of this are very large, and the phlox
long, strong and perfectly white. The latter is a tall perennial plant, the
stalk somewhat shrubby, several of which rise up from the root for several
years successively, the stems of the former year being killed by the winter
frosts. The balls of West India cotton are not quite as large as the other, but
the phlox or wool is long, extremely fine, silky and white. A plantation of
this kind will last several years, with moderate labor and care. The culture
of cotton is now much more attended to -- several indigo planters have
converted their plantations into cotton fields. The tobacco lands are equally
well adapted to wheat, which may hereafter make an important article of
commerce.

On the dry plains, grow large crops of sweet potatoes, which are found so
afford a wholesome nourishment, and from which is made, by distillation, a kind
of whisky, tolerably good, but inferior to that (...) of rye. It is by properly
macerating and washing this root that a sediment or starch is made, which has
obtained the name of (...) and answers all the purposes of the India sago.

Most of the tropical fruits would flourish in this state with proper (...).
The rice plant has been transplanted, and also the tea plant, of which such
immense quantities are consumed in the United States, was introduced into
Georgia, by Mr. Samuel Bowen, about the year 17^^ from India. The seed was
disseminated, and the plant now (...), without cultivation, in most of the
fenced lots in Savannah.

From many considerations we, may perhaps venture to predict, that the south
western part of the state, and the parts of East and West Florida, which lie
adjoining, will, in some future time, become the ^^^yard of America.

REMARKABLE SPRING.] In the county of Wilkes, within a mile and a half of the
town of Washington, is a medicinal spring, which rises from a hollow tree, four
or five feet in length. The inside of the tree is covered with a coat of
matter, an inch thick, and the leaves around the spring are incrusted with a
substances as white as snow. It is said to be a sovereign remedy for the
scurvy, scrofulous disorders, consumptions, gouts, and every other disease
arising from honors in the blood. -- A person, who had a severe rheumatism in
his right arm, having, in the space of ten minutes, drank two quarts of the
(...), experienced a momentary chill, and was then thrown into a perspiration,
which, in a few hours, left him entirely free from pain, and in perfect health.

This spring, situated in a fine healthy part of the state, in the
neighborhood of Washington, where are excellent accommodations, will no doubt
prove a pleasant and salutary place of resort for invalids from the maritime
and unhealthy parts of this and the neighboring states.

CURIOSITIES.] One of the greatest curiosities in this state is the bank of
oyster shells in the vicinity of Augusta, 90 miles from the sea, already
described page 165.

COMMERCE, MANUFACTURES AND AGRICULTURE.} The chief articles of export are
rice, tobacco, (of which the county of Wilkes only exported in 1788 about 3000
hogsheads) indigo, sago, lumber of various kinds, naval stores, leather, deer
skins, snake root, myrtle and bees wax, corn, and live stock. The planters and
farmers raise large stocks of cattle, from 100 to 1500 head, and some more.

The value, in sterling money, of the exports of Georgia, for eight^^ years,
from 1755 to 1772, was as follows: L 1755, 15,744 1756, 16,776 1757, 15,649
1758, 8,613 1759, 12,694 1760, 20,852 1761, 15,870 1762, 27,021 1763, 47,551
1764, 55,025 1765, 73,426 1766, 81,228 1767, 67,092 1768, 91,284 1769, 86,485
1770, 99,383 1771, 106,337 1772, 121,677

Statement of the number of vessels cleared out of Georgia, from 1755 to 1772.

Square rigged. Sloops. tons. 1755, 9 43 1,899 1756, 7 35 1,799 1757, 11 33
1,559 1758, 4 17 665 1759, 13 35 1,981 1760, 7 30 1,457 1761, 9 36 1,604 1762,
22 35 2,784 1763, 34 58 4,761 1764, 36 79 5,586 1765, 54 94 7,685 1766, 68 86
9,974 1767, 62 92 8,465 1768, 77 109 10,406 1769, 87 94 9,276 1770, 73 113
10,514 1771, 64 121 9,553 1772, 84 133 11,246

The amount of exports in the year ending September 30th, 17^^, was 491,472
dollars. In return for the enumerated exports are imported West India goods,
teas, wines, various articles of clothing, any dry goods of all kinds -- From
the northern states, cheese, fish, potatoes, apples, cider and shoes. The
imports and exports of this state are principally to and from Savannah, which
has a fine harbor, and is a place where the principal commercial business of
the state is transacted. The trade with the Indians in furs and skins was very
considerable before the war, but has since been interrupted by the wars in
which they have been involved. The manufactures of this state have hitherto
been very inconsiderable, if we except indigo, silk and sago. The manner in
which the indigo is cultivated and manufactured is as follows. -- The ground,
which must be a strong rich soil, is thrown into beds of 7 or 8 feet wide,
after having been made very mellow, and is then raked till it is fully
pulverized. The seed is then sown, in April, in rows at such a distance as
conveniently to admit of hoeing between them. In July the first crop is fit to
cut, being commonly two and a half feet high. It is then thrown into vats,
constructed for the purpose, and steeped about 30 hours; after which the liquor
is drawn off into other vats, where it is beat, as they call it, by which means
it is thrown into much such a state of agitation as cream is by churning. After
this process, lime water is put into the liquor, which causes the particles of
indigo to settle at the bottom. The liquor is then drawn off, and the sediment,
which is the indigo, is taken out and spread on cloths, and partly dried; it is
then put into boxes and pressed, and while it is yet soft, cut into square
pieces, which are thrown into the sun to dry, and then put up in casks for the
market. They have commonly three cuttings a season. A middling crop for 30
acres in 1300 pounds.

The culture of silk and the manufacture of sago are at present but little
attended to. The people in the lower part of this state manufacture none of
their own clothing for themselves or their negroes. For almost every articles
of their wearing apparel, as well as for their husbandry tools, they depend on
their merchants, who import them from Great Britain and the northern states. In
the upper parts of the country, however, the inhabitants manufacture the chief
part of their clothing from cotton, hemp and flax.

CHARACTER AND MANNERS.] No general character will apply to the inhabitants at
large. Collected from different parts of the world, as interest, necessity or
inclination led them, their character (...) manners must of course partake of
all the varieties which distinguish the several states and kingdoms from whence
they came. There (...) so little uniformity, that it is difficult to trace any
governing principles among them. An aversion to labor is too predominant,
(...) in part to the relaxing heat of the climate, and partly to the (...) of
necessity to excite industry. An open and friendly hospitality particularly to
strangers, is an ornamental characteristic of a great (...) of this people.

Their diversions are various. With some, dancing is a favorite (...). Others
take a fancied pleasure at the gaming table, which, however, frequently
terminates in the ruin of their happiness, (...), and constitutions. In the
upper counties, horse racing and (...) sighting prevail, two cruel diversions
imported from Virginia, and the Carolinas, from whence those who practice them
principally ^^^grated. But the most rational and universal amusement is
hunt^^^^ and for this Georgia is particularly well calculated, as the woods
(...) with plenty of deer, racoons, rabits, wild turkies, and other (...); at
the same time the woods are so thin and free from obstructions, that you may
generally ride half speed in chase without danger. (...) this amusement
pleasure and profit are blended. The exercise, more than any other, contributes
to health, fits for activity in business and expertness in war; the game also
affords them a palatable food, and the skins a profitable article of commerce.

RELIGION.] The inhabitants of this state, who profess the chris^^^^, religion,
are of the Presbyterian, Episcopalian, Baptist and ^^^thodist denominations.
They have but a few regular ministers among them.

CONSTITUTION.] The present constitution of this state was armed and
established in the year 1789, and is nearly upon the plan (...) the
constitution of the United States.

STATE OF LITERATURE.] The literature of this state, which is yet (...) its
infancy, is commencing on a plan which affords the most flat^^^ing prospects.
It seems to have been the design of the legislature of this state, as far as
possible, to unite their literary concerns, and provide for them in common,
that the whole might feel the benefit and no part be neglected or left a prey
to party rage, private prejudices and contentions, and consequent ignorance,
their inseparable attendant. For this purpose, the literature of this state,
like its policy, appears to be considered as one object, and in the same manner
subject to common and general regulations for the good of the whole. The
charter containing their present system of education, was passed in the year
1785. A college, with ample and liberal endowments, is instituted in
Louisville, a high and healthy part of the country, near the center of the
state. There is also provision made for the institution of an academy, in each
county in the state, to be supported from the same funds, and considered as
parts and member of the same institution, under the general superintendence and
^^^ction of a president and board of trustees, appointed, for their literacy
acomplishments, from the different parts of the state invested with the
customary powers of corporations. The institution (...) composed, is
denominated 'The University of Georgia.'

That this body of literati, to whom is entrusted the direction of the general
literature of the state, may not be so detached and independent, as not to
possess the confidence of the state; and in order to secure the attention and
patronage of the principal officers of government, the governor and council,
the speaker of the house of assembly, and the chief justice of the state, are
associated with the board of trustees, in some of the great and more solemn
duties of their offices, such as making the laws, appointing the president,
settling the property, and instituting academies. Thus associated, they are
denominated 'The Senate of the University,' and are to hold a stated, annual
meeting, at which the governor of the state presides.

The senate appoint a board of commissioners in each county, for the particular
management and direction of the academy, and the other schools in each county,
who are to receive their instructions from, and are accountable to the senate.
The rector of each academy is an officer of the university, to be appointed by
the president, with the advice of the trustees, and commissioned under the
public seal, and is to attend with the other officers at the annual meeting of
the senate, to deliberate on the general interests of literature, and to
determine on the course of instruction for the year, throughout the university.
The president has the general charge and oversight of the whole, and is from
time to time to visit them, to examine into their order and performances.

The funds for the support of their institution are principally in lands,
amounting in the whole to about fifty thousand acres, a great part of which is
of the best quality, and at present very valuable. There are also nearly six
thousand pounds sterling in bonds, houses and town lots in the town of Augusta.
Other public property to the amount of 1000l. in each county, has been set
apart for the purposes of building and furnishing their respective academies.

INDIANS.] The Muskogee or Creek Indians inhabit the middle parts of the state,
and are the most numerous tribe of Indians of any within the limits of the
United States. Their whole number some years since was 17,280, of which 5,860
were fighting men. They are composed of various tribes, who, after bloody wars,
thought it good policy to unite and support themselves against the Chactaws,
etc. They consist of the Appalachies, Alibamas, Abecas, Cawittaws, Coosas,
Conshacks, Coosactees, Chacsihoomas, Natchez, Oconies, Oakmulgies, Okohoy^,
Pakanas, Taensas, Talepoosas, Weetumkas, and some others. Their union has
rendered them victorious over the Chactaws, and formidable to all the nations
around them. They are a well made, expert, hardy, sagacious, politic people,
extremely jealous of their rights, and averse to parting with their lands. They
have abundance of tame cattle and swine, turkeys, ducks and other poultry; they
cultivate tobacco, rice, Indian corn, potatoes, beans, peace, cabbage, melons,
and have plenty of peaches, plumps, grapes, strawberries, and other fruits.
They are faithful friends, but inveterate enemies -- hospitable to strangers,
and honest and fair in their dealings. No nation has a more contemptible
opinion of the white men's faith in general than these people, yet they place
great confidence in the United States, and wish to agree with them upon a
permanent boundary, over which the southern states shall not trespass.

The country which they claim is bounded northward by about the 34th degree of
latitude; and extends from the Tombeckbee, or Mobile river, to the Atlantic
ocean, though they have ceded a part of this tract on the sea coast, by
different treaties, to the state of Georgia. Their principal towns lie in
latitude 32 and longitude 11 20 from Philadelphia. They are settled in a hilly
but not mountainous country. The soil is fruitful in a high degree, and well
watered, abounding in creeks and rivulets, from whence they are called the
Creek Indians. General M'Gillivray, the celebrated Chief of the Creeks, is a
half blooded Indian, his mother being a woman of high rank in the Creek nation.
He was so highly esteemed among them, that they in a formal manner elected him
their sovereign, and vested him with considerable powers. He has several
sisters married to l^^nding men among the Creeks. This gentleman would gladly
have remained a (...) of the Untied States; but having served under the British
during the late war, his property in Georgia, which was considerable, was
confiscated. This circumstance induced him to retire among his friends the
Creeks, since which he has been in active and zealous partizan in their
interests and politics.


The Chactaws, or flat heads, inhabit a very fine and extensive tract of hilly
country, with large and fertile plains intervening, between the Alabama and
Missisippi rivers, in the western part of this state. This nation had, not many
years ago, 43 towns and villages, in three divisions, containing 12,123 souls,
of which 4,041 were fighting men.

The Chicasaws are settled on the head branches of the Tombeckbee, Mobile and
Yazoo rivers, in the northwest corner of the state. Their country is an
extensive plain, tolerably well watered from springs, and of a pretty good
soil. They have seven towns, the central one of which is in latitude 34 23, and
longitude 14 30 west. The number of souls in this nations have been formerly
reckoned at 1725, of which 575 were fighting men.

HISTORY.] The settlement of a colony between the rivers Savannah and
Alatamaha, was meditated in England in 1732, for the accommodation of poor
people in Great Britain and Ireland, and for the further security of Carolina.
Private compassion and public spirit conspired to promote the benevolent
design. -- Humane and opulent men suggested a plan of transporting a number of
indigent families, to this part of America, free of expense. For this purpose
they applied to the King, George the II. and obtained from him letters pat^^,
bearing date June 9th, 1732, for legally carrying into execution what they had
generously projected. They called the new province GEORGIA, in honor of the
King, who encouraged the plan. A corporation, consisting of 21 persons, was
constituted by the name of the trustees, for settling and establishing the
colony of Georgia; which was separated from Carolina by the river Savannah. --
The trustees having first set an example themselves, by largely contributing to
the scheme, undertook also to solicit benefactions from others, and to apply
the money toward clothing, arming, purchasing utensils for cultivation, and
transporting such poor people as should consent to go over and begin a
settlement. They did not confine their charita^^ views to the subjects of
Britain alone, but wisely opened a door, for the indigent and oppressed
protestants of other nations. To prevent a misapplication of the money, it was
deposited in the bank of England.

About the middle of July, 1732, the trustees for Georgia, held their first
meeting, and chose Lord Percival president of the corporation -- and ordered a
common seal to be made. -- In November following, 116 settlers embarked for
Georgia, to be conveyed thither free of expense, furnished with every thing
requisite for building and for cultivating the soil. James Oglethorpe, one of
the trustees, and an active promoter of the settlement, embarked as the head
and director of these settlers. They arrived at Charleston early in the next
year, where they met a friendly reception from the governor and council. Mr.
Oglethorpe, accompanied by William Bull, shortly after his arrival, visited
Georgia, and after reconnoitering the country, marked the spot on which
Savannah now stands, as the fittest to begin a settlement. Here they
accordingly began and built a small fort, and a number of small huts for their
defense and accommodation. -- Such of the settlers as were able to bear arms,
were embodied, and well appointed with officers, arms and ammunition. -- A
treaty of friendship was concluded between the settlers and their neighbors,
and the Creek Indians, and every thing wore the aspect of peace and future
prosperity.

In the mean time the trustees of Georgia had been employed in framing a plan
of settlement, and establishing such public regulations as they judged most
proper for answering the great end of the corporation. In the general plan they
considered each inhabitant both as a planter and a soldier, who must be
provided with arms and ammunition for defense, as well as with tools and
utensils for cultivation. As the strength of the province was the object in
view, they agreed to establish such tenures for holding lands in it as they
judged most favorable for a military establishment. Each tract of land granted
was considered as a military fief, for which the possessor was to appear in
arms, and take the field, when called upon for the public defense. To prevent
large tracts from falling, in process of time, to one person, they agreed to
grant their lands in tail male in preference to tail general. On the
termination of the estate in tail male, the lands were to revert to the trust;
and such lands thus reverting were to be granted again to such persons, as the
common council of the trust should judge most advantageous for the colony; only
the trustees in such a case were to pay special regard to the daughters of such
persons as had made improvements on their lots, especially when not already
provided for by marriage. The wives of such persons as should survive them,
were to be, during their lives, entitled to the mansion house, and one half of
the lands improved by their husbands. No man was to be permitted to depart the
province without license. If any of the lands granted by the trustees shall not
be cultivated, cleared, and fenced round about with a worm fence, or pales, six
feet high, within eighteen years from the date of the grant, such part was to
revert to the trust, and the grant with respect to it to be void. All
forfeitures for nonresidences, high treasons, felonies, etc. were to the
trustees for the use and benefit of the colony. The use of negroes was to be
absolutely prohibited, and also the importation of rum. None of the colonists
were to be permitted to trade with the Indians, but such as should obtain a
special license for that purpose.

These were some of the fundamental regulations established by the trustees of
Georgia, and perhaps the imagination could scarcely have framed a system of
rules worse adapted to the circumstances and situation of the poor settlers,
and of more pernicious consequence to the prosperity of the province. Yet,
although the trustees were greatly mistaken, with respect to the plan of
settlement, it must be acknowledged their views were generous. As the people
sent out by them were the poor and unfortunate, who were to be provided with
necessaries at their public store, they received their lands upon condition of
cultivation, and (by their personal residence) of defense. Silk and wine being
the chief articles intended to be raised, they judged negroes were not
requisite for these purposes. As the colony was designed to be a barrier to
South Carolina, against the Spanish settlement at Augustine, they imagined that
negroes would rather weaken then strengthen it, and that such poor colonists
would run in debt, and ruin themselves by purchasing them. Rum was judged
pernicious to health, and ruinous to the infant settlement. A free trade with
Indians was a thing that might have a tendency to involve the people in
quarrels and troubles with the powerful savages, and expose them to danger and
destruction. Such were probably the motives which induced those humane and
generous persons to impose such foolish and ridiculous restrictions on their
colony. For by granting their small estates in tail male, they drove the
settlers from Georgia, who soon found that abundance of lands could be obtained
in America upon a larger scale, and on much better terms. By the prohibition of
negroes, they rendered it impracticable in such a climate to make any
impression on the thick forests, Europeans being utterly unqualified for the
heavy task. By their discharging a trade with the West Indies, they deprived
the colonists of an excellent and convenient market for their lumber, of which
they had abundance on their lands. The trustees like other distant legislators,
who framed their and mistakes; and however good their design, their rules were
stand improper and impracticable. The Carolinians plainly perceived that they
would prove insurmountable obstacles to the progress and prosperity of the
colony, and therefore from motives of pity began to invite the poor Georgians
to come over Savannah river, and little in Carolina, being convinced that they
could never succeed under such impolitic and oppressive restrictions.

Besides the large sums of money which they trustees had expended for the
settlement of Georgia, the parliament had also granted during the two last
years 36,000l. toward carrying into execution the humane purpose of the
corporation. But after the representation and memorial from the legislature of
Carolina reached Britain, the nation considered Georgia to be of the utmost
importance to the British settlements in America, and began to make still more
vigorous efforts for in speedy population. The first embarkations of poor
people from England, being collected from towns and cities, were found equally
ille and useless members of society abroad as they had been at home. An hardy
and bold race of men, inured to rural labor and ^^^tigue, they were persuaded
would be much better adapted both for cultivation and defense. To find men
possessed of these qualifications, they turned their eyes to Germany and the
Highlands of Scotland, and resolved to send over a number of Scotch and German
laborers to their infant province. When they published their terms at
Inverness, an hundred and thirty Highlanders immediately accepted them, and
were transported to Georgia. A township on the river Alatamaha, which was
considered as the boundary between the British and Spanish territories, was
allotted for the Highlanders, in which dangerous situation they settled, and
built a town, which they called New Inverness. About the same time an hundred
and seventy Germans embarked with James Oglethorpe, and were fixed in another
quarter; so that, in the space of three years, Georgia received above four
hundred British subjects, and about an hundred and seventy foreigners.
Afterward, several adventurers, both from Scotland and Germany, followed their
countrymen, and added further strength to the province, and the trustees
flattered themselves with the hope of soon seeing it in a promising condition.

Their hopes, however, were vain. Their injudicious regulations and
restrictions -- the wars in which they were involved with the Spaniards and
Indians -- and the frequent insurrections among themselves, threw the colony
into a state of confusion and wretchedness too grant for human nature to
endure. Their oppressed situation was represented to the trustees by repeated
complaints; till at length, finding that the province languished under their
care, and weary with the complaints of the people, they, in the year 1752,
sur^endered their charter to the king, and it was made a royal government. In
consequence of which, his majesty appointed John Reynolds, an officer of the
nave, governor of the province, and a legislature, similar to that of the other
royal governments in America, was established in it. Great had been the expense
which the mother country had already incurred, besides private benefactions,
for supporting this colony; and small had been the returns yet made by it. The
vestiges of cultivation were scarcely perceptible in the forests, and in
England all commerce with it was neglected and despised. At this time the whole
annual exports of Georgia did not amount to 10 000l. sterling. Though the
people were now favored with the same liberties and privileges enjoyed by
their neighbors under the royal care, yet several years more elapsed before
the value of the lands in Georgia was known, and that spirit of industry broke
out in it, which afterward diffused its happy influence over the country.

In the year 1740, the Rev. George Whitefield founded and orphan house academy
in Georgia, about 12 miles from Savannah. -- For the support of this, in his
Itinerations, he collected large sums of money of all denominations of
christians, both in England and America. A part of this money was expended in
erecting proper buildings to accommodate the students, and a part in supporting
them. In 1768, it was proposed that the orphan house should be erected into a
college. Whereupon Mr. Whitefield applied to the crown for a charter. In
consequence of some dispute, the affair of a charter was given up, and Mr.
Whitefield made his assignment of the orphan house in trust to the Countess of
Huntington. Mr. Whitefield died at Newbury Port, in New England, September
^^th, 1770, in the 56th year of his age and was buried under the Presbyterian
church in that place.

Soon after his death, a charter was granted to his institutions in Georgia,
and the Rev. Mr. Percy was appointed president of the college. Mr. Percy
accordingly came over to execute his office, but unfortunately, on the 30th of
May, 1775, the orphan house building caught fire, and was entirely consumed,
except the two wings, which are still remaining. The American war soon after
came on, and put every thing into confusion, and the funds have ever since lain
in an unproductive state. It is probable that the college estate, by the
consent of the countess of Huntington, may hereafter be so incorporated with
the university of Georgia, as to subserve the original and pious purposes of
its founder.

From the time Georgia became a royal government, in 1752, till the peace of
Paris, in 1763, she struggled under many difficulties, arising from the want of
credit from friends, and the frequent molestations of enemies. The good effects
of the peace were sensibly felt in the province of Georgia. From this time it
began to flourish, under the fatherly care of Governor Wright. To form a
judgment of the rapid growth of the colony, we need only attend to its exports,
in the foregoing table.

During the late war, Georgia was overrun by the British troops, and the
inhabitants were obliged to flee into the neighboring states for safety. The
sufferings and losses of her citizens were as great, in proportion to their
numbers and wealth, as in any of the states. Since the peace, the progress of
the population of this state has been rapid. Its growth in improvement and
population, has been checked by the hostile irruptions of the Creek Indians,
which have been frequent, and very distressing to the frontier inhabitants.
Treaties have been (...), and a cessation of hostilities agreed to between the
parties; and it is expected that a permanent peace will soon be concluded and
^^^^quillity restored to the state. See Hewett's Hist. S. Carolina and Georgia.

Spanish Dominions.
EAST AND WEST FLORIDA.
Length 600 Miles. between 25 and 31 N. Lat. Breadth 130 Miles. 5 and 17 W.
Lon. from Philadelphia.

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED north, by Georgia; east, by the Atlantic ocean; south, by
the Gulf of Mexico* west, by the Missisippi; lying in the form of an L.

RIVERS, LAKES AND SPRINGS.] Among the rivers that fall into (...) Atlantic,
St. John's and Indian rivers are the principal. St. (...) river rises in or
near a large swamp, in the heart of East Flor^^^ and pursues a northern course,
in a broad, navigable stream, which in several places spreads into broad bays
or lakes. Lake (...), which is only a dilatation of the river, is a beautiful
piece of (...), generally about 15 miles broad, and from 15 to 20 feet deep. It
is ornamented with several charming islands, one of which is a (...) orange
grove, interspersed with magnolias and palm trees^^^ Long Lake, which is two
miles long and four wide, which communicates with St. John's river by a small
creek, is a vast fountain of warm or rather hot mineral water, issuing from a
high bank on the river. It boils up with great force, forming immediately a
vast circular basin, capacious enough for several shallops to ride in, and runs
with rapidity into the river, three or four hundred yards distance. The water
is perfectly clear; and the prodigious number and variety of fish in it, though
many feet deep, appear as plainly as though lying on a table before your eyes.
The water has a disagreeable taste, and smells like bilge water. This river
enters into the Atlantic, north of St. Augustine.

Indian river rises a short distance from the sea coast, and runs from north to
south, forming a kind of inland passage for many miles along the coast.

Seguana, Apalachicola, Chatahatchi, Escambia, Mobile, Pascagoula and Pearl
rivers, all rise in Georgia, and run southerly into the Gulf of Mexico.

CLIMATE.] Very little different from that of Georgia.

SOIL AND PRODUCTIONS.] There are, in this country, a great variety of soils.
-- The eastern part of it, near and about St. Augustine, is far the most
unfruitful; yet even here two crops of Indian corn a year are produced. The
banks of the rivers which water the Floridas, and the parts contiguous, are of
a superior quality, and well adapted to the culture of rice and corn, while the
more interior country, which is high and pleasant, abounds with wood of almost
every kind; particularly white and red oak, live oak, laurel magnolia, pine
hiccory, cypress, red and white cedar. The live oaks, though not tall, contain
a prodigious quantity of timber. The trunk is generally from 12 to 20 feet in
circumference, and rises 10 or 12 feet from the earth, and then branches into 4
or 5 great limbs, which grow in nearly a horizontal direction* forming a gentle
curve. "I have stepped," says Bartram, Travels, page 85.
"above 50 paces, on a straight line, from the trunk of one of these trees to
the extremity of the limbs." They are ever green, and the wood almost
incorruptible. They bear a great quantity of small acorns, which is agreeable
food, when roasted, and from which the Indians extract a sweet oil, which they
use in cooking homminy and rice.

The laurel magnolia is the most beautiful among the trees of the forest, and
is usually 100 feet high, though some are much higher. The trunk is perfectly
erect, rising in the form of a beautiful column, and supporting a head like an
obtuse cone. The flowers are on the extremities of the branches -- are large,
white, and expanded like a rose, and are the largest and most complete of any
yet known; when fully expanded* they are from 6 to 9 inches diameter, and have
a most delicious fragrance. The cypress is the largest of the American trees.
"I have seen trunks of these trees," says Bartram, "that would measure 8, 10
and 12 feet in diameter, for 40 and 50 feet straight shaft." The trunks make
excellent shingles, boards, and other timber; and, when hollowed, make durable
and convenient canoes. "When the planters fell these mighty trees, they raise a
stage round them, as high as to reach above the buttresses; on this stage 8 or
10 negroes ascend with their axes, and fall to work round its trunk."

The intervals between the hilly part of this country are extremely rich, and
produce spontaneously the fruits and vegetables that are common to Georgia and
the Carolinas. But this country is rendered val^^ble in a peculiar manner, by
the extensive ranges for cattle.

CHIEF TOWNS.] ST. AUGUSTINE, the capital of East Florida, is (...) on the sea
coast, latitude 29 45 -- is of an oblong figure, and intersected by four
streets, which cut each other at right angles. The town is fortified with
bastions, and enclosed with a ditch. It is likewise defended by a castle,
called Fort St. John, which is well appointed as to ordnance. The north and
south breakers, at the entrance of the harbor, form two channels, whose bars
have eight feet water.

The principal town in West Florida is PENSACOLA, latitude 30 22. It lies along
the beach, and, like St. Augustine, is of an oblong form. The water approach to
the town, except for small vessels, is obstructed by a low and sandy shore. The
bay, however, on which the town lands, forms a very commodious harbor, and
vessels may ride here secure from every wind. The exports from this town,
consisting of (...), logwood, dying stuff, and silver dollars, amounted, while
in the possession of the British, to 63,000l. annually; the average value of
^^ports, for 3 years, from Great Britain, was 97,000l.

HISTORY.] The Floridas have experienced the vicissitudes of (...), and
frequently changed masters, belonging alternately to the French and Spaniards.
West Florida, as far east as Perdido river, was owned and occupied by the
French; the remainder, and all East Florida by the Spaniards, previous to their
being ceded to the English (...) the peace of 1763. The English divided this
country into East and West Florida. They were ceded by Spain to the English at
the peace of 1763. During the last war they were reduced by the arms of his
Catholic majesty, and guaranteed to the crown of Spain by (...) definitive
treaty of 1783.

LOUISIANA.
BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED by the Missisippi east; by the Gulf of Mexico south; by
New Mexico ^^st; and runs indefinitely north. Under the French government
Louisiana included both sides of the Missisippi, from its mouth to the ^^mo^s,
and back from the river, east and west indefinitely.

RIVERS.] It is intersected by a number of fine rivers, among which are St.
Francis, which empties into the Missisippi, at Kappas (...) Fort, navigable
about 250 or three hundred miles; its course is nearly parallel with the
Missisippi, and from 20 to 30 miles distant (...) it. The Natchitoches, which
empties into the Missisippi above (...) Coupee, and the Adays or Mexicano
river, emptying into the (...) of Mexico, and the river Rouge, on which, it is
well known, (...) (...) rich silver mines as any in Mexico. This is supposed to
be one principal reason, why the exclusive navigation of the Missisippi has
(...) so much insisted on by Spain.

CAPITAL.] NEW ORLEANS. It stands on the east side of the Missisippi, 105 miles
from its mouth, in latitude 30 2 north. In the ^^^ning of the last year it
contained about 1100 houses, seven eighths of which were consumed by fire, in
the space of five hours, on the 19th of March, 1788. It is now fast rebuilding.
Its advantages for trade are very great. Situated on a noble river, in a
fertile and healthy country, within a week's sail of Mexico, by sea, and as
near to the British, French and Spanish West India islands, with a moral
certainty of its becoming the general receptacle for the produce of that
extensive and valuable country, on the Missisippi and Ohio, these circumstances
are sufficient to ensure its future growth and commercial importance.

RELIGION, GOVERNMENT, etc.] The greater part of the white inhabitants are
Roman Catholics. They are governed by a Viceroy from Spain, and the number of
inhabitants is unknown.

CLIMATE, SOIL AND PRODUCE.] Louisiana is agreeably situated between the
extremes of heat and cold. Its climate varies as it extends toward the north.
The southern parts, lying within the reach of the refreshing breezes from the
sea, are not scorched like those under the same latitudes in Africa; and its
northern regions are colder than those of Europe under the same parallels, with
a wholesome serene air. To judge of the produce to be expected from the soil of
Louisiana, let us turn our eyes to Egypt, Arabia Felix, Persia, India, China
and Japan, all lying in corresponding latitudes. Of these, China alone has a
tolerable government; and yet it must be acknowledged they all are, or have
been, famous for their riches and fertility. From the favourableness of the
climate, two annual crops of Indian corn may be produced; and the soil, with
little cultivation, would furnish grain of every kind in the greatest
abundance. Their timber is as fine as any in the world, and the quantities of
live oak, ash, mulberry, walnut, cherry, cypress and cedar, are astonishing.
The neighborhood of the Missisippi, besides, furnishes the richest fruits in
great variety; the soil is particularly adapted for hemp, flax and tobacco; and
indigo is at this time a staple commodity, which commonly yields the planter
three or four cuttings a year. In a word, whatever is rich and rare in the most
desirable climates in Europe, seems to be the spontaneous production of this
delightful country. The Missisippi and the neighboring lakes, furnish in great
plenty several forts of fish, particularly perch, pike, sturgeon and eels.

In the northern part of Louisiana, 45 miles below the mouth of the Ohio river,
on the west bank of the Missisippi, settlement i^ commencing, conducted by
Colonel Morgan of New Jersey, under the patronage of the Spanish king. The spot
on which the city in proposed to be built is called New Madrid, after the
capital of Spain, and is in north latitude 36 30.

The limits of the new city of Madrid, are to extend four miles south, and two
miles west from the river; so as to cross a beautiful, living* deep lake, of
the purest spring water one hundred yards wide, and several miles in length,
emptying itself, by a constant rapid narrow stream, through the center of the
city. The banks of this lake, which is called St. Ann^s, are high, beautiful,
and pleasant; the water deep, clear, and sweet; the bottom a clear sand, free
from woods, shrubs, or other vegetables, and well stored with fish. On each
side of this delightful lake, streets are to be laid out, 100 feet wide, and a
road to be continued round it, of the same breadth; and the streets are
directed to be preserved forever, for the health and pleasure of the citizens.
A street 120 feet wide, on the banks of the Missisippi, is laid out; and the
trees are directed to be preserved for the same purpose. Twelve acres, in a
central part of the city, are to be reserved in like manner, to be ornamented,
regulated, and improved by the magistracy of the city for public walks; and 40
half acre lots for other public uses; and one lot of twelve acres for the
King's use.

New Madrid, from its local situation and adventitious privileges, is in
prospect of being the great emporium of the western country, unless the free
navigation of the Missisippi should be opened to the United States. And even
should this desired event take place, which probably will not without a rupture
with Spain, this must be a place of great trade. For here will naturally center
the immense quantities of produce that will be borne down the Illinois, the
Missisippi, the Ohio, and their various branches; and if the carriers can find
as good a market for their cargoes here, as at New Orleans or the West Indies,
and can procure the articles they desire, they will gladly save themselves the
difficulties and dangers of navigating the long Missisippi.

The country in the vicinity of this intended city is represented as excellent,
in many parts beyond description. The natural growth consists of mulberry,
locust, sassafras, walnut, hiccory, oak, ash, dog wood, etc. with one or more
grape vines running up almost every (...); the grapes yield, from experiment,
good red wine in plenty, and with little labor. In some of the low grounds
grow large cypress trees. The country is interspersed with prairies and now and
then a (...) patch of 100, and some of 1000 acres. These prairies have (...)
trees on them, but are fertile in grass, flowering plants, strawberries, and,
when cultivated produce, good crops of wheat, barley, Indian corn, flax, hemp
and tobacco, and are easily tilled. The climate is said to be favorable for
health and to the culture of fruits of various kinds, and particularly for
garden vegetables. Iron and lead (...) and salt springs, it is asserted, are
found in such plenty as to afford and abundant supply of these necessary
articles. The banks of the Missisippi, for many leagues in extent, commencing
about 20 miles above the mouth of Ohio, are a continued chain of lime stone. A
(...) tract of high, rich, level land, S. W. W. and N. W. of New Madrid, about
25 miles wide, extends quite to the river St. Francis.

It has been supposed by some that all settlers who go beyond the Missisippi,
will be forever lost to the United States. There is, I believe, little danger
of this, provided they are not provoked to withdraw their friendship. The
emigrants will be made up of the citizens of the United States. They will carry
along with them their man^^^ and customs, their habits of government, religion
and education; and as they are to be indulged with religious freedom, and with
the privilege of making their own laws, and of conducting education upon their
own plans, these American habits will undoubtedly be cherished. If so they will
be Americans in fact, though nominally the subjects of Spain.

It is true Spain will draw a revenue from them, but in return they will enjoy
peculiar commercial advantages, the benefit of which will be experienced by the
United States, and perhaps be an ample compensation for the loss of so many
citizens as may migrate thither. In (...), this settlement, if conducted with
judgment and prudence, may be mutually serviceable both to Spain and the United
States. It may prevent jealousies -- lessen national prejudices -- promote
religious toleration -- preserve harmony, and be a medium of trade reciprocally
advantageous.

Besides, it is well known that empire has been traveling from east to west.
Probably her last and broadest seat will be America. Here the sciences and the
arts of civilized life are to receive their highest improvements. Here civil
and religious liberty are to flourish, unchecked by the cruel hand of civil or
ecclesiastical tyranny. Here genius, aided by all the improvements of former
ages, is to be exerted in humanizing mankind, in expanding and enriching their
minds with religious and philosophical knowledge, and in planning and executing
a form of government, which shall involve all the excellencies of former
governments, with as few of their defects as is consistent with the
imperfection of human affairs, and which shall be calculated to protect and
unite, in a manner consistent with the natural rights of mankind, the largest
empire that ever existed. Elevated with these prospects, which are not merely
the visions of fancy, we cannot but anticipate the period, as not (...)
distant, when the American Empire will comprehend millions of souls west of the
Missisippi. Judging upon probable grounds, the Missisippi was never designed as
the western boundary of the American empire. The God of nature never intended
that some of the best part of his earth should be inhabited by the subjects of
a monarch 4000 miles from them. And may we not venture to predict, that, when
the rights of mankind shall be more fully known, (and the knowledge of them is
fast increasing both in Europe and America) the power of European potentates
will be confined to Europe, and their present. American dominions become, like
the United States, free, sovereign and independent empires.

It seems to depend on a timely adoption of a wise and liberal policy on the
part of Spain, whether or not there shall be a speedy revolution in her
American colonies. It is asserted by the best informed on the subject, that
there are not a hundred Spanish families in all Louisiana and West Florida; the
bulk of the inhabitants are French people, who are inimical to the Spaniards,
and emigrants from the United States, and a few English, Scots, Dutch and
Irish. This was the case in 1791; and as all emigrations to this country have
since been, and will probably in future be from the United States, and these
emigrations are numerous, the time will soon come, when the Anglo Americans in
this country will far exceed the number of all other nations.

The wretched and wicked policy of New Orleans, unless changed, will hasten a
revolution in the Spanish colonies. So long as the governor can dictate laws
and dispense with them at his pleasure, and create monopolies in trade for his
own and his favourites' advantage, as is now the case, there can be no
stability in the commerce of this place. The exclusive right, even of supplying
the market with fresh beef, pork, veal and mutton is monopolized. No farmer or
planter is allowed to kill his own beef, swine, calf or sheep, and send it to
market; he must sell it to the King's butcher, as he is called, at the price he
is pleased to give; and this man retails it out at a certain price agreed upon
by the governor, in just such pieces as he thinks proper, through a window or
grate. Ask for a roasting piece, and he will give you a shin or brisket of
beef; point to the piece you want, and he will tell you it is engaged to your
superior. From similar conduct, turkies now sell for four or five dollars a
piece, which, under the French government, were in abundance for half a dollar.
The monopol^^ of flour is, if possible, on still a worse footing for the
inhabitant -- (...) the tobacco inspection yet more discouraging to the
planter. The governor, or the crown, as it is called, must have an undefined
advantage in every thing. Hence all are ripe for a revolution the moment one
shall offer with prospect of being supported, whether it shall come from the
United States, England, France, or internally from the inhabitants.

It is said to be the fixed resolution of the British ministry, to seize on New
Orleans, in the first instance, in case of a rupture with Spain, (...) a
necessary prelude to an attack on the Spanish possessions in the West Indies
and on the main -- It has been their policy uniformly, and orders have been
given accordingly at different times. For this purpose every bend of the river,
every bay and harbor on the coast, have been surveyed and founded with the
utmost exactness, and all of them are better known to the British than to the
Spaniards themselves.

Whilst the United States were engaged in the revolution war against England,
the Spaniards attacked and possessed themselves of all the English posts and
settlements on the Missisippi, from the Iberville up to the Yazoos river,
including the Natchez country; and by virtue of this conquest are now peopling
and governing an extent three degrees north of the United States' south
boundary, claiming the exclusive navigation of the other. This alone will
probably be deemed sufficient cause for the United States to unite with any
other power against Spain, the first opportunity, as both of right, they
conceive, belong to them by treaty. It is asserted that the Kentucky country
alone, could, in one week, raise a sufficient force to conquer all the Spanish
possessions on the Missisippi; whilst one thousand men would be equal to defend
the whole country of New Orleans and Louisiana from any enemy approaching it by
sea. The greater (...) hostile fleet entering the Missisippi, the greater and
more certain would be their destruction if opposed by men of knowledge and
resolution. The following extract of a letter from a gentleman at New Orleans,
dated September, 1790, contains much useful information, in confirmation of the
above.

When I left you and my other friends in Baltimore, last year, I promised to
write to you by every opportunity, and to communicate to you every information
which I could derive from my excursion to the Ohio, down that beautiful stream,
during my stay at Kentucky and the western posts, my visit to the Illinois and
the different settlements on the Missisippi, from thence downward to New
Orleans.

As I have devoted more than twelve months in making this tour, with the
determination to judge for myself, and give you and my other friends
information to be depended upon, regarding the climate, soil, natural
productions, population, and other advantages and disadvantages, which you may
depend on finding in the country I have passed through, I cannot, within the
narrow bounds of this letter, comply with my intention, and your wish, but I
must beg of you to rest satisfied with what follows:

Nearly opposite to Louisville is a stockade fort, garrisoned by two companies
of the Is It United States regiment. What use this post is of, I never could
learn -- It is a mere hospital in the summer season, and the grave of brave
men, who might be usefully employed elsewhere. Port Harmar is as remarkably
healthful; so is the New England settlement at Muskingum; and I think the Miami
settlement will be healthful when the people have the comforts of good living
about them; at present they are the poorest among the poor emigrants to this
country, and not the best managers. Below the falls, on the west side, is a
miserable settlement, called Clarksville, frequently flooded, and composed of
people who cannot better themselves at present, or I suppose they would not
continue here. From hence I made an excursion by land (...) Post Vincent,
distant about 100 miles: The fort here is garrisoned by two companies, at great
expense, but little use. -- Not liking the country on account of the many
hostile neighboring Indians, I hastened out of it, and went with a party of
Frenchmen to Kaskaskias, in the Illinois country, and visited Prairit des
Rochers, St. Philip's, Bel^e Fontaine, and Kahokia; from whence making up a
party to pursue some hostile Kukapoos, and steering due east, we fell on the
head waters of the Kaskaskia river, which we crossed some distance -- This is a
delightful country ^ -- On our return to Kahokia, I crossed over to St. Louis,
on the Spanish side, but I did not proceed far into the country; what I did see
I did not like, and therefore bought a canoe and went down the Missisippi to
St. Genevieve and the Saline -- Not being pleased with these places, nor the
country around, I embraced the company of some French hunters and traders going
toward the St. Francis river, in a southwest direction from St. Genevieve --
After traveling thirty miles nearly, I came to a sweet country; here meeting
with some Shawanese Indians going to IN Ance la Graise and New Madrid, I made
them a small present, and engaged them to escort me there, which they did
through a country fine and beautiful beyond description; variegated by small
hills, beautiful timber, and extensive plains of luxuriant soil. Here the
Spaniards are building a handsome fort, to encourage the settlement by
Americans, on a plan of Col. Morgan's, of New Jersey; which, had it been
pursued, as proposed by him, would have made this the first in all the western
country; but they have deviated from it, so much as to discourage the
settlement, and many have left it. The banks of the Missisippi overflow above
and below the town, but the country back from the river is incomparably
beautiful and fine. I made a tour back to the river St. Francis, distant about
28 or 30 miles, and returned by another rout^ more southward, to my great
satisfaction. Expressing to some of the people at New Madrid my surprise at
Col. S***'s account of this country, I was told that he never went 100 yards
back from the river, either on the Ohio or Missisippi, except once, and that
was at 1' Ance la Graise, where a horse was provided for him, and he rude 15 or
20 miles, and returned so enraptured with the country, that he would not listen
to the proposed settlement of New Madrid being fixed at any other place; and he
actually applied to Col. Morgan for forty surveys, most of which were executed;
and be entered into obligations for settlement thereof; but the Col. refusing
to grant him 300 acres of the town lots, for a farm, as it would be injurious
to other applicants of equal merit, S*** swore he would do every thing in his
power to injure Morgan and the settlement, which it seems he has endeavored to
do, to the ruin, however, of his own reputation. I am satisfied that the
failure of this settlement is only to a narrow policy in the Spanish
government, or to a de^iation from their first plan, and not from the causes
represented by its enemies. This is the country, of all others, I have seen,
which I would wish to settle in, had Col. Morgan's plan been adopted, or
carried into execution; and thousands among the best people of the western
country would already have been settled here. Why it was not, I know not; but I
am told jealousy of his success was the cause.

After continuing two months in this delightful country, I proceeded to the
Natchez, which has already become a considerable settlement, and is now under
the government of Don Gayoso, a man greatly beloved; but the Spanish
government, though I think it liberal at present, will not long agree with
American ideas of liberty and justice; and a revolution is now in embryo, which
a small matter will blow to a flame; and New Orleans itself will be at the
mercy of new subjects it joined by a handful of the Kentucky people.




HISTORY.] The Missisippi, on which the fine country of Louisiana is situated,
was first discovered by Ferdinand de Soto, in 1541. Monsieur de la Salle was
the first who traversed it. He, in the year 1682, having passed down to the
mouth of the Missisippi, and surveyed the adjacent country, returned to Canada,
from whence he took passage to France.

From the flattering accounts which he gave of the country, and the
consequential advantages that would accrue from settling a colony in those
parts, Louis XIV. was induced to establish a company for the purpose.
Accordingly a squadron of four vessels, amply provided with men and provisions,
under the command of Monsieur de la Salle, embarked, with an intention to
settle near the mouth of the Missisippi. But he unintentionally sailed a
hundred leagues to the westward of it, where he attempted to establish a
colony; but through the unfavourableness of the climate, most of his men
miserably perished, and he himself was villainously murdered, not long after by
two of his own men. Monsieur Ibberville succeeded him in his laudable attempts.
He, after two successful voyages, died while preparing for a third. Crozat
succeeded him; and in 1712, the King gave him Louisiana. This grant continued
but a short time after the death of Louis XIV. In 1763 Louisiana was ceded to
the King of Spain to whom it now belongs.

MEXICO OR NEW SPAIN.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 2100 Miles. between 9 and 40 N. Lat. Breadth 1600 Miles. 18 and 50 W.
Lon.

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED north, by unknown regions; east, by Louisiana, and the
Gulf of Mexico; south, by the Isthmus of Darien, which separates it from Terra
Fir^^^ in South America; west, by the Pacific ocean.

GRAND DIVISIONS.] This vast country is divided as follows: Grand Divisions.
Audiences. Provinces. Chief Towns. OLD MEXICO. Galicia, 7 Guadalaxara, Mexico,
9 MEXICO, N. lat. 19 26 Guatimala. 6 Guatimala. This city was swallowed up by
an earthquake, June 7th, 1773, when 8,000 families instantly perished. New
Guatimala is well inhabited.
NEW MEXICO PROPER. Apacheira, ST. FE, N. lat. 36 30 Sonora. CALIFORNIA, on the
west, peninsula. ST. JUAN.

RIVERS, LAKES AND FOUNTAINS.] The land is in great part abrupt and
mountainous, covered with thick woods, and watered with large rivers. Some of
these run into the Gulf of Mexico, and others into the Pacific ocean. Among the
first, are Alvarado, Coatzacualco* and Tabasco. The Alvarado, has its principal
source in the mountains of the Zapotecas, and after making a circuit through
the province of Mazaltan* and receiving other smaller rivers and streams, is
discharged into the Gulf by three navigable mouths, at thirty miles distance
from Vera Cruz. The river Coatzacualco, which is also navigable* empties into
the ocean near the country of Onohualco. The river Tabasco begins its course
from the mountains which separate the diocese of Chiapan from that of
Guatimala, and afterward that of Onohualco, where it runs into the sea.

Amongst the rivers which run into the Pacific ocean the principal is the
river Guadalaxara* or great river. It takes its raise in the mountains of the
Valley of Toloccan, waters the country of Tonollan, where at present stands the
city of Guadalaxara, the capital of New Gallicia; and after running a course of
more than 600 miles, discharges itself into the ocean, in the latitude of 22
degrees.

There are several lakes, which do not less embellish the country than give
convenience to the commerce of the people. The lakes of Nicaragua. Chapallan,
and Pazquaro, are among the largest. The lakes Tetzcuco and Chalco occupy a
great part of the vale of Mexico, which is the finest tract of country in New
Spain. The waters of Chalco are sweet, those of Tetzcuco are brackish. A canal
unites them. The lower lake, (Tetzcuco) was formerly as much as 20 miles long
and 17 broad, and, lying at the bottom of the vale, is the reservoir of all the
waters from the surrounding mountains. The city of Mexico stands on an island
in this lake. These two lakes, whose circumference was not less than 90 miles,
represented the figure of a camel. At present the extent of these lakes is much
less, for the Spaniards have diverted into new channels many rivers which
formerly ran into them. All the water which is collected there is at first
sweet, and becomes salt afterward, from the nitrous bed of the lake, where it
is received. M. De Bomare says, that the salt of the Mexican lake may proceed
from the waters of the ocean in the north being filtered through the earth. But
this is truly a gross error, because that lake is 180 miles distant from the
ocean; besides, the bed of this lake is so elevated, that it has at least one
mile of perpendicular height above the level of the sea. The lake of Tocktlan
makes a fine prospect, and its banks a most delightful dwelling.

In this country are interspersed many fountains, of different qualities. There
are an infinity of nitrous, sulphurous, vitriolic, and alluminous mineral
waters, some of which spring out so hot, that in a short time any kind of fruit
or animal food is boiled in them. There are also petrifying waters, namely,
those of Tehuacan, a city about 1^0 miles S. E. from Mexico; those of the
spring of Pucuaro, in the states of the Conte di Miravalles, in the kingdom of
Michuacan, and that of a river in the province of the Queleni. With the waters
of Pucuaro they make little white smooth stones, not displeasing to the taste;
scrapings from which taken in broth, or in gruel made of Indian corn, are most
powerful diaphoretics, and are used with remarkable success, in various kinds
of fevers. The citizens of Mexico, during the time of their kings, supplied
themselves with water from the great spring of Chapoltepec, which was conveyed
to the city by an aqueduct.

We might here describe the stupendous falls or cascades of several rivers,
particularly that in the river Guadalaxara, 15 miles south of that city; and
the famous Ponti di Dio, which is a natural bridge thrown over the deep river
Atoyaque, 100 miles S. E. of Mexico, over which coaches and carriages
conveniently pass.

CLIMATE.] The climate of this extensive country is various. The maritime parts
are hot, and for the most part moist and unhealthy. Their heat, which occasions
sweat even in January, is owing to the perfect flatness of the coasts compared
with the inland country; or from the mountains of sand that gather upon the
shore. Lands which are very high, or very near to high mountains, which are
perpetually covered with snow, are cold; there has been white frosts and ice,
in the dog days. All the other inland parts which are the most populous, enjoy
a climate mild and benign, that they neither feel the rigor of winter, nor the
heats of summer. No other fire than the sun's rays, is necessary to give warmth
in winter; no other relief is wanted in the seasons of heat, than the shade;
the same clothing which covers a man in the dog days, defends him in January;
and the animals sleep all the year under the open sky.

The mildness and agreeableness of the climate under the torrid zone is the
effect of several natural causes, entirely unknown to the ancients, who
believed it uninhabitable; and not well understood by some moderns, by whom it
is esteemed unfavourable to those who live in it. The purity of the atmosphere,
the smaller obliquity of the solar rays, and the longer stay of this luminary
upon the horizon in winter, in comparison with other regions farther removed
from the equator, concur to lessen the cold, and to prevent all that horror
which disfigures the face of nature in other climes. During that season, a
serene sky, and the natural delights of the country are enjoyed; whereas under
the frigid, and even for the most part under the temperate zones, the clouds
rob man of the prospect of heaven, and the snow buries the beautiful
productions of the earth. No less causes combine to temper the heat of summer.
The plentiful showers which frequently water the earth after midday, from April
or May, to September or October; the high mountains continually loaded with
snow, scattered here and there through the country; the cool winds which
breathe from them in that season; and the shorter stay of the sun upon the
horizon, compared with the circumstances of the temperate zone, transform the
summer of those happy countries into a cool and cheerful spring.

But the agreeableness of the climate is counterbalanced by thunder storms,
which are frequent in summer, and by earthquakes, which at all seasons are
felt, although with less danger than terror.

MOUNTAINS.] The fire kindled in the bowels of the earth by the sulphurous and
bituminous materials, has made vents for itself in some of the mountains, or
volcanos, from whence flames are often seen to issue, and ashes and smoke.
There are five mountains in the district of the Mexican empire, where, at
different times, this dreadful phenomenon has been observed.

Pojauhtecal, called by the Spaniards Volcan de Orizaba, began to send forth
smoke in the year 1545, and continued to do so for 20 years; but after that,
for the space of more than two centuries, there has not been observed the
smallest sign of burning. This celebrated mountain, which is of a conical
figure, is indisputably the highest land in all Mexico; and, on account of its
height, is the first land descried by seamen who are steering that way, at the
distance of fifty leagues. It is higher than the peak of Toneriffe. Its top is
always covered with snow, and its border adorned with large cedars, pine and
other trees, of valuable wood, which make the prospect of it every way
beautiful. It is distant from the capital upwards of 90 miles to the eastward.

The Popocatepu and Tztaceihuatl, which lie near each other, 33 miles S. E.
from Mexico, are also of a surprising height. Popocatepu, for which they have
substituted the name Volcan, has a mouth or vent more than half a mile wide,
from which in the time of the Mexican kings, it frequently emitted flames; and
in the last century many times threw out great quantities of ashes upon the
places adjacent; but in this century, hardly any smoke has been observed.
Tztaceihuatl, or Seirra Nevada, threw out also at some times smoke and ashes.
Both mountains have tops always covered with snow, in such quantities, as to
supply, with what precipitates on the neighboring rocks, the cities of Mexico,
Gilopoli, Cholula, and the adjoining places, to the distance of forty miles
from these mountains, where an incredible quantity is yearly consumed in
cooling and congealing liquors.

The mountain Juruyo, situated in the valley of U^echo, is a great curiosity.
Before the year 1760, there was nothing of it but a small hill, where there was
a sugar plantation. But on the 29th of September, 1760, it burst with furious
shocks, and entirely ruined the sugar works, and the neighboring village of
Guacana; and from that time has continued to emit fire and burning rocks, which
have formed themselves into three high mountains, whose circumference was
nearly six miles in 1766; according to the account communicated by the governor
of that province, who was an eye witness of the fact. The ashes, at the
irruption, were forced to the almost incredible distance of 150 miles. In the
city of Valadolid, 60 miles distant, it rained ashes in such abundance that
they were obliged to sweep the yards of the houses two or three times during
the day.

Besides these there are others also, which though not burning mountains, are
yet of great celebrity for their height.

STONES AND MINERALS.] The mountains of Mexico abound in ores of every kind of
metal, and a great variety of fossils. The Mexicans found gold in various parts
of their country. They gathered this precious metal chiefly in grains among the
sand of the river. Silver was dug out of the mines of ^lachco, and others; but
it was not so much prized by them as it is by other nations. Since the
conquest, so many silver mines have been discovered in that country, especially
in the provinces which are to the northwest of the capital, it is quite
impossible to enumerate them. Of copper they had two forts; one hard, which
they used instead of iron to make axes, hatchets, mattocks, and other
instruments of war and agriculture; the other flexible, for making of basins,
pots and other vessels. Of tin they made money, and lead was sold at market.
There are also mines of iron, quicksilver, and in many places mines of sulphur,
alum, vitriol, ^^^abar, ochre, and a white earth strongly resembling white
lead. Of ^^ber and asphaltum, or bitumen of Judea, there was and still is great
abundance on both coasts; amber was used to set in gold for ornaments;
asphaltum was employed in certain incense offerings.

With respect to precious stones there were, and still are, diamonds, though
few in number; amethysts, cats eyes, turquoises, cornelians, and some green
stones resembling emeralds, and not much inferior to them. There are quarries
of jasper, and marble of different colors in the mountains of Calpolalpan. The
stone Tetzontli is generally of a dark red color, pretty hard, porous and
light, unites most firmly with lime and sand, and is therefore more in demand
than any other, for the buildings of the capital, where the foundation is
marshy. There are besides, entire mountains of loadstone, and among others one
very considerable between Tcoiltylan and Chilapan, in the country of the
Cohuixcas.

PRODUCTIONS.] However plentiful and rich and mineral kingdom of Mexico may be,
the vegetable kingdom is still more various and abundant. The celebrated Dr.
Hernandez, the Pliny of New Spain, describes, in his natural history, about
twelve hundred plants, natives of that country; but as his description is
confined to medicinal plants, he has hardly comprised one half of what
provident nature has produced there for the benefit of mankind. With regard to
the other vegetables, some are esteemed for their flowers, some for their
fruit, some for their leaves, some for their roots, some for their trunk or
their wood, and others for their gum* resin, oil or juice. Many flowers which
embellish the meads, and adorn the gardens of the Mexicans, are worthy to be
mentioned (would our limits permit) either on account of the singular beauty of
their colors, their exquisite fragrance, or the extraordinariness of their
form.

The fruits which are original in Mexico, are the pine apple, plums, dates, and
a great variety of others. There are also many others that are not original in
the country, viz. water melons, apples, peaches, quinces, apricots, pears,
pomegranates, figs, black cherries, walnuts, almonds, olives, chestnuts and
grapes.

The cocoa nut, vainilla, chia, great pepper, tomati, the pepper of Tabasco,
and cotton, are very common with the Mexicans. Wheat, barley, peace, beans and
rice, have been successfully cultivated in this country.

With respect to plants which yield profitable resins, gums, oils, or juices,
the country of Mexico is singularly fertile. Of the Elastic Cum, the Mexicans
make their foot balls, which, though heavy, rebound more than those filled with
air.

ANIMALS.] The animal kingdom of Mexico, is not very well known. Of the
quadrupeds, some are ancient, and some are modern. Those are called modern
which were transported from the Canaries and Europe into that country in the
sixteenth century. Such are horses, asses, bulls, sheep, goats, hogs, dogs, and
cats, which have all multiplied. Of the ancient quadrupeds, by which is meant
those that from time immemorial have been in that country; some were common to
both the continents of Europe and America, some peculiar to the new world,
others natives only of the kingdom of Mexico. The ancient quadrupeds common to
Mexico and the old continents are, lions, tigers, wild cats, bears, wolves,
foxes, the common stage and white stags, bucks, wild goats, badgers, pole cats,
weazles, martins, squirrels, rabbits, hares, otters, and rats. There are many
other kinds of animals in this country, too numerous to mention.

BIRDS OF MEXICO.] Their prodigious number, their variety, and many valuable
qualities, have occasioned some authors to observe that, as Africa is the
country of beasts, so Mexico is the country of birds. It is said there are two
hundred species peculiar to that kingdom. There are a prodigious number of
geese; at least, twenty species of ducks; several kinds of herons; with vast
numbers of swans, water rails, diverse, king fishers, pelicans, and others. The
multitude of ducks is sometimes so great, as quite to cover the fields, and to
appear at a distance like flocks of sheep. The pelican is remarkable in
assisting the sick or wounded of its own species, a circumstance which the
Americans sometimes take advantage of, to procure fish without trouble. They
take a live pelican, break its wing, and after tying it to a tree, conceal
themselves in the neighborhood; there they watch the coming of the other
pelicans with their provisions, and as soon as they see these throw up the fish
from their pouch, run and seize them, and after leaving a little for the
captive bird, they carry off the rest.

In the other classes of birds, some are valuable on account of their flesh,
some for their plumage, and some for their song; while others engage our
attention by their extraordinary instinct, or some other remarkable quality: Of
birds which afford a wholesome and agreeable food, there are more than seventy
species. There are 35 species of Mexican birds that are superlatively
beautiful. The talking birds, or those which imitate the human voice, are to be
found in equal abundance in this country; of these the parrot holds the first
place.

FISH.] The fish common to both oceans are, whales, dolphins, sword fish, saw
fish, tiburones, manitis, mantas, porpoises, bonat^^, cod, mullets, thornbacks,
barbels, flying fish, shad, lobsters, soles, and many others, together with
several species of tortoises, polypus, crabs, spunges, etc. The Mexican gulf,
besides those already mentioned, affords sturgeons, pike, congers, cuttle fish,
anchovies, carp, eels, nautiluses, turbot, etc. In the Pacific ocean, besides
those common to the two seas, there are salmon, tunnies, sea scorpions,
herrings, and others. In the lakes and rivers are three or four kinds of white
fish, carp, mullet, trout, barbels, eels, and many others.

Shells have been found in prodigious numbers, and of great variety, and some
of them of extraordinary beauty, especially those of the Pacific ocean. Pearls
also have been fished, at different times, along all the coasts of that ocean.

GOVERNMENT AND RELIGION.] The civil government of Mexico is administered by
tribunals, called audiences. In these courts the viceroy of the King of Spain
presides. His employment is the greatest trust and power his Catholic Majesty
has at his disposal, and is perhaps the richest government entrusted to any
subject in the world. The viceroy continues in office three years.

The clergy are extremely numerous in Mexico. The priests, ^^nks and nuns of
all orders, make a fifth part of the white inhabitants, both here and in other
parts of Spanish America.

CHIEF TOWNS AND COMMERCE.] Mexico is the oldest city in America of which we
have any account. The Abbe Clavigero, who is our authority for the preceding
account of this country, dates its foundation (...) far back as 1325. It is
situated in the charming vale of Mexico, on several small islands, in lake
Tetzcuco, in N. lat. 19 26 and 276 34 W. long. from Ferro. This vale is
surrounded with lofty and ver^^^t mountains, and formerly contained no less
than 40 eminent cities, besides villages and hamlets. The city is subject to
frequent inunda^^^^s, as is easily accounted for from its local situation, the
lake in which it stands being the reservoir of the waters flowing from the
neighboring mountains.

Concerning the ancient population of this city there are various opinions. The
historians most to be relied on say that it was nearly nine miles in
circumference, and contained upwards of 60,000 houses, containing each from 4
to 10 inhabitants. Some historians ^^kon 120 000 and some 130,000 houses. By a
late accurate enumeration, made by the magistrates and priests, it appears that
the present number of inhabitants exceeds 200,000. We may form some (...) of
its populou^ness from the quantity of pulque Pulque is the usual wine or beer
of the Mexicans, made of the fermented (...) of the Mague^. This liquor will
not keep but one day, and therefore that i^ made is daily consumed.
and tobacco which are daily consumed in it, ascertained from the custom house
^^^ks February 23, 1775. Every day upwards of 190,000 pounds of pulque are
carried into the city, which is almost solely consumed by the Indians and
mulattoes, who drink this beverage. The tax upon it amounts annually to about
280,000 crowns. The daily consumption of tobacco is reckoned at 1250 crowns.

The greatest curiosity in the city of Mexico is their floating gardens. When
the Mexicans, about the year 1325, were subdued by the Colhuan and Tepanecan
nations, and confined to the small islands in the ^^ke, having no land to
cultivate, they were taught by necessity to form moveable gardens, which
floated on the lake. Their construction is very simple. They lake willows and
the roots of marsh plants, and other materials which are light, and twist them
together, and so firmly unite them as to form a fort of platform, which is
capable of supporting the earth of the garden. Upon this foundation they lay
the light bushes which float on the lake, and over them spread the (...) and
dirt which they draw up from the bottom of the lake. Their regular figure is
quadrangular; their length and breadth various, but generally about 8 rods long
and 3 wide; and their elevation from the surface of the water is less than a
foot. These were the first fields that the Mexicans owned after the foundation
of Mexico; there they first cultivated the maize, great pepper, and other
plants necessary for their support. From the industry of the people these
fields soon became numerous. At present they cultivate flowers and every sort
of garden herbs upon them. Every day of the year, at sunrise, innumerable
vessels or boats, loaded with various kinds of flowers and herbs which are
cultivated in these gardens, are seen arriving by the canal at the great market
place of Mexico. All plants thrive in them surprisingly; the mud of the lake
makes a very rich soil, which requires no water from the clouds. In the largest
gardens there is commonly a little tree, and a little hut to shelter the
cultivator, and defend him from the rain or the sun. When the owner of a
garden, or the Chinampa, as he is called, wishes to change his situation, to
g^t out of a bad neighborhood, or to come nearer to his family, he gets into
his little boat, and, by his own strength alone, if the garden is small, or
with the assistance of others, if it is large, conducts it wherever he pleases,
with the little tree and hut upon it. That part of the island where these
floating gardens are, is a place of delightful recreation, where the senses
receive the highest possible gratification.

The buildings, which are of stone, are convenient, and the public edifices,
especially the churches, are magnificent, and the city has the appearance of
immense wealth.

The trade of Mexico consists of three great branches, which extend over the
whole world. It carries on a traffic with Europe, by La Vera Cruz, situated on
the Gulf of Mexico, or North Sea; with the East Indies, by Acapulco o^ the
South Sea, 210 miles S. W. of Mexico; and with South America, by the same port.
These two sea ports, Vera Cruz and Acapulco, are admirably well situated for
the commercial purposes to which they were applied. It is by means of the
former that Mexico pours her wealth over the whole world; and receives in
return the numberless luxuries and necessaries, which Europe affords her. To
this port the fleet from Cadiz, called the Flota, consisting of three men of
war, as a convoy, and 14 la^^^ merchant ships, annually arrives about the
beginning of November. Its cargo consists of almost every commodity and
manufacture of Europe; and there are few nations but have more concern in it
than th^^ Spaniards, who send out little else except wine and oil. The profit
of these, with the freight and commission to the merchants, and duty (...) the
king, is all the advantage which Spain derives from the American commerce. When
all the goods are landed and disposed of at La Vera Cruz, the fleet takes in
the plate, precious stones, and other commodities for Europe. Some time in May
they are ready to ^^part. From La Vera Cruz they sail to the Havannah, in the
Isle of Cuba, which is the rendezvous where they meet the galleons, another
fleet which carries on the trade of Terra Firma by Carthage^^ and of Peru by
Panama and Porto Bello. When all are collected (...) provided with a convoy
necessary for their safety, they steer for Old Spain.

Acapulco is the sea port, by which the communication is kept (...) between the
different parts of the Spanish empire in America and the East Indies. About the
month of December, the great galleon, attended by* a large ship as a convoy*
which make the only communication between the Philippines and Mexico, annually
arrive here. The cargoes of these ships, (for the convoy, though in a
clandestine manner, likewise carries goods) consist of all the rich commodities
and manufactures of the east. At the same time the annual ship from Lima, the
capital of Peru, comes in, and is computed to bring not less than two ^^^^ions
of pieces of eight in silver, besides quicksilver, and other valuable
commodities, to be laid out in the purchase of the galeons cargoes. Several
other ships, from different parts of Chili and Peru, meet upon the (...)
occasion. A great fair, in which the commodities of all parts of the world are
bartered for one another, lasts thirty days. The galeon them ^^^^ares for her
voyage, loaded with silver and such European goods (...) have been thought
necessary. The Spaniards, though this trade be (...) on entirely through their
hands, and in the very heart of their ^^^^ions, are comparatively but small
gainers by it. For as they al^^^ the Dutch, Great Britain, and other commercial
states, to fur^^^ the greater part of the cargo of the flota, so the Spanish
inhabitants of the Philippines, tainted with the indolence which ruined (...)
European ancestors, permit the Chinese merchants to furnish the (...) part of
the cargo of the galeon. Notwithstanding what has (...) said of Vera Cruz, and
Acapulco, the city of Mexico, the capi^^^ of the empire, ought to be considered
as the center of commerce (...) this part of the world; for here the principal
merchants reside, (...) the greatest part of the business is negociated. The
East India (...) from Acapulco, and the European from Vera Cruz, also pass
(...) this city. Hither all the gold and silver come to be coined, (...) the
king's fifth is deposited, and here are wrought all those (...) and ornaments
in plate which are every year sent into Europe.

HISTORY.] The empire of Mexico was subdued by Cortes in (...) year 1521.
Montezuma was at that time emperor of Mexico. In (...) course of the war, he
was treacherously taken by Cortes, and (...) as a prisoner. During the
imprisonment of Montezuma, Cortes and his army had made repeated attacks on his
subjects, but with^^^ success. Cortes was now determined as his last resource
to try (...) effect the interposition of Montezuma might have to soothe or
(...) his subjects. This unfortunate prince, at the mercy of the ^^cherous
Spaniards, and reduced to the sad necessity of becoming (...) instrument of his
own disgrace, and of the slavery of his sub^^^ advanced to the battlements in
his royal robes, in all the pomp which he used to appear on solemn occasions.
At fight of their ^^reign, whom they had long been accustomed to honor, and
al^^^ to revere as a god, the weapons dropped from their hands, ev^^^ tongue
was silent, all bowed their heads, and many prostrated themselves on the
ground. Montezuma addressed them with every ^^^ent that could mitigate their
rage, or persuade them from hostil^^^. When he ended his discourse, a sullen
murmur of disapproba^^ ^an through the crowd; to this succeeded reproaches and
threats; (...) their fury rising in a moment, they violently poured in whole
(...) of arrows and vollics of stones upon their unhappy monarch; (...) of the
arrows struck him in his body, which with the blow of a (...) on his temple,
put an end to his life. Guatimozin succeeded ^^^^uma, and maintained a vigorous
opposition against the assaults (...) Cortes. But he, like his predecessor,
after a noble defense, was (...) to submit. Previous to this, being aware of
his impending fate, (...) ordered that all his treasures should be thrown into
the lake. While a prisoner, on suspicion of his having concealed his treasure,
he was put to the torture, which was done by laying him on burning coals; but
he bore whatever the refined cruelty of his tormentors could inflict, with the
invincible fortitude of an American warrior. One of his chief favorites, his
fellow sufferer, being overcome by the violence of the anguish, turned a
dejected eye toward his master, which seemed to implore his permission to
reveal all that he knew. -- But the high spirited prince* darted on him a look
of authority, mingled with scorn, and checked his weakness by asking, 'Am I
reposing on a bed of flowers?' Overawed by the reproach, he persevered in
dutiful silence, and expired. Cortes, ashamed of the scene so horrid, rescued
the royal victim from the hands of his torturers, and prolonged a life for new
indignities and sufferings. Cortes died in Spain, in the year 1547, in the 62d
year of his age. Envied by his contemporaries, and ill requited by the court
which he served, he has been admired and celebrated by succeeding ages. By his
own desire he was carried to Mexico, and buried there.

Cortes, the great conqueror of Mexico, discovered the extensive peninsula of
California in the year 1536, after enduring incredible hardships, and
encountering dangers of almost every species. During a long period it continued
to be so little frequented, that even its form was unknown, and in most maps it
was represented as an island. Sir Francis Drake was the first who took
possession of it in 1578, and his right was confirmed by the principal king or
chief in the whole country.

SOUTH AMERICA.
WE now enter upon the description of that part of the globe, where the human
mind will be successively surprised with the sublime and astonishing works of
nature; where rivers of amazing breadth flow through beautiful and widely
extended plains, and where lofty mountains, whose summits are covered with
eternal snow, intercept the course of the clouds and hide their heads from the
view of mortals. In some parts of this extensive region, nature has
bountifully bestowed her treasures, and given every thing necessary for the
convenience and happiness of man. We have only to regret that a set of
avaricious men have successively drenched with innocent blood these plains,
which are so beautifully formed and enriched by the hand of nature; and that
the rod of Spanish despotism has prevented the population of a country which
might have supported millions of beings in affluence.

DIVISIONS.] South America, like Africa, is an extensive peninsula, connected
with North America by the Isthmus of Darien, and divided between Spain,
Portugal, France, Holland, and the Aborigines, as follows: Chief Towns. Spanish
Dominions. Terra Firma, Panama and Carthagena, Peru, Lima, Chili, St. Jago,
Paragua, Buennos Airs.

SOUTH AMERICA
map of South America

Chief Towns. Portuguese. Br^zil. St. Salvador. French. Cayenne. Caen. Dutch.
Surrinam. Paramaribo. Aborigines. Amazonia, Patagonia.

Of these countries we shall treat in their order. For the best history of
South America and Mexico, the reader is referred to Robertson's History of
America, and the Abbe Clavigero's History of Mexico.


Spanish America.
TERRA FIRMA, OR CASTILE DEL ORO.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 1400 Miles. between 60 and 82 West Longitude. Breadth 700 Miles. The
Equator, and 12 North Lat.

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED north, by the Atlantic ocean, here called the North Sea;
east, by the same ocean and Surrinam; south, by Amazonia and Peru; west, by the
Pacific ocean.

It is divided into Chief Towns. Terra Firma proper, or Darien, Porto Bello,
Panama. Carthagena, Carthagena, St. Martha, Venezeula, Comana, Paria, New
Granada, Popayan. Popayan.

BAYS.] In the South Sea the principal bays are those of Panama and St.
Michael; in the North Sea are the bays of Porto Bello, Si^o, Guiara, etc.

RIVERS.] The principal rivers are the Darien, Chagre, Santa Maria, Conception,
and Oronoko. The Peculiarities of this last mentioned river require a
particular description.

It was Columbus, who, in 1498, first discovered the Oronoko, the borders of
which have since been named Spanish Guiana. This great river takes its rise
among the Cordeleras mountains, and is said to discharge itself into the ocean
by forty openings, after it has been increased, throughout an immense tract,
by the afflux of a prodigious number of rivers more or less considerable. Such
is its impetuosity that it stems the strongest tides, and preserves the
freshness of its waters to the distance of twelve leagues form the mouth of
that vast and deep channel within which it was confined. Its rapidity, however,
is not always the same, which is owing to a circumstance perhaps entirely
peculiar. The Oronoko, which begins to swell in April, continues rising for
five months, and during the sixth remains at its greatest height. From October,
it begins gradually to subside, till the month of March, throughout the whole
of which it remains in the fixed state of its greatest diminution. These
alternate changes are regular, and even invariable. Perhaps the rising of the
waters of the Oronoko may depend entirely on the rainy season.

This river is not so easily navigated as might be presumed from its magnitude;
its bed being in many places filled up with rocks; which oblige the navigator,
at times, to carry both his boats and the merchandise they are laden with, by
land round the obstruction.

CLIMATE, SOIL AND PRODUCTIONS.] The climate here, especially in the northern
parts, is extremely hot and sultry during the whole year. From the month of May
to the end of November, the season called winter by the inhabitants, is almost
a continual succession of thunder, rain and tempests; the clouds precipitating
the rains with such impetuosity, that the low lands exhibit the appearance of
an ocean. Great part of the country is of consequence almost continually
flooded; and this, together with the excessive heat, so impregnates the air
with vapors, that in many provinces, particularly about Popayon and Porto
Bello, it is extremely unwholesome. The soil of this country is very different,
the inland parts being extremely rich and fertile, and the coasts sandy and
barren. It is impossible to view without admiration the perpetual verdure of
the woods, the luxuriancy of the plains, and the towering height of the
mountains. This country produces corn, sugar, tobacoo, and fruits of all kinds;
the most remarkable is that of the manzanillo tree. It bears a fruit resembling
an apple, but which, under this specious appearance, contains the most subtle
poison. The bean of Carthagena is the fruit of a species of willow, about the
bigness of a bean, and is an excellent remedy for the bite of the most venomous
serpents, which are very frequent all over this country. Among the natural
merchandise of Terra Firma, the pearls found on the coast, particularly in the
bay of Panama, are not the least considerable. An immense number of negro
slaves are employed in fishing for these, and have arrived at a wonderful
dexterity in this occupation. They are sometimes, however, devoured by sharks,
while they dive to the bottom, or are crushed against the shelves of the rocks.

CHIEF TOWNS.] CARTHAGENA is the principal seaport town in Terra Firma. It is
situated on the Atlantic ocean in N. Lat. 10 26, and about three degrees west
of the meridian of Philadelphia. The bay on which it stands is seven miles wide
from north to south -- abounds with a variety of good fish -- and has a
sufficient depth of water, with good anchorage, and so smooth that ships are no
more agitated than on a river. The many shallows at its entrance, however, make
the help of a good pilot necessary. The town and its suburbs are fortified in
modern style -- the streets are straight, broad and well paved. The houses are
principally brick, and one story high. All houses have balconies and lattices
of wood. This city is the residence of the governor of the province of
Carthagena, and of a bishop, whose spiritual jurisdiction extends over the
whole province. There is here also a court of inquisition -- several convents
and nun^^^ies -- a church, a chapel of case, and a college of Jesuits. The city
is well peopled with Indians, Europeans, Negroes, and Creoles. The Europeans,
who are not numerous, and the Creoles, manage the whole trade of the place; the
other inhabitants are poor, and work hard for subsistence. The inhabitants are
universally fond of chocolate and tobacco -- and the most sober seldom fail of
drinking a glass of brandy in the morning.

PANAMA is the capital of Terra Firma Proper, and is situated upon a capacious
bay to which it gives its name. It is the great receptacle of the vast
quantities of gold and silver, with other rich merchandise, from all parts of
Peru and Chili; here they are lodged in store houses, till the proper season
arrives to transport them to Europe.

PORTO BELLO is situated close to the sea, on the declivity of a mountain which
surrounds the whole harbor. The convenience and safety of this harbor is
such, that Columbus, who first discovered it, gave it the name of Porto Bello,
or the Fine Harbor.

HISTORY.] This part of South America was discovered by Columbus, in his third
voyage to this continent. It was subdued and settled by the Spaniards about the
year 1514, after destroying, with great inhumanity, several millions of the
natives. This country was called Terra Firma, on account of its being the first
part of the continent which was discovered, all the lands discovered previous
to this being islands.

PERU.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 1800 Miles. between the Equator and 25 S. lat. Breadth 500 Miles. 60
and 81 W. longitude.

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED north, by Terra Firma; west, by the Pacific ocean; south,
by Chili; and east, by the mountains called the Andes.

DIVISIONS.] Peru is divided into the following provinces: Provinces. Chief
Towns. Quito, Quito, Payta, Lima, Lima, latitude 12 11 S. Los Charcos. Potosi,
Porco.

RIVERS.] There is a number of rivers which rise in the Andes, but most of them
run to the eastward. Among these are the Grande, Oronoko, Amazon and Plate. The
Amazon rises in Peru, but directs its course eastward, and after running
between 3 and 4000 miles, falls into the Atlantic ocean, under the equator.
This river, like others between the tropics, annually overflows its banks, at
which time it is 150 ^^^es wide at its mouth. It is supposed to be the largest
river in the world, either with regard to the length of its course, the depth
of its waters, or its astonishing breadth. There is one river in Peru, the
waters of which are said to be as red as blood; but this is doubted by some. It
is probable, however, that there may be qualities in the earth through which
this river runs, which may tinge the waters and give them some resemblance to
blood.

CLIMATE, AIR AND SOIL.] From the situation of this country, which is within
the torrid zone, it is natural to suppose that it would be almost
uninhabitable; but the Andes mountains being on the one side, and the South sea
on the other, it is not so prodigiously hot as tropical countries in general
are; and in some parts it is disagreeably cold. In one part are mountains of a
stupendous height and magnitude, having their summits covered with snow; on the
other, volcanos flaming within, while their summits, chasms and apertures are
involved in ice. The plains are temperate, the beaches and valleys hot; and
lastly, according to the disposition of the country, its high or low situation,
we find all the variety of gradations of temperature between the two extremes
of heat and cold. It is remarkable, that in some places it never rains, which
defect is supplied by a dew, that falls every night, and sufficiently refreshes
the vegetable creation; but in Quito they have prodigious rains, attended by
dreadful storms of thunder and lightning. In the inland parts of Peru, and by
the banks of the rivers, the soil is usually very fertile; but along the sea
coast it is a barren sand.

ANIMAL AND VEGETABLE PRODUCTIONS.} Vast numbers of cattle were imported by the
Spaniards into Peru, when they took possession of that country; these are now
so amazingly increased, that they run wild and are hunted like game. The most
remarkable animals in this country are the Peruvian sheep, called the lamas and
vicunnas. The lama, in several particulars, resembles the camel, as in the
shape of the neck, head and some other parts; but has no bunch, is much
smaller, and is cloven footed. Its upper lip is cleft like that of a hare,
through which, when enraged, it spits a venomous juice, that inflames the part
on which it falls. The wool with which it is covered is of different colors;
but generally brown. These animals are generally docile, so that the Indians
use them as beasts of burden. Formerly they used to eat their flesh* and still
continue to make that use of such as are past labor, esteeming it preferable
to mutton. The vicunna resembles the lama in shape, but is much smaller, and
its wool shorter and finer. The most remarkable birds found in Peru are the
condors and ^ummers. The condor is prodigiously large and carnivorous, and very
voracious, frequently seizing the lambs as they are feeding upon the heath. The
hummer is a night bird, peculiar to the mountainous deserts of Peru. They are
seldom seen, though frequently heard, both by their singing and a strange
humming made in the air by the rapidity of their flight, which when near makes
a noise like that of a rocket. The insects found in Peru are musquetoes in
prodigious numbers, miguas, and several others equally venomous; also a variety
of beautiful butterflies. This country produces fruits peculiar to the climate
and most of those in Europe. The culture of maize, of pimento and of cotton,
which was found established there, has not been neglected; and that of wheat,
barley, cassava, potatoes, sugar, and of the olive and vine is attended to. The
goat has thriven very well; but the sheep have degenerated, and their wool is
become extremely coarse.

MINES.] In the northern parts of Peru are several gold mines; but those of
silver are found all over the country, particularly in the neighborhood of
Potosi. Nature never offered to the avidity of mankind, in any country on the
globe, such rich mines as those of Potosi. 'These famous mines were
accidentally discovered in the year 1545, in this manner; an Indian, named
Hualpa, one day following some deer, they made directly up the hill of Potosi;
he came to a steep craggy part of the hill, and the better to enable him to
climb up, laid hold of a shrub, which came up by the roots, and laid* open, a
mass of silver ore -- He for some time kept it a secret, but afterward
revealed it to his friend Guanca, who because he would not discover to him the
method of refining it, acquainted the Spaniard his master, named Valaroel, with
the discovery. Val^ro^l registered the mine in 1545; and from that time till
1638 these mines of Potosi had yielded 395,619,000 pieces of eight, which is
about 4,255,000 pieces a year. Potosi is about 20 or 25 leagues from the city
of La Plata. The hill, and also the country for a considerable distance round
is quite barren and desert, and produces neither tree, plant nor herb, so that
the inhabitants of Potosi, which is situated at the foot of the hill, on the
south side, are obliged to procure all the necessaries of life from Peru. These
mines begin to decrease, and others rise in reputation.

MANUFACTURES, TRADE AND CITIES.] We join these articles here because of their
intimate connection; for, except in the cities we shall describe, there is no
commerce worth mentioning. The city of Lima is the capital of Peru, and of the
whole Spanish empire: Its situation, in the middle of a spacious and delightful
valley, was fixed upon by the famous Pizarro, as the most proper for a city,
which he expected would preserve his memory. It is so well watered by the
R^mac, that the inhabitants, like those of London, command a stream, each for
his own use. There are many very magnificent structures, particularly churches,
in this city; though the houses in general are built of slight materials, the
equality of the climate, and want of rain, rendering stone houses unnecessary;
and besides it is found, that these are more apt to suffer by shocks of the
earth, which are frequent and dreadful all over this province. Lima is about
two leagues from the sea, extends in length two miles, and in breadth one and a
quarter. One remarkable fact is sufficient to demonstrate the wealth of the
city. When the viceroy, the duke de la Palada, made his entry into Lima in
1682, the inhabitants, to do him honor, caused the streets to be paved with
ingots of silver, amounting to seventeen millions sterling. All travelers
speak with amazement of the decorations of the churches with gold, silver, and
precious stones, which load and ornament even the walls. The only thing that
could justify these accounts, is the immense richness and extensive commerce of
the inhabitants. The merchants of Lima may be said to deal with all the
quarters of the world, and that both on their own accounts, and as factors for
others. Here all the products of the southern provinces are conveyed, in order
to be exchanged at the harbor of Lima for such articles as the inhabitants of
Peru stand in need of; the fleet from Europe and the East Indies land at the
same harbor, and the commodities of Asia, Europe, and America, are there
bartered for each other. What there is no immediate vent for, the merchants of
Lima purchase on their own accounts, and lay up in warehouses, knowing that
they must soon find an outlet for them, since by one channel or other they have
a communication with almost every commercial nation. But all the wealth of the
inhabitants, all the beauty of the situation, and the fertility of the climate
of Lima are not sufficient to compensate for one disaster, which always
threatens and has sometimes actually befallen them. In the year 1747, a most
tremendous earthquake laid three fourths of this city level with the ground,
and entirely demolished Caliao, the port town belonging to it. Never was any
destruction more perfect, not more than one of three thousand inhabitants being
left to record this dreadful calamity, and he, by a providence the most
singular and exextraordinary imaginable -- This man, who happened to be on a
fort which overlooked the harbor, perceived in one minute the inhabitants
running from their houses in the utmost terror and confusion; the sea, as is
usual on such occasions, receding to a considerable distance, returned in
mountainous waves, foaming with the violence of the agitation, buried the
inhabitants forever in its bosom, and immediately all was silent: But the same
wave which destroyed the town, drove a little boat by the place where the man
stood, into which he threw himself, and was saved.

Cusco, the ancient capital of the Peruvian empire, lies in the mountainous
country, at a distance from the sea, and has long been on the decline, but it
is yet a very considerable place. The inhabitants, three parts of whom are
Indians, are very industrious in manufacturing baize, cotton and leather. They
have also both here and in Quito, a particular taste for painting; and their
productions in this way, some of which have been admired in Italy, are
dispersed all over South America. Quito is next of Lima in populousness, if not
superior to it. It is like Cusco, an inland city, and having no mines in its
neighborhood, is chiefly famous for its manufactures of cotton, wool, and
flax, which supply the consumption over all the kingdom of Peru.

INHABITANTS, MANNERS AND GOVERNMENT.} It is impossible to ascertain with any
degree of precision the number of inhabitants in Peru. The city of Lima is said
to contain 54,000; Guagaquill 20,000; Potosi 25,000; La Paz 20,000, and Cusco
26,000. Among all the inhabitants of Peru, pride and laziness are said to be
the most predominant passions. Avarice may likewise be attributed to some of
them with a great deal of propriety.

The Indians and negroes are forbidden, under the severest penalties, to
intermarry; for division between these two classes, is the great instrument in
which the Spaniards trust for the preservation of the colonies. Peru is
governed by a viceroy, who is absolute; but it being impossible for him to
superintend the whole extent of his government, he delegates a part of his
authority to the several audiences and courts, established at different places
throughout his territories. At Lima there is a treasury court for receiving a
fifth of the mines, and certain taxes paid by the Indians, which belong to the
king of Spain.

NATURAL HISTORY.] There are certain waters in this country, which in their
course turn into stone; and fountains of liquid matter, called coppey,
resembling pitch and tar, and used by seamen for the same purpose. On the
coasts of Guagaquill and Guatimala are found a certain species of snails, which
yield the purple dye so celebrated by the ancients, and which the moderns have
supposed to have been loft. The shell that contains them is fixed to rocks,
watered by the sea. It is of the size of a large nut. Various methods are used
to extract the purple matter from the animal. There is no color that can be
compared to this either in luster or permanence.

Under this head it may not be improper to make some observations upon that new
substance called the Platina, and which may be considered as an eighth metal.
In its native state it is mixed with gold and iron, and this at first gave rise
to a suspicion that it was nothing more than a combination of these two metals;
but late experiments of chemists a fully prove, that it is a pure and simple
metal, with propertions peculiar to itself. It cannot be affected by any simple
acid, or by any known solvent, except the aqua regia; it will not tarnish in
the air, neither will it rust; it unites to the fixedness of gold, and to the
property it has of not being susceptible of destruction, a hardness almost
equal to that of iron, and a much greater difficulty of fusion. It is of an
intermediate color between that of iron and silver; it can be forged and
extended into thin plates; and when dissolved in aqua regia, it may be made to
assume, by precipitation, and infinite diversity of colors; and Count Milbey
has succeeded in varying these precipitates so much, that he has had a picture
painted, in the coloring of which, there is scarce any thing but platina made
use of. Upon the whole, from considering the advantages of the platina, we
cannot but conclude that this metal deserves, at least, from its superiority to
all others, to share the title of king of the metals, of which gold has so long
been in possession. The Peruvian bark, so famous at present for curing
intermittent fevers, may likewise be mentioned in this place. The tree from
which it is taken grows upon the slope of mountains, and is about the size of a
common cherry tree. It is distinguished into three kinds; the red, yellow, and
the white; but the red is found to be the best and most efficacious. The
Jesuits carried this bark to Rome as early as 1639; but the natives are
supposed to have been acquainted with its medicinal qualities many ages before.

GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.] In treating of this country the mind is naturally led
back to the barbarous and cruel conquerors of it, who, coming from the old
world in quest of gold to satisfy their avarice, displayed scenes shocking to
humanity. After the conquest, the country scarcely preserved any thing but its
name, every thing assumed a new face. There were other edifices, other
inhabitants, other occupations, other prejudices, and another religion. See
Robertson's History of America.

CHILE
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 1260 Miles. between 25 and 44 S. Lat. Breadth 580 Miles. 65 and 85 W.
Lon.

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED on the north, by Peru; by Paragua or La Plata on the
east; by Patagonia on the south; and by the Pacific ocean on the west. It lies
on both sides of the Andes; Chili Proper lies on the W. and Cuyo or Cutio, on
the east. -- The principal towns in the former are St. Jago and Baldivia; in
the latter, St. John de Frontlora.

CLIMATE AND SOIL.] The climate of Chili is one of the most delightful in the
world, being a medium between the intense heats of the torrid, and the piercing
colds of the frigid zones. Along the coast of the Pacific ocean, they enjoy a
fine temperate air, and a clear serene sky, most part of the year; but
sometimes the winds that blow from the mountains, in winter, are exceedingly
sharp. There are few places in this extensive country where the soil is not
exuberantly rich; and were its natural advantages seconded by the industry of
the inhabitants, Chili would be the most opulent kingdom in America.

ANIMAL AND VEGETABLE PRODUCTIONS.] The horses and mules of Chili are in great
esteem, particularly the former. This breed of horses was originally carried
from Old Spain, and instead of degenerating, have now become superior to the
Spanish horses themselves. In beauty and gracefulness, they are not inferior to
the famous Andalu^ian horses; and such is their value that one of them is
thought a present worthy the acceptance of a crowned head.

Prodigious numbers of oxen, goats and sheep, are fattened in the luxuriant
pastures of Chili, and indeed this is the only part of husbandry to which the
inhabitants pay any considerable attention. An ox well fattened may be
purchased for four dollars. Turkeys, geese, and all kinds of poultry are found
here in the same profusion. Wild fowl are also common, among which are wood
pigeons, turtle doves, partridges, and royal cirapicos. A very particular
species of bird is sound in Chili, called the awakener: It is about the size of
a middling fowl; its plumage is black and white; has a thick neck; the head
rather large, erect, and beautifully adorned with a tuft of feathers; its eyes
are large, sharp and lively. On the fore part of its wings are two spurs, about
an inch in length; these are its weapons of defense against all other birds. It
has obtained the name of the awakener from the notice it gives to all birds in
time of danger; and this it does, by making a loud chattering noise, which
immediately induces the other to fly from the enemy.

The coasts abound with many excellent fish; there are also vast numbers of
whales and sea wolves. The soil produces Indian and European corn, hemp,
grapes, and all other fruits. The European fruit trees are obliged to be
propped to enable them to sustain the weight of the fruit. The orchards in
particular yield great quantities of all sorts of apples, the strawberries are
very large and most commonly red, but sometimes white and yellow. In many
places orange trees are in bloom, and beat fruit throughout the year. Olives
also, and almond trees thrive exceedingly well; and the inhabitants press a
kind of muscadee wine from their grapes, which far exceeds any of the kind made
in Spain. The trunks of the vines are in some places said to be as thick as a
man's body, and the grapes are amazingly large.

MINES.] Mines of gold, silver, copper, tin, quicksilver, iron and lead, abound
in this country. Vast quantities of gold are washed down from the mountains by
brooks and torrents; the annual amount of which, when manufactured, is
estimated at no less than 800,000 dollars.

COMMERCE.] Chili has always had commercial connections with the neighboring
Indians on its frontiers, with Peru and with Paragua. The Indians in their
transactions are found to be perfectly honest. Chili supplies Peru with hides,
dried fruit, copper, salt meat, horses, hemp and corn: and receives in exchange
tobacco, sugar, cocoa, earthen ware, some manufactures made at Quito, and some
articles of luxury brought from Europe. The ships sent from Calao on this
traffic, which is reciprocally useful, were formerly bound for Conception bay,
but now come to Valparaiso. During the course of near a century, no navigator
in these tranquil seas would venture to lose sight of land, and then these
voyages lasted a whole year. A pilot of the old world, having at length
observed the winds, performed the navigation in one month. He was considered as
a wizard, and was taken up by order of the inquisition, whose ignorance becomes
an object of ridicule, when its cruelty does not excite our abhorrence. The
journal he produced was his vindication; and it plainly appeared that to
perform the same voyage it was only necessary to keep clear of the coasts. His
method was therefore universally adopted.

Chili sends to Paragua wines, brandy, oil, and chiefly gold; and receives in
payment mules, wax, cotton, the herb of Paragua, negroes, and also much of the
merchandise of the ancient hemisphere, before the merchants of Lima had
obtained, either by bribery, or by their influence, that this last branch of
commerce should be prohibited. The commerce between the two colonies is not
carried on by sea; it has been found more expeditious, safer, and even less
expensive to go by land, though it is 354 leagues from St. Jago to Buennos
Airs, and more than forty leagues of the way are amidst the snows and
precipices of the Cordeleras.

INHABITANTS, MANNERS AND CUSTOMS.] The Indians in this country are still in a
great measure unconquered; they live scattered in the desetts and the forests,
and it is impossible to ascertain their numbers. It has already been mentioned,
that those Indians, which are not subject to the Spanish yoke, are very honest
in their commercial transactions, performing to a punctilio whatever they have
promised; but, like almost all other Indians, they are very fond of spirituous
liquors, and are eager to purchase them from every quarter. They live in small
huts which they build in the course of a day or two at farthest; and which they
abandon when hard pushed by an enemy. They are brave and warlike, and all the
attempts of the Spaniards to subdue them have proved ineffectual. It is almost
equally difficult to ascertain the number of Spaniards in Chili. The Abbe
Rayanl says, there are 40,000 in the city of St. Jago; if this be true, the
aggregate number in all the provinces of Chili must be more considerable than
has been generally supposed. The character and manners of these people do not
differ materially from those in Peru.

GOVERNMENT.] St. Jago is the capital of the state and the seat of the empire.
The commandant there is subordinate to the viceroy of Peru in all matters
relating to the government, to the finances, and to war; but he is independent
of him as chief administrator of justice, and president of the royal audience.
Eleven inferior officers distributed in the province, are charged, under his
orders, with the details of administration.

PARAGUA, OR LA PLATA.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 1500 Miles. between 12 and 37 S. Latitude. Breadth 1000 Miles. 50 and
75 W. Longitude.

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED by Amazonia on the north; by Brasil east; by Patagonia
south; and by Peru and Chili west.

It contains the following provinces:

Paragua, Parana, Guira, Uragua, Tucuman, Rio de la Plata.

RIVERS.] Besides a vast number of smaller rivers which water this country,
there is the grand river La Plata, which deserves a particular description. A
Modenese Jesuit, by the name of P. Cattanco, who sailed up this river, speaks
in the following language concerning it: "While I resided in Europe, and read
in books of history or geography that the river De la Plata was 150 miles in
breadth, I considered it as an exaggeration, because in this hemisphere, we
have no example of such vast rivers. When I approached its mouth, I had the
most vehement desire to ascertain the breadth with my own eyes, and I have
found the matter to be exactly as it was represented. This I deduce
particularly from one circumstance: When we took our departure from Monte
Viedo, a fort situated more than 100 miles from the mouth of the river, and
where its breadth is considerably diminished, we sailed a complete day before
we discovered the land on the opposite bank of the river; and when we were in
the middle of the channel, we could not discover land on either side, and saw
nothing but the sky and water, as if we had been in some great ocean. Indeed we
should have taken it to be sea, if the fresh water of the river, which was
turbid like the Po, had not satisfied us that it was a river."

CLIMATE, SOIL AND PRODUCE.] From the situation of this country, some parts of
it must be extremely hot, from the almost vertical influence of the rays of the
sun; while other parts must be pleasant and delightful. But the heat is in some
measure abated by the gentle breezes, which generally begin about 9 or 10
o'clock in the morning and continue the greatest part of the day. Some parts of
the country are very mountainous; but in many others you find extensive and
beautiful plains, where the soil is very rich, producing cotton, tobacco, and
the valuable herb called Paragua, together with a variety of fruits. There are
also prodigiously rich pastures, in which are bred such herds of cattle, that
it is said the hides are the only part exported; while the flesh is left to be
devoured by the ravenous beasts of the wilderness. Not long since, a horse
might be purchased here for one dollar, and an ox, chosen out of several
hundred, for a still more trifling sum.

COMMERCE AND CHIEF CITY.] Paragua sends annually into the kingdom of Peru as
many as 1500 or 2000 mules. They travel over dreary deserts for the distance of
8 or 900 leagues. What is not man capable of doing when necessity, resolution
and avarice are united. Neither deep and miry swamps, nor summits of lofty
mountains covered with eternal snow, can bar his progress. The province of
Tucuman furnishes to Potosi, annually, 16 or 18,000 oxen, and 4 or 5000 horses,
brought forth and reared upon its own territory. Paragua sends several articles
of commerce to Spain, but they are all brought from neighboring districts. The
only article it furnishes from its own territory is hides.

Buennos Airs is the capital of this country. Its situation on the river La
Plata, is healthy and pleasant, and the air temperate. It is regularly built.
Its streets are wide, the houses are extremely low; and each of them is
accommodated with a garden. The public and private buildings, which, sixty
years ago, were all made of earth, are of more solid and commodious
construction, since the natives have learned the art of making brick and lime.
The number of inhabitants is about 30,000. One side of the town is defended by
a fortress with a garrison of 6 or 700 men. The town stands 180 miles from the
sea. The ships get to it by sailing up a river that wants depth, is full of
islands, shoals and rocks, and where storms are more frequent and more dreadful
than on the ocean. It is necessary to anchor every night on the spot where they
come to; and on the most moderate days a pilot must go to sound the way for the
ship. After having surmounted these difficulties, the ships are obliged, at the
distance of three leagues from the town, to put their goods on board some light
vessel, and to go to refit, and to wait for their cargoes at Incunado de
Barragan, situated seven or eight leagues below.

INHABITANTS.] As to the number of inhabitants in this country, from the best
information that can be obtained, there are not more than 100,000. including
Spaniards, Indians, Negroes and the mixed blood or Creoles. The Spaniards
exhibit much the same character here as in the other kingdoms already described.

GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.] It is a circumstance well known to all who are
acquainted with the history of South America, that long ago the Jesuits
introduced themselves into this country, and made great efforts to civilize and
christianize the natives. Their conduct and institutions open an abundant
source of reflection. We are naturally led to inquire what could induce men to
abandon the seat of ease and tranquillity; to traverse immense deserts; to
climb the craggy cliffs of lofty mountains; to plunge into deep and miry
swamps; to subject themselves to hunger, to thirst, to danger and misery of
every kind; surrounded by fierce and unknown savages, whose characters they
were unacquainted with, and whose suspicions might have armed them with
vengeance in an instant; who neither knew nor cared to know the errand on which
these missionaries came; whose manner of life was independent, and whose minds
disdained the burdens of civilized life: I say, we wish to know what powerful
motives could have inclined these missionaries to leave cultivated society, and
encounter all these dangers. Was it the love of riches, a thirst for glory, or
the good of mankind, that influenced their conduct? or were they influenced by
a blind and misguided superstition? Whatever may have been their motives, if
history speaks the truth, they have really made the inhabitants of this part of
the new world more virtuous, more civil, and more happy.

Portuguese America.
BRAZIL.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 2500 Miles. between the Equator and 35 S. Lat. Breadth 700 Miles. 35
and 60 W. Longitude.

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED by the mouth of the river Amazon and the Atlantic ocean
on the north; and by the same ocean on the east; on the south, by the river
Plata; on the west, by morasses, lakes, torrents, rivers and mountains; which
separate it from Amazonia, and the Spanish possessions. On the coast are three
small islands, where ships touch for provisions on their voyage to the South
Seas, viz. Fernando, St. Barbaro, and St. Catherine's.

BAYS, HARBORS AND RIVERS.] These are the harbors of Panambuco, All Saints,
Rio Janeiro, the port of St. Vincent, the harbor of Gabriel, and the Port of
St. Salvador. There is a great number of noble streams, which unite with the
rivers Amazon and Platz; beside others which fall into the Atlantic ocean.

CLIMATE, SOIL AND PRODUCTIONS.] The climate of Brazil has been described by
two eminent naturalists, Piso and Margrave, who observed it with a
philosophical accuracy, to be temperate and mild, when compared with that of
Africa. They ascribe this chiefly to the refreshing wind, which blows
continually from the sea. The air is not only cool, but chilly through the
night, so that the natives kindle a fire every evening in their huts. As the
rivers in this country annually overflow their banks, and leave a sort of slime
upon the lands, the soil here must be in many places amazingly rich; and this
corresponds with the best information upon the subject. The vegetable
productions are Indian corn, sugar canes, tobacco, indigo, hides, specacuana,
balsam, Brazil wood, which is of a red color, hard and dry; and is chiefly
used in dying, but not the red of the best kind. Here is also the yellow
fustic, of use in dying yellow; and a beautiful piece of speckled, wood made
use of in cabinet work. Here are five different sorts of palm trees, some
curious ebony, and a great variety of cotton trees. This country abounds in
horned cattle, which are hunted for their hides only, 20,000 being sent
annually into Europe. There is also a plenty of deers, hares and other game.
Amongst the wild beasts found here, are tigers, porcupines, janouveras, and a
fierce animal, somewhat like a greyhound; monkey, sloths and the topirassou, a
creature between a bull and an ass, but without horns and entirely harmless;
the flesh is very good and has the flavor of beef. There is a numberless
variety of fowl, wild and tame in this country. Among these are turkeys, fine
white hens and ducks. The remarkable birds are the humming bird; the lankima,
sometimes called the unicorn bird, from its having a horn two or three inches
long growing out of its forehead; the guira famous for often changing its
color, being first black, then ash colored, next white, afterward scarlet,
and last of all crimson; which colors grow richer and deeper the longer the
bird lives. Among the abundance of fish with which the seas, lakes and rivers
of this country are stored, is the globe fish, so called from its form, which
is so beset with spines like a hedgehog that it bids defiance to all fish of
prey. But the most remarkable creature is the sea bladder, so called because it
greatly resembles one, and swims on the surface of the waves; the inside is
filled with air, except a small quantity of water, that serves to poise it. The
skin is very thin and transparent, and, like a bubble raised in the water,
reflects all the colors of the sky. Brazil breeds a great variety of serpents
and venomous creatures, among which are the Indian salamander, a four legged
infect, the sting of which is mortal; the ibivaboca* a species of serpent about
seven yards long and half a yard in circumference, whose poison is
instantaneously fatal: the rattle snake, which there attains an enormous size;
the liboyd or roe buck snake, which authors inform us are capable of swallowing
a roe buck whole with its horns, being between twenty and thirty feet in length
and two yards in circumference. Besides those there are many other insects and
serpents of a dangerous and venomous nature.

COMMERCE AND CHIEF TOWNS.] The trade of Brazil is very great, and increases
every year; which is the less surprising, as the Portuguese have opportunities
of supplying themselves with slaves for their several works, at a much cheaper
rate than any other European power that has settlements in America; they being
the only European nation that has established colonies in Africa, and from
whence they import as many as 40,000 negroes annually. The exports of Brazil
are diamonds, sugar, tobacco, hides, drugs and medicines; and they receive in
return, woollen goods of all kinds, linens, laces, silks, hats, lead, tin,
pewter, copper, iron, beef and cheese. They also receive from Maderia a great
quantity of wine, vinegar and brandy; and from Azores, 25,000l. worth of other
liquors.

ST. SALVADOR is the capital of Brazil. This city, which has a noble, spacious
and commodious harbor, is built on a high and steep rock, having the sea upon
one side, a lake forming a crescent on the other. The situation makes it in a
manner impregnable by nature; and they have besides added to it very strong
fortifications. It is populous, magnificent, and beyond comparison the most gay
and opulent in all Brazil.

MINES.] There are gold mines in many parts of this country, which have been
wrought with considerable profit to government. The extraction of gold is
neither very laborious nor dangerous in Brazil. It is sometimes on the surface
of the soil, and this is the purest kind, and at other times it is necessary to
dig for it 18 or 20 feet, but seldom lower. It is found in larger pieces upon
the mountains and barren rocks than in the valleys or on the borders of the
river. Every man who discovers a mine, must give notice of it to the
government. If the vein be thought of little consequence by persons appointed
to examine it, it is always given up to the public. If it be declared to be a
rich vein, the government reserve a portion of it to themselves. Another share
is given to the commandant; a third to the intendant; and two shares are
secured to the discoverer. The mines are obliged to deliver to the king of
Portugal a fifth part of all the gold which is extracted. There are also many
diamond mines, which have been discovered in this country; they are of all
colors and also of every shade. The diamond has the red of the ruby, the
orange of the hyacinth, the blue of the sapphire, and the green of the emerald.
The last is the most scarce and dearest when it is of a beautiful tint.
Transparency and clearness are the natural essential properties of the diamond.

NATIVES.] The native Brazilians are about the size of the Europeans, but not
so stout. They are subject to fewer distempers, and are long lived. They wear
no clothing; the women wear their hair extremely long, the men cut their's
short; the women wear bracelets of bones of a beautiful white, the men
necklaces of the same; the women paint their faces, and the men their bodies.
The food of the Brazilians is very simple; they live upon shell fish by the sea
side; along the rivers by fishing; and in the forests by hunting; and when
these fail, they live upon Cassava and other roots. They are extremely fond of
dancing and other amusements; and these amusements are not interrupted by the
worship of a Supreme Being, for it is said they know of none; nor is their
tranquillity disturbed by the dread of a future state, of which they have no
idea. They have however their magicians, who, by strange contortions, so far
work upon the credulity of the people, as to throw them into violent
convulsions. If the impostures of these magicians are detected, they are
immediately put to death, which serves in some measure to check the spirit of
deceit. Every Brazilian takes as many wives as he chooses, and puts them away
when he gets tired of them. When the women lie in, they keep their bed but a
day or two; then the mother, hanging the child to her neck in a cotton scarf,
returns to her usual occupation, without any kind of inconvenience. Travelers
are received with distinguished marks of civility by the native Brazilians.
Wherever they go they are surrounded with women, who wash their feet, and
welcome them with the most obliging expressions. But it would be an
unpardonable affront if they should leave the family where they were first
entertained, in hopes of better accommodation in another. Some of these virtues,
however, were more applicable to these natives, before they were corrupted by
an intercourse with Europeans.

RELIGION.] Though the king of Portugal, as grand master of the order of
Christ, be solely in possession of the titles; and though the produce of the
crusade belongs entirely to him; yet in this extensive country, six bishoprics
have been successively founded, which acknowledge for their superior the
archbishopric of Bohia, established in the year 1552. The fortunate prelates,
most of them Europeans, who fill these honorable sees, live in a very
commodious manner, upon the emoluments attached to the function of their
ministry, and upon a pension of 50l. and from that to 1250l. granted to them by
the government. Among the inferior clergy, none but the missionaries, who are
settled in the Indian villages, are paid; but the others find sufficient
resources among the superstitious people, whom they are to edify, to instruct,
and to comfort. Besides an annual tribute, paid by every family to the
clergyman, he is entitled to two shillings for every birth, for every wedding,
and every burial. Though there be not absolutely an inquisition in Brazil, yet
the people of that country are not protected from the outrages of that
barbarous institution.

GOVERNMENT.] The government of Brazil is in the viceroy, who has two councils:
one for criminal the other for civil affairs, in both of which he presides; but
there is no part of the world where the lawyers are more corrupt, or the
chicanery of their profession more practiced.

Only half of the 16 Captainries, into which this country is divided, belong to
the crown; the rest being fiefs made over to some of the nobility, in reward of
their extraordinary services, who do little more than acknowledge the
sovereignty of the king of Portugal.

HISTORY, etc.] The Portuguese discovered this country in the year 1500, but
did not plant it till the year 1549, when they took possession of All Saints
Bay, and built the city of St. Salvador, which is now the residence of the
viceroy and archbishop. The Dutch invaded Brazil in 1623, and subdued the
northern provinces; but the Portuguese agreed in 1661, to pay the Dutch eight
tons of gold to relinquish their interest in this country, which was accepted,
and the Portuguese remained in peaceable possession of all Brazil till about
the end of 1762, when the Spanish governor of Buennos Airs, hearing of a war
between Portugal and Spain, took, after a month's siege, the Portuguese
frontier fortress, called St. Sacrament; but by the treaty of peace it was
restored.

FRENCH AMERICA.
CAYENNE.
BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED north and east, by the Atlantic ocean; south, by
Amazonia; and west, by Guiana, or Surrinam. It extends 240 miles along the
coast of Guiana, and nearly 300 miles within land; lying between the equator
and the 5th degree north latitude.

CLIMATE, SOIL AND PRODUCE.] The land along the coast is low, marshy and very
subject to inundations during the rainy seasons, from the multitude of rivers
which rush down from the mountains with great impetuosity. Here the atmosphere
is very hot, moist and unwholesome, especially where the woods are not cleared
away; but on the higher parts where the trees are cut down and the ground laid
out in plantations, the air is more healthy and the heat greatly mitigated by
the sea breezes. The soil in many parts is very fertile, producing sugar,
tobacco, Indian corn, fruits and other necessaries of life.

GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.] The French have taken possession of an island, upon
this coast, called also Cayenne. It is about 30 miles in circumference, and is
very unhealthy; but having some good harbors, they have here some settlements,
which raise sugar, coffee, and some other kinds of produce. The French
established themselves here, in 1635; but they afterward abandoned the island,
and the English took possession of it. Soon after the French returned and drove
out the English; but were expelled in their turn by the Dutch, who kept their
conquest but a short time, and then were subdued by the French, who still keep
possession of it. The whole of Cayenne is an inconsiderable province, and
therefore very little is related of it.

Dutch America.
SURRINAM, OR DUTCH GUIANA.
THIS province, the only one belonging to the Dutch, on the Continent of
America, is situated between 5 and 7 N. Lat. Having the mouth of the Oronoko
and the Atlantic on the north; Cayenne east: Amazonia south; and Terra Firma
west.

The Dutch claim the whole coast from the mouth of the Oronoko to the river
Marowyne, on which are situated their colonies of Essequebo, Demerara, Berbice,
and Surrinam. The latter begins with the river Saramacha, and ends with the
Marowyne, including a length of coast of 120 miles.

RIVERS.] A number of fine rivers pass through this country, the principal of
which are Essequebo, Surrinam, Demerara, Berbice and Conya. Essequebo is nine
miles wide at its mouth, and is more than 300 miles in length. Surrinam is a
beautiful river, three quarters of a mile wide, navigable for the largest
vessels 4 leagues, and for small^ vessels 60 or 70 miles further. Its banks,
quite to the water's edge, are covered with evergreen mangrove trees, which
render the passage up this river very delightful. The Demerara is about three
quarters of a mile wide where it empties into the Surrinam, is navigable for
large vessels 100 miles; a hundred miles further are several falls of easy
ascent, above which it divides into the Southwest and Southeast branches.

CLIMATE.] In the months of September, October, and November, the climate is
unhealthy, particularly to strangers. The common diseases are putrid and other
fevers, the dry belly ach, and the dropsy. 100 miles back from the sea, you
come to quite a different soil, a hilly country, a pure, dry, wholesome air,
where a fire sometimes would not be disagreeable. Along the sea coast, the
water is brackish and unwholesome -- the air damp and sultry. -- The
thermometer ranges from 75 to 90 through the year. A Northeast breeze never
fails to blow from about 9 o'clock in the morning through the day, in the
hottest seasons. As the days and nights, throughout the year, are very nearly
of equal length; the air can never become extremely heated, nor the inhabitants
so greatly incommoded by the heat, as those who live at a greater distance from
the equator. The seasons were formerly divided regularly into rainy and dry;
but of late years so much dependence cannot be placed upon them, owing probably
to the country's being more cleared, by which means a free passage is opened
for the air and vapors.

WATER.] The water of the lower parts of the rivers is brackish, and unfit for
use; and the inhabitants are obliged to make use of rain water, which is here
uncommonly sweet and good. It is caught in cisterns, placed under ground, and
before drinking, is set in large earthen pots to settle, by which means it
becomes very clear and wholesome. These eastern are so large and numerous, that
water is seldom scarce.

CHIEF TOWNS AND POPULATION.] Paramaribo, situated on Surrinam river, 4 leagues
from the sea, N. Lat. 6 W. Lon. 55 from London, is the principal town in
Surrinam. It contains about 2,000 whites, one half of whom are Jews, and 8,000
slaves. The houses are principally of wood; some few have glass windows, but
generally they have wooden shutters. The streets are spacious and straight, and
planted on each side with orange or tamarind trees.

About seventy miles from the sea, on the same river, is a village of about 40
or 50 houses, inhabited by Jews. This village and the town above mentioned,
with the intervening plantations, contain all the inhabitants in this colony,
which amount to 3,200 whites, and 43,000 slaves. The buildings on the
plantations are many of them costly, convenient and airy. The country around is
thinly inhabited with the native Indians, a harmless friendly set of beings.
They are, in general, short of stature, but remarkably well made, of a light
copper color, straight black hair, without beards, high cheek bones, and broad
shoulders. In their ears, noses and hair, the women wear ornaments of silver,
etc. Both men and women go naked. One nation or tribe of them (...) the lower
part of the leg of the female children, when young, with a cord bound very
tight for the breadth of 6 inches about the ancle, which cord is never
afterward taken off but to put on a new one; by which means the flesh, which
should otherwise grow on that part of the leg, increases the calf to a great
size, and leaves the bone below nearly bare. This, though it must render them
very weak, is reckoned a great beauty by them. The language of the Indians
appears to be very soft. They are mortal enemies to every kind of labor; but
nevertheless, manufacture a few articles, such as very fine cotton hammocks,
earthen water pots, baskets, a red or yellow dye called Roucau, and some other
trifles, all which they bring to town and exchange for such articles as they
stand in need of.

They paint themselves red, and some are curiously figured with black. Their
food consists chiefly of fish and crabs and cassava of which they plant great
quantities, and this is almost the only produce they attend to. They cannot be
said to be absolutely wandering tribes, but their huts being merely a few cross
sticks, covered with branches, so as to defend them from the rain and sun, they
frequently quit their habitations, if they see occasion, and establish them
elsewhere. They do not shun the whites, and have been serviceable against the
runaway negroes.

Dr. Bancroft observes, that the inhabitants of Dutch Guiana are either whites,
blacks or the reddish brown aboriginal natives. The promiscuous intercourse of
these different people, have generated several intermediate casts, whose
colors depend on their degree of consanguinity to either whites, blacks,
negroes, or Indians.

SOIL, PRODUCTIONS, TRADE, etc.] Through the whole country runs a ridge of
oyster shells, nearly parallel to the coast, but three or four leagues from it,
of a considerable breadth, and from four to eight feet deep, composed of shells
exactly of the same nature as those which form the present coast: From this and
other circumstances, there is great reason to believe that the land, from that
distance from the sea, is all new land, rescued from the sea, either by some
revolution in nature, or other unknown cause.

On each side of the rivers and creeks are situated the Plantations, containing
from 500 to 2000 acres each, in number about 550 in the whole colony, producing
at present annually about 16,000 hhds. of sugar, 12,000,000lb. coffee,
700,000lb. cocoa, 850,000lb. cotton: All which articles (cotton excepted) have
fallen off within 15 years, at least one third, owing to bad management, both
here and in Holland, and to other causes. Of the proprietors of these
plantations, not above 80 reside here. The sugar plantations have many of them
water mills, which being much more profitable than others, and the situation of
the colony admitting of them, will probably become general; of the rest, some
are worked by mules, others by cattle, but from the lowness of the country
norse by the wind. The estates are for the greatest part mortgaged for as much
or more than they are worth, which greatly discourages any improvements which
might otherwise be made. Was it not for the unfortunate situation of the
colony, in this and in other respects, it is certainly capable of being brought
to a great height of improvement; dies, gums, oils, plants for medical
purposes, etc. might and undoubtedly will, at some future period, be sound in
abundance. Rum might be distilled here; indigo, ginger, rice, tobacco, have
been and may be farther cultivated; and many other articles. In the woods are
found many kinds of good and durable timber, and some woods for ornamental
purposes, particularly a kind of mahogany called copic. The soil is perhaps as
rich and as luxuriant as any in the world; it is generally a rich, fat, clayey
earth, lying in some places above the level of the rivers at high water (which
rises about 8 feet) and in most places below it. Whenever from a continued
course of cultivation for many years, a piece of land becomes impoverished (for
manure is not known here) it is laid under water for a certain number of years,
and thereby regains its fertility, and in the mean time a new piece of wood
land is cleared. This country has never experienced those dreadful scourges of
the West Indies, hurricanes: and droughts from the lowness of the land, it has
not to fear; nor has the produce ever been destroyed by infects or by the
blast. In short, this colony, by proper management, might become equal to
Jamaica or any other. Land is not wanting; it is finely intersected by noble
rivers, and abundant creeks; the soil is of the best kind, it is well situated,
and the climate is not very unhealthy, and is growing better, and will continue
so to do the more the country is cleared of its woods, and cultivated.

ANIMALS, FISH, SERPENTS, etc.] The rivers abound with fish, some of which are
good; at certain seasons of the year there is plenty of turtle. The woods
abound with plenty of deer, hares, and rabbits, a kind of buffaloe, and two
species of wild hogs, one of which (the peccary) is remarkable for having its
navel on the back.

The woods are infested with several species of tigers, but with no other
ravenous or dangerous animals. The rivers are rendered dangerous by alligators
from four to seven feet long, and a man was a short time since crushed between
the jaws of a fish, but its name is not known. Scorpions and tarantulas are
found here of a large size and great venom, and other insects without number,
some of them very dangerous and troublesome. The torporific eel also, the touch
of which, by means of the bare hand or any conductor, has the effect of a
strong electrical shock. Serpents also, some of which are venomous, and others,
as has been asserted by many credible persons, are from 25 to 50 feet long. In
the woods are monkeys, the sloth, and parrots in all their varieties; also some
birds of beautiful plumage, among others the flamingo but few or no singing
birds.

MILITARY STRENGTH, GOVERNMENT, etc.] The river Surrinam is guarded by a fort
and two redoubts at the entrance, and a fort at Paramaribo, but none of them of
any strength, so that one or two frigates would be sufficient to make
themselves masters of the whole colony; and never was there a people who more
ardently wished for a change of government than the inhabitants of this colony
do at this time. The many grievances they labor under, and the immense burden
of taxes, which almost threaten the ruin of the colony, make them in some
measure excusable in their general desire to change the Dutch for a British or
French government. The colony is not immediately under the states general, but
under a company in Holland, called the Directors of Surrinam, (a company first
formed by the states general, but now supplying its own vacancies) by them are
appointed the governor and all the principal officers both civil and military.
The interior government consists of a governor and a supreme and inferior
council, the members of the latter are chosen by the governor from a double
nomination of the principal inhabitants, and those of the former in the same
manner. By these powers, and by a magistrate presiding over all criminal
affairs, justice is executed and laws are enacted necessary for the interior
government of the colony; those of a more general and public nature are enacted
by the directors, and require no approbation here by the court.

The colony is guarded farther by about 1600 regular troops paid by the
directors. These troops, together with a corpse of about 250 from negroes, paid
by the court here, and another small corpse of chasseurs, and so many slaves as
the court thinks fit to order from the planters from time to time, are
dispersed at posts placed at proper distances on a Cordon, surrounding the
colony on the land side, in order, as far as possible, to defend the distant
plantations and the colony in general from the attacks of several dangerous
bands of runaway slaves, which from very small beginnings have, from the
natural prolificacy of the negro race, and the continual addition of fresh
fugitives, arrive at such an height as to have cost the country very great sums
of money and much loss of men, without being able to do these negroes any
effectual injury. The foregoing account of Surrinam was principally taken from
a letter of Mr. Apthorp to his father. See American Apollo.


HISTORY.] This colony was first possessed by the French as early as the year
1630 or 40, and was abandoned by them on account of its unhealthy climate. In
the year 1650 it was taken up by some Englishmen, and in 1662 a charter was
granted by Charles II. About this time it was considerably augmented by the
settlement of a number of Jews, who had been driven out of Cayenne and the
Brazils, whose descendants (with other Jews) compose at present one half of the
white inhabitants of the colony, and are allowed great privileges. In 1667 it
was taken by the Dutch, and the English having got possession about the same
time of the then Dutch colony of New York, each party retained its conquest,
the English planters most of them retired to Jamaica, leaving their slaves
behind them, whose language is still English, but so corrupted as not to be
understood at first by an Englishman.

Aboriginal America. Or that Part which the ABORIGINAL INDIANS possess.
AMAZONIA.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 1400 Miles. between the Equator and 20 South Latitude. Breadth 900
Miles.

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED north, by Terra Firma and Guiana; east, by Brazil; south,
by Paragua; and west, by Peru.

RIVERS.] The river Amazon is the largest in the known world. This river, so
famous for the length of its course, that great vassal of the sea, to which it
brings the tribute it has received from so many of its own vassals, seems to be
produced by innumerable torrents, which rush down with amazing impetuosity from
the eastern declivity of the Andes, and unite in a spacious plain to form this
immense river. In its progress of 3300 miles, it receives the waters of a
prodigious number of rivers, some of which come from far, and are very broad
and deep. It is interspersed with an infinite number of islands, which are too
often overflowed to admit of culture. It falls into the Atlantic ocean under
the Equator, and is there 150 miles broad.

CLIMATE, SOIL AND PRODUCTIONS.] The air is cooler in this country than could
be expected, considering it is situated in the middle of the torrid zone. This
is partly owing to the heavy rains which occasion the rivers to overflow their
banks one half of the year, and partly to the cloudiness of the weather, which
obscures the sun great part of the time he is above the horizon. During the
rainy season on the country is subject to dreadful storms of thunder and
lightning.

The soil is extremely fertile, producing cocoa nuts, pine apples, bananas,
plaintains, and a great variety of tropical fruits; cedar, redwood, pak, ebony,
logwood, and many other sorts of dying wood; together with tobacco, sugar
canes, cotton, potatoes, balsam, honey, etc. The woods abound with tigers, wild
boars, buffaloes, deer and game of various kinds. The rivers and lakes abound
with fish. Here are also sea cows and turtles; but the crocodiles and water
serpents render fishing a dangerous employment.

WOMEN.] As early as the time of Hercules and Theseus the Greeks had imagined
the existence of a nation of Amazons; with this fable they embellished the
history of all their heroes, not excepting that of Alexander; and the
Spaniards, infatuated with this dream of antiquity, transferred it to America.
They reported that a republic of female warriors actually existed in America,
who did not live in society with men, and only admitted them once a year for
the purposes of procreation. To give the more credit to this romantic story, it
was reported, not without reason, that the women in America were all so
unhappy, and were treated with such contempt and inhumanity by the men, that
many of them had agreed to shake off the yoke of their tyrants. It was further
said, that being accustomed to follow the men into the forests, and to carry
their provisions and baggage when they went out to sight or to hunt, they must
necessarily have been inured to hardships, and rendered capable of forming so
bold a resolution. Since this story has been propagated, infinite pains have
been taken to find out the truth of it, but no traces could ever be discovered.

NATIVES.] These natives, like all the other Americans, are of a good stature,
have handsome features, long black hair, and ^^pper complexions. They are said
to have a taste for the imitative arts, especially painting and sculpture; and
make good mechanics. Their cordage is made of the barks of trees, and their
sails of cotton, their hatchets of tortoise shells or hard stones, their
chissels, plains and ^^imbles, of the horns and teeth of wild beasts; and their
canoes are (...) hollowed. They spin and weave cotton cloth; and build their
houses with wood any clay, and thatch them with reeds. Their arms in general
are darts and javelins, bows and arrows, with targets of cane or fish skins.
The several nations are governed by their chiefs or cachiques; it being
observable that the monarchical (...) of government has prevailed almost
universally, both among the ancient and modern barbarians, doubtless, on
account of its requiring a much less refined policy than the republican system.
The regalia, which distinguish the chiefs are a crown of parrots feathers, a
chain of tygers' teeth or claws, which hangs round the waist, and a wooden
sword.

GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.] The mind of a good man is pleased with the reflection,
that any part of South America has escaped the ravages of European conquerors.
This country has hitherto remained unsubdued. The original inhabitants enjoy
their native freedom and independence.

PATAGONIA.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 1100 Miles. between 35 and 54 South Latitude. Breadth 350 Miles.

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED north, by Chili and Paragua; east, by the Atlantic ocean;
south by the Straits of Magellan; west by the Pacific ocean.

CLIMATE, SOIL AND PRODUCE.] The climate is said to be much colder in this
country, than in the north, under the same parallels of latitude; which is
imputed to its being in the vicinity of the Andes, which pass through it, being
covered with eternal snow. It is almost impossible to say what the soil would
produce, as it is not at all cultivated by the natives. The northern parts are
covered with wood, among which is an inexhaustible fund of large timber; but
toward the south it is said there is not a single tree large enough to be of
use to mechanics. There are, however, good pastures, which feed incredible
numbers of horned cattle and horses, first carried there by the Spaniards, and
now increased in an amazing degree.

INHABITANTS.] Patagonia is inhabited by a variety of Indian tribes, among
which are the Patagons, from whom the country takes its name; the Pampas and
the Cossores. They all live upon fish and game and what the earth produces
spontaneously. Their huts are thatched, and, notwithstanding the rigor of the
climate, they wear no other clothes than a mantle made of seal skin, or the
skin of some beast, and that they throw off when they are in action. They are
exceedingly hardy, brave and active, making use of their arms, which are bows
and arrows headed with flints, with amazing dexterity.

Magellan, who first discovered the straits which bear his name, and after him
Commodore Biron, have reported. that those exists, in these regions, a race of
giants; but others, who have sailed this way, contradict the report. Upon the
whole we may conclude that this story is like that of the female republic of
Amazons.

The Spaniards once built a fort upon the straits, and lest a garrison in it to
prevent any other European nation passing that way into the Pacific Ocean: but
most of the men perished by hunger, whence the place obtained the name of Port
Famine; and since that fatal event, no nation has attempted to plant colonies
is Patagonia. As to the religion or government of these savages, we have no
certain information. Some have reported, that these people believe in invisible
powers, both good and evil; and that they pay a tribute of gratitude to the
one, and deprecate the wrath and vengeance of the other.

GENERAL OBSERVATIONS UPON SOUTH AMERICA.
We have now traversed the several provinces of that extensive region, which is
comprehended between the Isthmus of Darien and the fifty fourth degree of S.
latitude. We have taken a cursory view of the rivers, the soil, the climate,
the productions, the commerce, the inhabitants, etc. It only remains now, that
we should make such other general observations as naturally occur upon the
subject.

The history of Columbus, together with his bold and adventurous actions in the
discovery of this country, are sufficiently known to all who have paid any
attention to history. His elevated mind suggested to him ideas superior to any
other man of his age, and his aspiring genius prompted him to make greater and
more noble efforts for new discoveries. He crossed the extensive Atlantic, and
brought to view a world unheard of by the people of the ancient hemisphere.
This excited an enterprising, avaricious spirit among the inhabitants of
Europe; and they flocked to America for the purposes of carnage and plunder.
Accordingly, a scene of barbarity has been acted, of which South America has
been the principal theater, which shocks the human mind, and almost staggers
belief. No sooner had the Spaniards set foot upon the American continent, than
they laid claim to the soil, to the mines, and to the services of the natives,
wherever they came. Countries were invaded, kingdoms were overturned, innocence
was attacked, and happiness had no asylum. Despotism and cruelty with all their
terrible scourges attended their advances in every part. They went forth, they
conquered, they ravaged, they destroyed. No deceit, no cruelty was too great to
be made use of, to satisfy their avarice. Justice was disregarded, and mercy
formed no part of the character of these inhuman conquerors. They were intent
only on the prosecution of schemes most degrading and most scandalous to the
human character. In South America, the kingdoms of Terra Firma, of Peru, of
Chili, of Paragua, of Brazil and of Guiana successively fell a sacrifice to
their vicious ambition. The history of their several reductions is too lengthy
to be inserted in a work of this kind. The reader will find the best history of
these tragical scenes in Dr. Robertson's History of South America.
Let us then turn from these distressing scenes -- let us leave the political
world, where nothing but spectacles of horror are presented to our view; where
scenes of blood and carnage distract the imagination -- where the avarice,
injustice and inhumanity of men furnish nothing but uneasy sensations -- let us
leave these, I say, and enter the natural world, whose laws are constant and
uniform, and where beautiful, grand and sublime objects continually present
themselves to our view.

We have already given a description of those beautiful and spacious rivers
which every where intersect this country; the next thing that will engage our
attention is that immense chain of mountains, which runs from one end of the
continent to the other. At sight of these enormous masses, which rise to such
prodigious heights above the humble surface of the earth, where almost all
mankind have fixed their residence; of those masses, which in one part are
crowned with impenetrable and ancient forests, that have never resounded with
the stroke of the hatchet, and in another, raise their towering tops and stop
the clouds in their course, while in other parts they keep the traveller at a
distance from their summits, either by ramparts of ice that surround them, or
from volleys of flame issuing forth from the frightful and yawning caverns;
masses giving rise to impetuous torrents descending with dreadful noise from
their open sides, to rivers, fountains and boiling springs: At these
appearances, I say, every beholder is fixed in astonishment.

The height of the most elevated point in the Pyrences is, according to Mr.
Coss^ni, 6,646 feet. The height of the mountain Gemmi, in the Canton of Berne,
is 10,110 feet. The height of the pike of Teneriffe is 13,178 feet. The height
of the Chimborazo, the most elevated point of the Andes, is 20,280 feet. Upon
comparison, the highest part of the Andes is 7,102 feet higher than the pike of
Teneriffe, the most elevated mountain known in the ancient hemisphere.

West India Islands.
BETWEEN North and South America, lie a multitude of islands, which are called
the West Indies, and which, such as are worth cultivation, now belong to five
European powers, as Great Britain, Spain, France, Holland, and Denmark, as
follows: The BRITISH claim.
Jamaica, St. Vincent, Barbados, Nevis, St. Christopher's, Montserrat,
Antigua, Barbuda, Grenada, and the Grenadines, Anguilla, Bermudas, Dominica,
The Bahama Islands. SPAIN claims
Cuba, Trinidad, Part of St. Domingo, or Hispaniola, Margaretta, Porto Rico,
Juan Fernandes, in the Pacific Ocean. The FRENCH claim
Part of St. Domingo, St. Bartholomew, Deseada and Marigalante, Martinico,
Gaudalupe, Tobago. St. Lucia, The DUTCH claim
The Islands of St. Eustatia, Curassou, or Curacoa, Saba. DENMARK claims
The Islands of St. Croix, St. Thomas, and St. John's,

WEST INDIES Acccording to the best AUTHORITIES
map of the West Indies (Cuba, Jamaica, Hispaniola, Bahamas, etc.)

The climate in all the West India islands is nearly the same, allowing for
these accidental differences which the several situations and qualities of the
lands themselves produce. As they lie within the tropics, and the sun goes
quite over their heads, passing beyond them to the north, and never returning
farther from any of them than about 30 degrees to the south, they would be
continually subjected to an extreme and intolerable heat, if the trade winds,
rising gradually as the sun gathers strength, did not blow in upon them from
the sea, and refresh the air in such a manner, as to enable them to attend
their concerns even under the meridian sun. On the other hand, as the night
advances, a breeze begins to be perceived, which blows smartly from the land,
as it were from the center, toward the sea, to all points of the compass at
once.

By the same remarkable Providence in the disposing of things, it is that when
the sun has made a great progress toward the tropic of Cancer, and becomes in
a manner vertical, he draws after him such a vast body of clouds, which shield
them from his direct beams; and dissolving into rain, cool the air, and refresh
the country, thirsty with the long drought, which commonly prevails from the
beginning of January to the latter end of May.

The rains in the West Indies are like floods of water, poured from the clouds
with a prodigious impetuosity; the rivers suddenly rise; new rivers and lakes
are formed, and in a short time all the low country is under water. See Wafer's
journey across the Isthmus of Darien.
Hence it is, that the rivers which have their source within the tropics, swell
and overflow their banks at a certain season; but so mistaken were the ancients
in their idea of the torrid zone, that they imagined it to be dried and
scorched up with a continual and fervent heat, and to be for that reason
uninhabitable; when, it reality, some of the largest rivers of the world have
their course within its limits, and the moisture is one of the greatest
inconveniences of the climate in several places.

The rains make the only distinction of seasons in the West Indies; the trees
are green the whole year round; they have no cold, no frosts, no snows, and but
rarely some hail; the storms of hail are, however, very violent when they
happen, and the hailstones very great and heavy. Whether it be owing to this
moisture, which alone does not seem to be a sufficient cause, or to a greater
quantity of a sulphurous acid, which predominates in the air of this country,
metals of all kinds that are subject to the action of such causes rust and
canker in a very short time; and this cause, perhaps, as much as the heat
itself, contributes to make the climate of the West Indies unfriendly and
unpleasant to an European constitution.

It is in the rainy season (principally in the month of August, more rarely in
July and September) that they are assaulted by hurricanes, the most terrible
calamity to which they are subject (as well as the people in the East Indies)
from the climate; this destroys, at a stroke, the labors of many years, and
prostates the most exalted hopes of the planter, and at the moment when he
thinks himself out of danger. It is a sudden and violent storm of wind, rain,
thunder and lightning, attended with a furious swelling of the seas, and
sometimes with an earthquake; in short, with every circumstance which the
elements can assemble, that is terrible and destructive. First, they see as a
prelude to the ensuing havoc, whole fields of sugar canes whirled into the
air, and scattered over the face of the country. The strongest trees of the
forest are torn up by the roots, and driven about like stubble; their windmills
are swept away in a moment; their utensils, the fixtures, the ponderous copper
boilers, and stills of several hundred weight are wrenched from the ground, and
battered to pieces; their houses are no protection; the roofs are torn off at
one blast; whilst the rain, which in an hour raises the water five feet, rushes
in upon them with an irresistible violence.

The grand staple commodity of the West Indies in sugar; this commodity was not
at all known to the Greeks and Romans, though it was made in China, in very
early times, from whence was derived the first knowledge of it; but the
Portuguese were the first who cultivated it in America, and brought it into
request, as one of the materials of a very universal luxury in Europe. It is
not determined whether the cane, from which this substance is taken, be a
native of America, or brought thither to their colony of Brazil, by the
Portuguese, from India and the coast of Africa; but, however that matter may
be, in the beginning they made the most, as they still do the best, sugars
which come to market in this part of the world. The juice within the sugar cane
is the most lively, excellent, and the least cloying sweet in nature; which,
sucked raw, has proved extremely nutritive and wholesome. From the molasses,
rum is distilled, and from the scummings of the sugar a meaner spirit is
procured. The tops of the canes, and the leaves which grow upon the joints,
make very good provender for their cattle; and the refuse of the cane, after
grinding, serves for fire; so that no part of this excellent plant is without
its use.

They compute that, when things are well managed, the rum and molasses pay the
charges of the plantation, and the sugars are clear gain. However, a man cannot
begin a sugar plantation of any consequence, not to mention the purchase of the
land, which is very high, under a capital of at least 5000l.

The quantity of rum and molasses exported from all the British West India
islands, in 1787, 1788 and 1789, to all parts, was, accurately, as follows:
Gallons. Gallons. 1787 Rum 5,496,147 of which 1,660,155 came to the United
States. Molasses 30,580 do. 4,200 do. 1788 Rum 6,770,332 do. 1,541,093 do.
Molasses 28,812 do. 3,928 do. 1789 Rum 9,492,177 do. 1,485,461 do. Molasses
21,192 do. 1,000 do. Mr. Baillie, in his debate on the motion for the abolition
of the slave trade, April, 1792, asserts -- that the exports and imports to and
from the West India islands and Africa, amount annually to 10,000,000l.
sterling, which gives employment to 300,000 tons of shipping, and about 25,000
seamen.


The negroes in the plantations are subsisted at a very easy rate. This is
generally by allotting to each family of them a small portion of land, and
allowing them two days in the week, Saturday and Sunday, to cultivate it; some
are subsisted in this manner, but others find their negroes a certain portion
of Guinea or Indian corn, and to some a salt herring, or a small portion of
bacon or salt pork, a day. All the rest of the charge consists in a cap, a
shirt, a pair of breeches, and a blanket; and the profit of their labor yields
10 or 12l. annually. The price of men negroes, upon their first arrival, is
from 30 to 36l. Women and grown boys 50l. less; but such negro families as are
acquainted with the business of the islands generally bring above 40l. upon an
average one with another; and there are instances of a single negro man, expert
in the business, bringing 150 guineas; and the wealth of a planter is generally
computed from the number of slaves he possesses.

The islands of the West Indies lie in the form of a bow, or semicircle,
stretching almost from the coast of Florida north, to the river Oronoko, in the
main continent of South America. Some call them the Carribbees, from the first
inhabitants; though this is a term that most geographers confine to the Leeward
Islands. Sailors distinguish them into the Windward and Leeward islands, with
regard to the usual courses of ships, from Old Spain, or the Canaries, to
Carthagena, or New Spain and Porto Bello. The geographical tables and maps
distinguish them into great and little Antilles.

BRITISH WEST INDIES.
JAMAICA.
THIS island, the most valuable appendage to the British dominions in America,
is 180 miles long and 60 broad; of an oval form, lying between 17 34 N. lat.
and about the longitude of Philadelphia; containing 3,500,000 acres of land;
600,000 of which are cleared, and about 400,000 cultivated.

DIVISIONS AND POPULATION.] Jamaica is divided as follows: Counties. Parishes.
Towns and Villages. Acres. Inhabitants. Middlesex 8 15 1,305,285 Surry 7 12
672,616 23,000 Whites. Cornwall 5 10 1,512,149 300,000 Negroes. Total Three 20
37 3,500,000 323,000 Wilberforce's speech in the house of commons, April, 1792.


This island is intersected with a ridge of steep rocks, tumbling, by the
frequent earthquakes, in a stupendous manner upon one another. From the rocks
issue a vast number of small rivers of pure wholesome water, which fall down in
cataracts, and, together with the stupendous height of the mountains, and the
bright verdure of the trees through which they flow, form a most delightful
landscape. On each side of this chain of mountains are ridges of lower ones,
which diminish as they remove from it. On these, coffee grows in great plenty.
The vailies and plains between these ridges are level, and the soil is
prodigiously fertile.

The longest day in summer is about 13 hours, and the shortest in winter about
eleven; but the most usual divisions of the seasons in the West Indies are into
the dry and wet seasons. The air of this island is in most places excessively
hot, and unfavourable to European constitutions; but the cool sea breezes,
which sot in every morning at ten o'clock, render the heat more tolerable; and
the air upon the high grounds is temperate, pure, and cooling. It lightens
almost every night, but without much thunder, which when it happens is
terrible, and roars with astonishing loudness; and the lightning in these
violent storms frequently does great damage. In February or March, they expect
earthquakes. During the months of May and October, the rains are extremely
violent, and continue sometimes for a fortnight together. In the plains are
found several salt foundations; and in the mountains, not far from Spanish
Town, is a hot bath, of great medicinal virtues. It gives relief in the dry
belly ach, which, excepting the bilious and yellow fever, is one of the most
terrible endemial distempers of Jamaica.

Sugar is the greatest and most valuable production of this island. In 1787 --
824,706 cwt. of this article was exported to Great Britain, and in 1790 --
1,185,519 cwt. Cocoa was formerly cultivated in it to great extent. It produces
also ginger and the pimento, or, as it is called, Jamaica pepper, and vulgarly
allspice; the wild cinnamon tree, whose bark is so useful in medicine; the
machineel, whose fruit, though uncommonly delightful to the eye, contains one
of the worst poisons in nature; the mahogany, and of the most valuable quality;
but this wood begins to be scarce, and of late is very dear. Excellent cedars,
of a large size and durable; the cabbage tree, remarkable for the hardness of
its wood, which, when dry, is incorruptible, and hardly yields to any kind of
tool; the palma, affording oil, much esteemed by the savages, both in food and
medicine; the soap tree, whose berries answer all purposes of washing; the
mangrove and olive bark, useful to tanners; the fustic and redwood to the
dyers; and lately the logwood. The indigo plant was formerly much cultivated,
and the cotton tree it still so. They have maize, or Indian corn, Guinea corn,
peace of various kinds, with a variety of roots. Fruits grow in great plenty;
citrons, Seville and China oranges, common and sweet lemons, limes, shadocks,
pomegranates, mamees, soursops, papas, pine apples, prickly pears, allicada
pears, melons, pompions, guavas, and several kinds of berries; also garden
stuffs in great plenty, and good. The cattle bred on this island are but few;
their beef is tough and lean; the mutton and lamb are tolerable; they have
plenty of hogs; many plantations have hundreds of them, and their flesh is
exceedingly sweet and delicate. Their horses are small, mettlesome and hardy,
and when well made generally sell for 30 or 40l. Sterling. Jamaica likewise
supplies the apothecary with guaiacum, sarsaparilla, china, cassia, and
tamarinds. Among the animals are the land and sea turtle, and the alligator.
Here are all sorts of fowl, wild and tame, parrots, parroquets, pelicans,
snipes, teal, Guinea hens, geese, ducks, and turkies, the humming bird, and a
great variety of others. The rivers and bays abound with fish. The mountains
breed numberless adders, and other noxious animals, as the fens and marshes do
the guana and gallewasp; but these last are not venomous. Among the insects are
the ciror, of chegoe, which eat into the nervous and membranous parts of the
flesh of the negroes, and the white people are sometimes plagued with them.
These insects get into any part of the body, but chiefly the legs and feet,
where they breed in great numbers, and shut themselves up in a bag as soon as
the person feels them, which is not perhaps till a week after they have been in
the body; they pick them out with a needle, or the point of a penknife, taking
care to destroy the bag entirely, that none of the breed, which are like nits,
may be left behind. They sometimes get into the toes and eat the flesh to the
very bone.

Port Royal was formerly the capital of Jamaica. It stood upon the point of a
narrow neck of land, which, toward the sea, formed part of the border of a
very fine harbor of its own name. The convenience of this harbor, which was
capable of containing a thousand sail of large ships, and of such depth as to
allow them to load and unload with the greatest ease, weighed so much with the
inhabitants, that they chose to build their capital on this spot, though the
place was a hot dry sand, and produced none of the necessaries of life, not
even fresh water. But the advantage of its harbor, and the resort of pirates,
made it a place of great consideration. These pirates were called Buccaneers;
they fought with a desperate bravery, and then spent their fortune in this
capital with as inconsiderable dissipation. About the year 1692, no place for
its size could be compared to this town for trade, wealth and an entire
corruption of manners. In the month of June, in this year, an earthquake, which
shook the whole island to its foundations, totally overwhelmed this city, so as
to leave, in one quarter, not even the smallest vestige remaining. In two
minutes the earth opened and swallowed up nine tenths of the houses, and two
thousand people. The water gushed out from the openings of the earth, and
tumbled the people on heaps; but some of them had the good fortune to catch the
beams and rafters of houses, and were afterward saved by boats. Several ships
were cast away in the harbor; and the swan frigate, which lay in the dock to
careen, was carried over the tops of sinking houses, and did not overset, but
afforded a retreat to some hundreds of people, who saved their lives upon her.
An officer who was in the town at this time, says, the earth opened and shut
very quick in some places, and he saw several people sink down to the middle,
and others appeared with their heads just above ground and were squeezed to
death. At Savannah, above a thousand acres were sunk, with the houses and
people in them; the place appeared for some time like a, lake, was afterward
dried up, but no houses were seen. In some parts, mountains were split; and at
one place a plantation was removed to the distance of a mile. They again
rebuilt the city; but it was a second time, ten years after, destroyed by a
great fire. The extraordinary convenience of the harbor tempted them to build
it once more; and once more, in 1782, was it laid in rubbish by a hurricane the
most terrible on record. Such repeated calamities seemed to mark out this place
as a devoted spot; the inhabitants therefore resolved to forsake it forever,
and to reside at the opposite bay, where they built Kingston, which is now the
capital of this island. It consists of upwards of one thousand houses, many of
them handsomely built, and in the taste of these islands, as well as the
neighboring continent, one story high, with porticoes, and every convenience
for a comfortable habitation in that climate. Not far from Kingston stands St.
Jago de le Vega, or Spanish town, which, though at present inferior to
Kingston, was once the capital of Jamaica, and is still the seat of government,
and the place where the courts of justice are held.

On the 3d of October, 1780, was a dreadful hurricane, which almost overwhelmed
the little seaport town of Savannah la Mer, in Jamaica, and part of the
adjacent country. Very few houses were left standing, and a great number of
people were killed. Much damage was also done and many lives lost, in other
parts of the island.

The whole product of the island may be reduced to these heads. First, sugars,
of which they exported in 1787 824,706 cwt. -- 1788 1,124,017 cwt. -- 1789
1,236,603 cwt. -- 1790 1,185,519 cwt. Most of this goes to London, Bristol and
Glasgow, and some part of it into the United States, in return for the beef,
pork, cheese, corn, peace, staves, planks, pitch and tar, which they have from
thence. Second, ruin, of which they export about 4000 puncheons annually. The
rum of this island is generally esteemed the best, and is the most used in
Great Britain. Third, molasses, in which they formerly made their remittances
for the produce of the grand staple the sugar cane. According to the late
testimony of a respectable planter in Jamaica, that island has 280,000 acres
in canes, of which 210,000 are annually cut, and make from 68 to 70,000 tons of
sugar, and 4,200,000 gallons of rum. Fourth, cotton, of which they send out two
thousand bags. The indigo, formerly much cultivated, is now inconsiderable; but
some cocoa and coffee are exported, with a considerable quantity of pepper,
ginger, drugs for dyers and apothecaries, sweetmeats, mahogany and machineel
planks. But some of the most considerable articles of their trade are with the
Spanish continent of new Spain and Terra Firma; for in the former they cut
great quantities of logwood, and both in the former and latter they carry on a
vast and profitable trade in negroes and all kinds of European goods.

This island was originally a part of the Spanish empire in America. Several
descents had been made upon it by the English, prior to 1656; but it was not
till this year that Jamaica was reduced under the British dominion. Cromwell
had fitted out a squadron, under Penn and Venables, to reduce the Spanish
island of Hispaniola, but there this squadron was unsuccessful. The commanders,
of their own accord, to atone for this misfortune, made a descent on Jamaica,
and having carried the capital, St. Jago, soon compelled the whole island to
surrender. Ever since it has been subject to the English, and the government of
it is one of the richest places, next to that of Ireland, in the disposal of
the crown, the standing salary being 2,500l. per annum, and the assembly
commonly voting the governor as much more; which, with the other perquisites,
make it on the whole little inferior to 10,000l. per annum.

BARBADOS.
THIS island, the most easterly of all the Carribbees, is situated in 59
degrees west longitude, and 13 degrees north latitude. It is 21 miles in
length, and 14 in breadth. When the English, some time after the year 1625,
first landed here, it had not the least appearance of ever having been peopled
even by savages. There was no kind of beasts, no fruit, no herb nor root, fit
for supporting the life of man. Yet as the climate was so good, and the soil
appeared fertile, some gentlemen of small fortunes in England, resolved to
become adventurers thither. The trees were so large, and of a wood so hard and
stubborn, that it was with great difficulty they could clear as much ground as
was necessary for their subsistence. By unremitting perseverance, however, they
brought it to yield them a tolerable support; and they found that cotton and
indigo agreed well with the soil, and that tobacco, which was beginning to come
into repute in England, answered tolerably well. These prospects, together with
the storm between the king and parliament, which was beginning to break out in
England, induced many new adventures to transport themselves to this island.
And what is remarkable, 25 years after its first settlement, in 1650, it
contained more than 50,000 whites, and a much greater number of negro and
Indian slaves; the latter they acquired by means not at all to their honor;
for they seized upon all those unhappy men, without any pretense, in the
neighboring islands, and carried them into slavery -- a practice, which has
rendered the Carribbee Indians irreconcilable to the English ever since. They
had begun, a little before this, to cultivate sugar to great advantage. The
number of the slaves was, in consequence of their wealth, still augmented; and
in 1676, it is supposed that their number amounted to 100,000, which, together
with 50,000 whites, make 150,000 on this small spot, a degree of population
unknown in Holland, in China, or any other part of the world most renowned for
numbers.

At this time Barbados employed 400 sail of ships, one with another of 150
tons, in their trade. Their annual exports in sugar, indigo, ginger, cotton,
and citron water, were about 350,000l. and their circulating cash at home was
200,000l. Such was the increase of population, trade, and wealth, in the course
of 50 years. But since that time, this island has been much on the decline,
which is to be attributed partly to the growth of the French sugar colonies,
and partly to the other English establishments in the neighboring isles. Their
numbers at present are said to be 20,000 whites, and 100,000 slaves. Their
commerce consists in the same articles as formerly, though they deal in them to
less extent. In 1787 they exported to Great Britain upwards of 130,000 cwt. of
sugar, and in 1790, but about 113,000 cwt. Their capital is Bridgetown, where
the governor resides, whose employment is said to be worth 5000l. per annum.
They have a college, founded and well endowed by colonel Codrington, who was a
native of this island. Barbados, as well as Jamaica, has suffered much by
hurricanes, fires, and the plague. On the 10th of October, 1780, a dreadful
hurricane occasioned vast devastation in Barbados, great numbers of the houses
were destroyed, not one house in the island was wholly free from damage, many
persons were buried in the ruins of the buildings, and great numbers were
driven into the sea, and there perished.

ST. CHRISTOPHER's.
THIS island, commonly called by the sailors St. Kitt's, is situated in 62
degrees west longitude, and 17 degrees north latitude, about 14 leagues from
Antigua, and is 20 miles long, and 7 broad. It has its name from the famous
Christopher Columbus, who discovered it for the Spaniards. That nation,
however, abandoned it, as unworthy of their attention; and, in 1626, it was
settled by the French and English conjunctly; but entirely ceded to the latter
by the peace of Utrecht. Besides cotton, ginger, and the tropical fruits, it
produced, in 1787, 231, 397 cwt. of sugar, and in 1790, but about 113,000 cwt.
It is computed that this island contains 6000 whites and 36,000 negroes. In
February, 1782, it was taken by the French, but restored to England by the
treaty of 1783.

ANTIGUA,
SITUATED in 61 degrees west lon. and 17 degrees north lat. is of a circular
form, near 20 miles over every way. This island, which was formerly thought
useless, has now got the start of the rest. It has one of the best harbors in
the West Indies; and its capital St. John's, which, before the fire in 1769,
was large and wealthy, is the ordinary seat of the governor of the Leeward
islands. Antigua is supposed to contain about 7000 whites, and 30,000 slaves.
In 1787, 254,706 cwt. of sugar was sent from this island to Great Britain, and
in 1790, only 65,022 cwt.

GRENADA, AND THE GRENADINES,
GRENADA is situated in 12 north lat. and 62 west lon. about 30 leagues S. W.
of Barbados, and almost the same distance north of Andalusia, or the Spanish
main. This island is said to be 30 miles in length, and 15 in breadth.
Experience has proved; that the soil of this island is extremely proper for
producing sugar, coffee, tobacco, and indigo; and upon the whole it carries
with it all the appearance of becoming as flourishing a colony as any in the
West Indies, of it, dimensions. A lake on the top of a hill, in the middle of
the island, supplies it plentifully with fine rivers, which adorn and fertilize
it. Several bays and harbors lie round the island, some of which may be
fortified with great advantage, which render it very convenient for shipping;
and has the happiness of not being subject to hurricanes. St. George's bay has
a sandy bottom, and is capacious, but open. In its harbor, or careening place,
100 large vessels may be moored with perfect safety. This island was long the
theater of bloody wars between the native Indians and the French, during which
these handful of Carribbees defended themselves with the most resolute bravery.
In the last war but one, when Grenada was attacked by the English, the French
inhabitants who were not very numerous, were so amazed at the reduction of
Gaudalupe and Martinico, that they lost all spirit, and surrendered without
making the least opposition; and the full property of this island, together
with the small islands on the north, called the Grenadines, which yield the
same produce, were confirmed to the crown of Great Britain, by the treaty of
Paris in 1763. But in July, 1779* the French made themselves masters of this
island, though it was restored to Great Britain by the late treaty of peace. In
1787, 172,880 cwt. of sugar was exported from these islands to Great Britain,
and in 1790, 191,625 cwt.

DOMINICA,
SITUATED is 16^ N. lat. and in 62 W. lon. lies about half way between
Gaudalupe and Martinico. It is near 28 miles in length, and 13 in breadth; it
obtained its name from being discovered by Columbus on a Sunday. The soil of
this island is thin, and better adapted to the rearing of cotton than sugar;
but the sides of the hills bear the finest trees in the West Indies, and the
island is well supplied with rivulets of good water. By the peace of Paris, in
1763, it was ceded to the English; but they have derived little advantage from
this conquest, the island being, till lately, no better than a harbor for the
natives of the other Carribbees, who being expelled their own settlements, have
taken refuge here. But, on account of its situation between the principal
French islands, and Prince Rupert's bay being one of the most capacious in the
West Indies, it has been judged expedient to form Dominica into a government of
itself, and to declare it a free port. It was taken by the French in 1778; but
it was restored again to Great Britain by the late peace. It exported to Great
Britain, in 1790, upwards of 50,000 cwt. of sugar, and considerably more in
1787.

ST. VINCENT,
SITUATED in 13 N. lat. and 61 W. lon. 50 miles northwest of Barbados, 30
miles south of St. Lucia, is about 24 miles in length, and 18 in breadth. It is
very fruitful, being a black mould upon a strong loam, the most proper for the
raising of sugar. Indigo thrives here remarkably well, but this article is less
cultivated than formerly throughout the West Indies. Many of the inhabitants
are Carribbeans, and many here also fugitive, from Barbados and the other
islands.

The Carribbeans were treated with so* much injustice and barbarity, after this
island came into possession of the English, to whom it was ceded by the peace,
in 1763, that they greatly contributed toward enabling the French to get
possession of it again in 1779; but it was restored to Great Britain by the
late treaty of peace. It sent to Great Britain in 1790, 76,747 cwt. of sugar.

NEVIS, AND MONTSERRAT,
TWO small islands, lying between St. Christopher's and Antigua, neither of
them exceeding 18 miles in circumference, and are said to contain 5000 whites,
and 10,000 slaves. The soil in these four islands is pretty much alike, light
and sandy, but notwithstanding fertile in an high degree; and their principal
exports are derived from the sugar cane. Both these islands were taken by the
French in 1782, but were restored at the peace. They sent to Great Britain, in
1787, 108,324 cwt. of sugar, but much less in 1790.

BARBUDA,
SITUATED 17 49 N. lat. 61 50 W. lon. 35 miles north of Antigua, is 20 miles in
length, and 12 in breadth. It is fertile, and has a good road for shipping, but
no direct trade with England. The inhabitants are chiefly employed in
husbandry, and raising fresh provisions for the use of the neighboring isles.
It belongs to the Codrington family, and the inhabitants amount to about 1500.

ANGUILLA,
SITUATED in 18 N. lat. 60 miles N. W. of St. Christopher's, is about 50 miles
long, and 10 broad. This island is perfectly level, and the climate nearly the
same with that of Jamaica. The inhabitants, who are not numerous, apply
themselves to husbandry and feeding of cattle.

BERMUDAS, ON SOMMERS' ISLANDS.
THESE received their first name from their being discovered by John Bermudas,
a Spaniard; and were called Sommers' Islands, from Sir George Summers, who was
shipwrecked on their rocks, in 1609, in his passage to Virginia. They are
situated, at a vast distance from any continent, in 32 N. lat. and in 65 W.
lon. Their distance from the Madeiras is about 1200 leagues, and from Carolina
300. They are nearly in the form of a shepherd's crook; the main island is
about 16 miles in length, and from one to two in breadth. The parish of St.
George's, is an island to the eastward of the main land, on which stands the
town of St. George's, containing about 500 houses. Contiguous to this is the
island of St. David's, which supplies the town with butter, milk, vegetables,
poultry, and fresh meat. In the bosom of the crook, lie a vast number of small
islands, uninhabited. The island is rocky, and the ground hilly. In the main
road a sulky may pass; and even there, in many places, with difficulty; but
turn to the right or left, and it is passable only on horse back. The air is
healthy; a continual spring prevails. Cedars, mantled in green, always adorn
the hills. The pasture ground is ever verdant; the gardens ever in bloom. Most
of the productions of the West Indies might here be cultivated. The houses are
built of a soft stone, which is sawn like timber; when exposed to the weather,
and washed with lime, it becomes hard. The houses are white as snow; which,
beheld from an eminesice, contrasted with the greenness of the cedars and
pasture ground, and the multitude of islands, full in view, realize what the
Poets have feigned concerning the Ely^^an fields. The inhabitants are numerous;
the whole island is a continued village; no less, perhaps, than 15 or 20,000;
are collected on this small spot. The blacks are twice as numerous as the
whites. Happy for the country, were the color unknown among them. The
Bermudians are chiefly seafaring people; few of the men are ever at home; 3 or
400 go annually to Turks' Island, to rake salt, which is carried to America for
provisions, or sold to such as may call at Turk's Island, for cash. However
industrious the men are abroad, at home they are indolent; much given,
particularly of late, to gaming and luxury. They women are generally handsome
and comely; they love their husbands, their children, and their dress. Dancing
is their favorite amusement. The men must be equipped in taste when they
appear in company, should they not have a dollar in the pound to pay their
creditors; the women must array themselves like the belles of Paris, should
they not have a morsel of bread to preserve their blooming complexion. They are
thoroughly acquainted with one another families, and from their tea tables, as
from their atmosphere, arises constant gusts of scandal and detraction. To
strangers they are kind, but among themselves are quarrelsome. Their friendly
intercourse is too much confined within a narrow circle, bounded by cousins of
second cousins.

The common food of the Bermudians is coffee, fish of different kinds, a sweet
potatoe, Indian corn, and American flour. Their water is rain preserved in
cisterns; the general drink is grog. The men are amphibious animals* from their
being a yard long they swim out of their depth: and fishing is their favorite
amusement when grown up. The government is conducted under a governor named by
the crown of England, a council, and general assembly. The established religion
is episcopacy. There are nine churches; three clergymen have the charge of
these nine. There is one presbyterian church. A regard for religion is not the
characteristic of the Bermudians. They seldom go to church, except it be to
attend a funeral, or get their children baptized, or to hear a stranger. The
foregoing description of these islands was sent the author by an intelligent
gentleman, who had resided a number of years in Bermuda.


LUCAY's, OR BAHAMA ISLANDS,
THE Bahamas are situated between 22 and 27 degrees north lat. and 73 and 81
degrees west lon. They extend along the coast of Florida quite down to Cuba;
and are said to be 500 in number, some of them only rocks; but twelve of them
are large and fertile; all are, however, uninhabited; except Providence, which
is 200 miles east of the Floridas; though some others are larger and more
fertile, on which the English have plantations.

These islands were the first fruits of Columbus's discoveries; but they were
not known to the English till 1667. The Isle of Providence became an harbor
for the buccaneers, or pirates, who for a long time infested the American
navigation. This obliged the government, in 1718, to send out captain Woods
Rogers with a fleet to dislodge the pirates, and for making in a settlement.
This the captain effected; a fort was erected, and an independent company was
stationed in the island. Ever since this last settlement, these islands have
been improving, though they advance but slowly. In time of war, people gain
considerably by the prizes condemned there; and and at all times by the wrecks,
which are frequent in this labyrinth of rocks and shelves. The Spaniards and
Americans captured these islands during the last war, but they were retaken by
a detachment from St. Augustine, April 7th, 1783.

FALKLAND ISLANDS.
THOUGH these are not among the West India Islands, we shall mention them in
this place. They lie in the 52d degree of south latitude, near the Straits of
Magellan, at the utmost extremity of South America.

Falkland Islands were first discovered by Sir Richard Hawkins in 1594; the
principal of which he named Hawkins' Maidenland, in honor of queen Elizabeth.
The present English name Falkland was probably given them by captain Strong, in
1689, and, being adopted by Halley, it has from that time been received into
maps. Captain M'Bride, who visited them in 1766, thus describes them. "We
found, says he, a mass of islands and broken lands, of which the soil was
nothing but a bog, with no better prospect than that is barren mountains,
beaten by storms almost perpetual. Yet this is summer; and if the winds of
winter hold their natural proportion, those who lie but two cables length from
the shore, must pass weeks without any communication with it." The plants and
vegetables which were planted by Mr. Byron's people, and the fir trees, a
native of rugged and cold climates, had withered away; but goats, sheep, and
hogs, that were carried thither, were found to thrive and increase as in other
places. Geese, of a fishy taste, snipes, foxes, sea lions, penguins, plenty of
good water, and, in the summer months, wild celery and sorrel, are the natural
luxuries of these islands. But though the soil be barren, and the sea
tempestuous, an English settlement was made here, of which they were
dispossessed by the Spaniards in 1770.

SPANISH WEST INDIES.
CUBA.
THE island of Cuba is situated between 19 and 23 N. lat. and between 74 and 87
W. lon. 100 miles to the south of Cape Florida, and 75 miles north of Jamaica,
and is nearly 700 miles in length, and generally about 70 miles in breadth. A
chain of hills runs-through the middle of the island form east to west; but the
land near the sea is in general level and flooded in the rainy season, when the
sun is vertical. This noble island is supposed to have the best soil, for so
large a country, of any in America. It produces all the commodities known in
the West Indies, particularly ginger, long pepper, and other spices, cassia,
fistula, mastich, and aloes. It also produces tobacco and sugar; but from the
want of hands, and the laziness of the Spaniards, not in such quantities as
might be expected. It is owing to the same cause that this large island does
not produce, including all its commodities, so much for exportation as the
small island of Antigua.

The course of the rivers is too short to be of any consequence to navigation;
but there are several good harbors in the island, which belong to the
principal towns, as that of St. Jago, facing Jamaica, strongly situated and
well fortified, but neither populous nor rich. That of the Havannah, facing
Florida, which is the capital of Cuba, and a place of great strength and
importance, containing about 2000 houses, with a great number of churches and
convents. It was taken, however, by the English in the year 1762, but restored
in the subsequent treaty of peace. Besides these, there is also Cumberland
harbor, and that of Santa Cruz, and considerable town thirty miles east of the
Havannah.

HISPANIOLA, OR ST. DOMINGO.
THIS island was at first possessed by the Spaniards alone; but by far the most
considerable part is now in the hands of the French. However, as the Spaniards
were the original possessors, and still continue to have a share in it,
Hispaniola is commonly regarded as a Spanish island.

It is situated between the 17th and 21st degrees N. lat. and the 67th and 74th
of W. long. lying in the middle between Cuba and Porto Rico, and is 450 miles
long, and 150 broad. When Hispaniola was first discovered by Columbus, the
number of its inhabitants was computed to be at least one million. But such was
the cruelty of the Spaniards, and to so infamous a height did they carry their
oppression of the poor natives, that they were reduced to sixty thousand in the
space of fifteen years. The face of the island presents an agreeable variety of
hills, valleys, woods and rivers; and the soil is allowed to be extremely
fertile, producing sugar, cotton, indigo, tobacco, maize, and cassava root. The
European cattle are so multiplied here, that they run wild in the woods, and as
in South America, are hunted for their hides and tallow only. In the most
barren parts of the rocks, they discovered formerly silver and gold. The mines,
however, are not worked now. The northwest parts, which are in the possession
of the French, consist of large fruitful plains, which produce the articles
already mentioned in vast abundance. This indeed is the best and most fruitful
part of the best and most fertile island in the West Indies, and perhaps in the
world.

The most ancient town in this island, and in all America, built by Europeans,
is St. Domingo. It was founded by Bartholomew Columbus, brother to the admiral,
in 1504, who gave it that name in honor of his father Dominic, and by which
the whole island is sometimes name. It is situated on a spacious harbor, and
is a large well built city, inhabited, like the other Spanish towns, by a
mixture of Europeans, creoles, mestizos and negroes.

The French towns are Cape Francois, the capital, containing, several years
ago, about 8000 whites and blacks. Leogane, though inferior in point of size,
is a good port, a place of considerable trade, and the seat of the French
government in that island. They have two other town, considerable for their
trade, Petit Guaves, and Port Louis.

The following is said to be an exact statement of the product, population, and
commerce of the French colony of Hispaniola, in the year 1788, and may serve to
show the immense losses sustained by the late insurrection of the negroes.

POPULATION.] White people 27,717; viz. 9,699 men; 2401 males above 12 years
old; 2,296 under 12 years; 1,269 husbandmen of plantations; 1,832 plantation
managers; 325 sugar refiners; 308 physicians; 510 mechanics; 614 clerks; 2
white servants; 8,511 women and girls.

Free people of color 21,809; of which 3,493 were men; 2,892 males above 12
years; 2,892 under 12; 2,700 servants; 9,833 women, or girls; slaves, 405,528.

PLANTATIONS AND MANUFACTORIES.] Sugar 792; indigo 3,097; cotton 705; coffee
2,810; distilleries 173; brick and porter's ware 63; cocoa 69; tanners 3.

PRODUCTIONS EXPORTED TO FRANCE.
70,227,709 pounds of White Sugar, 93,177,518 do. Brut do. 68,151,181 do.
Coffee, 930,016 pounds of Indigo, 6,286,126 do. Cotton. 12,995 Dressed Skins.
SOLD TO AMERICAN, ENGLISH AND DUTCH SMUGGLERS.
25,000,000 pounds of Brut Sugars, 12,000,000 do. Coffee, 3,000,000 pounds of
Cotton.
The molasses exported in American bottoms, valued at 1,000,000 dollars;
precious wood, exported in French ships, 200,000 dollars.

TRADE.] Five hundred and eighty large ships, carrying 189,679 tons, in which
the imports amounted to 12,000,000 dollars, of which more than 8,000,000
dollars were in manufactured goods of France, and the other 4,000,000 in French
produce.

The Spanish ships exported in French goods or money 1,400,000 dollars, for
mules imported by them into the colony.

Ninety eight French ships, carrying 40,130 tons, imported 29,506 negroes;
which sold for 8,000,000 dollars.

The negroes in the French division of this island have for several years past
been in a state of insurrection. In the progress of these disturbances, which
have not yet subsided, the planters and others, have sustained immense losses.
As this unhappy affair has engaged much of the attention of the public, we are
happy in being able to give a summary statement of the causes of this
insurrection. From a pamphlet public published in 1792, entitled 'An Inquiry
into the Causes of the Insurrection of the Negroes in the Island of St.
Domingo.'


"The situation of the French colonies early attracted the attention of the
constituent assembly. At this time all was as tranquil as such a state of
oppression would permit. Political health can only be attributed to a country
with a free constitution. The situation of the islands, is that of a paralytic:
One part is torpid, whilst the other is affected with the frantic motions of
St. Vitus's dance.

The first interference of the National Assembly in the affairs of the colonies
was by a decree of the 8th March, 1790, which declared "That all free persons,
who were proprietors and residents of two years standing, and who contributed
to the exigencies of the state, should exercise the rights of voting, which
constitute the quality of French citizens."

This decree, though in fact it gave no new rights to the people of color, was
regarded with a jealous eye by the white planters; who evidently saw that the
generally of the qualification included all descriptions of proprietors. They
affected, however, to impose a different construction upon it. The people of
color appealed to common justice and common sense; it was to no purpose. The
whites repelled them from them assemblies. Some commotions ensued, in which
they mutually fell a sacrifice to their pride and resentment.

These disturbances again excited the vigilance of the National Assembly. A
decree was passed on the 12th day of October, 1790, by which the assembly
declared, as a constitutional article, "That they would establish no
regulations respecting the internal government of the colonies, without the
precise and formal request of the colonial assemblies."

Peace however was not the consequence of this decree. The proprietors, it is
true, had obtained a legal right of tyrannizing; but the unfortunate question
still recurred, Who should be permitted to exercise that right? On this head
the decree was silent. New distensions arose; each of the parties covered under
a factions patriotism the most atrocious designs. Assassination and revolt
became frequent. Mauduit, a French officer of rank, lost his life by the hands
of his own countrymen. The unfortunate Oge, a planter of color, who had
exerted himself in France in the cause of his brethren, resolved to support by
force their just pretensions. He landed in the Spanish territory of St.
Domingo, where he assembled about 600 mulattoes. Before he proceeded to
hostilities, he wrote to the French general, that his desire was for peace,
provided the laws were enforced. His letter was absurdly considered as a
declaration of war. Being attacked and vanquished, he took refuge amongst the
Spaniards, who delivered him up to his adversaries. The horrors of his death
were the harbingers of future crimes. These disturbances still increasing, the
National Assembly found it necessary, at length, to decide between the
contending parties.

On the 15th of May, 1791, a decree was made consisting of two articles, by the
first of which the assembly confirmed that of the 12th of October, so far as
respected the slaves in their islands. It is true that the word slave was
cautiously omitted in this document, and they are only characterized by the
negative description of 'men not free,' as if right and wrong depended on a
play of words, or a mode of expression.

This part of the decree met with but little opposition, though it passed not
without severe reprehension from a few enlightened members. The second article
respecting the people of color was strongly contested. Those who were before
known by the appellation of patriots divided upon it. It was, however,
determined in the result, that the people of color born of free parents should
be considered as active citizens, and be eligible to the offices of government
in the islands.

This second article, which decided upon a right that the people of color had
been entitled to for upwards of a century, instead of restoring peace, may be
considered as the cause or rather the pretext of all the subsequent evils that
the colony of St. Domingo has sustained. -- They arose not indeed from its
execution, but from its counteraction by the white colonists. Had they, after
the awful warnings they had already experienced, obeyed the ordinances of an
assembly they pretended to revere; had they imbibed one drop of the true spirit
of that constitution to which they had vowed an inviolable attachment; had they
even suppressed the dictates of pride in the suggestions of, prudence; the
storm that threatened them had been averted, and in their obedience to the
parent state they had displayed an act of patriotism, and preserved themselves
from all possibility of danger.

But the equalization of the people of color stung the irritable nerves of the
white colonists. The descendants of slaves might have lost the resentments of
their fathers; but the hatred of a despot is hereditary. The European maxim
allows, 'That they never pardon who have done the wrong;' but in the colonies
this perversity attains a more monstrous growth, and the aversion to African
blood descends from generation to generation. No sooner had the decree passed,
than deputies from the islands to the National Assembly withdraw their
attendance. The colonial committee, always under the influence of the planters,
suspended their labors. Its arrival in the island struck the whites with
consternation. They vowed to sacrifice their lives rather than suffer the
execution of the decree. Their rage bordered upon phrenzy. They proposed to
imprison the French merchants then in the island, to tear down the National
flag, and hoist the British standard in its place. Whilst the joy of the
mulattoes was mingled with apprehensions and with fears, St. Domingo reechoed
with the cries of the whites, with their menaces, with their blasphemies
against the constitution. A motion was made in the streets to fire upon the
people of color, who sled from the city, and took refuge in the plantations of
their friends and in the woods. They were at length recalled by a proclamation;
but it was only to swear subordination to the whites, and to be witnesses of
fresh enormities. Amidst these agitations the slaves had remained in their
accustomed subordination. Nor was it till the month of August, 1791, that the
symptoms of the insurrection appeared amongst them.

A considerable number, both of whites and people of color, had lost their
lives in these commotions before the slaves had given indications of
disaffection -- they were not, however, insensible of the opportunities of
revolt afforded by the dissensions of their masters. They had learnt that no
alleviation of their miseries was ever to be expected from Europe; that in the
struggle for colonial dominion, their humble interests had been equally
sacrificed or forgotten by all parties. They felt their curb relaxed by the
disarming and dispersion of their mulatto masters, who had been accustomed to
keep them under rigorous discipline. Hopeless of relief from any quarter, they
rose in different parts, and spread desolation over the island. If the cold
cruelties of despotism have no bounds, what shall be expected from the
paroxisms of despair?

On the 11th of September, 1791, a convention took place, which produced the
agreement called the Concordat, by which the white planters stipulated that
they would no longer oppose the law of the 15th of May, which gave political
rights to the people of color. The colonial assembly even promised to
meliorate the situation of the people of color, born of parents not free, and
to whom the decree of the 15th of May did not extend. An union was formed
between the planters, which, if it had sooner taken place, had prevented the
insurrection. The insurgents were every where dispirited, repulsed and
dispersed; and the colony itself preserved from total destruction.

By a decree of the National Assembly the 24th of September, the people of
color were virtually excluded from all right of colonial legislation, and
expressly placed in the power of the white colonists.

If the decree of the 15th of May could instigate the white colonists to the
frantic acts of violence before described, what shall we suppose were the
feelings of the people of color on that of the 24th of September, which again
blasted those hopes they had justly founded on the constitutional law of the
parent state, and the solemn ratification of the white colonists? No sooner was
it known in the islands, than those dissensions which the revolt of the negroes
had for a while appeased, broke out with fresh violence. The apprehensions
entertained from the slaves had been allayed by the effects of the Concordat;
hut the whites no sooner found themselves relieved from the terrors of
immediate destruction, that they availed themselves of the decree of the 24th
of September; they formally revoked the Concordat, and treacherously refused to
comply with an engagement to which they owed their very existence. The people
of color were in arms; they attacked the whites in the southern provinces;
they possessed themselves of Fort St. Louis, and defeated their opponents in
several engagements. A powerful body surrounded Port au Prince, the capital of
the island, and claimed the execution of the Concordat. At three different
times did the whites assent to the requisition, and as often broke their
engagement. Gratified with the predilection for aristocracy, which the
constituent assembly had in its dotage avowed, they affected the appellation of
patriots, and had the address to transfer the popular odium to the people of
color, who were contending for their indisputable rights, and to the few white
colonists who had virtue enough to espouse their cause. Under this pretext, the
municipality of Port au Prince required M. Grimoard, the captain of the Boreas,
a French line of battle ship, to bring his guns to bear upon, and to cannonade
the people of color assembled near the town: He at first refused, but the
crew, deluded by the cry of patriotism, enforced his compliance. No sooner was
this measure adopted, than the people of color gave a loose to their
indignation; they spread over the country, and set fire indiscriminately to all
the plantations; the greatest part of the town of Port au Prince soon after
shared the same fate. Nothing seemed to remain for the white inhabitants but to
seek their safety in quitting the colony.

In the northern parts the people of color adopted a more magnanimous and
perhaps a more prudent conduct. "They begun," says Mr. Verniaud, "by offering
their blood to the whites. We shall wait, said they, till we have saved you,
before we assert our own claims." They accordingly opposed themselves to the
revolted negroes with unexampled courage. They endeavored to soothe them by
attending to their reasonable requisitions; and if the colony of St. Domingo be
preserved to the French nation, it will be by the exertions of the people of
color."

After this recital of authentic and indisputable facts, it is not difficult to
trace the causes of the insurrection. The effects of this dreadful insurrection
we leave to be described by the professed historian.

PORTO RICO,
SITUATED between 64 and 67 degrees W. long. and in 18 degrees N. lat. lying
between Hispaniola and St. Christopher's, is 100 miles long, and 40 broad. The
soil is beautifully diversified with woods, valleys and plains; and is very
fertile, producing the same fruits as the other islands. It is well watered
with springs and rivers; but the island is unhealthy in the rainy seasons. It
was on account of the gold that the Spaniards settled here; but there is no
longer any considerable quantity of this metal found in it.

Porto Rico, the capital town, stands in a little island on the north side,
forming a cap^^ious harbor, defended by forts and batteries, which render the
town almost inaccessible. It was, however, taken by Sir Francis Drake, and
afterward by the Earl of Cumberland. It is better inhabited than most of the
Spanish towns, because it is the center of the contraband trade carried on by
the English and French with the King of Spain's subjects.

VIRGIN ISLANDS, situated at the east end of Porto Rico, are extremely small.

TRINIDAD,
SITUATED between 59 and 62 degrees W. long. and in 10 degrees N. lat. lies
between the island Tobago and the Spanish Main; from which it is separated by
the straits of Paria. It is about 90 miles long, and 60 broad, and is an
unhealthful but fruitful spot, producing sugar, fine tobacco, indigo, ginger, a
variety of fruit, and some cotton trees, and Indian corn. It was taken by Sir
Walter Raleigh in 1595, and by the French in 1676, who plundered the island,
and extorted money from the inhabitants.

MARGARETTA.
SITUATED in 64 degrees W. long. and 11-30 N. lat. separated from the northern
coast of New Andalusia, in Terra Firma, by a strait of 24 miles, and is about
40 miles in length, and 24 in breadth; and being always verdant, affords a most
agreeable prospect. The island abounds in pasture, maize and fruit; but there
is a scarcity of wood and water. There was once a pearl fishery on its coast.

There are many other small islands in these seas, to which the Spaniards have
paid no attention. We shall therefore proceed round Cape Horn into the South
Seas, where the first Spanish island of any importance is CHILOE, on the coast
of Chili, which has a governor, and some harbors well fortified.

JUAN FERNANDES,
LYING in 83 degrees W. long. and 33 S. lat. 300 miles west of Chili. This
island is uninhabited; but having some good harbors, it is found extremely
convenient for the English cruisers to touch at and waters. This island is
famous for having given rise to the celebrated romance of Robinson Crusoe. It
seems once Alexander Selkirk, a Scotsman, was left ashore in this solitary
place by his captain, where he lived for some years, until he was discovered by
captain Woods Rogers, in 1709; when taken up, he had almost forgotten his
native language. He was dressed in goat's skins, and would drink nothing but
water. During his abode in this island, he had killed 500 goats, which he
caught by running them down; and he marked as many more on the ear, which he
let go. Some of these were caught 30 years after, by lord Anson's people; their
venerable aspect and majestic beards discovered strong symptoms of antiquity.

Selkirk, upon his return to England, was advised to publish an account of his
life and adventures in his little kingdom. He is said to have put his papers
into the hands of Daniel Defoe, to prepare them for publication. But that
writer, by the help of those papers, and a lively fancy, transformed Alexander
Selkirk into Robinson Crusoe, and returned Selkirk his papers again; so that
the latter derived no advantage from them. They were probably too indigested
for publication, and Defoe might derive little from them but those hints, which
might give rise to his own celebrated performance.

FRENCH WEST INDIES.
THE French were among the last nations who made settlements in the West
Indies; but they made ample amends by the vigor with which they pursued them,
and by that chain of judicious and admirable measures which they used in
drawing from them every advantage that the nature of the climate would yield;
and in the contending against the difficulties which it threw in their way.

We have already mentioned the French colony upon the Spanish island of
Hispaniola, or St. Domingo, as the most important of all their foreign
settlements. We shall next proceed to the islands of which the French have the
sole possession, beginning with the large and important one of

MARTINICO,
WHICH is situated between 14 and 15 degrees of N. lat. and in 61 degrees W.
long. lying about 40 degrees N. W. of Barbados, is about 60 miles in length
and 30 in breadth. The inland part of it is hilly, from which are poured out
upon every side, a number of agreeable and useful rivers, which adorn and
enrich this island in a high degree. The produce of the soil is sugar, cotton,
indigo, ginger and such fruits as are found in the neighboring islands. But
sugar is here, as in all the West India islands, the principal commodity of
which they export a considerable quantity annually. Martinico is the residence
of the governor of the French islands in these seas. Its bays and harbors are
numerous, safe and commodious, and well fortified. In the year 1756, this
island was added to the British empire, but it was given back at the treaty of
peace.

GAUDALUPE,
SO called by Columbus, from the resemblance of its mountains to those of that
name in Spain, is situated in 16 degrees N. lat. and in 62 W. long. about 30
leagues north of Martinico, and almost as many south of Antigua; being 45 miles
long, and 38 broad. It is divided into two parts by a small arm of the sea, or
rather a narrow channel, through which no ships can venture; but the
inhabitants pass it in a ferry boat. Its soil is equally fertile and in the
same productions with that of Martinico. This island is in a flourishing
condition, and its exports of sugar almost incredible.

ST. LUCIA,
SITUATED in 14 degrees N. lat. and in 61 degrees W. long. 80 miles northwest
of Barbados, is 23 miles in length, and 12 in breadth. It received its name
from being discovered on the day dedicated to the virgin martyr St. Lucia. The
English first settled on this island in 1637. From this time they met with
various misfortunes from the natives and French; and at length it was agreed on
between the latter and the English, that this island, together with Dominica
and St. Vincent, should remain neutral. But the French, before the war of 1756
broke out, began to settle these islands; which by the treaty of peace were
yielded up to Great Britain, and this island to France. The soil of St. Lucia,
in the valleys, is extremely rich. It produces excellent timber, and abounds
with pleasant rivers and well situated harbors; and is now declared a free
port under certain restrictions. The English made themselves masters of it in
1778; but it was restored again to the French in 1783.

TOBAGO.
THIS island is situated 11 degrees odd minutes, N. lat. 120 miles south of
Barbados, and about the same distance from the Spanish Main. It is about 32
miles in length, and 9 in breadth. The climate here is not so hot as might be
expected so near the equator; and it is said that it lies out of the course of
those hurricanes that have sometimes proved so fatal to the other West India
islands. It has a fruitful soil, capable of producing sugar and indeed every
thing else that is raised in the West Indies, with the addition (if we may
believe the Dutch) of the cinnamon, nutmeg, and gum copal. It is well watered
with numerous springs; and its bays and rivers are so disposed as to be very
commodious for all kind of shipping. The value and importance of this island
appears from the expensive and formidable armaments sent thither by European
powers in support of their different claims. It seems to have been chiefly
possessed by the Dutch, who defended their pretensions against both England and
France with the most obstinate perseverance. By the treaty of Aix la Chapelle,
in 1748, it was declared neutral; though, by the treaty of peace in 1763, it
was yielded up to Great Britain; but in June, 1781, it was taken by the French,
and ceded to them by the treaty of 1783.

ST. BARTHOLOMEW, DESEADA, AND MARIGALANTE,
ARE three small islands lying in the neighborhood of Antigua and St.
Christopher's, and are of no great consequence to the French, except in time of
war, when they give shelter to an incredible number of privateers, which
greatly annoy the British West India trade. St. Bartholomew is now to be
considered as belonging to the crown of Sweden, being ceded to it by France,
1785.

DUTCH WEST INDIES.
ST. EUSTATIUS, OR EUSTATIA.
SITUATED in 17 29 N. lat. and 63 10 W. lon. and three leagues northwest of St.
Christopher's, is only a mountain, about 29 miles in compass, rising out of the
sea, like a pyramid, and almost round. But, though so small and inconveniently
laid out by nature, the industry of the Dutch have made it to turn to very good
account; and it is said to contain 5000 whites, and 15,000 negroes. The sides
of the mountains are laid out in very pretty settlements; but they have neither
springs nor rivers. They raise here sugar and tobacco; and this island, as well
as Curassou, is engaged in the Spanish contraband trade, for which, however, it
is not so well situated; and it has drawn the same advantage from its constant
neutrality. But when hostilities were commenced by Great Britain against
Holland, admiral Rodney was sent with a considerable land and sea force against
St. Eustatius, which, being incapable of any defense, surrendered at
discretion, on the 3d of February, 1781. The private property of the
inhabitants was confiscated, with a degree of rigor very uncommon among
civilized nations, and very inconsistent with the humanity and generosity by
which the English nation used to be characterised. The reason assigned was,
that the inhabitants of St. Eustatius had assisted the United States with naval
and other stores. But on the 27th of November, the same year, St. Eustatius was
retaken by the French, under the command of the marquis de Bouille, though
their force consisted of only three frigates and some small craft, and about
300 men.

CURASSOU,
SITUATED in 12 degrees north lat. 9 or 10 leagues from the continent of Terra
Firma, is 30 miles long, and 10 broad. It seems as if it were fated, that the
ingenuity and patience of the Hollanders should every where, both in Europe and
America, be employed in fighting against an unfriendly nature; for the island
is not only barren, and dependent on the rains for its water, but the harbor
is naturally one of the worst in America; yet the Dutch have entirely remedied
that defect; they have upon this harbor one of the largest and by far the most
elegant and cleanly towns in the West Indies. The public buildings are numerous
and handsome; the private houses commodious; and the magazines large,
convenient, and well filled. All kind of labor is here performed by engines;
some of them so well contrived, that ships are at once lifted into the dock.

Though this island is naturally barren, the industry of the Dutch has brought
it to produce a considerable quantity both of tobacco and sugar; it has,
besides, good salt works, for the produce of which there is a brisk demand from
the English islands, and the colonies on the continent. But what renders this
island of most advantage to the Dutch, is the contraband trade which is carried
on between the inhabitants and the Spaniards, and their harbor being the
rendezvous to all nations in time of war.

The Dutch ships from Europe touch at this island for intelligence, or pilots,
and then proceed to the Spanish coasts for trade, which they force with a
strong hand, it being very difficult for the Spanish guarda costas to take
these vessels; for they are not only stout ships, with a number of guns, but
are manned with large crews of chosen seamen, deeply interested in the safety
of the vessel and the success of the voyage. They have each of a share in the
cargo, of a value proportioned to the station of the owner, supplied by the
merchants upon credit, and at prime cost. This animates them with an uncommon
courage, and they fight bravely, because every man fights in defense of his own
property. Besides this, there is a constant intercourse between this island and
the Spanish continent.

Curassou has numerous warehouses, always full of the commodities of Europe and
the East Indies. Here are all sorts of woollen and linen cloth, laces, silks,
ribands, iron utensils, naval and military stores, brandy, the spices of the
moluccas, and the calicoes of India, white and painted. Hither the Dutch West
India, which is also their African Company, annually bring three or four
cargoes of slaves; and to this mart the Spaniards themselves come in small
vessels, and carry off not only the best of the negroes, at a very high price,
but great quantities of all the above sorts of goods; and the seller has this
advantage, that the refuse of warehouses and mercers' shops, and every thing
that is grown unfashionable and unsaleable in Europe, go off here extremely
well; every thing being sufficiently recommended by its being European. The
Spaniards pay in gold or silver, coined or in bars, cocoa, vanilla, jesuits
bark, cochineal, and other valuable commodities.

The trade of Curassou, even in times of peace, is said to be annually worth to
the Dutch no less than 500,000l. but in time of war the profit is still
greater, for then it becomes the common emporio^^ of the West Indies; it
affords a retreat to ships of all nations, and at the same time refuses none of
them arms and ammunition to destroy one another. The intercourse with Spain
being then interrupted, the Spanish colonies have scarcely any other market
from whence they can be well supplied either with slaves or goods. The French
come hither to but the beef, pork, corn, flour, and lumber, which are brought
from the continent of North America, or exported from Ireland; so that, whether
in peace or in war, the trade of this island flourishes extremely.

The trade of all the Dutch American settlements was originally carried on by
the West India company alone; at present, such ships as go upon that trade, pay
two and a half per cent, for their licenses; the company, however, reserve to
themselves the whole of what is carried on between Africa and the American
islands.

The other islands, BONAIRE and ARUBA, are inconsiderable in themselves, and
should be regarded as appendages to Curassou, for which they are chiefly
employed in raising cattle and other provisions.

The island of SABA, situated at no great distance from St. Eustatius, is small
and hardly deserves to be mentioned.

DANISH WEST INDIES.
ST. THOMAS,
AN inconsiderable member of the Carribbees, situated in 64 degrees West lon.
and 18 degrees North lat. about 15 miles in circumference, and has a safe and
commodious harbor.

ST. CROIX, OR SANTA CRUZ,
ANOTHER small and unhealthy island, lying about five leagues east of St.
Thomas, ten or twelve leagues in length, and three or four where it is
broadest. These islands, so long as they remained in the hands of the Danish
West India Company, were ill managed, and of little consequence to the Danes;
but that wife and benevolent prince, the late king of Denmark, bought up the
company's stock, and laid the trade open; and since that time the island of St.
Thomas, as well as this, has been so greatly improved, that it is said to
produce upwards of 3000 hogsheads of sugar of 1000 weight each, and other of
the West India commodities in tolerable plenty. In time of war, privateers
bring in their prizes here for sale; and a great many vessels trade from hence
along the Spanish Main, and return with money in specie or bars, and valuable
merchandise. As for Santa Cruz, from a perfect desert a few years since, it is
beginning to settle fast; several persons from the English islands, some of
them of great wealth, have gone to settle there, and have received very great
encouragement to do so.

These two nations, the Dutch and the Danes, hardly deserve to be mentioned
among the proprietors of America; their possessions there are comparatively
nothing. But notwithstanding, they appear extremely worthy of the attention of
these powers, as the share of the Dutch only is worth to them at least
600,000l. a year.

There seems to be a remarkable providence (says an ingenious and political
writer) in casting the parts, if I may use that expression, of the several
European nations who act upon the stage of America. The Spaniard, proud, lazy,
and magnificent, has an ample walk in which to expatiate, a soft climate to
indulge to indulge his love of ease, and a profusion of gold and silver to
procure him all those luxuries his pride demands, but which his laziness would
refuse him.

The Portuguese, naturally indigent at home, and enterprising rather than
industrious abroad, has gold and diamonds as the Spaniard has, wants them as he
does, but possesses them in a more useful though a less oftentatious manner.

The English, of a reasoning disposition, thoughtful and cool, and men of
business rather than of great industry, impatient of much fruitless labor,
abhorrent of constraint, and lovers of a country life, have a lot which indeed
produces neither gold nor silver; but they have a large tract of a fine
continent; These observations were made before the United States were separated
from Great Britain, and by an Englishman.
a noble field for the exercise of agriculture, and sufficient to furnish their
trade without laying them under any great difficulties. Intolerant as they are
of the most useful restraints, their commerce flourishes from the freedom every
man has of pursuing it according to his own ideas, and directing his life after
his own fashion.

The French, active, lively, enterprising, pliable, and politic; and though
changing their pursuits, always pursuing the present object with eagerness,
are, notwithstanding, tractable, and obedient to rules and laws, which bridle
their dispositions, and wind and turn them to proper courses -- These people
have a country (when Canada was in their possession) where more is to be
effected by managing the people than by cultivating the ground; where a
peddling commerce, that requires constant motion, flourishes more than
agriculture, or a regular traffic; where they have difficulties which keep them
alert by struggling with them, and where their obedience to a wise government
(meaning the excellent regulations respecting the French colonies in America)
serves them for personal wisdom. In the islands, the whole is the work of their
policy, and a right turn their government has taken.

The Dutch have a rock or two, on which to display the miracles of frugality
and diligence (which are their virtues) and on which they have exerted these
virtues, and shown those miracles.

New Discoveries.
OUR knowledge of the globe has been considerably augmented by the late
discoveries of Russian, British, and American navigators, which have been
numerous and important. Of these discoveries we have already given some
account, page 98. To the account we have given we add the following.

NORTHERN ARCHIPELAGO.
THIS consists of several groups of islands, which are situated between the
eastern coast of Kamtschatka and the western coast of the continent of America.
Mr. Coxe observes, that, "the first project for making discoveries in that
tempestuous sea, which lies between Kamtschatka and America, was conceived and
planned by Peter (...)." Voyages with that view were accordingly undertaken at
the expense of the crown; but when it was discovered that the islands in that
sea abounded with valuable furs, private merchant^ immediately voyaged with
ardour in similar expeditions; and within a period of ten years, more important
discoveries were made by these individuals, at their own private cost, than had
hitherto been effected by all the efforts of the crown. The investigation of
useful knowledge has also been greatly encouraged by the present empress of
Russia; and the most distant parts of her vast dominions, and other countries
and islands, have been explored, at her expense, by persons of abilities and
learning, in consequence of which considerable discoveries have been made.


Some of these islands are only inhabited occasionally, and for some months in
the year, and others are very thinly peopled; but others have a great number of
inhabitants, who constantly reside in them. The inhabitants of these islands
are, in general, of a short stature, with strong and robust limbs, but free and
supple. They have lank black hair, and little beard, slattish faces, and fair
skins. They are for the most part well made, and of strong constitutions,
suitable to the boisterous climate of their isles.

The Fox Islands, one of the groups, are so called from the great number of
black, gray, and red foxes, with which they abound. The dress of the
inhabitants consists of a cap and a fur coat which reaches down to the knee.
Some of them wear common caps of a partycoloured bird skin, upon which they
leave part of the wings and tail. On the fore part of their hunting and fishing
caps, they place a small board like a skreen, adorned with the jaw bones of sea
bears, and ornamented with glass beads, which they receive in barter from the
Russians. At their festivals and dancing parties they use a much more shewy
sort of caps. They feed upon the flesh of all sorts of sea animals, and
generally eat it raw. But if at any time they choose to dress their victuals,
they make use of a hollow stone; having placed the fish or flesh therein, they
cover it with another, and close the interstices with lime or clay. They then
lay it horizontally upon two stones, and light a fire under it. The provision
intended for keeping is dried without salt in the open air. Their weapons
consist of bows, arrows, and darts, and for defense they use wooden shields.

The most perfect equality reigns among these islanders. They have neither
chiefs nor superiors, neither laws nor punishments. They live together in
families, and societies of several families united, which form what they call a
race, who, in case of an attack, or defense, mutually help and support each
other. The inhabitants of the same island always pretend to be of the same
race; and every person looks upon his island as a possession, the property of
which is common to all the individuals of the same society. Feasts are very
common among them, and more particularly when the inhabitants of one inland are
visited by those of the others. The men of the village meet their guests
beating drums, and preceded by the women, who dance. At the conclusion of the
dance, the hosts serve up their best provisions, and invite their guests to
partake of the feast. They feed their children when very young with the
coarsest flesh, and for the most part law. If an infant cries, the mother
immediately carries it to the sea side, and, whether it be summer or winter,
holds it naked in the water until it is quiet. This custom is so far from doing
the children any harm, that it hardens them against the cold, and they
accordingly go barefooted through the winter without the least inconvenience.
They seldom heat their dwellings; but, when they are desirous of warming
themselves, they light a bundle of hay, and stand over it; or else they set
fire to train oil, which they pour into a hollow stone. They have a good share
of plain natural sense, but are rather slow of understanding. They seem cold
and indifferent in most of their actions; but let an injury or even a suspicion
only rouse them from this phlegmatic state, and they become inflexible and
furious, taking the most violent revenge, without any regard to the
consequences. The least affliction prompts them to suicide; the apprehension of
even an uncertain evil often leads them to despair; and they put an end to
their days with great apparent insensibility.

THE PELEW ISLANDS.
THE existence and situation of these islands were probably known to the
Spaniards at a distance period; but from a report among the neighboring
islands, of their being inhabited by a savage race of cannibals, it appears
that there had never been the least communication between them and any of the
Europeans, till the Antelope Packet, (belonging to the East India Company) was
wrecked on one of them, in August 1783. From the accounts given of these
islands, by Captain Wilson, who commanded the packet, it appears that they are
situated between the 5th and 9th degrees north latitude, and between 130 and
136 degrees of east longitude from Greenwich, and lie in a N. E. and S. W.
direction; they are long but narrow, of a moderate height, and well covered
with wood; that climate temperate and agreeable; the lands produce sugar cane,
yams, coca nuts, plantains, bananas, oranges, and lemons; and the surrounding
seas abound with the finest and greatest variety of fish.

The natives of these islands are a stout, well made people, above the middle
stature; their complexions are of a far deeper color than what is understood
by the Indian copper, but not black. The men go entirely naked, and the women
wear only two small aprons, one behind and one before, made of the husks of the
cocoa nut, dyed with different shades of yellow.

The government is monarchical, and the king is absolute, but his power is
exercised more with the mildness of a father than a sovereign. In the language
of Europeans, he is the fountain of honor. He occasionally creates his nobles,
called Rupacks or Chiefs, and confers a single honor of knighthood, called the
Order of the Bone, the members of which are distinguished by wearing a bone on
their arm.

The idea of these islanders, as communicated in the published account of
Captain Wilson, is that of a people, who, though totally ignorant of the arts
and sciences, and living in the simplest state of nature, yet possess all that
genuine politeness, that delicacy and chastity of intercourse between the
sexes, that respect for personal property, that subordination to government,
and those habits of industry, which are so rarely united in (...) (...)
civilized societies of modern times.

It appears that when the English were thrown on one of these islands, they
were received by the natives with the greatest humanity and hospitality; and
till their departure, experienced the almost courtesy and attention, "They felt
our people were distressed, and in consequence wished they should share
whatever they had to give. It was not that worldly munificence, that bestows
and spreads its favors with a distant eye to retribution. It was the pure
emotion of native benevolence. It was the love of man to man. It was a scene
that pictures human nature in triumphant coloring, and whilst their liberality
gratified the sense, their virtue struck the heart."

THE MARQUESAS ISLANDS,
ARE five in number, first discovered by Quiros, in 1595, and their situation
better ascertained by Captain Cook, in 1774. St. Dominica is the largest, about
16 leagues in circuit. The inhabitants, their language, manners and clothing,
with the vegetable productions, are nearly the same as at the Society Isles.

INGRAHAM's ISLANDS.
THESE islands were discovered by Captain JOSEPH INGRAHAM, of Boston, commander
of the Brigantine Hope, on the 19th of April, A day memorable to Americans, as
on this day (April, 1775) the Revolution War in America commenced, with the
battle of Lexington.
1791. They lie N. N. W. from the Marquesas islands, from 35 to 50 leagues
distant, and are seven in number, which Captain Ingraham named as follows, viz.

Names. Lat. S. Long. from Lon. Circuit. Washington, 8 52 140 19 These 5,
except Federal 1st. which is smaller, are about 10 leagues in circuit. Adams, 9
20 140 54 Lincoln, 9 24 140 54 Federal, 8 55 140 50 Franklin, 8 45 140 49
Hancock, 8 3 141 14 6 or 7 leagues, Knox. 8 5 141 18 5 do.

Most if not all these islands are inhabited; and appear generally to be
diversified with hills and valleys, and to be well wooded, and very pleasant.
The people resemble those of the Marquesas islands, at do their canoes, which
are carved at each end. They appeared friendly.

OTAHEITE, OR KING GEORGE'S ISLAND.
THIS island was discovered by Capt. Wallis, in the Dolphin, on the 19th of
June, 1767. It is situated between the 17th degree 28 minutes, and the 17th
degree 53 minutes, south latitude, and between the 149th degree 11 minutes, and
the 149th degree 39 minutes, west longitude. It consists of two peninsulas, of
a somewhat circular form, joined by an isthmus, and is surrounded by a reef of
coral rocks, which form several excellent bays and harbors, where there is
room and depth of water for almost any number of the largest ships. The face of
the country is very extraordinary, for a border of low land almost entirely
surrounds each peninsula, and behind this border the land rises in ridges that
run up into the middle of these divisions, and these form mountains that may be
seen at sixty leagues distance. The soil, except upon the very tops of the
ridges, is remarkably rich and fertile, watered by a great number of rivulets,
and covered with fruit trees of various kinds, forming the most delightful
groves. The border of low land that lies between the ridges and the sea, is in
few places more than a mile and a half broad, and this together with some of
the valleys are the only parts that are inhabited.

Some parts of the island of Otaheite are very populous; and Capt. Cook was of
opinion that the number of inhabitants on the whole island amounted to 204,000,
including women and children. They are of a clear olive complexion; the men are
tall, strong, well limbed, and finely shaped; the women are of an inferior
size, but handsome and very amorous, and indeed generally somewhat licentious.
Their clothing consists of cloth or matting of different kinds; and the
greatest part of the food eaten here is vegetable, as cocoa nuts, bananas,
bread fruit, plantains, and a great variety of other fruit.

They have no tools among them made of metal; and those they use are made of
stone, or some kind of bones. The inhabitants of Otaheite are remarkable for
their cleanliness; for both men and women constantly wash their whole bodies in
running water three times every day. Their language is soft and melodious, and
abounds with vowels.

There were no tame animals on this island but hogs, dogs, and poultry; and the
only wild animals are tropical birds, paroquets, pigeons, ducks, a few other
birds, rats, and a very few serpents. The sea, however, supplies the
inhabitants with a great variety of the most excellent fish, and by the
kindness of the English and the Spaniards, they have now bulls and cows, sheep,
goats, a horse and mare, geese, ducks, peacocks, and turkeys, and also cats.

The inhabitants of Otaheite believe in one Supreme Deity, but at the same time
acknowledge a variety of subordinate deities: They offer up their prayers
without the use of idols, and believe the existence of the soul in a separate
state, where there are two situations, of different degrees of happiness. Among
these people a subordination is established, which somewhat resembles the early
state of the European nations, under the feudal system. If a general attack
happens to be made on the island, every district is obliged to furnish its
proportion of soldiers for the common defense. Their weapons are slings which
they use with great dexterity, and clubs of about six or seven feet long, and
made of a hard heavy wood. They have a great number of boats, many of which are
constructed for warlike operations, Otaheite is said to be able to send out
1720 war canoes, and 68,000 fighting men.

SOCIETY ISLANDS.
OF the several islands so called in honor of the Royal Society, which were
discovered by Capt. Cook, in the year 1769. the principal are, HUAHEINE,
ULITEA, OTAHA, and BOLABOLA. Huaheine is about 31 leagues to the northwest of
Otaheite, and its productions are the same. The inhabitants seem to be larger
made and more stout than those of Otaheite. Mr. Banks measured one of the men,
and found him to be six feet three inches and a half high; yet they are so
indolent, that he could not persuade one of them to go up the hills with him;
for they said if they should attempt it, the fatigue would kill them. Ulitea is
about seven or eight leagues to the southwestward of Huaheine, and is a much
larger island, but appears neither so fertile nor so populous. Otaha is divided
from Ulitea by a strait that in the narrowest part is not above two miles
broad. About four leagues to the northwest of Otaha lies Bolabola, which is
surrounded by a reef of rocks, and several small islands, all which are no more
than eight leagues in compass. To these islands, and those of Maura, which lie
about 14 miles to the westward of Bolabola, containing six in all, Capt. Cook
gave the name of Society Islands.

THE FRIENDLY ISLANDS.
THESE islands were so named by Capt. Cook, in the year 1773, on account of the
friendship which appeared to subsist among the inhabitants, and from their
courteous behavior to strangers.

The plantations on some of these islands are both more numerous and more
extensive; and enclosed by fences which, running parallel to each other, form
fine, spacious public roads, which would appear beautiful in countries where
rural conveniences have been carried to the greatest perfection. They are, in
general, highly cultivated, and well stocked with the several roots and fruits
which whose islands produce; and Capt. Cook endeavored to add to their number
by planting Indian corn, and the seeds of melons, pumpkins, and the like.

Eooa, when viewed from the ship at anchor, formed one of the most beautiful
prospects in nature; and very different from the others of the Friendly Isles,
which, being low and perfectly level, exhibit nothing to the eye but the trees
which cover them; whereas here, the land rising gently to a considerable
height, presents us with an extensive prospect, where groves of trees are only
interspersed at irregular distances, in beautiful disorder, and all the rest is
covered with grass, except near the shores, where it is covered with fruit and
other trees; amongst which are the habitations, of the natives.

We are informed that the bulk of the people of these islands are satisfied
with one wife, but the chiefs have commonly several women, though it appeared
as if one only was looked on as a mistress of the family. Though female
chastity was frail enough in some, it is highly probable that conjugal fidelity
is seldom violated; as it does not appear that more than one instance of it was
known to our voyagers; and in that, the man's life who was the cause of it paid
the forfeit for his crime. Nor were those of the better sort who were unmarried
more liberal of their favors; those who were being obvious prostitutes by
profession. When they are afflicted by any disorder which they deem dangerous,
they cut off the joint of one of their little fingers; fondly believing that
the Deity will accept of that, as a fort of sacrifice efficacious enough to
procure the recovery of their health. It was supposed from some circumstances,
that though they believe in a future state, they have no notion of future
rewards nor punishments for the things done here. They believe in a Supreme
Being; but they believe also in a number of inferior ones; every island has its
peculiar god, as every European nation has its peculiar saint. Capt. Cook
thinks he can pronounce that they do not worship any thing that is the work of
their own hands, or any visible part of the creation. They make no offering of
hogs, dogs, or fruit, to the Otooa, as at Otaheite; but it is absolutely
certain that even this mild, humane and beneficent people use human sacrifices.
The government, as far as could be discovered, appears to approach nearly to
the feudal system, formerly established all over Europe. When any person of
consequence dies, his body is washed and decorated by some women, who are
appointed on the occasion; and these women are not, by their customs, to touch
any food with their hands for many months afterward; and it is remarkable,
that the length of the time they are thus proscribed is the greater in
proportion to the rank of the chief they had washed. Their great men are fond
of a singular piece of luxury, which is to have women sit beside them all
night, and beat on different parts of their body until they go to sleep; after
which they relax a little of their labor, unless they appear likely to awake,
in which case they redouble their drumming, until they are again fast asleep.
These are some of the most remarkable opinions, customs, laws and ceremonies
observed at the Friendly Islands, and which we have endeavored to collect into
one point of view, for the information of our more inquisitive readers.

NEW ZEALAND.
THIS country was first discovered by Tasman, the Dutch navigator, in the year
1642, who gave it the name of Staten Land, though it has been generally
distinguished, in our maps and charts, by the name of New Zealand, and was
supposed to be part of a southern continent; but it is now known, from the late
discoveries of Capt. Cook, who sailed round it, to consist of two large
islands, divided from each other by a strait 4 or 5 leagues broad. They are
situated between the latitudes of 34 and 48 degrees S. and between the
longitudes of 166 and 280 degrees E. of Greenwich. One of these island* is for
the most part mountainous, rather batten, and but thinly inhabited; but the
other is much more fertile, and of a better appearance. In the opinion of Sir
Joseph Banks and Dr. Solander, every kind of European fruits, grain, and
plants, would flourish here in the utmost luxuriance. From the vegetables found
here, it is supposed that the winters are milder than those of England, and the
summers not hotter, though more equally warm; so that it is imagined that if
this country were settled by people from Europe, they would, with moderate
industry, be soon supplied not only with the necessaries but the luxuries of
life in great abundance. Here are forests of vast extent, filled with very
large timber trees; and near four hundred plants were found here that had not
been described by naturalists. The inhabitants of New Zealand are stout and
robust and equal in stature to the largest Europeans. Their color in general
is brown, but in few deeper than that of a Spaniard who has been exposed to the
sun, and in many not so deep; and both sexes have good features. Their dress is
very uncouth, and they mark their bodies in a manner similar to those of
Otaheite, which is called tattowing. Their principal weapons are lances, darts,
and a kind of battle axes; and they have generally shown themselves very
hostile to the Europeans who have visited them. As to their religious
principles, they believe that the souls of such as are killed in battle, and
their flesh afterward eaten by the enemy, are doomed to perpetual (...); while
the souls of those who die a natural death, or whole bodies are preserved from
such ignominious treatment, ascend to the habitations of the gods. The common
method of disposing of their dead is by interment in the earth; but if they
have more of their slaughtered enemies than they can eat, they throw then into
the sea. They have no such things as morals, or other places of public worship;
nor do they ever assemble together with this view.

We conclude this article with the following character of Captain Cook, to
perpetuate the memory and services of so excellent a navigator and commander.

Perhaps no science ever received greater additions from the labors of a
single man, than geography has done from those of Capt. Cook. In his first
voyage to the South Seas, he discovered the Society Islands; determined the
insularity of New Zealand; discovered the straits which separate the two
islands, and are called after his name; and made a complete survey of both. He
afterward explored the Eastern coast of New Holland, hitherto unknown; an
extent of 27 degrees of latitude, or upwards of 2000 miles.

In his second expedition he solved the great problem of a southern continent,
having traversed that hemisphere between the latitude of 40 and 70, in such a
manner as not to leave a possibility of its existence, unless near the pole,
and out of the reach of navigation. During this voyage, he discovered New
Caledonia, the largest island in the Southern Pacific, except New Zealand; the
island of Georgia; and an unknown coast, which he named Sandwich Land, the ^
hule of the southern hemisphere; and having twice visited the tropical seas, be
settled the situations of the old, and made several new discoveries.

But the last voyage is distinguished above all the rest by the extent and
importance of its discoveries. Besides several smaller islands in the Southern
Pacific, he discovered, to the north of the Equinoxial Line, the group called
the Sandwich Islands, which, from their situation and productions, bid fairer
for becoming an object of consequence in the system of European navigation,
than any other discovery in the South Sea. He afterward explored what had
hitherto remained unknown of the Western coast of America, from the latitude of
43 to 70 North, containing an extent of 3,500 miles; ascertained the proximity
of the two great continents of Asia and America; passed the straits between
them, and surveyed the coast on each side, to such a height of northern
latitude, as to demonstrate the impracticability of a passage, in that
hemisphere, from the Atlantic into the Pacific ocean, either by an eastern or a
western course. In short, if we except the Sea of Amur, and the Japanese
Archipelago; which still remain imperfectly known to Europeans, ^e has
completed the hydrography of the habitable globe.

As a navigator, his services were not, perhaps, less splendid; certainly not
less important and meritorious. The method which he discovered, and so
successfully pursued, of preserving the health of seamen, forms a new era in
navigation, and will transmit his name to future ages, among the friends and
benefactors of mankind.

Those who are conversant in naval history need not be told at how dear a rate
the advantages which have been sought, through the medium of long voyages at
sea, have always been purchased. That dreadful disorder which is peculiar to
their service, and whose ravages have marked the tracts of discoverers with
circumstances almost too shocking to relate, must, without exercising an
unwarrantable tyrany over the lives of our seamen, have proved an insuperable
obstacle to the prosecution of such enterprises. It was reserved for Captain
Cook to show the world, by repeated trials, that voyages might be protracted to
the unusual length of three or even four years, in unknown regions, and under
every change and rigor of the climate, not only without affecting the health,
but even without diminishing the probability of life, in the smallest degree.

END OF PART 1.
EUROPE
map of Europe

THE AMERICAN UNIVERSAL GEOGRAPHY, OR, A VIEW OF THE PRESENT STATE OF ALL THE
Empires, Kingdoms, States, and Republics IN THE KNOWN WORLD, AND OF THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA IN PARTICULAR.

IN TWO PARTS.

The FIRST PART

Treats of Astronomical Geography, and other useful preliminaries to the study
of Geography, in an enlarged and improved Introduction of the WESTERN, or
AMERICAN CONTINENT -- of its Discovery -- its Aboriginal Inhabitants, and
whence they came -- its Divisions -- but more particularly of the United States
of America, generally and Individually -- of their Situation, Dimensions, Civil
Divisions, Rivers, Lakes, Climate, Mountains, Soil, Produce, Natural History,
Commerce, Manufactures, Population, Character, Curiosities, Springs, Mines and
Minerals, Military Strength, Constitutions, Islands, History of the War, and
the succeeding Events. -- With a View of the British, Spanish, French,
Portuguese, and other Dominions, on the Continent, and in the West Indies.

The SECOND PART

Describes at large, and from the latest and best Authorities, the Present
State, in respect to the above mentioned Particulars, of the EASTERN CONTINENT
-- and its Islands -- as divided into EUROPE, ASIA, and AFRICA and subdivided
into Empires, Kingdoms, and Republics.

TO WHICH ARE ADDED,

An improved CATALOGUE of NAMES of PLACES, and their GEOGRAPHICAL SITUATION,
alphabetically arranged -- an enlarged CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE of REMARKABLE
EVENTS, from the Creation to the present Time -- and, LIST of Ancient and
Modern Learned and Eminent MEN, in AMERICA, as well as EUROPE.

The whole comprehending a complete and improved SYSTEM of MODERN GEOGRAPHY.
Calculated for AMERICANS.

Illustrated with MAPS of the Countries described.

BY JEDIDIAH MORSE, A. M.

Published according to Act of Congress.

PART II.

Containing a GEOGRAPHICAL DESCRIPTION of the EASTERN CONTINENT and ISLANDS.

PRINTED AT BOSTON

BY YOUNG AND ETHERIDGE, FOR THE AUTHOR AND THOMAS AND ANDREWS.

Sold at the Bookstore of said THOMAS and ANDREWS, Faust's Statue, No. 45
Newbury Street, BOSTON; by said THOMAS, in WORCESTER, by BERRY, ROGERS and
BERRY, in NEWYORK; by H. and P: RICE, in PHILADELPHIA and by W. P. YOUNG, in
CHARLESTON.

MDCCXCIII.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THIS SECOND PART of the AMERICAN UNIVERSAL GEOGRAPHY, which the Author has
thought proper to add, for the reasons mentioned in the Preface, is compiled
principally from Chambers' Quarto Dublin Edition of Guthrie's Geographical
Grammar, which, it is believed, is the best Edition of that valuable work which
has been published. The Historical and less interesting parts have been
omitted, to give room for more recent and important matters. In the Account of
Europe, Zimmerman's Political Survey has been incorporated, as containing the
most complete and authentic information, on those interesting subjects of which
he treats. Various other improvements, too numerous to particularize, have been
introduced, from the latest Geographical Publications, State Papers, Travels,
Histories, etc. etc. so that it ought to be, and the Author hopes the Reader
will find it to be, the best General Account of the Eastern Continent that has
yet appeared in America.

CONTENTS OF PART II.
EUROPE.
Page GENERAL Remarks, 1 Public Revenue and Land Forces of the Principal States
in Europe, 3 Naval Forces of the different Powers, 4 Grand Divisions,
Situation, Boundaries, etc. of Europe, 5 Denmark, 7 East and West Greenland,
Iceland, and the Islands in the Atlantic Ocean, ibid. Norway, 14 Denmark
Proper, or Jutland, 21 Lapland, 30 Sweden, 35 Muscovy, or the Russian Empire in
Europe and Asia, 49 The British Empire, 73 England, 75 Scotland, 125 Ireland,
149 Isle of Man, 185 Isle of Wight, 186 Scilly Isles, 187 Jersey, Guernsey,
etc. 188 Germany, 189 Prussia, 205 Austria, 213 Hungary, 219 Transylvania,
Hungary, Sclavonia, etc. 224 Poland, 227 Switzerland, 241 Netherlands, 249
France, 267 Spain, 317 Protugal, 339 Italy, 346 Turkey in Europe, 375
ASIA.
Its Situation, Boundaries, Grand Divisions, and History, 384 Turkey in Asia,
387 Tartary in Asia, 403 China, 411 Indostan, Hindoostan, or India on this side
the Ganges, 425 India beyond the Ganges, 450 Persia, 457 Arabia, 466 Indian and
Oriental Islands, 475
AFRICA.
Situation, Boundary, Grand Divisions, etc. 483 Egypt, 489 The States of
Barbary, 497 Africa, from the Tropic of Cancer to the Cape of Good Hope 506
African Islands, 516 New Discoveries, [524] A new Geographical Table,
containing the Names and Situations of all the chief Places in the known World.
521 An improved Chronological Table of Remarkable Events, Discoveries and
Inventions from the Creation to the present Time, 533 List of Ancient and
Modern Learned and Ingenious Men, in America as well as Europe. 548
DIRECTIONS to the BOOKBINDER for PLACING the MAPS, etc.
PART I.
1. The World, to face Title Page, Page 2. Aruficial Sphere, etc. to face. 32
3. Northern and Middle States to face. 309 4. District of Maine to face. 345 5.
Map of Pennsylvania to face. 469 6. Map of Virginia, North Carolina, etc. to
face. 532 7. South America to face. 642 8. West Indies to face. 666
PART II.
1. Europe to face Page ^ 2. Asia to face. 3^4 3. Africa to face. 435
PART II.
From AMERICA we pass to the Eastern Continent, in the description of which we
begin with EUROPE.
EUROPE is the least extensive quarter of the globe, containing only about
2,627,574 square miles, According to the ingenious Zimmermann, in his
"Political Survey of the Present State of Europe," wherein he gives this as the
medium of the different writers on this subjects.
whereas the habitable parts of the World in the other quarters, are estimated
at 36,666,806 square miles. Here the arts of utility and ornament, the
sciences, both military and civil, have been carried to the greatest
perfection. If we except the earliest ages of the world, it is in Europe that
we find the greatest variety of character, government, and manners, and from
whence we draw the greatest number of facts and memorials, both for our
entertainment and instruction.

Two circumstances have had a considerable tendency in giving Europe its
present high rank in the world. First, the happy temperature of its climate, no
part of it lying within the torrid zone; and, secondly, the great variety of
its surface. The effect of a moderate climate, both on plants and animals, is
well known from experience. The immense number of mountains, rivers, seas, etc.
which divide the different countries of Europe from each other, is likewise
extremely commodious for its inhabitants. These natural boundaries check the
progress of conquest, which has always been so rapid in the extensive plains of
Africa and the East: The seas and rivers facilitate the intercourse and
commerce between different nations; and even the barren rocks and mountains are
more favorable for exciting human industry and invention, than the natural
unsolicited luxuriancy of more fertile soils. There is no part of Europe so
diversified in its surface, so interrupted by natural boundaries and divisions,
as Greece: And we have seen that it was there the human mind began to known and
to avail itself of its strength, and that many of the arts, subservient to
utility or pleasure, were invented, or at least greatly improved. What Greece
therefore is with regard to Europe, Europe itself is at present with regard to
the rest of the globe. Though most of the European governments are monarchical,
we may discover, on due examination, that there are a thousand little springs
which check the force, and soften the rigor of monarchy. In proportion to the
number and force of these checks, the monarchies of Europe, such as Russia,
Spain, and Denmark, differ from one another. Besides monarchies, is which one
man bears the chief sway, there are in Europe aristocracies or governments of
the nobles, and democracies or governments of the people. -- Venice is an
example of the former; Holland, and some states of Italy and Switzerland,
afford examples of the latter. There are, likewise, mixed governments, which
cannot be assigned to any one class. Great Britain, which partakes of all the
three, is the most singular instance of this kind we are acquainted with. The
other mixed governments in Europe are composed only of two of the simple forms,
such as Poland, several states of Italy, etc. all which shall be explained in
their proper places.

The Christian religion is established throughout every part of Europe, except
Turkey; but from the various capacities of the human mind, and the different
lights in which speculative opinions are apt to appear, when viewed by persons
of different educations and passions, that religion is divided into a number of
different sects, but which may be comprehended under three general
denominations; 1st, The Greek church; 2d, The Roman Catholic; and 3d,
Protestantism: Which fast is again divided into Lutheranism and Calvinism, so
called from Luther and Calvin, the two distinguished reformers of the 16th
century.

It may, perhaps, be an object of curiosity, to compare the proportions of
ground now occupied, and formerly disputed, by the Roman Catholic and
Protestant religions, with the numbers of their adherents. The proportion of
the surface of the countries, in which the Protestant religion is established,
to those in which the Roman Catholic religion prevails, is nearly as 3 to 4:
The number of Roman Catholics, according to the best calculations, is about
90,000,000; the number of Protestants only 24,000,000, which is a proportion of
nearly 4 to 1. In addition to this account of the European religions, it may be
observed, that an inconsiderable number of the ignorant Laplanders may, with
propriety, be called Pagans.

The languages of Europe are derived from the six following: The Greek, Latin,
Teutonic or old German, the Celtic, Sclavonic, and Gothic.

The greatest part of Europe being situated above the 45th degree of northern
latitude, and even its most southern provinces being far distant from the
torrid zone, the species of organized bodies are much less numerous in Europe
than in the other parts of the globe. Thus, for instance, upon an equal number
of square miles, the number of species of quadrupeds in Europe, is to the
number of them in Asia as 1 to 2 to that in America as 1 to 2(...); and to that
in Africa as 1 to 10, and the number of the vegetable species in the other
three divisions of the globe, is greatly superior to that in Europe. But nature
has enriched the European continent with every species of minerals, diamonds
and platina, perhaps, excepted. Gold, the first of metals, is not found in
Europe as plentifully as in the other continents. However, as the European
nations have the skill of making the best use of their natural productions, and
have taken care to transplant into their own soil as many of the foreign
productions as their nature will permit, Europe, upon the whole, must be
allowed to be one of the richest parts of the globe.

PUBLIC REVENUE OF THE PRINCIPAL STATES IN EUROPE.
L. Sterling. 1. Great Britain, 14,500,000 2. Austria, 12,400,000(112 million
florins) 3. France, 18,000,000(Necker Compte Rendu) 4. Spain, 5,000,000 of Old
Spain alone. 5. Russia, 5,800,000 6. Turkey, 5,000,000 7. Prussia, 3,600,000 8.
Protugal, 1,800,000 9. Sicily, 1,400,000 medium. 10. Holland, 4,000,000 11.
Sweden, 1,300,000 12. Venice, 1,000,000 13. Denmark, 1,000,000 14. Electorate
of Saxony, 1,100,000 15. Electorate of Hanover, 900,000 16. Joint Elect. Of
Palate.andBavaria, 1,100,000 17. Sardinia, 1,000,000

The preceding statement in round numbers is intended merely to give the reader
a general idea of the relative state of European finances. It would, however,
he very improper to judge of the power of states merely by their finances,
because, in some countries, the value of money is much higher than in others:
Thus, for instance, the whole Russian army costs the state less than two
millions of rubles. Russia, Denmark, England, Sweden, and others, have paper
money.

LAND FORCES OF THE EUROPEAN STATES IN THE YEAR 1783.
France, 300,000 Austria, 282,000 Russia (450,000 in all) in Europe, 290,000
Prussia, 224,000 Turkey (210,000 in all) but in Europe only 170,000 Spain,
60,000 including militia. Denmark, 72,000 Great Britain, 58,000 including
militia, Sweden, 50,000 Sardinia, 40,000 Holland, 37,000 Naples and Sicily,
30,000 Electorate of Saxony, 26,000 Portugal, 20,000 Electorate of Bavaria and
the Palatinate, 24,000 Hesse Cassel, 15,000 Hanover, 20,000 Poland, 15,000
Venice, 8,000 Wurtemberg, 6,000 The Ecclesiastical Estate, 5,000 Tuscany, 3,000

Having stated here the forces of the principal states only, passing over a
considerable part of Germany, Italy, and Switzerland, we may calculate the
armies of all the countries in Europe to amount to 2 millions of men; so that
supposing 140 millions of inhabitants in Europe, no more than of 1/70 the whole
population are soldiers. The present military establishment of every kingdom,
in a time of general peace, differs somewhat from the above statement. France,
Austria, and Prussia, have by far the most formidable armies: As to Russia, the
immense extent of its provinces can never allow an army of more than 120,000,
or 130,000 men to act against an enemy; and as to the Turkish forces, they are
at present much inferior to any other welldisciplined army. The different
proportions, in different countries, between the population and the number of
soldiers, is not unworthy of observation. There are in Germany, nearly 500,000
soldiers, consequently 1/52 of the whole population are engaged in the military
profession: In Italy, on the contrary, even supposing the standing armies of
that country to amount to 120,000 men, this number makes only 1/132 of the
whole population, which amounts to 16 millions.

NAVAL FORCES.
NUMBER OF SHIPS OF THE LINE, FRIGATES, CUTTERS, SLOOPS, etc.
1. England, 465 2. France, 266 3. Spain, 130 4. Holland, 95 5. Sweden, 85 6.
Denmark, 60 7. Turkey, 50 commonly reckoned 60. 8. Russia, 63 9. Sardinia, 32
10. Venice, 30 11. Sicily, 25 12. Portugal, 24 Total 1325

Several of these numbers, taken from the naval lists in the year 1783, are at
present reduced. This gives, however, some idea of the respective naval
strength of the different powers of Europe. Some of them, as for instance,
Denmark, Sweden, Sicily, Portugal, having had no war for many years past, and
having, for that reason, built but a small number of ships, are capable of
maintaining a much larger navy than they now have; and they would, undoubtedly,
increase their naval forces very considerably in case of a war.

The greatest part of Europe is under the influence of a climate, which, being
tempered with a moderate degree of cold, forms a race of men strong, bold,
active and ingenious; forced by necessity to make the best use they can of the
smaller share of vegetable and animal treasures, which their soil produces. In
hotter and richer parts of the globe, the profusion of spontaneous natural
productions, and the heat of the atmosphere, relax the bodily and mental powers
of the inhabitants, check their spirit of enterprise, and confine the compass
of their thought. The torrid zone has never been able, nor is over likely, to
boast of a Newton, a Caesar, or a Frederic.

Great ridges of mountains, the chief of which are the Alps, the Apennines, the
Pyrenean, the Carpathian, Sudetic, and Saxon mountains, effect not only a great
variety in the climate, but pour out many large and navigable rivers, and
contain every species of minerals. It is likewise no small convenience and
encouragement to commerce, that Europe is intersected by several seas, and that
it is contiguous to the Atlantic Ocean.

The seeming natural disadvantages of Europe have, by dint of the ingenuity and
perseverance of the inhabitants, given rise to numberless arts and sciences,
which have been carried to a great degree of perfection. Asia and Africa, have
immense deserts, such as are no where to be found in Europe; deserts of many
thousand square miles, and which are partly owing to natural and insuperable
disadvantages of situation, partly to want of industry, which is at once both
cause and effect of desolation. America is yet in its infancy, so that the
sciences of Europe far excel those of the other quarters of the globe,
excepting those parts into which European knowledge and civilization have been
transplanted. Europe may also boast of the greatest number of useful inventions
and institutions, to preserve and to propagate acquired knowledge. It has, at
present, about 130 universities, and an almost infinite number of literary
societies, or academies of sciences, arts, and languages.

The states of Europe considered with respect to their intrinsic power and
influence abroad, may be divided into three classes: France, Great Britain,
Austria, Prussia, and Russia, belong to the first. Secondary powers are those
of Turkey, Spain, Holland, Denmark, Sweden, and Sardinia: The third class
comprehends Portugal, Naples, and Sicily, Poland, the Joint Electorate of the
Palatinate and Bavaria, the Electorate of Saxony, Switzerland and Venice. For
the last three centuries past, the cabinets of Europe, and chiefly that of
France, have endeavored to keep up a constant equilibrium between the
different states. France and England endeavored to preserve the balance of
power in the west, Prussia, Austria, and Russia that in the east of Europe:
Russia has, by its late extraordinary increase of power, gained a great
ascendency in the north, after a successful struggle with the rival power of
Sweden.

GRAND DIVISIONS OF EUROPE.
THIS grand division of the earth is situated between the 10th degree west. and
the 65th degree east longitude from London; and between the 36th and 72d degree
of north latitude. It is bounded on the north, by the Frozen Ocean; on the
east, by Asia; on the south, by the Mediterranean Sea, which divides it from
Africa; and on the west, by the Atlantic Ocean, which separates it from
America: Being 3000 miles long, from Cape St. Vincent in the west, to the mouth
of the river Oby in the north east; and 2500 broad, from north to south, from
the north Cape in Norway to Cape Cayha or Metapar in the Morea, the most
southern promontory in Europe. The reader is desired to observe, that in this
part of the work, in reckoning the extent of countries, the longest and
broadest parts have been mentioned. Great allowances therefore must be made in
most countries. Jutland, for instance, is ^14 miles where broadest, though in
several others parts it is not fifty.
It contains the following kingdoms and states.

Kingdoms. Len. Bth. Chief City. Did. and Bearing from London. Diff. of Time
from London. Religions. Miles. H. M. England 380 300 London *** *** L^th.
Calvinists,etc. Scotland 300 150 Edinburgh 400 N. 0 12 aft. Calvinists, etc.
Ireland 285 16^ Dublin 270 N. W. 0 26 aft. Lat. Gal. and R. Ca. Norway 1000 300
Bergen 540 N. 0 24 bef. Lutherans Denmark 240 180 Copenhagen 500 N. E. 0 50
bef. Lutherans Sweden 800 500 Stockholm 750 N. E. 1 10 bef. Lutherans Russia
1500 1000 Petersburg 1140 N. E. 2 4 bef. Greek Church Poland 700 680 W. saw 760
E. 1 24 bef. R. C. ^uth. etc. Calv. K. of Pr. Dom. 609 350 Eerlin 540 E. 0 99
bef. Luth. and Calv. Germany 600 500 Vienna 600 E. 1 5 bef. R. C. Luth.andCalv.
Bahemia 300 250 Prague 600 E. 1 4 bef. R. Cath. (...) Holland 150 100 Amster^am
180 E. 0 18 bef. Calvinists. Flanders 200 200 Brussers 180 S. E. 0 16 bef. R.
Cath. France 600 500 Paris 200 S. E. 0 9 bef. R. Cath. Spain 700 500 Ma^rin 800
S. 0 17 aft. R. Cath. Portugal 300 100 (...) 850 S. W. 0 38 aft. R. Cath.
Switzerland 260 100 Bern, Coir. etc. 420 S. E. 0 28 bef. Calv. and R. Cath.
(...) Several small States Piedmont, Monserrat, Milan, Parma, Modena, Mantua,
Venice, Genoa, Tuscany, etc. Turin, Casal, Milan, Parma, Modena, Mantua, Venice
Genoa, Florence. Popedom 240 120 Rome 820 S. E. 0 5^ bef. R. Cath. Naples 280
120 Naples 870 S. E. 1 0 bef. R. Cath. Hungary 300 200 Buda 780 S. E. 1 17 bef.
R. C. and Prote^tan^^ Europe Danubian Provinces 600 420 Constantinople 1320 S.
E. 1 58 bef. Mahometans and Greek Church. ^ Tartary This includes the Cirm
Tartary, now ceded to Russia, for the particulars of which, see RUSSIA.
380 240 Precop 1500 E. 2 24 bef. Greece 400 240 Athens 1360 S. E. 1 37 bef.

Exclusive of the British isles, Europe contains the following principal
islands:

Islands. Chief Towns Subject to In the Northern Ocean. Iceland, Skalholt.
Denmark Zealand, Funed, Alsen, Falster, Langland, Laland, Femernen, Mona,
Bornholm, Denmark Baltic Sea. Zealand, Funed, Alsen, Falster, Langland, Laland,
Femernen, Mona, Denmark Gothland, Aland, Rugen, Sweden Osel, Dagho, Russia
Usedom, Wollm, Prussia Mediterrancan Sea. Ivica, Majorca, Minorca, Corsica,
Sardinia, Sicily

Ivica, Spain Majorca, Ditto Port Mahon, Ditto Minorca was taken from Spain by
General Stanhope, 1708, and confirmed to Great Britain by the Treaty of Utrecht
1713, but was besieged and taken by the Spaniards, February 15, 1782, and
confirmed to them by the definitive Treaty of Peace, signed at Pat^^, September
^, 1783.
Bastia, France Cagliari, K. of Sard. Palermo, K. of 2 Sic. Adriatic, or Gulf
Venice. Lusiena, Corfu, Cephalonia, ant, Leucadia, Venice. Archipelago, and
Levant Seas. Candia, Rhodes, Negropont, Lemnos, Tenedos, Scyros, Mytelene,
Scio, Samo^, Patmos, Paros, Cerigo, Santorin, etc. being part of ancient an
modern Greece. Turkey.

DENMARK.
I SHALL, according to my plan, begin this account of his Danish Majesty's
dominions, with the most northerly situations, and divide them into four parts:
1st, East and West Greenland, Iceland and the islands in the Atlantic Ocean;
2d, Norway; 3d, Denmark Proper; and 4th his German territories.

The dimensions of these countries may be seen in the following table.

Denmark. Square Miles. Length. Breadth. Chief Cities. Denmark Proper. North
Jutland, 9,600 155 98 Wyburg. South Jutland, or Sleswick, 2,115 70 63 Sleswick.
Islands at the entrance of the Baltic Sea. zealand, 1,935 60 60 COPENHACEN.
Funen, 768 38 32 Odensee, Falstar and 220 27 12 Nikoping. Naxkaw. Langland,
Femeren, 50 13 8 Borge. Alsen, 54 15 6 Sonderborge. Mona, 39 14 5 Stege.
Bornholm, 160 20 12 Roftcomby. In the North Seas, Iceland, Island, 46,000 435
185 Skalholt. Norway, 71,400 750 170 Bergen. Danish Lapland, 28,400 285 172
Wardhuys. Westphalia, Oldenburg, 1260 62 32 Oldenburg. Lower Saxony, Stormar,
Danish Holstein. 1000 52 3^ Gluckstadt. Total 163,041

The reader may perceive, that in the preceding table no calculation is made of
the dimensions of East and West Greenland; because in fact, they are not yet
known, or known very imperfectly: We shall proceed to give the latest accounts
of them, and from the best authorities that have come to our hands.

EAST AND WEST GREENLAND, ICELAND, AND THE ISLANDS IN THE ATLANTIC OCEAN.
EAST GREENLAND.
THE most northerly part of his Danish majesty's dominions; or as others call
it, New Greenland, and the country of Spitzbergen, lies between 10 and 11 degrees.
E. long. and 76 and 80 degrees. N. lat. Though it is now claimed by Denmark, it
certainly was discovered by Sir Hugh Willoughby in 1553; and is supposed to be
a continuation of Old Greenland. It obtained the name of Spitzbergen from the
height and ruggedness of its rocks. Few animals or vegetables are to be found
here, and the fish and fowl are said to forsake the coast in winter. The
Russians of Archangel have formed within the last 30 years, settlements for
hunting in several places of the island of Spitzbergen. The Aurora Borealis and
the northern lights reflected from the snow, enable them to pursue the chase
during the long winter nights of those gloomy regions; and they take a great
number of ^ealions which serve them for food. There is a whole-fishery, chiefly
prosecuted by the Dutch and some British vessels, on its coast. It likewise
contains two harbors; one called South Haven, and the other Maurice-Bay; but
the inland parts are uninhabited.

WEST GREENLAND
LIES between the Meridian of London, and 50 degrees. W. long. and between 60 and
76 degrees. N. lat.

INHABITANTS.] By the latest accounts from the missionaries employed for the
conversion of the Greenlanders, their whole number does not amount to above 957
stated inhabitants: M. Crantz, however, thinks that the roving southlanders of
Greenland may amount to about 7000. There is a great resemblance between the
aspect, manners, and dress of those natives, and the Esquimaux Americans, from
whom they naturally differ but little, even after all the pains which the
Danish and German missionaries have taken to convert and civilize them. They
are low of stature, few exceeding five feet in height, and the generality are
not so tall. The hair of their heads is long, straight, and of a black color;
but they have seldom any beards, because it is their constant practice to root
them out. They have high breasts and broad shoulders, especially the women, who
are obliged to carry great burdens from their younger years. They are very
light and nimble of foot, and can also use their hands with much skill and
dexterity. They are not very lively in their tempers, but they are
good-humoured, friendly, and unconcerned about futurity. Their most agreeable
food is the flesh of reindeer; but that is now scarce among them, and their
best provisions are fish, seals, and sea-fowl. Their drink is clear water,
which stands in the house in a great copper-vessel, or in a wooden tub, which
is very neatly made by them, ornamented with fish bones and rings, and provided
with a pewter ladle or dipping dish. The men make their hunting and fishing
implements, and prepare the wood-work of their boats; and the women cover them
with skins. The men hunt and fish, but when they have towed their booty to
land, they trouble themselves no farther about it; nay, it would be accounted
beneath their dignity only to draw the seal up upon the shore. The women are
the butchers and cooks, and also the curriers to dress the pelts, and make
clothes, shoes, and boots, out of them; so that they are likewise both
shoemakers and tailors. The women also build and repair the houses and tents,
so far as relates to the masonry, the men doing only the carpenter's work. They
live in huts during their winter, which is incredibly severe; but Mr. Crantz,
who has given us the latest and best accounts of this country, says, that in
their longest summer days it is so hot that the inhabitants are obliged to
throw off their summer garments. They have no trade, though they have a most
improveable fishery upon their coasts; but they employ all the year either in
fishing or hunting, in which they are very dexterous, particularly in catching
and killing seals.

CURIOSITIES.] The taking of whales in the seas of Greenland, among the fields
of ice that have been increasing for ages, is one of the greatest curiosities
in nature. These fields, or pieces of ice, are frequently more than a mile in
length, and upwards of 100 feet in thickness; and when they are put in motion
by a storm, nothing can be more terrible: The Dutch had 13 ships crushed to
pieces by them in one season.

There are several kinds of whales in Greenland; some white and others black.
The black sort, the grand bay whale, is in most esteem, on account of his bulk,
and the great quantity of fat or blubber he affords, which turns to oil. His
tongue is about 18 feet long, enclosed in long pieces of what we call
whale-bone, which are covered with a kind of hair like horse hair; and on each
side of his tongue are 250 pieces of this whale-bone. As to the bones of his
body they are as hard as an ox's bones, and of no use. There are no teeth in
his mouth; and he is usually between 60 and 80 feet long; very thick about the
head, but grows less from thence to that tail.

When the seamen see a whale spout, the word is immediately given, fall, fall,
when every one hastens from the ship to his boat; six or eight men being
appointed to a boat, and four or five boats usually belong to one ship.

When they come near the whale, the harpooner strikes him with his harpoon (a
barbed dart) and the monster, finding himself wounded, runs swiftly down into
the deep, and would carry the boat along with him if they did not give him line
fast enough; and to prevent the wood of the boat taking fire by the violent
rubbing of the rope on the side of it, one wets it constantly with a mop. After
the whale has run some hundred fathoms deep, he is forced to come up for air,
when he makes such a terrible noise with his spouting, that some have compared
it to the firing of cannon. As soon as the appears on the surface of the water,
some of the harpooners six another harpoon in him, whereupon he plunges again
into the deep; and when he comes up a second time, they pierce him with spears
in the vital parts till he spouts out streams of blood instead of water,
beating the waves with his tail and fins till the sea is in a foam, the boats
continuing to follow him some leagues, till he has lost his strength; and when
he is dying he turns himself upon his back, and is drawn on shore, or to the
ship if they be at a distance from the land. There they cut him in pieces, and
boiling the blubber extract the oil, if they have conveniences on shore;
otherwise they barrel up the pieces, and bring them home; but nothing can smell
stronger than these ships do. Every fish is computed to yield between 60 and
100 barrels of oil, of the value of 3l. or 4l. a barrel. Though the Danes claim
the country of East and West Greenland, where these whales are taken, the Dutch
have in a manner monopolized this fishery. Of late the English have also been
very successful in it.

ICELAND.
THIS island, which receives its name from the great masses of ice that are
seen near it, lies between 63 and 67 degrees. N. lat. and between 11 and 27 degrees. W.
long. It extends four hundred miles in length, and an hundred and sixty in
breadth, containing about 46000 square miles. In April, 1783, the inhabitants
of Iceland observed something risen and flaming in the sea, to the south of
Grinbourg, at eight miles distant from the rocks des Oiseaux, which afterward
was found to be a new Island. The fact is authentic, but its dimensions and
situation are not well ascertained. The information brought by the last ship
from thence, was, that the Island was still increasing, and that great
quantities of fire issued from two of its eminences.

POPULATION, INHABITANTS, MANNERS, AND CUSTOMS.] It appears that a Norwegian
colony, among which there were many Sweden, settled in Iceland in the ninth
century. They found there inhabitants who were Christians, and whom they called
Papas. It is said, that the Norwegians also found among them Irish books,
bells, and crosiers (...). And it is conjectured, that the people who were
there, when the Norwegians arrived in the island, originally came from England
and Ireland. The inhabitants long retained their freedom; but they were at last
obliged to submit to the kings of Norway, and afterward became subject,
together with Norway, to the kings of Denmark. They were at first governed by
an admiral, who was sent there every year to make the necessary regulations:
But that mode has now been changed for many years, and a governor appointed,
who is styled Stiftsamtmans, and who constantly resides in the country.

The number of the inhabitants of Iceland is computed at about 60,000, which is
by no means adequate to the extent of the country. It has been much more
populous in former times, but great numbers have been destroyed by contagious
diseases. The plague carried off many thousand from 1402 to 1404. Many parts of
Iceland have also been depopulated by famine: For though the Icelanders cannot
in general be said to be in want of necessary food, yet the country has several
times been visited by great famines. These have been chiefly occasioned by the
Greenland floating ice; which, when it comes in great quantities, prevents the
grass from growing, and puts an entire stop to their fishing. The small pox has
likewise been very fatal here; for in the year 1707 and 1708 that disease
destroyed 16,000 persons.

The Icelanders in general are middle-sized, and well-made, though not very
strong. They are an honest, hospitable well intentioned people, moderately
industrious, and very faithful and obliging. Theft is seldom heard of among
them. Their chief employment is fishing, and taking care of their cattle. On
the coasts, the men employ their time in fishing both winter and summer; and
the women prepare the fish, and sew and spin. The men also prepare leather,
work at several mechanic trades, and some few work in gold and silver. They
likewise manufacture a coarse kind of cloth, which they call Wadmal. -- They
have an uncommonly strong attachment to their native country, and think
themselves no where else so happy. An Icelander, therefore, seldom settles in
Copenhagen, though the most advantageous conditions should be offered him.
Their dispositions are serious, and they are much inclined to religion. They
never pass a river, or any other dangerous place, without previously taking off
their hats, and imploring the divine protection; and they are always thankful
for their preservation, when they have passed the danger. When they meet
together, their chief pastime consists in reading their history. -- The master
of the house begins, and the rest continue in their turns when he is tired.
They are famous for playing at chess; and one of their pastimes consists in
reciting verses. Sometimes a man and women take one another by the hand, and by
turns sing stanzas, which are a kind of dialogue, and in which the company
occasionally join in chorus. The dress of the Icelanders is not elegant or
ornamental, but it is neat, cleanly, and suited to the climate. On their
fingers the women wear several gold, silver, or brass rings. The poorer women
dress in the coarse cloth, called wadmal, and always wear black: Those who are
in better circumstances wear broadcloth, with silver ornaments, gilt. The
houses of the Icelanders are generally bad: In some places they are built of
drift wood, and in others they are raised of lava, with moss stuffed between
the lava. Their roofs are covered with sods laid over rafters, or sometimes
over ribs of whales, which are both more durable and more expensive than wood.
They have not even a chimney in their kitchens, but only lay their fuel on the
earth, between three stones; and the smoke issues from a square hole in the
roof. -- Their food principally consists of dried fish, sour butter, which they
consider as a great dainty, milk mixed with water and whey, and a little meat.
Bread is so scarce among them, that there is hardly any peasant who eats it
above three or four months in the year.

RELIGION.] The only religion tolerated in Iceland is the Lutheran. The
churches on the east, south, and west quarters of the island, are under the
jurisdiction of the bishop of Skalholt, (the capital of the island) and those
of the north quarter are subject to the bishop of Hoolum. The island is divided
into 189 parishes, of which 127 belong to the sea of Skalholt, and 62 to that
of Hoolum. All the ministers are natives of Iceland, and receive a yearly
salary of four or five hundred rix-dollars from the king, exclusive of what
they have from their congregations.

LANGUAGE.] The language of Iceland is the same as that formerly spoken in
Sweden, Denmark, and Norway, and has been preserved so pure, that any Icelander
understands their most ancient traditional histories.

LEARNING AND LEARNED MEN.] It is said that poetry formerly flourished very
much in Iceland; and we are informed that Egil Skallagrimson, Kormak Ogmundson,
Glum Geirson, and Thorlief Jarlaa were celebrated as great poets. But the art
of writing was not much in use till after the year 1000; though the Runic
characters were known in that country before that period, and most probably
brought thither from Norway. After the reception of the Christian religion, the
Latin characters were immediately adopted, as the Runic alphabet, which only
consists of sixteen letters, was found insufficient. The first Icelandic
bishop, Itself, founded a school at Skalholt; and soon after they founded four
other schools, in which the youth were instructed in the Latin tongue,
divinity, and some parts of theoretic philosophy. And from the introduction of
the Christian religion here, till the year 1264, when Iceland became subject 10
Norway, it was one of the few countries in Europe, and the only one in the
North, wherein the sciences were cultivated and held in esteem.

But this period of time seems to have produced more learned men in Iceland
than any other period since. It appears from their ancient chronicles, that
they had considerable knowledge in morality, philosophy, natural history, and
astronomy. Most of their works were written in the 11th, 12th, 13th, and 14th
centuries; and some of them have been printed. Mr. Banks, now Sir Joseph Banks,
presented (...) hundred and sixty-two Icelandic manuscripts to the British
Muse^^^. That gentleman visited Iceland in 1772, accompanied by Dr. Soland^^
Dr. Van Troil, and Dr. Lind. Dr. Van Troil, who published an (...) count of
their voyage, observes, that he found more knowledge among the lower class in
Iceland, than is to be met with in most other place^^ that many of them could
repeat the works of some of their poets by heart; and that a peasant was seldom
to be found, who, besides being well instructed in the principles of religion,
was not also acqurain^^^ with the history of his own country; which proceeds
from the frequent reading of their traditional histories, that being one of
their principal amusements.

John Aroson, bishop of Hoolum, employed John Matthiesson, a native of Sweden,
in establishing a printing-press in Iceland, about the year 1530; and the first
book printed by him there was the (...) viarium Nidarosiense. He also printed
an ecclesiastical manual, Lather's catechism, and other books of that kind. The
Icelandic (...) of laws appeared in 1578, and the Icelandic bible in 1584. A
(...) privileged printing-office has lately been established at Hrappsey in
this island, and at which several valuable books have been printed.

MOUNTAINS, VOLCANOES, AND NATURAL CURIOSITIES.] Though this island is situated
so far to the north, earthquakes and volcanoes and more known than in many
countries in much warmer climates. The former have several times laid the
country almost desolate, particularly in the years 1734, 1752, and 1755, when
fiery eruptions broke out of the earth, and produced very fatal consequences.
Many of the snow as mountains have also gradually become volcanoes. Of these
burning mountains Heckla is the best known, especially to foreigners. This
mountain is situated in the southern part of the island, about four miles from
the seacoast, and is divided into three points at the top, the highest of
which is that in the middle; and which is computed to be above 5000 feet higher
than the sea. This mountain has frequently sent for the flames, and a torrent
of burning matter. Its eruptions were particularly dreadful in 1693, when they
occasioned terrible devastations, the ashes being thrown all round the island
to the distance of 180 English miles. The last eruption of mount Heokla
happened in 1766. Is began on the 5th of April, and continued to the 7th of
September following. Flames proceeded also from it in December 1771, and in
September 1772; but no eruptions of lava.

But amongst all the curiosities of Iceland, nothing is more worthy of
attention than the hot spouting water-springs with which this island abounds.
The hot springs at Aix-la-Chapelle, Carlsbad, Bath, and Switzerland, and
several others found in Italy, are considered as very remarkable: But,
excepting in the last mentioned country, the water no where becomes so hot as
to boil; nor is it any where known to be thrown so high, as the hot spouting
water-springs in Iceland. All those waterworks that have been contrived with
so much art, and (...) so enormousan expense, cannot by any means be compared
with these. The waterworks at St. Cloud, which are thought the greatest among
all the French waterworks, cast up a thin column eighty feet into the and
While some springs in Iceland spout columns of water, of several feet in
thickness, to the height of many fathoms; and, as many affir^^^ of several
hundred feet. These springs are of unequal degrees of heat. From some, the
water flows gently as from other springs, and it is then called a bath: From
others, it spouts boiling water with a great noise, and it is then called a
kettle. Though the degree of heat is unequal, yet Dr. Van Troll says, that he
does not remember ever to have observed it under 188 of Fahrenheit's
thermometer. At Geyser, Roeyhum, and Laugarvatn, he found it at 212; and in the
last place, in the ground, at a little hot current of water, 213 degrees. It is
very common for some of the spouting-springs to cease, and others to rise up in
their stead. Frequent earthquakes, and subterranean noises, heard at the time,
cause great terror to the people who live in the neighborhood. In several of
these hot springs, the inhabitants who live near them, boil their victuals,
only by hanging a pot into which the flesh is put in cold water, in the water
of the spring. They also bathe in the rivulets that run from them, which, by
degree, become lukewarm, or are cooled by their being mixed with rivulets of
cold water. The cows that drink of these springs are said to yield an
extraordinary quantity of milk; and it is likewise esteemed very wholesome when
drank by the human species.

The largest of all the spouting-springs in Iceland is called Geyser. It is
about two days journey from Heckla, and not far from Skalholt. In approaching
toward it, a load roaring noise is heard, like the rushing of a torrent,
precipitating itself from stupendous rocks. The water here spouts several times
a day, but always by starts, and after certain intervals. Some travelers have
affirmed, that is spouts to the height of sixty fathoms. The water is thrown up
much higher at some times than at others; when Dr. Van Troil was there, the
utmost height to which it amounted was computed to be 92 feet.

Basaltine pillars are likewise very common in Iceland, which are supposed to
have been produced by subterranean fires. The lower fort of people imagine
these pillars to have been piled upon one another by giants, who made use of
supernatual force to effect it. They have generally from three to seven sides,
and are from four to six feet in thickness, and from twelve to sixteen yards in
length, without any horizontal divisions. In some places they are only seen
here and there among the lava in the mountains: But, in some other places, they
extend two or three miles in length without interruption.

There are immense masses of ice, by which every year great damage is done to
this country, and which affect the climate of it; they arrive commonly with a
N. W. or N. N. W. wind from Greenland. -- The field-ice is of two or three
fathoms thickness, is separated by the winds, and less dreaded than the rock or
mountain-ice, which is often seen fifty feet and more above water, and is at
least nine times the same depth below water. These prodigious masses of ice are
frequently left in shoal water, fixed, as it were, to the ground, and in that
state remain many months, nay, it is said, even years, undissolved, chilling
all the ambient part of the atmosphere for many miles round. The ice caused so
violent a cold in 1753 and 1754, that horses and sheep perished on account of
it. A number of bears arrive yearly with the ice, which commit great ravages,
particularly among the sheep. The Icelanders attempt to destroy these intruders
as soon as they get sight of them; and sometimes they assemble together, and
drive them back to the ice, with which they often float off again. For want of
firearms, they are obliged to make use of spears on these occasions. The
government encourages the natives to destroy these animals, by paying a premium
of ten dollars for every bear that is killed. Their skins are also purchased
for the king, and are not allowed to be sold to any other person.

It is extraordinary that no wood grows successfully in Iceland; nay, there are
very few trees to be found on the whole island, though there are certain proofs
that wood formerly grew there in great abundance. Nor can corn be cultivated
here to any advantage; though cabbages, parsley, turnips, and peace, may be met
with in five or six gardens, which are said to be all that are in the whole
Island.

TRADE.] The commerce of this island is monopolized by a Danish company. The
soil upon the seacoast is tolerably good for pasture; and though there is not
any considerable town in the whole island, the Icelanders have several
frequented ports. Their exports consist of dried fish, salted mutton and lamb,
beef, butter, tallow, train-oil, co^^^ woolen-cloth, stockings, gloves, raw
wool, sheepskins, lamb-skin^^^, fox-furs of various colors, eider-down, and
feathers. Their impost consist of timber, fishing-lines and hooks, tobacco,
bread, horse-shoes, brandy, wine, salt, linen, and a little silk; exclusive of
some necessaries and superfluities for the more wealthy.

STRENGTH AND REVENUE.] As Iceland affords no bait for avari^^ or ambition, the
inhabitants depend entirely upon his Danish majesty's protection; and the
revenue he draws from the country amounts to about 30,000 crowns a year.

THE FARO OR FERRO ISLANDS,
SO called from their lying in a cluster, and the inhabitants ferrying from one
island to another. They are about 24 in number, and his between 61 and 63 degrees.
W. long. from London. The space of this cluster extends about 60 miles in
length, and 40 in breadth 300 miles to the westward of Norway; having Shetland
and the Orkneys on the south-east, and Greenland and Iceland upon the north and
north-west. The trade and income of the inhabitants, who may be about 3000 or
4000, add little or nothing to the revenues of Denmark.

NORWAY.
NAME, BOUNDARIES, AND EXTENT.] THE natural signification of Norway is, the
Northern-way. It is bounded on the south by the entrance into the Baltic,
called the Scaggerac, as Categate; on the west and North, by the northern
ocean; and on the east it is divided from Sweden by a long ridge of mountains,
called at different parts by different names; as Fillefield, Dofrefield,
Rundfield, and Dourfield. The reader may consult the table of dimensions in
Denmark for its extent; but it is a country so little known to the rest of
Europe, that it is difficult to fix its dimension with precision.

CLIMATE.] The climate of Norway varies according to its extend and its
position toward the sea. At Bergen the winter is modern and the sea is
navigable. The eastern parts of Norway are commonly covered with snow; and the
cold generally sets in about the middle of October, with intense severity, and
continues so the middle of April; the waters being all that time frozen to a
considerable thickness. In 1719, 7000 Swedes, who were on their march to attack
Drontheim, perished in the snow, on the mountains which separate Sweden from
Norway; and their bodies were found in different postures. But even frost and
snow have their conveniences, as they facilitate the conveyance of goods by
land. As to the more northerly parts of this country, called Finmark, the cold
is so intense, that they are but little known. At Bergen, the longest day is
about 19 hours, and the shortest about six. In summer, the inhabitants can read
and write and midnight by the light of the sky; and in the most northerly
parts, about midsummer, the sun is continually in view. In those parts,
however, in the middle of winter, there is only a faint glimmering of light at
noon for about an hour and an half; owing to the reflection of the sun's rays
on the mountains. Nature, notwithstanding, has been so kind to the Norwegians,
that in the midst of their darkness, the sky is serene, and the moon and the
aurora borealis so bright, that they can carry on their fishery, and work at
their several trades in open air. Sudden thaws, and snow-falls, have sometimes
dreadful effects, and destroy whole villages.

MOUNTAINS.] Norway is reckoned one of the most mountainous countries in the
world. It contains a chain of unequal mountains running from south to north: To
pass that of Hardanger, a man must travel about seventy English miles; and to
pass others, upwards of fifty. Dofrefield is counted the highest mountain,
perhaps in Europe. The rivers and cataracts which intersect those dreadful
precipices, and that are passable only by slight tottering wooden bridges,
render traveling in this country very terrible and dangerous; though the
government is at the expense of providing, at different stages, houses
accommodated with fire, light, and kitchen furniture. Detached from this vast
chain, other immense mountains present themselves all over Norway; some of them
with reservoirs of water on the top; and the whole forming a most surprising
landscape. The activity of the natives, in recovering their sheep and goats,
when penned up, through a false step, in one of those rocks, is wonderful. The
owner directs himself to be lowered down from the top of the mountains, sitting
on a cross stick, tied to the end of a long rope; and when he arrives at the
place where the creature stands, he fastens it to the same cord, and it is
drawn up with himself. The caverns that are to be met with in these mountains,
are more wonderful than those, perhaps, in any other part of the world, though
less liable to observation. One of them, called Dolsteen, was, in 1750, visited
by two clergymen; who reported, that they proceeded in it till they heard the
sea dashing over their heads; that the passage was as wide and high as an
ordinary church, the sides perpendicular, and the roof vaulted: That they
descended a flight of natural stairs: but when they arrived at another, they
durst not venture to proceed, but returned; and that they consumed two candles
going and returning.

FORESTS.] The chief wealth of Norway lies in its forests, which furnish
foreigners with masts, beams, planks, and boards: And serve beside for all
domestic uses; particularly the construction of houses, bridges, ships, and for
charcoal to the founderies. The chief timber growing here are sir and pine,
elm, ash, yew, benreed (a very curious wood), birch, beech, oak, eel or alder,
juniper, the aspin-tree, the comol or flow-tree, hafel, elder, and even ebony
(under the mountains of Kolen) lime or linden tree and willows. The sums which
Norway receives for timber are very considerable; but the industry of the
inhabitants is greatly assisted by the course of their rivers, and the
situation of their lakes; which afford them not only the convenience already
mentioned, of floating down their timber, but that of erecting saw mills, for
dividing their large beams into planks and deals. A tenth of all sawed timber
belongs to his Danish Majesty, and forms no inconsiderable part of his revenue.

STONES, METALS, AND MINERALS.} Norway contains quarries of excellent marble,
as well as many other kinds of stones; and the magnet is found in the iron
mines. The amianthus, or abestos, in found here. It is of an incombustible
nature, and when its delicate fibers are woven into cloth, is cleaned by
burning. Besides this curious mineral, Norway produces crystals, granates,
amethysts, agate, thunder-stones, and eagle-stones. Gold found in Norway has
been coined into ducats. His Danish majesty is now working, to great advantage,
a silver mine at Konsberg; other silver mines have been found in different
parts of the country; and one of the many silver masses that have been
discovered, weighing 560 pounds, is to be seen at the Royal Museum at
Copenhagen. The lead, copper, and iron mines, are common in this country: One
of the copper-mines at R^raas is thought to be the richest in Europe. Norway
likewise produces quicksilver, sulphur, salt, and coal mines; vitriol, alum,
and various kinds of loam; the different manufactures of which bring in a large
revenue to the crown.

RIVERS AND LAKES.] The rivers and fresh water lakes in this country are well
stocked with fish, and navigable for vessels of considerable burden. The most
extraordinary circumstance attending the lakes is, that some of them contain
floating islands, formed by the cohesion of roots of trees and shrubs; and
thought torn from the main land, bear herbage and trees. So late as the year
1702, the noble family-feat of Borge, near Fredericstadt, suddenly sunk, with
all its towers and battlements into an abyss a hundred fathoms in depth; and
its site was instantly filled with water, which formed a lake 300 else in
length, and about half as broad. This melancholy accident, by which 14 people
and 200 head of cattle perished, was occasioned by the foundation being
undermined by the waters of a river.

UNCOMMON ANIMALS, FOWLS, AND FISHES.} All the animals that are natives of
Denmark are to be found in Norway, besides the elk, the reindeer, the hare,
the rabbit, the bear, the wolf, th^^ lynx, the fox, the glutton, the leming,
the ermine, the martin and th^^ beaver. The elk is a tall, ash-colored animal,
its shape partaking (...) once of the horse and the stag; it is harmless, and,
in the winter, special; and the flesh of it tastes like venison. The reindeer
is (...) species of stag, and will be described hereafter.

The hares are small; and are said to live upon mice in the winter time, and to
change their color from brown to white. The Norway ^^gian bears are strong and
sagacious: They are remarkable for (...) hurting children; but their other
qualities are in common with the rest of their species in northern countries;
nor can we much credit the very extraordinary specimens of their sagacity,
recorded by the natives: They are hunted by little dogs; and some prefer bear
hams to those of Westphalia. The Norwegian wolves, though fierce, are shy even
of a cow or goat, unless impelled by hunger: The natives are dexterous in
digging traps for them, in which they are taken or killed. The lynx, by some
called the goupes, is smaller than a wolf, but as dangerous: They are of the
cat kind, and have claws like tigers: They dig under ground, and often
undermine sheep-folds, where they make dreadful havoc. The skin of the lynx is
beautiful and valuable; as is that of the black fox. White and red foxes are
likewise found in Norway, and partake of the nature of that wily animal in
other countries; they have a particular way of drawing crabs ashore, by dipping
their tails in the water, which the crab lays hold of.

The glutton, otherwise called the erven, or vielfras, resembles a dog; with a
long body, thick legs, sharp claws and teeth; his fur, which is variegated, is
so precious, that he is shot with blunt arrows, to preserve the skin unhurt: He
is bold, and so ravenous, that it is said he will devour a carcass larger than
himself, and unburthens his stomach by squeezing himself between two
close-standing trees: When taken, he has been even known to eat stone and
mortar. The ermine is a little creature, remarkable for its shyness and
cleanliness. Their fur forms a principal part even of royal magnificence. There
is little difference between the martin and a large brown forest cat, only its
head and snout are sharper; it is very fierce, and its bite dangerous. The
beaver has been described in our account of the United States of America.

Norway produces a great variety of birds. The alks build upon rocks; their
numbers often darken the air, and the noise of their wings is like that of a
storm; their size is the bigness of a large duck: They are an aquatic fowl, and
their flesh is much esteemed. No fewer than thirty different kinds of thrushes
are said to reside in Norway; with various kinds of pigeons, and several sorts
of beautiful wild ducks. The Norwegian cock-of-the-wood is of a black or dark
gray color, his eye resembling that of a pheasant; and he is said to be the
largest of all eatable birds. In Norway are two kinds of eagles, the land and
the sea; the former is so strong, that he has been known to carry off a child
of two years old: The sea, or fish eagle, is larger than the other; he subsists
of aquatic food; and sometimes darts on large fishes with such force; that,
being unable to free his talons from their bodies, he is dragged into the water
and drowned.

Nature seems to have adapted these aerial inhabitants for the coast of Norway;
and industry has produced a species of mankind peculiarly fitted for making
them serviceable to the human race: These are the birdmen, or climbers, who are
amazingly dexterous in mounting the steepest rocks, and bringing away the birds
and their eggs: The latter are nutritive food: The flesh is eaten by the
peasants, who generally relish it; while the feathers and down form a
profitable commodity. Even the dogs of the farmers, in the northern districts
are trained up to be assistants to these birdmen in seizing their prey.

The Scandinavian lakes and seas abound in most kinds of fish that are found on
the seacoasts of Europe. Stock Fish in great numbers are caught and dried upon
the rocks without salting. Some fishes in those seas, however, have their
peculiarities. The haac-moren is a species of shark, said to be ten fathoms in
length, and its liver yields three oasks of train oil. The tuellaflynder is a
very large turbot, which has been known to cover a man who had fallen
overboard, to keep him from rising. The season for herring-fishing is announced
to the fishermen by the spouting of water from the whales (of which seven
different species are mentioned) in following the herring shoals. The large
whale resembles a cod, with small eyes, a dark marble skin, and white belly:
They spout out the water, which they take in at the mouth through two holes or
openings in the head. They copulate like land-animals, standing upright in the
sea. A young whale, when first produced, is about nine or ten feet long; and
the female sometimes brings forth two at a birth. The whale devours an
incredible number of small fish. They however have their revenge; some of them
fasten on his back, and incessantly beat him; others, with sharp horns, or
rather bones, on their beaks, swim under his belly, and sometimes rip it up;
some are provided with long sharp teeth, and tear his flesh. Even the aquatic
birds of prey declare war against him when he comes near the surface of the
water; and he has been known to be so tortured, that he has beat himself to
death on the rocks. The coasts of Norway may be said to be the native country
of herrings. -- Innumerable are the shoals that come from under the ice at the
north pole; and about the latitude of Iceland divide themselves into three
bodies: One of these supplies the Western Isles and coasts of Scotland, another
directs its course round the eastern part of Great Britain down the Channel,
and the third enters the Baltic through the Sound. They form great part of the
food of the common people; and the cod, ling, kabcliau, and torsk-fishes follow
them, and feed upon their spawn; and are taken in prodigious numbers in 50 to
60 fathoms of water; these, especially their roes, and the oil extracted from
their livers, are exported and sold to great advantages; and above 150,000
people are maintained by the herring and other fishing on the coast of Norway.
The sea-devil is about six feet in length, and is so called from its monstrous
appearance and voracity. The sea-scorpion is likewise of a hideous form, its
head being larger than its whole body, which is about four feet in length; and
its bite is said to be poisonous.

The accounts of the ancients, concerning sea monsters, seemingly the most
fabulous, are rendered credible by the productions of the Norwegian seas; and
the sea-snake, or serpent of the ocean, is no longer counted a chimera. In
1756, one of them was shot by a master of a ship; its head resembled that of a
horse; the mouth was large and black, as were the eyes, a white mane hanging
from its neck: It floated on the surface of the water, and held its head at
least two feet, out of the sea; between the head and neck were seven or eight
folds, which were very thick; and the length of this snake was more than a
hundred yards, some say fathoms. They have a remarkable aversion, to the smell
of castor; for which reason, ship, boat, and bark mastery provide themselves
with quantities of that drug, to prevent being overset; the serpent's olfactory
nerves being remarkably exquisi^^. The particularities related of this animal
would be incredible, were they not attested upon oath. Egede (a very reputable
author) says, that on the 6th day of July, 1734, a large and frightful
sea monster raised itself so high out of the water, that its head reached above
the main-top-mast of the ship; that it had a long sharp snout, broad paws, and
spouted water like a whale (...) that the body seemed to be covered with
scales; the skin was une^^^^ wrinkled, and the lower part was formed like a
snake. The body of this monster is said to be as thick as a hogshead; his skin
is variegated like a tortoise-shell; and his excrement, which floats upon the
surface of the water, is corrosive, and blisters the hands of the seaman if
they handle it.

I am under great difficulty in mentioning the kraken, or korven, whose
existence is said to be proved so strongly, as seems to put it out of all
doubt. I insert the common description, leaving every one to judge of its
truth. Its bulk is said to be a mile and a half in circumference; and when part
of it appears above the water, it resembles a number of small islands and
sand-banks, on which fishes disport themselves, and sea-weeds grow: Upon a
farther emerging, a number of pellucid antennae, each about the height, form,
and size of a moderate mast, appear; and by their action and re-action he
gathers his food, consisting of small fishes. When he sinks, which he does
gradually, a dangerous swell of the sea succeeds, and a kind of whirlpool is
naturally formed in the water. In 1680, a young kraken perished among the rocks
and cliffs of the parish of Alstahong; and his death was attended by such a
stench, that the channel where it died was impassable. -- Without entering into
any romantic theories, we may safely say, that the existence of this fish being
proved, accounts for many of these phenomenon of floating islands, and
transitory appearances in the sea, that have hitherto been held as fabulous by
the learned, who could have no idea of such an animal.

The mer-men and mer-women reside in the Norwegian seas. The mer-man is about
eight spans long, and has some resemblance to the human species; a high
forehead little eyes, a flat nose, and large mouth, without chin or ears,
characterize its head; its arms are short, but without joints or elbows, and
they terminate in members resembling a human hand, but of the paw kind, and the
fingers connected by a membrane: The parts of generation indicate their sexes:
Their under parts, which remain in the water, terminate like those of fishes.
The females have breasts, at which they suckle their young ones.

CURIOSITIES.] Those of Norway are all natural curiosities. On the coast,
latitude 67, is that dreadful vortex, or whirlpool, called by navigators the
navel of the sea, and by some Malestrom, or Moskoestrom. The island Moskoe,
from whence this stream derives its name, lies between the mountain Hesleggen
in Lofoden; and the island Ver, which are about one league distant; and between
the island and coast on each side, the stream makes its way. Between Moskoe and
Lofoden it is near 400 fathoms deep; but between Moskoe and Ver, it is so
shallow as not to afford passage for a small ship. When it is flood, the stream
runs up the country between Lofoden and Moskoe with a boisterous rapidity; and
when it is ebb, returns to the sea with a violence and noise unequalled by the
loudest cataracts. It is heard at the distance of many leagues, and forms a
vortex or whirlpool of great depth and extent; so violent, that if a ship comes
near it, it is immediately drawn irresistibly into the whirl, and there
disappears, being absorbed and carried down to the bottom in a moment, where it
is dashed to pieces against the rocks; and just at the turn of ebb and flood,
when the water becomes still for about a quarter of an hour, it rises again if
scattered fragments. When it is agitated by a storm, it has reached vessels at
the distance of more than a Norway mile, where the crews have thought
themselves in perfect feburity. Perhaps it is hardly in the power of fancy to
conceive a situation of more horror, than that of being thus driven forward by
the sudden violence of an impetuous torrent to the vortex of a whirlpool, of
which the noise and turbulence still increasing as it is approached, are an
earnest of quick and inevitable destruction; while the wretched victims, in an
agony of despair and terror, cry out for that help which they know to be
impossible; and see before them the dreadful abyss in which they are about to
be plunged, and dashed among the rocks at the bottom,

Even animals, which have come too near the vortex, have expressed the utmost
terror when they find the stream irresistible. Whales are frequently carried
away; and the moment they feel the force of the water, they struggle against it
with all their might, howling and bellowing in a frightful manner. The like
happens frequently to bears, who attempt to swim to the island to prey upon the
sheep.

It was the opinion of Kircher, that the Malestrom is a sea vortex, which
attracts the flood under the shore of Norway, and discharges it again in the
gulf of Bothnia: But this opinion is now known to be erroneous, by the return
of the shattered fragments of whatever happens to be sucked down by it. The
large stems of firs and pines rises again so shivered and splintered, that the
pieces look as if covered with bristles. The whole phenomenon are the effects
of the violence of the daily ebb and flow, occasioned by the contraction of the
stream in its course between the rocks.

PEOPLE, LANGUAGE, RELIGION, AND CUSTOMS OF NORWAY.} The Norwegians are of a
middle character, between the simple Greenlanders and Icelanders, and the more
polished Danes. Their religion is Lutheran; and they have bishops, as those of
Denmark, without temporal jurisdiction. Their viceroy, like his master, is
absolute; but the farmers and common people in Norway are much less oppressed
than those in Denmark.

The Norwegians in general are strong, robust, and brave; but quick in
resenting real or supposed injuries. The women are handsome and courteous; and
the Norwegian forms, both of living and enjoying property, are mild, and
greatly resembling the Saxon ancestors of the present English. Every inhabitant
is an artisan, and supplies his family in all its necessaries with his own
manufactures; so that in Norway there are few by profession who are hatters,
shoe-makers, tailors, tanners, weavers, carpenters, smiths, or joiners. The
lowest Norwegian peasant is an artist, a gentleman, and even a poet. They often
mix with oat-meal, the bark of the fir, made into a kind of flour; being
reduced to very extraordinary shifts for supplying the place of bread, or
farinaceous food. The middle class of Norwegians live in plenty; but, what is
singular, they are neither fond of luxury, nor do they dread penury: And this
middle state prolongs their ages surprisingly. Though their dress is in many
respects accommodated to their climate, yet, through custom, instead of
guarding against the inclemency of the weather, they outbrave it; for they
expose themselves to cold, without any cover upon their breasts or necks. A
Norwegian of a hundred years of age is not accounted past his labor: And in
1733, four couples were married, and danced before his Danish Majesty at
Fredericshall, whose ages, when joined, exceeded 800 years.

The funeral ceremonies of the Norwegians contain vestiges of their former
paganism: They play on the violin at the head of the coffin, and while the
corpse is carried to the church, which is often done in a boat. In some places
the mourners ask the dead person why he died; whether his wife and neighbors
were kind to him, and other such questions; frequently kneeling down and asking
forgiveness, if ever they had offended the deceased.

COMMERCE.] We have little to add to this head, different from what shall be
observed in our account of Denmark. The duties on their exports, most of which
have been already recounted, amount to about 100,000 rix-dollars a year.

STRENGTH AND REVENUE.] By the best calculations, Norway can furnish out 14,000
excellent seamen, and above 30,000 brave soldiers, for the use of their king.
The royal annual revenue from Norway amounts to near 200,000l. and till his
present majesty's accession, the army, instead of being expensive, added
considerably to his income, by the subsidies it brought him in from foreign
princes.

HISTORY.] We must refer to Denmark likewise for this head. -- The ancient
Norwegians certainly were a very brave and powerful people, and the hard^^st
seamen in the world. If we are to believe their histories, they were no
strangers to America long before it was discovered by Columbus. Many customs of
their ancestors are yet discernible in Ireland and the north of Scotland, where
they made frequent descents, and some settlements, which are generally
confounded with those of the Danes. From their being the most turbulent, they
are become now the most loyal subjects in Europe; which we can easily account
for, from the barbarity and tyranny of their kings, when a separate people.
Since the union of Calmar, which united Norway to Denmark, their history, as
well as interests, are the same with that of Denmark.

DENMARK PROPER, OR JUTLAND EXCLUSIVE OF THE ISLANDS IN THE BALTIC.
EXTENT AND SITUATION.
Length 240 Miles. between Degrees. 54 and 58 North latitude. Breadth 114
Miles. Degrees. 8 and 11 East longitude.

BOUNDARIES AND DIVISIONS.} IT is divided on the north from Norway by the
Scaggerac sea; and from Sweden on the east by the Sound; on the south by
Germany and the Baltic; and the German sea divides it from Great Britain on the
west.

Denmark Proper is divided into two parts: The peninsula of Jutland, anciently
called Cimbria Chersonesus, and the islands at the entrance of the Baltic,
mentioned in the table. It is remarkable, that though all these together
constitute the kingdom of Denmark, yet not any one of them is separately called
by that name.

CLIMATE.] The climate is more temperate in this country, on account of the
vapors from the surrounding sea, than it is in many more southerly parts of
Europe. Spring and autumn are seasons scarcely known in Denmark, on account of
the sudden transitions from cold to heat, and from heat to cold, which
distinguish the climate of this kingdom. In all the northern provinces of
Denmark the winters are very severe, so that the inhabitants often pass arms of
the sea in fledges upon the ice; and during the winter all their harbors are
frozen up.

RELIGION.] In Denmark, as in Sweden, the established religion is the Lutheran,
which was introduced in the year 1536. Christians of all other professions, and
Jews, are tolerated. Missions for the conversion of pagans are established in
the more remote possessions of this crown, in Lapland, Greenland, and
Tranquebar. The Danish clergy consists of bishops, provosts, and ministers. The
bishops, called in public acts superintendants, are six in number, of whom the
bishop of Seeland is the first in rank. All ecclesiastical affairs are subject
to the regulations and the jurisdiction of the college of Supreme Inspectors;
the provosts convene every six months a subordinate meeting of the ministers
under their inspection, in which they preside, and over which they exercise a
jurisdiction; from which an appeal lies to the Supreme Inspectors.

LANGUAGE AND LEARNING.] The language of Denmark is a dialect of the Teutonic;
but High Dutch and French are spoken at court; and the nobility have lately
made great advances in the English, which is now publicly taught at Copenhagen
as a necessary part of education. A company of English comedians occasionally
visit that capital, where they find tolerable encouragement. Denmark has two
universities, that of Copenhagen, and that of Kiel; two academical colleges, at
Soroe and Odensee; and thirty-two other great schools in the principal towns.
There is at Copenhagen a royal society of sciences; an historical society for
the study of Northern history; another of Icelandic history and literature; and
academy for painting and architecture; a college of physicians and surgeons;
and another society of sciences at Drontheim. This kingdom shares with Sweden
the praise of promoting sciences, by sending numbers of learned men, at the
public expense, to all parts of the globe, in order to make useful discoveries.

CAPITAL.] Copenhagen is the capital of Denmark, and the residence of the king.
It lies in N. Lat. 55, 41, and E. Lon. 12, 50, and stands on a low, marshy
ground, on the margin of the Baltic sea, and has a beautiful and commodious
harbor, which admits only one ship to enter it at a time, but is capable of
containing 500. The road for the shipping begins about two miles from the town,
and is defended by 90 pieces of cannon. On the land side are some lakes which
furnish the inhabitants with plenty of fresh water. The adjacent country is
pleasant; and opposite the city lies the island of Amac, which is very
fruitful, and forms the harbor. It is joined to the town by two bridges.

This city is more than six miles in circumference, and makes a fine appearance
at a distance. It contains 11 squares and markets, nearly 200 streets, 4 royal
castles, 10 parish, and 9 other churches, several palaces, between 4 and 5000
burghers houses, some of which are inhabited by 10 or more families, and about
87,000 inhabitants. This city is divided into Old Copenhagen, New Copenhagen,
and Christians-Hafen, which lies in the isle Amac. The two last divisions being
more modern than the first, are laid out in broad streets, running in a strait
line. Since the last great fire, the streets of Old Copenhagen, have been
altered for the better. There are in some parts of the city, broad and deep
canals, into which large ships may enter, and lade and unlade close to the ware
houses.

Among the most remarkable public buildings are 1st, The great Wartow Hospital
in the west quarter of Old Copenhagen, containing upwards of 300 beds for the
sick and poor, each of whom has his lodging gratis, and a weekly allowance of
half a rix dollar. Close to this hospital is a small church, so contrived, that
the bed-ridden may hear divine service in their beds. -- 2d, The Orphan house,
which takes up one entire side of the New Market, and is a great ornament to
it. 3d, The city prison, which has its particular church. 4th, A largeedifice,
in the strand quarter of the old city, in the first story of which is the
Arsenal; in the second the king's library; in the third the picture gallery,
the royal cabinet of curiosities, and the cabinet of medals; and in the fourth
the cabinet of models. Between Christian-Hafen and Copenhagen is a high pillar,
erected in the middle of the water, on which is the statue of a naked woman,
with a swan on her left side, that extends its neck behind her back, and
bringing its head over her right shoulder, puts its bill into her mouth.

The inhabitants of this city are mostly Lutherans -- the Calvinists have a
church to themselves: The Jews have their synagogues; and the Roman Catholics
resort to the chapels of the foreign ministers of their religion. The
magistracy of Copenhagen consists of a president, three burgomasters, and some
vice-burgomasters, and common councilmen.

WEALTH AND COMMERCE.] If the cold and barren kingdom of Norway did not require
large supplies of corn from Denmark, the latter would be able to export a
considerable quantity of it. Sleswic, Jutland, Seeland, and Leland, are very
rich corn countries. Black cattle, which is in great abundance, and of great
excellence in these provinces, is a most valuable article of commerce with the
neighboring provinces of Germany: Between 60 and 80,000 head of cattle are
annually sold. -- Denmark is rather deficient in sheep, with which the climate
does not agree so well. The chief produce of Norway is wood and timber; the
annual exports of masts, planks, balks, and fir-wood, amount to the value of
1,000,000 rix-dollars: This trade is chiefly carried on by the towns of
Christiana, and Drontheim; one district in the government of Drontheim supplies
annually 535,000 planks. Norway exports great variety of peltry, consisting of
skins of bears, lynxes, wolves, ermine, gray squirrels, and several sorts of
foxes, reindeer, elks, etc. The mines of Norway are very valuable; there is
but little gold found, except at Edsfort, in the government of Christiana. The
mines at Konsberg and Jarisberg produce silver to the value of 300 -- 350,000
rix-dollars annually; and they employ upwards of 4000 miners: Government,
however, does not derive any revenue from these mines, the expenses of which
exceed the profits. The iron-works in this kingdom produce an annual profit of
60,000 rix-dollars. About 4 -- 5000 ship-pound of copper are exported; the
greatest mine of this metal is at Roeraa, in the government of Drontheim. The
number of miners in Norway amounts to about 8000. Norway has very valuable
fisheries. According to Pontoppidan, upwards of 100 species of fishes are
caught in these seas; of which the articles of cod, herrings, and whales, are
valued at near two million of rix-dollars. The same author informs us, that
Norway exports large quantities of train oil. The imports of Denmark consist
chiefly in corn; as to Norway, only, 1/14 part of it is fit for agriculture;
besides corn, the articles of salt, flax, linen, wool, brandy, wine, fruits,
silk, spices, hardware, and luxuries, are imported. Norway being thinly
peopled, and little acquainted with luxury, and possessing the abovementioned
valuable articles of exportation, has, upon the whole, the balance of trade in
its favor, which is against the kingdom of Denmark. The whole of the exports
of Denmark and Holstein, amounted in 1768 to 1,382,681 rix-dollars; the imports
to 1,976,800 r. d. The exports of Norway, to 1,711,369, and the imports to
1,238,284 dollars. (Busching). There are at present two trading companies, an
East India, and a Guinea and West India company; an Insurance company, and a
paper bank. The passage through the Sund, between Helsingoer and Helsingborg,
is very much frequented: In 1783,11,161 ships passed it; the number of ships is
at present more than double the number of those which passed it in 1750.
Manufactures do not thrive in Denmark; there are, however, several manufactures
of cloth, hardware, china, gloves, etc. refineries of sugar, salt-petre-works,
etc. For the encouragement and convenience of inland trade, a navigable canal
has been drawn lately from Kiel, through Holstein, to the river Eyder; by means
of which the Baltic and the German sea are connected. The chief commercial
towns in this kingdom are* Copenhagen, Flensburg, and Kiel; and Bergen and
Drontheim, in Norway. Of late the Danes have a commercial intercourse with the
United States of America, whence they have received, in one year, from October
1790, in various commodities, to the amount of 277,273 Dols. 53 Cents.

CURIOSITIES, NATURAL AND ARTIFICIAL.] Denmark Proper, affords fewer of these
than the other parts of his Danish majesty's dominions, if we except the
contents of the Royal Museum at Copenhagen, which consists of a numerous
collection of both. It contains several good paintings, and a fine collection
of coins, particularly those of the Consuls in the time of the Roman Republic,
and of the Emperors after the seat of empire was divided into the East and
West. Besides artificial skeletons, ivory carvings, models, clock-work, and a
beautiful cabinet of ivory and ebony, made by a Danish artist, who was blind,
here are to be seen two famous antique drinking vessels; the one of gold, the
other of silver, and both in the form of a hunting-horn: That of gold seems to
be of Pagan manufacture; and from the raised hieroglyphical figures on its
outside, it probably was made use of in religious ceremonies: It is about two
feet nine inches long, weighs 102 ounces, contains two English pints and a
half, and was found in the diocese of Ripen, in the year 1639. The other, of
silver, weighs about four pounds, and is termed Cornu Oldenburgicum; which,
they say, was presented to Otho I. duke of Oldenburg, by a ghost. This museum
is likewise furnished with a prodigious number of astronomical, optical, and
mathematical instruments; some Indian curiosities, and a set of medals ancient
and modern. Many curious astronomical instruments are likewise placed in the
round tower at Copenhagen; which is so contrived that a coach may drive to its
top. The village of Anglen, lying between Flensburg and Sleswick, is also
esteemed a curiosity, as giving its name to the Angles, or Anglo-Saxon
inhabitants of GreatBritain, and the ancestors of the bulk of the modern
English.

The greatest rarities in his Danish majesty's dominions are omitted, however,
by geographers; I mean those ancient inscriptions upon rocks, that are
mentioned by antiquaries and historians; and are generally thought to be the
old and original manner of writing, before the use of paper of any kind, and
waxen tables, was known. These characters are Runic, and so imperfectly
understood by the learned themselves, that their meaning is very uncertain; but
they are imagined to be historical. Stephanus, in his notes upon
Saxo-Grammaticus, has exhibited specimens of several of those inscriptions.

GOVERNMENT.] The ancient kings of Denmark exercised a power limited by the
very considerable rights and privileges possessed by the estates of the
kingdom* viz. the nobility, the clergy and the commons. It was no longer ago
than the beginning of 1661, that the estates, annoyed by dissensions among
themselves, and guided by leaders indifferent to the inestimable blessings of
liberty, took the rash step of surrendering their native rights to their
monarch. Since this servile act of submission, the kings of Denmark have been
possessed of an absolute and uncontroled authority, subject to the conditions
of their professing the established protestant religion, and preserving the
dominions of the kingdom undivided. The order of succession was settled in
1665, by the Lex Regia, which renders women capable of succeeding to the
throne. The law of Indigenate, which excludes foreigners, not naturalized, from
holding any employment of trust or profit, was introduced by the present king.
Christian V. published an excellent code of civil and criminal laws, for the
use of the kingdoms of Denmark and Norway; Iceland retaining its very ancient
and peculiar customary law. The Roman or civil law is not in force in this
kingdom, nor is any regard paid to other foreign systems of law. Justice is
administered in the several courts with great fairness and dispatch, according
to the simple and excellent regulations of the code of laws. The highest
department of administration is the cabinet, or supreme council, composed, at
present, of the hereditary prince and six ministers of state, presidents of the
subordinate departments; among which that of foreign affairs is considered as
the most honorable. There are two chanceries, one for the Danish, and the
other for the German language. Each province has a particular governor
presiding over the provincial departments.

PUNISHMENTS.] The common method of execution in Denmark is beheading and
hanging: In some cases, as an aggravation of the punishment the hand is chopped
off before the other part of the sentence is executed. For the most atrocious
crimes, such as the murder of a father or mother, husband or wife, and robbery
upon the highway, the malefactor is broken upon the wheel. But capital
punishments are not common in Denmark: And the other principal modes of
punishment are branding in the face, whipping, condemnation to the rasphouse,
to houses of correction, and to public labor and imprisonment; all which are
varied in duration and rigor, according to the nature of the crime.

FINANCES.] Seven millions of dollars. In the year 1769, 6,272,000 dollars.

1. Denmark 3,106,000 2. Norway 1,600,000 3. Sleswick and Holstein 1,328,000 4.
Oldenburg, Delmenhorst, and Ploen 390,007 5. West India Islands 133,000

The King's private Chatoulle.
1. The custom of the Sund 700,000 2. From the town of Altona 18,000

The debts were in 1770 only about 1,400,000 dollars, and since that time they
have been still more dimished.

ARMY.] According to the new plan of 1785, which has been almost executed, the
number of the army will be as follows: 1. Cavalry, 6073 men. 2. Infantry,
33,475 men. 3. For Norway, 35,715. Total of the army, 75,263.

The expenses of the army will amount to only 1,663,922 rix-dollars. There is a
military school at Copenhagen.

NAVY.] (1779) Sixty-one sail, viz.

Thirty-one ships of the line.

Nine ditto of 50 guns.

Twenty-one frigates, besides some sloops, bombs, and fireships. -- Only 25
ships of the line and 15 frigates are fit for service. There have been some
more built lately. There are employed in the King's ships 5000 sailors, besides
a corpse of marines. At Copenhagen there is a naval academy.

HISTORY.] Denmark was little known till the year 714, when Gormo was king.
There can be no doubt that the Scandinavians or Cimbri, and the Teutones (the
inhabitants of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden) were Scythians by their original.
By Scythia may be understood all those northern countries of Europe and Asia
(now inhabited by the Danes, Norwegians, Swedes, Russians, and Tartars) whose
inhabitants overturned and peopled the Roman empire, and continued so late as
the 13th century to issue forth in large bodies, and naval expeditions,
ravaging the more southern and fertile kingdoms of Europe; hence by Sir William
Temple, and other historians, they are termed the northern Hive, the Mother of
Nations, the Storehouse of Europe.

In the eleventh century under Canute the Great, Denmark may be said to have
been in its zenith of glory, as far as extent of Dominion can give sanction to
the expression. Few very interesting events in Denmark preceded the year 1387,
when Margaret mounted that throne; and partly by her address, and partly by
hereditary right, (...) formed the union of Calmar, anno 1397, by which she was
acknowledged sovereign of Sweden, Denmark, and Norway. She held (...) dignity
with such firmness and courage, that she was justly styled (...) Semiramis of
the North. Her successors being destitute of her great qualifications, the
union of Calmar, by which the three kingdoms were in future to be under one
sovereign, fell to nothing. Norway, however, still continued annexed to
Denmark. About the year 144^ the crown of Denmark fell to Christian, count of
Oldenburg, (...) whom the present royal family of Denmark is descended. About
the year 1536, the protestant religion was established in Denmark, by that wise
and politic prince Christian III.

Christian IV. of Denmark, was chosen head of the protestant league, formed
against the house of Austria in 1629, and died in 1648, and was succeeded by
his son Frederic III; who was persuaded by the Dutch, to declare war against
Charles Gustavus, king of Sweden, which had almost cost him his crown, in 1657.
Frederic, who was a man of great abilities, both civil and military, was
succeeded in 1670, by his unfortunate son Christian V. who died 1699. His
successor was the brave and warlike Frederic IV. who died 1730, having, two
years before, seen his capital reduced to ashes by an accidental fire. His son
and successor Christian VI. made no other use of his power and the advantages
with which he mounted the throne, than to cultivate peace with all his
neighbors, and to promote the happiness of his subjects; whom he eased of many
oppressive taxes.

In 1734, after guaranteeing the Pragmatic Sanction, An agreement by which the
princes of Europe engaged to support the House of Austria in favor of the
queen of Hungary, daughter of the emperor Charles VI. who had no male issue.
Christian sent 6000 men to the assistance of the Emperor, during the dispute
of the succession to the crown of Poland. Though he was pacific, yet he was
jealous of his rights, especially over Hamburg. He obliged the Hamburgers to
call in the mediation of Prussia, to abolish their bank, to admit the coin of
Denmark as current, and to pay him a million of silver marks. Christian died in
1746, with the character of being the father of his people.

His son and successor, Frederic V. had, in 1743, married the princess Louisa,
daughter to his Britannic majesty George II. He improved upon his father's
plan, for the happiness of his people. Upon the death of his first queen, who
was mother to his present Danish majesty, he married a daughter of the duke of
Brunswic-Wolfenbuttle; and died in 1766. His son, Christian VII. was born the
29th of January, 1749; and married his present Britannic majesty's youngest
sister, the princess Carolina-Matilda. In 1768, he visited England, and
traveled through the principal states of Europe: And from his return from this
tour, in 1769, may with propriety be dated that memorable Revolution which took
place in the court of Denmark in 1772. An authentic, interesting, and affecting
history of this Revolution, and of the melancholy fates of Queen
Carolina-Matilda, and Counts Struensee and Brandt, was written by a "Personage
principally interested," and translated from the German, by B. H. Latrobe, and
printed for J. Stockdale, 1789. To this valuable work the curious reader is
referred.

In 1780, his Danish majesty acceded to the armed neutrality proposed by the
Empress of Russia. He appears at present to have such a debility of
understanding as to disqualify him for the proper management of public affairs.
On the 16th of April, 1784, another court revolution took place. The
queen-dowager's friends were removed, a new council formed under the auspices
of the prince royal, some of the former old members restored to the cabinet,
and no regard is to be paid for the future to any instrument, unless signed by
the king, and countersigned by the Prince Royal. Christian VII. reigning king
of Denmark and Norway, L. L. D. and F. R. S. was married to the princess
Carolina Matilda* of England; and has issue, Frederic prince royal of Denmark,
born Jan. 28, 1768. Louisa Augusta princess royal* born July 7, 1771.


DANISH GERMAN DOMINIONS.
Holstein, a duchy of Lower Saxony, about 100 miles long (...) 50 broad, and a
fruitful country, was formerly divided between the Empress of Russia (termed
ducal Holstein) the king of Denmark and the imperial cities of Hamburg and
Lubeck; but on the (...) of November, 1773, the Ducal Holstein, with all the
rights, p^^rogatives, and territorial sovereignty, was formally transferred
(...) the king of Denmark, by virtue of a treaty between both cou^^^^. The duke
of Holstein Gottorp, is joint sovereign of great part (...) it now, with the
Danish monarch. Kiel is the capital of Du^^ Holstein, and is well built, has a
harbor, and neat public ^^^^fices. The capital of the Danish Holstein is
Gluckstadt, a well (...) town and fortress, but in marshy situation on the
right of the (...) and has some foreign commerce.

Altena, a large, populous, and handsome town, of great traffic, (...)
commodiously situated on the Elbe, in the neighborhood of Hamburg. It was
built professedly in that situation by the kings of Denmark, (...) it might
share in the commerce of the former. Being declared a (...) port, and the
staple of the Danish East India company, the merchants also enjoying liberty of
conscience, great numbers flock to ^^^^tena from all parts of the North, and
even from Hamburg itself.

HAMBURG, a celebrated imperial city, is situated on the north (...) of the
river Elbe* in N. lat. 5^ 16 and E. long. 10 38, in the Du^^^ of Holstein, in
his Danish Majesty's German dominions. It (...) nearly circular, and six miles
in circumference. Besides its natural strength, it is as well fortified by art
as a place of such magnitude (...) be. It has six gates and four entrances by
water, two from the (...) and two from the Alster. The wall is defended by
bulwarks, (...) out works, and a deep ditch. A line with other works runs from
(...) largest basin of the Alster to the Elbe, about half a mile above (...)
town: And on the other side of the basin below the town, is the (...) Leonce,
an almost impregnable fortification. The walls and other fortifications that
lie open to view, are planted with rows of (...) trees in such a manner that on
that side of the wall next to Altena, (...) houses cannot be seen. The number
of houses are reckoned at (...) than 30,000, and the inhabitants at 180,000.

The public buildings are but indifferent. The churches which (...) ancient
structures, stand open every day, and in some of them (...) book sellers shops.
They have six large market places. Of the ^^ny hospitals in this city, are the
Hospital for Orphans, which has a revenue of between L60 and 70,000 a year.
There is a large hospital for poor travelers that fall sick; another for the
relief of ancient maimed and decayed seamen, where care is also taken of the
(...) and children of those who lose their lives in the service of the public.
Another for the poor old blind and dumb people; another (...) the veneral
disease, and a pest house. The prison for malefactors (...) the hangman's
house. The criminal, after sentence, is carried to (...) upper room, where he
is allowed a good bed, with all comforts (...) to his melancholy condition, and
is there constantly attended by (...) of the city Clergymen. Among the several
convents, which are (...) Lutheran, one is obliged to offer a glass of wine to
every malefactor that is carried by it to the place of execution.

The government of Hamburg is vested in the Senate and three Colleges of
burghers. The principal persons of the Republic have a right to exercise every
act of sovereignty; but the management of the finances is solely intrus^ed to
the burghers. The Hamburghers (though nominally and politically the subjects of
the King of Denmark, who still lay claim or certain privileges within the walls
of the city) are subject to the general laws of the Germanic body, but have
neither seat nor vote in the General Diet of the Empire. They pay to the
Emperor, for their protection, the annual tribute of 80,000 crowns.

Hamburgh from its situation has several advantages for trade. The ships come
to their doors to lade and unlade. Besides the Elbe, which enters the German
ocean a little below the town, a canal is opened into the Trave, for the sake
of a communication with Lubec and the Baltic Sea. The Elbe, and the many
navigable rivers that fall into it, running through the richest and most
trading parts of Germany, furnish this city with the produce and manufactures
of upper and lower Saxony, Austria and Bohemia. By the Flavel and Spree rivers,
it trades with the Electorate of Brandenburg; and by a canal from the Spree and
the Ader, its commerce is extended into Silesia, Moravia, and Poland. It has
two spacious harbors, formed by the river Elbe, which runs through the town,
and 84 bridges are thrown over its canals. The Hamburghers maintain 12
companies of foot, and one troop of dragoons, besides an artillery company.

Lubec, an imperial city, with a good harbor, and once the capital of the Hans
Towns, and still a rich and populous place, is also in this duchy, and
governed by its own magistrates. It has 20 parish churches, besides a large
cathedral. Lutheranism is the established religion of the whole Duchy.

In Westphalia, the king of Denmark has the counties of Oldenburg and
Delmenhurst, about 2000 square miles, they lie on the south side of the Weser;
their capitals have the same name; the first has the remains of a
fortification, and the last is an open place. Oldenburg gave a title to the
first royal ancestor of his present Danish majesty. The country abounds with
marshes and heaths, but its horses are the best in Germany.

DANISH POSSESSIONS IN THE OTHER PARTS OF THE GLOBE.} ASIA. Settlements in
Coromandel 20,000 inhabitants.1. Tranquebar, with the 2. Fort of Dansborg. 3.
The Nicobar, or Frederick's Islands, north of Sumatra. 4. Some factories or
lodges.

AFRICA, 1. Christiaansbourg, 2. Fredensbourg (on the coast of Guinea.) 3. Some
factories, near Axim.

AMERICA. 1. Greenland, divided into East or Old Greenland, and West Greenland,
a very extensive country, of many thousand square miles, but very thinly
inhabited. Crantz, and after him Fab^icius, give the best description of this
country. 2. The islands of St. Croix, St. Thomas, and St. John, in the
West Indies. Here the Moravian brethren have useful establishments.

The whole of Denmark contains 68 towns, 22 smaller towns, or ^o^oughs, 15
earldoms, 16 baronies, 932 estates of the inferior nobility, ^000 villages.

Norway contains only 18 towns, two earldoms, and 27 estates of the other
nobility.

LAPLAND.
THE northern situation of Lapland, and the division of its property render it
proper, that it should be here described under a distinct head.

SITUATION, EXTENT, DIVISION, AND NAME.] The whole country of Lapland extends,
so far as it is known, from the North Cape in 71 30 N. lat. to the White Sea,
under the arctic circle. Part of Lapland belongs to the Danes, and is included
in the government of Wardhuys* part to the Swedes, which is by far the most
valuable; and some parts in the east, to the Muscovites or Russians. It is
impossible to point out the dimensions of each. That belonging to the Swedes,
may be seen in the table of dimensions given in the account of Sweden: But
other accounts say, that it is about 100 German miles in length, and 90 in
breadth; it comprehends all the country from the Baltic, to the mountains that
separate Norway from Sweden. The Muscovite part lies toward the east, between
the lake Enarak and the White Sea. -- Those parts, notwithstanding the rudeness
of the country, are divided into smaller districts; generally taking their
names from rivers: But, unless the Swedish part, which is subject to a Prefect,
the Laplanders can be said to be under no regular government. The Swedish
Lapland, therefore, is the object chiefly considered by authors in describing
this country. It has been generally thought, that the Laplanders are the
descendants of Finlanders driven out of their own country, and that they take
their name from Lappes, which signifies exiles. The reader, from what has been
said in the Introduction, may easily conceive that in Lapland, for some months
in the summer, the sun never sets; and during winter, it never rises: But the
inhabitants are so well assisted by the twilight and the aurora borealis, that
they never discontinue their work on account of the darkness.

CLIMATE.] The winters here, as may easily be concluded, are extremely cold.
Drifts of snow often threaten to bury the traveller, and cover the ground four
or five feet deep. A thaw sometimes takes place, and then the frost that
succeeds, presents the Laplander with a smooth level of ice, over which he
travels with a reindeer in a sledge with inconceivable swiftness. The heats of
summer are excessive for a short time; and the cataracts, which dash from the
mountains, often present to the eye the most picturesque appearances.

MOUNTAINS, RIVERS, LAKES, ANE FORESTS.] The reader must form in his mind a
vast mass of mountains, irregularly crowded together to give him an idea of
Lapland: They are, however, in some interstices, separated by rivers and lakes,
which contain an incredible number of islands, some of which form delightful
habitations; and are believed by the natives to be the terrestrial Paradise:
Even roses and other flowers grow wild on their borders in the summer; though
this is (...) a short gleam of temperature, for the climate in general is
excessively severe. Dusky forests, and noisome, unhealthy morasses, and barr^^
plains cover great part of the flat country, so that nothing can be (...)
uncomfortable than the state of the inhabitants.

METALS AND MINERALS.] Silver and gold mines, as well as these of iron, copper
and lead, have been discovered and worked in Lapland to great advantage;
beautiful crystals are found here, as are some amethysts and topazes; also
various sorts of mineral stones, surprisingly polished by the hand of nature;
valuable pearls have likewise been sometimes found in the rivers, but never in
the seas.

ANIMALS, QUADRUPEDS, BIRDS, FISHERS, AND INSECTS.] We must refer to our
accounts of Denmark and Norway for great part of this article, as its contents
are in common with all the three countries. -- The zibelin, a creature
resembling the marten, is a native of Lapland; and its skin, whether black or
white, is so much esteemed that it is frequently given as presents to royal and
distinguished personages. The Lapland hares grow white is the winter; and the
country produces a large black cat, which attends the natives in hunting. By
far the most remarkable, however, of the Lapland animals, is the reindeer,
which nature seems to have provided to solace the Laplanders for the privation
of the other comforts of life. This animal, the most useful perhaps of any in
the creation, resembles the stag, only it somewhat droops the head, and the
horns project forward. All who have described this animal have taken notice of
the cracking noise that they make when they move their legs, which is
attributed to their separating and afterward bringing together the divisions
of the hoof. The under part is entirely covered with hair, in the same manner
that the claw of the Ptarmigan is with feathery bristles, which is almost the
only bird that can endure the rigor of the same climate. The hoof, however, is
not only thus protected; the same necessity which obliges the Laplanders to use
snow shoes, makes the extraordinary width of the rein's hoof to be equally
convenient in passing over snow, as it prevents their sinking too deep, which
they continually would, did the weight of their body rest only on a small
point. This quadruped has therefore an instinct to use a hoof of such a form
in a still more advantageous manner, by separating it when the foot is to touch
the ground so as to cover a larger surface of snow. The instant however the leg
of the animal is raised, the hoof is immediately contracted, and the collision
of the parts occasions the snapping which is heard on every motion of the rein,
and probably the cracking which they perpetually make, may serve to keep them
together when it is remarkably dark. -- In summer, the reindeer provide
themselves with leaves and grass, and in the winter they live upon moss: They
have a wonderful sagacity at finding it out, and when found, they scrape away
with their feet the snow that covers it. The scantiness of their fare is
inconceivable, as is the length of the journies which they can perform without
any other support. They fix the reindeer to a kind of sledge, shaped like a
small boat, in which the traveller, well secured from cold, is laced down, with
the reins in one hand, and a kind of bludgeon in the other, to keep the
carriage clear of ice and snow. The deer, whose harnessing is very simple, sets
out, and continues the journey with prodigious speed; and is so safe and
tractable, that the driver is at little or no trouble in directing him. At
night they look out for their own provender; and their milk often helps to
support their master. Their instinct in choosing their road, and directing
their course, can only be accounted for by their being well acquainted with the
country during the summer months, when they live in woods. Their flesh is a
well tasted food, whether fresh or dried: Their skin forms excellent clothing
both for the bed and the body: Their milk and cheese are nutritive and
pleasant; and their intestines and tendons supply their masters with thread and
cordage. When they run about wild in the fields* they may he shot at as other
game. But it is said, that if one is killed in a flock, the survivors will gore
and trample him to pieces; therefore single stragglers are generally pitched
upon. With all their excellent qualities, however, the reindeer have their
inconveniences.

It is difficult in summer to keep them from straggling; they are sometimes
buried in the snow; and they frequently grow restive, to the great danger of
the driver and his carriage. Their surprising speed (for they are said to run
at the rate of 200 miles a day) seems to be owing to their impatience to get
rid of their ^ncumbrance. None but a Laplander could bear the uneasy posture in
which he is placed, when he is confined in one of those carriages or pulkhas;
or would believe that, by whispering the reindeer in the ear, they know the
place of their destination. But after all these abatements, the natives would
have difficulty to subsist without their reindeer, which serve them for so
many purposes.

PEOPLE, CUSTOMS AND MANNERS.] The language of the Laplanders comprehends so
many dialects, that it is with difficulty they understand each other. They have
neither writing nor letters among them, but a number of hieroglyphics, which
they make use of in their Rounes, a sort of sticks that they call Pistave, and
which serve them for an almanac. These hieroglyphics are also the marks they
use instead of signatures, even in matters of law. Missionaries, from the
christianised parts of Scandinavia, introduced among them the Christian
religion; and they have among them some religious seminaries, instituted by the
king of Denmark. The majority of the Laplanders however may be called pagans.
The number and oddities of their superstitions have induced the northern
traders to believe, that they are skilled in magic and divination. For this
purpose it is said their magicians, who are a peculiar set of men, make use of
what they call a drum, made of the hollow trunk of a fir, pine, or birch-tree,
one end of which is covered with a skin; on this they draw, with a kind of red
color, the figures of their own gods, as well as of Jesus Christ, the
apostles, the sun, moon, stars, birds and rivers; on these they place one or
two brass rings, which, when the drum is beaten with a little hammer, dance
over the figures; and according to their progress the sorcerer prognosticates.
These frantic operations are generally performed for gain; and the northern
ship-masters are such dupes to the arts of these impostors, that they often buy
from them a magic cord, which contains a number of knots, by opening of which,
according to the magician's directions, they gain what wind they want. This is
also a very common traffic on the banks of the Red Sea, and is managed with
great address on the part of the sorcerer, who keeps up the price of his
knotted talisman. The Laplanders still retain the worship of many of the
Teutonic gods; but have among them great remains of the druidical institutions.
They believe the transmigration of the soul; and have festivals set apart for
the worship of certain genii, called Jeuhles, who they think inhabit the air,
and have great power over human actions; but being without form or substance,
they assign (...) them neither images nor statues.

Agriculture is not much attended to among the Laplanders. They are chiefly
divided into Lapland fishers, and Lapland mountaineers. The former always make
their habitations on the brink, or, in the neighborhood of some lake, from
whence they draw their subsistence. The others seek their support upon the
mountains, and their environs. They are excellent and very industrious
herdsmen, and are rich in comparison to the Lapland fishers. Some of them
possess six hundred or a thousand reindeer, and have often money and plate
besides. They mark every reindeer on the ears, and divide them into classes;
so that they can perceive whether any one is strayed, though they cannot count
to so great a number as that ^o which their flock often amounts. The Lapland
fishers, who are also called Laplanders of the woods, because in summer they
dwell upon the borders of the lakes, and in winter in the forests, live by
fishing and hunting, and choose their situation by its convenience for either.
The greatest part of them, however, have some reindeer. They are active and
expert in the chase: And the introduction of firearms among them has almost
entirely abolished the use of the bow and arrow. Besides looking after the
reindeer, the fishery, and the chase, the men employ themselves in the
construction of their canoes, which are small, light, and compact. They also
make sledges, to which they give the form of a canoe, harness for the
reindeer, cups, bowls, and various other utensils, which are sometimes neatly
carved, and sometimes ornamented with bones, brass, or horn. The employment of
the women consists in making nets for the fishery, in drying fish and meat, in
milking the reindeer, in making cheese, and in tanning hides: But it is
understood to be the business of the men to look after the kitchen; in which,
it is said, the women never interfere.

The Laplanders live in huts in the form of tents, from twenty-five to thirty
feet in diameter, and not much above six in height. They cover them according
to the season, and the means of the possessor; some with briars, bark of birch,
and linen; others with turf, coarse cloth, or felt, or the old skins of
reindeer. The door is of felt, made like two curtains, which open asunder. A
little place surrounded with stones is made in the middle of the hut for fire,
over which a chain is suspended to hang the kettle upon. In winter, at night,
they put their naked feet into a fur bag. The reindeer supply the Laplanders
with the greatest part of their provisions; the chase and fishery supply the
rest. Their principal dishes are the flesh of the reindeer, and pudding which
they make of their blood. But the flesh of the bear is considered by them as
their most delicate meat. They eat every kind of fish, even the sea dog; as
well as all sorts of wild animals, not excepting birds of prey, and carnivorous
animals. Their winter provisions consist chiefly of flesh and fish dried in the
open air, both of which they eat raw, and without any sort of dressing. Their
common drink is water, sometimes mixed with milk: They make also broths and
fishsoups. Brandy is very scarce with them, but they are extremely fond of it.
Whenever they are inclined to eat, the head of the family spreads a mat on the
ground; and then men and women squat round this mat, which is covered with
dishes. Every Laplander always carries about him a knife, a spoon, and a little
cup for drinking. Each has is portion separately given him, that no person may
be injured; for they are great eaters. Before and after the meal they make a
short prayer: And, as soon as they have done eating, each gives the other his
hand.

In the dress of the Laplanders they use no kind of linen. The men wear close
breeches, reaching down to their shoes, which are made of untanned skin,
pointed, and turned up before; and in winter they put a little hay in them.
Their doublet is made to fit their shape, and open at the breast. Over this,
they wear a close coat with narrow sleeves, whose skirts reach down to the
knees, and which is fastened round them by a leathern girdle, ornamented with
plates of tin or brass. To this girdle they tie their knives, their instruments
for getting fire, their pipes, and the rest their smoking apparatus. Their
clothes are made of fur, of leather, or of cloth, the close coat of cloth or
leather, always bordered with fur, or bindings of cloth of different colors.
Their caps are edged with fur, pointed at top, and the four seams adorned with
lists of a different color from that of the cap. The women wear breeches,
shoes, doublets, and close coats, in the same manner as the men; but their
girdle, at which they carry likewise the implements for smoking tobacco, is
commonly embroidered with brass wire. Their close coat has a collar, which
comes up somewhat higher than that of the men. Besides these, they wear
handkerchiefs, and little aprons, made of painted cloth, rings on their
fingers, and earrings, to which they sometimes hang chains of silver* which
pass two or three times round the neck. They are often dressed in caps folded
after the manner of turbans. They wear also caps fitted to the shape of the
head; and, as they are much addicted to finery, they are all ornamented with
the embroidery of brass wire, or at least with list of different colors.

Lapland is but poorly peopled, owing to the general barrenness of its soil.
The whole number of its inhabitants may amount to about 60,000. Both men and
women are in general considerably shorter than more southern Europeans.
Maupertuis measured a woman, who was suckling her child, whose height did not
exceed four feet two inches and a half; they make, however* a much more
agreeable appearance than the men, who are often ill shaped and ugly, and their
heads too large for their bodies. Their women are complaisant, chaste, often
well-made, and extremely nervous; which is also observable among the men,
although more rarely.

When a Laplander intends to marry a female, he, or his friends, court her
father wi^h brandy; when with some difficulty, he gains admittance to his fair
one, he offers her a beaver's tongue, or some other eatable, which she rejects
before company, but accepts of in private. Cohabitation often precedes
marriage; but every admittance to the fair one is purchased from her father by
her lover with a bottle of brandy, and this prolongs the courtship sometimes
for three years. The priest of the parish at last celebrates the nuptials; but
the bridegroom is obliged to serve his father-in-law for four years after. He
then carries his wife and her fortune home.

COMMERCE.] Little can be said of the commerce of the Laplanders. Their exports
consist of fish, reindeer, furs, baskets and toys; with some dried pikes, and
cheeses made of reindeer milk. They receive for these rix-dollars, woollen
cloths, linen, copper, tin, flour, oil, hides needles, knives, spirituous
liquors, tobacco, and other necessaries. -- Their mines are generally worked by
foreigners, and produce no inconsiderable profit. The Laplanders travel in a
kind of caravan, with their families, to the Finland and Norway fairs. And the
reader may make some estimate of the medium of commerce among them, when he is
told, that fifty squirrel skins, or one fox skin, and a pair of Lapland shoes,
produce one rix-dollar, but no computation can be made of the public revenue,
the greatest part of which is allotted for the maintenance of the clergy. With
regard to the security of their property, few disputes happen; and their judges
have no military to enforce their decrees, the people having a remarkable
aversion to war; and, so far as we know, are never employed in any army.

SWEDEN.
EXTENT AND SITUATION.
Length 800 Miles. between Degrees. 50 and 70 North latitude. Breadth 500
Miles. Degrees. 10 and 30 East longitude.

BOUNDARIES.} THIS country is bounded by the Baltic Sea, the Sound, and the
Categate, or Scaggerac, on the south; by the impassable mountains of Norway, on
the west; by Danish or Norwegian Lapland, on the north; and by Muscovy, on the
east.

DIVISIONS AND POSSESSIONS.] An authentic account of these is contained in the
following table.

DIVISIONS, POSSESSIONS. Sq. Miles. Population. Populs. for (...). sq. mile.
CHIEF TOWNS. Number of Inhabitants. SWEDEN 230 528 3 millions. Divided into
Sweden, properly so called, and Gothland. Both together 64,000 2,100,000 33 A.
SWEDEN contains Upland, Soedermanland, Westmanland, Nerike Dalecarlien
Stockhol^, about 80,000 Upsal Univers, and second in rank. Nykeeping. B.
GOTHLAND contains. Ostgothland Smaeland, Oeland and Gottland Westgottland,
Wermeland, Dahland Bohleha, Sudgothland, viz. Schonen, Halland, Bleckingen
Fulun, a famous mining place, 7,000 Norkioping, ^,150. Lynkioping. Calmat,
trading town. Gothenburg* ^^,800, C. NORDLAND 95,472 150,000 not yet 2 Land,
university. D. LAPPLAND, divided into 7 districts called Marken, viz. Jemteland
Lappmark, Asele, Umea, Pitea Lulla, Tornea, Keml Helsingberg, near the Sand.
Ca^ls^ron, Admiralty seat. Tornea. E. FINNLAND 48,780 624,000 12 Abo,
university, 8,750. F. The Swedish Part of Pomerania, viz. Pomerania, Island of
Rugen, the District of Wismar 1,440 100,550 70 Stralsund* 10,840. Griessw^ld,
university. Bergen (Isle of Rugen) 1,402. Wismar, 6,000. G. In the West India,
Sweden obtained in the Year 1^85* from France the Island of St. Barthelemi 30
The whole Kingdom contains only 104 towns, ^0,250 villages, and 1,200 estates
of the nobility.

The face of Sweden is pretty similar to that of the neighboring countries;
except that it has the advantage of them in navigable rivers.

CLIMATE AND SEASONS.] The same may be said with regard to this article. Summer
bursts from winter; and vegetation is more speedy than in southern climates;
for the sun is here so hot, as sometimes to set forests on fire. Stoves and
warm furs mitigate the cold of winter, which is so intense that the noses and
extremities of the inhabitants are sometimes mortified; and in such cases, the
best remedy that has been found out, is rubbing the affected part with snow.

ANTIQUITIES AND CURIOSITIES, NATURAL AND ARTIFICIAL.} A few leagues from
^ottenburg there is a hideous precipice, down which rushes a dreadful cataract
of water with such impetuosity, and into such a depth of water, that large
masts, and other bodies of timber, that are precipitated down it, disappear,
some for half an hour, and others for an hour, before they are recovered: The
bottom of this water has never been found, though sounded by lines of several
hundred fathoms. A remarkable slimy lake, which singes things put into it, has
been found in the southern part of Gothland: And several parts of Sweden
contain a stone, which being of a yellow color, intermixed with several
streaks of white, as if composed of gold and silver, affords sulphur, vitriol,
alum, and minium. The Swedes pretend they have a manuscript copy of a
translation of the Gospels into Gothle, done by a bishop 1300 years ago.

SEAS.] Their seas are the Baltic, and the Gulfs of Bothnia and Finland, which
are arms of the Baltic; and on the west of Sweden are the Categate sea, and the
Sound, a strait about four miles over, which divides Sweden from Denmark.

These seas have no tides, and are frozen up usually four months in the year;
nor are they so salt as the ocean, never mixing with it, because the current
sets always out of the Baltic sea into the ocean.

QUADRUPEDS, BIRDS, AND FISHES.] These differ little from those already
described in Norway and Denmark. The fishes found in the rivers and lakes of
Sweden, are the same with those in other northern countries, and taken in great
quantities. Their pikes particularly are salted and pickled for exportation.
The train-oil of the seals, taken in the Gulf of Finland, is a considerable
article of exportation.

INHABITANTS, MANNERS, AND CUSTOMS.] There is a great diversity of characters
among the people of Sweden. Their peasants are strong and hardy, and appear to
have no other ambition than that of subsisting themselves and their families.
The mercantile classes are much of the same cast; but great application and
perseverance is discovered among them all. One could, however, form no idea
that the modern Swedes are the descendants of those, who, under Gustavus
Adolphus and Charles XII. carried terror in their names through distant
countries, and shook the foundations of the greatest empires. The principal
nobility and gentry of Sweden are naturally brave, polite, and hospitable; they
have high and warm notions of honor, and are jealous of their national
interests. The dress, exercises, and diversions of the common people, are
almost the same with those of Denmark: The better sort are infatuated with the
French modes and fashions. The women, plough, thresh, row upon the water, serve
the brick layers, carry burdens, and do all the common drudgeries in husbandry.

RELIGION.] Christianity was introduced here in the ninth century. The
established religion in Sweden is the Lutheran, which the sovereign must
profess, and is engaged to maintain in the kingdom. Calvinists, Roman Catholics
and Jews are tolerated. The superi^^ clergy of Sweden have preserved the
dignities of the Roman Catholic church; it is composed of the archbishop of
Upsal, of 14 bishops, and of 192 presidents. The jurisdiction in ecclesiastical
matters is in the hands of 19 consistories. The number of the inferior clergy,
comprehending the ministers of parishes, etc. amounts only to 1387. No
clergyman has the least direction in the affairs of state; but their morals,
and the sanctity of their lives, endear them so much to the people, that the
government would repent making them its enemies. Their churches are neat, and
often ornamented. A body of ecclesiastical laws and canons direct their
religious economy.

LANGUAGE, LEARNING, AND LEARNED MEN.] The Swedish language is a dialect of the
Teutonic, and resembles that of Denmark. The Swedish nobility and gentry are,
in general, more conversant in polite literature than those of many other more
flourishing states. They have of late exhibited some noble specimens of their
munificence for the improvement of literature; witness their sending at the
expense of private persons, that excellent and candid natural philosopher*
Hasselquist, into the eastern countries for discoveries, where he died. This
noble spirit is eminently encouraged by the royal family; and her Swedish
majesty purchased, at no inconsiderable expense, for that country, all
Hasselquist's collection of curiosities. That able civilian, statesman and
historian, Puffendorf, was a native of Sweden; and so was the late celebrated
Linnaeus, who carried natural philosophy, in some branches at least,
particularly botany, to the highest pitch. The passion of the famous queen
Christina for literature, is well known to the public; and she may be accounted
a genius in many branches of knowledge. Even in the midst of the late
distractions of Sweden, the fine arts, particularly drawing, sculpture, and
architecture, were encouraged and protected. Agricultural learning, both in
theory and practice, is now carried to a considerable height in that kingdom;
and the character given by some writers, that the Swedes are a dull, heavy
people, fitted only for bodily labor, is in a great measure owing to their
having no opportunity of exerting their talents. The importance of Sweden is
greatly diminished, since the unfortunate wars of Charles XII. by which it lost
its richest provinces. And notwithstanding all the encouragement given to
agriculture, mining and commerce, the population is yet so* thin, and the
climate so severe, that this kingdom is not likely to receive soon any
cosiderable and rapid additions of power. The fate of the sciences in Sweden
has been much more fortunate. Good schools are established in every part of the
kingdom; there are three very useful universities at Upsal, Lund and Abo; and
the German university of Gr^efswald, in the Province of Pomerania. At
Stockholm, Gothenburg, and Upsal, there are royal societies of sciences;
academies for antiquities, the belles lettres, painting, and music, are
established in the capital. There is also a particular and very valuable
institution for promoting the study of Swedish geography and topography, called
Landmeter college; and a physiographical society at Lund. Sweden has many men
of learning, distinguished for their knowledge of natural philosophy,
chemistry, political economy, etc. The ancient connection of this kingdom with
France has been confirmed by the late king, who opened forever a free harbor
to the French in consideration of the island of St. Barthelemi, in the
West Indies, ceded to him by France, in the year 1784. The neighboring states
of Russia and Denmark are very attentive to the motions of Sweden, which in
former times proved to them an enemy of the greatest consequence.

WEALTH AND COMMERCE.] Though Sweden is by no means favored with respect to
climate, though the greater part of it is barren, (the uncultivated parts being
estimated at upwards of 110,000 square miles) yet the industry of the
inhabitants, in arts and agriculture, has raised Sweden to the rank of a
secondary European power. However, notwithstanding the great encouragement
given to agriculture, Sweden is still obliged to import 300,000 tons of corn,
and 4,535 hogsheads of spirituous liquors. It imports, likewise, hemp, flax,
salt, wine, beef, silk, paper, leather, and East and West India goods. The
exports consist chiefly in wood and minerals. In 1781, Sweden exported 27,819
dozen of planks, 795 beams, and 1,258 balks of beech, 95,657 tons of tar, and
15,868 tons of pitch; some cod, upwards of 150,000 tons of herrings, of which
England bought for more than 12,000l. sterling; blubber or train-oil to the
value of 28,468 silver dollars. -- Of the produce of the whale fishery, there
was exported, in 1781, 606 tons of train-oil, and 68,000 pounds of whalebone.
The most valuable among the productions of Sweden are its minerals, principally
copper and iron. Gold is found at Adelfort, in the province of Smaeland, to the
amount of 850 ducats; but the expenses of working this mine exceed the profits:
A small quantity of gold is found in Westmanland. The mines at Sala, in the
same province, produce silver to the amount of upwards of 600 lb. there are
also silver mines in Dalecarlia and Northfinnland. The total amount of the
silver obtained from the Swedish mines, in 1774, was 2,700 lb. The copper mines
at Falun and Garpenberg, in Dalecarlia, are very rich: The exportation of
copper does, however, not exceed 6,000 ship-pound. Of the iron found in Nerike,
Upland, Dalecarlia, etc. 320,000 ship-pound are exported. No less than 450
forges, hammering mills, and smelting houses, are employed in the iron
manufacture. -- Sweden produces 35,000 lies-pound of saltpeter, 5,500 tons of
alum; and it has likewise vitriol and sulphur works. The value of the whole of
exported minerals amounts to 2,300,000 German dollars. The exportation of wood
is valued at 1 million; and that of tar, pitch, and pot-ash, at 300,000 German
dollars. Sweden exports also, peltry, or furs of gray squirrels, bears, wolves,
foxes, ermine, martins, reindeer, gluttons, etc. in great quantities. All the
exported goods amounted, in 1768, to upwards of 13 millions, and the imports to
little more than 10 millions of silver dollars. The Swedes trade to all parts
of Europe, to the Levante, the East and West Indies, to Africa and China. There
is a Swedish East India Company, who have advanced 3 millions of dollars to the
crown, and pay a duty to the king on every voyage: There is likewise a Levante
Company. The bank of Sweden is a loan and paper bank: Its profits are estimated
at between 2 and 3 millions of dollars annually. The crown owed to this bank,
in 1772, upwards of 45 millions of silver dollars. There are 38 commercial
towns in the kingdom, among whom Stockholm, Gothenburg, and Marstrand, are the
principal. Sweden has endeavored to avoid paying the disagreeable duty in the
Sound, by joining the island lakes with the sea, by a canal beginning not far
from Stockholm from the gulf of Bothnia, and extending to the German ocean
(...) Gothenburg; but the attempt has not yet succeeded.

GOVERNMENT.] Since the memorable revolution in the year 1772, Sweden may, with
great propriety, be called a monarchy. The senate it is true, claims still some
share in the administration; but its members are chosen by the king himself. On
coming to the throne, the sovereign engages to observe the fundamental laws of
the kingdom: He has the absolute disposal of the army, and has the power of
calling together as well as of dissolving the assembly of the states; but he
cannot impose any new tax without consulting the diet, whose consent is
necessary to levy them from the subject. The senate is the highest court or
council in the kingdom, and is composed of 17 senators or supreme counselors.
The diet is formed by the deputies of the four estates, or orders of the
nation, viz. the order of the nobility, the clergy, the citizens and the
peasants; each order has its speaker, who presides over the respective
deputies. The senate is divided into two departments; one of them has the
supreme inspection over the administration of justice, over the mines, being
the chief source of the national wealth, and the revision of all public
accounts: The other department transacts all other branches of public and
foreign business. The provinces are under governors, called provincial
captains. Justice is administered in every town by the civil magistrates. The
whole kingdom is divided into 82 districts of jurisdiction, each of which has
its own court of justice, called Heeradsting: In these country courts the judge
is assisted by a jury of twelve peasants. From the decisions of these courts,
their lies appeal to 21 superior courts, called Lagmansting: and from the
latter to four supreme courts of judicature, established at Stockholm,
Jonkoping, Abo, and Wasa. The Roman, or Civil law, is not in force in Sweden:
Justice is administered, without the delays usual in other countries, according
to the regulation of the code of laws published in the year 1736. Other
departments for the transaction of public business are the following: The War
Office, the Exchequer, the Court of Admiralty, the Chancery, the Board of
Trade, and the Board of Mines.

FINANCES.] The revenue amounted, in 1772, to 11,089,122 silver dollars, the
public expenditure, to 11,466,125 silver dollars; and the national debt,
exceeded, at that time, the sum of 60 millions. Since the late revolution, the
revenue has been increased, by appropriating to the crown the lucrative
monopoly in spirituous liquors, which is valued at upwards of 7 millions of
silver dollars. Mr. Tunberg estimates the ordinary revenue, in 1784, at 4
millions of rix-dollars. The revenue accruing from the German province of
Pomerania, amounted, in 1781, to 234,287 German dollars; and, in 1782, that of
Pomerania and Wismar to 249,000 German dollars. The chatoulle; or private purse
of the king, is estimated at 200,000 rix-dollars.

ARMY AND NAVY.] In 1784, it consisted of 50,421 men. The Swedish forces are
divided into national troops; and levied troops, who are mostly foreigners: The
first, being supplied by the Swedish nation, and consisting of country people,
who serve only during the season of the reviews, have some resemblance to a
national militia: They are, however, much better disciplined than militias
commonly are, The infantry must be supplied and maintained by the order of the
peasants, the cavalry by the order of the nobility. The levied troops, most of
whom are foreigners, are perpetually on duty, and receive continual pay.

NATIONAL TROOPS. Infantry.
22 national regiments of different strength, 1 battalion 1,284 together 25,125
1 -- of Chasseurs 128 Covalry.
Horse Guards 1,5^^ The noble Guard (6 companies) ^9^ 5 regiments 5,000
Dragoons, 2 regiments besides 2,000 1 Escadr. of Dragoons of 400 1 -- 300 1
Comp. -- 100 LEVIED, ON STANDING TROOPS. Infantry.
King's Guards 2,800 (...) regiment, some of 1,260 men, some of less 5,960
Sawolax Chasscurs 400 Cavalry.
Hussars 300 Light Dragoons 200 Artillery.
5 Brigades 3,230 5 -- (Fortificats.) 2,706 50,42^

NAVY.
25 ships of the line. 12 -- 14 frigates. 50 galleys. 15 -- 17,000 Seamen.
Two regiments of marines, together 1400 men. Some new ships of the line have
been lately built, so as to make up the number of 30.

CAPITAL.] Stockholm, the capital of Sweden, and the residence of the king, is
situated in N. lat. 59. 20. and E. long. 19. 30. 760 miles N. E. from London.
Standing at the junction of the Baltic sea, and the Lake Maler, it has the
convenience both of salt and fresh water. It is built, partly on islands and
partly on peninsulas, and its circuit is computed at 12 miles. Most of the
streets are broad, and the market places spacious. In the quarter of the town
properly called the city, are above 5000 houses, most of them standing on
piles. They are built entirely of stone, and are four or five stories high; but
some are covered with copper or iron plates, and others with tiles. The islands
on which this city is built are six, viz. Stockholm, on which among other
public buildings, are the new-palace, the senate house, the town house and the
bank -- Ritterholm, on which is St. Francis' Church, where lie interred, many
of the Swedish kings and queens -- Schiffsholm, on which is the dock yard --
Helgandsholm, or the island of the Holy Ghost -- Ronigsholm --
Landugard-island, on which is the king's orchard, park and orangery, and an
orphan house, founded by Free-Masons, in 1750.

All parts of this city are connected by bridges. It affords a fine prospect of
the Lake Maler, on one side, and of the harbor, on the other. The number of
inhabitants who pay taxes, is computed at 60,000.

In this city are, a Board of Admiralty, an Office of the Revenue, a National
Bank, with a capital of L466,666,134 sterling, a Customhouse, a Naval-office,
an Insurance-office, an Office where goods manufactured in the kingdom are
examined, and disputes between manufactures decided -- a commodious dock,
various kinds of manufactories -- a Royal Academy of Sciences, a College of
Physicians, a Royal Library, a chemical and mechanical Elabaratory, an Academy
for Painting and Sculpture, and others for Military Architecture and Land
Surveying.

PUNISHMENTS.] The common method of execution in Sweden is beheading and
hanging; for murder, the hand of the criminal is first chopped off, and he is
then beheaded and quartered; women, after beheading, instead of being
quartered, are burned. No capital punishment is inflicted without the sentence
being confirmed by the king. Every prisoner is at liberty to petition the king,
within a month after the trial. The petition either complains of unjust
condemnation, and in such a case demands a revisal of the sentence; or else
prays for pardon, or a mitigation of punishment. Malefactors are never put to
death except for very atrocious crimes, such as, murder, housebreaking, robbery
upon the highway, or repeated thefts. Other crimes, many of which in some
countries are considered as capital, are chiefly punished by whipping,
condemnation to live upon bread and water, imprisonment and hard labor, either
for life, or for a stated time, according to the nature of the crime. Criminals
were tortured to extort confession till the reign of the present king; but, in
1773, his Swedish majesty abolished this cruel and absurd practice.

ROYAL STYLE.] The king's style is king of the Goths and Vandals, great prince
of Finland, duke of Schonen, Pomeran, etc.

ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD.] These are, the order of the Nor^^ Star, consisting of
24 members; the order of Vasa, and the order of the Sword; the last created in
1772.

HISTORY.] The Goths, the ancient inhabitants of this country, joined by the
Normans, Danes, Saxons, Vandals, etc. have had the reputation of subduing the
Roman empire, and all the southern nations of Europe. The introduction of
Christianity by Ansgatius, bishop of Brenem, in 829, seems to present the first
certain period of the Swedish history.

The history of Sweden, and indeed of all the northern nations, even during the
first ages of Christianity, is confused and uninteresting, and even doubful;
but sufficiently replete with murders* malsacres, and ravages. That of Sweden
is void of consistency, till about the middle of the fourteenth century, when
it assumes an appearance more regular, and affords wherewith to recompense the
attention of those who choose to make it an object of their studies.

Magnus Ladulus, crowned in 1276, seems to have been the first king of Sweden
who pursued a regular system to increase his authority; and to succeed in this,
he made the augmentation of the revenues of the crown his principal object. He
was one of the ablest princes who had ever sat on the Swedish throne; by his
art and address he prevailed upon the convention of estates to make very
extraordinary grants to him for the support of his royal dignity. The
augmentation, of the revenues of the crown was naturally followed by a
proportionable increase of the regal power. The successors of Magnus did not
maintain their authority with equal ability; and several commotions and
revolutions followed, which threw the nation into great disorder and confusion,
and the government was for a long time in the most unsettled state.

In the year 1387, Margaret, daughter of Valdemar, king of Denmark, and widow
of Huguin, king of Norway, reigned in both these kingdoms. That princess, to
the ordinary ambition of her sex, added a penetration and enlargement of mind,
which rendered her capable of conducting the greatest and most complicated
designs. She has been called the Semiramis of the North, because, like
Semiramis, she found means to reduce by arms, or by intrigue, an immense extent
of territory; and became queen of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden, being elected to
this last in 1394. She projected the union of Calmar, so famous in the North,
by which these kingdoms were for the future to remain under one sovereign,
elected by each kingdom in its turn, and who should divided his residence
between them all. Several revolutions ensued after the death of Margaret; and
at length Christian II. the last king of Denmark, who, by virtue of the treaty
of Calmar, was also king of Sweden, engaged in a scheme to render himself
entirely absolute. The barbarous policy by which he attempted to effect this
design no less barbarous, proved the destruction of himself, and afforded an
opportunity for changing the face of affairs in Sweden. In order to establish
his authority in that kingdom, he laid a plot for massacring the principal
nobility. This horrid design was actually carried into execution, November 8,
1520. Of all those who could oppose the despotic purposes of Christian, no one
remained in Sweden, but Gustavus Vasa, a young prince, descended of the ancient
kings of that country, and who had already signalized his arms against the king
of Denmark. An immense price was laid on his head. The Danish soldiers were
sent in pursuit of him; but by his dexterity and address he eluded all their
attempts, and escaped, under the disguise of a peasant, to the mountains of
Dalecarlia. This is not the place to relate his dangers and fatigues, how to
prevent his discovery he wrought in the brass mines, how he was betrayed by
those in whom he reposed his confidence, and in fine, surmounting a thousand
obstacles, engaged the savage, but warlike inhabitants of Dalecarlia, to
undertake his cause, to oppose, and to conquer his tyrannical oppressor.
Sweden, by his means, again acquired independence. The ancient nobility were
mostly destroyed. Gustavus was at the head of a victorious army, who admired
his valor, and were attached to his person. He was created therefore first
administrator, and afterward king of Sweden, by the universal consent, and
with the shouts of the whole nation. His circumstances were much more
favorable than those of any former prince who had possessed this dignity. The
massacre of the nobles, had rid him of those proud and haughty enemies, who had
so long been the bane of all regular government in Sweden. The clergy, indeed,
were no less powerful and dangerous; but the opinions of (...), which began at
this time to prevail in the North, the force with which they were supported,
and the credit which they had acquired among the Swedes, gave him an
opportunity of changing the religious system of that country; and the exercise
of the Roman Catholic religion was prohibited in the year 1544, under the
severest penalties, which have never yet been relaxed. Instead of a Gothic
aristocracy* the most turbulent of all governments, and, when impoisoned by
religious tyranny, of all governments the most wretched, Sweden, in this
manner, became a regular monarchy. Some favorable effects of this change were
soon visible: Arts and manufactures were established and improved; navigation
and commerce began to flourish; letters and civility were introduced* and a
kingdom, known only by name to the rest of Europe, began to be known by its
arms, and to have a certain weight in all public treaties or deliberations.

Gustavus died in 1559, and was succeeded by his on Eric, who was deposed 1566.
His brother John succeeded him, and entered into a ruinous war with Russia.
John attempted, by the advice of his queen, to re-establish the Catholic
religion in Sweden; but, though he made strong efforts for that purpose, and
even reconciled himself to the pope, he was opposed by his brother Charles, and
the scheme proved ineffectual. John's son Sigismund, was, however, chosen king
of Poland in 1587, upon which he endeavored again to restore the Roman
Catholic religion in his dominions; but he died in 1592.

Charles, brother to king John, a strenuous protestant, was chosen
administrator of Sweden; and afterward crowned in 1599. The reign of Charles,
through the practices of Sigismund, was turbulent; which gave the Danes
encouragement to invade Sweden. Their conduct was checked by the great Gustavus
Adolphus, though then a minor, and heir apparent to Sweden. Upon the death of
his father, which happened in 1611, he was declared of age by the states,
though then only in his eighteenth year. Gustavus, soon after his accession,
found himself through the power and intrigues of the Poles, Russians, and
Danes, engaged in a war with all his neighbors, under infinite disadvantages;
all which he surmounted. He had almost become master of Russia; but the
Russians were so tenacious of their independency, that his scheme was hassled.
In 1617 he made a peace, under the mediation of James I. of England, by which
he recovered Livonia, and four towns in the prefecture of Novogorod, with a sum
of money besides.

The ideas of Gustavus began now to extend. He had seen a vast deal of military
service, and he was assisted by the counsels of La Gardie, one of the best
generals and wisest statesmen of his age. His troops, by perpetual war, had
become the best disciplined and most warlike in Europe; and he carried his
ambition farther than historians are willing to acknowledge. The princes of the
house of Austria were, it is certain, early jealous of his enterprising spirit,
and supported his ancient implacable enemy Sigismund, whom Gustavus defeated.
-- In 1627, he formed the siege of Dantzick, in which he was unsuccessful; but
the attempt, which was defeated only by the sudden rise of the Vistula, added
so much to his military character, that the protestant cause placed him at the
head of the confederacy for reducing the house of Austria. His life, from that
time, was a continued chain of the most rapid and wonderful successes: Even the
mention of each would exceed our bounds. It is sufficient to say, that after
taking Riga, and overrunning Livonia, he entered Poland, where he was
victorious; and from thence in 1630, he landed in Pomerania, drove the Germans
out of Mecklenburgh, defeated the famous count Tilly the Austrian general, who
was till then thought invincible; and over ran Franconia. Upon the defeat and
death of Tilly, Wallenftein, another Austrian general, of equal reputation, was
appointed to command against Gustavus, who was killed upon the plain of Lutzen
in 1632, after gaining a battle; which, had he survived, would probably have
put a period to the Austrian greatness.

The amazing abilities of Gustavus Adolphus, both in the cabinet and the field,
never appeared so fully as after his death. He left behind him a set of
generals, trained by himself, who maintained the glory of the Swedish army with
most astonishing valor and success. His chancellor Oxenstiern, was as
consummate a politician as he was a warrior* and during the minority of his
daughter Christina, he managed the affairs of Sweden with such success, that
she in a manner dictated the peace of Westphalia, 1648, which threw the affairs
of Europe into a new system.

Christina was but six years of age when her father was killed. She received a
noble education; but her fine genius took an uncommon and indeed romantic turn.
She invited to her court, Descartes, S^^masius, and other learned men. Being
resolved not to marry, she resigned her crown to her cousin Charles Gustavus,
son to the duke of Deux-Ponts, in 1654. He died of a fever in 1660. His son and
successor, Charles XI. was not five years of age at his father's death; and
this rendered it necessary for his guardians to conclude a peace with their
neighbors, by which the Swedes gave up the island of Bornholm, and Drontheim,
in Norway. All differences were accommodated at the same time with Russia and
Holland; and Sweden continued to make a very respectable figure in the affairs
of Europe.

Charles XI. died in 1697, and was succeeded by his minor son, the famous
Charles XII. The history of no prince is better known than that of this hero.
Soon after his accession, the kings of Denmark and Poland, and the czar of
Muscovy, formed a powerful confederacy against him, encouraged by the mean
opinion they had of his youth and abilities. He made head against them all; and
besieging Copenhagen, he dictated the peace of Travendahl to his Danish
majesty, by which the duke of Holstein was re-established in his dominions. The
czar Peter was at this time ravaging Ingria, at the head of 80,000 men and had
besieged Narva. The army of Charles did not exceed 20,000 men; but such was his
impatience, that he advanced at the head of 8000, entirely routed the main body
of the Russians, and raised the siege. Such were his successes, and so numerous
his prisoners, th^^ the Russians attributed his actions to necromancy. Charles
from thence marched into Saxony, where his warlike achievements equalled,
(...) they did not excel, those of Gustavus Adolphus. He dethroned A^gustus
king of Poland; but stained all his laurels, by putting the bra^^ count Patkul
to a death equally painful and ignominious. He raised Stani^^aus to the crown
of Poland in 1705, and his name carried with it such terror, that he was
courted by all the powers of Europe; (...) among others, by the duke of
Marlborough, in the name of queen Anne, amidst the full career of her successes
against France. His stubbornness and implacable disposition, however, were
such, that he cannot be considered in a better light than that of an
illustrious madman; for he lost in the battle of Pultowa, 1709, which he sought
in his march to dethrone the czar, more than all he had gained by his
victories. His brave army was ruined, and he was forced to take refuge among
the Turks at Bender. His actions there, in attempting to defend himself with
300 Swedes against 30,000 Turks, prove him to have been worse than frantic. The
Turks found it however convenient for their affairs to set him at liberty. But
his misfortunes did not cure his military madness; and after his return to his
dominions, he prosecuted his revenge against Denmark, till he was killed by a
cannon-shot, as it is generally said, at the siege of Fredericfhall, in Norway,
belonging to the Danes, in 1718, when he was no more than thirty-six years of
age. It has been supposed, that Charles was not in reality killed by a shot
from the walls of Fredericshall, but that a pistol from some nearer hand, from
one of those about him, gave the decisive blow, which put an end to the life of
this celebrated monarch. This opinion is said to be very prevalent among the
best informed persons in Sweden. And it appears, that the Swedes were tired of
a prince, under whom they had lost their richest provinces, their bravest
troops, and their national riches; and who yet untamed by adversity, pursued an
unsuccessful and pernicious war, nor would ever have listened to the voice of
peace, or consulted the internal tranquillity of his country.

Charles XII. was succeeded by his sister, the princes Ulrica Eleonora, wife to
the hereditary prince of Hesse. Adolphus Frederic, married the princess Ulrica,
sister to the king of a mild and gentle temper, and much harrassed by the
contending Swedish factions, and found his situation extremely troublesome, in
consequence of the restraints and opposition which he met with from the senate.
-- He passed the greatest part of his reign very disagreeably, and was at
length, through the intrigues of the queen, brought over to the French party.
He died in February, 1771, and was succeeded by his son, Gustavus the Third. He
possessed abilities greatly superior to those of his father, and had much more
ambition. He was about five and twenty years of age when he was proclaimed king
o^ Sweden; his understanding had been much cultivated, he had an insinuating
address, and a graceful and commanding elocution. He was at Paris at the time
of his father's death, from whence he wrote in the most gracious terms to the
senate, repeatedly assuring them that he designed to govern according to the
Laws. In consequence of the death of his father, an extraordinary diet was
called to regulate the affairs of the government, and to settle the form of the
coronation oath. Some time after his arrival in Sweden, on the 28th of March,
1772, his majesty solemnly signed, and swore to observe twenty-four articles,
relative to his future administration of government. This was termed a
capitulation; and among the articles were the following: "The king promises
before God to support the government of the kingdom as then established; to
maintain the rights and liberties of the states, the liberties and security of
all his subjects, and to reign with justice and equity according to the laws of
the kingdom, the form of the regency as it was established in the year 1720,
and conformably to the present act of capitulation. In consequence of the
declaration of the states, the king shall regard any person, who shall openly
or clandestinely endeavor to introduce absolute sovereignty, as an enemy of
the kingdom, and as a traitor to his country, and every person must take an
oath respecting this matter, before (...) can take possession of any
employment. With regard to the affairs of the cabinet and the senate, the king
promises to follow the regulations of the year 1720 upon that head, which are
to be directed always by a majority of votes, and never to do any thing therein
without, (...) much less against, their advice. To the end that the council of
(...) may be so much the more convinced of the inviolable designs of (...)
majesty, and of his sincere love for the good of his people, he declare them to
be entirely disengaged from their oath of fidelity, in case th^^ he wilfully
acts contrary to his coronation oath, and to this capitulation. And lastly, the
king threatens any person with his highest displeasure, who shall be so
inconsiderate as to propose to him a greatest degree of power and splendour than
is marked out in this act of capitulation, as his majesty desires only to gain
the affection of his faithful subjects, and to be their powerful defender
against any attempts (...) may be made upon their lawful liberties."

But scarcely had the king taken these solemn oaths to rule according to the
then established form of government, and accepted the crown upon these
conditions, before he formed the plan to govern as (...) thought proper,
regarding these oaths only as matters of ceremo^^* And he made use of every
art, the most profound dissimulation, (...) the utmost dexterity and address,
in order to render this hazardous enterprise successful. At his first arrival
at Stockholm he adopted every method which could increase his popularity. Three
times a (...) he regularly gave audience to all who presented themselves.
Neither rank, fortune, nor interest, were necessary to obtain access to him. It
was sufficient to have been injured, and to have a legal cause of complaint to
lay before him. He listened to the meanest of his subjects with affability, and
entered into the minutest details that concerned them; he informed himself of
their private affairs, and seemed to interest himself in their happiness. This
conduct made him considered as truly the father of his people, and the Swedes
began to ido^^^^ him. In the warmth of their gratitude they forgot that motives
of ambition might have some share in forming a conduct which to them appeared
to proceed from principles of the purest benevolence. At the same time that he
labored to render himself generally popular, he (...) endeavored to persuade
the leading men of the kingdom, that he w^ sincerely and inviolably attached to
the constitution of his country, that he was perfectly satisfied with the share
of power the constitution had allotted to him, and he took every opportunity to
declare, that he considered it as his greatest glory to be the first citizen of
a (...) people. He seemed intent only on banishing corruption, and promoting
union; he declared he would be of no party but that of the nations and that he
would ever pay the most implicit obedience to whatever the diet should enact.
These professions lulled the many into a (...) security, though they created
suspicions among a few of greater penetration, who thought his majesty promised
too much to be in earnest. In the mean time, there happened some contentions
between the different orders of the Swedish states; and no methods were left
untried to foment these jealousies. Emissaries were likewise planted in every
part of the kingdom, for the purpose of sowing discontent among the
inhabitants, of rendering them disaffected to the established government, and
of exciting them to an insurrection. At length, when the king found his scheme
ripe for execution, having taken the proper measures for bringing a
considerable number of the officers and soldiers The fidelity which was
manifested by a private soldier on this occasion, deserves to be recorded. The
night preceding the revolution, the king being desirous of visiting the
arsenal, went thither, and ordered the sentinel to admit him. The latter
refused. "Do you know who you are speaking to?" said the king. "Yes," replied
the soldier, "but I likewise know my duty." Vid. a very judicious and
well-written account of this extraordinary revolution in Sweden, published by
Charles Francis Sheridan, Esquire. who was secretary to the British envoy in
Sweden, at the time of the revolution; and is now secretary at war in Ireland.
into his interest, on the 19th of August, 1772, he totally overturned the
Swedish constitution of government. In less than an hour he made himself master
of all the military force of Stockholm. He planted grenadiers, with their
bayonets fixed, at the door of the council chamger, in which the senate were
assembled, and made all the members of it prisoners. And that no news might be
carried to any other part of Sweden, of the transaction in which the king was
engaged, till the scheme was completed, cannon were drawn from the arsenal, and
planted at the palace, the bridges, and other parts of the town, and
particularly at all the avenues leading to it. Soldiers stood over these with
matches ready lighted; all communication with the country was cut off, no one
without a passport from the king being allowed to leave the city. The senators
were then confined in separate apartments in the palace, and many others who
were supposed to be zealously attached to the liberties of Sweden, were put
under arrest. The remainder of the day the king employed in visiting different
quarters of the town, in order to receive oaths of fidelity to him from the
magistrates, the colleges, and city militia. Oaths were also tendered the next
day to the people in general, to whom he addressed a speech, which he concluded
by declaring, that his only intention was to restore tranquillity to his native
country, by suppressing licentiousness, overturning the aristocratic form of
government, reviving the old Swedish liberty, and restoring the ancient laws of
Sweden, such as they were before 1680. "I renounce now," said he, "as I have
already done, all idea of the abhored absolute power, or what is called
sovereignty, esteeming it now, as before, my greatest glory to be the first
citizen among a trust free people." Heralds then went through the different
quarters of the town, to proclaim an assembly of the states for the following
day. This proclamation contained a threat, that if any member of the diet
should absent himself, he should be considered and treated as a traitor to his
country.

On the morning of the 21st of August, a large detachment of guards was ordered
to take possession of the square, where the house of nobles stands. The palace
was invested on all sides with troops, and cannon were planted in the court,
facing the hall where the states were to be assembled. These were not only
charged, but soldiers stood over them with matches ready lighted in their
hands. The several orders of the states were here compelled to assemble by the
king's orders, and these military preparations were made in order to assist
their deliberatio^^. The king being seated on his throne, surrounded by his
guards, and a numerous band of officers, after having addressed a speech to the
sta^^^ he ordered a secretary to read a new form of government, which he
reffered to the states of their acceptance. As they were surrounded by an armed
force, they thought proper to comply with what was requ^^ed of them. The
marshal of the diet, and the speakers of the other orders, signed the form of
government; and the states took the (...) to the king, which he dictated to
them himself. This extraordinary transaction was concluded in a manner equally
extraordinary. The king drew a book of psalms from his pocket, and taking off
his (...) began to sing Te Deum, in which he was joined by the assembly. (...)
afterward gave them to understand, that he intended in six years (...) again
to convene an assembly of the states. Thus was this great revolution completed
without any bloodshed, in which the Swedes surrendered that constitution, which
their forefathers had bequeathed (...) them after the death of Charles the
Twelfth, as a bulwark against any despotic attempts of their future monarchs.

The Swedes, it some periods, have discovered an ardent love of liberty; at
others, they have seemed fitted only for slavery; and what they were laboring
to render themselves free, they have wanted that sound political knowledge,
which would have pointed out to the (...) proper methods for securing their
future freedom. The most capital defect of the Swedish constitution was the
total want of all balance of its parts: And the division of the Swedish nation
into three distin^^ classes of nobles, burghers, and peasants, whose interests
were perpetually clashing, has been a circumstance very unfavorable to the
liberty of the Swedes. The power of their kings was much restrained; but no
sufficient regulations were adopted for securing the personal ^^^dom of the
subject. These defects in the Swedish constitution pawl the way for the late
revolution: But it is notwithstanding a just subject of surprise, that a bold
and hardy people, who had so cautiously limited the power of their prince,
should, at once, without a struggle, suffer him to proceed to so great an
extension of his authority. It appears, however, that the exorbitant power
which Gustavus the Third thus assumed, he exercised with some degree of
moderation.

Gustavus, of Holstein-Gottorp, late king of Sweden, was born in 1746. He was
married in 1766, to Sophia Magdalene, the princess royal of Denmark, by whom he
had issue a prince, Gustavus Adolphus, born Nov. 1, 1778.

Gustavus III. the Swedish Monarch, died, March 29th, 1792, (...) 45, of the
wounds he received from Capt. Aukenstrom, a most daring and desperate assassin
-- who discharged the contents of a pistol into his body, on the 16th of March,
at the Opera House. -- The Prince Royal who is but 14 years old, and has
promising abilities, immediately on his father's death, was proclaimed King of
Sweden, by the name of Gustavus Adolphus IV. The Duke of Sudermania, in
compliance with his late Majesty's will, was declared "sole regent," or
guardian of the young King, till he attains his majority, which is fixed at the
age of eighteen.

RUSSIA
MUSCOVY, OR THE RUSSIAN EMPIRE IN EUROPE AND ASIA.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length unknown Miles. between Degrees. 23 and 180 East longitude. Breadth 1500
Miles. Degrees. 44. 40 and 72 N. latitude.

THIS immense Empire stretches from the Baltic sea and Sweden on the west, to
Kamtskatka and the Pacific Ocean on the east: And from the Frozen Ocean on the
north to about the 44th degree of lat. on the south, on which side it is
bounded by Poland, Little Tartary, Turkey, Georgia, the Euxine and Caspian
Seas, Great Tartary, Chinese Tartary, and other unknown regions in Asia.

The country now comprised under the name of Russia or the Russias, is of an
extent nearly equal to all the rest of Europe, and greater than the Roman
empire in the zenith of its power, or the empire of Darius subdued by
Alexander, or both put together.

Russia is, at present, divided into 42 governments, which are comprehended
again under 19 general governments, viz.

A. European Part of RUSSIA, 30 GOVERNMENTS.
TOWNS. 1. Government of St. Petersburg, divided into 7 Parts or Circles
Petersburg 170,000 inhab. 191,000 (1784) 126,700 (Coxe) Narva 3,580 Kronstadt
5,000 2. Government of Wiburg, divided into 6 Circles Wiburg Fridricksham 3.
Government of Riga, properly of Livonia Riga 27,938 Dorpt Pernau 4. Government
of Reval, properly of Estland Reval 10,000 5. Government of Moskow divided into
Moskow 277,000 (Coxe) 12,550 houses, and 153,000 inhabitants 6. Government of
Wolodimer 14 Wolodimer 7. -- Pereslaw Pereslau-Saleskoi 8. Government of
Kaluga, divided into 12 Circles. Kaluga 9. -- of Tula 12 Tula 10. -- of
Jaraslaw 12 Jaraslaw 30,000 inhab* 11. -- of Kostroma 15 divisions. Kostroma
12. -- of Nowogorod, 15 Circles. Nowogorod 6,000 13. -- of Twer 13 Twer 10,000
14. -- of Wologda 19 Wologda 8,000 Archangel, 15. -- of Nishnie Nowogorod
Nishnei Nowogorod 16. Gov. of Woronesh 15 Woronesh 17. -- of Tanbow 14 Tanbow
18. -- of Kursk 15 Kursk 19. -- of Orel 13 Orel 20. -- of Charcow 15 Charcow
21. -- of Kiew (Cosac Country, or the Ukraine) about 1 million of people 11
Kiew 22. -- of Tshernigo 11 Tshernigo 23. -- of Nowogrod Sewersk 11 Nowogrod
Sewersk 24. -- of Smolensk (White Russia) 13 Smolensk 4,000 25. -- of Pleskow
10 Pleskow 26. -- of Polotzka 11 Polotzka 27. -- of Mohilow 12 Mohilow 28. --
of Ekatarinoslow (New Russia) 20 Pultawa Charson Asow 29. -- of Tauria (or
Crimea) 7 Caffa 4,000 Perekov 30. -- Wiaetka 10 Wiaetka B. ASIATIC RUSSIA. 12.
GOVERNMENTS.
TOWNS. 1. Govern. of Caucasia (Kuban) Ta^^n 2. -- of Casan, divided into 13
Circles Casan, 2,5000 3. -- of Permia (Catarinb^) 16 Circles Perm
Ekatarinenberg 4. -- of Pensa 7 Pensa 5. -- of Sinbirsk 12 Sinbirsk Samara 6.
-- of Saratow 9 Saratow 7. -- of Astrachan Astrachan 70,000 8. -- of Orenburg
Orenburg Gurjew 9. -- of Ufa Ufa 10. -- of Tobolsk, 3 Divisions Tobolsk 2000
houses Jeniscisk 11. -- of Irkutzk, 17 Circles Irkutzk 1,113 Jakutzk 600
Kiechta Oihotz 12. -- of Kolywan 5 Kolywan Tomsk 2,000

C. Tributary ISLANDS in the Great South Sea, between Asia and America.
1. The A^EUTIAN ISLANDS. 2. The ANDREAN ISLANDS. 3. The FOX ISLANDS. 4. The
KUHILIAN ISLANDS.
Whole RUSSIA square Miles. Population. Popu. for every square Mile. A and B
4,880,000 24,000,000 5 A 1,194,976 20,000,000 20 B 3,695,024 4,000,000 for the
ancient limits 1 Livonia 16,000 525,300 32 Estronia 6,400 200,000, 31 Crimea
24,368 200,000, according to some accounts only or only 60,000 2 By the
Division of Poland, Russia acquired 31,000 1,800,000 57

According to the former division into governments, which is preserved in most
of the maps, the European part of Russia contains only 1,008,000 square miles.

The superiority of the European part over the vast but uncultivated provinces
of Asia, is striking.

The provinces acquired by the division of Poland, are highly valuable to
Russia, to which the acquisition of Crimea is by no means comparable in value.

This immense empire comprehends upwards of fifty different nations. They may
be reduced to the following classes: 1. Slavonian nations, viz. Russians,
Polanders, Cosaks, 2. Lettonian (in Livonia.) 3. Finnian, viz. Laplanders,
Tshorkis, Estonians, Lieffs, Wotjaks, Tchermisses, Tshowashes, Permekian,
Wogolian, Morduines, Samojedes, Ostiaks, Yuraks. 4. Tartarian, viz. Nogaitz,
Tshulyms, Bashkirians, Kirgis, Yakutes, Bazabins, etc. Tartars. 5. Mongolian,
viz. Kalmucs, Buraets, Telcuts, etc. 6. Tungusian, Koriakes, Kamtskadaly,
Kurilian, etc. 7. Migrated Europeans from every part of Europe, chiefly
Germans. 8. Armenians, Indians, Persians. It is supposed, that the number of
languages cannot well be less than the number of different nations.

CLIMATE.] In the southern parts of Russia, or Muscovy, the longest day does
not exceed fifteen hours and a half; whereas, in the most northern, the sun is
seen in summer two months above the horizon. The reader from this will
naturally conclude, that there is in Muscovy a vast diversity of climate, and
that the extremes of heat and cold are felt in this vast empire.

The severity of the climate, however, in Russia properly so called, is very
great. Dr. John Glen King, who resided eleven years in Russia, observes, that
the cold in St. Petersburgh, by Farenheit's scale, is, during the months of
December, January, and February, usually from 8 to 15 or 20 degrees below o;
that is, from 40 to 52 degrees below freezing point: Though commonly, in the
course of the winter, it is for a week or ten day some degrees lower. The same
writer remarks, that it is almost difficult for an inhabitant of our temperate
climate to have any idea of a cold so great: But it may help to give some
notion of it to inform the reader, that when a person walks out in that severe
weather, the cold makes the eyes water, and that water freezing, hangs in
little icicles on the eye-lashes. As the common peasants usually wear their
beards, you may see them hanging at the chin like a solid lump of ice. But,
even in that state, the beard is found very useful in protecting the glands of
the throat: And the soldiers, who do not wear their beards, are obliged to tie
a handkerchief under the chin to supply their place. All the parts of the face,
which are exposed, are very liable to be frozen: Though it has often been
observed, that the person himself does not know when the freezing begins; but
is commonly told of it first, by those who meet him, and who call out to him to
rub his face with snow, the usual way to thaw it. It is also remarked, that the
part, which has once been frozen, is ever after most liable to be frozen again.
In some very severe winters, sparrows, though a hardy species of birds, have
been seen quite numbed by the intense cold, and unable to fly: And drivers,
wh^^ sitting on their loaded carriages, have sometimes been found frozen to
death in that posture. When the thermometer has stood as 25 degrees below
(...), boiling water, thrown up into the air by an engine, so as to spread, has
fallen down perfectly dry, formed into ice. A pint bottle of common water was
found by Dr. King, frozen into a solid piece of ice in an hour and a quarter. A
bottle of strong ale has also been frozen in an hour and a half: But in this
substance there was about a tea-cup full in the middle unfrozen, which was as
strong and inflammable as brandy of spirits of wine. But notwithstanding the
severity of the cold in Russia, the inhabitants have such various means and
provisions to guard against it, that they suffer much less from it than might
be expected. The houses of persons in tolerable circumstances are so well
protected, both without doors and within, that they are seldom heard to
complain of cold. The method of warming the houses in Russia is by an oven
constructed with several flues, and the country abounds with wood, which is the
common fuel. These ovens consume a much smaller quantity of wood than might be
imagined, and yet they serve at the same time for the ordinary people to dress
their food. They put a very moderate faggot into them, and suffer it to burn
only till the thickest black smoke is evaporated; they then shut down the
chimney to retain all the rest of the heat in the chamber; by this chimney to
retain all the rest of heat in the chamber; by this method the chamber keeps
its heat 24 hours, and is commonly so warm, they sit with very little covering,
especially children, who are usually in their shirts. The windows in the huts
of the poor are very small, that as little cold may be admitted as possible: In
the houses of persons of condition, the windows are caulked up against winter,
and commonly have double glass frames. In short, they can regulate the warmth
in their apartments by a thermometer with great exactness, opening or shutting
the flues to increase or diminish the heat. When the Russians go out, they are
clothed so warmly, that they almost bid defiance to frost and snow; and it is
observable, that the wind is seldom violent in the winter; but when there is
much wind, the cold is exceedingly piercing.

One advantage which the Russians derive from the severity of their climate is,
the preserving provisions by the frost. Good housewives, as soon as the frost
sets in for the winter, about the end of October, kill their poultry, and keep
them in tubs packed up with a layer of snow between them, and then take them
out for use as occasions requires: By which means they save the nourishment of
the animal for several months. Veal frozen at Archangel, and brought to
Petersburg, is esteemed the finest they have; nor can it be distinguished at
the table from what is fresh killed, being equally juicy. The markets in
Petersburg are by this means supplied in winter with all manner of provisions,
at a cheaper rate than would otherwise be possible; and it is not a little
curious to see the vast stacks of whole hogs, sheep, fish, and other animals,
which are piled up in the markets for sale. The method of thawing frozen
provisions in Russia, is by immerging them in cold water: For when the
operation of thawing them is effected by heat, it seems to occasion a violent
fermentation, and almost a sudden putrefaction: But when produced by cold
water, the ice seems to be attracted out of the body, and forms a transparent
incrustation round it. If a cabbage, which is thoroughly frozen, be thawed by
cold water, it is as fresh as if just gathered out of the garden; but if it be
thawed by fire of hot water, it becomes so rancid and strong that it cannot be
eaten. Vegetation in Russia is very rapid.

WEALTH AND COMMERCE OF RUSSIA.] In so vast a tract of country as the empire of
Russia, spreading under many degrees of latitude, watered by more than eight
rivers, which run through the space of 2000 miles, and crossed by an extensive
chain of mountains, we many expect to find an infinite number of natural
productions, though we must make some allowances for the great deserts of
Siberia, and the many other parts of this immense empire not yet thoroughly
investigated by natural historians. The species of plants peculiar to this part
of the globe, which have been already discovered, amount to many thousands. The
soil contains almost all minerals, tin, platina, and some semimetals excepted,
which have not yet been found. Yet in the mines of all the these large
provinces not half the number of miners is employed, nor even half as many
mines have been explored as in Germany or even in England. Animals of every
species are here likewise in such abundance, that a great quantity of them
remain undescribed. As to the useful productions of the animal kingdom, Russia
can boast of the greatest variety of the finest furs, as it has plenty of
sables, martins, ermine, black, white, blue, and red foxes, white and common
lynxes, bears, wolves, and several animals of the spotted cat kind. It abounds
likewise in camels, horses, asses, and cattle both wild and tame; it has
innumerable stocks of more than one species of hares and squirrels, wild and
tame sheep, wild goats, different sorts of deer, reindeer, elks, the musk
animal, the musk beaver, different antelopes, etc. The following data may give
the reader a general idea of their value to the country. In 1781, there were
exported, from the harbor of Petersburg alone, 428,877 skins of hares, 36,904
skins of gray squirrels, 1354 of bears, 2018 of ermine, 5639 of foxes, 300 of
wild cats, besides those of wolves and of the suslic (a beautiful animal of the
rat kind) exclusive of the exportation of the same articles from Archangel,
Riga, and the Caspian Sea. In one year there were exported from Archangel
783,000 pud of tallow (a pud is equal to 40 lb.) 8602 pud of candles, and 102
pud of butter. In 1781, from Petersburg 148,990 pud of red leather, 10,885 pud
of leather for soles, 530,646 pud of candles, 50,000 pud of soap, 27,416 pud of
ox bones, 990 calve-skins. The sheep of some Russian provinces are very
profitable to their owners; the most esteemed on account of their wool and
skins, are the sheep of the Calmucks and Kirgis Tartars. These nations sell the
skins of the young, and even of the unborn lambs, which are the softest in the
world, and feel like satin. The Kirgis and Bashkires carry on a great trade in
horses and camels, the former of which are much valued; there are individuals
among them who posses sometimes 2000 horses. The cattle of the Ukraine are
reckoned the best in Europe. In the year 1768, wax was exported to the value of
72,000 rubles; yet the vast quantity of honey, produced by the wild bees of
Astrachan, Casan, and Orenburg, is not sufficient for the inland consumption of
this article, which in Russia is very generally used instead of sugar. Birds
are very plentiful in Russia; but the advantages to be derived from them do not
seem to have been sufficiently attended to, as Russia continues to import
feathers, goose-quills, and down. The fisheries of the Baltic and Caspian Sea,
of the lakes Onega and Ladoga, are of great importance. The different sorts of
sturgeon caught in great plenty in these waters, viz* the common sturgeon, the
beluga, the sterlid, etc. serve not only for food, but supply also the
fish-gum, of which there were exported 3000 pud from Petersburg in the year
1781. From the spawn of these fishes caviar is made; one single beluga contains
sometimes 120 lb. of spawn. The caviar is prepared in different manners and is
mostly exported. The seals, walrosses, and cod, caught in the Russian seas, are
likewise very important articles.

Of the productions of the vegetable kingdom, the most valuable to Russia are
its immense forests of fir-trees. Oaks and beeches do not commonly grow to a
useful size beyond the 60th degree of north latitude. In 1768, the value of
timber exported amounted to 585,000 rubles, of pitch and tar to 82,000 rubles,
pot-ash to 37,000 rubles, masts to 59,000 rubles. In 1760, an English merchant
contracted with the Russian government for leave to export annually, for the
space (...) 30 years, 250,000 large pieces of timber, 10,000 masts, 10,000
smaller pieces of timber, 200,000 planks, 5000 fathom of birch-wood, and
200,000 small beams. This branch of trade is carried on chiefly by the towns of
Petersburg, Wiburg, Narva, Archangel, and Kola. The plant kali, Salsola
Linnoei, from which alkali, is extracted, grows near Astrachan and Assow.

The European part of the Russian dominions, and chiefly the province of
Livonia, is distinguished for the quantity of corn of all sorts it produces.
The value of the rve and wheat exported annually amounts to upwards of 7^4,000
rubles. Tobacco is cultivated in several parts of Russia. Hemp, flax, and
sail-cloth, Russia exports to the amount of ^00,000 rubles. In 1768, Russia
received for hemp seed exported 93,000 rubles; for hemp-oil, commonly called
linseed-oil, 255,000, rubles; for flax-seed 483,000 rubles. Archangel sent
abroad in 1777, 62,043 cwt. of flax-seed, 71,783 pud of hemp, 105,928 arschien
(yards) of linen, and 3210 popes.

The mineral stores of this empire would be much more valuable, i^ there was a
greater population and more liberty: Yet the gold mines near Catharinchurg
produce annually no less than 240 lb. of gold-dust. Among the richest mines are
those of Kolivan, which yielded some years ago from 200 to 400 pud of silver,
but of late from 400 to 800 pud (...) or about 30,000 pounds of silver; every
100 lb. of silver containing 3lb. of gold. The silver mines at the
Schlangenberg, and the copper, lead, and iron mines, (especially those of the
Altai, and of the several branches of the Ural,) produce great riches. The
mines in the neighborhood of Nertschinsk, near the borders of China, yield
annually 16,000 pounds of silver and some quicksilver. In 1781, there was
exported from Petersburg 3,589,869 shippound of iron, and 280,000 shippound of
copper; lead to the value of 96,000 rubles, and sugar of lead (saccharum
Saturni) to the value of 6000 rubles. There are several manufactures of sulphur
in the empire; one of them, established at Sernoi Gorodoc, near the river
Wolga, produces 1500 pud. Salt abounds in Russia, but as there is not a
sufficient number of salt-works, a considerable quantity of salt is still
imported. Isinglass (mica membranacea, Cronstadt) is a famous mineral
production of Russia; it is found in Siberia, especially in the neighborhood
of Irkutzk in the Ural mountains, and in the island of Solowezkoi, in the
government of Astmihen; the largest and most valuable plates are found in the
province of Wologda, 3037 pud of it were exported from Petersburg in 1779.
There are besides many sorts of jasper, marble, and granit; the latter being
found in very large masses, is of great use in ornamental architecture.

The whole of the exports of Russia amounted in 1783 to near 13 million of
rubles; the imports did not much exceed the sum of 12 millions. So much has
commerce been encouraged of late, that in the course of five years the value of
the exports increased at the rate of nearly a million each year. The imports
consist chiefly of wine, spices, fruits, fine cloth, and other manufactured
commodities and articles of luxury. The English, and next to them the Dutch,
have the most considerable share in the Russian trade. The value of the exports
from Russia into Great Britain, amounted in 1785 to 1,606,6881. the value of
the imports from Great Britain, etc. to 233,9981. sterling. (Custom-house
Account, presented to the House of commons 1787.)

The commerce of the Black Sea has considerably increased since the late war
with the Turks. The value of the imports in the several harbors on the Black
Sea, amounted in 1785 to 806,330 piasters, the piaster computed at 40 paras
each, nearly equal to 241,849l. sterling. The exports from the same harbors
amount to 735,177 rubles.

It is apparently owing to the want of hands that there are at present no more
than 484 manufactures in the whole empire. Some of them, however, are brought
to a degree of perfection, which proves the skill and ingenuity of the nation:
As the manufacture of muskets and other arms at Tula, which employs 6000
people, and supplies and Russian dominions.

There are some useful canals, viz. that of Ladoga, Twer, and others.

MOUNTAINS, RIVERS, AND FACE OF THE COUNTRY.] Russia is in general a flat,
level country, except toward the north, where lie the Zimnopoias mountains,
thought to be the famous Montes Riphaei of the ancients, now called the Girdle
of the Earth. On the western side of the Dnieper comes in part of the
Carpathian mountains, and between the Black Sea and the Caspian, Mount Caucasus
borders a range of vast plains extending to the sea of Oral. And here we may
observe, that from Petersburg to Pekin, one shall hardly meet with a mountain
on the road through Independent Tartary, and from Petersburg to the north part
of France, by the road of Dantaic, Hamburg, and Amsterdam, we scarcely can
perceive the smallest hill.

The most considerable rivers are the Wolga, or Volga, running east and south,
which, after traversing the greatest part of Muscovy, and winding a course of
3000 English miles, discharges itself into the Caspian sea: It is not only
reckoned the largest, but one of the most fertile rivers of Europe: It produces
all kinds of fish; and fertilizes (...) the lands on each side, where grow the
richest trees, fruits, and vegetables; and it is remarkable, that in all this
long course there is not (...) single cataract to interrupt the navigation, but
the nearer it approaches to its mouth, multiplies its quantity of isles, as it
divides itself into (...) greater number of arms than any known river in the
world: And all these arms divide themselves into others still less, which join
and meet again, so that the Wolga discharges itself into the Caspian sea by
more than 70 mouths. By means of this noble river, the city of Moscow preserves
a communication, not only with all the southern parts of Russia, but even with
Persia, Georgia, Tartary, and other countries bordering on the Caspian sea. The
Don, or Tanais, divides the most eastern part of Russia from Asia; and in its
course toward the east, comes so near the Wolga, that the late czar had
undertaken to have cut a communication between them by means of a canal: This
grand project, however, was defeated by the irruptions of the Tartars. This
river, exclusive of its turnings and windings, discharges itself into the Palus
Maeotis, or sea of Asoph, about four hundred miles from its rise. The
Borysthenes, or Dnieper, is among the largest rivers in Europe, and runs
through Lithuania, the country of the Zaporog Cossacs, and that of the Nagaisch
Tartars, and falls into the Euxine, or Black Sea, at Kinbourne, near Oczakow;
it has thirteen cataracts within a small distance. To these may be added the
two Dwinas, one of which empties itself at Riga into the Baltic; the other has
its source near Ustiaga, and dividing itself into two branches near Archangel,
there falls into the White Sea.

POPULATION, MANNERS, AND CUSTOMS.] According to the foregoing table, Russia
contains 24,000,000 inhabitants. As her imperial majesty of all the Russias
possesses many of the countries from when^^ the prodigious swarms of barbarians
who overthrew the Roman empire issued, there is the strongest reason to
believe, that her dominions must have been better peopled formerly than they
are at present; -- twenty-four millions, are but a thin population for the
immense tract of country she possesses. As the like decrease of inhabitants is
observable in many other parts of the globe, we are to look for the reason in
natural causes, which we cannot discuss here.

The Russians, properly so called, are in general a personable people, hardy,
vigorous, and patient of labor, especially in the field, to an incredible
degree. Their complexions differ little from those of the English or Scots; but
the women think that an addition of red heightens their beauty. Their eyesight
seems to be defective, occasioned, probably, by the snow, which for a long time
of the year is continually present to their eyes. Their officers and soldiers
always possessed a large share of passive valor; but in the late war with the
king of Prussia, they proved as active as any troops in Europe; and in the late
war with the Turks they greatly distinguished themselves. They are implicitly
submissive to discipline, let it be ever so severe; they endure extreme
hardships with great patience; and can content themselves with very hard fare.

Before the days of Peter the Great, the Russians were in general barbarous,
ignorant, mean, and much addicted to drunkenness; no less than 4000 brandy
shops have been reckoned in Moscow. Not only the common people but many of the
boyards, or nobles, lived in a continual state of idleness and intoxication;
and the most complete objects of misery and barbarity presented themselves upon
the streets, while the court of Moscow was by far the most splendid of any upon
the globe. The czar and the grandees dressed after the most superb Asiatic
manner; and their magnificence exceeded every idea that can be conceived from
modern examples. The earl of Carlisle, in the account of his embassy, says,
that he could see nothing but gold and precious stones in the robes of the czar
and his courtiers. The manufactures, however, of those, and all other luxuries,
were carried on by Italians, Germans, and other foreigners. Peter saw the bulk
of his subjects, at his accession to the throne, little better than beasts of
burden to support the pomp of the court. He forced his great men to lay aside
their long robes, and dress in the European manner; and he even obliged the
laity to cut off their beards. The Russians, before his days, had hardly a ship
upon their coasts. They had no conveniences for traveling, no pavements in
their streets, no places of public diversion; and they entertained a sovereign
contempt for all improvements of the mind. At present, a French or English
gentleman may live as comfortably and sociably in Russia, as in most other
parts of Europe. Their polite assemblies, since the accession of the present
empress, have been put under proper regulations; and few of the ancient usages
remain. It is, however, said that they are yet addicted to intemperance.

The Russians were formerly noted for so strong an attachment to their native
soil, that they seldom visited foreign parts. The Russian nobility, however,
besides those who are in a public character, are now found at every court in
Europe. Her imperial majesty even interests herself in the education of young
men of quality in the knowledge of the world, and foreign services.

It is said that the Russian ladies were formerly as submissive to their
husbands in their families, as the latter are to their superiors in the field;
and that they thought themselves ill-treated if they were not often reminded of
their duty by the discipline of a whip, manufactured by themselves, which they
presented to their husbands on the day of their marriage. Their nuptial
ceremonies are peculiar to themselves; and formerly consisted of some very
whimsical rites, many of which are now disused. When the parents are agreed
upon a match, though the parties perhaps have never seen each other, the bride
is examined stark naked by a certain number of females, who are to correct, if
possible, any defects they find in her person. On her wedding day she is
crowned with a garland of wormwood; and after the priest has tied the nuptial
knot, his clerk or sexton throws a handful of hops upon the head of the bride,
wishing that she may prove as fruitful as that plant. She is then led home,
with abundance of coarse, and indeed indecent ceremonies, which are now wearing
off even among the lowest ranks; and the barbarous treatment of wives by their
husbands, which extended even to scourging or broiling them to death, is either
guard^^ against by the laws of the country, or by particular stipulations in
(...) marriage contract.

FUNERALS.] The Russians entertain many fantastic notions (...) regard to the
state of departed souls. After the dead body is dress^^ a priest in hired to
pray for his soul, of purify it with incense, (...) to sprinkle it with holy
water while it remains above ground, wh^^ among the better sort, it generally
does for eight or ten days. Wh^^ the body is carried to the grave, which is
done with many gesti^^^tions of sorrow, the priest produces a ticket, signed by
the bishop (...) another clergyman, as the deceased's passport to heaven. When
(...) is put into the coffin between the fingers of the corpse, the comp^^^
returns to the deceased's house, where they drown their sorrow (...)
intoxication; which lasts, among the better sort, with a few interval for forty
days. During that time, a priest every day says prayers (...) the grave of the
deceased; for though the Russians do not believe (...) purgatory, yet they
imagine that their departed friend may be assi^^^^ by prayer, in his long
journey, to the place of his destination (...) this life.

PUNISHMENTS.] The Russians are remarkable for the severity barbarism and
variety of their punishments, which are both inflict^^ and endured with a
wonderful insensibility. Peter the Great used (...) suspend the robbers upon
the Wolga, and other parts of his dominions by iron hooks fixed to their ribs,
on gibbets, where they writhed themselves to death, hundreds, nay thousands, at
a time. The single (...) double knout were lately inflicted upon ladies, A
particular account of the manner in which this punishment was inflicted upon a
(...) lady, is given in Mons. L' Abbe Chappe D' Auteroche's journey into
Siberia. (...) Lapouchin was one of the finest women belonging to the court of
the empress Elizabeth and was intimately connected with a foreign ambassador,
then engaged in a conspiracy. This lady, therefore, being suspected to be
concerned in the conspiracy, was condemned, (...) the empress Elizabeth, to
undergo the punishment of the knout. She appeared at the (...) of execution in
a genteel undress, which contributed still to heighten her beauty. The
sweetness of her countenance, and her vivacity, were such as might indicate
indiscriminately but not even the shadow of guilt; although I have been assured
by every person of wh^^ ^^^ve made inquiry, that she was really guilty. Young,
lovely, admired, and sought for (...) the court, of which the was the life and
spirit, instead of the number of admirers her (...) usually drew after her, she
then saw herself surrounded only by executioners. She (...) on them with
astonishment, seeming to doubt whether such preparations were intended (...)
her. One of the executioners then pulled off a kind of cloak which covered her
(...) her modesty taking the alarm, made her start back a few steps: she also
turned pale, (...) (...) into tears. Her clothes were soon after stripped off,
and in a few moments ^he (...) quite naked to the waist, exposed to the eager
looks of a vast concourse of people prosou^^^ silent. One of the executioners
then seized her by both hands, and turning half (...) threw her on his back,
bending forwards, so as to raise her a few inches from the ground: The other
executioner them laid hold of her delicate limbs, with his rough hands (...) at
the plough, and, without any remorse, adjusted her on the back of his
companion, in (...) prope^e^t posture for receiving the punishment. Sometimes
he laid his large hand (...) upon her head, in order to make her keep it down;
sometimes, like a butcher going to (...) a lamb, he seemed to soothe her, as
soon as he had fixed her in the most favorable at^^^^. This executioner then
took a kind of whip called knout, made of a long strap of leather (...) pared
for this purpose; he then retreated a few steps, measuring the requisite
distance (...) a steady eye; and leaping backwards, gave a stroke with the end
of the whip, so as to (...) away a slip of skin from the neck to the bottom of
the back, then striking his feet (...) the ground, he took his aim for applying
a second blow parallel to the former; so (...) a few moments all the skin of
her back was cut away in small slips, most of which (...) hanging to the shift.
Her tongue was cut out immediately after, and she was directly ^^^^ed into
Siberia. In 1762, the was recalled from banishment by Peter III.
as well as men (...) quality. Both of them are excruciating; but, in the
double knout, the hands are bound behind the prisoner's back, and the cord
being fixed to a pulley, lifts him from the ground, with the dislocation of
both his shoulders; and then his back is in a manner scarified by the
executioner, with a hard thong, cut from a wild ass's skin. This punishment has
been so often fatal, that a surgeon generally attends the patient, to pronounce
the moment that it should cease. It is not always the number of the strokes,
but the method of applying them, which occasions the death of the criminal; for
the executioner can kill him in three or four blows, by striking him upon the
ribs; though persons are sometimes recovered, in a few weeks, who have received
three hundred strokes, moderately inflicted. The boring and cutting out the
tongue, are likewise practiced in Russia; and even the late empress Elizabeth,
though she prohibited capital punishments, was forced to give way to the
supposed necessary of those tortures.

According to the strict letter of the law, there are no capital punishments in
Russia, except in the case of high treason: But when this matter is thoroughly
investigated, there is much less humanity in it than has been supposed. For
there are many felons who die under the knout, and others die of fatigue in
their journies to Siberia, and from the hardships they suffer in the mines; so
that there is reason to believe, that not fewer criminals suffer death in
Russia than in those countries wherein capital punishments are authorized by
the laws.

Felons, after receiving the knout, and having their cheeks and foreheads
marked, are sometimes sentenced for life to the public works at Cronstadt,
Vishnei Voloshok, and other places: But the common practice is to send them
into Siberia, where they are condemned for life to the mines at Nershink. There
are upon an average from 1600 to 2000 convicts at these mines. The greatest
part are confined in barracks, excepting those who are married: The latter are
permitted to built huts, near the mines, for themselves and families.

TRAVELING.] Among the many conveniences introduced of late into Russia, that
of traveling is extremely remarkable, and the expense very trifling. The
Russians perform the longest and most uncomfortable journies, with the greatest
facility and dispatch. Like their Scandinavian and Lapland neighbors, they
travel in sledges made of the bark of the linden-tree, lined with thick felt,
drawn by reindeer, when the snow is frozen hard enough to bear them. In the
internal parts of Russia, horses draw their sledges; and the sledge* way
toward February, becomes so well beaten, that they erect a kind of coach upon
the sledges, in which they may lie at full length, and so sleep and travel
night and day, wrapped up in good furs; thus they often perform a journey of
about 400 miles, such as that between Petersburg and Moscow, in three days and
three nights. Her imperial majesty, in her journies, is drawn in a house which
contains a bed, a table, chairs, and other conveniences for four people, by 24
post* horses; and the house itself is fixed on a sledge.

DIFFERENT NATIONS SUBJECT TO RUSSIA.] As the present subjects of the Russian
empire, in its most extensive sense, are the descendants of many different
people, and inhabit prodigious tracts of country, so we find among them a vast
variety of character and manners; and the great (...) introduced of late years,
as well as the discoveries made, render former accounts to be but little
depended upon (...) Many of the Tartars, who inhabit large portions of the
Russian dominions, now live in fixed houses and villages, cultivate the land,
and ^^^tribute like other subjects. Till lately, they were not admitted into
the Russian armies: but they now make excellent soldiers. Other Russian Tartars
retain their old wandering lives. Both sides of the Wolga are inhabited by the
Tscheremisses and Morduars; a peaceable industrious people. The Baskirs are
likewise fixed inhabitants of the tract that reaches from Kasan to the
frontiers of Siberia; and have certain privileges, of which they are tenacious.
The wandering Kalmucs occupy the rest of the tract of Astrachan and the
frontiers of the Usbecs; and in consideration of certain presents they receive
from (...) imperial majesty, they serve in her armies without pay, but are apt
(...) plunder equally friends and foes.

The Cossaks, who lately made a figure its the military history of Europe, were
originally Polish peasants, and served in the Ukraine (...) militia against the
Tartars. Being oppressed by their unfeeling lord a part of them removed to the
uncultivated banks of the Don, (...) Tanais, and there established a colony.
They were soon after joined in 1637, by two other detachments of their
countrymen; and the reduced Asoph, which they were obliged to abandon to the
Turk^^ after laying it in ashes. They next put themselves under the protection
of the Russians, built Circaska, on an island in the Don; (...) their
possessions, which consisted of thirty-nine towns on both sides that river,
reached from Ribna to Asoph. They there lived in a fruitful country, which they
took care to cultivate; and they were (...) wedded to their original customs,
that they were little better th^^ nominal subjects of the czars, till the time
of Peter the Great. Th^^ professed the Greek religion; their inclinations were
warlike, and they occasionally served against the Tartars and Turks on the
Pal^^^ Maeotis.

The internal government of the Cossacs approaches very near (...) the idea we
form of that of the ancient Germans, as described by Tartars. The captains and
officers of the nation choose a chief, whom they call hauptman, and he resides
at Circaska; but this choice is confirmed by the czar; and the hauptman holds
his authority during life. He acts as superior over the other towns of the
nation, each of which is formed into a separate commonwealth, governed by its
own hetman who is chosen annually. They serve in war, in consideration of th^^
enjoying their laws and liberties. They indeed have several time rebelled, for
which they suffered severely under Peter the Great. (...) the Russian yoke was
so much easier than that of the Poles, that, (...) 1654, the Cossacs of the
Ukraine put themselves likewise under (...) protection of Russia. They
complained, however, that their liberties had been invaded; and in the war
between Charles XII. and Peter their hetman Mazeppa, joined the former; but he
found him (...) unable to fulfill the magnificent promises he had made to
Charles. He brought over, however, some of the Zaparovian Cossacs, who (...)
settled about the falls of the river Nieper, but most of them were (...) in
pieces.

The mien and character of the Tartars of Kasan, and of those deriv^^ from
them, are very uniform, and may serve for the character marks of all the
Mohammedan Tartars in their neighborhood. Very few of them are tall; but they
are generally straight and well-made, have small faces, with fresh complexions,
and a sprightly and agreeable air. They are haughty and jealous of their
honor, but of a very moderate capacity. They are sober and frugal, dexterous
at mechanical trades, and fond of neatness. The Tartarian women are of a
wholesome complexion rather than handsome, and of a good constitution: From
their earliest infancy they are accustomed to labor, retirement, modesty, and
submission. The Tartars of Kasan take great care of the education of their
children. They habituate their youth to labor, to sobriety, and to a strict
observance of the manners of their ancestors. They are taught to read and
write, and are instructed in the Arabic tongue, and the principles of their
religion. Even the smallest village has its chapel, school, priest, and school
master; though some of these priests and schoolmasters are not much skilled in
the Arabic language. The best Tartarian academies in the Russian empire are
those of Kasan, Tobolsk, and Astrachan, which are under the direction of the
Gagouns, or highpriests. It is not uncommon to find small collections of
historical anecdotes in manuscript, in the huts of the boors; and their
merchants, besides what these little libraries contain, are pretty extensively
acquainted with these history of their own people, and that of the circumjacent
states, with the antiquities of each. Such as choose to make a progress in
theology, enter themselves into the schools of Bougharia, which are more
complete than the others.

The Tartar citizens of Kasan, Orenberg, and other governments, carry on
commerce, exercise several trades, and have some manufactories. Their manner of
dealing is chiefly by way of bartar: Coin is very rarely seen among them, and
bills of exchange never. They are not in general very enterprising; but, as
they extend their connexions by partners and clerks, many of them carry on a
great deal of business, which their parsimonious way of life renders very
lucrative. At Kasan they make a trade of preparing what is called in England,
Morocco leather. The villages of these people comprehend from ten to one
hundred farms. These villages were at first composed of troops of wandering
shepherds; but being drawn gradually closer together by successive population,
they found themselves under the necessity of cultivating the earth, and
erecting fixed habitations. They never ^eave their fields fallow; for which
reason they use more manure than the Russians. They are much attached to the
cultivation of bees; many of them are perfect masters of this part of rural
economy, and ^eap great profit from it. Most of the villages also contain
tanners, shoe-makers, tailors, dyers, smiths, and carpenters. The laborious
females spin, and make cloth from the fleece of their flocks, and thread from
hemp of their own cultivation.

The movables of these Tartars are, for the most part, only such as are
necessary to the real wants of life. Their catalogue of kitchen and table
furniture is very short; and they have but few utensils of agriculture and
mechanics. A chest or two, some carpets and pieces of (...), mats made of the
bark of trees, with which they cover broad ^^nches that they use instead of
beds, with a few chairs and tables, are commonly all the furniture to be seen
in their houses; though some (...) the principal people have stuffed cushions
and pillows on their sleeping benches. But chairs and tables are only seen in
towns; and even there, never but in the houses of such as have business with
foreigners. They commonly make four meals a day, at which their bench serves
them for table and chairs; for on this they place themselves round the dishes,
each person sitting on his heels, after the oriental manner. They make
ablutions, and say prayers, at the beginning and end of all their meals. The
Tartars of Kasan, as well as most of the Mohammedan Tartars, are very polite,
both among one another and toward strangers. Old men, who have maintained good
characters, are held in great veneration among them: And a gray beard is
considered as naturally entitling a man to respect. They are fond of asking
advice of their old men, who have always preference and precedence, and are the
arbitrators in all disputes.

The habitations and manner of living of the Tartar citizens and villages of
Astrachan are perfectly similar to those of the Tartars of Kasan. In the city
of Astrachan they have a large magazine for goods, built of bricks, and several
shops upon arches. They carry on an important commerce with the Armenians,
Persians, Indians, and Bougharians: And their manufactories of Morocco leather,
cottons, camelots, and silks, are in a very thriving state.

The Finns are of Asiatic origin, and have a close resemblance to the
Laplanders, only they are more civilized, and better informed. They live in
towns and villages, have schools and academies, and make some progress in the
arts and sciences. They profess the Lutheran faith, and use the christian era
in their chronology. They carry on commerce, and exercise most of the common
trades. The boors are chiefly employed in agriculture, hunting and fishing.
They are great eaters, making five meals a day, and are immoderately fond of
brandy. They enjoy a considerable degree of freedom, as the Russian government
has continued to them the enjoyment of the privileges which they formerly had
under the crown of Sweden.

The Wotjaks, who are a Finnish race, chiefly inhabit the province of Viaitk,
in the government of Kasan. This nation was one of those who were formerly
under the protection of the Tartars; but, since it has been subjected to
Russia, it has preferred the quiet and security which agriculture affords, to
the ambulatory life of herdsmen and shepherds, and fixed habitations to their
ancient tents. The Wotjaks are of a middle stature, and generally red haired;
they are honest, peaceable, and hospitable* but superstitious, and very
credulous. They are assiduous in rural economy, neglecting neither the culture
of bees, not, the chase* in the latter they use indifferently the bow or
firearms. In their leisure hours many of them employ themselves in making all
sorts of turnery, such as cups, spoons and shuttles; and others varnish all
kinds of cups and bowls. The women are employed in sewing, in making linen,
coarse cloths, and ornaments of embroidery. Some of the Wotjaks are Christians,
but a great part of them are heathens and idolaters; though even these believe
the doctrine of a future state of rewards and punishments.

The Ostiaks, who are likewise a Finnish race, are one of the most, numerous
nations of Siberia. Before they were in subjection to Russia, they were
governed by princes of their own nation, and their descendants are still
reputed noble. As these people divide themselves into different stocks or
tribes, they choose their chiefs from among the progeny of their ancient
rulers. These maintain peace and good order, and superintend the payment of the
taxes. They are entirely unacquainted with the use of letters, and are
extremely ignorant; they can reckon as far as ten, but no farther, as is the
case with other Finnish nations. These people have a singular custom, that the
daughter-in-law never uncovers her face in the presence of her father-in-law;
nor is the son-in-law allowed to appear before the mother-in-law till his wife
has had a child. They are most of them idolators; and one of their opinions is,
that bears enjoy after death a happiness at least equal to that which they
except for themselves. Whenever they kill one of these animals, they sing songs
over him, in which they ask his pardon for the injury they have done him. They
also hang up his skin, to which they show many civilities, and pay many fine
compliments, to induce him not to take vengeance on them in the world of
spirits. Indeed, it appears that bears are in great estimation among all the
Pagan nations of the north and north-east.

The Wogolians are rather below the middle stature, have generally black hair,
and a scanty beard. They are of a gay disposition, honest, laborious, and
acute; but slovenly and sickle, and inclined to be extremely passionate. Their
women are well made, robust, civil, and laborious. They are unacquainted with
the use of letters, as well as some of their kindred nations: They do not
reckon their time by years, though they mark the months, and name them after
the various revolutions of nature which they observe in their forests. They
distinguish themselves into tribes or races: And a Wougoul village is commonly
composed only of one family, whose chief or elder performs the functions of
staroste, or magistrate of the village. Their principal occupation is the
chase, in which they discover much eagerness and address; using
indiscriminately firearms, the bow, and the spear. They are also skilful in
contriving traps, snares, and gins, and all the lures of game.

The Tschouwasches dwell along the two sides of the Wolga, in the governments
of Nischnei-Nowogrod, Kasan and Orenberg. They never live in towns, but
assemble in small villages, and choose the forests for their habitations. They
are very fond of hunting, and procure for that purpose screw-barrel muskets,
which they prefer to the bow. One of their marriage ceremonies is, that, on the
wedding night, the bride is obliged to pull off her husband's boots. A late
writer says, "Among the Tschouwasches the husband is master of the house; he
orders every thing himself; and it is the duty of the wife to obey without
reply: A custom calculated to prevent domestic broils. Accordingly quarrels are
very uncommon in the families of the Tschouwasches."

The Kirguisians have a frank and prepossessing air, similar to that which
characterizes the Tartars of Kasan. They have a sharp, but not a fierce look,
and smaller eyes than those Tartars. They have good natural sense, and are
affable, and high-spirited; but fond of their ease, and voluptuous. They dwell
always in portable huts, wandering about their deserts in search of pasturage
for their flocks and herds, which constitute their principal occupation. As
their courses are regulated by necessity, in summer they traverse the northern
deserts, and in winter the southern parts. It is only when they have nothing
else to do that they follow hunting and fishing, and agriculture is absolutely
unknown to them. Their troops of cattle consist of horses, camels, cows, goats,
and sheep, which supply them both with food and ^^^ment. Camels are of great
service to them throughout their whole economy, carrying their huts and
furniture at every change of station, which they do to the weight of nine
hundred pounds. The Kirguisians dress in the eastern manner, but their clothes
are for the most part better than those worn by the other Tartars. The
decoration of their horses employs them almost as much as that of their
persons; they having generally elegant saddles, handsome housings, and
ornamental bridles. They are great eaters; and they also smoke tobacco to
exce^^ Men, women, and children, all smoke, and take snuff: They keep the
latter in little horns fastened to their girdles. The great and wealthy live
perfectly in the same manner as the rest of the people, and are distinguished
only by the numerous train that accompanies them in their cavalcades, and the
quantity of huts which surround their quarters, inhabited by their wives,
children and slaves.

The Tungusians from one of the most numerous nations of Siberia. They are of a
middle stature, well made, and of a good mien. Their sight and hearing are of a
degree of acuteness and delicacy that is almost incredible; but their organs of
smelling and feeling are considerably more blunt than ours. They are acquainted
with almost every tree and stone within the circuit of their usual
perambulations; and they can even describe a course of some hundred miles by
the configurations of the trees and stones they meet with, and can enable
others to take the same route by such descriptions. They also discover the
tracks of the game by the compression of the grass of most. They learn foreign
languages with case, are alert on horseback, good hunters and dexterous at the
bow.

The Kalmucs are a courageous tribe, and numerous; for the most part raw-boned
and stout. Their visage is so flat that the skull of a Kalmuc may easily be
known from others. They have thick lips, a small nose, and a short chin, their
complexion a reddish and yellowish brown. The women are of the same shape and
make with the men, and the skin of their face a wholesome white and red; they
are lively, agreeable, and industrious. The standing character of this tribe
is, rough, but less dissolute and base than they are commonly supposed to be.
They are much attached to their chiefs or masters, but their, active spirit,
and their improvidence and carelessness, make them thievish and dirty. In their
robberies, they use more stratagem than violence, and as they believe in the
nocturnal wandering of dead men's spirits, they are seldom accompanied with
murder. They are superstitious about good and bad days, and have written laws
which are founded on reason, custom, and the will of the prince. Their code is
very favorable to females, and never looks upon a women as the author of any
crime. A rape and adultery is punished with a mulct of nine head of cattle.
Their speech is a mongrel dialect with many. Tartarian words, but their
religious books are in the Tangut or Tibetan. The sole profession among them is
the breeding of cattle; they pursue the chase as an amusement; their dwelling
is in tents, on yourts of felt, which they call gar, and the Russians kibilka,
and much resemble the Kirguisians. Their clothing is oriental, and their heads
are exactly Chinese. Some of their women wear a large golden ring in their
nostrils. Their principal food consists of animals tame and wild, and even
their chiefs will feed upon cattle that have died of distemper or age, and let
it stink ever so much; so that in every hord the flesh market has the
appearance of a laystall of carrion; they eat likewise the roots and plants of
their deserts. They are great eaters, but can endure want for a long time
without complaint. Both sexes smoke continually. During the summer they keep to
the north, and in the winter to the southern deserts. They sleep upon felt or
carpeting, and cover themselves with the same.

The Kamtschadales have a lively imagination, a strong memory, and a great
genius for imitation. Their chief employments are hunting and fishing. The
chase furnishes them with sables, foxes, and other game. They are very expert
in fishing, and are well acquainted with the proper seasons for it. Their nets
are made of the stamina of nettles. When they are not engaged in hunting and
fishing, they sometimes employ themselves in building huts, forming different
wooden utensils, cutting wood for fuel and building, and making bows and
arrows: But much of their time is passed in absolute idleness; for they are
generally extremely indolent. Poverty gives them no concern; and nothing but
the calls of hunger can drive them to the chase. They live in villages,
consisting of a few small houses, and situated in general near some river. When
a village becomes too populous, they separate and form a new village. They eat
and drink great quantities; but as what they eat is always cold, and their
teeth are very fine. Dogs are their only domestic animals, and they put a high
value upon them. Some of them travel in small carriages drawn by dogs; and a
complete Kamtschadalian equipage, dogs, harness, and all, costs in that country
4l* 10, or near twenty rubles. The Kamtschadales believed the immortality of
the soul, before they were prevailed upon to embrace the Christian religion.
They are superstitious to extravagance; and extremely singular and capricious
in the different enjoyments of life, particularly their convivial
entertainments.

The manners of the Siberians were formerly so barbarous, that Peter the Great
thought he could not inflict a greater punishment upon his capital enemies, the
Swedes, than by banishing them to Siberia. The effect was, that the Swedish,
officers and soldiers introduced European usage and manufactures into the
country, and thereby acquired a comfortable living. In this wide and forlorn
region, that was so long unknown to Europe, some new mines have lately been
discovered, which, upon their first opening, have yielded 45.000 pounds of fine
silver, and which is said to have been obtained with little difficulty or
expense. But Kamtschatka is now considered as the most horrid place of exile in
the vast empire of Russia, and here some of the greatest criminals are sent.

RELIGION.] The religion established in the Russian empire is the Greek. The
most essential point in which their profession of faith differs from that of
the Latin church, is the doctrine, that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father
only. The Greek church keeps Lent and other days of fast, which are very
numerous, with the utmost strictness; its liturgy in Russia continues to be
read in the old Sclavonian language; and its from of worship is at least as
much overloaded with rites as the Roman Catholic. Saints are held in veneration
painted images of them, but no statues are suffered in the churches. There is a
sect of dissenters, who call themselves Christians of the old faith, but who
are called apostates by the orthodox church; the differences between them
relate chiefly to ceremonies. The church has been governed since the time of
Peter the Great by a national council, called the Holy Synod, composed of a
president, two vice-presidents, and nine other members. The Russian clergy
consists of three metropolitans, viz. those of Kiew Tobolsk, and the
new-appointed metropolitan of Georgia; of 28 bishops, independent of the
metropolitan and subject only to the authority of the Synod, who preside over
dioceses called Eparchies, and of protopopes, popes, and deacons. Marriage is
forbid to the archbishops and bishops, but is allowed to the inferior clergy.
There are 479 convents for men, and 74 for women, containing about 70,000
persons; the convents of monks are governed by presidents, called
Archimandrites; those of nuns by women, called Igumenias. Above 900,000
peasants belong to the estates in possession of the clergy.

Besides the Greek religion, all other religious professions are tolerated, and
enjoy the free exercise of their worship. Livonia and some other provinces,
which formerly belonged to Sweden, are of the Lutheran religion. The Roman
Catholics in the Polish provinces, in which the order of Jesuits is still
tolerated, are under the government of the Catholic Archbishop of Mohilow. The
Jews are tolerated only in or near the Polish provinces. The Armenians have a
bishop of their own, residing at Astrachan. In the province of Saratow there
are several flourishing settlements of Moravian brethren. (...) the Asiatic
nations belonging to this vast empire, some are Mahomedans, others worship the
Dela^ Lama of Tibet, or the great Kutuch^^ of the Calmucks, and others, as the
Kamskadales and Kurilians (...) a form of Pagan superstition peculiar to
themselves.

LANGUAGE.] The common language of Russia is a mixture of the Polish and
S^lavonian; their priests, however, and the most learned of their clergy, make
use of what is called modern Greek; and (it is said) those who know that
language in its purity, are at no loss for understanding it in its corrupted
state. The Russians have thirty-six letters, the forms of which have a strong
resemblance to the old Greek alphabet.

LEARNING, etc.] Sciences and arts, introduced by Peter the Great, are highly
encouraged by the present empress. There are in Russia three universities, at
Petersburg, Moscow, and Kiew; the latter (...) which is merely a seminary for
the clergy; an academy of sciences, an academy of arts, and an academy of the
Russian language. The present empress is actually employed in founding a number
of school^, for the education of the lower classes of her subjects, throughout
the best inhabited parts of the empire; an institution of the most beneficial
tendency, which, if rightly executed, will entitle the great Catharine, more
than any of her predecessors, to the gratitude of the Russian nation.

GOVERNMENT.] The emperor, or autocrator of Russia, (the ^^^ent empress styles
herself autocratrix) is absolute. He must be of (...) Greek church by the
ancient custom of the empire. The only wri^^ fundamental law existing is that
of Peter the First, by which the right of succession to the throne depends
entirely on the choice of the reigning monarch. Some writers, however, consider
the indivisibility of the empire as a second fundamental law of the monarchy.
The nobility and gentry have no rights and privileges to protect them against
the arbitrary will of the sovereign, who has unlimited power over their lives
and property, as well as over all the rest of his Russian subjects. Yet some of
the conquered provinces, as Livonia and Esthonia, enjoy, by the peace of
Nystadt, some valuable privileges. The Cossacks and some other Asiatic nations
are likewise in a state of less servile subjection.

The management of public affairs is entrusted to several departments. At the
head of all those concerned in the regulation of internal affairs (the synod or
ecclesiastical convocation excepted) is the senate, under the presidency of a
chancellor and vice chancellor. The sovereign himself nominates the members of
this supreme court, which is divided into six chambers, four of which are at
Petersburg, and two at Moscow. The provinces are ruled by governors appointed
by the sovereign; each government, containing on an average 400,000 subjects,
has two courts of justice, one of which is appropriated to civil and the other
to criminal causes. Under the control of the senate are the following
departments: The war department; the board of admiralty; the supreme court of
appeals at Moscow, of which the court of judicature at Petersburg is a branch:
The latter has the control of the civil magistrates in the cities, and of the
court of Relief, established for the benefit of those who have not the means of
suing for redress in the other courts. From all courts of justice there lies an
appeal to the senate. The other departments are: The board of the treasury; the
board of commerce; the board of the mines, including the inspection of the
mint; the board of manufacture; the court of exchequer (or chamber of
finances); the board of revision of all public accounts; the salt-revenue
office; the post office; the medical court; the department of police, and the
chamber of seizures and forfeitures.

FINANCES.] The public revenue in 1765 amounted to only 20 millions. The
present revenue is a very large one, considering the ^ow price of all the
necessaries of life, which are at least four time cheaper than in England: The
revenue commonly exceeds the expense of the government.

This s^un is raised, 1. From a capitation tax, which at present has been
extended to the provinces of Livonia, Esthonia, and Finnland, contrary to the
privileges granted to them by Peter the Great. The produce of this tax in 1768
was seven millions of rubles, but it is ^nce greatly increased. 2. From the
customs, amounting to upwards (...) three million of rubles, and increasing
with the extension of commerce. 3. From the monopoly invested in the crown of
vending all parts of spirituous liquors, which yields likewise upwards of three
million of rubles. 4. From the salt works, which produce one million and a
half. 5. From taxes on lands, on sales of gentlemen's es^^es, fisheries, and
licenses of public houses. 6. From the profits profits of (...) mint. 7. From
the mines.

The public debts are computed to amount to about 40 million (...) rubles.

ARMY.] The army is generally calculated to amount to from (...) to 450,000
men; according to Busching the amounted in 177^, (...) above 600,000.

Regular and Irregular, 1783.
Regular cavalry 56,^^^ Irregular cavalry 48,^^^ Regiments of infantry 160,^^^
Garrisons 8^,^^^ Militia cavalry 26,^^^ Artillery of the camp (...) -- of the
garrisons (...) Train (...) (...)

The army in 1784 amounted to 368,901, viz.
Guards ^^^ Cavalry 59,^ Infantry 149,^^ Artillery 29,^^^ Garrisons 87,^^^
Cossacs, etc. ^^^^ Total 368,^^^

NAVY.] Sixty three armed ships, of which 24 are of the (...) 20,000 sailors.
It has been related, that (in 1785) there were 48 (...) of the line at
Cronstadt, and 12 ships of the line in the Black Sea (...) other accounts the
strength of the Russian navy is much less considerable.

The chief harbors are, 1. Cronstadt, not far from Petersburg, (...) the gulf
of Finnland, where there is a fine dock-yard. 2. Reval, (...) the province of
Livonia, on the Baltic Sea. 3. Archangel, on (...) White Sea. 4. Cherson, on
the Black Sea, in the province of Ekatarinoslow. The admiralty consists of one
high-admiral, three admi^^^ three vice-admirals, and four country admirals.

The whole army was, in the year 1784* divided into nine di^^^ divisions and
three corpse, the Caucasian that of Orenburg and of (...) beria. All the war
affairs are under the war department of Petersburg, where there is also founded
an academy for cadets and for ^^^^ry. Tulo, the capital of the province of the
same name, is famous (...) great manufacture of muskets. The expenses of the
whole (...) amount only to about two millions of rubles.

CITIES, TOWNS, PALACES, AND OTHER BUIEDINGS.} Petersburg naturally takes the
(...) in this division. It lies at the ^^^^tion of the Neva with the lake
Ladoga, already mentioned, (...) latitude 59 57. and E. long. 31; but the
reader may have a (...) idea of its situation, by being informed that it stands
on both (...) river Neva, between that lake and the bottom of the Finland
(...). In the year 1703, this city consisted of a few small fishing huts, (...)
spot so marshy, that the ground was formed into nine island which, according to
Voltaire, its principal quarters are still divided. Without entering into too
minute a description of this city, it is sufficient to say, that it extends
about six miles every way, and contains every structure for magnificence, the
improvement of the arts, revenue, navigation, war and commerce, that are to be
found in the most celebrated cities in Europe. There is but one bridge over the
Neva, which joins the Dock yard to Basil's island -- It is constructed with
flat bottomed boats, which in the spring are laid across the river, and removed
in autumn before the frost begins. There is a convent which deserves particular
notice, in which 440 young ladies are educated at the empress's expense; 200 of
them of superior rank, and the others, daughters of citizens and tradesmen,
who, after a certain time allotted to their education, quit the convent with
improvements suitable to their conditions of life, and those of the lower class
are presented with a sum of money as a dowry if they marry, or to procure ot
themselves a proper livelihood. Near to this convent is a Foundling Hospital,
assistant to the noble established at Moscow, and where the mother may come to
be delivered privately, and then after the utmost attention to her, she leaves
the child to the state, as a parent more capable of promoting its welfare.

As Petersburg is the emporium of Russia, the number of foreign ships trading
to it in the summer time is surprising. In winter, 3000 one-horse sledges are
employed for passengers in the streets. It is supposed, that there are 170,000
inhabitants in this city; and it is ornamented with thirty-five great churches;
for in it almost every sect of the Christian religion is tolerated. It also
contains five palaces, some of which are superb, particularly that which is
called the New Summer Palace, near the Triumphal Port, which is an elegant
piece of architecture. This magnificent city is defended on that side next the
sea by the fortress of Cronstadt; which, considering the difficulty and danger
of navigating a large naval force through the gulf of Finland, is sufficient to
guard it on that side from the attempts of any enemy. Petersburg is the capital
of the province of Ingria, one of Peter the Great's conquests from the Swedes.
All the neighborhood of this city is covered with country houses and gardens.

The city of Moscow, formerly the capital of this great empire, stands on a
pleasant plain, in N. lat. 55 40 E. long. 38 1414 miles N. E. of London. The
river Moskwa running through it in a winding course, and several eminences,
interspersed with gardens, groves and lawns, form most delightful prospects. It
seems rather to be a cultivated country than a city. The ancient magnificence
of this city would be incredible, were it not attested by the most
unquestionable authors: But we are to make great allowances for the
uncultivated state of the adjacent provinces, which might have made it appear
with a great luster in the eyes of a traveller. Busching speaks of it as the
largest city in Europe; but that can be only meant as to the ground it stands
on, computed to be 16 miles in circumference. It is generally agreed, that
Moscow contains 1600 churches, among which are 11 Cathedrals, and 271 parish
churches. Around the exchange, according to Busching, are about 6000 fine
shops, which display a vast parade of commerce, especially to and from China.
No city displays a greater contrast than Moscow, of magnificence and meanness
in building. The houses of the inhabitants in general are miserable timber
booths; but their palaces, churches, convents, and other public edifices, are
spacious and lofty. The grand imperial palace, is mentioned as one of the most
superb structures in the world. It stands in the Kremelin, one of the interior
circles of the city, and contains the old imperial palace, pleasure-house, and
stables, a victualling-house, the palace which formerly belonged to the
patriarch^^ nine cathedrals, five convents, four parish churches, the arsenal
with the public colleges, and other offices. All the churches in the Kremelin
have beautiful spires, most of them gilt, or covered with silver: The
architecture is in the Gothic taste; but the insides of the churches are richly
ornamented; and the pictures of the saints (...) decorated with gold, silver,
and precious stones. Mention is made of the cathedral, which has no fewer than
nine towers, covered with copper double gilt, and contains a silver branch with
forty-eight lights, said to weigh 2800 pounds. A volume would scarcely suf^^^
to recount the other particulars of the magnificence of this city. I^^
sumptuous monuments of the great dukes and czars, the magazine, the patriarchal
palace, the exchequer, and chancery, and noble structures. The public is not
unacquainted with the barbarous anecdote, that the czar John Basilides, ordered
the architect of the church of Jerusalem to be deprived of his eyesight, that
he might never contrive its equal. The story is improbable, and might take its
rise from the arbitrary disposition of that great prince. I shall have occasion
hereafter to montion the great bell of Moscow. The inhabitants are so
distractedly fond of bells, that they are always tinkling in every quarter. The
jewels and ornaments of an image of the Virgin Mary, in the Kremelin church,
and its other furniture, can be only equalled by what (...) seen at the famous
Holy House of Loretto in Italy. Voltaire says, that Peter, who was attentive to
every thing, did not neglect Moscow at the time he was building Petersburg; for
he caused it to be paved, adorned it with noble edifices, and enriched it with
manufactures.

The founding Hospital at Moscow is an excellent institution, and appears to be
under very judicious regulations. It was founded by the present empress, and is
supported by voluntary contributions, legacies and other charitable endowments.
It is an immense pile of building, of a quadrangular shape, and contains 3000
foundlings: When the establishment is completed, it is intended to contain
8000. They are taken great care of; and at the age of fourteen, they have the
liberty of choosing any particular branch of trade; and for this purpose there
are different species of manufactures established in the hospital. When they
have gone through a certain apprenticeship, or about the age of twenty, they
are allowed the liberty of setting up for themselves: A sum of money is
bestowed upon each foundling for that purpose, and they are permitted to carry
(...) trade in any part of the Russian empire. This is a very considerable
privilege in Russia, where the peasants are slaves, and cannot leave their
villages with out the permission of their masters.

Nothing can be said with certainty as to the population of Moscow. When lord
Carlisle was the English ambassador there, in the reign of Charles II. this
city was 12 miles in compass, and the number (...) houses was comprised at
40,000. Voltaire says, that when he wr^^^ Moscow was twenty miles in
circumference, and that its inhabitants amounted to 5000,000: Later and more
authentic accounts say, that the number of inhabitants in Moscow is about
150,000; consisting of noble families, merchants, priests, monks, mechanics,
laborers, carriers, fledge-drivers and servants, belonging to the church.

CURIOSITIES.] This article affords no great entertainment, as Russia has but
lately been admitted into the rank of civilized nations. She can, however,
produce many stupenduous monuments of the public spirit of her sovereign;
particularly the canals made by Peter the Great, for the benefit of commerce.
Siberia is full of old sepulchers of an unknown nation, whose instruments and
arms were all made of copper. In the cabinet of natural history at Petersburg,
is a rhinoceros dug up on the banks of the river Valui, with his skin, and hair
upon it perfect. I have already hinted at the passion the Russians have for
bell-ringing; and we are told that the great bell of Moscow, the largest in the
world, weighs 443,772 pounds. It is 19 feet high, and 23 in diameter; and was
cast in the reign of the empress Anne; but the beam on which it hung, being
burnt, it fell, and a large piece is broken out of it; so that it lately lay in
a manner useless. Mr Bruce, in his late Memoirs, mentions a bell at Moscow,
founded in Czar Boris's time, 19 feet high, 23 in diametre, 64 in
circumference, and two in thickness, that weighed 336,000 pounds, The building
of Petersburg, and raising it of a sudden from a few fishing-huts to be a
populous and rich city, is perhaps a curiosity hardly to be paralleled since
the erection of the Egyptian pyramids. The same may be said of the fortress of
Cronstadt, in the neighborhood of Petersburg, which is almost impregnable.
This fortress and city employed, for some years, 300,000 men, in laying its
foundations, and driving piles, night and day; a work which no monarch in
Europe (Peter excepted) could have executed. The whole plan, with a very little
assistance from some German engineers, was drawn by his own hand. Equally
wonderful was the navy which he raised to his people, at the time when they
could hardly be said to have possessed a ship in any part of the globe. What is
more wonderful than all, he often wrought in person in all these amazing works,
with the same assiduity as if he had been a common labourer.

GENERAL REMARKS.] Russia is indebted for its present flourishing state to the
efforts of two great monarchs, succeeding each other at no great distance of
time. Had the intermediate sovereigns between Peter the Great and Catharine the
Second, who filled up the interval of 37 years, been capable of following the
steps of the first of these monarchs, who found, about 90 years ago, his native
country uncivilized and desolate, this rising empire would have been much
farther advanced in wealth and prosperity. The present condition of this
country requires, that the increase of its population should be the principal
object of the attention of government. It is the obvious policy of Russia to
avoid wars, to encourage marriages, and to promote agriculture, manufactures,
and commerce. Though its provinces are of an enormous extent, though its army
is the largest in Europe, the Russian empire is not yet become formidable to
the other great European powers. Its vast dominions, peopled in the more remote
parts by numerous, fierce, and restless barbarians, contain as many domestic
enemies, who, in a great measure, engage the attention and occupy the power of
the state. The neighboring Persian and Turkish dominions, easily provoked to
hostilities, require large bodies of troops to guard the frontiers, which
cannot be withdrawn without endangering the safety of the whole empire.

The present Empress of Russia, notwithstanding the very unfavourable
circumstances which attended her taking possession of the government of that
empire, has, since the commencement of her reign, filled her high station with
distinguished reputation and ability. She has encouraged learning and the arts,
and endeavored greatly to extend the commerce of her subjects: Though the
extreme despotism of the Russian government is a great impediment to the
progress of the arts and sciences, and to the real prosperity of this empire.
Her imperial majesty has, however, effected many beneficial and important
regulations in the interior police of her vast empire, and particularly in the
courts of justice. One of these is, the abolition of the use of torture; and
she has also adopted an excellent plan for the reformation of prisons. The new
code of laws, for which she has given her instructions, is yet wanting to give
political felicity to an oppressed people. But one of the most remarkable
transactions of her reign, is her establishment of an armed neutrality, for the
protection of the commerce of nations not at war, from any attacks or insults
from belligerent powers. By the code of maritime law, which her imperial
majesty has endeavored to enforce, neutral ships are to enjoy a free
navigation, even from port to port, and on the coasts of belligerent powers;
and all effects belonging to the subjects of belligerent powers are looked upon
to be as free, on board such neutral ships, excepting only such goods as are
expressly stipulated contraband in her treaty of commerce with Great Britain.
It was in 1780 that her imperial majesty invited the powers not at war to
accede to this armed neutrality. Those who engaged in it were to make a common
cause of it at sea, against any of the belligerent powers who should violate,
with respect to neutral nations, these principles of maritime law. The armed
neutrality was acceded to, the same year, by the kings of Sweden and Denmark,
and by the States General.

Catherine II. Empress of all the Russias, princess of Anhalt Zerbst, was born
in 1729, and ascended the throne in 1762, upon the deposition and death of her
husband. She was married to that prince whilst duke of Holstein Gottorp, in
1745, by whom she had issue Paul Petrowitz, great duke of Russia, born in 1754,
who has been twice married, and by his present duchess, the princess of
Wirte^^berg, has had two sons, Alexander and Constantine, and a daughter
Alexandrina Pawlcona.

THE BRITISH EMPIRE.
TABLE
GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND Areas in Square Miles. Population. Population for
each single Sq. Mile. 92,294 Kitchen According to some Authors only 9,000,000
104,701 Guthrie, or Templeman To others 11,800,000 115 100,^28 St. Ueb.
Probably 11,000,000 109 A. GREAT BRITAIN. Extent and Divisions. Areas in Sq.
Miles. Population. Population for every square Mile Long.2east, 6 20^ W.
Kitchen 70,096 9,300,000 but more probably 8,300,000 105 ^at, 49 -- 58 50^ --
^he Shetland Islands to above 61. St. U. 79,712 ENGLAND and WALES 54,112
8,000,000 5,500,000 Dr. Price 8,477,200 Chalmer 7,000,000 the most probable
statement 129 In England are 28 Cities, above 650 Towns, and 1,586,000
Dwellings. CHAIMER. SCOTLAND 25,600 1,300,000 51 1,500,000 according to others
B. IRELAND. 21,216 2,500,000 2,161,514 B. 117

ENGLAND is divided into the following 40 Counties or Shires.

CHIEF TOWNS.
Houses 1. Middlesex London 800,000 inhab. 900,000 accord. to Entick. 130,000
and is constantly increasing. 2. Surrey Southwark 1,000,000 Busching 750,000
Wendeborn 862,500 medium. 3. Essex Colchester, Harwich 4. Hertfordshire
Hertford 5. Kent Canterbury, Dover 6. Sussex Chichester, Winchelsea 7.
Buckinghamshire Buckingham 8. Bedfordshire Bedford 9. Huntingdonshire
Huntingdon 10. Cambridgeshire Cambridge, 6000 Ely 11. Suffolk Ipswich, Bury,
Newmarket 12. Norfolk Norwich, Yarmouth 13. Oxfordshire Oxford 14. Berkshire
Reading, Windsor 15. Gloucestershire Gloucester 16. Worcestershire Worcester,
25,000 17. Monmouthshire Monmouth 18. Herefordshire Hereford 19. Shropshire
Shrewsbury 20. Staffordshire Stafford, Lichfield, 21. Warwickshire Warwick,
Coventry 25,000, Birmingham 50,000 22. Leicestershire Leicester 23. Derbyshire
Derby 24. Nottinghamshire Nottingham, 17,000 25. Lincolnshire Lincoln 26.
Rutlandshire Okeham 27. Northamptonshire Northampton 28. Somersetshire Bath,
Bristol, 90,000 29. Wiltshire Salisbury 30. Hampshire Winchester, Portsmouth,
Southampton. 31. Dorsetshire Dorchester 32. Devonshire Exeter, Plymouth 33.
Cornwall Launceston 34. Yorkshire York, Hull, Halifax, Leeds 35. Cheshire
Chester, 14,000 36. Durham Durham 37. Lancashire Lancaster, Manchester 28,000,
Liverpool 40,000 38. Westmoreland Appleby 39. Northumberland Newcastle, 40,000
40. Cumberland Carlisle, Whitehaven

WALES contains 7011 square miles, and about 300,000 people. (...) is divided
into 12 counties: Pembrokeshire, Carmarthenshire, Gl^morganshire,
Brecknockshire, Cardiganshire, Radnorshire, Montgomeryshire, Merionethshire,
Flintshire, Denbighshire, Carnarvonshire, Anglesea.

SCOTLAND is divided into 31 shires and two stewardships; (...) counties
belonging to South Scotland, 15 to North Scotland. Their names are the
following: 1. Midlothian (or Edinburg) 2. West Lothian. 3. East Lothian. 4.
Merse or Berwick. 5. Roxborough. 6. Selkirk. 7. Peebles. 8. Dumfries. 9.
Galloway. 10. Air. 11. Lanerk. 12. Dumbarton. 13. Renfrew. 14. Stirling. 15.
Cla^mannan. 16. Fife. 17. Kinross. 18. Bute. 19. Argyle. 20. Pert^^ 21. Forfar.
22. Kinkardin. 23. Aberdeen. 24. Bamff. 25. Nair^^. 26. Elgin. 27. Inverness.
28. Cromarti^. 29. Ross. 30. Sutherland. 31. Caithness, and the two stewarties:
32. Kirbudbright, and 33. Orkney and Shetland Islands. The chief towns are
Edinburg, 81,865 inhabitants, Glasgow 30,000, Perth 11,000, Aberdeen 18,000,
Inverness 11,000, Dumfries 5000.

IRELAND is divided into four provinces, those of Leinster, Ulster, Connought,
and Munster. Leinster contains the following 12 counties: 1. Dublin. 2. Louth.
3. Wicklow. 4. Wexford. 5. Longford. 6. East Mead. 7. West Mead. 8. King's
County. 9. Queen's County. 10. Kilkenny. 11. Kildare. 12. Carlow. Ulster
contains nine counties: 13. Down. 14. Armagh. 15. Monaghan. 16. Cavan. 17.
Antrim. 18. Londonderry. 19. Tyrone. 20. Fermanagh. 21. Donegall. -- T^
Connaught belong 5 counties: 22. Leitrim. 23. Roscommon. 24. Mayo. 25. Sligo.
26. Galway. -- Munster contains 6 counties: 27. Clare. 28. Cork. 29. Kerry.
30. Limerick. 32. Tipperary. 32. Waterford. The chief towns of this kingdom are
the following: Dublin, the capital of Ireland, contains about 160,000
inhabitants, (See Kutner's Letters) Cork 87,000, Limerick 32,000, Waterford
and Gallway.

British Possessions beyond the Seas.

1. In EUROPE the fortress of Gibraltar, on the coast of Spain, 3,200
inhabitants.

2. In AFRICA, Cabo Corse, on the coast of Guinea, and some other forts there
and near the Gambia, and the island of St. Helena.

3. In ASIA the extensive countries of Bengal, Bahar, and part of Orixa: The
capital of Bengal is Calcutta, or Fort William, the residence of the
governor-general of the English East India settlements. These territories are
computed to contain 10,000,000 inhabitants, and to be in extent near 150,000
square miles. 2. Large settlements on the coast of Coromandel, of which Madras
is the capital, containing 80,000 inhabitants. 3. The settlements of Bombay and
Surat, on the Malabar coast, and many other forts and factories on the
continent of India, and the Islands of Sumatra, Bally, Banca.

4. In AMERICA the extensive provinces of Canada, 1. Nova Scotia; settlements
in Labrador and Hudson's Bay, the islands of Newfoundland, Cape-Breton, and St.
John. 2. In the West Indies, the Bahama islands, Bermudas, Jamaica, Barbados,
St. Christopher's, Antigua, Montserat, Nevis, Grenada, and the Grenadines,
Barbuda, Dominica, St. Vincent, Anguilla. These appendages to the British
Empire, we shall describe more particularly in their proper places, and shall
proceed to consider separately the three grand divisions of the British Empire,
ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND.

ENGLAND.
EXTENT AND SITUATION.
Length 380 Miles. between Degrees. 50 and 56 North latitude. Breadth 300
Miles. Degrees. 2 East and 6-20 West longitude.

CLIMATE AND BOUNDARIES.] THE longest day in the northern parts, contains 17
hours 30 minutes; and the shortest in the southern, near 8 hours. It is bounded
on the north, by that part of the island called Scotland; on the east, by the
German Ocean; on the west, by St. George's Channel; and on the south, by the
English Channel, which parts it from France.

The insular situation of England, renders it liable to a great unc^^tainty of
weather, so that the inhabitants on part of the sea coasts are often visited by
agues and fevers. On the other hand, it prevents the extremes of heat and cold,
to which other places, lying in the same degree of latitude, are subject; and
it is, on that account, friendly (...) the longevity of the inhabitants in
general, especially those who live on a dry soil. To this situation likewise is
to be ascribed that perpetual verdure for which England is remarkable,
occasioned by refreshing showers and the warm vapors of the sea.

NAME AND DIVISIONS ANCIENT AND MODERN.] Antiquaries are divided with regard to
the etymology of the word England; some derive it from a Celtic word,
signifying a level country; others, and with more probability, from Anglen, a
province now subject to his Danish majesty, which furnished a great part of the
original Saxon adventurers into this island. In the time of the Romans, the
whole island went by the name of Britannia. The word Brit, according to Mr.
Camden, signified painted or stained; the ancient inhabitants being famous for
painting their bodies: Other antiquaries, however, do not agree in this
etymology. The western tract of England, which is almost separated from the
rest by the rivers Severn and Dee, is called Wales; or the land of strangers,
because inhabited by the Belgis Gauls, who were driven thither by the Romans,
and were stranger, to the old natives.

The Romans divided England into,

1. Britannia Prima, which contained the southern parts of the kingdom.

2. Britannia Secunda, containing the western parts, comprehending Wales; and,

3. Maxima Caesariensis, which reached from the Trent as far northward as the
wall of Severus, between Newcastle and Carlisle, and sometimes as far as that
of Adrian in Scotland, between the Forth and Clyde.

To these divisions some add the Flavia Caesariensis, which they suppose to
contain the midland counties.

When the Saxons invaded England about the year 450, and when they were
established in the year 582, their chief leaders appropriated to themselves,
after the manner of the other northern conquerors, the countries which each had
been the most instrumental in conquering; and the whole formed a heptarchy, or
political republic, consisting of seven kingdoms. But in time of war, a chief
was chosen out of the seven kings; for which reason it has been called a
political republic, its constitution greatly resembling that of ancient Greece.

Kingdoms erected by the Saxons, usually styled the Saxon Heptarchy.

Kingdoms. Counties. 1. Kent founded by Hengist in 475, and ended in 823. Kent.
2. South Saxons, founded by Ella in 491, and ended in 600. Sussex Surry 3. East
Angles, founded by Uffa in 575, and ended in 793. Norfolk Suffolk Cambridge
With the Isle of Ely 4. West Saxons, founded by Cerdie in 512, and ended in
1060. Cornwall Devon. Dorset Somerset Wilts Hants Berks 5. Northumberland,
founded by Ida in 574, and ended in 792. Lancaster York Durham Cumberland
Westmoreland Northumberland, and Scotland to the Frith of Edinburgh 6.
East Saxons, founded by Erchewin in 527, and ended in 746. Essex Middlesex, and
part of Hertford 7. Mercia, founded by Cridda in 582, and ended in 874. The
other part of Hertford Gloucester Hereford Worcester Warwick Leicester Rutland
Northampton Lincoln Huntingdon Bedford Buckingham* Oxford Stafford Derby Salop
Nottingham Chester.

We preserve these divisions, as they account for different local customs, and
many very essential modes of inheritance, which to this day prevail in England,
and which took their rise from different institutions under the Saxons. Since
the Norman invasion, England has been divided into counties, a certain number
of which, excepting Middlesex and Cheshire, are comprehended in six circuits,
or annual progress of the judges, for administering justice to the subjects who
are at a distance from the capital. These circuits are: 1. Home circuit. 2.
Norfolk circuit. 3. Oxford circuit. 4. Middland circuit. 5. Western circuit. 6.
Northern circuit.

Middlesex is not comprehended; and Cheshire is left out of these circuits,
because, being a county palatine, it enjoys municipal laws and privileges. The
same may be said of Wales, which is divided into four circuits. The circuits of
Wales are: 1. North-East circuit. 2. North-West circuit. 3. South-East circuit.
4. South-West circuit.

IN ENGLAND.
40 Counties, which send up to parliament 80 knights. 25 Cities (Ely none,
London four.) 50 citizens. 167 Boroughs, two each 334 burgesses. 5 Boroughs
(Abingdon, Banbury, Bewdley, Higham-Ferrars, and ^onmouth,(one each) 5
burgesses. 2 Universities. 4 representatives. 8 Cinque ports Hastings, Dover,
Sandwich, Romney, Hythe, and their three dependents, Rye, Winchelsea, and
Seaford,) two each. 16 barons.

WALES
12 Counties 12 knights. 12 Boroughs (Pembroke two, Merioneth none) one each 12
burgesses.

SCOTLAND.
33 Shires 30 knights. 67 Cities and Boroughs 15 burgesses. Total 558

Besides the 52 counties into which England and Wales are divided, there are
counties corporate, consisting of certain districts, to which the liberties and
jurisdictions peculiar to a county have been granted by royal charter. Thus the
city of London is a county distinct from Middlesex; the cities of York,
Chester, Bristol, Norwich, Worcester, and the towns of Kingston upon Hull, and
Newcastle upon Tyne, and counties of themselves, distinct from those in which
they lie. The same may be said of Berwick upon Tweed, which lies in Scotland,
and has within its jurisdiction a small territory of two miles on the
north-side of the river.

Under the name of a town, boroughs and cities are contained; for every borough
or city is a town, though every town is not a borough or city. A borough is so
called, because it sends up burgesses to parliament; and this makes the
difference between a village or town, and a borough. Some boroughs are
corporate, and some not corporate; and though decayed, as Old Sarum, they still
send burgesses to parliament. A city is a corporate borough, that has had, or
at present has, a bishop, for if the bishopric be dissolved, yet the city
remains. To have suburbs proves it to be a city. Some cities are also counties,
as before mentioned.

SOIL, AIR, SEASONS, AND WATER.] The soil of England and Wales differs in each
county, not so much from the nature of the ground, though that must be admitted
to occasion a very considerable alteration, as from the progress which the
inhabitants of each country have made in the cultivation of lands and gardens,
the draining of marshes, and many other local improvements, which are here
carried to a much greater degree of perfection than they are perhaps in any
other part of the world if we except China. If no unkindly seasons happen,
England produces corn, not only sufficient to maintain her own inhabitants, but
to bring large sums of ready money for her exports. No nation exceeds England
in the productions of the garden, which have come to such perfection, that the
rarest of foreign fruits have been cultivated here with success. If any farther
proof of this should be required, let it be remembered, that London and its
neighborhood, though peopled by about 1,000,000 inhabitants, is plentifully
supplied with all kinds of fruits and vegetables from grounds within 12 miles
distance.

The soil of England seems to be particularly adapted for rearing timber; and
the plantations of trees round the houses of noblemen and gentlemen, and even
of peasants, are delightful and astonishing.

The air in many places is loaded with vapors wafted from the Atlantic Ocean
by westerly winds; but they are ventilated by winds and storms, so that in this
respect England is to foreigners, and people of delicate constitutions, more
disagreeable than unhealthy. It cannot, however, be denied, that in England the
weather is so excessively capricious, and unfavourable to certain
constitutions, that many of the inhabitants are induced to fly to foreign
countries for health.

The spring begins sometimes in February, and sometimes in April. In May the
face of the country is often covered with hoary frost instead of blossoms. The
beginning of June is sometimes as cold as in the middle of December, yet at
other times the thermometer rises in that month as high as it does in Italy.
Even August has its vicissitudes of heat and cold, and upon an average
September, and next to it October, are the two most agreeable months in the
year. The natives sometimes experience all the four seasons within the compass
of one day, cold, temperate, hot and mild weather. The inconstancy of the
seasons, however, is not attended with the effects that might be naturally
apprehended. A fortnight, or at most three weeks, generally make up the
difference with regard to the maturity of the fruits of the earth: And it is
hardly ever observed that the inhabitants suffer by a hot summer. Even the
greatest irregularity and the most unfavourable appearances of the seasons, are
not, as in other countries, attended with famine, and very seldom with scarcity.

The champain parts of England are generally supplied with excellent springs
and fountains of water; though a discerning palate may perceive, that they
frequently contain some mineral impregnation. The constitutions of the English,
and the diseases to which they are liable, have rendered them extremely
inquisitive after salubrious waters, for the recovery and preservation of their
health; so that England contains as many mineral wells, of known efficacy, as
perhaps any country in the world. The most celebrated are the hot baths of Bath
and Bristol in Somersetshire, and of Buxton and Matlock in Derbyshire; the
mineral waters of Tunbridge, Epsom, Harrowgate, and Scarborough.

FACE OF THE COUNTRY AND MOUNTAINS.] The industry of the English has in a good
degree supplied the absence of those favors which nature has so lavishly
bestowed upon some foreign climates. The cultivated parts of England abound in
the most beautiful scenes. Barren spots are not without their verdure; but
nothing can give us a higher idea of the English industry, than observing that
some of the pleasantest counties in the kingdom are naturally the most barren,
but rendered fruitful by labor. Perhaps it may be safely affirmed, that no
country in Europe surpasses England in the beauty of its prospects, or the
opulence of its inhabitants.

Though England is full of delightful hills and rising grounds, yet (...)
contains few mountains. The most noted are the peak in Derbyshire, and the
Endle in Lancashire. Wales, and the northern parts may be called mountainous.

RIVERS AND LAKES.] The rivers in England add greatly to (...) beauty, as well
as its opulence. The Thames* a noble river, rises on the confines of
Gloucestershire, a little S. W. of Cirencester, and (...) receiving the many
tributary streams of other rivers, it passes to O^ford, then by Abingdon,
Wolingford, Reading, Marlow, and Windfor. From thence to Kingston, where
formerly it met the tide, which since the building of Westminster bridge, is
said to flow no high^^ than Richmond; thence it flows to London, and after
dividing the counties of Kent and Essex, it widens in its progress, till it
falls into the sea at the Nore, whence it is navigable for large ships to
London bridge: For many ages, there were but two bridges over the Thames, those
of London and Kingston. The great increase of riches, commerce, and inland
trade, is however now multiplying them, and (...) commodiousness, architecture,
and workmanship, those lately erected at Westminster and Black Friars, are
equalled perhaps by none in the world.

The river Medway, which rises near Tunbridge, falls into the Thames at
Sheerness, and is navigable for the largest ships as far as Chatham. The
Severn, reckoned the second river for importance (...) England, and the first
for rapidity, rises at Plinlimmon-hill in North Wales* becomes navigable at
Welch-Pool; and discharges itself (...) the Bristol channel, near King-road;
and there lie the great (...) which cannot get up to Bristol. The Trent rises
in the Moorlands (...) Staffordshire, and running south-east by
Newcastle-under-line, divi^^ that county into two parts; and being joined by
the Ouse, and seve^^ other rivers toward the mouth, obtains the name of the
Humber, falling into the sea south-east of Hull.

The other principal rivers in England, are the Ouse (a Gaelic (...) signifying
water in general) which falls into the Humber, after receiving the water of
many other rivers. Another Ouse rises in (...) and falls into the sea near Lynn
in Norfolk. The Tine runs (...) west to east through Northumberland, and falls
into the German (...) at Tinmouth, below Newcastle. The Tees runs from west to
east, ^^^viding Durham from Yorkshire, and falls into the German sea (...)
Stockton. The Tweed runs from west to east on the borders of S^^^land* and
falls into the German sea at Berwick. The Eden runs (...) south to north
through Westmoreland and Cumberland, and pass^^^ by Carlisle, falls into Solway
Frith below that city. The Lower (...) runs west through Wiltshire to Bath, and
then dividing Somerset^^^^ from Gloucestershire, runs to Bristol, falling into
the mouth of (...) Severn below that city. The Derwent, which runs from east to
(...) through Cumberland, and passing by Cockermouth, falls into the (...) sea
a little below. The Ribble, which runs from east to west (...) Lancashire, and
passing by Preston, discharges itself into the Irish (...). The Mersey, which
runs from the south-east to the north-west (...) Cheshire, and then dividing
Cheshire from Lancashire, passes by (...) pool, and falls into the Irish sea a
little below that town; and the (...) rises in Wales, and divides Flintshire
from Cheshire, falling (...) (...) Irish channel below Chester.

The lakes of England are few; though it is plain from history and antiquity,
and indeed, in some places from the face of the country, that meres and fens
have been frequent in England, till drained and converted into arable land. The
chief lakes remaining, are Soham mere, Wittlesea mere, and Ramsay more, in the
isle of Ely, in Cambridgeshire. All these meres in a rainy season are
overflowed, and form a lake of 40 or 50 miles in circumference. Winander mere
lies in Westmoreland, and some small lakes in Lancashire go by the name of
Derwent waters.

FORESTS.] The first Norman kings of England, partly for political purposes,
that they might the more effectually enslave their new subjects, and partly
from the wantonness of power, converted immense tracts of grounds into forests
for the benefit of hunting, and these were governed by laws peculiar to
themselves: So that it was necessary, about the time of passing the Magna
Charta, to form a code of the forest laws; and justices in Air* so called from
their fitting in the open air, were appointed to see them observed. By degrees
those vast tracts were disforested; and the chief forests, properly so called,
remaining out of no fewer than 69, are those of Windsor, New Forest, the Forest
of Dean, and Sherwood Forest.

METALS AND MINERALS.] Among the minerals, the tin mines of Cornwall deservedly
take the lead. They were known to the Greeks and Phoenicians, the latter
especially, some ages before that of the Christian Era; and since the English
have found the method of manufacturing their tin into plates, and white iron,
they are of immense benefit to the nation. An ore called Mundic is found in the
beds of tin, which was very little regarded till about 70 years ago; Sir
Gilbert Clark, discovered the art of manufacturing it, and it is said now to
bring in 150,000l. a year, and to equal in goodness the best Spanish copper,
yielding a proportionable quantity of lapis calaminaris for making brass. Those
tin-works are under peculiar regulations, by what are called the stannary laws;
and the miners have parliaments and privileges of their own, which are in force
at this time. The number of Cornish miners are said to amount to 100,000. Some
mines of copper have lately been discovered in Wales, which are of considerable
extent, yield great profit, and have much reduced the price of that metal. Some
gold has likewise been discovered in Cornwall, and the English lead is
impregnated with silver. The English coined silver is particularly known by
roses, and that of Wales by that prince's cap of feathers. Devonshire, and
other counties of England, produce marble; but the best kind, which resembles
Egyptian granite, is excessively hard to work. Quarries of freestone are found
in many places. In Northumberland and Cheshire are alum and salt pits. The
English fullers earth is of such consequence to the clothing trade, that its
exportation is prohibited under severe penalties. Pit and sea coal is found in
many counties of England; but the city of London, to encourage the nursery of
seamen, is chiefly supplied from the pits of Northumberland, and the bishopric
of Durham. The cargoes are shipped at Newcastle and Sunderland, and the
exportation of coals to other countries is a valuable article. -- See article
Wealth and Commerce.

VEGETABLE AND ANIMAL PRO^^CTIONS BY SEA AND LAND.} Nothing can be laid with ^y
certainty concerning the quantities of wheat, barley, rye, peace, beans,
vetches, oats, and other grain growing in this kingdom. Excellent institutions
for the improvement of agriculture are now common in England, and their members
are (...) public-spirited as to print periodical accounts of their discoveries
and experiments, which serve to show that agriculture and gardening may be
carried to a much higher state of perfection than they are in at present. Honey
and saffron are natives of England. The cider of Devon and Herefordshire, when
kept, and made of proper appl^^^^ and in a particular manner, is often
preserved by judicious palates, (...) French white wine. The English have made
the different fruits of the world their own, sometimes by simple culture, but
often by (...) beds, and other means of forcing nature. The English pine-apples
(...) delicious and now plentiful. The same may be said of other natives of the
East and West Indies, Persia, and Turkey.

Woad for dying is cultivated in Bucks and Bedfordshire, as (...) and flax are
in other counties. In nothing, however, have the English been more successful
than in the cultivation of clover, cinque^^^^ trefoil, saintfoin, lucern, and
other meliorating grasses for the soil.

With regard to ANIMAL PRODUCTIONS, we shall begin with the quadrupeds. The
English oxen are large and fat, but some prefer for the table the smaller breed
of the Scotch and the Welsh cattle, after grazing in English pastures. The
English horses are among the best in the world, whether we regard their spirit,
strength, swiftness, or docility* Incredible have been the pains taken, by all
ranks, for improving the breed of this favorite and noble animal, and the
success has been answerable: for they now unite all the qualities and beauties
of Indian. Persian, Arabian, Spanish, and other foreign horses. The
irresistible spirit and weight of the English cavalry, render them superior to
all others in war: And an English hunter will perform incredible things in a
fox or stag-chace. Those which draw equipages on the streets of London, are
often particularly beautiful. The exportation of horses has of late become a
considerable article of commerce. The breed of asses and mules begins likewise
to be improved and encouraged in England.

The English sheep are of two kinds; those that are valuable for their fleece,
and those that are proper for the table. The former and very large, and their
fleeces constitute original staple commodity of England. The large fat sheep
are very rank eating. It is thought that in England, twelve millions of fleeces
are shorn annually, which, at a medium of as* a fleece, makes 1,200,000l.

The English mastiffs and bull-dogs are said to be the strongest and fiercest
of the canine species in the world.

With regard to reptiles, such as adders, vipers, snakes, and worms; and
insects* such as ants, gnats, wasps, and sties, England is pretty much upon a
par with the rest of Europe.

POPULATION, INHABITANTS, MANNERS, CUSTOMS, AND DIVERSONS.} For the population
of England the reader is referred at the Table.

Englishmen, in their persons are generally well sized, regula^^ featured,
commonly fair rather than otherwise, and florid in the (...) complexions. It
is, however, to be prefumed, that the vast number of foreigners that are
intermingled and intermarried with the nati^^^^ have given a cast to their
persons and complexions different from the (...) of their ancestors 150 years
ago. The women, in their shapes, (...) ^^^^ures, and complexion, appear
graceful and lovely. But beside their external graces, they are still more to
be valued for their thorough cleanliness, and all the engaging duties of
domestic life.

The English are remarkable for their cleanliness. Their nerves are very
delicate, and people of both sexes are sometimes even mortally affected by
imagination. This over-sensibility has been considered as one of the sources of
those singularities, which so strongly characterize the English nation. They
sometimes magnify the slightest appearances into realities, and bring the most
distant dangers immediately home ^o themselves; and yet when real danger
approaches, no people face it with greater resolution, or constancy of mind. A
groundless paragraph in a news-paper, has been known to affect the stocks, and
consequently public credit, to a considerable degree; and their credulity goes
so far, that England may be termed the paradise of quacks and empiries, in all
arts and professions. In short, many of the English feel, as if it really
existed, every evil in mind, body, and estate, which they form in their
imagination. At particular intervals, they are sensible of this absurdity, and
run into a contrary extreme, striving to banish it by dissipation, riot,
intemperance, and diversions. They are fond, for the same reason, of clubs and
convivial associations; and when these are kept within the bounds of temperance
and moderation, they prove the best cures for those mental evils, which are so
peculiar to the English, that foreigners have pronounced them to be national.

The same observations hold with regard to the higher orders of life, which
have undergone a remarkable change since the accession of the House of Hanover,
especially of late years. The English nobility and gentry of great fortunes,
now assimilate their manners to those of foreigners, with whom they cultivate a
more frequent intercourse than did their forefathers. They do not now travel
only as pupils, to bring home the vices of the countries they visit, under the
tuition perhaps of a despicable pedant, or family dependant; but they travel
for the purposes of society, and at the more advanced ages of life, while their
judgments are mature, and their passions regulated. This has enlarged society
in England, which foreigners now visit as commonly as Englishmen visited them,
and the effects of the intercourse become daily more visible, especially as it
is not now, as formerly, confined to one sex.

Such of the English noblemen and gentlemen, as do not strike into those high
walks of life, affect rather what we call a snug, than a splendid way of
living. They study and understand convenience in their houses, gardens,
equipages, and estates, and they spare no cost to purchase it. It has, however,
been observed, that this turn renders them less communicative than they ought
to be: But, on the other hand, the few connexions they form, are sincere,
cheerful, and indissoluble. The like habits descend pretty far into the lower
ranks, and are often discernible among tradesmen. This love of snugness and
convenience may be called the ruling passion of the English people, and is the
ultimate end of all their great application, and severe labors and fatigues. A
good oeconomist, with a brisk run of trade, is generally, when turned of 50, in
a condition to retire from business; that is either to purchase as estate, or
to settle his money in the funds. He then commonly resides in a comfortable
house in the country, often his native country, and expects to be treated on
the footing of a gentleman; but his style of living is judiciously suited to
his circumstances.

Wendeborn in his view of England observes that "There are in no country such
large contributions raised for the support of the poor, a^ in England; yet
there is no where so great a number of them; and their condition, in comparison
with the poor of other countries, appears truly the most miserable: They never
seem to be apprehensive* or to think of making any provision for a time of
want. In Germany and other northern countries of Europe, the poor keep always
in mind, that it is cold in winter, and that no harvest or fruits can be reaped
from the earth, while it is covered with snow. On this account, they consider
in time the warmer clothing they will then require, and lay up such a store of
provisions as their circumstances allow, in order to prepare themselves in the
best manner possible, for the inclemency of that season. But in England, it
seems as if the poor and necessitous never looked forward, or would not trouble
themselves to think of what may happen to them in future. They neither foresee
the winter's cold, nor the scarcity of that season; and, therefore, when it
arrives* are the most forlorn beings imaginable. The lower class of people have
no disposition to be frugal or provident: When trade becomes dull, and
employment scanty, they who maintained themselves by their labor, must either
beg, or obtain support for themselves and their families, from the parish. The
watermen of the Thames, whose gains are very sufficient for their livelihood,
when the river is frozen or covered with shoals of ice, are often seen dragging
a boat or little ship through the streets of London, and begging alms of the
public. In those counties and towns where manufactures are carried on, there
is, for this very reason, the greatest number of poor; for as soon as any
particular branch of them is on the decline, the workmen* who were employed in
it, are threatened with want, and in danger of starving. The number of the poor
in such counties, raises the poor-rates very high, and consequently makes both
land and houses less eligible to purchase; for according to the value or rent
of houses, the poor rates are levied; so that the tenant of a middling house of
about forty pounds yearly rent, in a county where four shillings in the pound
are demanded for the support of the poor, much pay a yearly tax of eight pounds
for poor-rates.

In Germany, there is a great difference, as to value, between the dresses of
the different ranks of people: But in England, this distinction bolds in a much
smaller degree. The clothing manufactured for the poor and common people, is in
small proportion to their number; and few or none of them like to wear it. Even
in country places, it is but little used; and in London or the great towns, it
is seldom or never to be seen. All do their best to wear fine clothes; and
those who cannot purchases them new, buy the old at second-hand, that they may
at least have the appearance of finery. Servants in general, (...) nearly as
well as their masters and mistresses; and when servant (...) or maids marry,
they frequently begin the married state with a life (...) more expense, or
rather profusion, than their circumstances will (...) and continue the same,
until children and want force them to apply (...) (...) and their parish. The
English thieves and rogues usually (...) "we can be but hanged at last." In
like manner, servants and others, who, by their extravagance and mismanagement,
bring poverty upon themselves, feel as little contrition, and say, "the parish
must maintain us." Such instances, however, of worthlessness and depravity,
render the wealthy and industrious not very willing to contribute to the
support of the poor: And the poor themselves generally thank neither God nor
man, for the charity that feeds them.

The number of those who are born poor, and of those who from misfortune or
misconduct become so in time, is very great. The first are brought up by
charities; the latter are maintained, and at last buried out of the same fund.
No person, therefore, need wonder that the taxes which are yearly collected
under act of parliament for the support of the poor, should, in England alone,
amount to three millions sterling; Sir John Sinclair, in his history of the
public revenue of the British empire, page 115, speaking of the poor-rate, says
it is (...) ^rievous burden, which this supposed, amounts, at (...).
a sum which must appear altogether extraordinary, when it is considered, that
the revenues of many kingdoms do hardly, by half, amount to so much. At the
same time it ought to be remembered that the extremely necessitous poor only,
are supported by it; that the streets of London, notwithstanding all this, are
crowded with beggars; that the poor blind, led by dogs, beg charity, and that
this is equally the case, in proportion, in the country.

It is supposed, that a million of poor people are maintained at the public
expense; but I should think there were a great many more: Their number
increases every year. From a very accurate calculation, made in the year 1680,
it appears, that the annual sum, requisite to provide for the poor, amounted to
665,392 pounds sterling. In the year 1764, it had risen to upwards of 1,200,000
pounds; and, in the 1773, it exceeded, as beforementioned, three millions; but
even this sum was not sufficient for the purpose.

People who live on the continent, when they see a traveller who speaks either
good or broken English, generally suppose him to be a Briton, whose pockets are
lined plentifully with money. They bow to him, and make him pay, if an
opportunity offers, accordingly. But I can assure my countrymen, if what I have
said before has not already altered their opinion, that there are numbers of
British-born subjects, such as the inhabitants of some of the western islands,
who are unacquainted with any coin; nay, others, who, perhaps, during their
whole lives, never tasted a morsel of bread. An old man from one of the
Orkneys, arrived on the northern coast of Scotland, and tasting there some
bread, which he found, according to his palate, very delicious, cried out, "Oh!
how luxuriously the people live here!" Is there any one, even of the poorest,
in Germany, of whom the same could be said, as of this old man, who, in all
probability, had gone through life as happily as many London epicures, and
grown old, without those distempers that attend luxury. He, according to his
way of living, hardly stood a chance of becoming a beggar; and even as such, he
could not be very burdensome to his community.

I am almost of opinion with doctor Franklin, that this enormous sum, collected
annually for the poor in England, increases their number as well as their
wretchedness, and that, perhaps, it might be for the benefit of the nation, if
poor-rates were entirely abolished, and the distribution of charities left to
every man's own discretion."

The English are dupes in several respects. They attend to projectors, and no
scheme is so ridiculous that will not find abettors in England. They listen to
the voice of misfortunes in trade, whether real or pretended, deserved or
accidental, and generously contribute to the relief of the parties, sometimes
even by placing them in a more creditable condition than ever; but they often
make an oftentatious display of their own merits, which diminishes their value.
There is among the generality of the English of all ranks, an unpardonable
preference given to wealth, above most other considerations. Riches, both in
public and private, are often thought to compensate for the absence of almost
every good quality. This offensive failing, arises partly from the people being
so much accustomed to trade and commerce, the great object of which is gain;
and partly from the democratical part of their constitution, which makes the
possession of property a qualification for the legislature, and for almost
every other species of magistracy, government, honors, and distinctions.

Men of learning, and genius, while living, often meet not with suitable regard
even from the Patrons of literature: And it is not unusual for them to throw
aside the best productions, if they are not acquainted with the author. We
scarcely have an instance, even in the munificent reign of Queen Anne, or of
her predecessors, who owed so much to the press, of a man of genius as such,
being made easy in his circumstances. Mr. Addison had about 300l. a year of the
public money to assist him in his travels, and Mr. Pope, though a Roman
catholic, was offered, but did not accept of, the like pension from Mr. Craggs,
the whig secretary of state; and it was remarked, that history friend and
companion the earl of Oxford, when sole minister, did nothing for him, but
bewail his misfortune in being a papist.

The unevenness of the English in their conversation is very remarkable:
Sometimes it is delicate, sprightly, and replete with true wit; sometimes it is
solid, ingenious, and argumentative; sometimes it is cold and phlegmatic, and
borders upon disgust, and all in the same person. They possess a great share of
courage, and make the best of soldiers. The English are not remarkable for
invention, though they are for their improvements upon the inventions of
others, and in the mechanical arts they excel perhaps all nations in the world.
The intense application which an Englishman gives to a favorite study is
incredible.

All that has been said concerning the English, is to be understood of them in
general, as they are at present; for it is not to be dissembled, that every day
produces strong evidence of great alterations in their manners. The great
fortunes made during the late and the preceding wars, the immense acquisitions
of territory by the peace of 1763, and above all, the amazing increase of
territorial as well as commercial property in the East Indies, introduced a
species of people among the English, who have become rich without industry, and
by diminishing the value of gold and silver, have created a new system of
finances in the nation. The plain, frugal manners of men of business, which
prevailed so lately as the accession of the present family to the crown, are
now disregarded for tasteless extravagance in dress and equipage, and the most
expensive amusements and diversions, not only in the capital, but all over the
trading towns of the kingdom.

Even the customs of the English have, since the beginning of this century,
undergone an almost total alteration. Their ancient hospitality subsists but in
few places in the country, or is revived only upon electioneering occasions.
Many of their favorite diversions are now disused. Those remainining, are
operas, dramatic exhibitions, ridottos, and sometimes masquerades in or near
London; but concerts of music, and card and dancing assemblies, are common all
over the kingdom. The barbarous diversions of boxing and prize-fighting, though
prohibited, are as frequent in England, as the shows of gladiators were in
Rome. The game acts have taken from the common people a great fund of
diversion, though without answering the purposes of the rich: For the farmers
and country people destroy the game in their nests, which they dare not kill
with the gun.

The people of England love rather to be neat than fine in their apparel. Few
even of the lowest tradesmen, on Sundays, carry about them less than 10l. in
clothing, and even many beggars in the stre^^^ appear decent in their dress. In
short, none but the most abandoned of both sexes are otherwise; and the
appearance of an artisan or manufacturer on holidays, is commonly an indication
of his industry.

RELIGION.] The established religion in that part of Great Britain called
England, is the episcopal church of England, a particular branch of
protestantism, which in its liturgy, and still more in its government, differs
from the continental protestant churches. It has preserved much more of the
ancient hierarchy of the Roman Catholic church, together with its dignities and
jurisdiction. The king is the head of the church, but he has no spiritual
powers; he has the right of calling together and dissolving the convocation, or
ecclesiastical parliament, by which the church was formerly governed, but which
has, for many years past, not been allowed to meet. England is divided into two
ecclesiastical provinces, that of Canterbury and York: The archbishop of
Canterbury, who is primate of England, has 21 bishoprics belonging to his
province; and three bishoprics are under the archbishop of York. All these
prelates are lords of parliament, in which they represent the clergy; they have
their seats in the House of Lords. There is, besides, the bishop of Sodor and
Man, belonging to the province of York, who has no seat in the House of Peers.
The other dignitaries of the church are the deans and prebendaries of the
chapters, archdeacons, and rural deans; the inferior clergy consist of priests
and deacons, who, according to the church benefices they occupy, are called
rectors, vicars, and curates of parishes.

The revenues of the church of England are large; the present value of the sees
and livings is supposed to amount to 3,000,000l. sterling. This income arises
chiefly from the tithes, the value of which increases with the improvements of
lands.

All other denominations of Christians, called Dissenters and Jews, are very
liberally tolerated. There are many other Protestant sects in England, among
whom the Unitarians, Baptists, Quakers, and Methodists, are the most
conspicuous. The number of Roman Catholics in England is estimated at 60,000;
they have about 350 priests; some peers of the kingdom, and several other
ancient and opulent families belong to that communion, whose exercise of
religion is under gentle ^^^strictions; their number is said to be decreasing.
There are about 60 (...) Quakers and 12,000 Jewish families. The numerous
French and Gentleman inhabitants in London form several Lutheran and
Calvinisti^^ parishes.

LEARNING.] With respect to the state of knowledge and scien^^ England is
entitled to an eminent rank among the first nations of Europe. It must,
however, be owned, that its superiority with resp^^ to sciences was more
conspicuous in the beginning of the present ^^^tury than now; though it has,
upon the whole, not gone backwa^^^ in the sciences, it has not been able,
amidst the great exertions of ^^^er countries, to leave them behind at the same
distance. England (...) but two universities, or rather collections of
universities, at Oxford and Cambridge, in which the wealth and splendour of the
foundation^ is deserving of admiration, and is a proof of the estimation in
which learning has always been held in this country. It cannot be deni^^^ (...)
(...) universities, though gradually much reformed, preserve still too much of
the spirit of the age of Alfred, and that they have (...) long ago, the lead in
science and national literature, which is at p^^^ent transferred to the
metropolis. Schools are very numerous (...) England: Besides some colleges of
ancient foundation, there are (...) private schools and academies. As
government does not in the least concern itself in the education of youth, any
person, however qualified, is at liberty to open a school, a liberty which does
often a great deal of mischief. The lower classes of people are much neglected
(...) their education, and much more so in England than in Scotland. (...) this
source of corruption we must trace the frequency of cri^^^^ equally injurious
to the prosperity and glory of this great nation; (...) evil which is
constantly increasing, and which the horrors of Newgate and Botany Bay will not
be able to counteract. The zeal of ^^^ny well-meaning persons, in establishing
charitable institutions of education, called Sunday schools, is very laudable;
and it is to be hoped these and other charity schools will be improved into
permanent and effectual remedies of the evil beforementioned.

London has, besides the Royal Society of Sciences, an Antiq^^^^ Society* a
Society for promoting Arts and Manufactures, an Academy of Painting and
Sculpture, a grand collection of natural curiositi^^^ books, and MSS. called
the British Museum. Oxford and Cambridge possess large libraries; of which the
Bodleian library, at Oxford, it the most celebrated. England abounds with
magnificent seats of noblemen and gentlemen, adorned with excellent collections
of (...) pieces of painting, and surrounded by parks and gardens, which both by
nature and art, form some of the most beautiful pieces of ^^^enery in Europe. [
For the names of the most distinguished liter^^^ character, which England has
produced, the reader is reserved to the (...) of (...) men at the close of this
work.]

UNIVERSITIES.] We have already mentioned the two universities of Oxford and
Cambridge, which have been the seminaries of (...) numbers of learned men for
many ages, and rank amongst the hig^ ^^est literary institutions in Europe. It
is certain that their mag^^^gent buildings, which in splendor and architecture
rival the (...) superb royal edifices, the rich endowments, the liberal ease
and (...) quality enjoyed by those who inhabit them, surpass all the ideas
which foreigners, who visit them, conceive of literary societies. So
respectable are they in their foundations, that each university sends two
members to the British parliament, and their chancellors and officers have ever
a civil jurisdiction over their students, the better to secure their
independency. Their colleges, in their revenues and buildings, exceed those of
many other universities. In Oxford there are twenty colleges and five halls:
The former are very liberally endowed, but in the latter the students chiefly
maintain themselves. The university is of great antiquity: It is supposed to
have been a considerable place even in the time of the Romans; and Camden says
that "wise antiquity did, even in the British age, consecrate this place to the
Muses." It is said to have been styled an university before the time of king
Alfred; and the best historians admit, that this most excellent prince was only
a restorer of learning here. Alfred built three colleges at Oxford; one for
divinity, another for philosophy, and a third for grammar.

The number of officers, fellows, and scholars, maintained at present by the
revenues of this university, is about 1000* and the number of such scholars as
live at their own charge is usually about 2000; the whole amounting to 3000
persons, besides a great number of inferior officers and servants, belonging to
the several colleges and halls. Here are four terms every year for public
exercises, lectures, and disputations, and set days and hours when the
professors of every faculty read their lectures; and in some of the colleges
are public lectures, to which all persons are admitted.

There are libraries belonging to the several colleges, but besides these,
there are two other public libraries, the university library, and the Radcliffe
library. The university library is usually called the Bodleian library, from
Sir Thomas Bodley, its principal founder. It is a large lofty structure, in the
form of a Roman H, and is considered as one of the finest libraries in Europe,
from the number and value of its books. The original library has been
prodigiously increased, by many large and valuable collections of Greek and
Oriental manuscripts, as well as other choice and curious books. The Radcliffe
library is a sumptuous pile of building; and was built at the sole expense of
that eminent physician, Dr. John Radcliffe, who bequeathed forty thousand
pounds for this purpose. The theater at Oxford is also a very magnificent
structure, which was erected by Sir Christopher Wren, at the expense of
Archbishop Sheldon. In this edifice are held the public acts of the university;
and when the theater is properly filled, the vice chancellor being seated in
the center of the semi-circular part, the noblemen and doctors on his right and
left hand, the proctors and curators in their robes, the masters of arts,
bachelors, and under-graduates, in their respective habits and places, together
with strangers of both sexes, it makes a most august appearance.

The whole number of fellows in the university of Cambridge are four hundred;
and six hundred and sixty-six scholars, with about two hundred and thirty-six
officers and servants of various kinds who are maintained upon the foundation.
These, however, are not all the students of the university; there are also two
sorts of students called pensioners, the greater and the less; the greater
pensioners are sons of the nobility, and of gentlemen of large fortunes, and
are called fellow-commoners, because, though they are scholars, they dine with
(...) fellows; the lesser pensioners dine with the scholars that are on the
foundation, but live at their own expense. There are also a considerably number
of poor scholars, called sizars, who wait upon the fellows (...) scholars, and
the pensioners of both ranks, by whom they are in a (...) degree maintained:
But the number of pensioners and sizars cannot (...) ascertained, as it is in a
state of perpetual fluctuation.

The senate house at Cambridge is a most elegant edifice, executed entirely in
the Corinthian order, and is said to have cost sixteen thousand pounds. Trinity
college library is also a very magnificent structure and in Corpus Christi
college library is a valuable collection of (...) manuscripts, which were
preserved at the dissolution of the monasheri^^^ and given to this college by
archbishop Parker.

ANTIQUITIES AND CURIOSITIES NATURAL AND ARTIFICIAL.} The antiquities of
England (...) either British, Roman, Saxon, ^^^nish, and Anglo-Normanic; but
these, excepting the Roman, (...) no great light upon ancient history. The
chief British antiquities (...) those circles of stones, particularly that
called Stonehenge, in Wilt^^ing which probably were places of worship in the
times of the Drui^^ Stonehenge is, described as a regular circular structure.
The body (...) the work consists of two circles and two ovals, which are thus
co^^sed: The upright stones are placed at three feet and a half dist^^^ from
each other, and joined at the top by over-thwart stones, with ^^^^ons fitted to
the mortises in the uprights, for keeping them in their (...) position. Some of
these stones are vastly large, measuring two (...) in breadth, one in
thickness, and above seven in height; others are (...) in proportion. The
uprights are wrought a little with the chisel, (...) sometimes tapered; but the
transomes, or over-thwart stones, are (...) plain. The outside circle is near
one hundred and eighty feet in diameter; between which and the next circle
there is a walk of (...) hundred feet in circumference, which has a surprising
and awful (...) upon the beholders.

Monuments of the same kind are to be met with in Cumberland, ^^^fordshire,
Cornwall, and other parts of England, as well as Scotland, (...) the isles.

The Roman antiquities in England, consist chiefly of alters and ^^^umental
inscriptions, which instruct us as to the legionary stations (...) the Romans
in Britain, and the names of some of their command^^. The Roman military ways
give us the highest idea of the civil as (...) as military policy of those
conquerors. Their vestiges are numer^^ (...). The remains of many Roman camps
are discernible all over England (...) one particularly very little defaced,
near Dorchester in Dorsetsh^^^ where also is a Roman amphitheatre. The private
cabinets of (...) men and gentlemen, as well as the public repositories,
contain (...) number of Roman arms, coins, fibulae, trinkets, and the like,
which have been found in England; but the most amazing monument of (...) Roman
power in England, is the praetenture, or wall of Severus, ^^^monly called the
Picts wall, running through Northumberland and Cumberland; beginning at
Tinmouth, and ending at Solway Frith, (...) about eighty miles in length. The
wall at first consisted only of (...) and turf, with a ditch; but Severus built
it with stone forts, and ^^^^ets at proper distances, so that each might have a
speedy commu^^tion with the other, and it was attended all along by a deep
ditch, or vallum, to the north, and a military highway to the south. This
prodigious work, however, was better calculated to strike the Scots and Picts
with terror, than to give any real security to the Roman possessions. In some
places, the wall, the vallum, and the road, are plainly discernible* and the
latter serves as a foundation for a modern work of the (...) kind carried on at
the public expense.

The Saxon antiquities in England consist chiefly in ecclesiastical edifices,
and places of strength. The cathedral of Winchester served as the burying-place
of several Saxon kings, whose bones were collected together by bishop Fox, in
six large wooden chests. The British Mu^^^ contains several striking original
specimens of their learning. Many Saxon characters, signed by the king and his
nobles, with a plain cross instead of their names, are still to be met with.
The writing is ne^t and legible, and was always performed by a clergyman, who
affixed the name and quality of every donor, or witness, to his respective
cross.

All England is full of Anglo-Normanic monuments so called because, though the
princes under whom they were raised were of Norman origin, yet the expense was
defrayed by Englishmen, with English money. Yorkminister and Westminister hall
and abbey, are perhaps the finest specimens to be found in Europe, of that
Gothic manner which prevailed in building, before the recovery of the Greek and
Roman architecture. All the cathedrals, and old churches in the kingdom, are
more or less in the same taste, if we except St. Paul's.

The natural curiosities of England are so various, that we can touch upon them
only in general; as there is no end of describing the several medicinal waters
and springs which are to be found in every part of the country. They have been
analyzed with great accuracy and care by several learned naturalists, who, as
their interests or inclinations led them, have not been sparing in recommending
their salubrious qualities. The most remarkable of these wells have been
divided into those for bathing and those for purging. The chief of the former
lie in Somersetshire: and the Bath waters are famous through all the world both
for drinking and bathing. Spaws of the same kind are found at Scarborough, and
other parts of Yorkshire; at Tunbridge in Kent; Epsom and Dulwich in Surry, and
at Action and Islington in Middlesex. There also are many remarkable springs,
whereof some are impregnated either with salt, as that at Droitwich in
Worcestershire; or sulphur, as the famous well of Wigan in Lancashire; or
hituminous matter, as that at Pitchford in Shropshire. Others have a petrifying
quality, as that near Lutterworth in Leicestershire; and a dropping well in the
west riding of Yorkshire. And finally, some ebb and flow, as those of the Peak
in Derbyshire, and Laywell near Torbay, whose waters rise and fall several
times in an hour. To these we may add that remarkable fountain near Richard's
castle in Herefordshire, commonly called Bonewell, which is generally full of
small bones, like those of frogs or fish, though often cleared out. At Ancliff,
near Wigan in Lancashire, is the famous burning well; the water is cold,
neither has it any smell; yet there is so strong a vapor of sulphur issuing
out with the stream, that upon applying a light to it, the top of the water is
covered with a flame, like that of burning spirits, which lasts several hours,
and emits so fierce a heat that meat may be boiled over it. The (...) itself
will not burn when taken out of the well. This extraordinary heat has been
found to proceed from a vein of coals, which (...) since dug from under this
well; at which time the uncommon warmth ceased.


Derbyshire is celebrated for many natural curiosities. The (...) Tor, or
Mother Tower, is said to be continually mouldering away (...) never diminishes.
The Elden Hole, about four miles from the (...) place: This is a chasm in the
side of a mountain, near seven yards (...) and fourteen long, diminishing in
extent within the rock, ^ut of (...) depth is not known. A plummet once drew
884 yards of line (...) whereof the last 80 were wet, without finding a bottom.
The entran^^ Poole's hole near Buxton, for several paces, is very low, but soon
(...) into a very lofty vault, like the inside of a Gothic cathedral. The (...)
is certainly very great, yet much short of what some have asserted, (...)
reckon it a quarter of a mile perpendicular, though in length it (...) that
dimension; a current of water, which runs along the middle, (...) by its
sounding stream, re-echoed on all sides, very much to the ^^^ishment of all who
visit this vast concave. The drops of water (...) l^^ng from the roof, and on
the sides have an amusing effect; for (...) not only reflect numberless rays
from the candles carried by the gui^^ but, as they are of a petrifying quality,
they harden in several pla^^^ to various forms, which, with the help of a
strong imagination, (...) pass for lions, fonts, organs, and the like. The
entrance into that ^^^ural wonder at Castleton, which is from its hideousness
named the ^^il's Arse, is wide at first, and upwards of thirty feet
perpendicular. ^^eral cottagers dwell under it, who seem in a great measure to
subsist (...) guiding strangers into the cavern* which is crossed by four
strea^^ water, and then is thought impassable. The vault, in several (...)
makes a noble appearance, and is particularly beautiful by being ^^uered with
various colored stones.

Some spots of England are said to have a petrifying quality. We (...) told,
that near Whitby in Yorkshire are found certain stones, res^^^ling the folds
and wreaths of a serpent; also other stones of ^^^fia^s, and so exactly round,
as if artificially made for cannon (...) which being broken, do commonly
contain the form and likeness (...) serpents, wreathed in circles, but
generally without heads. In (...) parts of Gloucestershire, stones are found,
resembling cockles, oys^^^ and other testac^ous marine animals. Those
curiosities, however, (...) often magnified by ignorance and credulity.

CITIES, TOWNS, FORTS, AND OTHER EDIFICIES, PUBLIC AND PRIVATE.} This head is
so very extensive, that we can only (...) upon objects that may assist in
giving the reader some idea of its importance, grandeur, or utility.

London* London is situated in 51 31 north latitude, 400 miles south of
Edinburgh, (...) south-east of Dublin; 180 miles west of Amsterdam, 210
north-west of Paris, 500 (...) of Copenhagen, 600 north-west of Vienna, 790
south-west of Stockholm, 800 north-(...) Madrid, 820 north-west of Rome, 850
north-east of Lisbon, 1360 north-west of C^^^ople, and 14^4 south-west of
Moscow.
the metropolis of the British empire, naturally takes (...) lead in this
division. It appears to have been founded between (...) reigns of Julius Caesar
and Nero, but by whom is uncertain; for (...) are told by Tacitus, that it was
a place of great trade in Nero's (...) and soon after became the capital of the
island. It was first walled about with hewn stones, and British bricks, by
Constantine the Great, and the walls formed an oblong square, in compass about
three miles, with seven principal gates. The same emperor made it a bishop's
see; for it appears that the bishops of London and York, and another English
bishop were at the council of Arles, in the year 3^4: He also settled a mint in
it, as is plain from some of his coins.

London in its large sense, including Westminister, Southwark, and part of
Middlesex, is a city of a very surprising extent, of prodigious wealth, and of
the most extensive trade. This city, when considered with all its advantages,
is now what ancient Rome once was; the seat of liberty, the encourager of arts,
and the admiration of the whole world. London is the center of trade; it has an
intimate connection with all the counties in the kingdom; it is the grand mart
of the nation, to which all parts send their commodities, from whence they are
again sent back into every town in the nation, and to every part of the world.
From hence innumerable carriages by land and water are constantly employed; and
from hence arises that circulation in the national body, which renders every
part healthful, vigorous, and in a prosperous condition; a circulation that is
equally beneficial to the head, and the most distant members. Merchants are
here as rich as noblemen; witness their incredible loans to government; and
there is no place in the world where the shops of tradesmen make such a noble
and elegant appearance, or are better stocked.

It is situated on the banks of the Thames, a river, which though not the
largest, is the richest and most commodious for commerce in the world. It being
continually filled with fleets, sailing to or from the most distant climates;
and its banks extend from London Bridge to Blackwall, almost one continued
great magazine of naval stores, containing three large wet docks, 32 dry docks,
and 33 yards for the building of ships, for the use of the merchants, besides
the places allotted for the building of boats and lighters; and the king's
yards lower down the river for the building of men of war. As this city is
about sixty miles distant from the sea, it enjoys by means of this beautiful
river, all the benefits of navigation, without the danger of being surprised by
foreign fleets, or of being annoyed by the moist vapors of the sea. It rises
regularly from the waterside, and extending itself on both sides along its
banks, reaches a prodigious length from east to west in a kind of amphitheatre
toward the north, and is continued for near 20 miles on all sides, in a
succession of magnificent villas, and populous villages, the country seats of
gentlemen and tradesmen; whither the latter retire for the benefit of fresh
air, and to relax their minds from the hurry of business. The regard paid by
the legislature to the property of the subject, has hitherto prevented any
bounds being fixed for its extension.

The irregular form of this city makes it difficult to ascertain its extent.
However, its length from east to west, is generally allowed to be above seven
miles from Hydepark corner to Poplar, and its breadth in some places three, in
others two; and in others again not much above half a mile. Hence the
circumference of the whole is almost 18 miles; or according to a modern
measurement, the extent of continued buildings, is 35 miles two furlongs and 39
roods. But it is much easier to form an idea of the large extent of a city so
irregularly built, by (...) number of the people, who are computed to be near 4
million; and from the number of edifices devoted to the service of religion.

Of these, besides St. Paul's cathedral, and the collegiate church (...)
Westminister, here are 102 parish churches, and 69 chapels of the established
religion; (...) French protestant chapels; 11 chapels belonging to the Germans,
Dutch, Dan^^, etc. 26 independent meetings, 34 pre^^^terian meetings; 10
baptist meetings; 19 Roman Catholic chap^^^ and meeting houses for the use of
foreign ambassadors, and people (...) various sects; and 3 Jews synagogues. So
that there are 305 plac^^^ devoted to religious worship, in the compass of this
vast pile of buildings, without reckoning the (...) out-parishes usually
included in (...) bills of mortality, and a great number of methodist
tabernacles.

There are also in and near this city 100 alms houses, about 20 hospitals and
infirmaries, 3 colleges, 10 public prisons, 15 flesh markets; (...) market for
live cattle, 2 other markets more particularly for her^^^ and 23 other markets
for corn, coals, hay, etc. 15 inns of court, of public squares, besides those
within single buildings as the Temple, (...) 3 bridges, 49 halls for companies,
8 public schools, called free schools and 131 charity-schools which provide
education for 5034 poor children; 207 inns, 447 taverns, 661 coffee houses,
5975 alehouses; (...) hackney-coaches; 400 ditto chairs; 7000 streets, lanes,
courts, and alleys, and 150,000 dwelling-houses, containing, as has been
already observed, about 1,000,000 inhabitants, who, according to a late ^^mate,
consume annually the following articles of provisions. "The population of
London has been greatly over-rated, and i^ not yet exactly (...) mined; but it
is probable that the residents in London, Westminster, Southwark and all (...)
out parishes, fall sha^^ of 600,000 souls."

Airkin's "England D^^i^ated." Published in 17^^.




Black Cattle 98,244 Sheep and Lambs 711,1^^ Calves 194,76^ Swine 186,932 Pigs
52,000 Poultry, and wild fowl innumerable Mackarel sold at Billingsgate
14,740,000 Oysters, bushels 115,536 Small boats with cod, haddock, whiting,
etc. over and above those brought by land-carriage, and great quantities of
river and salt-fish 1,39^ Butter, pounds weight, about 16,000,000 Cheese,
ditto. about 20,000,000 Gallons of milk 7,000,000 Barrels of strong beer
1,172,494 Barrels of small beer 798,495 Tons of foreign wines 30,044 Gallons of
rum, brandy, and other distilled waters, above 11,000,000 Pounds weight of
candles, above 11,000,000

London Bridge consists of 20 arches, and is 900 feet long, 60 (...) and 74
feet broad. London Bridge was first built of timber, about the year 994, by a
College of Priests -- It was repaired or new-built (...) 1^63. The stone bridge
was begun by king Henry, in 1^76, (...) finished by king John, in 1209. The
architect was Peter of Colechurch, a priest.

Westminster-bridge is reckoned one of the most complete and elegant structures
of the kind in the known world. It is built entirely of stone, and extended
over the river at a place where it is 1,223 feet broad; which is above 300 feet
broader than at London bridge. On each side is a fine ballustrade of stone with
places of shelter from the rain. The width of the bridge is 44 feet, having on
each side a fine foot-way for passengers. It consists of 14 piers, and 13
large, and two small arches, all semi-circular, that in the center being 76
feet wide, and the rest decreasing four feet each from the other; so that the
two least arches of the 13 great ones, are each 52 feet. It is computed that
the value of 40,000l. in stone, and other materials, is always under water.
This magnificent structure was begun in 173^, and finished in 1750, at the
expense of 389,000l. defrayed by the Parliament.

Black-friars-bridge, situated near the center of the city, built according to
a plan of Mr. Robert Mylne, is a light elegant structure. It has but 9 arches,
which are very large, and of an eliptical form. The center arch is 100 feet
wide -- the others decrease in regular gradation. It has an open ballustrade at
the top, and a foot way on each side, with room for three carriages a breast in
the middle. It has also recesses on the sides for foot passengers, each
supported by two lofty Ionic columns. This bridge was begun in 1760, and
finished in 1770, at the expense of 152,840l. to be discharged by a toll upon
the passengers. It is situated almost at an equal distance between those of
Westminster and London, commands a view of the Thames from the latter to
Whitehall, and discovers the majesty of St. Paul's in a very striking manner.

The cathedral of St. Paul's is the most capacious, magnificent, and regular
Protestant church in the world. The length within is 500 feet; and its height,
from the marble pavement to the cross, on the top of the cupola, is 340. It is
built of Portland stone, according to the Greek and Roman orders, in the form
of a cross, after the model of St. Peter's at Rome, to which, in some respects
it is superior. St. Paul's church is the principal work of Sir Christopher
Wren, and undoubtedly the only work of the same magnitude that ever was
completed by one man. He lived to a great age, and finished the building 37
years after he himself laid the first stone. It takes up six acres of ground,
though the whole length of this church measures no more than the width of St.
Peter's. The expense of rebuilding it after the fire of London, was defrayed by
a duty on coals, and is computed at a million sterling.

Westminster-abbey, or the collegiate church of Westminster, is a venerable
pile of building, in the Gothic taste. It was first built by Edward the
Confessor; king Henry III. rebuilt it from the ground, and Henry VII. added a
fine chapel to the east end of it; this is the repository of the deceased
Birtish kings and nobility; and here are also monuments erected to the memory
of many great and illustrious personages, commanders by sea and land,
philosophers, poets, etc. In the reign of queen Anne, 4000l. a year out of the
coal duty, was granted by parliament for keeping it in repair.

The Banqueting House at Whitehall, is but a very small part of a noble
palace, designed by Inigo Jones, for the royal residence, and as it now stands,
under all its disadvantages, its symmetry, and ornament are in the highest
style and execution of architecture.

Westminster Hall, though on the outside it makes a mean, and no v^ry
advantageous appearance, is a noble Gothic building, and is said to be the
largest room in the world, whose roof is not supported with pillars, it being
200 feet long, and 70 broad. Its roof is the finest of its kind that can be
seen. Here are held the coronation feasts of our kings and queens; also the
courts of chancery, king's bench, and common pleas, and above stairs, that of
the exchequer.

That beautiful column, called the Monument, erected at the char^^ of the city,
to perpetuate the memory of its being destroyed by fire, it justly worthy of
notice. This column, which is of the Doric order, exceeds all the obelisks and
pillars of the ancients, it being 202 feet high, with a staircase in the
middle to ascend to the balcony, which i^ about 30 feet short of the top, from
whence there are other steps, (...) for persons to look out at the top of all,
which is fashioned like ^^^urn, with a flame issuing from it. On the base of
the monument (...) the street, the destruction of the city, and the relief
given to the sufferers by Charles II. and his brother, is emblematically
represented (...) bass relief. The north and south sides of the base have each
a (...) inscription, the one describing its dreadful desolation, Which may be
thus rendered: "In the year of Christ, 1666, Sept. 2. eas^^^ from hence, at the
distance of 202 feet (the height of this column) a terrible fire (...) out
about midnight; which, driven on by a high wind, not only wasted the adjacent
pa^^s, but also very remote places, with incredible crackling and fury. It
consumed 89 churches, the city gates, Gu^^dhal^, many public structures,
hospitals, schools, libraries, a vast ^^^ber of stately edifices, 13,000
dwelling-houses, and 400 streets. Of the 26 wards it (...) destrove 15, and
left eight others shattered and ha^ burnt. The ruins of the city (...) 436
acres, from the Tower by the Thames side to the Temple church; and from (...)
north-east along the wall to Holborn-bridge. To the estates and fortunes of the
citi^^^ it was merc^iefs, but to their lives very favorable, that it might in
all things (...) the last conflagration of the world. The destruction was
sudden; for in a small (...) (...) time the city was seen most flourishing, and
reduced to nothing. Three days after, (...) this fatal fire (...) baffled all
human counsels and endeavors, in the opinion of all, it ^^^ped, as it were by
a command from heaven, and was on every side extinguished."
and the other its splendid resurrection; and on the east side is an
inscription, she^^ing when the pillar was begun and finished. The charge of
erection this monument, which was begun by Sir Christopher Wren, in (...) and
finished by him in 1677, amounted to upwards of 13,000l.

The Royal Exchange is a large noble building, and is said to have cost above
80,000l.

The terrace in the Adelphi is a very fine piece of architecture, and has laid
open one of the finest prospects in the world.

We might here give a description of the Tower, In examining the curiosities of
the Tower of London, it will be proper to begin (...) these on the outside the
principal gate; the first thing a stranger usually goes to (...) the wi^d
beasts; which, from their situation, first present themselves: For having (...)
the (...) gate, and passed what is called the spur-guard, the keeper's house
presents (...) before you, which is known by a painted lion on the wall, and
another over the door (...) leads to their dens. By ringing a bell, and paying
six pence each person, you may (...) gain admittance.

The next place worthy of observation is the Mint, which comprehends near one
(...) of the Tower, and contains houses for all the officers belonging to the
coinage. On (...) ^^^ing the principal gate you see the White Tower, built by
William the Conqueror. (...) is a large, square, irregular stone building,
situated almost in the center, no one (...) swering to another, nor any of its
watch towers, of which there are four at the (...) alike. One of these towers
is now converted into an observatory. In the first story are two noble rooms,
one of which is a small armoury for the sea-service, it having various sorts of
arms, very curiously laid up, for above 10,000 seamen. In the other room are
many closets and presses, all filled with warlike engines and instruments of
death. Over this are two other floors, one principally filled with arms; the
other with arms and other warlike instruments, as spades, shovels, pickaxes,
and chevaux de frize. In the upper story, are kept match, sheep skins, tanned
bides, etc. and in a little room, called Julius Caesar's chapel, are deposited
some records, containing perhaps the ancient usages and customs of the place.
In this building are also preserved the models of the new-invented engines of
destruction, that have from time to time been presented to the government. --
Near the south-west angle of the White Tower, is the Spanish armoury, in which
are deposited the spoils of what was vainly called the Invincible Armada; in
order to perpetuate, to latest posterity, the memory of that signal victory,
obtained by the English over the whole naval power of Spain, in the reign of
Philip II.

You are now come to the grand store house, a noble building to the northward
of the White-Tower, that extends 245 feet; length, and 60 in breadth. On the
left side of the uppermost landing place is the workshop, in which are
constantly employed about 14 furbishers, in cleaning, repairing, and
new-placing the arms. On entering the armoury, you see what they call a
wilderness of arms, so artfully disposed, that at one view you behold arms for
near 80,000 men, all bright and fit for service; a sight which it is impossible
to behold without astonishment; and beside those exposed to view, there were,
before the late war, 16 chests shut up, each chest holding about 1,000 muskets.
The arms were originally disposed by Mr. Harris, who contrived to place them in
this beautiful order, both here and in the guard chamber of Hampton Court. He
was a common gunsmith; but after he had performed this work, which is the
admiration of people of all nations, he was allowed a pension from the crown
for his ingenuity.

You now come to the line of kings, which your conductor begins by reversing
the order of chronology; so that in following them we must place the last first.

In a dark, strong stone room, about 20 yards to the eastward of the grand
storehouse, or new-armoury, the crown jewels are deposited.

The record office consists of three rooms, one above another, and a large
round room, where the rolls are kept.


Bank of England, the new Treasury, the Admiralty-Office, and the Horse-Guards
at Whitehall, the Mansion House of the lord mayor, the Custom-house,
Excise-office, India-house, and a vast number of other public buildings,
besides Montague-house, The British Museum is deposited in Montague-house. Sir
Hans Sloane, bart. (who died in 1753) may not improperly be called the founder
of the British Museum; for its being established by parliament, was only in
consequence of his leaving by will his noble collection of natural history, his
large library, and his numerous curiosities, which cost him 50,000l. to the use
of the public, ^n condition that the parliament would pay 20,000l. to his
executors. To this collection were added the Cottonian library, the Harleian
manuscripts collected by the Oxford family, and purchased likewise by the
parliament, and a collection of books given by the late major Edwards. His late
majesty, in consideration of its great usefulness, was graciously pleased to
add thereto the royal libraries of books and manuscripts collected by he
several kings of England.

The Sloanian collection consists of an amazing number of curiosities; among
which are, the library, including books of drawings, manuscripts, and prints,
amounting to about 50,000 volumes. Medals, and coins, ancient and modern
20,000. Cameos and intaglios, about 700. Seals 268. Vessels, etc. of agate,
jasper, etc. 542. Antiquities 1,125. Precious stones, agates, jasper, etc.
2,256. Metals, minerals, ores, etc. 2,725. Crystal, spars, etc. 1,864. Fossils,
flints, stones, 1,275. Earths, sands, salts, 1,035. Bitumens, sulphurs, ambers,
etc. 999. Tales, micae, etc. 388. Corals, spunges, etc. 2,421. Testacea, or
shells, etc. 5,843. Echini, echinitae, and 659. Asteriaei t^ochi, entrochi,
etc. 241. Crustaceae, crabs, lobsters, etc. 363. Stellae marinae, star-fishes,
etc. 173. Fish, and their parts, etc. 1,555. Birds, and their parts, eggs, and
ne^ts, of different species, 1,172. Quadrupeds, etc. ^,836. Vipers, serpents,
etc. 521. Insects, and. c 5,439. Vegetables, 12,506. Hortus siccus, or volumes
of dried plants, 334. Humani, as calculi, anatomical preparations, 756.
Miscellaneous things, natural, 2,098. Mathematical instruments, 55. A catalogue
of all the above is written i^ a number of large volumes.


in Bloomsbury, with a number of others of the nobility and gentry; but these
would be sufficient to fill a large volume.

This great and populous city is happily supplied with abundance of fresh water
from the Thames and the New River; which is not only of inconceivable service
to every family, but by means of fire plugs every where dispersed, the keys of
which are deposited with the parish officers, the city is in a great measure
secured from the spreading of fire; for these plugs are no sooner opened than
there are vast quantities of water to supply the engines.

This plenty of water has been attended with another advantage, it has given
rise to several companies, who insure houses and goods from fire. The premium
is small, and the recovery in case of loss, is easy and certain. Every one of
these officers keep a set of men in pay, who are ready at all hours to give
their assistance in case of fire; and who are on all occasions extremely bold,
dexterous, and diligent.

Before the conflagration in 1666, London was totally inelegant, inconvenient,
and unhealthy, of which latter misfortune many melancholy proofs are
authenticated in history, and which, without doubt, proceeded from the
narrowness of the streets, and the unaccountable projections of the buildings,
that confined the putrid air, and joined with other circumstances, such as the
want of water, rendered the city seldom free from pestilential devastation. The
fire which consumed the greatest part of the city, dreadful as it was to the
inhabitants of that time, was productive of consequences, which made ample
amends for the losses sustained by individuals; a new city arose on the ruins
of the old; but though more regular, open, convenient, and healthful than the
former, yet it is ever to be lamented (such was the infatuation of those times)
that the magnificent, elegant, and useful plan of the great Sir Christopher
Wren, was totally disregarded and sacrificed (...) the mean and selfish views
of private property. Views which did irreparable injury to the citizens
themselves, and to the nation in general; for had that great architect's plan
been followed, what has often been asserted, must have been the result; the
metropolis of this kingdom would incontestably have been the most magnificent
and elegant city in the world.

In fine, London unites in itself all the benefits arising from navigation and
commerce, with those of a metropolis at which all the public business of a
great nation is transacted; and is at the same time the mercantile and
political head of the whole Empire. It is also the seat of many considerable
manufactures. The most important of its peculiar manufactures is the silk
weaving, established in Spital-fields by refugees from France. A variety of
works in gold, silver, and jewelry; the engraving of prints; the making of
optical and mathematical instruments, are likewise principally or solely
executed here, and some of them in greater perfection, than in any other
country. The porter brewery, a business of very great extent, is also chiefly
carried on in London. To its port are likewise confined some branches of
foreign commerce, as the vast East India trade, and that to Turkey and Hudson's
Bay.

Bristol city, in Somersetshire, is situated at the conflux of the river Avon,
with the small stream of the Froom, at the distance of about 10 miles from the
place where the Avon empties into the Seve^^ mouth, in point of wealth, trade
and population has long been rech^^^ed, second to London, within this kingdom.
The great trade of British is supported by its extensive inland communications
with the Seve^^^ and all its branches, the Avon, the Wye, and various other
stream. Hence it enjoys the export and import traffic of a large part of (...)
kingdom, and is enabled to find a market for a great variety of its (...)
manufactures, such as glass ware, hard soap, hats, leather, white lead,
gunpowder, earthen ware. etc. The refining of sugar, which they import from
the West Indies, is one of the principal manufactures of Bristol. They have 70
or 80 ships constantly employed in the West India trade. The city is compactly
built; but is now extending itself, like other large cities, into its suburbs,
by new and more airy streets.

The city of York has always been considered as the capital of the north, and
in point of rank, as the second in the kingdom. Its minister or cathedral is
one of the most elegant gothic structures in the kingdom. From its top is seen
a vast extent of country. This city has a stone bridge, with five arches over
the river Ouse. Though in wealth and populousness, this city falls behind
several newer trading towns, it still supports a considerable degree of
consequence, and is inhabited by many genteel families. It is in the county of
Yorkshire.

Exeter, the capital of Devonshire, is the principal city for size and
consequence in the west of England, and the seat of an extensive foreign and
domestic commerce. The trade of Exeter consists principally in the exportation
of coarse woollen goods manufactured in the counties of Devon, Cornwall, and
part of Somerset. These are sold as they come from the loom, to the merchants
at Exeter, who procure them to be milled, dyed and finished, and then export
them. These goods consist chiefly of articles little consumed in England, as
druggets, duroys, longells, and serges. The markets for them are first Italy,
then Spain, Germany, Holland, Portugal, and lately France. The average annual
value exported is reckoned at L.600,000 sterling. Besides which L.105,000 worth
of longells are purchased by the East India company. For making these woollens,
about 4000 bags of wool are imported from Kent.

Gloucester, the capital of Gloucestershire, stands on a pleasant hill, and has
lately been much improved. Its four principal streets have been much admired
for the regularity of their junction in the center of the town. A
pin-manufactury affords the principal employment to the inhabitants of this
city. It has also several Glass houses. They river Severn washes it on one
side, by which it carries on a considerable traffic.

Birmingham, is situated in the north-western part of Warwickshire, and is
noted for its vast variety of useful and ornamental articles, such as metal
buttons, buckles, plated goods of all kinds, japanned and paper ware, and other
hard ware manufactures; in consequence of which it has risen to be superior in
populousness to any other of the modern trading towns in England, and has
filled the surrounding country with its industrious inhabitants. It is
plentifully supplied with coals by means of a canal to Wednesbury in
Staffordshire; and it has a communication with the great trunk from the Trent
to the Severn, by means of a branch passing by Wolverhampton. The Birmingham
goods are dispersed about the kingdom, but chiefly sent to London, by land
carriage. They are exported in great quantities to foreign countries, where, in
point of cheapness and show united, they are unrivaled; so that Birmingham has
become, according to the emphatical expression of a great Orator, the toy-shop
of Europe.

Poole, in Dorsetshire, is situated on a peninsula, projecting into a capacious
bay, branching into many creeks, and forming several islands. The harbor
admits vessels of moderate size only, but for them it is v^ry secure. Poole
rose to some consequence several centuries ago, when the ancient town of
Wareham fell into decay. It now ranks high among the seaports of England, and
its trade and population are rapidly increasing. The principal branch of
business here, is the Newfoundland fishery, to which it sends annually a large
number of vessels, which carry out provisions and commodities, and bring back
cargoes of fish, caught on the great cod banks, which are carried to Spain,
Portugal and Italy. This port has also a large importation of deals from Norway
and a general commerce to America, and various parts of Europe. Great
quantities of corn are sent from it in coasters, and it imports Newcastle coal
for all the eastern part of the country. Near the mouth of Poole harbor lies
an Oyster bank, upon which are employed, during the season, a number of smacks,
which carry away vast quantities of them, to be fattened in the Essex and
Thames Creek for the London market.

Burton, upon the river Trent, at the head of its navigation, in Staffordshire,
is noted for the excellence of its malt liquor, great quantities of which are
sent down the river to Hull, and thence exported to other parts of the kingdom
and abroad. The longest bridge in England is that over the Trent at this place,
built by Barnard, Abbot of Burton, in the 12th century. It is all of squared
freestone, and 1545 feet long, consisting of 34 arches. This, however, comes
far short of the wooden bridge over the Drove, a river of Germany, which,
according to Dr. Brown, is 5 miles long.

Dover, in the county of Kent, formerly a place of the greatest importance, and
accounted the key of the island, is at present known chiefly as the station of
the French and Flemish pacquets, and the shortest passage to the continent. The
distance from Dover to Calais is but 27 miles; and in the narrowest part of the
straits the two lands are only 21 miles apart. The harbor of Dover is formed
by a gap i^ the cliffs, which are here of sublime height, though some what
exaggerated in the most picturesque description of Shakespeare. Dover i^ the
principal of those ancient port towns, called Cinque ports, formerly of great
consequence, now become almost insignificant. The country inland from Dover,
consists chiefly of open downs, excellent for the feeding of sheep.

The city of Bath took its name from some natural hot baths, for the medicinal
waters of which this place has been long celebrated, and much frequented. The
seasons for drinking the Bath waters and the spring and autumn: The spring
season begins with April, and ends with June; the autumn season begins with
September, and (...) till December, and some patients remain here all the
winter. In (...) spring, this place is most frequented for health, and in the
autu^^ for pleasure, when at least two-thirds of the company, consisting
chiefly of persons of rank and fortune, come to partake of the amusements of
the place. In some seasons there have been no (...) than 8000 persons at Bath,
besides its inhabitants. Some of (...) buildings lately erected here are
extremely elegant, particularly Qu^^^^ Square, the North and South Parade, the
Royal Forum, and (...) Circus.

No nation in the world can show such dock-yards, and all co^^niencies for the
construction and repair of the royal navy at Ports^^^^^ (the most regular
fortification in England) Plymouth (by far the best dock-yard) Chatham,
Woolwich, and Deptford. The royal hospital at Greenwich, for superannuated
seamen, is scarcely exceeded by any royal palace for its magnificence and
expense.

WEALTH, COMMERCE, REVENUE AND NAVIGATION OF GREAT BRITAIN.} The two divisions
of Great Britain, England and Scotland, differ exceedingly with respect to
their natural fertility and to the wealth of their inhabitants. South-Britain,
or England, abounds with all the useful productions of those countries of
Europe which are situated in the same climate with it, wine, silk, and some
wild animals excepted. The genius and industry of the inhabitants have
increased and improved many of the natural productions to a degree which leaves
the efforts of all neighboring nations at a distance. Agriculture, the art of
gardening, the cultivation of all those plants which are most useful for
feeding cattle as well as breeding horses and sheep, are carried in England to
an astonishing height. Of about 42,000,000 acres, which England contains, only
8,500,000 produce corn; the rest is either covered with wood, or laid out in
meadows, gardens, parks, etc. and a considerable part is still waste land. Yet
out of the crops obtained from the fifth part of the lands, there have been
exported, during the space of five years, from 1745 to 1750, quantities of corn
to the value of 7,600,000l. sterling. About the year 1766 it was found, that
the exportation of corn was carried too far, and proved prejudicial to the
country; it was consequently entirely prohibited, and the importation of corn
permitted. The net produce of the English corn-land is estimated by Mr. Young
at 9,000,000l. sterling; the rents of pasture-ground, meadows, woods, commons,
etc. at 7,000,000l. the number of people engaged in and maintained by farming
is stated by him to amount to 2,800,000 persons. Among the other useful plants,
hops, saffron, wood, and madder, are become very important articles of
commerce. Maltliquor and cider are brought in England to a very high degree of
perfection, and render wine a superfluity; yet luxury deems the latter
essentially necessary.

The counties of Cheshire, Lancashire, Yorkshire, Leicestershire, Derbyshire,
Norfolk, Suffolk, Kent, Gloucestershire, and Somersetshire, are most
distinguished for their excellent cattle. They city of Chester exports annually
22,000 tons of cheese, 14,000 of which are sent to London. One of the greatest
sources of the riches of England is wool, the great staple commodity of this
country. The stock of the best sort of the present English sheep came over from
Spain; Edward the IVth had 3000 Spanish sheep brought over, which he ordered to
be distributed among the several parishes of England; and ever since that time,
great care has been taken to continue and to improve the breed: There are
instances, that a single ram, of extraordinary beauty and strength, has been
purchased with 100 guineas. The counties of Herefordshire, Gloucestershire,
Somersetshire, Hampshire, Dorsetshire, Derbyshire, Leicestershire,
Lincolnshire, Durham, and the East Riding of Yorkshire, are most famous for
their large and excellent flocks. At the beginning of the present century, the
number of sheep was computed to amount to 12 millions, and there is no doubt
but that this number has been greatly increased since that time. In the years
1769, 1770, and 1771, the value of the woollens exported from England amounted
to upwards of 10,500,000l. sterling, exclusive of the woollens of Yorkshire,
the value of which, in the same period of time, amounted to upwards of
3,000,000l. sterling. The English horses, the breed of which as before
observed, has been much improved by Arabian, Spanish, and Barbary horses, are
famous all over Europe for their beauty and swiftness. The best race-horses run
82 feet in one second, or nearly an English mile in one minute.

Though neither gold nor silver is found in the English mines, or only in
quantities too insignificant to be mentioned, yet the other minerals are great
sources of wealth. Copper, tin, lead, and iron, are found in great abundance,
and the first two metals of the very best quality. The copper annually obtained
from the mines of Cornwall is estimated at 4000 tons; the number of Cornish
miners is said to amount to 80,000 people. The tin of Cornwall is valued at
200,000l. sterling annually. Northumberland, Durham, Lancashire, Cumberland,
Shropshire, Staffordshire, Wales, and Devonshire, produce large quantities of
iron, which is, however, of an inferior quality to the iron of Sweden, Sti^ia,
Carinthia, and Russia; it is therefore necessary to import from these countries
upwards of 25,000 tons, for the manufactures of finer tools and hardware. The
most important manufactures of the latter sort are at Sheffield, where it is
supposed upwards of 40,000 workmen are employed by about 600 owners and
manufacturers. One company of iron manufacturers in Shropshire use every day
500 tons of coals in their works. In Great Britain there is made every year 50
-- 60,000 tons of pig-iron, and 20 -- 30,000 tons of bar-iron.

England possesses a very great treasure in its inexhaustible coal mines, which
are worked chiefly in the northern counties, from whence they are conveyed by
sea and by the inland canals to every other part of the kingdom. The mines of
Northumberland alone send every year upwards of 600,000 chaldron of coals to
London, and 1500 vessels are employed in carrying them to that harbor, along
the eastern coast of England. This trade and navigation is one of the great
nurseries of seamen, and, in that respect, of the utmost importance to the
commerce and preservation of the empire.

Manufacrtures in England have been carried to higher perfection than in any
other country. An enumeration of them would comprehend almost every contrivance
of mechanism in its most improved state, which ever was invented by the
ingenuity of any age or country for the convenience and use of man. Their
surprising perfection must be accounted for from many circumstances, which no
where coincided so happily to promote their progress as they do in this island.
It seems they are nearly equally indebted to the national character, to the
situation of the country, and the excellence of its constitution. Nothing could
be more favorable to the progress of the mechanical arts, than the English
reflection and perseverance, and the exclusive attention they are able to
bestow on favorite pursuits, often wi^^ the neglect of every other concern,
and their enterprising spirit, (...) desponding under the bad success of first
trials, animated by the prospect of ample rewards, and by the certainty of
enjoying the glo^^^ and the fruits of their labors. The insular situation of
England taught its inhabitants to consider the surrounding ocean as the bulwark
of their safety, the theater of their power, and the source of their wealth.
Navigation with its appendages, distant acquisitions and colonization, gave an
astonishing extent to commerce, and an air of grandeur and importance to the
occupations of a merchant, which flattered ambition as well as the love of
gain. The mere natural productions of the country were insufficient for so
large a market; it was deficient in articles of luxury and the precious metals.
Manufacturing industry was therefore called forth, in order to supply materials
for commerce; and every new invention of mechanical genius sound liberal
support and encouragement from the great number of people who had acquired
wealth. The English government, favorable to liberty and to every exertion of
genius, has provided by wise and equitable laws for the secure enjoyment of
property acquired by ingenuity and labor, and has removed obstacles to
industry, by prohibiting the importation of such articles from abroad which
could be manufactured at home. Next to the woollen manufactory, that of cotton
is the most considerable, as it is reckoned to employ in the northern and
middle counties not less than 500,000 persons, women and children included.

Among the advantages the British islands are possessed of, with respect to
navigation, the following are worthy of attention: The great extent of the
coasts, the sea-line of which, including both Great Britain and Ireland,
extends near 3800 miles, whereas the seacoast of France has but 1000 miles; the
neighborhood to the continent; the number of excellent harbors; the number of
navigable canals which form a communication between the seaports on the
eastern and western coasts of England.

The constant increase of this immense commerce is astonishing. In the years
1783 and 1784, the ships cleared outward, amounting to 950,000 tons, exceed
the number of tons of the ships employed 24 years ago (1760) by upwards of
400,000 tons. The value of the cargoes exported in 1784, amounted to upwards of
15,000,000l. sterling; and the net customs paid for them into the Exchequer
were upwards of 3,000,000l. sterling; and even this sum was exceeded the
following year, 1785, by upwards of 1,000,000l.

The balance of trade in favor of England is estimated by some authors at
3,000,000l. sterling. Far more considerable is the inland trade, valued at
upwards of 42,000,000l. sterling. -- As the quantity of circulating specie may in
some measure indicate the extent of commerce, we may judge of the increase of
the latter, by comparing the sums which the three last monarchs found necessary
to coin. By George I. 8,725,921l. sterling were coined. In the long reign of
George II. 11,965,576l. sterling, and in the first 24 years of his present
majesty's reign, the sums coined amounted to 33,089,274l. sterling.

The coasting trade is said to give employment to about 100,000 people; but
this number seems to be exaggerated. Yet some branches of the fisheries require
a great number of hands. About 10,000 people are employed in the oyster-fishery
along the coasts of England. On the coasts of Scotland great fisheries are
carried on; there have been sometimes upwards of 300 vessels employed in the
herring-fishery. About 40,000 tons of herrings are annually imported into the
port of Yarmouth by 1100 vessels: the whole annual quantity of salt-herrings
and cured pilchards amounts to 150,000 tons. (...) Newfoundland there have been
carried to foreign markets (...) quintals of fish in 1785; this fishery is
another great nursery of (...) men. The English whale-fishery on the coasts of
Greenland employs more ships than are sent thither for the same purpose by
(...) Dutch.

By far the most important part of foreign commerce is carried (...) privileged
trading companies, among which the East India Company is the most
distinguished, by its very brilliant and extraordinary ^^^cess, and by its
influence on the general interests of the whole (...) ^^pire. It dates its
origin from the time of queen Elizabeth; its (...) ^^ress was for a long time
gradual and disputed by a rival comp^^^^ with which it was at length
incorporated, and obtained the (...) of parliament for an exclusive trade to
the East Indies and (...) for a limited number of years, in consideration of a
large sum advanced to the public. These privileges were afterward renew^^^.
Within these last thirty years the company has made vast territ^^^ acquisitions
in India, which increased in an extraordinary (...) the trade, power. and
importance of this company. Its trade employs 110 ships and about 8000 men; the
articles exported to (...) consist in woollens of all sorts, bullion, hardware,
lead, and (...) silver; the imports in gold, diamonds, raw silk, spices, tea,
^^^^petre, arrack, and China porcelaine. The revenues of the comp^^^ are said
to amount to upwards of 3,000,000l. sterling annually; (...) the expense of
governing and defending their acquisitions; the (...) in which they are often
involved, and the peculations of their servants, have been very great drawbacks
upon their profits. The (...) fairs of the East India Company are under the
management of 2^ (...) rectors, residing in England, and chosen by the court of
propri^^^ of East India stock. The directors formerly appointed their serv^^
abroad; but the conduct of these servants, and the large domin^^^ acquired by
the company, covering upwards of 280,000 square miles and containing 30
millions of inhabitants, rendered an alteration (...) the constitution of this
great commercial body. and the interfe^^^ of government in its affairs,
necessary. An act of parliament, posses in 1773, among other regulations, gave
the presidency of Bengal (...) superiority over the other presidencies in
India, vested the right of nominating a governor-general in the crown, and
established a (...) of justice in India. Yet this regulation was found
insufficient to answer the intended purposes, and to repress the enormous
abuses committed by the company's servants. After the failure of Mr. (...) plan
for the government of the East India Company in 1783, an (...) of parliament
passed in 1784, which established a board of contr^^ in England, to be
nominated by the crown, which was calculated (...) connect the civil and
military government in India with that over (...) whole empire, to superintend
the regulations and orders made (...) the directors of the company, and to call
the conduct of its servants (...) account. Time must show, whether the
provisions of Mr. Pitt's (...) will be an adequate cure of the evils which have
affected the prosp^^^ and stability of this extraordinary commercial society.

The Levant Company is at present of no great consequence, as (...) trade to
the Levant has been laid open, and as the French have acqui^^^ a great
superiority in the commerce of the Mediterranean.

The South Sea Company is only nominally a commercial company; it is rather an
incorporated society of stockholders, to whom government is indebted. Its
affairs are managed by a governor, two subgovernours, and one and twenty
directors.

The Hudson's-Bay Company carries on an extensive trade in peltry with very
considerable profits: But in all probability its interests will be materially
affected by the separation of the American colonies from Great Britain, and by
the late commercial schemes of the French in the Pacific Ocean, especially
between Kamtskatka and North America.

The Bank of England was incorporated in 1694; this company deals, by the
sanction of parliament, in bills of exchange, it buys and fells bullion, and
manages government annuities paid at its office. The credit of this company is
the most extensive of any company in Europe. It is one of the principal
creditors of the nation; and the value of the shares in its stock runs very
high. There are besides eight insurance companies in England.

State of the Trade of England at different periods with the several Nations of
the World. [Extracted from Playfair's Tables.]

IRELAND. Guern. Jerf. andAld. GERMANY. Years Imports Exports Imports Exports
Imports Exports 1700 270,000 240,000 30,000 9,000 575,000 995,000 1710 300,000
270,000 25,000 25,000 610,000 895,000 1720 335,000 370,000 20,000 27,000
620,000 1,000,000 1730 340,000 600,000 18,000 45,000 680,000 1,105,000 1740
475,000 760,000 39,000 50,000 700,000 1,115,000 1750 660,000 950,000 55,000
40,000 715,000 1,405,000 1760 870,000 1,450,000 57,000 50,000 705,000 1,615,000
1770 1,230,000 1,870,000 51,000 46,000 680,000 1,820,000 1780 1,470,000
1,890,000 61,000 64,000 670,000 1,240,000

Baltic and the East Country. Denm. and Norway. SWEDEN. Years Imports Exports
Imports Exports Imports Exports 1700 136,000 110,000 70,000 35,000 197,000
57,000 1710 130,000 85,000 81,000 59,000 160,000 46,000 1720 188,000 86,000
96,000 76,000 154,000 35,000 1730 198,000 118,000 97,000 65,000 183,000 29,000
1740 230,000 133,000 93,000 67,000 186,000 33,000 1750 250,000 154,000 90,000
79,000 196,000 30,000 1760 210,000 175,000 79,000 115,000 212,000 25,000 1770
220,000 135,000 85,000 163,000 209,000 57,000 1780 280,000 70,000 93,000
185,000 198,000 95,000

RUSSIA. GREENLAND. HOLLAND. Years Imports Exports Imports Exports Imports
Exports 1700 109,000 135,000 -- -- 570,000 2,150,000 1710 140,000 100,000 -- --
510,000 2,100,000 1720 195,000 50,000 200 100 590,000 1,920,000 1730 235,000
45,000 2,000 50 510,000 1,840,000 1740 335,000 75,000 2,800 -- 420,000
2,200,000 1750 440,000 85,000 10,000 200 370,000 1,930,000 1760 570,000 98,000
16,000 330 400,000 1,810,000 1770 890,000 133,000 22,000 60 480,000 1,780,000
1780 1,185,000 290,000 38,000 70 490,000 1,570,000

STATE OF THE TRADE OF ENGLAND CONTINUED.
FLANDERS. FRANCE. Portugal and (...) Years Imports Exports Imports Exports
Imports Exports 1700 7,000 80,000 20,000 30,000 250,000 630,^^^ 1710 20,000
150,000 50,000 75,000 275,000 700,^^^ 1720 51,000 245,000 48,000 175,000
350,000 800,^^^ 1730 125,000 270,000 51,000 255,000 365,000 1,070,^^^ 1740
150,000 290,000 57,000 305,000 340,000 1,140,^^^ 1750 70,000 345,000 31,000
285,000 350,000 1,200,^^^ 1760 70,000 420,000 55,000 275,000 300,000 1,110,0^^
1770 175,000 840,000 80,000 165,000 360,000 680,^^^ 1780 225,000 1,050,000
45,000 155,000 370,000 590,^^^

SPAIN and CANARIES. STRAIGHTS. Venice and Italy. Years Imports Exports Imports
Exports Imports Exports 1700 225,000 220,000 2,000 250,000 22,000 15,50^ 1710
280,000 320,000 25,000 300,000 32,200 17,500 1720 420,000 565,000 70,000
475,000 46,500 18,^^^ 1730 480,000 650,000 135,000 625,000 52,500 14,^^^ 1740
190,000 450,000 40,000 675,000 50,000 14,^^^ 1750 90,000 400,000 80,000 535,000
56,000 18,^^^ 1760 525,000 1,150,000 60,000 425,000 64,000 50,^^^ 1770 510,000
1,040,000 20,000 90,000 71,000 72,^^^ 1780 440,000 860,000 300 85,000 15,500
8^,^^^

TURKEY. AFRICA. EAST INDIES. Years Imports Exports Imports Exports Imports
Exports 1700 250,000 170,000 14,000 11,000 440,000 140,^^^ 1710 287,000 195,000
18,000 7,000 595,000 95,^^^ 1720 295,000 220,000 30,000 12,000 880,000 120,000
1730 270,000 185,000 50,000 18,000 965,000 145,000 1740 187,000 155,000 32,000
15,000 970,000 360,000 1750 155,000 100,000 27,000 16,000 930,000 700,000 1760
137,000 83,000 43,000 30,000 1,005,000 880,000 1770 126,000 89,000 53,000
48,000 1,515,000 1,330,000 1780 142,000 109,000 73,000 53,000 1,550,000 840,000

WEST INDIES. Spainsh W. Indies. BERMUDA. Years Imports Exports Imports Exports
Imports Exports 1700 580,000 30^,000 -- -- 500 6^^ 1710 750,000 335,000 -- --
600 1,000 1720 1,060,000 435,000 34,000 84,000 1,900 3,0^^ 1730 1,260,000
450,000 37,000 83,000 1,500 2,2^^ 1740 1,290,00 515,000 12,000 11,000 800 1,500
1750 1,460,000 770,000 -- -- 1,600 7,^^^ 1760 2,105,000 865,000 13,000 1,000
1,800 10,^^^ 1770 2,995,000 1,190,000 26,000 3,000 1,700 13,^^^ 1780 2,210,000
1,220,000 28,000 7,000 1,700 15,^^^

STATE OF THE TRADE OF ENGLAND CONTINUED.
All North America. U. S. of America. ALL AMERICA. Years Imports Exports
Imports Exports Years Imports Exports 1700 280,000 200,000 238,000 240,000 1770
1,480,000 4,550,000 1710 370,000 250,000 310,000 280,000 1771 1,430,000
4,630,000 1720 520,000 350,000 450,000 410,000 1772 1,445,000 3,600,000 1730
630,000 500,000 590,000 540,000 1773 1,465,000 2,465,000 1740 780,000 620,000
700,000 760,000 1774 1,435,000 3,840,000 1750 820,000 930,000 760,000 1,110,000
1775 2,065,000 985,000 1760 950,000 1,750,000 940,000 1,610,000 1776 245,000
1,190,000 1770 1,480,000 4,550,000 900,000 1,660,000 1777 230,000 1,880,000
1780 300,000 1,805,000 540,000 1,050,000 1778 265,000 1,150,000 1779 295,000
1,370,000 1780 300,000 1,805,000 1781 385,000 1,545,000 1782 295,000 905,000

TOTAL TRADE WITH ALL THE WORLD.
Years Imports Exports Balance 1700 4,550,000 6,300,000 1,950,000 1710
4,900,000 7,000,000 2,100,000 1720 5,350,000 8,600,000 3,350,000 1730 7,500,000
10,900,000 3,400,000 1740 7,550,000 12,000,000 4,450,000 1750 7,250,000
12,650,000 5,400,00 1760 10,300,000 14,250,000 3,950,000 1770 11,850,000
16,300,000 4,650,000 1780 10,750,000 12,400,000 1,650,000 1771 12,800,000
17,150,000 4,350,000 1772 13,300,000 16,150,000 2,850,000 1773 11,400,000
14,750,000 3,350,000 1774 13,250,000 15,900,000 2,650,000 1775 3,550,000
15,200,000 1,650,000 1776 11,700,000 13,700,000 2,000,000 1777 11,850,000
12,650,000 800,000 1778 10,250,000 11,550,000 1,300,000 1779 10,650,000
12,650,000 2,^00,000 1780 10,750,000 12,550,000 ^,800,000 1781 11,900,000
10,550,000 1,350,000 1782 9,500,000 12,350,000 2,850,000

We shall conclude this article, with the following comparative view of
shipping, which till a better table can be formed, may have its uses.

If the shipping of Europe be divided into twenty parts, then, Great Britain,
etc. is computed to have 6 The United Provinces 6 Denmark, Sweden, and Russia 2
The trading cities of Germany, and the Austrian Netherlands 1 France 2 Spain
and Portugal 2 Italy, and the rest of Europe 1

In a pamphlet, entitled "A brief examination into the increase of the revenue,
commerce and navigation of Great Britain," (published 1792) -- Among other
causes which have contributed to the prosperity of the nation since the peace
of 1783, the writer mentions an Act for auditing public accounts. "Losses to an
immense amount," he observes, "had been sustained by the public, from persons
to whom large sums of money had been issued, and who had not rendered any
account: The late commissioners of the Public Accounts state, in their 8th
Report, that L126,000,000, issued to various Public Accountants in 16 years. to
October 1780, exclusive of the unsettled Debt of Lard Holland, were unaccounted
for; -- and in their 1oath Report, that between 1746 and 1783 there were 664
Persons, Sub-accountants for Army Services, who remained accountable to the
Public for the sum of L.38,933,920, (...) latter, 127 have rendered Accounts to
the new Board of Commissioners for taking (...) stating the Public Accounts, to
the amount of upwards of L.32,000,000; besides (...). Accountants in the
ordinary course. -- It is not however meant to suggest, that by (...) the
greater pare of the Totals stated by the late Commissioners for Public (...)
though not accounted for, were not in a great proportion properly expended; the
(...) probably is, that they were so: But on the other hand it is highly
improper, (...) whole should not have undergone a regular Investigation in due
time; and it is (...) ably true, that, large sums have been lost to the Public,
from the Parties, who (...) account for the same, having in some instances
become insolvent; and in others, (...) their property having descended in a
manner not now to be traced, which in most (...) Cases would render any
Attempt, at this time, to recover the balances due, perfectly ^^^perate.
A very large proportion of them had never been called upon; the few who were,
with those who voluntarily tendered themselves, passed their accounts for
millions, before a deputy or clerk appointed by an auditor, who always
considered his own office (...) sinecure. To remedy this evil, an act was
passed in 1785, for (...) examining and auditing the public accounts of the
kingdom; (...) which, they have been examined with attention and scrupulous
^^^ness. Sums amounting in the whole to L.761,000 have been re-paid into the
Exchan^^^ Accountants, or their Representatives, between January 5, 1784, and
January 5, (...) arising from the Investigation of the new Board of Accounts,
and of the Comp^re^^^ Army Accounts * including some Balance re-paid by Agents
in consequence of a (...) Examination made by three Gentlemen appointed for
that Purpose.
The effects of this law will not, however, be felt in its (...) extent, till a
period, which it is to be hoped is a very distant one, (...) we may have the
misfortune to be again embarked in a war. (...) beyond all belief to persons
not experienced in such matters, (...) have been saved, if such an institution
had been provided previ^^^ the two last wars,"

"It must be in the recollection of every one," continues this (...) "how
universal a persuasion prevailed, that the separation of the American Colonies
from Great Britain would be felt as a great and (...) wound, injuring our
resources, and lessening our navigation. (...) cannot, therefore, but
contemplate with some degree of pleasure on (...) effects produced by the
measures before alluded to, and by (...) other causes which have contributed to
the general prosperity of (...) country. To compare the revenue at different
periods, before (...) since the separation, would not alone be admitted as a
criterion, (...) new taxes have been since added to a large amount; although it
(...) equivocal proof of the energy of the country, that, under an imm^^^^
accumulation of debt and taxes, it has been able to effect most (...) fully
what was never before attempted, the gradual and certain ^^^tion of the debt.

A more direct argument will however arise from an inquiry into (...) state of
our navigation and commerce during the years of our (...) prosperity in the
last peace, and at this time. In this inquiry (...) occurs some difficulty as
to the navigation; it is to be lamented, (...) previous to 1786, no ships were
registered in Great Britain, (...) those which traded to the Plantations:
Entries of ships outward (...) till then made very loosely; there was no sort
of check on the (...) or owner, who invariably represented the vessels of a
less burden (...) the real tonnage, to save the payment of light duties and
other charg^^ notwithstanding which, a tolerable judgment may be formed of
(...) increase of our navigation, by comparing the numbers of the (...) cleared
out at the different periods, having in view that, previo^^ the separation of
the Colonies from Great Britain, all American ^^^^ping was deemed British, and
that the size of our ships is now (...) than at that time.

Number of British Ships entered Inwards to Great Britain.
The proportion of these ships, in the last peace, belonging to the Provinces
(now the United States of America) was very large; but it is impossible to
ascertain the number of them, with any degree of accuracy.
Ships. Tonnage. 1772 7,698 757,800 1773 8,259 796,000 1774 8,587 820,000 1775
From this year they continued diminishing ^ll 1782, when there were only 4,652.
9,247 943,000 1787 9,969 1,058,000 1788 11,121, 1,328,000 1789 11,907
1,401,000 1790 12,294 1,442,000

Number of British Ships entered Outward from Great Britain.
Ships. Tonnage. 1772 9,408 923,811 1773 9,396 874,042 1774 9,524 808,904 1775
9,719 888,854 1787 11,762 1,211,199 1788 12,936 1,412,689 1789 13,648 1,515,021
1790 12,762 1,424,912

Total Value of Imports into Great Britain.
1772 L*14,500,000 1773 12,675,000 1774 13,346,000 1775 14,816,000 1787
L.17,804,000 1788 18,027,000 1789 17,821,000 1790 19,130,000

Total Value of Exports from Great Britain.
Foreign Manufactures. British Manufactures. Total. 1772 L.6,746,000
L10,973,000 L17,719,000 1773 7,114,000 9,417,000 16,531,000 1774 6,729,000
10,556,000 17,285,000 1775 6,253,000 10,072,000 16,325,000 1787 L.4,815,000
L.12,054,000 L.16,869,000 1788 4,747,000 12,724,000 17,471,000 1789 5,561,000
13,779,000 19,340,000 1790 5,199,000 14,921,000 20,120,000

The following Abstract shows the comparative situation of Great Britain, in
respect to the particulars mentioned, at the periods annexed -- Taken from the
forementioned pamphlet.

Price of L.3 per Cents Consol. January 27th, 1784. L55. Prince of L.3 per
Cents Consol. February 10th, 1792. L93(...) Price of India Stock, January 27th,
1784. L121. Price of India Stock, February 10,1792. L197(...) Value of Imports,
1783, L13,325,000 Value of Imports, 1790. L19,130,000.

Value of Exports, 1783. Value of Exports, 1790. British Manufacture. Foreign
Produce. Total. British Manufacture. Foreign Produce. Total. L.10,409,00
L.4,332,000 L.14,741,00 L.14,921,000 L.5,199,000 L20,120,000

No. of British Ships entered Inwards to Great Britain in 1783. 7,690 No. of
British Ships entered Inwards to Great Britain in 1790. 12,294. No. of British
Ships cleared Outward from Great Britain in 1783. 7,329. No. of British Ships
cleared Outward from Great Britain in 1790. 12,762. Amount of the Permanent
Taxes in 1783. L.10,194,259. Amount of the Permanent Taxes in 1791.
L.14,132,000. In 1783 the whole of the Revenue (including the Land and Malt)
below the Expenditure on a Peace Establishment. L2,000,000 In 1791 the whole of
the Revenue above the Expenditure on the reduced Peace Establishment.
L1,000,000.

NATIONAL DEBT.] The National Debt of Great Britain in 1755, previous to the
French War was L72,289,000; the Interest L.2,654,000

In January 1776, before the American War it was L.123,964,000; ditto
L.4,411,000

In 1786, till which time the whole Debt of the last War was not funded, it was
L.239,154,000; Exclusive of a capital of L.1,991,000 granted by Parliament to
Loyalists, as a compensation for loss of property in America
ditto L.9,275,000.

No permanent provision has ever been made for the progressive and certain
reduction of this immense Debt, until 1786 -- when Parliament had the wisdom
and the firmness to pass an Act for vesting unalienably, i^ Commissioners, the
sum of one million annually; in which Act every possible precaution was taken
that could be devised for preventing the surplus from being diverted at any
future time, and for carrying to the account of the Commissioners for the
purposes of the Act, the interest of such stock as should be purchased, and
such temporary annuities as should fall in. Under the provisions of this Act,
Eight Millions Two Hundred Thousand Pounds of the capital of the debt has been
purchased; And Loyalists debentures have been satisfied to the amount of
L.686,000, which may be considered as a further reduction of the debt to that
amount.
and the amount of the annual sum, now applicable for the reduction of it is
L.1,360,000.

REVENUE.] The state of the Revenue will appear from the following Report of
the Select Committee, etc. 1786.

1. Total net payments into the Exchequer, from January 5, 1785, to January 5,
1786, L.12,499,916 Deduct therefrom the respited duties paid by the East India
Company L.401,118 457,219 Excess beyond the future amount of the window duties
56,101 L.12,042,697 2. Further produce of the window duty, imposed by the 24th
Geo. III. 253,534 3. Further produce of the duty on two-wheel and four-wheel
carriages 107,186 4. To complete the former duty on male servants 42,444 5.
Further produce of the duties on horses, wagons, and carts 73,610 6. -- taxes
imposed in 1784 22,000 7. -- taxes imposed in 1785, including the improvement
of the medicine duty 242,000 8. Paid at the Excise and Alienation Office, in
part of civil list 14,000 9. Produce of the land and malt 2,600,000 15,397,471

EXPENDITURE.
10. Interest and charges of the public debts L.9,275,769 11. Exchequer bills
258,000 12. Civil list 900,000 13. Charges on the aggregate fund 64,600 14.
Navy 1,800,000 15. Army 1,600,000 16. Ordnance 348,000, 17. Militia 91,000 18.
Miscellaneous services 74,274 19. Appropriated duties 66,538 24,478,18^ (...)

What has been the total improvement of the Revenue from the year 1783 to the
present time, will appear from the following statement: Produce of all the
PERMANENT TAXES.
From 5th January 1783 to 5th January 1784 The actual payments into the
Exchequer in this year were L.523,053 less than this sum; but it is added here,
as duties of customs to that amount, due by the East India Company, were
postponed.
10,194,259 1784 to 1785 10,356,996 1785 to 1786 Deducting L.40^,^^8 duties of
customs paid by the East India Company within this year, which became due in a
former one.
12,104,798 1786 to 1787 Deducting L.522,500 of ditto.
11,867,055 1787 to 1788 12,923,134 1788 to 1789 13,007,642 1789 to 1790
13,433,068 1790 to 1791 L.233,098 of custom duties due by the East India
Company had been suspended in 1782. From this sum should be deducted L.193,000,
being the amount of a 53d Weekly payment, which would leave the produce of the
year L.13,879,000.
14,072,978 1791 to 1792 14,132,000

From the above it appears, that the revenue has almost gradually risen, in the
course of the last nine years, from L.10,194,259 to L.14,132,000.

GOVERNMENT.] The government of Great Britain may be called a limited monarchy.
It is a combination of a monarchical and popular government. The king has, or
at least is understood to have, only the executive power; the legislative is
shared by him and the parliament, or more properly speaking, by the people.
Notwithstanding the limitations of regal power provided by the constitution,
the prerogative of the king is still very great. In consequence of possessing
the executive power of the state, he appoints his privy council and his
ministers, by whom the national business is to be carried on; he has the right
of calling together and dissolving the parliament; he can withhold his assent
from any bill which has passed both houses, and by that means prevent it from
passing into a law; his person is sacred and inviolable; he cannot, in the eye
of the law, do wrong, but the blame of his measures falls always on his
ministers and advisers; he nominates all the great officers of the state and
church; he confers honors, dignities, and titles, especially that of the
peerage; he pardons criminals; he is the supreme commander of the army and
navy, and the head of the church. His income is very ample, amounting annually
to 900,000l. sterling.

The crown is hereditary; both male and female descendants are capable of
succession. By a fundamental law the king must profess the Protestant religion.

The legislative power belongs to the king and parliament, or the great senate
of the nation. This parliament is composed of the peers and commons, and
divided into two assemblies, called the House of Lords and the House of
Commons. The House of Lord is composed, 1. Of the temporal peers, or the
hereditary nobility of the kingdom of England, distinguished by the different
ranks of dukes, marquises, earls, viscounts, and barons; who have by
birthright (...) creation, a seat in the House of Lords, and are hereditary
counselors of the king. 2. Of the spiritual lords, or the two archbishops and
24 bishops of England, who have seats in the house by virtue of th^^ dignities.
3. Of 16 Scotch peers, the representatives of the peerage of Scotland. The
House of Commons is composed of such persons of fortune and interest as are
chosen representatives for the several counties, cities and boroughs of the
kingdom. The number of these representatives is 558, chosen in the following
manner: For the 40 counties of England, two members for each (...) For the 12
counties of Wales, one for each (...) For the counties of Scotland (...) For
the cities in England (...) For the boroughs in England (...) For the two
universities (...) For the cinque ports (...) For the boroughs of Wales (...)
For the boroughs of Scotland (...) (...)

This plan of representation, founded on the ancient state of (...) kingdom, is
at present liable to many objections. Among the pl^^^ which are represented in
parliament, there are many which was formerly flourishing, but which are at
present sunk into insignificance and many towns, now opulent and populous,
which at that time was not yet risen into consequence, have not acquired the
right of send^^ representatives. Several boroughs are become private property;
(...) others the number of electors is very small, and of course easily
influenced by powerful individuals; so that upon the whole the representation
is very unequal and defective: But its present state is so nearly connected
with the rights of private property and the interest of (...) great families,
that it is a very difficult matter to render it equal (...) independent. The
duration of parliaments is at present extended (...) seven years, after the
expiration of which a new general election (...) representatives takes place.
Many of those who are zealous for (...) rights of the people, wish to shorten
the septennial parliaments, beca^^ experience teaches that they give two much
influence to the (...) over the members, and diminish that of the constituents
over their representatives. To be chosen a representative, certain
qualification (...) necessary, as the possession of landed property of the
annual valun^^ 300l. if it be for a borough, and of 500l. a year if it be for a
count^^. No foreigner, though naturalized, can be chosen a member of (...)
House of Commons. In the House of Lords the lord chancellor ^^sides; in the
House of Commons an elective president, called (...) Speaker. Any member of
either house has the right of bringing (...) biil; which, before it can pass
into an act a parliament, and (...) the force of a law, must be agreed to by a
majority of both (...) and afterward receive the assent of the king. Bills
relating to ^^^tion, revenue, and its administration, originate always in the
(...) of Commons, who, by the invaluable privilege of granting or (...) sing
supplies, have the power of promoting or stopping any (...) of government: The
Commons have likewise the privilege, that none of their money bills can be
altered or amended by the Lords. The upper house of parliament have the supreme
judicial authority in the state, to which appeals may be made from the
decisions of the courts of Westminster. The power of parliament is the highest
in the state, and is unlimited; it has even altered more than once the
established religion, and the order of succession to the crown.

In consequence of the mixed character of the English constitution, there have
been, since the time of the Stuarts, two parties in the nation of opposite
political principles; one of which favors the power of the crown, and the
other the democratical, or aristocratical power in the constitution. They were
originally distinguished by the names of Cavaliers and Roundheads; afterward
they were called Tories and Whigs, and at present the Court Party and the
Opposition. The mutual jealousy of these parties, when founded in principle, is
beneficial to the constitution; but their dissensions must often be attributed
to private views, disappointed ambition, and struggle for power: Yet,
notwithstanding the divisions of party, the influence which the king has over
the parliament, by his constitutional prerogative, and the numerous favors and
rewards he has it in his power to bestow, is exceedingly great.

Besides the parliament, the king has the assistance of his ministers, or
privy-counsellors, nominated by himself, and responsible for their advice and
conduct. Among these privy-counsellors are the great officers of the state, who
hold their places during the king's pleasure, and who retain the dignity of
privy-counsellors, though removed from their officers. The offices of Lord
Chamberlain and Earl Marshal are hereditary to the ducal families of Ancaster
and Norfolk. Among the privy-counsellors, those ministers who compose the
cabinet are the principal; the Lord Chancellor, the first Lord of the Treasury,
the Chancellor of the Exchequer, who, when he is at the same time first Lord of
the Treasury, is considered as the first minister, the two Secretaries of State
for the northern and southern department, the Lord President of the Council,
and Lord Privy Seal, to which must be added, the first Lord of the Admiralty:
These ministers are presidents of the principal state departments. Scotland has
its own officers of state and courts of justice.

The administration of justice in England is, as it may be expected in a
constitution so favorable to liberty, famous for its fairness, independence,
and impartiality. The laws of England have been least of any influenced by the
Roman laws, the admission of which the nation has firmly opposed. They are
divided into the unwritten, or common law, and the statute law: The first is
not founded on any known act of the legislature, but transmitted down by
tradition. Its principles are collected from the judgments which have passed
according to it, from time immemorial, and which are carefully preserved under
the name of records. Its legal force is, probably, founded on acts of
parliament, prior to the reign of Richard I. the originals of which are now
lost. The written, or statute law, is the collection of acts of parliament, the
originals of which have been preserved, especially since the time of Edward
III. The chief courts of common law are, 1. the Court of King's Bench, 2. the
Court of Common Pleas, and 3. the Court of Exchequer; each of these courts has
four judges, who (...) not be deprived of their places but on an accusation by
parliament. To obtain legal remedy in cases to which the jurisdiction of the
common law courts did not extend, the courts of equity have been added viz. the
Court of Chancery, under the Lord High Chancellor, and the Court of Exchequer
Chamber. In important and difficult causes, the twelve judges, joined sometimes
by the Lord Chancellor, meet (...) deliberate on the judgments passed in the
courts. There are, besides many provincial and subordinate courts, the
ecclesiastical courts, (...) courts martial, and admiralty court; into the
three latter, the principles and proceedings of the Roman law have been
admitted. From all courts of justice appeals can be made to the House of Lords,
(...) highest judicial tribunal in the kingdom.

It is chiefly in the criminal judicature that the laws of England differ so
greatly and so honorably from those of other counties. Wh^^ a person is
charged with a crime, he is first examined by a magistrate, who may discharge
him if the accusation should be evidently futile (...) false; but if it appears
to have sufficient weight, he binds the party to give bail for his appearance
to answer to the charge; and, in capital cases, he commits him to prison.
Before the party is brought to a trial, the accusation undergoes a second
discussion by the grand jury of the county, consisting of more than 12, and
less than 24, persons of character and respectability; if twelve or more of
them are of opinion that the charge is well grounded, the prisoner is indicted.
He is then brought to the bar of the court to take his trial, in a public
manner, before the judge and petty jury. The latter is composed of twelve
impartial persons of the same rank with the prisoner, any of whom, as far as
twenty persons successively, the prisoner may challenge, if he has any
objection to be tried by them; and this jury are finally to judge the prisoner,
according to the evidence produced in the trial. When the jury have taken their
oaths, the indictment is read to the prisoner, who pleads either guilty, or not
guilty, to it. In the first case, no trial is necessary; in the other, the
evidence of the witnesses, who are on their oath, is produced in presence of
the prisoner, who is allowed to question them himself, or by his counsel, and
to bring witnesses in his defense. When the evidence is before the court, the
judge, in a speech, sums it up, points out the preci^e state of the question,
and gives his opinion concerning the evidence and the point of law. By this
opinion the jury are no further bound than as it coincides with their own; and
they agree among themselves on the decision or verdict which they are to give,
and which must be unanimous it is either that the prisoner is guilty, or not
guilty, of the fact of which he stands accused: If they acquit him, he is
immediately discharged from prison; if he is found guilty, the judge pronounces
the sentence of the law incurred by the crime, and the prisoner is sent back to
prison till the sentence is put in execution. If any extenuating circumstances
appear in the trial, the jury may recommend the convict to mercy; and the king
has the power either to grant him a free pardon, or (...) mitigate the rigor
of his punishment.

Such are the proceedings of criminal justice in England, which manifest the
greatest attention to the liberty and life of the subject which remove every
fear of oppression from the poorest and weal^^^ and which give innocence the
fairest chance of vindicating itself from unjust and malicious accusation.

The laws of Scotland are different from those of England; and they partake
much more of the principles and forms of the civil law. The trial by jury in
Scotland may, perhaps, be considered as an improvement on that mode of trial:
It differs from that in England, by requiring only a majority of two-thirds,
not a unanimity of the jury, in order to give a decisive verdict.

The government of Ireland resembles, in every respect, that of Great Britain,
with which it has now no other connection than that of being subject to the same
king. Ireland has its own parliament, framed on the same plan with the British;
its officers of state, courts of justice, etc. but it is protected by the
British army and navy.

ARMY.] In time of peace the Army consists of about 40,000 men.

CAVALRY.
Horse Guards, 2 troops. Horse Grenadier Guards, 2 troops. Royal regiment of
Horse Guards. 4 Regiments of Horse. 3 Regiments of Dragoon Guards. 6 Regiments
of Dragoons. 13 Regiments of Light Dragoons.
INFANTRY.
3 Regiments of Foot Guards. 73 Regiments of Foot. Artilery Regiment in
England. -- Ireland. Engineers in England. -- Ireland. Marines. Invalids.
In time of peace, most regiments consist of only one battalion, composed of
ten companies; in time of war additional companies are raised, and the number
of regiments increased. The whole of the army last war, including the foreign
troops in English pay, amounted to about 135,000 men. Twelve regiments of
cavalry, and 20 of infantry, are usually in Ireland, and are maintained by that
kingdom, amounting to about 12,000 to 14,000 men: For the service of
Great Britain, the garrisons, and colonies, about 17,000 men are voted annually
by parliament, exclusive of marines.

A militia of about 40,000 men.

NAVY.] The number of Ships in and out of commission, building, etc. in 1787,
were as follows, viz.

Ships of the line 157 Fifties 19 Frigates 143 Sloops 128 Total 447

Ships actually in commission, in 1786, as guard-ships in the principal ports,
and on the several stations, the Channel, North Seas, West Indies, America,
East Indies, Africa, and the Mediterranean, (...) out, etc.

Ships of the line 12 Frigates 27 Sloops 69

The usual complement in time of peace, voted by parliament, 18, (...) seamen,
including about 3,500 marines.

The principal ports of the navy are Portsmouth, Plymouth, (...) Chatham, where
there are excellent dock-yards.

In times of war, as in 1782. the ships fit for actual service (...) according
to the Admiralty Lift, Ships of the line 114 Fifties 11 Frigates 111 Sloops 42
Guard-Ships 24 Total 302

The whole of the fleet carried upwards of 20,000 guns, and (...) manned by
116,546 seamen.

The Royal Navy of Great Britain, as it stood at August, 31, 1784.

Rates of Ships. Complement of Men. Weight of (...) Guns. No. of each rate.
Men. Metals. 1st. 100 and upwards 5 875 to 850 42 24 12 6 2d. 98 to 00 20 750
to 700 32 18 12 6 3d. 80 to 64 130 650 to 500 32 18 9 6 4th. 60 to 50 27 420 to
380 24 12 6and18 9 5th. 44 to 32 102 300 to 220 18 9 6and12 6 6th. 30 to 20 50
200 to 160 9 4 334 Sloops, 18 to 14 143 124 to 110 Bombs, Fireships, etc. 19
Total 496

In commission 25 of the line, 7 fifties, 36 frigates, and 105 (...). When a
ship of war becomes old, or unfit for service, the same (...) transferred to
another, which is built, as it is called, upon her (...).

While a single beam of the old ship remains, the name cannot (...) changed
unless by act of parliament.

The pay of the Officers of the Royal Navy in each Rate. FLA^^

FICERS, and the CAPTAINS to Hags. Per (...) Admirals and Commanders in Chief
of the Fleet L.5 (...) An Admiral 3 10 Vice Admiral 2 10 Rear Admiral 1 15
First Captain to the Commander in Chief 1 (...) Second do. and Captain to other
Admirals 1 (...) -- to V. Admirals if first or second Rates, to have the Pay of
such Rates 0 16 -- to R. Admirals if first or second Rates, to have the Pay of
such Rates 0 (...)

HISTORY.] For this interesting article, the reader is referred (...) Home,
Goldsmith, Macauley or some other professed Historian (...) shall here set down
a chronology of English kings, from the time that this country became united
under one monarch, in the person of Egbert, who subdued the other princes of
the Saxon heptarchy, and gave the name of the Angle-land to this part of the
island, the Saxons, and Angles having about four centuries before, invaded and
subdued the ancient Britons, whom they drove into Wales and Cornwall.

Began to reign.

Sax Princes. 800 Egbert 838 Ethelwulf 857 Ethelbald 860 Ethelbert 866 Ethelred
871 Alfred the Great 901 Edwards the Elder 925 Athelstan 941 Edmund 946 Edred
955 Edwy 959 Edgar 975 Edward the Mar. 978 Ethelred II. 1016 Edmund II. or
(Ironside.
Danish. 1017 Canute, king of Denmark 1035 Harold 1039 Hardicanute
Saxon. 1041 Edward the Confessor 1065 Harold

1066 William I. (Commonly called the conqueror) duck of Normandy, a province
facing the south of England, now annexed to the French monarchy. 1087 William
II. Sons of the Conqueror. 1100 Henry I. 1135 Stephen, grandson to the
Conqueror, by his 14th daughter Adela. 1154 Henry II. (Plantagenet) grandson of
Henry I. by his daughter the empress Matilda, and her 2d husband, Geoffroy
Plantagenet. 1189 Richard I. Sons of Henry II. 1199 John 1216 Henry III. son of
John. 1272 Edward I. son of Henry III. 1307 Edward II. son of Edward I. 1327
Edward III. son of Edward II. 1377 Richard II. grandson of Edward III. by his
eldest son, the Black Prince. 1399 Henry IV. Son to John of Gaunt, duke of
Lancaster, 4th son to Edw. III. Houses of Lancaster. 1423 Henry V. son of Henry
IV. 1422 Henry VI. son of Henry V. 1461 Edward IV. descended from Edward III.
by Lionel his 3d son. House of York. 1483 Edward V. son of Edward IV. 1483
Richard III. brother of Edward IV. 1485 Henry VII. (Tudor son of the countess
of Richmond, of the Houses of Lancaster. Houses of Tudor, in whom were united
the Houses of Lancaster and York, by Henry VII.'s marriage with Elizabeth,
daug. of Edward IV. 1509 Henry VIII. son of Henry VII. 1547 Edward VI. son of
Henry VIII. 1553 Mary Daugthers of Henry VIII. 1558 Elizabeth 1603 James I.
Great grandson of James IV. king of Scotland, by Margaret, daughter of Henry
VII. and first of the Stuart family in England. 1625 Charles I. son of James I.
Common wealth, and protectorate of Cromwell. 1649 Charles II. Sons of Charles
I. 1685 James II. 1688 William III. nephew and son-in-law of James II. and Mary
Daughters of James II. in whom ended the Protestant line of Charles I. for
James II. upon (...) abdicating the throne, carried with him his infant son
(the late Pretender) who was excluded (...) act of parliament, which settled
the succession (...) the next Protestant heirs of James I. The surviving issue
of James, at the time of his death, (...) a son and a daughter, viz. Charles,
who succeeded him, and the Princess Elizabeth, who married the Elector
Palatine, who took the title of king of Bohemia, and left a daughter, the
Princes Sophia, who married the Duke of Brunswick Lunenburgh, by whom she had
George, elec^^^ of Hanover, who ascended the throne, by act of parliament,
expressly made in favor of his mother. 1702 Anne 1714 George I. Houses of
Hanover. 1727 George II. son of George I. 1760 George III. grandson of George
II.

WALES.
THE principality of Wales, long an independent and separate country from
England, and still entirely differing from it in languages and, in some
respects, in manners and customs, is strongly marked (...) by nature, as a
detached district, characterised by an almost continu^^ range of mountains more
or less wild and lofty, and interjacent valleys more or less extensive and
fertile. It occupies all the central part of the western coast, and the country
inland to a moderate distance; li^^ing its northern and southern limits well
defined by the projecting line of coast from the Dee to Anglesea on the one
hand, and the wide entrance of the Bristol channel on the other. The ancient
internal dimensions of Wales have been contracted, by taking from it the whole
county of Monmouth, and a part of the several adjacent English counties. At
present it consists of 12 middle sized counties; For their names, see England.
six of which are reckoned to belong to north, and six to south Wales. In
general population and fertility the latter division has the superiority. All
the Welsh counties, except three, touch the sea coast in some part of their
boundary.

EXTENT AND SITUATION.
Length 130 Miles. between Degrees. 51 and 54 North latitude. Breadth 96 Miles.
Degrees. 2,41 and 4,56 West longitude.

Area in square miles 7011.

NAME AND LANGUAGE.] The Welsh, according to the best antiquaries, are
descendants of the Belgic Gauls, who made a settlement in England about
fourscore years before the first descent of Julius Caesar, and thereby obtained
the name of Galls or Wall^s (the G and W being promiscuously used by the
ancient Britons) that is, Strangers. Their language has a strong affinity with
the Celtic or Phoenician. and is highly commended for its pathetic and
descriptive powers by those who understand it. [For Divisions, see England.]

CLIMATE, SOIL, AND WATER.] The seasons are pretty much the same as in the
Northern parts of England, and the air is sharp, but wholesome. The soil of
Wales, especially toward the North, is mountainous, but contains rich valleys,
which produce crops of wheat, rye and corn. Wales contains many quarries of
freestone and slate, several mines of lead, and abundance of coal-pits. This
country is well supplied with wholesome springs; and its chief rivers are the
Clywd, the Wheeler, the Dee, the Severn, the Elwy, and the Allen, which, near
Mold, sinks under ground, and is lost for a short space. These rivers furnish
Flintshire with great quantities of fish.

MOUNTAINS.] It would be endless to particularize the mountains of this
country. Snowdon, in Caernarvonshire, and Plinlimmon, which lies partly in
Montgomery and partly in Cardiganshire, are the most famous; and their
mountainous situation greatly assisted the natives in making so noble and long
a struggle against the Roman, Anglo-Saxon, and Norman, powers.

POPULATION, INHABITANTS, MANNERS AND CUSTOMS. The inhabitants of Wales are
supposed to amount to about 300,000, and though not in general wealthy, they
are provided with all the necessaries, and many of the conveniences of life.
The Welsh are, if possible, more jealous of their liberties than the English;
and they are remarkable for their sincerity and fidelity. The Welsh may be
called an unmixed people, as may be proved by their keeping up the ancient
hospitality, and their strict adherence to ancient customs and manners. This
appears even among gentlemen of fortune, who in other countries commonly follow
the stream of fashion. We are not however to imagine, that many of the nobility
and gentry of Wales do not comply with the modes and manner of living in
England and France. All the better sort of the Welsh speak the English
language, though numbers of them understand the Welsh.

RELIGION.] The Welsh clergy, in general, are but poorly provided for; and in
many of the country congregations they preach both in Welsh and English. Their
poverty was formerly a vast discouragement to religion and learning, but the
measures taken by the society for propagating christian knowledge, have in a
great degree removed the reproach of ignorance from the poorer sort of the
Welsh. In the year 1749, a hundred and forty-two schoolmasters were employed,
to remove from place to place for the instruction of the inhabitants; and their
scholars amounted to 72,264. No people have distinguished themselves more,
perhaps, in proportion to their abilities, than the Welsh have done by acts of
national munificence. They print, at a vast expense, bibles, common prayers,
and other religious books, and distribute them gratis to the poorer sort. Few
of their towns are unprovided with a free school. The established religion is
that of England.

LEARNING AND LEARNED MEN.] Wales was a seat of learning at a very early
period; but it suffered an eclipse by the repeated massacres of the bards and
clergy. Wickliffism took shelter in Wales, when it was persecuted in England.
The Welsh and Scotch dispute about the nativity of certain learned men,
particularly four of the name of Gildas. Giraldus Cambrensis, whose history was
published by C^^den, was certainly a Welchman; and Leland mentions several
learned men of the same country, who flourished before the reformation.

With regard to the present state of literature among the Welsh, it is
sufficient to say, that some of them make a considerable figure in the republic
of letters, and that many of their clergy are excellent schol^^^.

CITIES, TOWNS, FORTS, AND OTHER EDIFICES, PUBLIC AND PRIVATE.} Wales contains
no cities or towns that are remarkable either for populousness or magnificence.
Beaumaris, a neat well (...) place, is the chief town of Anglesey, The isle of
Anglesey, which is the most western county of North Wales, is surrounded on all
sides by the Irish sea, except on the south east, where it is divided from
Britain by a ^^row strait, called the Menai, which in some places may be passed
on foot at low water; (...) island is of a rhomboidal shape, and from point to
point the length is about 22 miles, and the breadth 20. It contains 74
parishes. The part of the island bordering the Menai is (...) wooded, recalling
to the mind its ancient state, when it was the celebrated seat of the (...),
the terrific rites of whose religion, were performed in the gloom of the
thickest (...) Rude mounds and heaps of stone, supposed to be Druidical
remains, are yet to be seen (...). A little way within, however, the whole
country changes its aspect into a naked tract, without trees or even hedges,
rising in small hills, watered by numerous rills, and fertile in (...) and
corn. The products of Anglesey are corn and cattle. In favorable seasons large
quantities of barley and oats are exported by sea, and several thousand head of
cattle, besides ^^^titudes of sheep and hogs, annually cross the ferry of the
Menai to the main land. (...) fertility is of ancient reputation, for it had
long ago acquired the title of the nursing (...) of Wales. But the wealth and
population of Anglesey have lately received a great (...) from the discovery of
the famous copper mine on Pary's mountain, the largest bed of (...) that metal
probably known in the world. It is wrought not in the common manner of (...)
terraneous mines, but like a stone quarry, open to the day; and the quantities
of ore (...) are prodigious. The ore is poor in quality, and very abundant in
sulphurs: Quantities of nearly pure copper are obtained from the waters lodged
beneath the bed of ore, by the in^^^vention of iron. A lead ore rich in silver
is also found in the same mountain. In (...) north west part of the island is a
quarry of green marble, intermixed with that curious ^^^stance, abestos.
and has a harbor for ships, (...) a castle founded by Edward I. It has no
trade. Brecknock has a trade in the woollen branches. It is moderately large*
well built, and inhabited by several families of gentry. Cardigan is a large
populous town, lying in the neighborhood of lead and silver mines, on the
mouth of the river Towy. Caermarthen has a large bridge, is (...) built and
populous, and is reckoned the first town in South Wale. Its river, the Towy,
admits of vessels of moderate burden, which (...) it a considerable trade.
Pembroke, situated on a creek which co^^^nicates with Milford Haven, is well
inhabited by gentlemen (...) tradesmen, but on the decline, the navigation to
it being injuried by the rubbish of the lime stone quarries near it. A part of
the country is so fertile and pleasant, that it is called Little England.

ANTIQUITIES AND CURIOSITIES, NATURAL AND ARTIFICIAL.} Wales abounds in remains
of antiquity; but the remains of the Druidical institutions, and places of
worship, are chiefly disce^^^ble in the isle of Anglesey, the ancient Mona,
mentioned by Tacitus, who describes it as being the chief seminary of the
Druidical rites and religion.

Among the natural curiosities of this country, are the following. In
Flintshire is a famous well, known by the name of St. Winifred's well, at
which, according to the legendary tales of the common people, miraculous cures
have been performed. The spring boils with vast impetuosity out of a rock at
the foot of a high hill, and is formed into a beautiful polygonal well, covered
with a rich arch supported by pillars, and the roof is most exquisitely carved
in stone. Over the spring is also a chapel, a neat piece of Gothic
architecture, but in a very ruinous state. This spring is supposed to be one of
the finest in the British dominions, and is now applied to the purpose of
turning several mills, for the working of copper, making brass wire, paper and
snuff, and spinning cotton; which branches give great employment to the town
and neighborhood, and by two different trials and calculations lately made, is
found to sling out about twenty-one tons of water in a minute. It never
freezes, or scarcely varies in the quantity of water in droughts, or after the
greatest rains. After a violent fall of rain, it becomes discolored by a
wheyish tinge. The small town adjoining to the well, is known by the name of
Holywell. In Caernarvonshire is the high mountain of Penmanmawr, across the
edge of which the public road lies, and occasions no small terror to many
travelers; from one hand the impending rock seems ready every minute to crush
them to pieces, and the great precipice below, which hangs over the sea, is so
hideous, and, till very lately, when a wall was raised on the side of the road,
was so dangerous that one false step was on dismal consequence. Snowdon hill is
by triangular measurement 1240 yards perpendicular height.

There are a great number of pleasing prospects and picturesque views in Wales;
and this country is highly worthy the attention of the curious traveller.

COMMERCE AND MANUFACTURES.] The Welsh are on a footing, as to their commerce
and manufactures, with many of the western and northern counties of England.
Their trade is mostly inland, or with England, into which they import numbers
of black cattle. Milfordhaven, which is reckoned the finest in Europe, lies in
Pembrokeshire; but the Welsh have hitherto reaped no great benefit from it,
though of late considerable sums have been granted by parliament for its
fortification. The town of Pembroke employs near 200 merchant ships, and its
inhabitants carry of an extensive trade. In Brecknockshire are several woollen
manufactures; and Wales in general carries on a great coal trade with England
and Ireland.

CONSTITUTION AND GOVERNMENT.] Wales was united, and incorporated with England,
in the 27th of Henry VIII. when, by act of parliament, the government of it was
modelled according to the-English form; all laws, customs, and tenures,
contrary to those of England, being abrogated* and the inhabitants admitted to
participation of all the English liberties and privileges, particularly that of
sending members to parliament, viz. a knight for every shire, and a burgess for
every shire-town, except Merioneth.

REVENUE.] As to the revenues, the crown has a small property, in the product
of the silver and lead mines; but it is said that the revenue accruing to the
prince of Wales from his principality, does not exceed 7 or 8,000l. a year. The
land tax of Wales brought in several years ago about L.43,700 a year.

HISTORY.] The ancient history of Wales is uncertain, on account of the number
of petty princes who governed it. That they were sovereign and independent,
appears from the English history. It was formerly inhabited by three different
tribes of Britons; the Silu^^^ the Dimetoe, and the Ordovices. These people
appear never to (...) been entirely subdued by the Romans; though part of their
country from the ruins of castles, was bridled by garrisons. The Saxons
conquered the counties of Monmouth and Hereford, but never penetra^ed farther,
and the Welsh remained an independent people, governed by their own princes and
their own laws. About the year (...) Roderic, king of Wales, divided his
dominions among his three (...) and the names of these divisions were, Demetia,
or South Wales; ^^^^vesia, or Powis-land; and Venedotia, or North Wales. This
divisions gave a mortal blow to the independency of Wales. About the (...)
1112, Henry I. of England, planted a colony of Flemings on the ^^^^tiers of
Wales, to serve as a barrier to England, none of the (...) princes being
powerful enough to oppose them. They made however many vigorous and brave
attempts against the Norman kings of England to maintain their liberties; and
even the English historians ^^mit the injustice of their claims. In 1237, the
crown of England (...) first supplied with a handle for the future conquest of
Wales; (...) old and infirm prince Llewellin, in order to be safe from the
pres^^^tions of his undutiful son Griffyn, having put himself under subjecting
and homage to king Henry III.

But no capitulation could satisfy the ambition of Edward I. who resolved to
annex Wales to the crown of England; and Llewellin, prince of Wales, disdaining
the subjection to which old Llewellin (...) submitted, Edward raised an
irresistible army at a prodigious (...) with which he penetrated as far as
Flint, and taking possession of (...) isle of Anglesey, he drove the Welsh to
the mountains of Snowdon and obliged them to submit to pay a tribute. The
Welsh, however made several efforts under young Llewellin; but at last, in
1285, (...) was killed in battle. He was succeeded by his brother David, the
(...) independent prince of Wales, who, falling into Edward's (...) through
treachery, was by him most barbarously and unjustly hang^^ and Edward from that
time pretended that Wales was annexed to (...) crown of England. It was about
this time, probably, that Edward perpetrated the inhuman massacre of the Welsh
bards. Perceiving that his cruelty was not sufficient to complete his conquest,
he (...) his queen in the year 1282, to be delivered in Caernarvon castle, that
the Welsh having a prince born among themselves, might the (...) readily
recognize his authority. This prince was the unhappy Edward II. and from him
the title of prince of Wales has always (...) descended to the eldest sons of
the English kings. The history of Wales and England, from this period, becomes
the same. It is prop^^^^ however, to observe, that the kings of England have
always found (...) their interest to soothe the Welsh with particular marks of
their ^^gard. Their eldest sons not only held the titular dignity, but act^^^^
kept a court at Ludlow; and a regular council, with a president, (...) named by
the crown, for the administration of all the affairs of (...) principality.
This was thought so necessary a piece of policy, (...) when Henry VIII. had no
son, his daughter Mary was created ^^^^cess of Wales.

SCOTLAND.
EXTENT AND SITUATION.
Length 300 Miles. between Degrees. 54 and 59 North latitude. Breadth 190
Miles. 1 and 6 West longitude.

NAMES.] THE word Scot is no other than a corruption of Scuyth, or Scythian,
being originally from that immense country, called Scythia by the ancients. It
is termed, by the Italians, Scotia; by the Spaniards, Escotia; by the French,
Ecosse; and by the Scots, Germans, and English, Scotland.

BOUNDARIES.] Scotland, which contains an area of 27,794 square miles, is
bounded on the south by England; and on the north, east, and west, by the
Deucaledonian, German, and Irish seas, or, more properly, the Atlantic Ocean.

DIVISIONS AND SUBDIVISIONS.] See England.

CLIMATE, SOIL, AIR, AND WATER.] In the northern parts, daylight, at midsummer,
lasts eighteen hours and five minutes. The air of Scotland is more temperate
than could be expected in so northerly a climate. This arises partly from the
variety of its hills, valleys, rivers, and lakes; but still more, as in
England, from the vicinity of the sex, which affords those warm breezes, that
not only soften the natural ^^eness of the air, but, by keeping it in perpetual
agitation, render it pure and healthful, and prevent those epidemic distempers
that prevail in many other countries. In the neighborhood of some high
mountains, however, which are generally covered with snow, the air is keen and
piercing for about nine months in the year. The soil in general is not so
fertile as that of England; and in many places less fitted for agriculture than
for pasture. At the same time, there are particular plains and valleys of the
most luxuriant fertility. The finer particles of earth, incessantly washed down
from the mountains, and deposited in these valleys, afford them a vegetative
nourishment, which is capable of carrying the strongest plants to perfection:
Though experience has proved, that many vegetables and hortulane productions do
not come so soon to maturity in this country as in England. There is, indeed, a
great variety of soils in Scotland, the face of which is agreeably diversified
by a charming intermixture of natural objects. The vast inequalities of the
ground, if unfavourable to the labors of the husbandman, are particularly
pleasing to a traveller, and afford those delightful situations for
country-houses, of which many of the Scottish nobility and gentry have so
judiciously availed themselves. It is their situation, more than any expensive
magnificence, that occasions the seats of the dukes of Argyle and Athol, of
Lord Hopton, and many others, to six the attention of every traveller. The
water in Scotland, as every where else, depends on the qualities of the soil
through which it passes. Water passing through a heavy soil is turbid and
noxious, but filtrating through sand or gravel, it is clear, light, and
salutary to the stomach. This last is in general the case in Scotland, where
the water is better than that of more southern climates, in proportion as the
land is worse.

MOUNTAINS.] The principal mountains in Scotland are the Grampion hills, which
run from east to west, from near Aberdeen to Cowal in Argyleshire, almost the
whole breadth of the kingdom. Another chain of mountains, called the Pentland
hills, runs through Lothian (...) joins those of Twcedale. A third, called
Lammar-Muir, rises (...) the eastern coast, and runs westward through the
Merse. (...) those continued chains, among which we may reckon the Chevi^^
(...) Tiviot Hills, on the borders of England, Scotland contains many ^^tached
mountains, which, from their conical figure, sometimes (...) the Celtic word
Laws. Many of them are stupendously high, (...) beautiful forms; but too
numerous to be particularized here.

RIVERS, LAKES, AND FORESTS.] The largest river in Scotland, i^ (...) Forth,
which rises in Monteith near Callendar, and passing by Sti^^^ after a number of
beautiful meanders, discharges itself near Edin^^^^ into that arm of the German
sea to which it gives the name of Fr^^^^ Forth. Second to the Forth is the Tay,
which issues out of Loc^ (...) in Broadalbin, and running south east, passes
the town of Perth, (...) falls into the sea at Dundee. The Spey, which is
called the most ^^^^id river in Scotland, issues from a lake of the same name
in Bad^^ and, running from south-west to south-east, falls into the sea near
^^^^gin; as do the rivers Dee and Don, which run from west to east, (...)
disembogue themselves at Aberdeen. The Tweed rises on the (...) of Lanerkshire,
and, after many beautiful serpentine turnings, (...) charges itself into the
sea at Berwick, where it serves as a (...) between Scotland and England, on the
eastern side. The Clyde (...) large river on the west of Scotland, and falls
into the Frith of (...) opposite to the isle of Bute. Besides those capital
rivers, Scotland ^^^^tains many of an inferior sort, well provided with salmon,
trout, (...) other fishes, which equally enrich and beautify the country. (...)
of those rivers go by the name of Esh, which is the old Celtic (...) water. The
greatest improvement for inland navigation that has (...) attempted in Great
Britain, was undertaken at a very considerable ^^pense, by a society of
public-spirited gentlemen, for joining the (...) Forth and Clyde together; by
which a communication has been ^^^^ed between the east and west seas, to the
advantage of the whole ^^^^dom.

The lakes of Scotland (there called Lochs) are too many to be particularly
described. Those called Loch Tay, Loch Lomond, Loch (...) Loch Au, and one or
two more, present us with such picturesque (...) as are scarcely equalled in
Europe, if we except Ireland. Seve^^^ ^^tness lakes are beautifully fringed
with woods, and contain (...) fresh water fish. The Scots sometimes give the
name of a loch (...) arm of the sea; for example, Loch Fyn, which is 60 miles
long (...) four broad, and is famous for its excellent herrings. The Loch (...)
Spi^ie, near Elgin, is remarkable for its number of swans and cy^^^ which often
darken the air with their flights; owing, as some thi^^^ the plant olorina,
which grows in its waters, with a straight stal^^ a cluster of seeds at the
top. Near Lochness is a hill almost two (...) perpendicular, on the top of
which is a lake of cold fresh water, (...) 30 fathoms in length, too deep ever
yet to be fathomed, and (...) never freezes; whereas, but 17 miles from thence,
the lake Loch^^^^ or Green Lake, is covered with ice all the year round.
Besides (...) rivers and lochs, and others two numerous to mention, the co^^^^
Scotland are in many parts indented with large, bold, and (...) bays or arms of
the sea; as the bay of Gl^nluce and Wigtown (...) sometimes they are called
Friths, as the Solway Frith, which separates Scotland from England on the west;
the Frith of Forth, Murray Frith, and those of Cromarty and Dornock.

The face of Scotland, even where it is most uninviting, presents us with the
most incontrovertible evidences of its having been formerly overrun with
timber. The deepest morasses, contain large logs of wood; and their waters
being impregnated with turpentine have a preserving quality, as appears by the
human bodies which have been discovered in those morasses. Fir trees grow in
great perfection almost all over Scotland, and form beautiful plantations. The
Scotch ^^k is excellent in the Highlands, where some woods reach 20 or 30 miles
in length, and four or five in breadth but without being of much emolument to
the proprietors, being at too great a distance from water carriage.

METALS AND MINERALS.] Though Scotland does not at present boast of its gold
mines, yet it is certain, that it contains such, or at least that Scotland
formerly afforded a considerably quantity of that metal for its coinage. James
V. and his father contracted with certain Germans for working the mines of
Crawford-Moor; and it is an undoubted fact, that when James V. married the
French king's daughter, a number of covered dishes, filled with coins of Scotch
gold, were presented to the guests by way of desert. The civil wars and
troubles which followed, under his daughter, and in the minority of his
grandson, drove those foreigners, the chief of whom was called Cornelius, from
their works, which since that time have never been recovered.

Several landholders in Scotland derive a large profit from their lead mines,
which are said to be very rich, and to produce large quantities of silver; but
we know of no silver miner that are worked at present. Some copper mines have
been found near Edinburgh; and many parts of Scotland, in the east, west, and
nothern counties produce excellent coal of various kinds, large quantities of
which are exported, to the vast emolument of the public. Limestone is here in
great plenty, as is freestone; so that the houses of the better fort are
constructed of the most beautiful materials. The indolence of the inhabitants
of many places in Scotland, where no coal is found, prevented them from
supplying that defect by plantations of wood; and the peat-mosses being in many
parts, of the north especially, almost exhausted, the inhabitants are put to
great difficulties for fuel; however the taste for plantations, of all kinds,
that now prevails, will soon remedy that inconvenience.

Lapis lazuli is said to be dug up in Lanerkshire; alum mines have been found
in Bamffshire; crystal, variegated pebbles, and other transparent stones, which
admit of the finest polish for seals, are found in various parts; as are talc,
flint, sea-shells, potters clay, and fullers earth. The stones which the
country people call elf-arrow heads, and ^o which they assign a supernatural
origin and use, were probably the flint-heads of arrows made use of by the
Caledonians and ancient Scots. No country produces greater plenty of iron-ore
both in mines and stones, than Scotland; of which the proprietors now begin to
partake of the profits.

VEGETABLE AND ANIMAL PRODUCTIONS BY SEA AND LAND.} It is certain, that the
soil (...) Scotland, may be rendered, in ^^ny parts, nearly as fruitful as that
of England. It is even said, (...) some tracts of the low countries at present
exceed in value English ^^tates of the same extent, because they are far less
exhausted and (...) out than those of the southern parts of the island; and
agriculture (...) now perhaps as well understood, both in theory and practice,
(...) many of the Scotch landlords and farmers, as it is in any part of ^^rope.

The merchants of Glasgow, who are the life and soul of (...) part of the
kingdom, and into whose hands a very considerable part of the landed property
has lately fallen, while they are daily ^^^troducing new branches of commerce,
are no less attentive to the ^^^^ress of agriculture, by which they do their
country in particular, (...) the whole island in general, the most essential
service. The (...) genius of these people extends even to moors, rocks, and
mar^^^^ which being hitherto reckoned useless, were consequently negle^^^^ but
are now brought to produce certain species of grain or timber, (...) which the
soil is best adapted.

But the fruits of skill and industry are chiefly perceivable in (...) counties
lying upon the river Forth, called the Lothians, where (...) culture is
thoroughly understood, and the farmers, who generally (...) from 3 to 500l. per
ann. are well fed, well clothed, and comfort^^^^ lodged. The reverse, however,
may be observed of a very consid^^^^ part of Scotland, which still remains in a
state of nature, and (...) the landlords, ignorant of their real interest,
refuse to grant such ^^^^es as would encourage the tenant to improve his own
farm. In (...) places the husbandmen barely exist upon the gleanings of a (...)
farm, seldom exceeding 20 or 30l. per ann. the cattle are lean and (...) the
houses mean beyond expression, and the face of the country ^^^^hibits the most
deplorable marks of poverty and oppression. (...) from a mistaken notion of the
landed people in general, the (...) part of the kingdom lies naked and exposed,
for want of such (...) rows and planting as adorn the country of England. They
co^^^^ hedges as useless and cumbersome, as occupying more room than (...) they
call stone enclosures, which, except in the Lothians already ^^^^tioned, are
generally no other than low paltry walls, huddled up (...) loose stones,
without lime or mortar, which have a black and mean appearance.

The soil in general produces wheat, rye, barely, oats, hemp, flax, (...) and
pasture. In the southern counties the finest garden fruits, particularly
apricots, nectarines, and peaches, are said to fall little, if at (...) short
of those in England; and the same may be said of the (...) fruits. The
uncultivated parts of the Highlands abound in various (...) of salubrious and
pleasant-tasted berries; though many extensive (...) are covered with a strong
heath. The seacoast produces the al^^ ^^^rina, dulse or dulish, a most
wholesome nutritive weed, in great quantities, and other marine plants.

The Scots have improved in their fisheries as much as they have (...) their
manufactures and agriculture: For societies have been (...) which have carried
that branch of national wealth to a per^^^^ that never was before known in that
country; and bids fair to (...) late the Dutch themselves in curing, as well as
catching, their fish. In former times, the Scots seldom ventured to fish above
a league's distance from the land; but they now ply in the deep waters as
boldly and successfully as any of their neighbors. Their salmons, which they
can send more early, when prepared, to the Levant and southern markets, than
the English or Irish can, are of great service to the nation, as the returns
are generally made in specie, or beneficial commodities.

The numbers of black cattle that cover the hills of Scotland toward the
Highlands, and sheep that are fed upon the beautiful mountains of Tweedale, and
other parts of the south, are almost incredible, and formerly brought large
sums into the country; the black cattle especially, which, when fattened on the
southern pastures, have been reckoned superior to English beef. This trade is
now said to be on the decline, in consequence of the vast increase of
manufacturers in Scotland, whose demand for butchers meat must lessen the
exportation of cattle into England. Some are of opinion, that a sufficient
stock, by proper methods, may be raised to supply both markets, to the great
e^olument of the nation.

POPULATION, INHABITANTS, MANNERS, AND CUSTOMS. If we consult the most ancient
and creditable histories, the population of Scotland in the thirteenth century,
must have been excessive, as it afforded so many thousands to fall by the
swords of the English. For the present number of inhabitants in Scotland, see
the General Table of Great Britain.

The people of Scotland are generally raw-boned; and a kind of a
characteristical feature, that of high-cheek bones, is observable in their
faces; they are lean, but clean limbed, and can endure incredible fatigues.
Their adventuring spirit was chiefly owning to their laws of succession, which
invested the elder brother, as head of the family, with the inheritance, and
left but a very scanty portion for the other sons. This obliged the latter to
seek their fortunes abroad, though no people have more affection for their
native soil than the Scots have in general. It is true, this disparity of
fortune among the sons of one family prevails in England likewise; but the
resources which younger brothers have in England are numerous, compared to
those of a country so narrow, and so little improved, either by commerce or
agriculture, as Scotland was formerly.

It remains perhaps a question, whether that lettered education, for which the
Scots were noted among the neighboring nations, was not of prejudice to their
country, while it was of the utmost service to many of its natives. Their
literature, rendered them acceptable and agreeable among foreigners; but at the
same time it drained the nation of that order of men, who are the best fitted
for forming and executing the great plans of commerce and agriculture for the
public emolument.

With regard to gentlemen who live at home, upon estates of 300l. (...) year
and upwards, they differ little or nothing in their manners, and (...) of
living, from their English neighbors of the like fortunes.

The peasantry have their peculiarities; their ideas are confined; but no
people can conform their tempers better than they do to their (...) They are
taughs from their infancy to bridle their passions, to behave submissively to
their superiors, and live within the boun^^^ of the most rigid economy. Hence
they save their money and (...) constitutions, and few instances of murder,
perjury, robbery and other atrocious vices, occur at present in Scotland. They
seldom enter ^^^^ly upon any daring enterprise; but when they act in concert,
the secresy, sagacity, and resolution, with which they carry on any desperate
undertaking, is not to be paralleled; and their fidelity to one another, under
the strongest temptations arising from their poverty, (...) still more
extraordinary. Their mobs are managed with all the ^^^tion of conspiracies;
witness that which put Porteus to death in 17^^ in open defiance of law and
government, and in the midst of 20,^^^ people; and, though the agents were well
known, and some of then tried, with a reward of 500l. annexed to their
conviction, yet no ^^^^dence could be found sufficient to bring them to
punishment. The fidelity of the Highlanders of both sexes, under a still
greater temptation, to the young Pretender after his defeat at Culloden, could
sc^^^ly be believed were it not well attested.

The inhabitants of those parts of Scotland, who live chiefly by ^^^ture, have
a natural vein for poetry; and the beautiful simplicity of the Scotch tunes is
relished by all true judges of nature. Love is generally the subject, and many
of the airs have been brought upon (...) English stage with variations, under
new names, but with this disadvantage, that, though rendered more conformable
to the rules of (...) they are mostly altered for the worse, being stripped of
that (...) simplicity, which, however irregular, is their most essential
characteristic, which is so agreeable to the ear, and has such powers over
(...) human breast. Those of a more lively and merry strain have had (...)
fortune, being introduced into the army in their native dress, by the fife, an
instrument for which they are remarkably well suited.

Dancing is a favorite amusement in this country, but little (...) is paid to
art or gracefulness; the whole consists in agility, and i^ keeping time in
their own tunes, which they do with great exactness. One of the particular
diversions practiced by the gentlemen, is the (...) which requires an equal
degree of art and strength; it is played (...) bat and a ball; the latter is
smaller and harder than a cricket ball; (...) bat is of a taper construction,
till it terminates in the part that (...) the ball, which is loaded with lead,
and faced with horn. The diversion itself resembles that of the Mall, which was
common in England in the middle of the last century. An expert player will send
the (...) an amazing distance at one stroke; each party follows his ball upon
(...) open heath, and he who strikes it in fewest strokes into a hole, who the
game. The diversion of Curling is likewise, I believe, peculiar (...) the
Scots. It is performed upon ice, with large flat stones, often (...) twenty to
two hundred pounds weight each, which they hurl from a common stand to a mark
at a certain distance; and whoever is ^^^est the mark is the victor. These two
may be called the standing ^^^^mer and winter diversions of Scotland. The
natives are expert (...) the other diversions common in England, cricket
excepted, of (...) they have no notion; the gentlemen considering it as too
athle^^^ mechanical.

LANGUAGE.] The language of the Highlanders, especially (...) Lochaber and
Baden^ch, is radically Celtic.

RELIGION.] Ancient Scottish historians, with Bid, and other writers,
generally agree that Christianity was first taught in Scotland by some of the
disciples of St. John the apostle, who fled to this northern corner to avoid
the persecution of Domitian, the Roman emperor; though it was not publicly
professed till the beginning of the third century, when a prince, whom Scotch
historians call Donald the First, his queen, and several of his nobles, were
solemnly baptized. It was farther confirmed by emigration from South Britain,
during the persecutions of Aurelius and Dioclesian, when it became the
established religion of Scotland, under the management of certain learned and
pious men, named Culdees, who seem to have been the first regular clergy in
Scotland* and were governed by overseers or bishops chosen by themselves, from
among their own body, and who had no pre-emi^^^ce or rank over the rest of
their brethren.

Thus, independent of the church of Rome, Christianity seems to have been
taught, planted, and finally confirmed in Scotland as a national church, where
it flourished in its native simplicity, till the arrival of Palladius, a priest
sent by the bishop of Rome in the fifth century, who found means to introduce
the modes and ceremonies of the Romish church, which at last prevailed, and
Scotland became involved in that darkness which for many ages overspread
Europe; though their dependence upon the Pope was very slender, when compared
to the implicit subjection of many other nations.

The Culdees, however, long retained their original manners, and remained a
distinct order, notwithstanding the oppression of the Roman Clergy, so late as
the age of Robert Bruce, in the 14th century, when they disappeared. But it is
worthy of observation, that the opposition to the old Religion in this island,
though it ceased in Scotland upon the extinction of the Cludees, was in the
same age revived in England by John Wickliffe, a man of abilities and learning,
who was the forerunner, in the work of reformation, to John Huss, and Jerome of
Prague, as the latter were to Martin Luther, and John Calvin.

The reformation in Scotland began in the reign of James V. made great progress
under that of his daughter Mary, and was at length completed through the
preaching of John Knox, who had adopted the doctrines of Calvin, and in a
degree was the apostle of Scotland.

The bounds of this work do not admit of entering at large upon the doctrinal
and oeconomical part of the church of Scotland. It is sufficient to say, that
its first principle is a parity of ecclesiastical authority among all its
presbyters; and it is modelled principally after the Calvinistical plan
established at Geneva. The power of the Scotch clergy is at present very
moderate, or at least very moderately exercised. They have been ever since the
Revolution, firm adherents to civil liberty, and the house of Hanover; and
acted with remarkable intrepidity during the rebellion in 1745. They dress
without clerical robes; but some of them appear in the pulpit in gowns, after
the Geneva form, and bands. They make no use of set forms in worship. The rents
of the bishops, since the abolition of episcopacy, are paid to the king, who
commonly appropriates them to pious purposes. A thousand pounds a year is
always sent by his majesty for the use of the protestant schools erected by act
of parliament in North Britain, and the Western Isles; and the Scotch clergy,
of late, have planned out funds for the support of their widows and orphans.
The number of parishes in Scotland are eight hundred and ninety, whereof
thirty-one are collegi^^ churches, that is, where the cure is served by more
than one mini^^^^.

The highest ecclesiastical authority in Scotland is the general assembly,
which we many call the ecclesiastical parliament of Scotland. (...) consists of
commissioners, some of which are laymen, under the title (...) ruling elders,
from presbyteries, royal burghs, and universities. A presbytery, consisting of
under twelve ministers, sends two ministers, (...) one ruling elder: If it
contains between twelve and eighteen ministers it sends three, and one ruling
elder: If it contains between eighteen and twenty-four ministers, it sends four
ministers and two ruling ^^ders; but if the presbytery has twenty-four
ministers, it (...) five ministers and two ruling elders. Every royal burgh
sends (...) ruling elder, and Edinburgh two; whose election must be attested by
the respective kirk-sessions of their own burghs. Every univer^^^ sends one
commissioner, usually a minister of their own body. (...) commissioners are
chosen yearly, six weeks before the meeting of (...) assembly. The ruling
elders are often of the first quality of the country.

The king presides by his commissioner (who is always a noble (...) in this
assembly, which meets once a year; but he has no voice in (...) deliberations.
The order of their proceedings is regular, though (...) number of members often
creates a confusion; which the mod^^^^ who is chosen by them to be as it were
speaker of the house, h^^ (...) sufficient authority to prevent. Appeals are
brought from all the (...) ecclesiastical courts in Scotland to the general
Assembly; and ^^^^peal lies from its determinations in religious matters.

Provincial synods are next in authority to the general Assembly* They are
composed of a number of the adjacent presbyteries, (...) whom they have a
power; and there are fifteen of them in Scotland. But their acts are reversible
by the general Assembly.

Subordinate to the synods, are presbyteries, sixty-nine of which (...) in
Scotland, each consisting of a number of contiguous parishes. The ministers of
these parishes, with one ruling elder, chosen half-yearly out of every
kirk-session, compose a presbytery. These presbyteri^^ meet in the head town of
that division; but have no jurisdiction beyond their own bounds, though within
these they have cognizance of all ecclesiastical causes and matters. A chief
part of their business (...) the ordination of candidates for livings, in the
which they are regular (...) solemn. The patron of a living is bound to
nominate or present in (...) months after a vacancy, otherwise the presbytery
fills the place (...) devoluto; but that privilege does not hold in royal
burghs.

A kirk-session is the lowest ecclesiastical judicatory in Scotland and its
authority does not extend beyond its own parish. The members consist of the
minister, elders, and deacons. The deacons (...) laymen, and have the
superintendency of the poor, and take (...) of other parochial affairs. The
elder, or, as he is called, the ruling (...) is a place of great parochial
trust, and he is generally a lay person (...) quality or interest in the
parish. They are supposed to act in (...) of co-ordinancy with the minister,
and to be assisting to him in (...) of his clerical duties, particularly in
catechizing, visiting the sick, (...) at the communion table.

The office of ministers, or preaching presbyters, includes the offices of
deacons and ruling-elders; they alone can preach, administer the sacraments,
catechize, pronounce church censures, ordain deacons and ruling-elders, assist
at the imposition of hands upon other ministers, and moderate or preside in all
ecclesiastical judicatories.

The other sects of dissenters in Scotland are episcopalians, a few quakers,
many Roman Catholics and some sectaries, who are denominated from their
preachers. Episcopacy, from the time of the restoration in 1660, to that of the
Revolution in 1688, was the established church of Scotland. The partisans of
the duke of York, retained the episcopal religion; and king William's
government was rendered so unpopular in Scotland, that in queen Anne's time,
the episcopalians were more numerous in some parts than the Presbyterians; and
their meetings, which they held under the act of Toleration, as well attended.
A Scotch episcopalian thus becoming another name for a Jacobite, they received
some checks after the rebellion in 1715; but they recovered themselves so well,
that at the breaking out of the rebellion in 1745, they became again numerous,
after which the government found means, to invalidate the acts of their
clerical order. Their meetings, still subsist, but thinly.

Scotland, during the time of episcopacy, contained two archbishopricks, St.
Andrews and Glasgow; and twelve bishoprics.

LEARNING AND LEARNED MEN.] For this article we may refer to the literary
history of Europe for 1400 years past. The western parts and isles of Scotland
produced St. Patrick, the celebrated apostle of Ireland; and many others since,
whose barn names would make a long article. Charles the Great, or Charlemagne,
most unquestionably held a correspondence by letters with the kings of
Scotland, with whom he formed a famous league; and employed Scotchmen in
planning, settling, and ruling his favorite universities, and other seminaries
of learning, in France, Italy, and Germany. It is an undoubted truth, though a
seemingly paradoxical fact, that Harbor, a Scotch poet. Philosopher, and
historian, though prior in time to Chaucer, having flourished in the year 1638,
wrote, according to the modern ideas, as pure English as that bard, and his
versification is perhaps more harmonious. The destruction of the Scotch
monuments of learning and antiquity have rendered their early annals lame, and
often fabulous: but the Latin style of Buchanan's history is, to this day, the
most classical of all modern productions. The letters of the Scotch kings to
the neighboring princes, are incomparably the finest compositions of the times
in which they were written, and are free from the barbarisms of those sent them
in answer. This has been considered as a proof, that classical, learning was
more cultivated at the court of Scotland, than at any other in Europe.

The discovery of the logarithms, a discovery, which in point of ingenuity and
utility, may vie with any that has been made in modern times, is the
indisputable right of Napier of Merchiston. And since his time, the
mathematical sciences have been cultivated in Scotland with great success.
Keil, in his physico-mathematical works, to the clearness of his reasoning, has
added the coloring of a poet, which is the more remarkable, not only as the
subject is little susceptible of ornament, but as he wrote in an ancient
language. Of all writers on astronomy, Gregory is allowed to be one of the most
perfect and elegant Maclaurin, the companion and the friend of Sir Isaac
Newton, (...) endowed with all that precision and force of mind, which rendered
him peculiarly fitted for bringing down the ideas of that great man (...) the
level of ordinary apprehensions, and for diffusing that light through the
world, which Newton had confined within the sphere of the learned. His Treatise
on Fluxions is regarded by the best judges, in Europe, as the clearest account
of the most refined and subtle sp^^^lations on which the human mind ever
exerted itself with succ^^^ While Maclaurin pursued this new career, a
geometrician, no less ^^^mous, distinguished himself in the sure, but almost
deserted track of antiquity. This was the late Dr. Simson, so well known over
Europe, for his illustration of the ancient geometry. His Elements of Euclid,
and above all, his Conic Sections, are sufficient, of themselves, to establish
the scientific reputation of his native country.

This, however, does not rest on the character of a few mathematicians and
astronomers. The fine arts have been called sisters to do note their affinity.
There is the same connection between the sciences, particularly those which
depend on observation. Mathematics and physics, properly so called, were in
Scotland accompanied by the other branches of study to which they are allied.
In medicine, particularly, the names of Pitcairn, Arbuthnot, Monro, Smellie,
and Whyt, hold a distinguished place.

Nor have the Scots been unsuccessful in cultivating the Belles Lettres.
Foreigners who inhabit warmer climates, and conceive the northern nations
incapable of tenderness and feeling, are astonished at the poetic genius and
delicate sensibility of Thomson.

But of all literary pursuits, that of rendering mankind more virt^^^ and
happy, which is the proper object of what is called morals, (...) to be
regarded with peculiar honor and respect. The philosophy of Dr. Hutcheson*
Ireland also claims the honor of giving birth to this Gentleman, and upon,
((...))* good authority.
not to mention other works more subtle and (...) but less convincing and less
instructive, deserves to be read by all (...) know their duty* or who would
wish to practice it. Next to Loch^^^ Essay on the Human Understanding, it is
perhaps the best dissection of the human mind, that has appeared in modern
times; and it is (...) wise the most useful supplement to that essay.

It would be endless to mention all the individuals, who have distinguished
themselves in the various branches of literature; particularly as those who are
alive (some of them in high esteem for histeri^^ethical, and sermonic
composition) dispute the palm of merit (...) the dead, the cover their country
with unfading laurels.

UNIVERSITIES.] The universities of Scotland are four, viz. St. St. Andrews has
a Chancellor, two Principals, and eleven Professors in Greek. Moral Philosophy,
Church History, Humanity, Natural Philosophy, Divinity, Hebrew, Mathematics,
Medicine. Logic* Civil History,

This University possesses several very great advantages for the education of
youth, air is pure and salubrious; the place for exercise dry and extensive;
the (...) (...) selves are healthy and innocent. It is situated in a
peninsulated country, remote (...) ^^^merce with the world, the haunt of
dissipation. From the smallness of the Society (...) student's character is
perfectly known. No little irregularity can be committed, but it is soon
discovered and checked: Vice cannot gain consequence in this place, for the
incorrigible are never permitted to remain the corruptors of the rest.


^^^drews, founded in 1411. -- Glasgow Glasgow has a Chancellor, Rector, Dean
of Faculty, Principal, and fourteen Professors in Greek, Moral Philosophy,
Divinity, Humanity, Natural Philosophy, Civil and Scotch Law, Hebrew,
Mathematics, Medicine, Oriental Languages, Practical Astronomy, Anatomy. Logic,
History,


about 1453. -- Aberdeen, Aberdeen has properly two colleges, viz. King's
College, and Marischal College, King's College has a Chancellor, Rector,
Principal, and seven Professors in Greek, Philosophy, Civil Law, Humanity,
Divinity, Medicine. Oriental Languages,

Ma^schal College has a Chancellor, Rector, Principal, and seven Professors in
Greek, Natural Philosophy, Divinity, Oriental Languages, Mathematics, Medicine.
Moral Philosophy and Logic,


1494. -- And Edinburgh, At present (1790) the Senatus Academicus of this
University consists of the following members, arranged according to the
different faculties.

Faculty of Theology.
William Robertson, D. D. Principal of the College. Andrew Hunter, D. D.
Professor of Divinity. Thomas Hardy, D. D. Regius Professor of Church History.
James Robertson, D. D. Professor of Oriental Languages, and Emeritus Secretary
and Librarian.
Faculty of Law.
Robert Dick, Advocate, Professor of Civil Law. Allan Maconoehie, do. do. of
Public Law. Alexander Fraser Tytler, do. do. of Universal Civil History, and of
Greek and Roman Antiquities. David Hume, do. do. of Scots Law.
Faculty of Medicine.
Alexander Monro, M. D. Professor of Medicine, Anatomy and Surgery. James
Gregory, M. D. do. of the Practice of Physic. Joseph Black, M. D. do. of
Medicine and Chemistry. Francis Home, M. D. do. do. and Materia Medica. Andrew
Duncan, M. D. do. of the Theory of Physic. Daniel Rutherford, M. D. do. of
Medicine and Botany. Alexander Hamilton, M. D. of Midwifery.
Faculty of Arts.
George Stewart, L. L. D. Emeritus Professor of Humanity. Adam Fergusson* L. L.
D. do. do. of Moral Philosophy, and joint Professor of Mathematics. Rugh ^air,
D. D. do. do. of Rhetoric and Belles Lettres. Andrew Dalziel, A. M. Professor
of Greek, and Secretary and Librarian. John Robison, A. M. Professor of Natural
Philosophy. ^^gald Stewart, A. M. do. of Moral Philosophy. John Hill, L. L. D.
do. of Humanity. John Bruce, A. M. Joint Professor of Logic. John Walker, D. D
Regius Professor of Natural History and Keeper of the Museum. William
Greenfield, A. M. Professor of Rhetoric and Belles Lettres. John Playfair, A.
M. do. of Mathematics. Robert Blair, M. D. Regius Professor of Practical
Astronomy. James Finlayson, A. M. Joint Professor of Logic. Andrew Coventry, M.
D. Professor of Agriculture.
The number of Students during the session of the College commencing Oct. 10,
(...) and ending May 6th, 1790, was nearly as follows: Students in Divinity,
130 -- Law, 100 -- Physic, 440 General Classics, 420 In all 1090

The old buildings having fallen into decay, have been partly taken down, and a
(...) building is now erecting, the foundation of which was laid with great
ceremony, (...) 1789. The east and west points of this pile extend 255 feet,
and the south and north (...) feet. The rooms for the Library and Museum, are
each to be 68 feet in length; (...) dimensions of the Hall for degrees and
public Exercises are about 90 feet by 30.

Encyol. Brit, article Edinburgh -- now publishing in Edinburgh


1582.

SOCIETY.] A Society was incorporated by patent, in the year 1708, for erecting
schools in North-Britain and the Isles; and in 1716, an act passed for their
establishment, and a fund of L.20,005 was appropriated, and made a stock, for
carrying on the design. The Society applied to George II. for an additional
charter to erect work houses for employing children in manufactures, house
wifery and husbandry, in the Highlands and Isles, and obtained from him not
only a patent, but a revenue of L.1000 a year, and they have now upwards 100
schools, in which between 4 and 5000 boys and girls are educated.

CITIES, TOWNS, AND OTHER EDIFICES PUBLIC AND PRIVATE.} Edinburgh. This city is
^^^^ated in W. long. 3, N. lat. (...) near the southern ^ank of the river
Forth, upon a sleep hill, (...) from E. to W. and terminating in a high rock,
on which the ^^stands. It is the metropolis of Scotland. It has lately been
established with a great number of fine houses in modern taste. Its (...)
street is the noblest in the world: It is broad enough for five (...) to pass
abreast. This street is exceedingly well paved, and rises (...) the middle,
with canals on each side. The houses are very lofty ^^pecially in the
High Street; some are not less than fourteen stori^^^ height. This is owning to
their being straitened for room, which ^^^ing two small for great foundations,
they are forced to make up (...) that scantiness by the superstructures. Most
of the houses being ^^^^ed into tenements, they have as many landlords as
stories, without dependence on one another. The excessive height of buildings
has ^^^ly been prohibited. The city is watered by leaden pipes bro^^^ from a
neighboring spring. It contains besides churches, (...) magnificent buildings,
among which are, the castle already mentioned situated at the west end of the
city, inaccessible on the north, (...) and west, and at the entrance from the
city is defended by an out^^^^ and a round battery: It is furnished with water
by two wells (...) rock. In this place are kept the regalia and records of
State.

The hospital, founded by George Herriot, stands to the south-(...) of the
castle, in a noble situation. It is the finest and most (...) specimen which
Ignio Jones has left us of his Gothic manner, and (...) exceeding any thing of
that kind to be seen in England. It was (...) for the maintenance and education
of poor children belonging to (...) citizens and tradesmen of Edinburgh, and is
under the direction of (...) city magistrates.

The Parliament Square, or, as it is there called, Close, was for^^^ the most
ornamental part of this city; it is formed into a very (...) quadrangle, part
of which consists of lofty buildings; and in the ^^^dle is a fine equestrian
statue of Charles II. The room built (...) Charles I. for the parliament house,
though not so large, is better ^^^portioned than Westminster Hall; and its
roof, though executed (...) the same manner, has been by good judges held to be
superior. (...) now converted into a court of law, where a single judge, called
(...) lord ordinary, presides by rotation; in a room near it, fit the (...)
judges; and adjoining are the public offices of the law, exchequer, chancery,
shrievalty, and magistracy of Edinburgh; and in it is kept the valuable library
of the lawyers. This equals any thing of the like kind to be found in England,
or perhaps in any part of Europe, and was at first entirely founded and
furnished by lawyers. -- The number of printed books it contains is amazing;
and the collection has been made with great taste and judgment. It contains
likewise the most valuable manuscript remains of the Scotch history,
chartularies, and other papers of antiquity, with a series of medals. Adjoining
to the library is the room where the public records are kept; but both it and
that which contains the library, though lofty in the roof, are miserably dark
and dismal. It is said that preparations are now carrying on, for lodging both
the books and the papers in rooms far better suited to their importance and
value.

The modern edifices in and near Edinburgh, such as the exchange, public
offices, its hospitals, bridges, and the like, demonstrate the vast improvement
of the taste of the Scots in their public works. Parallel to the city of
Edinburgh, on the north, the nobility, gentry, and others, have begun to build
a new town, upon a plan which does honor to the present age. The streets and
squares are laid out with the utmost regularity, and the houses are to be built
of stone, in an elegant taste. The fronts of some are superbly finished in all
the beauties of architecture, displaying at the same time the judgment of the
builder, and the public spirit of the proprietor.

Between the old and the new town, is a narrow vale, which, agreeably to the
original plan was to have been formed into a sheet of water, bordered by a
terrace walk, and the ascent toward the new town covered with pleasure
gardens, shrubberies, etc. But this elegant design was frustrated, through the
narrow ideas of the magistrates, who, finding greater benefits by letting the
grounds to inferior tradesman upon building leases; this spot, formed by nature
as an agreeable opening to a crowded city, became a nuisance to those gentlemen
who had been so liberal in ornamenting the buildings upon the summit. A
decision of the House of Lords (in which a certain great luminary of the law,
equally distinguished for his taste and good sense, heartily concurred) put a
stop to these mean erections. At the west, or upper end of this vale, the
castle, a solid rock, not less than twenty stories high, looks down with awful
magnificence. The eastern extremity is bounded by a lofty bridge, the middle
arch being ninety feet high, which joins the new buildings to the city, and
renders the descent on each side the vale (there being no water in this place)
more commodious for carriages.

Edinburgh contains a playhouse, which has now the sanction of an act of
parliament; and concerts, assemblies, balls, musick-meetings, and other polite
amusements, are as frequent and brilliant here, as in any part of his majesty's
dominions, London and Bath excepted.

Edinburgh is governed by a lord provost, four baillies, a dean of guild, and a
treasurer, annually chosen from the common council.

Leith, though near two miles distant, may be properly called the harbor of
Edinburgh, being under the same jurisdiction. The neighborhood of Edinburgh is
adorned with noble seats, which are daily increasing; some of them yield to few
in England; but they are too numerous to be particularized here. About four
miles from Edinburgh is Roslin, noted for a stately Gothic chapel, considered
as (...) of the most curious pieces of workmanship in Europe: Founded in the
year 1440, by William St. Clair, prince of Orkney, and (...) of Oldenburgh.

Glasgow, in the shire of Lanerk, situated on a gentle declivity, ^^^ing
toward the river Clyde, 44 miles west of Edinburgh, is, for ^^^lation,
commerce, and riches, the second city of Scotland, and, ^^^sidering its size,
the first in Great Britain, and perhaps in Europe (...) to elegance,
regularity, and the beautiful materials of its building (...)* The streets
cross each other at right angles, and are broad, stra^^^ well paved, and
consequently clean. The houses make a grand ^^pearance, and are in general four
or five stories high, and many (...) them, toward the center of the city, are
supported by arcades, (...) form piazzas, and give the whole an air of
magnificence. Some of (...) modern built churches are in the finest style of
architecture; and (...) cathedral is a stupendous Gothic building, hardly to be
paralleled (...) that kind of architecture. It contains three churches, one of
(...) stands above another, and is furnished with a very fine spire spring
(...) from a tower; the whole being reckoned a masterly and a matc^^ (...)
fabric. It was dedicated to St. Mungo or Kentigern, who was (...) of Glasgow in
the 6th century. The cathedral is upwards of (...) years old, and was preserved
from the fury of the rigid Reformers by the resolution of the citizens. The
townhouse is a lofty building and has very noble apartments for the
magistrates. The university (...) esteemed the most spacious and best built of
any in Scotland, and i^ (...) present in a thriving state. In this city are
several well-endowed hospitals; and it is particularly well supplied with large
and conveni^^i^ns. The number of inhabitants in this city has been estimated by
some, at 30,000, by others, at 50,000, and others, at 60,000.

Aberdeen bids fair to be the third town in Scotland for improvement and
population. It is the capital of a shire, to which it gives (...) name, and
contains two towns, New and Old Aberdeen. The (...) is the shire town, and
evidently built for the purpose of commerce. (...) is a large well built city,
and has a good quay, or tide harbor: In (...) are three churches, and several
episcopal meeting houses, a considerable degree of foreign commerce and much
shipping, a well frequented university, and above 12,000 inhabitants. Old
Aberdeen, near (...) mile distant, though almost joined to the New, by means of
a long village, has no dependence on the other; it is a moderately large
market town, but has no haven. In each of these two places there is a
well-endowed college, both together being termed the university (...) Aberdeen,
although quite independent of each other.

Perth, the capital town of Perthshire, lying on the river Tay, (...) to Norway
and the Baltic: It is finely situated, has an improving (...) manufactory, and
lies in the neighborhood of one of the most (...) spots in Great Britain,
called the Carse of Gowry Dundee, by the ^^^eral computation, contains about
11,000 inhabitants: It lies (...) (...) month of the river Tay; it is a town of
considerable trade, exp^^^^ much linen, grain, herrings, and peltry, to foreign
parts; and (...) three churches, Montrose, Aberbrothie and Brechinlie; also, in
the county of Angus: The first has a large and increasing trade, and (...)
manufactures of the other two are flourishing.

Two Pictish monuments, as they are thought to be, of a very extraordinary
construction, were lately standing in Scotland; one of them at Abernethy in
Perthshire, the other at Brechin in Angus; both of them are columns, hollow in
the inside, and a staircase without: That of Brechin is the most entire, being
covered at the top with a spiral roof of ^^one, with three or four windows
above the cornice: It consists of (...) regular courses of hewn freestone, laid
circularly and regularly, and ^^^pering toward the top. If these columns are
really Pictish, that people must have had among them architects that far
exceeded those of any coeval monuments to be found in Europe, as they have all
the appearance of an order; and the building is neat, and in the Roman style of
architecture. It is, however, difficult to assign them to any but the Picts, as
they stand in their dominions; and some sculptures upon that at Brechin, denote
it to be of Christian origin. It is not indeed impossible that these sculptures
are of a later date. Besides these two pillars, many other Pictish buildings
are found in Scotland, but not in the same taste.

The vestiges of erections by the ancient Scots, are not only curious but
instructive, as they regard many important events of their history. That people
had amongst them a rude notion of sculpture, in which they transmitted the
actions of their kings and heroes. At a place called Aberlemno, near Brechin,
four or five ancient obelisks are still to be seen, called the Danish stones of
Aberlemno. They were erected as commemorations of the Scotch victories over
that people; and are adorned with has-reliefs of men on horseback, and many
emblematical figures and hieroglyphics, not intelligible at this day. There is
a stone near the town of Forres, or Fortrose, in Murray, which far surpasses
all the others in magnificence and grandeur, "and is (says Mr. Gordon) perhaps
one of the most stately monuments of that kind in Europe. It rises about 23
feet in height, above ground, and is, as I am credibly informed, no less than
12 or 15 feet below; so that the whole height is at least 35 feet, and its
breadth near five. It is all one single and entire stone; great variety of
figures in relievo are carved thereon, and some of them still distinct and
visible; but the injury of the weather has obscured those toward the upper
part."

At Sandwick, in Rose-shire, is a very splendid ancient obelisk, surrounded at
the base with large, well cut flag stones, formed like steps. Both sides of the
column are covered with various ornaments, in well finished carved work. The
one face presents a sumptuous cross, with a figure of St. Andrew on each hand,
and some uncouth animals and flowerings underneath. The central division on the
reverse, exhibits a variety of curious figures, birds, and animals.

Besides these remains of Scotch antiquities, there are many Roman, Pictish,
and Danish remains, and many Druidical monuments and temples are discernible in
the northern parts of Scotland, as well as in the isles, where we may suppose
that paganism took its last refuge. They are easily perceived by their circular
forms; but though they are equally regular, yet none of them are so stupendous
as the Druidical erections in South-Britain. There is in Perthshire a barrow
which seems to be a British erection, and the most beautiful of the kind
perhaps in the world; it exactly resembles the figure of a ship, with the keel
uppermost. The common people call it Ternay, which some interpret to be terroe
navis, the ship of earth. It seems to be of the most (...) antiquity, and
perhaps was erected to the memory of some British prince, who acted as
auxiliary to the Romans* for it lies near Auc^terarder* not many miles distant
from the great scene of Agrico^^^ operations.

The traces of ancient volcanoes are not unfrequent in Scotland. The hill of
Finehaven is one instance; and the hill of Bergonium, (...) Dunstastage castle,
is another, yielding vast* quantities of pu^i^^ (...) scoria of different
kinds, many of which are of the same species with those of the volcanic Iceland.

COMMERCE AND MANUFACTURES.] In addition to what we have said on this article
in the account of England, we observe (...) Scotland, in respect to her
commerce and manufactures, has, (...) some years past, been in a very improving
state. The expedition of the Scots to take possession of Darien, (of which we
gave some acco^^^ in the general description of America) and to carry on an
East and West India trade, was founded upon true principles of comme^^^, and
(so far as it went) executed with a noble spirit of enterprise. The miscarriage
of that scheme, after receiving the highest and most sole^^ sanctions, is a
disgrace to the annals of that reign in which it happened; as the Scots has
then a free, independent, and unconnected parliament. We are to account for the
long langour of the Scottish commerce, and many other misfortunes which that
country sustained, by the disgust the inhabitants conceived on that account,
and some inv^sions of their rights afterward, which they thought inconsistent
with the articles of union.

The bounties and encouragement granted to the Scots, for the benefit of trade
and manufactures, during Mr. Pelham's administration made them sensible of
their own importance. Mr. Pit, a succeeding minister, pursued Mr. Pelham's
wise plan; and justly boasted in parliament, that he availed himself of the
courage, good sense, and spirit of the Scots, in carrying on the most extensive
war that Great Britain ever was engaged in. Let me add, to the honor of the
British government, that the Scots have been suffered to avail themselves of
all the benefits of commerce and manufactures they can claim, either in right
of their former independency, the treaty of union, or posterior (...) of
parliament.

The increase of their shipping within these 30 years past, has (...) very
considerable. The exports of those ships are composed chiefly of Scotch
manufactures, fabricated from the produce of the soil, and the industry of its
inhabitants. In exchange for these, they import tobacco, rice, cotton, sugar,
and rum, from the British plantations, from the United States of America, and
from other countries, their produce, to the immense saving of their nation. The
prosperity of Glasgow and its neighborhood has been greatly owing to the
connection and trade with Virginia, and some other of the American States.

The fisheries of Scotland are not confined to their own co^^^, (...) they have
a great concern in the whale fishery, carried on upon (...) coast of
Spitsbergen; and their returns are valuable; as the government allows them a
bounty of 40^. for every ton of shipping employ^^ in that article.

The busses, or vessels employed in the great herring fishery on the western
coasts of Scotland, are fitted out from the north-west parts of England, the
north of Ireland, as well as the numerous ports of the Clyde and neighboring
islands. The grand rendezvous is at Campbletown, a commodious port in
Argyleshire, facing the north of Ireland, where sometimes 300 vessels have been
assembled.

The benefits of the fisheries are perhaps equalled by various manufactures,
particularly that of iron at Carron, in Sterlingshire. The (...) manufactory,
notwithstanding a strong rivalship from Ireland, is in a flourishing state. The
thread manufacture of Scotland is equal, if not superior, to any in the world;
and the lace fabricated from it, has (...) deemed worthy of royal wear and
approbation. It has been said, (...) years ago, that the exports from Scotland
to England, and the British plantations, in linen, cambricks, checks,
Osnzburgs, inckle, and the like commodities, amounted annually to 400,000l.
exclusive of their home comsumption; and there is reason to believe that the
sum is considerably larger at present. The Scots are likewise making very
promising efforts for establishing woollen manufactures; and their exports of
caps, stockings, mittens, and other articles of their own wool, begin to be
very considerable.

Among the other late improvements of the Scots, we are not to forget the vast
progress they have made in working the mines, and smelting the ores of their
country. Their coal trade to England is very considerable, and of late they
have turned even their stones to account, by their contracts for paving the
streets of London. If the great trade in cattle, which the Scots carried on of
late with the English, is now diminished, it is owing to the best of national
causes, that of an increase of home consumption.

The trade carried on by the Scots with England, is chiefly from Leith, and the
eastern ports of the nation; but Glasgow was the great emporium for the
American commerce, before the commencement of the unhappy breach with the
colonies. The late junction of the Forth to the Clyde will render the benefits
of trade of mutual advantage to both parts of Scotland.

With regard to other manufactures, not mentioned, some of them are yet in
their infancy. The town of Paisley alone employs an incredible number of
har^ds, in fabricating a particular kind of flowered and striped lawns, which
are a reasonable and elegant wear. Sugar-houses, glass-works of every kind,
delf-houses, and paper-mills, are erected everywhere, and the Scotch carpeting
makes neat furniture.

REVENUES.] See England.

GOVERNMENT.] The ancient constitution of government in Scotland has been
highly applauded, as excellently adapted to the preservation of liberty; and it
is certain, that the power of the king was greatly limited, and that there were
many checks in the constitution upon him, which were well calculated to prevent
his assuming or exercising a despotic authority. But the Scottish constitution
of government was too much of the aristocratic kind, to afford to the common
people that equal liberty which they had a right to expect. The king's
authority was sufficiently restrained; but the nobles, chieftains, and great
landholders, had it too much in their power to tyrannize over and oppress their
tenants, and the common people.

The ancient kings of Scotland, at their coronation, took the following oath,
containing three promises, viz.

"In the name of Christ, I promise these three things to the Christian people
my subjects: First, That I shall give order, and employ (...) force and
assistance, that the church of God, and the Christian people may enjoy true
peace during our time, under our government. ^^^ondly, I shall prohibit and
hinder all persons, of whatever (...) from violence and injustice. Thirdly, In
all judgments I shall (...) the prescriptions of justice and mercy, to the end
that our element (...) merciful God may show mercy unto me, and to you."

The parliament of Scotland anciently consisted of all who held (...) portion
of land, however small, of the crown by military service. The parliament
appointed the times of its own meeting and adjournment and committees to
superintend the administration during the inter^^^ of parliament; it had a
commanding power in all matters of government; it appropriated the public
money, ordered the keeping of (...) and called for the accounts; it armed the
people, and appointed commanders; it named and commissioned ambassadors; it
granted and ^^^ited pardons; it appointed judges and courts of judicature; it
^^^ed officers of state and privy-counsellors; it annexed and alienated the
revenues of the crown, and restrained grants by the king. The king of Scotland
had no negative voice in parliament; nor could (...) declare war, make peace,
or conclude any other public business of importance, without the advice and
approbation of parliament. The prerogative of the king was so bounded, that he
was not even entr^^^ed with the executive part of the government. In short, the
constitution was rather aristocratical than monarchical.

The privy council of Scotland before the revolution, had, or ass^^ed,
inquisitorial powers, even that of torture; but it is now sunk in the
parliament and privy council of Great Britain; and the civil and criminal
causes in Scotland are chiefly cognizable by two courts of judicature.

The first is, that of the college of justice, which was instituted (...) James
V. after the modal of the French parliament. This court consists of a president
and fourteen ordinary members, besides extraordinary ones named by the king,
who may sit and vote, but have no sal^^ries, and are not bound to attendance.
This court may be called a standing jury in all matters of property that lie
before them. The civil law is their directory in all matters that come not
within the ^^nicipal laws of the kingdom.

The justice court is the highest criminal tribunal in Scotland; but in its
present form it was instituted so late as the year 167^, when (...) lord
justice general, removeable at the king's pleasure, was appointed. This
lucrative office still exists in the person of one of the chief n^^^ity; but
the ordinary members of the court, are the justice-clerk (...) five other
judges, who are always nominated from the lords of (...). In this court the
verdict of a jury condemns or acquits; but without any necessity of their being
unanimous.

Besides these two great courts of law, the Scots, by the articles of (...)
Union, have a court of exchequer, with the same power, authority, ^^^ilege, and
jurisdiction, over the revenue of Scotland, as the court (...) exchequer, in
England, has over the revenues there; and all (...) and things competent to the
court of exchequer in England relating thereto, are likewise competent to the
exchequer of Scotland.

The court of admiralty in Scotland, was, in the reign of Charles II. by act of
parliament, declared to be a supreme court, in all causes competent to its own
jurisdiction; and the lord high admiral is declared to be the king's lieutenant
and justice-general upon the seas, and in all ports, harbors, and creeks of
the same; and upon fresh waters and navigable rivers, below the first bridge,
or within flood-mark; so that nothing competent to his jurisdiction can be
meddled with, in the first instance, but by the lord high admiral and the
judges of his court. Sentences passed in all inferior courts of admiralty, may
be brought again before his court; but no appeal lies from it to the lords of
the session, or any other judicatory, unless in cases not maritime. Causes are
tried in this court by the civil law, which, in such cases, is likewise the
common law of Scotland, as well as by the laws of Oleron, Wisby and the Hanse
towns, and other maritime practices and decisions common upon the continent.
The place of Lord admiral of Scotland is little more than nominal, but the
salary annexed to it is reckoned worth 1000l. a year; and the judge of the
admiralty is commonly a lawyer of distinction* with considerable perquisites
pertaining to his office.

The college or faculty of advocates, which answers to the English inns of
courts, may be called the seminary of Scotch lawyers. They are within
themselves an orderly court, and their forms require great precision and
examination to qualify its candidates for admission. Subordinate to them is a
body of inferior lawyers, or, as they may be called, attorneys, who call
themselves writers to the signet, because they alone can subscribe the writs
that pass the signet; they likewise have a bye government for their own
regulation. Such are the different law courts that are held in the capital of
Scotland.

One thing, which we must not omit to mention, proves the similarity between
the English and Scotch constitutions. In old times, all the Freeholders in
Scotland met together in presence of the king, who was seated on the top of a
hillock, which, in the old Scotch constitutions, is called the Moot, or
Mute-hill; all national affairs were here transacted; judgments given, and
differences ended. This Moon-hill is probably of the same nature with the Saxon
Pole-mote, and may signify no more than the hill of meeting.

HISTORY.] The Caledonians were, probably, the first inhabitants of Scotland;
the Picts, undoubtedly, were the Britons, who were forced northwards by the
Belgic Gauls, above fourscore years before the descent of Julius Caesar; and
who settling in Scotland were joined by great numbers of their countrymen, that
were driven northwards by the Romans. The Scots, most probably, were a nation
of adventurers from the ancient Scythia, who had served in the armies of the
continent, and, after conquering the other inhabitants, gave their own name to
the country.

Christianity was introduced into Scotland, about the year 201 of the Christian
era, by Donald'I.

Mary, daughter and successor of James V. was but a few hours old at the time
of her father's death. Her beauty, her misconduct, and her misfortunes, are
alike famous in history. During her minority, and while she was wife to Francis
II. of France, the reformation advanced in Scotland. Being called to the throne
of her ancestors (...) a widow, she married her own cousin german, the lord
Darnley, (...) untimely death has given rise to much controversy. The
^^^quence of her husband's death, and of her marriage with Both^^^ who was
considered as his murderer, was an insurrection of her subjects, from whom she
sled into England, where she was ungen^^^^ detained a prisoner for eighteen
years, and afterward on motiv^^^ state policy beheaded by queen Elizabeth in
1587, in the forty (...) year of her age.

Mary's son, James VI. of Scotland, succeeded in right of his (...) from Henry
VII. upon the death of queen Elizabeth, to the (...) crown, after showing
considerable abilities in the government of (...) land. This union of the two
crowns, in 1603, destroyed the independency, as it impoverished the people of
Scotland: James, (...) (...) splendid, but troublesome reign over his three
kingdoms, left (...) 1625, to his son, the unfortunate Charles I. That prince,
by ^^^^potic principles and conduct, induced both his Scottish and his (...)
subjects to take up arms against him: And indeed, it was in Scotland that the
sword was first drawn against Charles. But when the (...) party was totally
defeated in England, the king put himself (...) power of the Scottish army:
They at first treated him with respe^^^^ afterward delivered him up to the
English parliament, on cond^^^ of their paying 400,000 pounds to the Scots,
which was said to (...) to them for arrears. However, the Scots afterward made
(...) bloody, but unsuccessful attempts, to restore his son, Charles II. (...)
Robertson's History of Scotland.

ISLANDS OF SCOTLAND.
THE Islands of Scotland are the Shetland, Orcades or Orkney, (...) the
Hebrides, or Western isles.

SITUATION AND EXTENT.] The islands of Shetland lie north (...) of the Orcades
or Orkney-islands, between 60 and 61 degrees of north latitude; and are part of
the shire of Orkney.

The Orcades lie north of Dungsby-head, between 59 and 60 deg^^^ of north
latitude; divided from the continent by a tempestuous (...) called Pentland
Frith, 24 miles long and 12 broad.

The Hebrides, or Western isles are very numerous, and (...) them large;
situated between 55 and 59 degrees of north latitude.

CLIMATE.] There is very little difference in the climate of (...) islands, the
air being keen, piercing, and salubrious; son that many of the natives live to
a great age. In the Shetland and Orkney (...) they see to read at midnight in
June and July; and during four of the summer months, they have frequent
communications, both for ^^^ness and curiosity, with each other, and with the
continent: The (...) of the year, however, they are almost inaccessible,
through fogs, ^^^ness, and storms.

CHIEF ISLANDS AND TOWNS.] The largest of the Shetland (...) which are
forty-six in number (though many of them are uninha^^^ is Mainland, which is 60
miles in length, and 20 in breadth. Its ^^^cipal town is Larwick, which
contains 300 families; the whole ^^^ber of families in the island does not
exceed 500. Skalloway is ^^^er town, where the remains of a castle are still to
be seen, and it (...) seat of a presbytery.

The largest of the Orkney islands, which are about thirty in number (though
several of them are unpeopled) is called Pomona. Its length is 33 miles, and
its breadth, in some places, 9. It contains nine parish churches, and four
excellent harbors.

The isle of Mull, in the Hebrides, is 24 miles long, and, in some places,
almost as broad. It contains two parishes, and a castle, called Duart, which is
the chief place in the island. The other principal western islands are Lewis,
or Harries (for they both form but one island) which belongs to the shire of
Ross, and is 100 miles in length, and 13 or 14 in breadth, its chief town is
Stornvay. Sky, belonging to the shire of Inverness, is 40 miles long, and, in
some places, 30 bread; fruitful and well peopled. Bute, which is about ten
miles long, and three or four broad, is famous for containing the castle of
Rothsay, which gave the title of duke to the eldest sons of the kings of
Scotland; as it now does to the prince of Wales. Rothsay is likewise a royal
burgh; and the islands of Bute and Arran form the shire of Bute. The isles of
Ila and Jura, are part of Argyleshire, and contain together about 370 square
miles, but they have no towns worthy notice. North Uist contains an excellent
harbor, called Lochmaddy. ^^mous for herring-fishing. The famous isle of Iona,
was once the sent and sanctuary of western learning, and the burying place of
many kings of Scotland, Ireland, and Norway. It is still famous for its
re^iques of sanctimonious antiquity.

INHABITANTS, CUSTOMS, POPULATION, AND RELIGION.] It is not to be expected,
that the inhabitants of the islands belonging to Scotland can be minutely
described here. Those of Shetland and Orkney were formerly subject to the
Normans, who conquered them in 1099. In the year 1263 they were in possession
of Magnus of Norway, who sold them to Alexander, king of Scots. After this,
they were claimed by, and became subject to the crown of Denmark. Christian I.
in the reign of James III. conveyed them in property to the crown of Scotland,
as a marriage portion with his daughter Margaret, and all future pretensions
were entirely ceded on the marriage of James VI. of Scotland with Anne of
Denmark. The isles of Shetland and Orkney form a ^^ewartry, or shire, which
sends a member to parliament. At present the people in general differ little
from the Lowlanders of Scotland. Men of fortune there, have greatly improved
their estates of late years, and have introduced into their families many
elegancies and luxuries. They build their dwelling and other houses, in a
modern taste; and are remarkable for the fineness of their linen. As to the
common people, they live upon butter, cheese, fish, sea and land fowl (of which
they have great plenty) particularly geese; and their chief drink is whey,
which they have the art to ferment, so as to give it a vinous quality. In some
of the northern islands, the Norwegian, which is called the Norse language, is
still spoken. Their vast intercourse with the Dutch, during the fishing season,
renders that language common in the Shetland and Orkney islands. The people
there are as expert (...) the Norwegians, already described, in seizing the
nests of sea-fowls, who build in the most frightful precipices and rocks. The
people's ^^^^rance preserves them from any diseases known to luxury. They care
the scurvy and the jaundice, to which they are subject, with the ^^^der of
snail-shells and scurvy grass, of which they have plenty. -- Their religion is
protestant, and according to the discipline of the church of Scotland; and
their civil institutions are much the (...) with those of the country to which
they belong.

Nothing certain can be mentioned, as to the population of the^^ three
divisions of islands. We have the most undoubted evidences of history, that
about 400 years ago, they were much more populous (...) they are now: For the
Hebrides themselves were known often to send 10,000 fighting men into the
field, without prejudice to their agriculture. At present, their numbers are
said not to exceed 48,000. -- The people of the Hebrides are clothed, and live
like the Scotch Highlanders.

The religion professed in the Hebrides is chiefly presbyterian, as established
in the church of Scotland; but the Roman Catholic religion still prevails among
some of the islanders.

SOIL, MINES, AND QUARRIES.] It is certain that the soil, both of the northern
and western islands belonging to Scotland, has suffered an amazing alteration.
It is evident, that many of these islands (...) been the habitations of the
Druids, whose temples are still visible (...) most of them; and those temples
were surrounded by groves, though little or no timber now grows in the
neighborhood. The stumps of former trees, however, are discernible, as are
many vestiges of ^^^deur, even since the admission of the Christian religion;
which (...) the decrease of the riches, power, and population of the
inhabitants. Experience daily shows, that if the soil of the northern and (...)
islands till of late were barren, cold, and uncomfortable, it was (...) to
their want of culture; for such spots of them as are now cultivated, produce
corn, vegetables, and garden-stuff, more than sufficient (...) the inhabitants;
and even fruit trees are now brought to maturity. Tin, lead, and silver mines;
marl, slate, freestone, and even quar^^^ of marble, have been found upon these
islands, They are not desti^^ of fine fresh water; nor of lakes and rivulets
that abound with excellent tront. At the same time it must be owned, that the
(...) face of the soil is bare, and unornamented with trees, excepting a few
that were reared in gardens.

TRADE AND MANUFACTURES.] These are all in their infancy i^ these islands. The
reader can easily suppose, that their staple commodities consist of fish,
especially herrings, which are equal to any in the world, and, when properly
cured, are equal even to those of (...) Dutch. They carry on likewise a
considerable trade in down and feathers; and their sheep afford them wool,
which they manufa^^^ into coarse cloths; and even the linen manufactures make
no (...) progress in these islands. They carry their black cattle alive to
(...) adjacent parts of Scotland, where they are disposed of in sale or ^^ter;
as are large quantities of their mutton, which they salt (...) (...) hide. Upon
the whole, application and industry, with some (...) of public encouragement,
are only wanting to render these (...) once ornamental and beneficial to their
mother country, as well (...) their inhabitants.

HORSES.] The Shetland isles are famous for a small breed of ^^^es, which are
incredibly active, strong and hardy, and frequently (...) in the streets of
London, yoked to the splendid carriages of the (...) or wealthy.

RARITIES AND CURIOSITIES, ARTIFICIAL AND NATURAL} These islands exhibit many
pregnant proofs, in their churches, the vestiges of old forts, and other
buildings both sacred and civil, of what has been already observed, that they
were formerly more populous than they are now. The use and construction of some
of those works are not easily accounted for at present. In a gloomy valley
belonging to Hoy, one of the western islands, is a kind of hermitage, cut out
of a stone, called a dwarf-stone, 36 feet long, 18 broad, and nine thick; in
which is a square hole, about two feet high, for an entrance, with a stone of
the same size for a door. Within this entrance is the resemblance of a bed,
with a pillow cut out of the stone, big enough for two men to lie on: At the
other end is a couch, and in the middle a hearth, with a hole cut out above for
a chimney.

The gigantic bones found in many burial-places here, give room to believe,
that the former inhabitants were of larger size than the present. It is
likewise probable, from some ancient remains, particularly catacombs, and nine
silver fibulae or clasps, found at Stennis, one of the Orkneys, that the Romans
were well acquainted with these parts.

The cathedral of kirkwall, the capital of the Orkneys, is a fine Gothic
building, dedicated to St. Magnus, but now converted into a parish church. Its
roof is supported by 14 pillars on each side, and its steeple, in which is a
good ring of bells, by four large pillars. The three gates of the church are
chequered with red and white polished stones, embossed and elegantly flowered.

The Hebrides are still more distinguished than the Orkney or Shetland isles,
for their remains of antiquity; and it would far exceed the bounds allotted to
this head, were we even to mention every noted monument found upon them,
dedicated to civil, religious, or warlike purposes. Innumerable are the
inscriptions of ancient customs and ceremonies that are discernible upon this
island; and which give countenance to the well-known observation, that when
learning was nearly extinct on the continent of Europe, it found a refuge in
Scotland, or rather in these islands.

But some of the most astonishing appearances in nature have remained
undescribed, and, till lately, unobserved even by the natives of these islands.
A discovery reserved for the inquisitive genius of Sir Joseph Banks, who, in
relating his voyage through the Hebrides, in 1772, says, "We were no sooner
arrived, than we were struck with a scene of magnificence which exceeded our
expectations, though founded, as we thought, upon the most sanguine
foundations; the whole of that end of the island ( viz. Staffa, a mile ^n
length, and half a mile in breadth) supported by ranges of natural pillars,
mostly above fifty feet high, standing in natural colonnades, according as the
bays or points of land formed themselves: Upon a firm basis of solid, unformed
rock, above these, the stratum which reaches to the soil or surface of the
island, varied in thickness as the island itself formed into hills or valleys;
each hill, which hung over the columns below, formed an ample pediment; some of
these, above sixty feet in thickness from the base to the point, formed by the
sloping of the hill on each side, almost into the shape of those used in
architecture.

"Compared to this, what are the cathedrals or palaces built by man? Mere
models or play-things. Imitations as diminutive, as his works will always be,
when compared to those of nature. When is no^ the boast of the architect?
Regularity, the only part in which he fancied himself to exceed his mistress,
Nature, is here found in her possession; and here it has been for ages
undescribed. Proceeding farther to the N. W. you meet with the highest ranges
of pillars, the magnificent appearance of which is past all description: Here
they are bare to their very bases, and the stratum below them is also visible."

Mr Banks particularizes sundry other appearances in this and a neighboring
island, which is wholly composed of pillars without any stratum. In some parts
of Staffa, instead of being placed upright, the pillars were observed to lie on
their sides, each forming a segment of a circle; but the most striking object
in this field of scenery is Fingal's Cave, which Mr. Banks describes in the
following manner: "With our minds full of such reflections, we proceeded along
the shore, treading upon another Giant's Causeway, every stone being regularly
formed into a certain number of sides and angles; till, in a short time, we
arrived at the mouth of a cave, the most magnificent, I suppose, that has ever
been described by travelers. The dimensions of the cave are thus given by Mr.
Banks.

Feet (...) Length of the cave from the arch without 371 At the end (...) From
the pitch of the arch 250 Height of an outside pillar (...) Breadth of ditto at
the month 53 Of one at the N. W. corner (...) At the farther end 20 Depth of
water at the mouth (...) Height of the arch at the mouth 117 At the bottom (...)


The mind can hardly form an idea more magnificent than such a space, supported
on each side by ranges of columns, and rooted by the bottoms of those which
have been broken off in order to form it; between the angles of which a yellow
stalagmitic matter has exuded, which serves to define the angles precisely, and
at the same time vary the color, with a great deal of elegance; and to render
it still more agreeable, the whole is lighted from without; so that the
farthest extremity is very plainly seen from without: And the air within being
agitated by the flux and reflux of the tide, is perfectly dry and wholesome,
free entirely from the damp of vapors with which natural caverns in general
abound."

Mr. Pennant, who also made a voyage to these islands in the same year, had a
glance of Staffa, in his passage from Iona to Mull, but was prevented by stormy
weather from approaching it. "On the west," says he, "appears the beautiful
groupe of the Treashunish isles. -- Nearest lies Staffa, a new Giant's
Causeway, rising amidst the waves, but with columns of double the height of
that in Ireland; glossy and resplendent, from the beams of the eastern sun." --
And in the isle of Sky, a considerable way northward, he resumes the subject.
"We had in view a fine series of genuine basaltic columns, resembling the
Giant's Causeway; the pillars were above twenty feet high, consisting of four,
five, and six angles, but mostly of five. At a small distance from these, on
the slope of a hill, is a tract of some roads entirely formed of the tops of
several series of columns, even and close set, forming a reticulated surface of
amazing beauty and curiosity. This is the most northern basaltes I am
acquainted with; the last of four in the British dominions, all running from
north to south, nearly in a meridian: The Giant's Causeway appears first;
Staffa, etc. succeeds; the rock Humbla about twenty leagues farther, and,
finally, those columns of Sky: The depth of the ocean, in all probability,
conceals the vast links of this chain."

IRELAND
SITUATION BOUNDARIES, AND EXTENT.

THE Island of Ireland is situated on the west side of England, between 6 and
10 degrees of west longitude, and between 51 and 55 degrees 30 minutes north
latitude, or between the middle parallel of the eighth clime (where the longest
day is 16 hours) and the 24th parallel, or the end of the tenth clime, where
the longest day is 17 hours.

It is 285 miles from Fairhead, north, to Misenhead, south; and from the east
part of Down, to the west part of Mayo (where the island stretches most in
opposite directions) 160 miles, and contains 11,042,642 Irish plantation acres,
or about 17,900,000 acres of English statute measure.

This island is bounded on the north by the Deucaledonian Sea; on the south and
west by the Atlantic Ocean; and on the east by the Irish Sea, or St. George's
Channel, which divides it from the western shores of Great Britain, from which
it is distant in some places, not more than 19 or 20 leagues.

DIVISIONS.] See general account of Great Britain.

NAME.] The Irish Antiquarians generally agree, that the ancient name of
Ireland was Scotia, and that, at different periods, it has also been called
Ierne, Juverna, Hibernia, etc.

CLIMATE, SOIL, AND FACE OF THE COUNTRY.] The climate of Ireland, though it
does not generally differ much from that of England, is however found to
possess an atmosphere more moist, with more frequent returns of rain. From the
reports of various registers it appears, that the number of days on which rain
had fallen in Ireland was much greater than in the same years in England. But
without the evidence of registers, it is certain, that moisture (even without
rain) is not only more Characteristic of the climate of this island than that
of England, but is also one of its worth and most inconvenient circumstances.
-- This is accounted for in observing, that "the westerly winds, so favorable
to other regions, and so benign even in this, by qualifying the rigor of the
northern air, are yet hurtful in the extreme. Meeting with no lands on this
side of America to break their force, and proving in the general too powerful
for the counteraction of the shifting winds from the eastern and African
Continents, they waft hither the vapors of an immense ocean. The sky is hereby
much obscured; and, from the nature of rest and condensation, these vapors
descend in such constant rains, as threaten destruction to the fruits of the
earth in some seasons. This unavoidable evil from natural causes is aggravated
by the increase of it from others, which are absolutely either moral or
political. The hand of industry has been long idle in a country where almost
every advantage must be obtained from its labor, and where discouragements on
the labourer must necessarily produce a state of languor, equally hurtful to
the prosperity and manners of every nation. Ever since the neglect of
agriculture in the ninth century, the rains of so many ages subsiding on the
lower grounds, have converted most of our extensive plains into mossy morasses,
and near a tenth part of this beautiful Isle is become a repository for
stagnated waters, which, in the course of evaporation, impregnate our air with
noxious exhalations. O'Conor's Dissertations.
But, in many respects, the climate of Ireland is more agreeable than that of
England; the summers being cooler and the Winters less severe. The piercing
frosts, the deep snows, and the dreadful effects of thunder and lightning,
which are so frequently observed in the later kingdom, are never experienced
here.

The dampness above alluded to, being peculiarly favorable to the growth of
grass, has been used as an argument why the inhabitants should confine their
attention to the rearing of cattle, to the total desertion of tillage, and
injury to the consequent growth of population; but the soil is so infinitely
various, as to be capable of almost every species of cultivation suited to such
latitudes, with a fertility equal to its variety. This is so conspicuous, that
it has been observed by a (...) spectable English traveller, that "Natural
fertility, acre for acre, over the two kingdoms, is certainly in favor of
Ireland; of this I believe there can scarcely be a doubt entertained, when it
is considered, that some of the more beautiful, and even best cultivated
counties in England, owe almost every thing to the capital art and industry of
(...) inhabitants."

We shall conclude this article with the further sentiments of the same author
(Mr. Young) whose knowledge of the subject, acquaintance with the kingdom, and
candor, are unimpeachable.

The circumstance which strikes me as the greatest singularity of Ireland, is
the rockiness of the soil, which should seem at first fight against that degree
of fertility; but the contrary is the fact. Stone is so general, that I have
great reason to believe the whole island is o^^ vast rock of different strata
and kinds rising out of the sea. I have rarely heard of any great depths being
sunk without meeting with is. In general it appears on the surface in every
part of the kingdom; the flattest and most fertile parts, as Limerick,
Tipperary, and Mead, have it at no great depth, almost as much as the more
barren ones. May we not recognize in this the hand of bounteous Providence,
which has given, perhaps, the most stoney soil in Europe to the moistest
climate in it? If as much rain fell upon the clays of England (a soil very
rarely met with in Ireland, and never without much stone) as fall upon the
rocks of her sister island, those lands could not be cultivated. But the rocks
here are clothed with verdure; those of limestone with only a thin covering of
mould, have the softest and most beautiful turf imaginable.

The rockiness of the soil in Ireland is so universal, that it predominates in
every sort. One cannot use, with propriety, the (...) clay, loam, sand. etc. it
must be a stoney clay, a stoney loam, a gravest said. Clay, especially the
yellow, is much talked of in Ireland, but it is for want of proper
discrimination. I have once or twice see^^^ almost a pure clay upon the
surface, but it is extremely rare. The true yellow clay is usually found in a
thin stratum, under the surface mould, and over a rock; harsh, tenacious,
stoney, strong loams, difficult to work, are not uncommon, but they are quite
different from English clays.

Friable sandy loams, dry, but fertile, are very common, and they form the best
soils in the kingdom for tillage and ^eep. Tipperary and Roscommon abound
particularly in them. The most fertile of all are the bullock-pastures of
Limerick, and the banks of the Shannon in Clare, called the Corcasses. These
are mellow, putrid, friable loam.

Sand, which is so common in England, and yet more common through Spain,
France, Germany, and Poland, quite from Gibraltar to Petersburgh, is no where
met with in Ireland, except in narrow slips of hillocks, upon the sea coast.
Nor did I ever meet with, or hear of, a chalky soil.

RIVERS AND MOUNTAINS.] Few countries can be better watered by large and
beautiful rivers than Ireland; and it is remarkable, that by much the finest
parts of the kingdom are on the banks of these rivers. Witness the Suir,
Blackwater, the Lissey, the Boyne, the Nore, the Barrow, and part of the
Shannon: they wash a scenery that can hardly be exceeded. From the rockiness of
the country, however, there are few of them that have not obstructions, which
are great impediments to inland navigation.

The mountains of Ireland give to traveling that interesting variety, with
which a flat country can never abound. And, at the same time, they are not in
such number as to confer the usual character of poverty, which attends them. I
was either upon or very near the most considerable in the kingdom. Mangerton
and the Reeks, in Kerry; the Calties in Cork; those of Mourn," and Iseah in
Down, are reckoned the highest in the kingdom, particularly that called Slieu
Donard, which is said to be 1050 yards in perpendicular height; "Crow Patrick
and Nephin, in Mayo; these are the principal in Ireland, and they are of a
character in height and sublimity, which should render them the objects of
every traveller's attention. Mr. Young.


BAYS, HARBORS, AND LAKES.] Perhaps no country of the same extent is more
bountifully watered by the finest rivers and lakes, or more perfectly indented
by the noblest harbors; so as to possess in an eminent degree those great
requisites for agriculture, manufactures and the most extended commerce. The
rivers, besides abounding with an infinite variety of fish, communicate
uncommon fertility to the lands which they beautify, and afford a multitude of
the best situations for the machinery of manufactures. The harbors are not
only numerous, but, in some instances, capable of containing. in the utmost
security, the greatest sleets; stretching out their protecting arms, and
courting the pompous ornament of regal navies, or the cheerful signs of
farextended commerce. These, however, have been long solitary and unfrequented,
as the illiberal spirit of trading jealousy had, for many ages, with successful
injustice, rendered all these distinguished blessings of Providence of no
value, except to the adventurous mariner, whom distress or tempest had driven
to experience their seasonable protection.

It would be difficult to enumerate the many bays, havens, har^^^ and creeks,
which indent every part of the coast. The following the principal: Waterford,
Carlingford, and Strangford-havens, (...) bay of Carrickfergus, on the east;
Lough-Foyle and Lough-(...) Ship-haven, Killybegs-harbour, Donegal-haven, on
the north; (...) way-haven, the mouth of the Shannon, Sherwick or St. Mary^^^
haven, Dingle-bay, on the west; Kenmare-bay or river, Bantry, ^^^manus, and
Baltimore-bays, Castle-haven, Glendore-haven, (...) and Cork-havens, on the
south and south-east. These are the principal unbarred havens. There are
likewise a great many barred (...) some of which have been much improved by
Acts of Parliament, particularly that of Dublin.

The Lakes or Loughs of Ireland have so many properties, in (...) respects
peculiar to themselves, that their singularities, their extent (...) their
beauties, have long engaged the pens of the traveller, and (...) poet; and have
attracted the curiosity and excited the admiration people of taste from every
part of Europe. The most remarkable (...) the Lake of Killarney, Lough-Erne and
Lough-Neagh.

The Lakes of Killarney hold the first place. They are (...) number. The
northern or lower Lake, is six miles in length, (...) from three to four in
breadth. The Town of Killarney is situated (...) its northern shore.

The upper lake is four miles in length, and from two to thr^^ breadth -- it is
almost surrounded with mountains. The islands in (...) lake are numerous, and
afford an amazing variety of pictura^^ views.

The third, or center lake, communicates with the upper -- it (...) small in
comparison of the other two. The eastern boundary is ^^^ed by the base of
Mangerton, down the steep side of which (...) a cascade, visible for a hundred
and fifty yards. This fall of (...) supplied by a circular lake, near the
summit of the mountain, (...) the Devil's Punch-Bowl; which, on account of its
immense (...) and the continual overflow of water, is considered as one of the
(...) curiosities of Killarney.

There are various situations, on this and the neighboring ^^^tains, that
command extensive prospects of the lakes, with (...) Islands, Bays, and
Promontories -- these views are wild and grand (...) an astonishing degree.

Lough-Erne is the largest lake in Ireland, being forty miles in len^^^ and in
some parts fifteen in breadth. In this lake is an island on (...) stands the
Town of Inniskillen -- the communication with the (...) land being preserved by
two bridges. No town in Ireland can (...) of such an advantageous situation for
inland commerce, the lake ^^fording it an intercourse, by water, with several
counties; and (...) circumstance in its favor might be further improved, by
cutting canal and building locks, from Belleck to Bally-Shannon, (...) would
open a passage into the Atlantic Ocean.

Lough-Neagh is of an oval figure, but considerably indented (...) sides; it is
near twenty miles in length, and about ten in brea^^ and abounds with a variety
of fish, particularly the Pullein, or, as (...) call it, the fresh water
herring, greatly admired for the uncomm^^ delicacy of its flavor.

This Lough is distinguished for the mineral and petrifying qualities which it
is supposed to possess.

Whether the petrifying quality imputed to this lake, exists in the water, or
the soil, has been a subject of much inquiry; that it exists in one or the
other is generally believed from the numerous specimens, which are constantly
discovered on the shores, of different species of wood, either wholly converted
into stone, or which are found to be partly in one state and partly in the
other; which latter afford the most conclusive evidence of the existence of
this petrifying property. It has been justly observed that whatever particular
quality water is impregnated with, must be derived from the soil through which
it runs; now, in the neighboring grounds, even at the distance of two or three
miles, and in situations considerably higher than the Lough, specimens of wood,
perfectly and imperfectly, converted into stone are frequently found; sometimes
on the banks of many of those streams which fall into the lake, and sometimes
in situations more remote. -- On the shores are also frequently found a variety
of beautiful pebbles, cornelians, agates, and other valuable stones, which have
long been objects of curiosity to the virtuosi.

CAVES AND GLENS.] About two miles from the city of Kilkenny, in the
neighborhood of the Park-house of Donmore, are a number of caves, which are
supposed to be equal to any in the world; those of Antiparos, in the
Archipelago, excepted. The following description of them, being written by a
gentleman on the spot, we shall give it in his own words: "After a difficult
descent of about one hundred feet, the entrance into this subterraneous world
is gained. The appearance of the first cavern is uncommonly awful, and gives
rise to an idea of a grand Gothic structure in ruins. The solemnity of this
place is not a little increased by the gaiety of those scenes that present
themselves on every side, previous to our entering it. The floor is uneven, and
stones of various sizes are promiscuously dispersed upon it. The sides are
composed of ragged work, in some parts covered with moss, and in others
curiously frosted; and from the roof, which is a kind of arch, several huge
rocks project beyond each other, in such a manner, that they seem to threaten
instant ruin. The circumference of this cave is not less than two hundred feet,
and its height about fifty. Here is a small, but continually dropping water
from the ceiling, and a few petrifactions resembling icicles. This place is not
destitute of inhabitants, for immediately on entering into it, you are
surprised with a confused noise, which is occasioned by a multitude of wild
pigeons. Hence there is a passage toward the lest, where, by a small ascent,
a kind of hole is gained, much larger, but in form greatly resembling the mouth
of an oven, which introduces the spectator to a place, where, by the help of
candles (daylight being entirely excluded) a broken and surprising scene of
monstrous stones, heaped on each other, chequered with various colors,
inequality of rocks over head, and an infinity of stalactical stones, presents
itself. Here the traveller is threatened from a thousand vast rocks rudely
piled on each other, that compose the sides, which seem bending in, and a
multitude of no smaller size we pendent from the roof in the most extraordinary
manner; add to this, that by one false step, he would be dashed from precipice
to precipice; Indeed it would be matter of much difficulty, or rather
impracticable, to walk over this apartment, had not nature, as if sti^ous for
the safety of the curious, caused branches, as it were, to (...) from the
surface of the rocks, which are remarkably smooth, very (...) equal, and always
damp. These branches are from four to six inches in length, and nearly as
thick. They are useful on the summits of (...) rocks to prevent slipping, and
in the sides are ladders, whereby to ^^scend and ascend with tolerable
facility. This astonishing and fra^^ous passage leads to a place far more
curious than the rest. On ^^^^ing into it, one is almost induced to believe
oneself situated in an ancient temple, decorated with all the expense of art;
yet, notwithstanding the beauty and splendor that catches the eye on every
(...) there is something of solemnity in the fashion of the place, (...) must
be felt by the most inattentive spectator. The floor, in (...) parts, is
covered with a crystalline substance; the sides, in many ^^^es, are incrusted
with the same, wrought in a taste not unlike (...). Gothic style of ornament,
and the top is almost entirely covered (...) inverted pyramids of the same
elegantly white and lucid matter, (...) the points of these stalactical
streets, are perpetually hanging drops pellucid water, for when one falls,
another succeeds. These pen^^^ gems contribute not a little to the glory of the
roof, which, when (...) place is properly illuminated, appears as if formed of
the purest ^^^^tal. Here are three extraordinary and beautiful congelations,
wh^^^ without the assistance of a strong imagination, may be taken for as
^^^gan, altar, and cross. The former, except when strictly exam^^ appears to be
a regular work of art, and is of a considerable size: (...) second is of a
simple form, rather long than square; and the (...) reaches from the floor to
the roof, which must be about twenty (...). These curious figures are owing to
water that falls from the (...) parts of the cave to the ground, which
coagulates into stone from (...) to time, till it acquires those forms which
are now so pleasing; (...) an exsudation or extillation of petrifying juices
out of the earth; (...) perhaps they partake of the nature of spar, which is a
kind of (...) plant. The former appears to be the most probable supposition
these figures, in color and consistence, appear exactly like the (...) on the
top, which are only seen from the wet parts of the cave^^^ and in this place,
there is a great oozing of water, and a much lar^^ number of petrifactions,
than in any other. When you quit this ^^rious apartment, the guides lead you
for a considerable way thro^^^ winding places, until a glimmering light
agreeably surprises. (...) the journey, of above a quarter of a mile, through
those parts in ^^ed: But upon returning into the first cavern, the entrance
into (...) apartments, less curious indeed, but as extensive as those we have
^^^scribed, offers itself. The passages into some of these are so very (...)
that there is a necessity of creeping through them; by these we ^^ceed until
the noise of a subterraneous river is heard, but farther (...) have ventured."

Amongst the numerous glens in Ireland, distinguished for partic^^^ beauty, are
two in the county of Wicklow. The Glen of the (...) is a pass between two vast
ridges of mountains covered with (...) which have a very noble effect; the vale
is no wider than to (...) the road, a small gurgling river almost by its side,
and narrow slips (...) rocky and shrubby ground which part them: In the front
all (...) (...) denied by an immense conical mountain, which rises out of the
^^len, and seems to fill it up. The scenery is of a most magnificent character.

The Dargle is a narrow vale, formed by the sides of two opposite mountains;
the whole thickly spread with oak at the bottom: It is (...) to the mere
channel of the river, which tumbles from rock (...) ^ock. The extent of wood
that hangs to the eye in every direction (...), the depth of the precipice
immense, which, with the roar of (...) water, forms a scene truly interesting.
In less than a quarter of a (...), the road passing through the wood leads to
another point of (...) (...) the right; it is the crown of a vast projecting
rock, form which (...) down a precipice absolutely perpendicular, and many
hund^^^ (...) deep, upon the torrent, which finds its noisy way over large
(...) of rocks. At some distance below is a vast chasm in the (...), which
seems torn asunder, to let the torrent through, that comes ^^^bling over a
rocky bed far sunk in a channel embosomed in wood. (...) a bellow, formed of
rock and wood, the torrent breaks forth from (...) of rock, and tumbles through
the chasm, rocks bulging over (...) if ready to fall into the channel. The
shade is so thick as to ex^^^^ the heavens; all is retired and gloomy; it is a
spot for melan^^^^ to muse on.

FORESTS, OR WOODS.] Tradition and history both inform us, that (...) countries
of equal extent, were better timbered than Ireland; (...) woods were so
abundant, Though every part of Ireland in which I have been, one hundred
contiguous acres (...) be sound, without evident signs, that they were once
wood, or at least very well (...). A vast number of the Irish names for hills,
mountains, valleys, and plaint, have (...), woods, groves, or trees for the
signification;" YOUNG'S TOUR.
as to occasion her being called by some (...) ancient writers the woody
island; and their quality was of such (...) (...) to become an article of
traffic, and often employed in the (...) conspicuous buildings of the sister
kingdom. But the natives, re^^dly harrassed by the inroads and encroachments of
the English, ^^^ently found an asylum in their forests. These became therefore
(...) object of equal jealously and vengeance, and the destroying axe gen^^^ly
accompanied the sword, in the joint extirpation of woods and (...), till the
island became almost distorested. For many ages it has (...) in this state. The
encouragement of the Dublin Society, (...) ever, and the example of many noble
individuals, promise again to (...) the land with its most valuable ornaments.

VEGETABLE AND ANIMAL PRODUCTIONS BY LAND AND SEA.} These are in general
similar to those in Great Britain. ^^^^-dogs (once so useful and celebrated)
were perhaps peculiar to (...); but that species is now nearly extinct.
Although the coasts (...) the neighboring islands may be furnished with the
same varieties (...); yet those of Ireland have them in much greater abundance,
(...) of a larger and more excellent quality.

METALS, MINERALS, AND MEDICINAL WATERS] The mines of (...), until the
destruction of her woods, were worked to a very (...) extent. At present,
although abundance of the various species (...), lead, silver, and copper ores
are to be found in every direction through the kingdom, yet the want of
capital, or skill, or (...) is such, that few are worked to any important
extent or pro^^^ except the great copper mines of the country Wicklow, which
the hands of an English company.

In several counties are noble quarries of the finest marble, (...) Kerry are
of various colors, green, red, yellow, and white; (...) of Kilkenny black and
white; each of which takes the most (...) polish, and are calculated for all
the purposes of building or (...).

Many parts of the kingdom abound with free stone, some (...) sparkling color,
others of a gray or ash color, and some (...) to a blue. Those of Ardbracken,
Garrycorris, and the (...) Wicklow and Dublin, are particularly admired, and
much public buildings; but the want of inland water carriage, pre^^^ being sent
to the metropolis, in such sizes as are necessary (...) columns, etc. which
induces a considerable expense for the (...) Portland stone.

Various species of coal, and in the greatest abundance, (...) found in
different parts of the kingdom. The pits of Kilkenny a coal possessing many
peculiar properties; it is very hard, b^^ly, emits little or no smoke, is of a
bright black, and is foun^^ admirably adapted for malting, and various purposes
of man^^^. The pits of Ballycastle (in the county Antrim) produce abun^^ coal,
yet the want of a safe and commodious harbor to ship ^^^vents their being
worked to an extent fully equal to the supply (...) nation. The collieries of
Tyrone produce a very fine species, (...) of considerable capacity; they lie in
the heart of a populous (...) manufacturing country, where other fuel is very
scarce; but (...) of a more perfect inland water carriage contracts the
operat^^^ numerous benefits which the situation of these collieries pres^^^
pits of Lough Allen are probably of most importance, as th^^ (...) such
magnitude, and so happily circumstanced by situation, (...) fine a quality, and
so intermixed with strata of the purest (...) other ores, as promise, with
attention and capital, to be a (...) great profit and advantage to the nation
-- placed at the (...) Shannon, which is almost navigable to the sea, were
canals (...) from the capital and other parts, communicating with this (...)
would, in a few years, render the cutting of bogs unnecessary large sums now
annually sent for foreign coals, and establish ^^^factures on different parts
of these lines of the greatest (...) extent.

MINERAL WATERS.] There are great numbers of minerals (...) in this kingdom of
the various classes recommended for medi^^^ ^^^poses: Such as the vitriolic,
alkaline and absorbent, saline (...) ^ative, sulphurous, chalybeate, and
sulphureae chalybeate (...) which those of the two latter kinds are most
powerfully (...) by the benevolent hand of Providence, as efficacious remedy
(...) one of the most prevalent endemics of its northern and (...) the scurvy;
of these the most generally resorted to, from (...) ^^^^enced good effects, are
the waters of Swanlinbar and (...) the north west quarter, and of Lucan, six
miles from the capi^^^ (...) (...) also some tepid springs here, the
temperature of which, however, (...) very moderate, that of Mallow in the
county of Cork, the warmest of them, not raising Farenheit's thermometer above
the 68; but from (...) mild, soft, and specifically light nature, and being
considerably impregnated with an absorbent earth, and a portion of other
medicinal ^^tter, has been found serviceable in several classes of diseases.

ANTIQUITIES AND CURIOSITIES.] The natural curiosities of Ireland have long
occupied the attention of travelers and philosophers. (...) Giant's Causeway
being the most distinguished, we shall give the ^^^wing account of it as the
most recent and accurate.

The Causeway itself is generally described as mole of Quay, project^^^ from
the base of a steep promontory, some hundred feet into the (...) and is formed
of perpendicular pillars of basaltes, which stand in (...) with each other,
exhibiting an appearance not much unlike a (...) honeycomb. The pillars are
irregular prisms, of various determinations from four to eight sides; but the
hexagonal columns are ^^mmerous as all the others put together.

On a minute examination, each pillar is found to be separable into (...)
joints, whose articulation is neat and compact beyond expres^^^^; the unequal
termination of one joint, always meeting a concave ^^^ket in the next; besides
which, the angles of one frequently (...) over those of the other, so that they
are completely locked to^^her, and can rarely be separated without a fracture
of some of their (...).

The sides of each column are unequal among themselves, but the ^^tiguous sides
of adjoining columns are always of equal dimensions, (...) as to touch in all
their parts.

Though the angles be of various magnitudes, yet the sum of the con^^^^ angles,
of adjoining pillars, always makes up four right ones. (...) there are no void
spaces among the basaltes, the surface of the ^^^^seway exhibiting to view a
regular and compact pavement of po^^^^ stones.

The outside covering is soft, and of a brown color, being the earthy (...) of
the stone nearly deprived of its metallic principle by the (...) of the air,
and of the marine acid which it receives from the (...). This coating contains
iron which has lost its phlogiston, and is nearly reduced to a slate (...)
calx; for with a very moderate heat it becomes of a bright rod ochre color,
the attendant (...) a^ iron earth.


These are the obvious external characters of this extraordinary pile (...)
basaltes, observed and described with wonder by every one who has (...) it. But
it is not here that our admiration should cease; whatever the process was by
which nature produced that beautiful and cu^^ous arrangement of pillars so
conspicuous about the Giant's Causeway; the cause, far from being limited to
that spot alone, appears to have extended through a large tract of country, in
every direction, in (...) much that many of the common quarries, for several
miles around, (...) to be only abortive attempts toward the production of a
Giant's Causeway.

From want of attention to this circumstance, a vast deal of time and (...)
have been idly spent in minute examinations of the Causeway (...); -- in
tracing its course under the ocean -- pursuing its columns into the ground --
determining its length and breadth and the (...) of its pillars -- with
numerous wild conjectures concerning its (...) all of which cease to be of any
importance, when this spot is ^^^^ed only as a small corner of an immense
basalt quarry, extending ^^ly over all the neigbhbouring land.

The basaltes of the Giant's Causeway is a black, ponderous grained stone;
which does not effervesce in any of the min^^^.

Its specific gravity is to that of water, nearly in the prope^^ 2,90 to 1,00
-- and to that of the finest marble as 2,90 to 2,70.

Though its texture be compact, it is not absolutely homo^^ for if ground to a
smooth surface, its bright jet-black polish ^^^^ed several small pores.

It strikes fire imperfectly with a steel.

When exposed to a moderate heat in a common fire, it assu^^^ dish color,
which is more vivid on its natural outside cover^^ loses about 1-50th part of
its weight. This loss probably arises from water expelled by the heat. For in
the co^^^^ four hours after, it will have nearly recovered its former weight,
particularly (...).


In a more intense heat it readily melts, and is, as the chy^^^ press it,
fusible per se.

With the assistance of an alkali flux it may be vitrified, and (...) an opake
glass of a black or blueish color.

Its principal component parts are iron in a metallic state, (...) chiefly with
siliceous and argillaceous earths.

Its metallic principle may be demonstrated by a very simple ^^^^ment. Let a
small fragment of basaltes, in its natural state, be (...) into contact, or
very near to a good magnetical needle, and it (...) made to detain the needle
at a considerable distance from its (...). Let this fragment be touched by a
magnet, and it will acquire (...) strong polarity, capable of attracting or
repelling the needle at ^^^tance of an inch or more. From hence it is proved to
contain (...) a metallic state, because the calx of that metal is incapable of
(...) any magnetical phenomenon whatever.

To determine the quantity and quality of each constituent (...) quires a very
slow and laborious operation, which would be (...) equally tedious in the
description. I shall therefore just ment^^ results from the experiments of that
able chemist, Sir Tor^e^ man.

Basaltes 100 parts. Contains siliceous earth 50 Argillaceous earth 15
Calcareous earth 8 Magnesia 2 Iron 25 100

From these elements we shall easily be enabled to account (...) ^^al of its
properties.

Hence it comes to pass that its specific gravity is so (...) exceeding that of
many stones, which, when polished, appe^^^ more compact, the quantity of
phlogisticated iron easily making compensation.

We see also why it answers so well for a touchstone, the hardness of its iron
particles easily rubbing and fretting off the parts of any softer metal which
may be applied to it, and its black ground serving to display these of greater
advantage.

Hence too arises its fusibility without addition; for though flint, (...), and
calcareous earth are separately refractory, in any degree of ^^^^cial heat, yet
when mixed together they are readily fusible, and (...) more easily when united
with phlogisticated iron.

From the metallic state of its iron element we are enabled to infer, a ^^^ri,
that the columns of the Giant's Causeway are all natural mag^^, whose lower
extremity is their north pole. For having stood ^^ring many ages in a
perpendicular position, they must have acquired that polarity which is peculiar
to all iron substances, in a similar situation; and like natural magnets, every
fragment, when broken, will have its north and south-pole. And this has been
found true by experience; each pillar of the Giant's Causeway, and each
fragment of a pillar, which was applied near to the needle, having its
attractive and repellent point. See. Dr. Hamilton's Letters on the County
Antrim.


POPULATION.] Few kingdoms have experienced greater variation in population
than Ireland. At some remote period there are reasons to believe that its
inhabitants were extremely numerous. In several parts of the island (in rough
or mountainous ground) difficulty of access, and now in a barren state, are
evident traces of cultivation; but at what time it prevailed, tradition or
history does not inform us.

At the commencement of the present century the numbers in Ireland were thought
to be about two millions, whereas in 1672, there were, according to Sir William
Petty, no more than 1,100,000. -- The following data are afforded, from which
we may ascertain the present number.

From the accounts laid before the House of Commons in 1786 (as returned by the
hearth-money collectors) the number of houses in Ireland amounted to 474,234.
Now, adding to that the increase since, and also the numbers intentionally or
unavoidably overlooked in such returns, we may reasonably conclude that the
present actual amount is 500,000.

We are next to consider what average number of persons we should allow to each
house. In the peasants cottages in Ireland (perhaps the most populous in the
world) Mr. Young in some parts found the average 6 and 6; others have found it
in different places to be 7; and Dr. Hamilton, in his account of the island of
Raghery, enumerates the houses, and discovered the average therein to be 8. In
the cities and principal towns, the houses, particularly in the manufacturing
parts, generally contain several families; and from different accounts, the
members in such are from ten up so high as seventy. Dr. Tisdal enumerated the
inhabitants of two parishes in Dublin in 1731, and averaged (...) number in
each house at 12 1-12. The numbers varied from 10 to 70.
The averages, however, of different writers on the population of cities vary
between 10 and 13.

From such data then, it will not perhaps be erroneous, if we (...) average for
the whole island at eight persons to each house, which ^^tiplied by the number
of houses, makes the population of (...) amount to four millions.

LANGUAGE.] The antiquarians and critics agree, that the ^^^rupted native
language of the Irish is the Gaedhlic, or Scotic, the ^^^est and most ancient
of all the Celtic dialects. It appears from ^^^tionable testimony, that arts,
navigation and letters were first (...) in Europe by the Phoenicians, who had a
very early intercourse (...) the Iberian Spaniards. From that nation the
Gaedelian or (...) colony derived their original, who amongst other arts,
introduce (...) elements of letters into the island, at a remote period before
the ^^^tian Era. This fact will easily account for the early use of (...)
Ireland, where great security from foreign conquest retained the^^ where the
manners of the people and the form of government (...) the cultivation of them
necessary.

AGRICULTURE.] The agriculture of Ireland, though great, ^^tended and improved
within these twenty or thirty years past, (...) in a very backward state: For
though the quantity of corn (...) creased to such a degree, that instead of
depending, as formerly, (...) precarious importation of foreign grain, for the
supply of the ^^ants; they only have a sufficiency for home consumption; but
^^^bled to export large quantities; yet the mode of cultivation (...)
defective, the Irish not having yet introduced those improved (...) of culture,
which have long been pursued with such advanta^^ England, and some other parts
of Europe.

FISHERIES.] Ireland has advantages in the several fisheries (...) enjoyed by
any other country in Europe, particularly in situation, (...) in her numerous
creeks and harbors. Her shores are stored with the varieties of fish, her
fishermen a hardy and adventurous race, (...) the opportunity of curing on
contiguous shores, gives them a (...) superiority.

The north-west and western coasts of this kingdom abounding, (...) superior
degree, with herrings, have long attracted the national ^^^^tion legislative
encouragement. In 1786, no less than 17,^^^ barrels of herrings were exported
from Ireland. The same year (...) vessels, whose tonnage amounted to 15,336,
were employed (...) fishery.

LEARNING AND LEARNED MEN.] The corroborating testi^^^ of natives and
foreigners represent the ancient Irish as a people (...) learned and pious, and
who were resorted to by men of the most (...) ^uished ranks of distant nations.
Camden, Bid, and other (...) enumerate the benefits diffused through various
parts of Euro^^ the numbers of learned men from Ireland, who imparted the (...)
lights of science and of christianity, and founded monasteries (...) ^^^ous
parts of Britain, France, and Italy. It is observable, that ^^^^ton saints of
several nations on the continent are acknowle^^^ Irish, as were the first
professors in the university of Paris, (...) those placed by Alfred in his
newly-founded college of Oxford.

Few of the writings of the ancient Irish have reached the (...) times, from
the long continuance of civil discord amonst them (...) few however as have
been published or remain in the hands of the curious, confirm the reputation of
their genius and learning. The po^^^^ of Columb-cil, several miscellaneous
pieces translated by the learned Colonel Vallancey and others, but above all
the poems of Ossian (which are unquestionably the original production of this
country) place the ancient literary same of Ireland in the highest rank.

A long night of mental darkness, owing to various causes, succeeded this
luminous period. In modern times, however, the genius of the nation, encouraged
by peace and harmony, appears again in the republic of letters.

The limits of our work, will not permit us to give a minute detail of Irish
writers and their works, and therefore we shall present the ^^der with the
following sketch.

Usher was a scholar, second to none these islands can boast of, unless we
except Seldom. Berkley, bishop of Cloyne, was a writer of very superior
talents. He has been called the Irish Hato. His Minute Philosopher is among the
standards of the English language. His essay on Vision has extended the
boundaries of science. King. archbishop of Dublin, was a less fanciful, but a
more consistent, philosopher than Berkley. His book upon the Origin of Evil, is
a master piece* He was a man of wit, and of a sarcastic vein. Dr. Dodwell, the
famous Canden professor of history in the university of Oxford, was of this
country. He was a man of universal erudition, but of an enthusiastio turn of
mind. Leslie of Glaslough, was a man of great reading, prodigious memory, and
voluminous composition. His short and easy method with the Deists, is esteemed
one of the best pieces extent on the subject. Toland was a writer of opposite
principles. A catholic priest originally, he became a deist in religion, and a
republican in politics. His scholarship has been arraigned by his antagonists,
but he is commended by Mr. Lock as a man of parts and learning. Clayton,
bishop of Clogher, wrote and essay on Spirit, and Analysis of the Works of Lord
Bolingbroke, and other books. Mr. Molyneux This was the writer of that
celebrated vindication of his country's rights. The Case of (...), published at
the close of the last century, which alarmed the English government to (...),
that it was ordered to be burnt by the hands of the common hangman.
(the friend of Mr. Lock, and champion for the independence of his native
country) was a philosopher and mathematician, and reckoned among the first of
that scientific age. His Dioptrics are highly commended by Dr. Halley. Dr.
Helsham published an elegant and learned course of lectures, upon the several
branches of physics and mechanick^. -- Dr. Brian Robinson wrote an essay upon
that Ethereal Fluid to which Newton alludes in his queries: And also a treatise
on the Animal Economy, in which he appears happily to have applied his great
mathematical knowledge to the extension of medical science. Sir Hans S^^ane, no
less remarkable for his museum than his genius. Dr. Macbride, who has so
successfully applied the theory of fixed air to practice in the cure of the sea
scurvy. Dr. Young's inquiry into the principal phenomenon of Sounds, is a work
of great scientific knowledge. (...) ^^^ilton, whose philosophical account of
the county of Antrim, (...) Basaltes, is highly esteemed. O'Gallagher, author
of an essay on the first Principles of Nature. Dr. Sullivan's treatise on the
Feudal Law and Constitution of England, is making its way in the good ^^^ion of
the world; notwithstanding this avenue to fame had been (...) occupied by Dr.
Blackstone's Commentaries. Dr. Hutcheson is (...) principal Ethic writer of
this country. Whilst a teacher of an (...) in Dublin, he wrote his books on the
origin of our ideas of bea^^^ and on the passions. These raised his reputation
so high, that he (...) invited to accept the moral chair in the university of
Glasgow, (...) he filled with such celebrity, as to lay the foundation for that
(...) which Glasgow ^ow enjoys as an Ethic school. Two of the (...) divines of
this country were dissenters from the established (...) Mr. Abernethy and Dr.
Leland. The sermons of the former upon (...) Attributes are held to be one of
the best systems of natural those (...). He was deputed by the dissenters of
Ulster to address the Duke ^^^mond, in a tour he made when Lord Lieutenant; and
his Grace (...) afterward heard to say, that, of all the men who ever
approached (...) on like occasions, he was most pleased with "the young man of
Antrim." And Dr. Leland's view of Deistical Writers, and other (...) are
equally known and admired. Dr. Duchal wrote presumptive ^^guments in favor of
Revelation, and several volumes of ser^^^^ which have been well received. The
writers who have done the ^^^tion most honor in theology are, Sing, Story,
Brown, Delany, ^^^son, Orr. Skeleton, and Ryan, author of "The Effects of
Religion (...) Mankind." Bishop Sing is said to have been a man of great (...)
and learning; he was author of the Religion of a Gentleman. (...) bishop of
Kilmore, published only some occasional sermons, but (...) treatise on the
Priesthood, deep erudition and christian moderation (...) equally conspicuous.
Brown, bishop of Cork, published some ^^^umes of sermons; he is, however, more
celebrated for his deli^^^ than his composition. Delany's sermons on the Social
Duties, are excellent. Dr. Lawson was a most celebrated preacher. His Lec^^^
upon Oratory, which he delivered in Trinity College Dublin, he (...) to the
world himself; they show a nice classical taste, a fine poet^^^ vein, and a
thorough knowledge of the art of preaching.

Swift, whose literary character is well known, was a native of I^land. The
other principal miscellaneous writers in this kingdom (...) Roscommon, author
of the ingenious Essay on translated verse, and (...) excellent translation of
Horace's Art of Poetry. Parnell, the (...) delicioe musarum, of whose poetry,
above all others, it may be said (...) repetita placebit. Burke, on the
sublime, etc. Lord Molesworth^^ Lord Orrery. Earl Nugent. Mr. and Mrs. Millar.
Dr. Arb^^^ writer of Hibernicus's, letters, etc. Molloy, author of a period
(...) paper in London, called Common Sense, etc. Ogle, who moder^^^ Chaucer's
Tales. Dr. Dunkin, author of a quarto collection of ha^^ous poems, some of
which are in three languages, Greek, Latin, and English. Wood, who published
Ruins of Palmyra and Balbec, and Essay on the genius and writings of Homer.
Robertson, author of (...) attempt to explain the words reason, substance, etc.
Stern, bishop Clogher, of a book de visitatione infirmorum. Stern, the
ini^^^^ Stern, whose Sermons, Tristram-Shandy, and Sentimental Jour^^^ will be
admired whilst feeling and sentiment remain among mank^^^ Webb, who inquired
into the beauties of painting, etc. (...) author of several admired Tracts,
theological and poetical. Pill^^^^^ who published a Dictionary of Painters.
Cunningham, author of several poetical pieces, particularly his natural and
deservedly admired Pastorals. Preston, author of several miscellaneous poems:
His "Irregular ode to the moon," claims a first rank in English poetry. Dr.
Clancy, author of the Templum Veneris, etc. Bush, of Socrates. -- Johnston,
author of Chrysal. Brook, of the Farmer's Letters, Fool of Quality, Gustavus
Vasa, etc. Dr. Sheridan (in whose family genius seems as hereditary as the
name) author of several pieces for the improvement of the English language,
particularly a pronouncing Dictionary; he also published a Life of Swift. His
sons are not less celebrated; Brindsley's genius, unconfined to the praise of
having rivalled the Ciceros and Demonsthenes of antiquity, has added new
treasures to the Drama, in his Duenna, School for Scandal, etc. and Charles
Francis, his brother, has acquired great credit for his History of the late
Revolution of Sweden. Usher, author of Clio, a very ingenious Essay on Taste.
To these we might add a list of female writers; Mrs. Sheridan, Mrs. Pilkington,
Mrs. Grierson, Mrs. Barber, Mrs. Davies, Mrs. Griffith, Miss Brook, etc.

Ireland now produces a catalogue of celebrated scenic writers. -- Of her late
writers in this line are some, whose names are not yet forgotten; and others
whose works will last as long as the English stage shall hold the mirror up to
nature: Earl of Orrery; N. Tate; Concannen; John Kelly, author of the Married
Philosopher, etc. Dr. Madden, of Themislocles; Jones, of the Earl of Essex;
Morgan, of Philocles; Hartson. of the Countess of Salisbury, etc. A Philips;
Mrs. Centlivre; Sir R. Steel; Farquhar; Southern, Congreve, Brook, and Kelly.

It would perhaps be injurious to the memory of Dr Goldsmith, to draw his
poetical character from his the^^rical pieces, though they are replete with the
true vis comica. His same must be founded upon his Traveller, Deserted Village,
Vicar of Wakefield, and Citizen of the World.

UNIVERSITY.] Ireland contains but one university, which is called
Trinity-College. It was founded in 1591, in the reign of Elizabeth; but its
original constitution being found imperfect, in 1637, it received a new
charter, and another set of statures, compiled by archbishop (...). This
prelate made several essential alterations in the constitution of the college,
the most material of which was the depriving the follows of the election of
their provost, the appointment to that important office being from thenceforth
reserved to the crown. To make the fellows some amends for the loss of their
first privilege, it was appointed by the new charter that they should be
tenants for life in their fellowships, if they remained unmarried, or
unprovided with a benefice of more than 10l. in the king's books, whereas by
the first charter they were to quit their office in seven years after they
became of master's ^^^ding. At the same time the number of fellows was enlarged
from seven to sixteen, distinguished into seven senior fellows and nine juni^^,
and the number of scholars was augmented to seventy. The government of the
college was placed in the provost and major part of (...) senior fellows, from
whose decisions an appeal was given to the ^^^sitors, which are the chancellor
of the ^^iversity, or his vice chancellor, and the archbishop of Dublin. (...)
provost has a negative voice in all the proceedings of the board of seniors;
and to him is also ^^^mitted the extraordinary power of nominating any
candidate to ^^^lowship (who shall have sustained the whole previous
examination) even against the unanimous sense of the other examiners.

The number of fellowships fixed at present, is twenty-two, (...) senior, and
fifteen junior. The emoluments of a senior fellow^^^ are supposed at present to
exceed 600l. yearly.

A spirit of emulation to excel in their studies is scarcely in any (...) of
education so well supported as among the students of Dublin ^^^lege, owing to
the excellent institution of public quarterly examinations. Three of the four
terms of the year are closed with a vac^^^ of from three to four weeks each,
and the fourth with a long (...) of four months, during which the students have
time to prepare (...) selves for a public examination, that begins the business
of the (...) ensuing term. Two days are allotted to this examination, four
(...) each day. The examiners are the fellows under the degree of (...) and the
resident masters; the examined are all the undergr^^^ distributed into four
classes, and each class into divisions of two^^^ thirty persons, according to
the number of students and examinations. The subjects of examination are all
the sciences in which the (...) have been instructed to that time, together
with the particular (...) of the Greek and Latin classicks appointed to be read
by each (...) during the term preceding the examination: A Latin theme (...)
demanded of each person, the second morning of the examination a subject given
out by the examiner the evening before. The ^^^ers are furnished with lists of
the names of the persons they are ^^^amine, with separate columns for every
branch of the examinations which columns they distinguish by technical marks
the respecting ^^swering of the students, and after the examination make a
report (...) same to the senior lecturer. These reports, which are called
^^^ments, being submitted to the inspection of the board, are read ^^ly, a few
days after the examinations in the college hall, wh^^ (...) operate powerfully
to the credit or disgrace of the parties (...). Some of these judgments are of
so humbling a nature, that the (...) who has deserved them is not accounted as
having answered a^ ^^ination for that time, a certain number of which
examinations (...) sustain before he is admitted to the first degree in arts.
In (...) term, the best answerer in each division receives a premium of (...)
stamped with the college arms, to the value of forty shillings; (...) other
three examinations, if the person who has before obtained ^^^mium in that year,
appears to be the best answerer again, he is ^^^ed with a certificate on vellum
in lieu of a premium, which is (...) judged to the second best in the division,
in order to spread (...) of emulation more widely. The effect of this judicious
distrib^^^^ rewards and censures is great, almost beyond conception: (...)
anything seem wanting to the perfection of such a system, (...) provision for
augmenting the number of examiners in prop^^^ (...) the daily increasing demand
for them. The whole number (...) graduates in Dublin College fearcely ever
falls short of four (...) (the entire number of collegiates on the books being
usually (...) hundred) and of the undergraduates, if more than twenty be (...)
into a division, it becomes difficult, if not impossible, to (...) their merits
justly within the time allotted to the examination.

Besides the two and twenty fellowships, there are on the foundation five royal
professorships, divinity, common law, civil law, physic and Greek; besides
professors of mathematics, Oriental tongues, modern languages, oratory,
history, and natural philosophy. The late Sir Patrick Dunn, knight, bequeathed
a considerable estate for the support of three professors in medicine, viz.
theory and practice of physic, surgery, and midwifery, pharmacy, and the
materia medica. The students are classed under three ranks, fellow-commoners,
pensioners, and si^^rs. The necessary annual expense of a fellow-commonner,
clothing and books included, is about 100l. of a pensioner about 70l. A sizar
receives his commons and instructions gratis: The number of these last is
commonly about thirty.

As to the college edifice, it is unquestionably one of the noblest of the kind
in Europe. It extends in front above 300 feet, and in depth 600, and is divided
into two nearly equal squares. The principal front, opposite College-green,
which was erected in 1759, is in the Corinthian order, and built of mountain
stone, as are all the buildings in the first square, the east side of which is
intended to be ornamented with an elegant steeple and spire near 150 feet high.
On the north side is the refectory, or dining hall, a spacious room, with the
front ornamented with Ionic pilasters. Connected with this, and projecting into
the square, there is now building a chapel whose front is intended to
correspond with that of the opposite theater. This chapel is connected with the
west front by a regular range of buildings for the students; as are those on
the south side, till joined with the theater, which projects into the square.
The front of this theater is ornamented with four columns in the Corinthian
order, and pediment, and is greatly admired for its delicacy and elegance. It
is intended for lectures, examinations, etc. The ornaments of the inner part,
particularly the stucco work, are much admired, and in ten compartments therein
are placed full length portraits of their present majesti^s, Queen Elizabeth
(the foundress) Primate Usher, Archbishop King, Bishop Berkeley, Dean Swift,
Doctor Baldwin, Mr. Molyneux (author of the Case of Ireland) and Mr. Grattan.

The inner square is partly composed of plain brick buildings containing
apartments for the students. The south side is entirely taken up by a superb
library, supported by a piazza erected in 1732. The inside of the library is
beautiful and commodious, and embellished with busts in white marble of Plato,
Socrates, Aristotle, Cicero, Demosthenes, Homer, Shakespeare, Milton, Bacon,
Newton, Lock, Boil, Swift, Usher. Earl of Pembroke, and the doctors Delany,
Lawson, Gilbert and Baldwin.

Few public bodies have been so much indebted to the munificence of their
members, as the university of Dublin has been to the two last mentioned
gentlemen, who were contempories for many years in the respective offices of
provost and vice-provost. Dr. Baldwin, after governing the college for the
space of two and forty years, died in 1758, aged upwards of ninety. By his will
he bequeathed to the college in real and personal property, to the amount of
near 100,000l. out of which his executors shortly after purchased, for the use
of the body, two advowsons, and founded two new fellowships. Dr. Gilbert
enriched the library by a bequest of his books, 12,000 volumes, chosen by
himself in a long course of years for this purpose, without regard (...)
expense, by a valuable collection of MSS. prints, and medals; and lastly, by 14
marble busts (enumerated above) of ancient and modern worthies, executed by the
best masters at a considerable cost. The shelves of the library will contain by
computation 60,000 volumes Two thirds of them are at present full, containing,
besides Dr. Gilbert's (which is the best) the entire libraries of the great
archbishop Usher, one of the original members of this university, and about
(...) volumes, part of the collection of another fellow of the college, (...)
late Right Reverend Dr. Palliser, archbishop of Cashel.

The printing office is a neat structure, built in the modern (...). The
anatomy house is worthy of inspection, as among other curiosities, it contains
a set of figures in wax, representing women in every state of pregnancy. They
are executed from real skeletons, and (...) the product of almost the whole
life of an ingenious French (...). They were purchased by the late Earl of
Shelburne, who made a ^^^ent of them to the college.

The ROYAL IRISH ACADEMY of Science, Polite literature, and Antiquities, was
incorporated by letters parent in 1786, under the (...) age of his majesty, and
is composed of some of the most learned and ingenious men in the kingdom. They
have published two volumes of their transactions, which consist of several
curious and valuable papers, on various subjects, presented by different
members; wh^^ have been received by the literary world with much applause. The
institution certainly forms a new era in the History of Irish Literature and
will doubtless be productive of the most distinguished consequences, in the
promotion of science and general erudition amongst (...).

CHARACTER AND MANNERS.] The Irish are inferior to none in bodily strength and
beauty, they are equal to any in pliability and ^^^^ity of limbs.

Always inclined to manly and martial exercises, they readily confront any
undertaking; their bodies are fitted to any climate, or to (...) difficulty,
and from the same source might perhaps be derived, (...) spirit of heroism
which has so eminently characterised them.

Strong intellects, warm fancies, and acute feelings, have generally carried
them beyond the line of mediocrity; and whether the depths of science were to
be explored, the heights of heroism attained, (...) sympathy awakened in the
inmost soul, Irishmen would be equal to the task. In virtue too they take an
uncommon range, and in the paths of vice they are not slow or backward. Even
the blunders with which they have been charged by their good neighbors, may
have some foundation in truth, if by blunders we are to understand, those quick
sallies by which the regular concordance of worms is broken and overleaped for
something bold and expressive in the thought. But what peculiarly distinguishes
the Irish character is, a comprehension of qualities which are seldom found
compatible. Sudden ard^^^ unabating perseverance; universal aptitude; firm
adherence; ^^^tience of injury; a long remembrance of it; strength of
resolution tenderness of affection. These outlines of the Irish character, may
(...) filled by the full grown lineaments, which the writers of differe^^ges,
and of different countries, have affixed to it. The Irish have been
represented, strongly actuated by a thirst of glory; Prodigal of (...)
impetuous, vindictive, generous, hospitable, curious, credulous, alive to the
charms of music, constant in love or hatred.

A respectable English traveller, Mr. Young, in his late tour in Ireland
gives the following character of the Irish nation, which, as it appears to
have been written with great fairness, and impartiality, we are happy to afford
a place in this work.

It is but an illiberal business for a traveller, who designs to publish
remarks upon a country, to sit down cooly in his closet and right a satire on
the inhabitants. Severity of that sort must be enlivened with an uncommon share
of wit and ridicule, to please. Where very gross absurdities are found, it is
fair and manly to note them; but to enter into character and disposition is
generally uncandid, since there are no people but might be better than they are
found, and none but have virtues which deserve attention, at least as much as
their failings; for these reasons this section would not have found a place in
my observations, had not some persons, of much more flippancy than wisdom,
given very gross misrepresentations of the Irish nation. It is with pleasure,
therefore, that I take up the pen, on the present occasion, as a much longer
residence there enables me to exhibit a very different picture; in doing this,
I shall be free to remark, wherein I think the conduct of certain classes may
have given rise to general and consequently injurious condemnation.

There are three races of people in Ireland, so distinct, as to strike the
least attentive traveller: These are the Spanish, which are found in Kerry, and
a part of Limerick and Cork, tall and thin, but well made, a long visage, dark
eyes, and long black hair. The time is not remote when the Spaniards had a kind
of settlement on the coast of Kerry, which seemed to be overlooked by
government. There were many of them in Queen Elizabeth's reign, nor were they
entirely driven out till the time of Cromwell. There is an island of Valentia
on that coast, with various other names, certainly Spanish. The Scotch race is
in the north, where are to be found the features which are supposed to mark
that people, their accent, and many of their customs. In a district, near
Dublin, but more particularly in the baronies of Bargie and Forth in the county
of Wexford, the Saxon tongue is spoken without any mixture of the Irish, and
the people have a variety of customs, which distinguish them from their
neighbors. The Milesian race of Irish, which may be called native, are
scattered over the kingdom, but chiefly found in Connaught and Munster; a few
considerable families, whose genealogy is undoubted, remain, but none of them
with considerable possessions, except the O'Briens, and Mr. O'Neil, O'Hara and
M'Dermot are great names in Connaught, and O'Donnohue a considerable one in
Kerry; but the O'Connors, and O'Drischals in Cork, claim an origin prior in
Ireland to any of the Milesian race.

The only divisions which a traveller, who passed through the kingdom without
any residence, could make, would be into people of considerable fortune and
mob. The intermediate division of the scale, so numerous and respectable in
England, would hardly attract the least notice in Ireland. A residence in the
kingdom convinces one, however, that there is another class, in general of
small fortune -- country gentlemen and renters of land. The manners, habits and
customs of people of considerable fortune, are much the same every wh^^^^^
least there is very little difference between England and Ireland, (...) among
the common people one must look for those traits by whi^^^ discriminate a
national character. The circumstances which (...) me most in the common Irish
were, vivacity, and a great and (...) volubility of speech. They are infinitely
more cheerful and lively (...) any thing we commonly see in England, having
nothing of that ^^^vility of sullen silence, with which so many Englishmen seem
to (...) themselves up, as if retiring within their own importance. (...) work,
but so spiritedly active at play, that at hurling and other (...) exercises,
they show the greatest feats of agility. Their love of ^^^ty is as remarkable
as their curiosity is insatiable; and their ^^^ity to all comers, be their own
poverty over so pinching, has the (...) merit to be forgotten. Pleased to
enjoyment with a joke, or (...) repartee, they will repeat it with such
expression, that the laugh (...) be universal. Warm friends and revengeful
enemies; they are ^^^lable in their secrecy, and inevitable in their
resentment; with (...) notion of honor, that neither threat not reward would
induce (...) to betray the secret or person of a man, although that man we^^
^^^pressor. Hard drinkers and quarrelsome; but civil, submissive (...)
obedient. Dancing is so universal among them, that there are (...) where
itinerant dancing-masters, to whom the cotters pay six (...) quarter for
teaching their families. Besides the Irish jig, which (...) can dance with a
most luxuriant expression, minuets and country ^^^es are taught; and I even
heard of cotillons coming in. Many (...) in their character are evidently to be
ascribed to the extreme opp^^^ion under which they live. If they are as great
thieves and (...) (...) they are reported, it is most certainly owing to this
cause.

But I must now come to another class of people, to whose conduct it is almost
entirely owing, that the character of the nation (...) (...) that luster
abroad, which I dare assert, it will soon very gener^^ merit: This is the class
of little country gentlemen, This expression is not to be taken in a general
sense. God forbid I should (...) character of all country gentlemen of small
fortunes in Ireland: I have myself been ac^^^ed with exceptions. -- I mean only
that in general they are not the most liberal people (...) kingdom.
tenants (...) drink their claret by means of profit rents; jobbers in farms;
(...) your follows with round hats, edged with gold, who hunt in the (...)
trunk in the evening, and fight the next morning. I shall (...) ^well on a
subject so perfectly disagreeable, but remark that these (...) the men among
whom drinking, duelling, ravishing, etc. etc. (...) found as in their native
soil; once to a degree that made them the (...) of society; they are growing
better, but even now, one or two (...) them got by accident (where they have no
business) into better company, are sufficient to derange the pleasures that
result from a lib^^^^ conversation. A new spirit; new fashions; new modes of
politeness exhibited by the higher ranks are imitated by the lower, which will
it is to be hoped, put an end to this race of beings; and either (...) their
sons and cousins into the army or navy, or sink them into (...) tradesmen or
farmers like those in England, where it is common (...) men with much greater
property without pretending to be gentlemen (...) it from the intelligence I
received, that even this class are very different from what they were twenty
years ago, and improve so fast that the time will soon come when the national
character will not be degraded by any set.

That character is upon the whole respectable: It would be unfair to attribute
to the nation at large the vices and follies of only one class of individuals.
Those persons from whom it is candid to take a general estimate do credit to
their country. That they are a people learned, lively and ingenious, the
admirable authors they have produced will (...) on eternal monument, witness
their Swift, Stern, Congreve, Boil, Berkeley, Steel, Fa^quhar, Southern,
and Goldsmith. Their talent (...) eloquence is felt, and acknowledged in the
parliaments of both the kingdoms. Our own service both by sea land, as well as
that (unfortunately for us) of the principal monarchies of Europe, speak their
^eady and determined courage. Every unprejudiced traveller who (...) them will
be as much pleased with their cheerfulness, as obliged by their hospitality;
and will find them a brave, polite, and liberal people.

RELIGION.] The established religion of Ireland is the Protestant; (...) (...)
discipline is similar to that of England, and is under (...) archbishops and
eighteen bishops. The four archbishoprics, are Armagh, Dublin, Cashal, and
Tuam; and the eighteen bishoprics are Cl^gher, Clonfert, Clov^e, Cork, Derry,
Down, Dromore, Elphin, Kildare, Killala, Killaloe, Kilmore, Leighlin and Ferns,
Limerick, Mouth, Ossory, Raphoe, and Waterford.

The dissenters are almost as various here as in England: but the most
prevailing are the Roman-Catholics, Presbyterians, Quakers, Anabaptists,
Moravians, and Methodists, all of whom are tolerated by law.

CONSTITUTION AND LAWS.] Ireland is at present a distinct independent kingdom,
and its imperial crown is inseparably annexed by an Irish act of parliament, to
that of Great Britain. From the time of the accession of the sovereignty of
Ireland, to the kings of England, until the tenth year of the reign of Henry
VII. the mode of enacting laws within the English pale in the parliaments of
this country, was nearly the same as in England; the king's viceroy summoning
and holding parliaments at pleasure, in which were enacted such statutes as
were then thought expedient or necessary. But an ill use (as it was then
termed) having been made of this power, a set of acts were passed in the reign
of Henry VII. one of which, viz. 10 Henry VII. c. 4. provided, "That no
parliament (...) hereafter summoned or holden, unless the king's lieutenant
then being, shall previously certify to the king, under the great seal of
Ireland, the causes and considerations thereof, and the articles proposed to be
passed therein; and that after the king in his council of England, shall have
considered and approved, or altered said acts, or any of them, and certified
them back under the great seal of England, and shall have given license to
summon and ^old a parliament, then the same shall be summoned and held, and the
said acts of certified, and none other, shall be therein introduced, passed,
(...) rejected.

By another law, viz. 10 Henry VII. c. 2^, it was enacted that "all (...)
before that time passed in England, should be of force in Ireland." From the
making of which law, all subsequent English (...) were absurdly supposed to
have bound Ireland, if therein names, (...) included under general words.

About the beginning of the reign of George I. in consequ^^^^ of its being a
question, whether England had a right to make laws to bind this country, which
was ready to be disputed by the Irish (...) act was passed in the British
parliament (6th of George I. e. 5.) (...) by it was declared, "That the kingdom
of Ireland ought to be ^^^^dinate to, and dependent upon, the imperial crown of
Great Britain as being inseparably annexed and united thereto, and that the
king majesty, with the consent of the lords and commons of Great Britain in
parliament assembled, has power to make laws to bind Ireland.

However, this illiberal and unjust usurpation of the legislative (...) of
Ireland was of short duration. For after the emancipation (...) trade of this
kingdom in the year 1779, the 10th statute of Henry (...) c. 4. before
mentioned, was very much altered, by an act passed in (...) Irish parliament.
in the twenty-first and twenty-second years of (...) present majesty George
III. etc. namely. statute the twenty-first and twenty second Geo. III. cap. 47.
By which it is enacted, "That (...) lord lieutenant and council of Ireland
shall certify under the (...) seal of the same, to his majesty, without
addition, alteration, etc. (...) such hills, and no other, as the parliament of
Ireland shall judge to (...) expedient: that all bills so certified and
returned back again (...) the great seal of England, without any alteration
whatever, and (...) other, shall pass in the Irish parliament." "And that no
bill (...) be certified into Great Britain, as a cause or consideration of
(...) ^^ing any parliament. Provided always that no parliament (...) ^^moned or
holden, until a license be obtained from his majesty, (...) that purpose," And
this act of the Irish legislature was followed (...) declaration of rights
under the form of an address to the thro^^ (...) a little strengthened by the
spirited and united efforts of the (...) Irish nation, who, with one voice, and
with the very arms in (...) hands with which they defended themselves from the
enemies of (...) empire, when destitute of their own established forces, who at
(...) time were bleeding in every quarter of the world in the support (...)
British standard, firmly demanded and insisted on, from the (...) parliament,
the restoration of those rights which the tyrannic oppression of their
predecessors had wrested from them. While on the (...) hand, that senate
restored to the Irish their legislative, as they (...) fore done their
commercial rights, not only repealing the 6th (...) c. 5. but passing and act
renunciatory of their former groundless (...) to what they now declared to be
the rights of their hitherto oppor^^^^ and injured neighbors.

At present, therefore, as was before mentioned. the Irish (...) governed by
parliaments of its own, which consist of the king in (...) legislative
capacity, the lords spiritual (22) and lords (tempo^^ (...) 165) who together
with the king (or his viceroy) sit in one houses (...) the commons (300)
composed of knights, citizens, and burgesses ((...) ^^ed by the people) who sit
in another; and these in conjunction (...) the Irish parliament, which alone is
empowered with, alone (...) and alone has right to exert the privilege of
making new, or (...) or repealing those laws already made, for the government
of this (...) In which the manner of proceeding from the first introduction of
a hill into either house till it is transmitted to England by the lord
lieutenant in order to receive the royal assent, is nearly the same with that
of the British parliament.

In respect of duration, the parliaments of the two countries differ, the
parliament of Ireland is at present octennial, and before the beginning of the
reign of his present majesty, was perpetual: Whereas that of Great Britain i^
septennial.

The common law of England was adopted here by the council of Lismore, in the
reign of Henry II. and ever since has been the common law of Ireland; between
which and that of England there is hardly and difference, except where the
alterations made in it by the statute law of either country, may have produced
a slight variation. But, to speak generally, the principles of both are the
same, and the decisions of the courts at Westminster, are of high authority in
guiding the determinations (in similar cases) of the king's courts at Dublin,
which in number, superiority, and extent of jurisdiction are similar to those
at Westminster, some few and trivial deviations, in the peculiar practice of
each court, excepted.

In consequence of the above mentioned restoration of the constitutional
immunities of this country, a writ of error no longer lies from the King's
Bench in Ireland, to that at Westminster, and the ultimate appeal must now be
brought before the Irish House of Peers, whole sentence is final and
irreversible.

There are likewise ecclesiastical, and admiralty courts here, as in England,
also for the general distribution of justice. The kingdom is divided into five
circuits; the principal county towns in each of these are visited twice a year
by two of the twelve judges who sit as judges of assize and gaol delivery
alternately, for the hearing and deciding of suits by (...) Prius, and for the
trial of prisoners.

To attempt to enter more minutely into a subject, which the ingenuity of the
most able lawyers, that have wrote on it, could scarcely contract into a few
volumes, would at present be inconvenient, or rather impossible, in a work of
this kind, wherein a desire to give a general view of many branches will not
permit any enlargement on one.

INLAND NAVIGATION.] The important consequences arising from the extension of
inland water carriage seem now to be generally felt and promoted in Ireland.

Among the canals completed or now prosecuting in Ireland, the most
distinguished in consequence and extent (and the only one which the limits of
our work will permit us to notice particularly) is that called the Grand Canal.
This canal was commenced in the year 177^, under the direction of parliament
and the navigation board, and d^ster ^owrd^ grants were made from time to time
for carrying it on. But after some years it was observed that little effectual
progress was made therein, which led the legislature to hold out encouragement
to private subscribers to undertake the prosecution of the work, by granting an
aid of one sixth part of the sum which should be necessary to (...) thereon.
Accordingly several noblemen and gentlemen subscribed a capital of one hundred
thousand pounds, and were incorporated by parliament in 1772, by the name of
the company of undertakers of the Grand Canal, who were put in possession of
all the works which had been previously done at the public expense, and
invested with (...) powers for the better carrying into execution this
important object. After combating a variety of difficulties, enlarging their
capital, (...) further aids by loan, etc. the line was completed from Dublin to
(...) astereven in 1786.

This noble canal proceeds from the west end of the metropolis, passes through
Sallins, Roberts-town, and Rathangan, and in the neighborhood of several other
towns and villages. It crosses the Li^^^ an aqueduct bridge of seven arches
(constructed on the most ingen^^^ and permanent principles) pierces the hill of
Downings several hundred yards -- runs through a great part of the Bog of Allen
-- and (...) into the River Barrow at Monastereven, after a course of 31 (...).
It is navigated by boats of from 30 to 50 tons burden; and supplie^^ with
water throughout the different levels from numerous streams (...) rivers, viz.
the Black-wood-mill, Loughlewhelnan, Brockasa (...) Fouraunfan streams on the
North; and on the South by the (...) Bog, Miler's-town and Donore streams, and
the Mill-town (...) which is made navigable four miles from the great trunk,
(...) terminates near the Curragh; but that which supplies the (...) with such
abundance of most excellent water, is the Great (...) taken in at the fifteenth
lock about twelve miles from Dublin; (...) are 26 locks on this navigation (6
double and 20 single) the falls (...) which vary from 4 feet 3 inches, to 19
feet 7 inches. The (...) level is 202 feet 4 inches above the James's-street
harbor; 82 (...) inches above the river Barrow at Monastereven; and 265 feet
(...) the tide in the Lisfy at Dublin.

These works have been principally conducted and effected by (...) and Evans,
Esquire. engineer, whose integrity and zeal have been riv^^^ only by the ingenuity
and resources he displayed in the course of the of the most arduous
undertakings in the history of inland navigation.

From this canal a collateral cut to Naas is completed by the ki^^^ company,
and several others are meditated; particularly one to the Prosperous -- another
to Athy, and the tide water in the Barrow -- of another toward the Shannon at
Banagher by Edenderry, etc.

The completion of this canal has communicated the most es^^^^ advantages to
the country through which it passes, and its vici^^^^ and through a
considerable extent of the adjoining countries, rec^^ing large tracts of land
and bog, increasing their value, extending agriculture and manufactures, and
convening the important supp^^^ all flour, corn, coal, turf, etc. etc. by a
cheap and expeditious (...) to the metropolis; from whence it transports in
return those ^^^^^ries which render the intercourse of the city and country of
such (...) ^^ciprocal benefit. -- To these advantages are to be added, the may
conveniences afforded to traveling, etc. by the establishing of commodious
packet boats on this line, which passing rapidly to different stages every day
at stated hours, afford one of the cheapest, most expeditious and social modes
of conveyance yet known in any part of Europe.

From the tolls on this navigation, and the profits arising from (...)
pacquets, a very considerable revenue accrues to the company, whi^^ fortitude
and perseverance in effecting this great national work, under the most
discouraging circumstances, claim the praise a^^ (...) of their countrymen.
Their success has at length proved from experience, that the effectual mode of
conducting canals, is by companies, subscribing rateably to the expense, and
procuring from parliament such aid as their importance and utility may entitle
them to claim.

DUBLIN SOCIETY.] Ireland has the honor of having formed the first
agricultural society in Europe, and has continued to maintain the precedence of
its merit also unrivalled. This society originated about the year 1731, and was
supported solely by the voluntary subscriptions of its members, amounting to
about 1000l. per annum; with this fund, and the animating zeal of several
individuals, particularly Dr. Madan, and Mr. Prior (two of the most valuable
patriots which and country has produced) they communicated many of those
benefits to which the present improving appearance of the nation is in a great
degree indebted. For several years past, the legislature have given them the
most liberal grants, which have enabled them to extend their views as well to
arts and manufactures as to agriculture. The school for portrait, ornament, and
architect drawing, under the direction of this society, has proved a prolific
nursery for the fine arts; having produced a number of genuisses, the boast and
ornament of their country, and the admiration of foreigners.

TRADE AND MANUFACTURES.] This subject has at length become of consequence to
the people of Ireland. Through the concurrence of various favorable
circumstances, the revolution in America, and the embarrassment of
Great Britain, Providence seconding the courage and virtue of the people, broke
the chains, which trading jealousy and national injustice, had so long imposed
upon this country. Whilst the sun of commerce and power in Venice, in Genoa, in
Holland, the Netherlands, and other countries rose and set; the kingdom of
Ireland, more fruitful in soil, more powerful in people, more fortunate in
situation, and more strong in natural resources, was compelled for several
hundred years to look on these events a joyless and indifferent spectator.
During that long night of misery to Ireland, where her fields stained with the
blood of insurrections rapidly treading on the heels of each other; raised
either by a sense of oppression, or fomented by the interested artifices of
English ministers and their creatures. -- These produced perpetual change and
consequent insecurity of property; and confiscation being often the object, was
generally the effect of excited disorder. In a country so distracted,
manufactures could not take root, and commerce could not flourish. These are
the offspring of peace and settlement, which were here experienced but for
short intervals till the revolution.

From the latter part of the reign of William III. to the late emancipation of
the trade of Ireland in 1779, this unfortunate country experienced a series of
the most wanton and impolitic restrictions Between the years 1740 and 1779,
there were no less than twenty-four embargoes in (...) and, one of which lasted
three years."
from England, equally injurious to the intercourse and prosperity of both.

In School the lords and commons of England addressed King William, to employ his
influence in Ireland to "suppress the woollen manufacture therein;" to which he
answered the lords, "that his (...) will take care to do what their lordships
have desired" -- and to (...) commons he answered "I shall do all that in me
lies to discourage (...) woollen trade in Ireland" -- And indeed so
successfully was this (...) influence employed upon the legislature, that they
passed an act lay^^^ heavy duties on the export of their woollens to England,
where a (...) was also made in the following year prohibiting our exports to
oth^^ countries, so that between the two legislatures the manufacture (...)
completely annihilated as it could be by law.

The immediate consequences to Ireland showed the value of (...) she lost; many
thousand manufactures were obliged to leave this kingdom for want of
employment; many parts of the southern and (...) ^^tern counties were so
depopulated, that they have not yet recove^^^ reasonable number of inhabitants;
and the whole kingdom was (...) ^^ed to the greatest poverty and distress.

In consideration of this loss, the Irish were to get full and unrivalled
possession of the linen trade; as if one manufacture was sufficient (...) the
employment of a whole nation, especially where a large major^^ of it were
totally ignorant of the process or habits of the trade, (...) possessing but
little of the necessary material; whilst in the other, (...) hands were formed
even to enviable perfection, and the materials (...) possessed at home in
abundance. The Irish women were to (...) spinners for the English manufactures,
and the richer were to (...) the clothiers for the poorer nation.

Several years had elapsed before the promised encouragement (...) linen was
granted; and so wretched a state was it in, in the year 17^^ that the exports
of linen amounted in value but to 14,112l.

The people of Ireland, deprived as we have mentioned, of (...) Woollen, were
obliged to confine their sole attention to the manufacture of Linen. As with
individuals so with nations, when the (...) lie mind is exclusively bent to one
object, it cannot avoid succe^^^ in its pursuit to a considerable degree. An
Act of Parliament was (...) ^^ed in Ireland in 1709, enabling the Lord
Lieutenant to appoint (...) ^^tees for the disposal of the revenue granted for
the encouragement (...) the linen manufacture. From this Board, called the
Trustees of the (...) ^^en and hempen manufactures in Ireland, has the
important object of the^^ appointment received the most zealous and unremitting
attention (...) and to them this kingdom is principally indebted for the
flourishing state to which the manufacture has attained, and for the character
(...) maintains in all countries. The province of Ulster was the first wherein
it was extended; here it was actively taken up by the industry illustrious
descendants of the hardy Scotch Colonies settled therein, (...) still it
continues the principal seat of the manufacture. The (...) provinces have but a
small comparative share, although that of Connaught has been making
considerable advances in the coarser branch^^^ for some years.

To give the reader a more perfect idea of the progress and importance of this
manufacture, we have annexed a view of the quanti^^ exported at different
periods; and, as the export of Linen-Yarn in (...) some degree connected with
the subject, we have also given a similar view of it*

EXPORTS.
Years. Linen Cloth. Linen Yarn. Yards. Ct. qrs. lb. 17^3 1,819,816 11,802 2 17
17^3 4,878,545 15,672 3 17^^ 4,777,076 13,357 2 21 1743 6,058,041 14,16^ 1 10
1^^3 10,493,858 23,238 4 1763 16,013,105 34,468 7 1778 1^,450,700(...) 28,078 3
25 17^3 16,039,705(...) 35,812 3 23 1784 24,961,898 33,013 2 15 17^5 26,677,647
28,842 1 5 17^^ 28,168,866 31,062 20 1787 30,728,728 31,0^^ 2 0

The Lawn, Cambrick, and other finer branches of manufacture, (...) of them are
in a flourishing state.

The Woollen manufacture has been in possession of this country from (...)
early period; but the restrictions under which it had labored ^^^^ove a
century, has confined its extent to little more than the (...) of the
peasantry; and although the emancipation of trade was (...) to produce powerful
effects upon this manufacture, yet the restrained export of Wool and Yarn, and
the home market remaining unprotected, have caused, and must continue to cause,
this valuable trade to remain in a very torpid state. Considering however the
(...) of difficulties under which the manufacture struggles, it is surprising
to observe the pitch of excellence to which it has arrived. -- The best
Broad-Cloths of Ireland are little inferior to the English, and (...) Dr^ggits
are much admired. Her Blanketing and Flannels are in (...) esteem, and the
Worsted branches have been brought to great ^^^^ction, and many become fit
articles for extensive exportation.

Another branch of trade is in the produce of Cattle, which brings very large
returns into this kingdom. The exports in this line consist of beef, butter,
cheese, candles, tallow, hides (tanned and untanned) ^^cks and cows, hogs,
bacon, hog's-lard and pork. -- The last article (...) one of the most
increasing and valuable exports, it is the principal among the very few
resources of the numerous poor peasantry, as it is almost the only article
which brings them money, and being reared without expense, trouble or
attention, the returns must be considered as so much clear gain to the nation.
The average export for five years, ending 1767, was about 40,000 barrels. --
The like ending 1774, was 46,924 Barrels. -- The like ending 1782, was 87,085,
and in the year 17^7 it rose to 101,859.

The silk manufacture is of great importance, but principally confi^^^^ to the
metropolis, probably from its connection with the fashions. ^^^eral branches
have been brought to the highest perfection; their (...) and lutestrings are
excellent, and their handkerchiefs are not ^^^ly superior to English, but are
also unrivalled by any nation in Europe. The mixed goods, or tabinets and
poplins, have been long celebrated.

The cotton manufacture is of late introduction, but yet has arrival at great
perfection and considerable extent. Considerable sums (...) been expended on
the erection of noble mills and machinery.

The glass manufacture has arisen to considerable consequence wi^^^ a few years.

The manufacture of paper has been advancing by silent, but (...) steps, to
great improvement and importance; and from the nu^^^^ hands it employs, and the
small proportion the value of the (...) bears to the labor, it is certainly of
the first consequence to a manufacturing nation.

These are some of the principal manufactures of Ireland; (...) which appear,
from the best evidence, to be daily increasing in (...) and improvement.

Having enumerated the leading manufactures, exports, of this kingdom etc. it
is necessary to observe on the principal articles which ^^pose her imports;
these generally come from or through Great ^^^ain, The people of Ireland
continue to complain loudly of the want of reciprocity (...) trading
intercourse with Great Britain as well on the subject of malt and beer as a
(...) of other articles, not less remarkable.
and consist of her manufactures of various denominations, (...) lens, silks,
cottons, mixed goods, haberdashery, manufactures of (...) steel and other
metals, groceries, hops, bark, earthen-ware, beer, (...) and an infinite number
of other articles; besides the produce (...) East and West Indies to a
considerable amount. The table (...) will show the comparative value of this
intercourse; but whilst it (...) the balance to be generally in favor of
Ireland, there must be th^^^ into the opposite scale, the remittances to
absentees, interest of (...) on Irish estates, pensions, freight and insurance
of ships, remittances regiments on the Irish establishment, etc. etc. amounting
in (...) above a million and a half, or perhaps two millions sterling.

The annexed table is extracted from the Irish Custom House (...) counts.

Value of Goods Exported to, and Imported from Great Britain, at different
periods.
Exports. Imports. L s. d. L s. d. 1700 814,745 15 0 792,473 3 2 1705 516,771
17 0 497,794 1 9 1710 712,497 2 6 554,247 12 4 1715 1,529,765 14 1 972,688 9 11
1720 1,038,381 7 1 891,678 5 6 1725 1,053,782 13 11 819,761 13 3 1730 992,832 7
0 929,896 1 2 1735 1,248,410 16 0 935,849 8 9 1740 1,259,853 6 8 7/^; 849,678 7
10 1745 1,390,930 8 9(...) 949,603 15 10 1750 1,069,864 1 2 5/^; 920,340 17 0
1755 1,312,176 2 6 1,039,911 10 4(...) 1760 1,450,757 8 67/8; 1,094,752 12 11
1765 1,693,197 5 7 1,439,969 4 8(...) 1770 2,408,838 12 2 1,878,599 6 11 1775
2,379,858 9 8 1,739,543 18 4 1780 2,384,898 16 7 1,576,635 13 5 1781 2,187,406
15 0 2,432,417 13 10 1782 2,709,766 18 1 2,277,946 10 8 1783 1,989,290 6 9
2,320,455 18 7 1784 2,337,273 11 10 2,400,456 16 4 1785 2,764,75^ 1 11
1,949,074 0 11(...) 1786 3,039,531 3 5 2,346,024 1 6 1787 3,299,523 12 10
2,326,756 19 2

Since the opening of the Irish trade, the intercourse with the United States
of America, the British colonies, and also to the West India islands, has been
an accession of considerable consequence. To the latter the exports are
principally composed of produce, and manufactures of various sorts, and is a
trade that promises to increase to a great extent, if not restrained by the
illiberal construction of the navigation laws, which prevent their sending the
redundancy of their imports into the English markets. The trade to the British
colonies is composed of similar exports as to the islands, and will probably
rise to equal importance; but with the American States it is expected to be
much superior.

The trade of Portugal is one of the most important to the kingdom, and
constantly produces a considerable balance in her favor: In some years the
export of butter alone has been equal to the whole of her imports from that
country, which principally consist of wine, salt, (...), oil, pat-ash and cork;
for which are sent in return butter, beef, (...), tallow, cheese, shoes, new
and old drapery and fine linens, etc.

The trade with Spain consists of nearly the same articles of import and export
as to Portugal.

The exports to France generally consist of beef, butter, pork, hides, (...)
tallow, wheat, flour, biscuit, lin^^s, woollens, shoes, and sundry other
manufactures; -- and the imports of wine, brandy, (...) capers, oil, cork,
salt, gloves, cambrick, etc. The balance of (...) trade, though fluctuating,
has been generally in favor of Ireland.

The trade with Holland and Flanders, consists principally of (...) port of
beef, butter, hides, tallow, linen, new and old drapery, ^^^nels, frize,
woollen yarn, etc. and the imports of flax, thread, (...) and linseed oil,
paper, garden-seeds, Geneva, snuff, drugs, (...) stuffs, etc.

The trade with the East Country, including Denmark, (...) Sweden, Russia, the
Baltic, consists of an export nearly similar (...) preceding, and the imports,
of iron, timber, deals, tar, train-oil, (...) flax, bark, ^amp;c.

Value of the Exports and Imports of Ireland, to and from all parts, from 1700
to 1787 inclusive, with the balance of trade for and against.
Average of 10 years. Exports. Imports. Balance for. Balance against. L s. d. L
s. d. L s. d. L s. d. From 1700 to 1710 553023 16 0 513657 17 2 39365 18 9 From
1710 to 1720 1126670 6 11 852905 7 11 273764 19 0 From 1720 to 1730 1019809 3
2(...) 856936 6 8 162872 16 6 From 1730 to 1740 1190253 3 4 835044 8 2 305208
15 2 From 1740 to 1750 1485110 18 3 1123373 1 8 361737 16 7 From 1750 to 1760
2002354 5 10 1594164 7 1 ^08189 18 8 From 1760 to 1770 258900^ 19 2 2035023 4 2
553979 15 0 From 1770 to 1780 3125396 8 8 2544264 2 6 ^81132 6 2 1780 3012178
13 9(...) 2127579 9 7(...) ^84599 4 1 1781 2896035 7 1 3123031 9 7 -- -- --
226996 2 6 1782 3400598 10 8 2994265 17 8 406332 13 0(...)4; 1783 2935707 17 6
3007236 17 1 -- -- -- 71528 19 9 1784 3326211 16 6 3343031 13 9 -- -- -- 16819
17 3(...)4 1785 3737068 0 7(...) 3056394 14 11 680673 5 8 1786 3957396 18
11(...) 3480387 0 2 527009 18 9 1787 (...) 1^ (...) (...) ^4^7289 11 5(...)4;
8^10^6 (...) 6

COINS.] The coins of Ireland are at present of the same denominations and the
like fabric with those of England, only an English shilling passes in Ireland
for thirteen pence, and so in proportion in the other coins.

BANK OF IRELAND.] The subscribers to the national banks were incorporated by
charter in 1783, by the name of the Governor and Company of the Bank of
Ireland, and proceeded to business on the 25th June, in the same year, upon a
capital stock of 600,000l. which consisted of 4 per cent. government debentures
deposited at par. -- These debentures were cancelled by government, agreeably
to act of parliament, and an annuity at the rate of 4 per cent. granted in lieu
thereof. In addition to their capital they borrowed 60,000l. Previous to the
opening of the bank, for which they issued debentures at 5 per cent. and in
1784 a further sum of 40,000l. on the like terms.

In this bank are deposited, certain moneys received into his majesty's
treasury; and by an act passed in 1784, all money lodged in the courts of
chancery and exchequer are also to be deposited in the bank.

The governors, directors, and officers are annually elected in the month of
April. Of the 15 directors 5 must be new. The qualification of governor, is the
actual possession of 5000l. stock; of the deputy governor 3000l. and of each of
the directors 2000l.

Under the direction of this company, an office was opened in June 1787, for
purchasing light guineas and half guineas, of terms so highly advantageous to
the public, that it has proved of the utmost utility.

MILITARY STRENGTH.] The military establishment of Ireland consists of Four
regiments of dragoon guards 684 men Eight regiments of dragoons 1416
Twenty-eight regiments of foot 13132 Total 15,232

To this is to be added the ordnance, which is on a distinct establishment, and
is composed of 6 companies, of 50 men each, making in the whole 300.

Of this force, Great Britain may employ seven regiments (or 3283 men) on
foreign service at the expense of Ireland; but during the late war the
principal part of the army was withdrawn, so that in the year 1777 there were
little more than 3000 men left for the protection of the kingdom.

CITIES, PUBLIC EDIFICES, etc.] Dublin, the capital of Ireland, is in extent,
beauty and number of inhabitants, the second city in the British dominions. It
is situated on the east side of the island, on the (...) Liffey, near its
junction with the sea, in latitude 53 20 and is about 270 miles N. W. of London.

Dublin is equal in magnitude to above one-fourth of London. It is two miles
and a half long, and its greatest breadth is nearly equal; so that the
circumference may be about eight Irish miles. It lies mostly (...) a level, or
rather low, in respect to the adjacent country; a great (...) of the old town
being built on a marshy foundation. Its increase (...) last twenty years, is
almost incredible: In the year 1754, the re^^^^ of houses was 12,857, and in
1766, it was 13,194. It now contains at a moderate computation, about 15,000
houses, mostly (...) inhabitants, who are estimated at near 200,000 souls, and
is dairy (...) creasing both in extent and population.

Dublin would have had a commodious and secure station for shipping, if the
entrance of the bay had not been so choked up, that vessels of great burden
cannot come over the bar: But the defects of (...) harbor are greatly
remedied, by a prodigious work of stone and (...) of wood, extending about
three miles into the bay.

At the end of the piles, there is a light house erected, curiously (...)
constructed of hewn stone. The approach to the city from the harbor exhibits a
most beautiful prospect. It is a spacious amphith^^^^ bounded mostly by a high
shore; and the country all round is (...) ^^spersed with white villas, which
have a pleasing effect.

The river Liffey, though navigable for ships of a moderate but bu^^^^ as far
as the old Custom-house, is but narrow, the breadth being (...) some parts 250
feet, in others only 140. It runs for two miles (...) straight through the
city, dividing it nearly into two equal parts, ^^^ing spacious quays, wasted in
the whole length of the city. At (...) breadth of a wide street from the river
on each side, the houses (...) built opposite each other, which has a grand
effect. Over the (...) are erected five bridges, two of them, Essex and the
Queen's, are ^^^^gant structures; the other three, Ormond, Arran, and
Bloody-bridge^ have but little to recommend them, besides affording the
convenien^^^ of passage.

This city is the sea of an archbishop, and sends two members to parliament;
and the university sends two more. Besides two cathedral (Christ's and St.
Patrick's) there are eighteen parish churches, (...) meeting houses for
Presbyterians, one for Baptists, three for Me^^dists, one for Moravians, two
for Quakers; fifteen Roman-(...) chapels, three nunneries, one Jewish
synagogue, and fourteen hospit^^^. The linen and yarn halls, fifteen public
markets for every species (...) provisions, of which Ormond market is perhaps
the first in Eu^^^ and seven public prisons. The Four Courts, consisting of the
(...) Court of Chancery, King's Bench, Common Pleas, and Exchequer, (...) held
here, as also Courts of Prerogative, Delegate, Consistory, (...) Admiralty;
several halls for corporation, etc. one theater, (...) coffee-houses, besides a
number of elegant hotels for the accom^^tion of foreigners.

The east end of the town on each side of the Liffey is extending (...) by
several new streets, on a noble scale; and when the bridge which is in
contemplation for uniting the line from Grafton to Sackv^^^ street is built,
and the various avenues intended to be opened ther^^ are completed, Dublin will
be unrivalled in Europe.

The municipal government of the city of Dublin is vested in a (...) mayor, 24
aldermen, 2 sheriffs, and 97 common council, who are ele^^^ by the several
corporations. The various departments of its (...) are partly in the hands of
this corporation, and partly in several (...) instituted for the purpose within
these few years. In the for^^^ the care of the water, which they are to see
carefully and consist distributed to every part of the metropolis, from two
principal (...) one from a basin at the west end of the city, on the south side
of (...) street, which affords a noble head of water, being chiefly supp^^
(...) the grand canal; and the other from the Liffey at Island-bridge, where
arcing engine is employed to raise the water to a proper level for the better
supply of the north side of the city: From these sources it is supplied, in a
degree, perhaps, superior to any other in Europe.

Cork is the second city in the kingdom, and capital of the province of
Munster, governed by a mayor and other magistrates, and sends two members to
parliament. It is seated on an island in the river Lea, which branching into
two arms about a mile above the site of the city, one runs on its north and
the other on its south side, over which are placed neat bridges, by which the
communication with the opposite continents is preserved. The island is
intersected by several canals, ^^her natural or artificial, which being banked
in, bring up ships almost to every street, and greatly facilitate their trade.
The situation of the city is partly of a rising ground on the north and south,
and the middle on a level; it is three miles long and near two broad, and is
uncommonly populous for its extent, containing above 80,000 inhabitants.
Formerly the streets and houses were as narrow and inelegant as those of equal
antiquity in Ireland; but the public and private buildings of late years are in
the style of modern elegance, and alike declare the improved taste, spirit, and
riches of the inhabitants, who have been at all times distinguished for their
liberal hospitality and agreeable suavity of manners. Here are seven Protestant
churches, eleven Catholic chapels, and four dissenting meeting houses,
belonging to Presbyterians, Baptists, Quakers and French Protestants. The
Custom house, Exchange, Market-house, County-Court-house and the Theater, are
handsome buildings; and the charity schools and similar foundations are
numerous and well supported; upon the whole, this city very justly ranks as the
second in the kingdom, and is 124 miles S. W. of Dublin. The trade of Cork is
very considerable, and its exports are in some articles much superior to those
of metropolis. In time of war it is the great market for provisions, from
whence the British navy draw an inexhaustible supply. The other articles of
export consist of corn, wool, hay and woollen yarn, camblets, serges, hides,
butter, candles, (...), tallow, herrings, etc. Wool-combing is carried on to
such extent in this county, that half the wool of Ireland is said to be combed
have; the manufactures consist of camblets, serges, ratteens, frizes, d^^ggets,
narrow cloths, coarse linen, stockings, etc. but when agriculture and
manufactures are more widely diffused through this fruitful province, their
trade will be more valuable, as being derived from the enlarged industry and
ingenuity of the people.

Limerick is situated on the Shannon, one of the noblest rivers which any
European island can boast, and placed in one of the most fertile counties of
the kingdom. It is a flourishing city, and composed of what is called the Irish
and the English town. The latter stands upon the south part of a piece of
ground three miles in circumference, called the King's Island, formed by the
Shannon, which divides itself about half a mile above the city. The Irish town
is on the south or opposite side of the river, and both are united by an old
bridge, called Baal's. -- These towns in their ancient state consisted but of
one wide well built (...) out at right angles by many narrow lanes; at present
the city (...), populous and regular; three miles in circumference; is supposed
to contain above 40,000 inhabitants, and is 92 miles, S. W. by W. from Dublin,
and about 60 miles from the sea. It is governed (...) mayor, sheriffs and other
magistrates; is a city and county in (...) and sends two members to parliament.
Its trade is considerable, particularly in the export of beef, pork, butter,
hides, rape-seed, etc. (...) and the manufactures of linen, woollen and paper
are carried (...) some extent; that of gloves is no less celebrated abroad than
at (...) for their uncommon delicacy and beauty.

Belfast, though a few years since of inferior or second rate consequence, now
ranks amongst the first towns in Ireland; to which (...) importance it has
arrived by the most rapid progress, and for which (...) indebted to the
enterprizing activity of its merchants, the uncom^^^ industry of its people,
and from its situation, being the medium th^^^ which are conveyed the imports
and exports of a populous and (...) manufacturing country. Belfast is in the
county of Antri^, on (...) river Lagan, at its junction with the Lough of
Belfast, is supposed (...) contain at least 30,000 inhabitants, governed by a
Sovereign and (...) Burgesses, sends two members to parliament, and is 80 miles
north (...) Dublin. The streets are broad, the houses generally modern and
(...) built. The Exchange, Hall, and other public buildings are suited (...)
the purposes of their erection, and worthy the consequence of (...) town. Their
trade has risen (and is daily rising) into conside^^^ value; the exports of
linen, manufactured cotton, glass, corn, (...) pork, and sundry other articles,
are great; and their various manufactures form some of the most important in
the kingdom.

Waterford stands on the south side of the Suire, a broad and (...) river
without by bridge, and about four miles and a half from its j^^tion with the
Nore and Barrow, all which united form the harbor (...). This city is about
eight miles from the sea, and 74 miles south-south-(...) from Dublin; it is a
most convenient port for foreign traffic, and its harbor runs almost 12 miles
up the country, nearly in a strait line, all (...) way deep and clear. This
city is the capital of the county of the (...) name, governed by a Mayor and
other magistrates, and sends two ^^^bers to parliament; there are, a cathedral
of great extent and eleg^^^ three churches (one of which is extremely beautiful
and spacious, (...) rivals any which even the capital can boast) four Catholic
chap^^^ and places of worship for French Protestants, Presbyterians, Qua^^^ and
Baptists. The Bishop's palace is a fine building of hewn (...) with two fronts.
The Courthouse, Exchange, Custom-house, (...) Barracks, are neat handsome
buildings, and the new Theater and assembly Rooms are fitted up in a very fine
taste. There are (...) charity schools and humane foundations, well supported.
The (...) glass and other manufactures of Waterford are in a flourishing st^^^
and its export of beef, pork, butter, hides, tallow, corn, etc. is
considerable; to which the extensive inland navigation it has by means of (...)
Nore, Suire, and Barrow greatly contributes; as they also do to (...) import
trade, from the demand for foreign commodities in the (...) rich counties and
flourishing towns through which these rivers (...). The trade it carries on
with Newfoundland, and of which it enjoy^^ principal share, is of the utmost
importance, as upwards of (...) sail of shipping are employed in the supply of
the banks with fish ^^^sions, etc. and return from thence and the West Indies
with fish, (...) sugar, cotton, etc. Some idea of the provision trade here may
(...) by the vast number of large hogs killed, which amount to upwards of ^000
per week, for many weeks together, and of butter there have been exported from
hence from 60, to 80,000 casks a year.

Kilkenny is one of the best inland cities in this kingdom, pleasantly situated
on the river Nore, distant 57 miles south-west from Dublin. It is governed by a
Mayor, Recorder, and Aldermen. It comprises two towns, Kilkenny, so called, and
Irish-Town, each of which sends two members to parliament; and, together, are
computed to contain about 20,000 inhabitants. It has two churches, and several
Catholic Chapels -- The cathedral stands in a sequestered situation, is a
venerable Gothic pile, and built above five hundred years ago; close to it is
one of those remarkable round towers, which have so much engaged the attention
of travelers. There are two very fine bridges of cut marble over the Nore;
John's particularly, which consists of three elliptic arches, is beautifully
proportioned, and might serve as a model of lightness and elegance. The only
manufactures of consequence in this city are ^^arse woollen cloths, blankets of
extraordinary fine quality, and considerable quantities of starch; in the
neighborhood also are manufactured those beautiful chimney-pieces, which are
known all over the kingdom by the name of Kilkenny marble; which are cut and
polished by water, a mill (the only one of its kind probably in Europe) having
been invented by the late ingenious Mr. Colles for this purpose.

Galway is the most considerable town in Conaught, and seated on the noble bay
of Galway, on the Western Ocean, 120 miles west from Dublin. It has but one
parish church, an Exchange, three nunneries, three monasteries, a
charter-school, and an hospital. It is county in itself, governed by a Mayor,
or his Deputy, two Sheriffs and a Recorder, and sends two members to
parliament. The town is surrounded with walls, and including its suburbs,
contains about 15,000 inhabitants. The salmon and herring fisheries are carried
on here with great spirit, and employ several hundred boats; the quantity of
kelp manufactured and exported is considerable.

Londonderry is 115 miles north-north-west from Dublin, in the province of
Ulster, and capital of the county of the same name; sends two members to
parliament, and is governed by a Mayor and other Magistrates. It is seated on
an eminence or declivity of an oval form, being almost a peninsula at the
bottom, and on a narrow part of Lough Foil, which surrounds, for a quarter of
a mile broad, two thirds or more of the eminence, and by which they have an
open navigation to the sea on the very north of the kingdom. This situation is
not more advantageous than beautiful; the city is extremely well built and
neat, and a general appearance of order, industry and sobriety prevails
throughout. Its trade is considerable; the exports consist of linen,
linen-yarn, grain, etc. and their exertions in the Greenland and other
fisheries, have been successful. The ground plot of this city is the property
of the corporations of London, from which circumstance it has compounded its
former name, which was Derry.

The other considerable towns in Ireland are, Newry in the county Down, 50
miles N. from Dublin, and seated on the Newry Water, which is rendered
navigable for large vessels into the bay of Carlingford; and by a noble canal
which joins the Banan river, has a communication with Lough Neagh and all the
circumjacent neighborhood. -- Drogheda, seated on the river Boyne, which is
navig^^^ ships of burden to the Quay; 23 miles N. from Dublin, gover^^ a Mayor,
Sheriffs, Recorder, and Aldermen; is a county in (...) sends two members to
parliament. -- Wexford, capital of the co^^^ the same name, 67 miles S. from
Dublin; governed by a may^^ (...) other magistrates, and sends two members to
parliament; (...) the sea, upon the river Slaney. -- And Armagh, which is not
only (...) of the greatest markets for linen, but is perhaps unrivalled (...)
other of equal extent, for the beauty of its public buildings, for (...) it is
indebted to the unexampled munificence of its primate.

REVENUE AND EXPENSES.
L s. Hereditary Revenue 262249 9 (...) Additional duties on Customs and Excise
inwards and outward 516695 4 (...) Duties on stamped paper and parchment 39893
3 (...) Revenue arising from the Post Office 14171 9 (...) Pells and Poundage
received at the Treasury 25301 (...) (...) Surplus from the public coal yards
864 16 (...) Lottery offices ^cences 233 18 (...) Rent of New Geneva County
Waterford 738 14 (...) Regimental Balance 1500 0 (...) Absentee Tax 6308 9
(...) 867956 13 (...)

Expenses of Ireland for one year, ending March 25, 1787
Civil List 197727 (...) Military Establishment 501289 (...) Extraordinary
Charges 533221 (...) The Total Gross Expense 1232237 15 (...) From whence
deducting lottery payments 160000 0 0 The militia expense of one year 20000 0 0
And sums repaid out of the produce of the tillage duties 4228 17 11 184228 17
The Actual Expense 1048008 17 ^^

NATIONAL DEBT. Extracted from the Journals of the House of Common.
] The debt of Ireland is considered as (...) originated in 1715, when a vote of
credit for 50,000l. was passed (...) threatened invasion of the kingdom. --
From that period its (...) though regular and fluctuating, was considerable,
and in the you^^^ it amounted to 205,117l. However, through the exercise of
(...) economy, or an increase of revenue, this debt was extinguished the
nation was in credit from the year 1750 to 1760, when the (...) again engaged
in debt, which, accumulated from L.223,438, (...) in 1761, to L.2,302,146, the
debt in 1787.

HISTORY.] See Ireland's History of Ireland -- O'Conor's Dissertations on the
History of Ireland -- And Historical Tracts by Sir John (...), Attorney General
and Speaker of the House of Commons in Ireland.

ISLE OF MAN.
THE Mona, mentioned by Tacitus was the isle of Anglesea, not this ^^and. It
lies in St. George's Channel, and is almost at an equal distance from the
kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland. Its length from north to south is
rather more than thirty miles, its breadth from eight to fifteen; and the
latitude of the middle of the island is fifty-four degrees sixteen minutes
north. It is said, that on a clear day the three Britannic kingdoms may be seen
from this island. The (...) here is wholesome, and the climate, only making
allowance for the situation, pretty much the same as that in the north of
England, from which it does not differ much in other respects. The hilly parts
are b^^ren, and the champaign fruitful in wheat, barley, oats, rye, flax,
(...), roots, and pulse. The ridge of mountains, which, as it were, divides the
island, both protects and fertilizes the valleys, where there (...) good
pasturage. The better sorts of inhabitants have good sizeable houses, and a
small kind, which are swift and hardy; nor are they enabled with any noxious
animals. The coasts abound with sea-fowl; (...) the puffins, which breed in
rabbit-holes, are almost a lump of fat, (...) esteemed very delicious. It is
said, that this island abounds with (...), lead, and copper mines, though
unwrought; as are the quarries of marble, slate and stone.

The Isle of Man contains seventeen parishes and four towns on the
(...)-coasts. Castle-town is the metropolis of the island, and the seat of its
government; Peele, which of late years begins to flourish; Douglas has the best
market and best trade in the island, and is the richest and most populous town,
on account of its excellent harbor, and its fine mole, extending into the sea*
Ramsey has likewise a considerable commerce, on account of its spacious bay, in
which ships may ride safe from all winds excepting the north-east. The reader,
by throwing his eyes on the map, may see how conveniently this island is
situated for being the storehouse of smugglers, which it was till within these
few years, to the inexpressible prejudice of his majesty's revenue.

The crown of Great Britain purchased this island 1765 from the A^hol family to
whom it then belonged, for 70,000l. The Duke of A^hol, however, retains his
territorial property in the island, though the form of its government is
altered; and the king has now the same rights, powers, and prerogatives, as the
duke formerly enjoyed. The inhabitants, also, retain many of their ancient
constitutions and customs.

The^ established religion in Man is that of the Church of England. The bishop
of S^dor and Man enjoys all the spiritual rights and pre^^^ces of other
bishops, but does not set in the British house of (...); his see never having
been erected into an English barony. -- (...) of the most excellent prelates
who ever adorned the episcopal character, was Dr. Thomas Wilson, bishop of Man,
who presided (...) that diocese upwards of fifty-seven years, and died in the
year 17^^ aged ninety-three. He was eminently distinguished for the piety and
exemplariness of his life, his benevolence and hospitality, and (...)
unremitting attention to the happiness of the people entrusted to him care. He
encouraged agriculture, established schools for the instruction of the children
of the inhabitants of the island, translated some of his devotional pieces into
the Mank's language to render them (...) generally useful to them, and founded
parochial libraries in every publish in his diocese. Some of his notions
respecting government and church discipline were not of the most liberal kind:
But his fai^^^ were so few, and his virtues so numerous and conspicuous, that
he (...) a great blessing to the Isle of Man, and an ornament to human (...)
Cardinal Fleury had so much veneration for his character, that out (...) regard
to him, he obtained an order from the court of France, that (...) privateer of
that nation should ravage the Isle of Man.

The ecclesiastical government is well kept up in this island, and (...)
livings are comfortable. The language, which is called the Ma^^^ and is spoken
by the common people, is radically Erse, or Irish, (...) with a mixture of
other languages. The New Testament and ^^mon Prayer Book have been translated
into the Manks language. (...) natives, who amount to above 20,000, are
inoffensive, charitable, (...) hospitable. The better sort live in stone
houses, and the poorer (...) thatched; and their ordinary bread is made of
oatmeal. Their ^^^ducts for exportation consist of wool, hides, and tallow;
which (...) exchange with foreign shipping for commodities they may have
co^^^sion for from other parts. Before the south promontory of Man, (...)
little island called the Calf of Man: It is about three miles in cir^^^ and
separated from Man by a channel about two furlongs broad.

This island affords some curiosities which may amuse an antiquity. They
consist chiefly of Runic sepulchral inscriptions and monu^^^ of ancient brass
daggers, and other weapons of that metal, and (...) of pure gold, which are
sometimes dug up, and seem to indicate (...) splendor of its ancient
possessors.

ISLE OF WIGHT.
THIS island is situated opposite the coast of Hampshire, from which it is
separated by a channel, varying in breadth from (...) to seven miles; it is
considered as port of the county of Southampton and is within the diocese of
Winchester. Its greatest length, ex^^^ing from east to west, measures nearly
twenty-three miles; its breadth from north to south about thirteen. The air is
in general (...) particularly the southern parts; the soil is various, but so
great (...) fertility, it was many years ago computed, that more wheat was
(...) here in one year, than could be consumed by the inhabitants in (...). And
it is supposed that its present produce, under the great improvements of
agriculture, and the additional quantity of land lately (...) into tillage, has
more than kept pace with the increase of popula^^. A range of hills, which
affords fine pasture for sheep, extends from (...) to west, through the middle
of the island. The interior parts of (...) (...), as well as its extremities,
afford a great number of beautiful and p^^^^esque prospects, not only in the
pastoral, but also in the great and romantic style. Of these beauties, the
gentlemen of the island have availed themselves, as well in the choice of
situation of their (...), as in their other improvements. Domestic fowls and
poultry are bred here in great numbers; the outward-bound ships and ves^^^
Spithead, the Mother-bank, and Cowes, commonly furnishing themselves from this
island.

Such is the purity of the air, the fertility of the soil, and the beauty and
variety of the landscapes of this island, that it has been called the ^^^^len
of England; it has some very fine gentlemen's seat's; -- (...) it is often
visited by parties of pleasure on account of its delightful scenes.

The island is divided into thirty parishes. And, according to a very ^^^ate
calculation made in the year 1777, the inhabitants then a^^^ted to eighteen
thousand and twenty-four, exclusive of the (...) quartered there. Most of the
farm-houses are built with (...), and even the cottages appear neat and
comfortable, having each (...) garden.

(...) town of Newport stands nearly in the center of the island, of (...) it
may be considered as the capital. The river Medina empties (...) into the
channel at Cowes harbor, distant above five miles, and (...) navigable up to
the quay, renders it commodious for trade. -- The three principal streets of
Newport extend from east to west, and (...) ^^ssed at right angles by three
others, all which are spacious, clean and well paved.

Carisbrooke castle, in the Isle of Wight, has been rendered remarkable by the
confinement of king Charles I. who taking refuge here, was detained a prisoner,
from November 1647, to September 1648. -- ^^^^er the execution of the king,
this castle was converted into a place ^^co^finement for his children; and his
daughter, the princess Elizabeth, died in it. There are several other sorts in
this island, which (...) all erected about the 36th year of the reign of Henry
VIII. when many other forts and block houses were built in different parts of
the ^^st of England.

The SCILLY ISLES, anciently the SILURES, are a cluster of dangerous rocks, to
the number of 140, lying about 30 miles from the La^d's End in Cornwall, of
which county they are reckoned a part. By their situation between the English
channel and St. George's chan^^^, they have been the destruction of many ships
and lives. Some of the ^^^ands are well inhabited, and have large and secure
harbors.

In the English channel are four islands subject to England: These (...)
Jersey, Guernsey, Alderney, and Sark; which, though they lie (...) nearer to
the coast of Normandy than to that of England, are (...) the diocese of
Winchester. They lie in a cluster in Mount St. (...) (...) bay, between Cape la
Hogue in Normandy, and Cape Fre^^^ in Brittany. The computed distance between
Jersey and Sark (...) leagues; between that and Guernsey, seven leagues; and
be^^^ the same and Alderney, nine leagues.

JERSEY, anciently CAESAREA, was known to the Rom^^ (...) lies farthest within
the bay, in forty-nine degrees seven minutes (...) latitude, and in the second
degree twenty-six minutes west (...) eighteen miles west of Nomandy, and
eighty-four miles (...) Portland. The north side is inaccessible through lofty,
(...) the south is almost level with the water; the high^ (...) in its midland
part, is well planted, and abounds with ^^^^ards, from which is made an
incredible quantity of (...) cider. The valleys are fruitful and well
cultivated, and con^^^ ^^ty of cattle and sheep. The inhabitants neglect
tillage too much (...) intent upon the culture of cider, the improvement of
comm^^^ particularly the manufacture of stockings. The honey in (...)
remarkably fine: And the island is well supplied with fish and (...) fowl
almost of every kind, some of both being peculiar to the (...) and very
delicious.

The island is not above twelve miles in length; but the (...) salubrious,
that, in Camden's time, it was said there was here ^^^ness for a physician. The
inhabitants in number are about (...) and are divided into twelve parishes. The
capital town is St. (...) or Hilary, which contains above 400 houses, has a
good harbor castle, and makes a handsome appearance. The property of (...)
belonged formerly to the Carterets, a Norman family, who (...) always attached
to the royal interest, and gave protection to (...) both when king and prince
of Wales, at a time when no part (...) British dominions durst recognize him.
The language of the in^^^ants is French, with which most of them intermingle
English (...) Knit stockings and caps form their staple commodity; but they
(...) on a considerable trade in fish with Newfoundland, and disp^^^^ their
cargoes in the Mediterranean. The governor is appointed (...) crown of England,
but the civil administration rests with a (...) assisted by twelve jurats. As
this island is the principal rema^^^^ duchy of Normandy depending on the kings
of England, it pre^^^^ the old feudal forms, and particularly the assembly of
states, (...) as it were a miniature of the British parliament, as settled in
the (...) of Edward I.

GUERNSEY, is thirteen miles and a half from south-west to (...) east, and
twelve and a half where broadest, east and west; has (...) ten parishes, to
which there are but eight ministers, four of the (...) being united, and
Alderney and Sark, which are appendages of ^^^sey, having one a-piece. Though
this is a much finer island (...) of Jersey, yet it is far less valuable;
because it is not so well cul^^^^ nor is it so populous. It abounds in cider;
and the inhabitants (...) French: But want of siring is the greatest
inconveniency (...) islands labor under. The only harbor here is at St. Pet^^
(...) which is guarded by two forts; one called the Old-Castle, (...) other
Castle-Cornet. Guernsey is likewise part of the an^^^ man patrimony.

ALDERNEY is about eight miles in compass, and is by (...) nearest of all these
islands to Normandy, from which it is sep^^^^ a narrow strait, called the race
of Alderney, which is a dang^^sage in stormy weather, when the two currents
meet; other^^^^ ^a^e, and has depth of water for the largest ships. This island
is healthy, and is remarkable for a fine breed of cows.

SARK is a small island depending upon Guernsey; the inhabitants are
long-lived, and enjoy from nature all the conveniences of life; -- (...)
number is about 300. The inhabitants of the three last-mentioned ^^^^nds
together, are thought to be about 20,000. The religion of all (...) four
islands is that of the church of England.

GERMANY.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 600 Miles. between Degrees. 5 and 19 E. long. Sq. Miles. 191,571
Breadth 520 Miles. Degrees. 45, 4 and 54, 40 N. lat. Sq. Miles. 191,571

BOUNDARIES.] THE empire of Germany, properly so called, is bounded by the
German ocean, Denmark, and the Baltic, on the North; by Poland and Hungary,
including Bohemia, (...) the East; by Switzerland and the Alps, which divide it
from Italy, (...) the South; and by the dominions of France and the Low
Countries, on the West, from which it is separated by the Rhine, Moselle, and
the Maese.

GRAND DIVISIONS.] The divisions of Germany, according to Zimmermann, are as
follows: Divisions. Areas in Square Miles. Population. Populat. for every sq.
Mile. 1. Upper Saxony 3^,000 3,700,000 115 2. Lower Saxony 20,480 2,100,000 102
3. Westphalia 20,000 2,300,000 115 4. Upper Rhine 8,000 1,000,000 225 5. Lower
Rhine 7,328 1,100,000 163 6. Burgundy 7,504 1,880,000 255 7. Franconia 7,744
1,000,000 125 8. Swabia 11,664 1,800,000 154 9. Bavaria 16,320 1,600,000 98 10.
Austria 34,320 4,182,000 121 11. Bohemia 15,376 2,266,000 148 12. Moravia 6,336
1,137,000 179 13. Silesia 11,520 1,800,000 157 14. Lusatia 2,880 400,000 136
Total 26,265,000

Subdivisions of each of the Ten Circles, viz.
1. Circle of Upper Saxony.
SUBDIVISIONS.
1. Duchy of Pomerania. 2. Duchy of Saxe-Weimar. 3. (...) of Gotha. 4. Coburg.
5. Meinungen, 6. Hildburghanson* 7. (...) Eisenach. 8. Thuringia. 9. Anhalt.
10. Schwarzburg. 11. Electorate of Brandenburg. 12. Electorate of Saxony. 13.
Co^^^ Mansfeld. 14. Werningerode. 15. Barby. 16. Hohenstein. 17. (...) Hazfeld.
18. Reus. 19. Shaumburg. 20. Merseburg. 21. ^^^burg Zeitz. 22. Walkenried. 23.
Abbey of Quedlingburg.

2. Circle of Lower Saxony.
SUBDIVISIONS.
1. Bishopric of Hildesheim. 2. Bishopric of Lubec. 3. Ab^^^^ Gandersheim. 4.
Duchy of Magdeburg. 5. Duchy of Hal^^^^ 6. Duchy of Bremen. 7. Duchy of Celle.
8. Duchy of Cr^^^gen. 9. Duchy of Calenberg. 10. Duchy of Lauenburg. 11. (...)
of Wolsenbuttel. 12. Duchy of Mecklenburg. 13. Duchy of (...) stein. 14. County
of Rantzau. 15. Principality of Blankenburg. 16. (...) Principality of
Schwerin. 17. Principality of Ratzeburg. 18. ^^^rial Cities: Hamburg. 19.
Lubec. 20. Goslar, 21. Miilhau^^. 22. Nordhausen. 23. Bremen.

3. Circle of Westphalia.
SUBDIVISIONS.
1. Bishoprics of Munster. 2. Osnaburg. 3. Paderborn. 4. (...). 5. Duchies of
Cleves. 6. Juliers. 7. Bergen. 8. Principalities Minden. 9. Verden. 10.
Oostfriesland. 11. Nassau. 12. ^^^burg. 13. Counties of Lip. 14. Bentheim.
15. Tekl^^^. 16. Hoya. 17. Diepholz. 18. Wied. 19. Sayn. 20. (...) 21. Limburg.
22. Seven Abbeys. 23. Imperial Cities, (...). 24. Aix la Chapelle. 25.
Dortmund, besides some smaller (...) and lordships.

4. Circle of the Upper Rhine.
SUBDIVISIONS.
Bishoprics of Worms, Spire, Strasburg, Basel, Fulda; Great (...) tership of
the Knights of St. John, at Heitersheim; 3 Provosti^^^ Landgraviates of Hesse
Cassel; Darmstadt, Homberg, Rotenbu^^ Principalities of Nassau, Deux Ponts,
Sponheim, Veldenz, Si^^^ Lautern, Waldec, Salm; Counties, Hanau, Lichtenberg,
(...) Munzenberg, Sponheim, Iseburg, Witgenstein, Falkenstein, ^^^gen, etc.
Imperial towns, Worms, Spire, Frankfort on the (...) Wezlar.

5. Circle of the Lower Rhine, also called Electoral Circle
SUBDIVISIONS.
Four Electorates of Mentz, Trier, Cologne, and the Palatin^^^chy of Aremberg,
Balley of Coblenz, belonging to the Teutonic (...) Counties of Beilstein, Lower
Isenburg. The Prince of Turn (...) is, Postmaster-general of the Empire, is one
of the states of this (...) but his estates are not situated in this circle.

6. Circle of Burgundy.
SUBDVISIONS.
Formerly 17 provinces of the Netherlands belonged to it; the remaining parts
of this circle are those provinces which belong at present to the house of
Austria, viz. Duchies of Brabant, Limburg, Luxemburg, Cueldre; counties of
Flanders, Hennegau, Namur; marquisate of Antwerp, Malines.

7. Circle of Franconia.
SUBDIVISIONS.
The bishoprics of Bamburg, Wurzburg, Eichstedt, the territory of the great
master of the Teutonic order, Mergentheim; marquisate of Anspach, Bareuth;
counties of Schwarzenberg, Wertheim, Hohen^^he Castle, etc. The Imperial towns
of Nurenberg, Rothenburg, Windsheim, Schweinfurt, Weissenburg.

8. Circle of Swabia.
SUBDIVISIONS
Bishoprics of Costanz and Augsburg; abbeys, Elwangen, Kempten, Lindau,
Buchau, etc. and twenty more; duchy of Wurtemberg; marquisate of Baaden;
Principalities of Hohenzollern (the origin of the house of Prussia)
Furstenburg, Oettingen; counties of Konigsegg, ^^ar Hohenembs, etc. and many
baronies; twenty Imperial towns, the principal of which are: Augsburg,
Nordling, Ulm, Heilbronn, Hall, Reutling, etc.

9. Circle of Bavaria.
SUBDIVISIONS.
The archbishopric of Salzburg; the bishoprics of Freisingen, Passau,
Regensburg; the provosty of Bertolsgaden; the abbeys of St. ^meran, Lower and
Upper Munster; the duchy of Bavaria; the upper palatinate, Neuburg; the
principalities of Sulzbach, Leuchtenberg; counties of Sternstein, and seven
others; the Imperial town of Regensburg.

10. Circle of Austria.
SUBDIVISIONS.
1. Archduchy of Austria, or Lower Austria. 2. Duchy of Stiria. 3. Carinthia.
4. Carniola. 5. The Austrian Friaul, or Coritia. 6. The Littorale, or the
government of Trieste. 7. Tyrol. 8. Upper Austria. 9. The bishoprics of
Trident or Trent. 10. Brixen. 11. ^^lley, Austria. 12. Bal. of Trasp.



Besides these ten circles, there belong also to the German empire: 1. The
kingdom of Bohemia, divided into sixteen circles. 2. The marquisate to Moravia,
divided into five circles (both Austrian provinces.) 3. The marquisate of
Lusatia (belonging to the elector of Saxony.) 4. Silesia, only the smaller part
of it, subject to the house of Austria, belongs at present to the Roman empire.
5. The three circles of immediate lordships or fignories, called the estates of
the independent and immediate knighthood of the empire, viz. I. that of (...);
2 of Franconia; 3 of the Rhine; they have no vote at the (...), but are under
the protection of the empire; each of these circles, which consist of smaller
counties, baronies, abbeys, small towns, etc. (...) its own directors: The
Mundfruck belongs to the third circle. -- 6. The lordships of Jever,
Kniphausen, Rheda, Mumpelgard, (...) and twenty-eight more. 7. Some lordships,
which are gover^^ common by more than one ancient noble family, and which are
(...) Immediate Villages of the Empire.

MOUNTAINS.] The chief mountains of Germany are the (...) which divide it from
Italy, and those which separate Saxony, (...) and Moravia from Bohemia. But
many other large tracts of ^^^^tains are found in different parts of the empire.

FORESTS.] The vast passion which the Germans have for (...) the wild boar, is
the reason why perhaps there are more woods (...) chaces yet standing in
Germany than in most other countries. (...) Hercynian forest, which in Caesar's
time was nine days journals length, and six in breadth, is now cut down in many
places, or p^^^^ed out into woods, which go by particular names. Most of the
(...) are pine, fir, oak and beech. There is a vast number of forests (...)
note in every part of this country; almost every count, baron, or ^^^^tleman,
having a chase or park adorned with pleasure-houses, (...) well-stocked with
game, viz. deer, of which there are seven or (...) sorts, as roebucks, stags,
etc. of all sizes and colors, and many (...) vast growth; plenty of hares,
conies, foxes, and boars. They (...) so much also with wild fowl, that in many
places the peasants (...) them, as well as venison, for their ordinary food.

RIVERS AND LAKES.] No country can boast a greater variety of (...) large
rivers than Germany. At their head stands the Danube or ^^^naw, so called from
the swiftness, of the current, and which some (...) tend to be naturally the
finest river in the world. From Vien^^ Belgrade in Hungary, it is so broad,
that in the wars between (...) Turks and Christians, ships of war have been
engaged on it; (...) convenience for carriage to all the countries through
which it (...) inconceivable. The Danube, however, contains a vast number of
^^^aracts and whirlpools; its stream is rapid, and its course, (...) reckoning
turnings and windings, is computed to be 1620 miles. (...) other principal
rivers are the Rhine, Elbe, Oder, Weser and Mos^^^.

The chief lakes of Germany, not to mention many inferior once, (...) those of
Constance and Bregentz. Besides these are the Chiemse^ the lake of Bavaria; and
the Zirnitzer-see in the duchy of Car^^^ whose waters often run off and return
again in an extraordinary ^^^^ner.

Besides those lakes and rivers, in some of which are found (...) Germany
contains large noxious bodies of standing water, which (...) next to
pestilential, and afflict the neighboring natives with (...) ^^plorable
disorders.

PRODUCTIONS MINERAL, VEGETABLE, AND ANIMAL, COMMERCE, etc.} From the advan^^
situation and the (...) tent of Germany, from the various appearance of the
soil, the (...) of its mountains, forests, and large rivers, we must naturally
(...) we actually find an extraordinary variety and vast plenty of
us^^^ductions. The northern, and chiefly the north-east parts, furn^^^ sorts of
peltry, as skins of foxes, bears, wolves, squirrels, lyn^^^ cats, boars, etc.
the southern parts produce excellent wines (...) (...) the middle provinces
great plenty of corn, cattle, and minerals. (...) have been explored in Germany
from the earliest times, and (...) derived from them were in a great measure
the cause and the support of the former celebrated trade of the Venetians. The
Hartz-mountains in Lower Saxony contain gold, silver, copper, lead, iron, zinc,
cobalt, vitriol, sulphur, and other minerals: gold, however, is found only in
the lower Hartz, to the amount of some hundred ducats; silver is coined
annually in the upper Hartz, to the amount of 600,000, of according to other
statements, 655,000 dollars: And the value of all the minerals of the Hartz
amounts to near double that sum. The mountains of Upper Saxony are still
richer; they have yielded not less than ^4,000 lb. of silver annually; and the
famous Saxon cobalt, chiefly ^^^ed in making the blue color called smalte, is
reckoned to be nearly equal in value to the above quantity of silver. The
quantity of iron and lead Germany supplies is extraordinary: The iron-works and
founderies of Smalkalden, Iserlohe, Herzberg, Solingen, etc. are very ^^^tle
inferior to the iron-works in England. Hesse Cassel, as well as Hesse
Darmstadt, the principalities of Nassau, and some neighboring provinces,
abound in copper, iron and lead. The palatinate is remarkable for its minerals,
chiefly for its quicksilver, of which Deux^^^ts alone produces 50,000 lb. a
year. The minerals of the provinces belonging to the house of Austria, the
value of which is remarkably (...), and those of the Prussian provinces,
neither of which are here spoken of, will be noticed hereafter, when we treat
of Prussia and Austria. Salt is found in Germany in such abundance and so great
purity, as is found in few other countries. The salt-works of Salzbourg, in the
circle of Bavaria, are immense; the Durnberg yields annually 750,000lb. Not to
mention those of Swabia, of Allendorf, Naunheim, Hall, in Upper Saxony,
Creuznach, Schoenebeck, which are perhaps the greatest salt-works that either
now are or ever were; but we must not omit to take notice, that the best or
purest salt we know of is that of Lunenburg, in the Hanoverian dominions. The
articles of less use, as for instance, topazes, garnets, emeralds, crystals, do
not deserve any particular mention; but the fine clay of Upper and Lower
Saxony, of Hesse, and the Palatinate, forms a very considerable object of
commerce, as it is used in making the porcelaine of Dresden, Berlin,
F^^rstenberg, Frankenthal, etc. superior to all other sorts of porcelaine,
except that of Japan and China. Pitcoal is found in Silesia, in the circles of
Burgundy, and of Westphalia, and in Hesse. The small bishopric of Liege exports
annually to the value of near 100,000 due^ts. In other parts plenty of fuel is
supplied by the forests. The mineral waters of Germany are in high repute, and
prove considerable articles of trade. The electorate of Treves gains 80,000
florins annually by that of Selt^e; the prince of Waldeck 40,000 dollars by
that of Pyrmont. The Spa waters produce a revenue of 60,000 dollars; and those
of Aix la Chapelle, Wisbaden, the Schlangenbath, (...), ^^^berg, etc. sums
proportioned to their reputation and their (...) effects. There are in Germany
exceedingly fine materials for (...); the mountains near the Rhine furnish the
best basaltes, and (...) strong and useful sorts of lava, the greatest part of
which is sold (...) Dutch: the mountains of Saxony and Franconia contain
excellent ^^^ite, porphyry, and marble quarries.

Notwithstanding the northerly situation of Germany, vines prospe^ (...) the
greatest part of it, viz. in both the circles of the Rhine, Swabia, Franconia,
Upper Saxony, Westphalia, Bohemia, and (...). Among the German wines, those of
the Rhine and Swabia claim the first rank; the best sorts are that of Hochheim,
commonly called (...) hock; that of Johannesberg, Rudesheim, and Bacharach,
etc. Excellent fruits are found in great abundance in the southern provinces;
thus, for instance, Lankheim, a small village in the circle of the R^^^, sells
sometimes in one year, dried plumbs to the amount of 50,000 ^^^^ins. The apples
of Leipzick, are a considerable article of exportation. Tobacco is cultivated
in large quantities: The Palatinate, exports to the amount of 800,000 florins
annually Baireuth 50,^^^ cwt. of the same article. The richest corn countries
are both ^^^^ies, Holstein, Mecklenburg, Bavaria, and Pomerania: Flax and (...)
are produced chiefly in Lower Saxony, Westphalia, and Silefia. (...) great
value of this branch of trade is too well known to need any particular mention.
The greatest trading towns of Germany are at ^^^ent, in general, the Imperial
cities, Hamburg, Lubeck, (...), Frankfurt on the Main: none of them a seaport
town; yet they (...) situated on large rivers, and the three first not far from
the sea. Formerly these three cities commanded, in a greater measure, the
tra^^^^ all Europe, while they were at the head of the famous Han^^^^ league;
and though their present power and opulence is no (...) equal to their
influence in former ages, they still may be consid^^^ (...) the greatest
factories or emporiums of Germany. A considerable (...) land trade is carried
on at the fairs of Leipzic, Brunswic Frankfurt (...) the Oder, and Frankfurt on
the Main. As to the national industry, we observe, that there are scarce any
articles of trade, conven^^^ and luxury not manufactured in Germany. If the
Germans are inferior to the English in the manufactures of cloth, hardware, and
in the articles of luxury, the causes must perhaps entirely be looked for (...)
the political situation of this country: The great number of (...) the variety
of the forms of government, the different interests and ^^^tual jealousy of the
petty states, are great checks on the commerce and prosperity of the whole. The
great number of courts require (...) sums of money, which might be appropriated
to useful purposes, and the encouragement of industry; they keep up a
predilection (...) court and military life among the nobility and gentry, and a
(...) for the employments of a tradesman and a manufacturer. The (...) of
surrounding neighbors can greatly confine the market of a (...) country, whose
industry is greater than theirs; and the difficulty of obtaining their
concurrence in measures of general utility, is frequently the cause why there
are so few canals and good roads, to (...) traveling and inland trade.

CITIES, TOWNS, ^ORTS, AND OTHER EDIFICES, PUBLIC AND PRIVATE; with occasional
estimates of REVENUES AND POPULATION.} This is a ^^pious head in all countries,
(...) more particularly so in Germany, on account of the numerous independent
states it contains. The reader therefore must be (...) with the mention of the
most capital places, and their peculiarities.

Though Berlin is accounted the capital of all his Prussian (...) dominions,
and exhibits perhaps the most illustrious example of ^^^^den improvement that
this age can boast of; yet during the late (...) it was found a place of no
strength, and fell twice, almost with^^^^^ ^^^tance, into the hands of the
Austrians, who, had it not been for the politeness of their generals, and their
love of the fine arts, which always preserves mankind from barbarity and
inhumanity, would have levelled it to the ground.

Berlin lies on the river Spree, and, besides a royal palace, has many other
superb palaces; it contains fourteen Lutheran, and eleven Calvinist churches,
besides a Roman Catholic one. Its streets and squares are spacious, and built
in a very regular manner. But the houses, though neat without, are
ill-furnished and ill-finished within, very indifferently provided with
inhabitants. The king's palace here, and that of prince Henry, are very
magnificent buildings. The ope^^-house is also a beautiful structure: And the
arsenal, which is handsomely built in the form of a square, contains arms for
200,000 men. There are sundry manufactures in Berlin, and several schools,
libraries, and charitable foundations. The number of its inhabitants, according
to Busching, in 1755, was 126,661, including the garrison. In the same year,
and according to the same author, there were no fewer than 443 silk-looms, 149
of half-silks, 2858 for woollen stuffs, 453 for cotton, 248 for linen, 454 for
lace-work, 39 frames for silk stockings, and 310 for worsted ones. They have
here manufactures of tapestry, gold and silver lace, and mirrors.

The electorate of Saxony is, by nature, the richest country in Germany, if not
in Europe: It contains 210 walled towns, 61 markettowns, and about 3000
villages, according to the latest accounts of the Germans themselves; and the
revenue, estimating each rix-dollar at four shillings and sixpence, amounts to
1,350,000l. This sum is so moderate, when compared to the richness of the soil,
which, according to Busching, produces even diamonds, and almost all the
precious stones to be found in the East Indies and elsewhere, and the variety
of splendid manufactures, that the Saxon princes must have been the most
moderate and patriotic of any in Germany.

We can say little more of Dresden, the elector of Saxony's capital, that can
be said of all fine cities, that its fortifications, palaces, public
buildings, churches, and charitable foundations, and, above all, its suburbs,
are magnificent beyond all expression; that it is beautifully situated on both
sides the Elbe; and that it is the school of Germany for statuary, painting,
enamelling, and carving; not to mention its ^^^rors, and founderies for bells
and cannon, and its foreign commerce carried on by means of the Elbe. The
inhabitants of Dresden, by the ^^^est accounts, amount to 110,000.

The city of Leipsic in Upper Saxony, 46 miles distant from Dresden, is
situated in a pleasant and fertile plain on the Pleisse, and the inhabitants
are said to amount to about 40,000. There are also large and well built
suburbs, with handsome gardens. Between these suburbs and the town is a fine
walk of lime-trees, which was laid out in the year 1702, and encompasses the
city. Mulberry-trees are also planted in the town-ditches; but the
fortifications seem rather calculated for the use of the inhabitants to walk
on, than for defense. The streets are clean, commodious, and agreeable, and are
lighted in the ^ight with seven hundred lamps. They reckon 436 merchants
houses, and 192 manufactures of different articles, as brocades, paper, cards,
etc. Leipsic has long been distinguished for the liberty of conscience allowed
here to persons of different sentiments is religious matters (...). Here is an
university, which is still very considerable, with six churches for the
Lutherans, theirs being the established religion, one for the Calvinists, and a
chapel in the castle for those of the Romish church. The university-library
consists of about 26,000 volumes, 6000 of which are folios. Here is also a
library for the magistrates, which consists of about 36,000 volumes, and near
2000 manuscripts, and contains (...) of urns, antiques, and medals, with many
curiosities of art and (...). The Exchange is an elegant building.

The city of Hanover, the capital of that electorate, stands on the river
Leine, and is neat, thriving, and agreeable city. It contain^ about twelve
hundred houses, among which there is an electoral (...) ace. It carries on some
manufactures; and in its neighborhood (...) the palace and elegant gardens of
Herenhausen. The dominions of the electorate of Hanover contain about seven
hundred and fifty thousand people, who live in fifty-eight cities, and sixty
market towns, besides villages. The city and suburbs of Bremen, belonging by
purchase to the said elector, contain about fifty thousand inhabitants, (...)
have a considerable trade by the Weser. The other towns belonging to this
electorate have trade and manufactures; but in general, it (...) be remarked,
that the electorate has suffered greatly by the access^^^ of the Hanover family
to the crown of Great Britain. Osnaburg (...) chief city of the bishopric of
Osnaburg, lying between the rivers Weser and Ems, has been long famous all over
Europe for the manufacture known by the name of the duchy, and for the
manufacture of the (...) Westphalia h^ms. The whole revenue of the bishopric
amounts (...) about 30,000l.

Breslau, the capital of Silesia, which formerly belonged to the kingdom of
Bohemia, lies on the river Oder, and is a fine city, where a^sects of
Christians and Jews are tolerated, but the magistracy is Lutheran. Since
Silesia fell under the Prussian dominion, its trade is greatly improved, being
very inconsiderable before. The manufactures of Silesia, which principally
center at Breslau, are numerous. The revenue of the whole is by some said to
produce for his Prussian majesty, near a million sterling: but this sum seems
to be exaggerated; if, as other authors of good note write, it never brought in
to the house of Austria above ^00,000l. yearly.

Frankfurt is situated in an healthful, fertile, and delightful country along
the Meine, by which it is divided into two parts, distinguished by the names of
Frankfurt and Saxenhausen. The former of these, being the largest, is divided
into twelve wards, and the latter into (...) and both are computed to contain
about three thousand houses. -- Frankfurt is the usual place of the election
and coronation of the king of the Romans, and is also a free and imperial city.
It is of a circular form, without any suburbs; but the streets are generally
narrow, and the houses are mostly built of timber and pla^ster, and covered
with state; though there are some handsome private structures, of a kind ^^red
marble, that deserve the name of palaces; as the buildings called the Compestel
and Fronhof, the Triershof, the Cullenhof, the (...) house, an august edifice,
situated near the bridge over the Maine, (...) Hesse-Darmstadthof, the palace
of the prince de la Tours, and (...) houses of the counts of Solms,
Schauenburg, and Schonborn; and there are three principal squares.

GOVERNMENT, LAWS, COURTS, etc.] The German empire, which, till the year 843,
was connected with France, now forms a state by itself, or may be considered as
a combination of upwards of three hundred sovereignties, independent of each
other, but composing one political body (...) an elective head, called the
emperor of Germany, or the Roman emperor. Otho the Great, who possessed several
Italian provinces, formerly parts of the western empire, left to his successors
the title of Roman emperor inseparably annexed to the kingdom of Germany; and
in consequence of the ancient respect entertained for the Roman (...), all the
other sovereigns have allowed the emperor the first rank (...) the European
monarchs. Eight princes of the empire, called electors, have the right of
electing the emperor. By a fundamental law, known under the name of the Golden
Bull, the number of electors was limited to only seven; two new electoral
dignities have been (...) afterward, one of which is extinct since the year
1777. The electors are divided into ecclesiastical and temporal: The
ecclesiastical electors are the following, 1. The archbishop of Mentz, great
chancellor of the empire, and director of the electoral college. In consequence
of this presidency, he has the prerogative, on a vacancy of the ^^^perial
throne, to give notice of the death of the emperor to the states of the empire,
to convoke the diet during the interregnum, and to proclaim the new-elected
successor. 2. The archbishop of Treves, (...) chancellor of France and Arelat,
a dignity, which, since the separation of France from the empire is merely
nominal. 3. The archbishop of Cologne, great chancellor of Italy, a mere title
also. The temporal electors are, 4. The king or elector of Bohemia, cup bearer
of the emperor. 5. The elector of the Palatinate and of Bavaria. great steward.
6. The elector of Saxony, great-marshal. 7. The elector of ^^^^enburg,
great-chamberlain. 8. The elector of Brunswic (Hanover) arch-treasurer of the
empire.

As soon as an emperor is elected, he is obliged to confirm by oath the
capitulation he has signed, and which is proposed to him by the electors: He
engages likewise by oath to protect the Roman Catholic religion and the Holy
See. It is not absolutely necessary that the emperor should be a Roman
Catholic, though hitherto no Protestant has been seated on the Imperial throne.
The prerogatives the emperor acquires by his accession to that dignity, and
which are called his asser^ata, are chiefly the following: He is the supreme
lord (...) of the Roman empire, of whom the princes are supposed to (...) their
dominions in fee: He has the power of calling together the (...), over which he
presides in person, or by his commissary, and of ^^^ifying their resolutions by
his confirmation. He is the supreme judge, in whose name justice is
administered in the high courts of the empire: He can, however, exempt the
subordinate states from the jurisdiction of these tribunals, by granting them
the privilege de non app^^^^. He is the fountain of honor, and has the power
of conferring titles of nobility, such as baron, count, prince, duke, etc. he
claims (...) right of establishing post-offices all over the empire; this
right, ^^^ever, is subject to some limitations: he grants charters to the
universities, and confers academical degrees. He is not allowed to raise any
taxes, nor to begin an offensive war, or to conclude a peace, (...) to alter
any law of the empire without the consent of the diet, which may be considered
as the supreme power of the German empire. The revenues of the emperor are at
present reduced to a very trifling (...) they arise chiefly from the
contributions of some Imperial towns, and amount to little more than 20,000
florins. In times of war, or (...) unusual emergencies, the diet allows the
emperor extraordinary (...) or supplies, called Roman months, and valued at
50,000 florins (...). The diet is composed of the emperor and of the immediate
states of the empire; the latter are those individuals or societies which (...)
the supreme legislative and executive power of the confederation, (...) the
right of voting in this assembly. Since the year 1663, the (...) which used to
assemble formerly at unequal intervals of time, (...) been held, without
interruption, to the present day. The diet ^^^^cises all the acts of
sovereignty, as far as they concern the inter^^^ the whole confederate
political body; it levies taxes, it gives la^, it makes war, and concludes
treaties of peace by which the whole empire is bound. It has the power of
conferring this right of parti^^^tion in the government, or of voting at the
diet; and can take it (...) by way of punishment, from such members as have
violated the public peace. In consequence of the difference of religion
prevailing (...) the German empire, the states are divided into the Catholic
and ^^^^estant bodies ( Corpus Catholicorum and Corpus Evangelicorum.) (...)
respect to rank and privilege, they are divided into three college. The
electoral college; that of the princes, including the immed^^^^ prelates and
counts; and the college of the Imperial cities. Each of these colleges holds
separate deliberations, in which the maj^^ty of votes decides. That of the
electors is under the direction of (...) ^^^^tor of Mentz. The college of the
princes is subdivided into the ecclesiastical and temporal bench: On the first
are seated those archbishops who are not electors, the grand masters of the
Teutonic order, and of the order of St. John, the archduke of Austria, and the
duke of Burgundy, the bishops and the prelates; the latter have no pers^^^ but
two collective votes. The Protestant bishop of Lubeck, and the bishop of
Osnaburg, when a Protestant, have a separate bench to themselves. On the
secular bench, the first seats are held by those princ^^^ are related to the
electors; next to them are seated the ancient ^^^ly families; next, those
families, who, in later times have been raised (...) the princely dignity; and
last of all, the independent counts of the empire, who have only four
collective votes. The votes of the ecclesiastical bench amount to 35, those of
the temporal to 65. The (...) of the imperial cities is divided into two
benches, that of the cir^^ (...) the Rhine, and that of the circle of Swabia;
the first has 14, the (...) 37 votes. Th^se propositions, which are to pass
into a law of ^^^^pire, must be agreed to by the three colleges; when this is
done, (...) are called Resolutions of the empire. The resolutions must be
pr^^^ed to the emperor for his confirmation, which he has it in his (...) give
or to refuse; when the confirmation is obtained, the (...) are called Acts or
Statutes of the empire, and acquire the force of (...). At the conclusion of
every diet, a collection is made of all the acts (...) during the sessions,
called the Recess of the Empire.

The fundamental laws, or those which settle the constitution of the empire,
are, (...) Such acts of the diet as are of a public nature. The (...)
remarkable among them are the following: 1. The golden bull ((...) called on
account of the great gold seal of the emperor affixed to it) which was
published at the diet of Nurnberg in the year 1356, and in the reign of Charles
IV. It settles every thing relating to the election (...) coronation of the
emperor, and the rights of the electors. The Latin original is preserved at
Frankfurt on the Maine. 2. The public (...); a collection of regulations for
the preservation of the peace between the members of the empire. It was
calculated (...) put a period (...) the feudal dissensions which harrassed
Germany in the middle ages. This law was promulgated under Maximilian I. in the
year 1495 -- (...). The convention of Passau in 1552, and the peace of religion
in 1555, by which the Protestant religion as well as the Roman Catholic are
acknowledged to be established in the empire. 4. The last recess of the empire
of 1654, containing several public acts, which finally settle several points
incompletely arranged in the Westphalian peace. -- (...). The capitulation of
the emperor, by which the emperor engages ^^^self to govern according to the
laws of the empire, and under the conditions and restrictions imposed on him by
the electors, who have (...) valuable right to check every stretch of imperial
power, or to re^^^^s grievances crept in, by imposing new conditions at the
beginning of a new reign. III. The peace of Westphalia, concluded in the year
16^9, which serves for the basis of all subsequent treaties of peace, and, in a
great measure, for the foundation of the present political system of Europe.
This famous act determines likewise, with great pre^^^^, the civil, political,
and religious rights of each individual state in ^^^^many.

There are two supreme courts of judicature, which have a concurring
jurisdiction in the Roman or German empire. 1. The Imperial Chamber,
established in 1495, and kept at pre^^^^t Wetzlar, an Imperial city in the
circle of the Upper Rhine. The emperor has the right of nominating the first
judge and the two presidents of this court: 27 ^^^ssors or counselors are
nominated by the states of the empire. -- 2. The Aulic Council, depending
entirely on the emperor, is established as Vienna, the imperial residence. It
consists of a president and 18 counselors, and is divided into a noble and a
learned bench. Seven of the members of this council are Protestants. The judges
of the Imperial Chamber receive their salaries from the states of the empire,
who have appropriated to their maintenance a particular tax, which amounts
annually to about 90,000 florins. The judges of the Aulic Council are paid by
the emperor. In all cases where the statute or fundamental laws of the empire
are defective, these two courts adopt the regulations of the Roman law, which
is in general introduced into the German courts of justice, except where it is
limited or superseded by the particular statutes of each state. To both courts
appeals may (...) made from the decisions of the courts of justice, or of the
sovereigns of the German states. In criminal cases, in matters of religion, and
(...) pecuniary lawsuits, in which the contested property does not ex^^^ed the
sum of 400 rix dollars, the decision of the territorial courts (...) of the
sovereign is final. In these cases, however, the party who thinks himself
aggrieved by a sentence, is allowed to submit the decision, given by the judges
of his own country, to the examination of the juridical faculty of one or more
impartial German universities, by which the decree may be confirmed or
reversed. In the (...) of the electors and other princes, who are exempted from
(...) the supreme courts of the empire, courts of appeal are established, (...)
which the decrees of the courts of justice, especially in causes between the
sovereign and the subject, may be revised, and if excepti^^^^, may be set aside.

The states of the empire, considered in their separate capacity, enjoy
sovereign power in their respective dominions, limited only by the laws
beforementioned, and the jurisdiction of the Imperial (...), from which,
however, the chief among them are exempted. The constitution of the different
states is very different; most of them on governed by single persons, as the
electorates, principalities, (...), etc. and some have a republican form of
government, as the (...) cities. As to the exercise of power, the sovereigns
are limited by the states of their countries, who must give their consent to
taxes, and to new laws: and who may appeal to the high courts of the empire,
(...) to the courts of appeal within their own country, in case of any
difference between them and the sovereign. In extreme cases, the (...) may lay
their complaints before the diet. This mode of redressing grievances, provided
by the constitution of the German empire, at a time when no standing armies
were yet kept, is, it must be owned, of little avail in states where military
power is preponderant; yet it is a very effectual check on the tyranny of petty
sovereigns. The (...) possess some considerable political advantages, besides
the right of ^^^^ing the emperor; their concurrence and consent is necessary to
the emperor, whenever he declares war or concludes treaties; they (...) a
particular confederation among themselves, called the Electoral (...) they
claim the honors allowed to kings, and their ambassadors in foreign courts are
in possession of the next rank after those of king^. -- With regard to foreign
countries, each independent German sovereign has the right of entering into
treaties, or engaging in wars with them, provided it does not affect the peace
of the whole empire, or of (...) other state of it. The government of most of
the Imperial cities is a mixture of Democracy and Aristocracy. The best
governed among them are Hamburg, Lubeck, and Frankfurt: in others, especially
in Nurnberg, a rigorous oligarchy prevails.

The power of the two greatest potentates of Germany, whose religious and
political interests are opposite, is at present pretty equally balanced. For
though Austria is certainly in itself superior in strength to Prussia, yet the
combination of the latter, with the mightiest princes in Germany, gives it a
sufficient weight to counterbalance that superiority. It may not be improper to
observe, that the connexions of some parts of Germany with foreign countries,
under one sovereign, though they seemed to promise an accession of power to
these provinces, have commonly proved disadvantageous, involving Germany i^
wars and calamities which would otherwise not have reached (...). (...), for
instance, the connection of Hungary with Austria has been the cause of several
bloody wars with the Turks; that of Poland (...) Saxony, and that of England
with Hanover, have proved no (...) judicial to Germany, than to the countries
thus united with it.

ARMY OF THE EMPIRE.] There is, properly speaking, no standing army of the
empire; but in time of war the states of the empire must furnish their
respective quotas of soldiers, according to an agreement made in the year 1681.
At present the army of the empire, when complete, must amount to 28,000
infantry and 12,000 cavalry. The quotas for the different circles are regulated
as follows: Infantry. Cavalry. Circle of Austria 5507 2521 -- Burgundy 2707
1321 -- Bavaria 1494 800 -- Franconia 1902 980 -- Swabia 2707 1321 -- Lower
Rhine 2707 600 -- Upper Rhine 2853 491 -- Westphalia 2707 1321 -- Upper Saxony
2707 1321 -- Lower Saxony 2707 1321 Total 27,998 11,997

In case 1 million of florins should be necessary to be raised for the war and
for the army of the empire, the shares of this sum stand thus: Florins.
Krcutzer. Circles of Austria 306,390 20 -- Burgundy 156,360 15 -- Bavaria
91,261 5 -- Franconia 113,481 25 -- Swabia 156,360 15 -- Lower Rhine 105,654 5
-- Upper Rhine 101,411 30 -- Westphalia 156,360 15 -- Upper Saxony 156,360 15
-- Lower Saxony 156,360 15 Total 1,499,999 40

RELIGION.] Since the year 1555, the three following denominations of
Christians are the established religions of the empire: The Roman Catholic, the
Lutheran, and Calvinist, generally called the reformed religon. The first
prevails in the South of Germany, the Lutheran in the North, and the reformed
near the Rhine. In the subsequent civil wars, of which religious bigotry was
the principal cause, the rights of these rival religions, as established by the
religious peace of 1555, had undergone great alterations whenever the provinces
had changed masters; and the confusion arising from the claims of the oppressed
parties, and from the encroachments of the victorious, was become extreme. It
was at length settled by the peace of Westphalia, that the religion of the
different states should remain as it had been in the year 1624, which is, on
that account, called the definitive year, Annus normalis. According to this
agreement, the sovereign is obliged to leave each of these religions,
established, or tolerated, or excluded, as they were at that period; yet the
right of correcting abuses in the public worship, was reserved to him. The Jews
are tolerated throughout the empire. There are likewise in the empire (...) of
all the denominations mentioned under the article of the Eur^^^ religions. The
Roman Catholic church acknowledges the supre^^^ of the pope; and in consequence
of an agreement between the (...) church and the Holy See, the latter acquired
the right of (...) firming all the prelates of the empire. Their superior
clergy (...) of eight archbishops, forty bishops, and many abbots; some of
which as well as most of the archbishops and bishops, are sovereign (...).
There is a very great number of Roman Catholic convents, and seve^^^
commanderies of the knights of the Teutonic Order, as well as of the Order of
St. John. The grand masters of these Orders must be (...) Catholic noblemen;
the residence of the first is Mergentheim, in ^^conia; that of the latter is
Heitersheim, in the circle of the Upper Rhine.

The Protestant clergy is governed by assemblies, called Consi^^^ under the
control of the sovereign of each state. It is compos^^ superintendents general,
who are commonly members of the Consi^^^ superintendents or inspectors, and
ministers of the parishes. All (...) Roman Catholics, or the Corpus
Catholicorum, is under the dire^^^^ of the elector of Mentz: the Corpus
Evangelicorum, or the Protes^^^ under the direction of the elector of Saxony.
These directors (...) (...) the concerns of religion at the diet. To balance
the rights and influence of the Catholics and Protestants, of which the former
(...) majority of votes on the diet, the states of either party have the (...)
of succession (jus eundi in parts.) In consequence of this right, (...)
Protestants or Catholics, if they are afraid that their interests, as a (...)
might be affected by a majority of votes, may come to a separate (...) l^tion,
agreed upon amongst themselves, which cannot be anni^^^ by the ordinary manner
of voting; and by this mean^ they can (...) any attack upon their religious and
political rights.

GENERAL REMARKS, RESPECTING THE MILITARY, POLITICS, AND LITERATURE OF
GERMANY.} The German empire, (...) considered as one single power or state, at
the head of which the emperor stands, is of no great political consequence in
Europe, bec^^^ from the inequality and weak connection of its parts, and the
different nature of their government, from the insignificancy of its
ill-comp^^d army, and above all, from the different views and interests of its
^^^^ters, it is next to impossible its force should be united, compact, and
uniform. There are, however, in this empire, two potentates (...) to tank among
the first deciding powers of Europe; and the intri^^^ power of Germany, in some
sense, is superior to that of any Europ^^^ country. The number of soldiers in
the service of all the (...) princes amount to 500,000, even after deducting
from the (...) army 45,000 men for the provinces not belonging to the German
empire, and 76,000 men of the Austrian army, for the kingdom of ^^^gary and the
Italian dominions of Austria. The actual (...) (...) German states (exclusive
of the kingdom of Prussia, and the (...) dominions not belonging to Germany)
amount annually to (...) (...) millions of dollars, or near 18,000,000l.
sterling. Considering (...) cheapness of victuals and labor in most parts of
Germany, this (...) (...) astonishing; yet the effects of so much national
wealth is (...) (...), than it would be in France or England, where (...) (...)
metropolis would collect it, as it were, into a focus, and assist its
circulation throughout the provinces. Germany neither has, or can have,
properly speaking, a capital, while it is divided among so great a number of
sovereigns.

The Germans can boast of a greater number of useful discoveries and inventions
in arts and sciences, than any other European nation. They have the honor of
discovering the Art of Printing about the year 1450. It would be easy to
enumerate nearly one hundred of their inventions without filling up the lift
with mere improvements in machines and mechanical arts. Improvements of this
sort are greatly fa^^^^^ted by a concurrence of favorable circumstances, such
as an advantageous situation for commerce, long and uninterrupted peace, great
and easy influx of wealth, and the concomitant increase of luxury. An open and
extensive market for the productions of manufacturing industry, and the
frequent calls of luxury for gratifications of new-imagined wants, multiply the
arts; the latter assist each other in perfecting their respective instruments,
and afford many opportunities for ingenious ^^^binations of mechanism. In a
country, whose commerce is confined by natural and political limits, where the
reward of genius and industry is not always opulence and splendor, the
national character (...) with chance alone the claim to a number of important
inventions, some of which have been productive of the principal revolutions of
modern life. Literature and the sciences are arrived in Germany at a very high
degree of eminence, both with respect to universality and solidity. Within
these fifty years their improvements have been rapid and astonishing. The
German language has been greatly cultivated and enriched with many excellent
compositions in all branches of polite and useful literature, which have been
marked with the applause, and translated into the languages of neighboring
nations. -- Many branches of useful knowledge, hitherto confined to particular
classes of men, and difficult to be acquired, have been reduced to a scientific
form in Germany; they form indispensible parts of polite education, and are
publicly taught in the universities. The theory of trades and mechanical arts,
the principles of private and public economy, of internal administration, and
the science of finances; the knowledge of the political situation, resources
and wealth of every state, have been added to the established list of
academical sciences, and they employ the talents of a great number of writers,
under the name of Technology, Economy, Science of Finances, and Statistic.

Many other sciences have undergone considerable changes. Their principles have
been more thoroughly investigated, their proper limits assigned; they have
received great improvements with respect to methodical arrangement and
practical utility. The science of education has experienced a total and most
advantageous revolution. In no other country this important science is so
universally and so successfully attended to; nor can any country boast of so
many institutions of education. Upwards of 50 writers, possessed of laudable
zeal and great abilities, assisted by practical experience, and encouraged by
some of the wisest and most patriotic sovereigns, have for some years past
applied their talents entirely to the improvement of the method of instructing,
and to the establishing of institutions, calculated to promote the happiness of
future generations. The beneficial labors of these men extend to the lowest
ranks of society. Several (...) schools are established, in which this numerous
and valuable (...) people are instructed in religion, in the duties of their
station, and (...) proper use of their reason; and where they are brought up in
(...) of industry, which attach them to their situation in life. The (...) plan
these friends of mankind pursue, is to render education, so (...) neglected by
statesmen, an essential part of internal polities. (...) inculcate the
necessity of bestowing no less pains on the formation (...) active habits, the
early impression of religious and moral princip^^ the developement of the
bodily and mental powers, by the cas^^^ (...) most natural steps, the
preservation of the health of young people, (...) on their progress in
classical and scientifical knowledge.

The progress of the Germans in natural philosophy and mathe^^^ is better known
abroad, than their progress in metaphysics and div^^ty, which has, at least,
kept pace with the former. The general (...) for literature and scientific
inquiry, which is the bent the genius and the industry of the nation has taken,
in consequence of the singu^^ political constitution, has diffused a vast mass
of knowledge through Germany, especially through its northern parts. In these
provin^^ the number of literati is exceedingly great; they may be said to (...)
a particular republic of letters, distinguished by liberality of manners by a
considerable degree of independence, and a very perceptible influence on the
government of the states, by the direction of the public opinion. The number of
readers in the German empire, and in the neighboring countries, especially in
the north of Europe, where the German language has an extensive circulation, is
large enough to ^^courage the publication of no less than 5000 annual literary
productions, of which two-thirds are original performances, and one-third
translations from other languages. It is true, this rage of writing (...) of
reading has some disadvantages; among which, the publication (...) a great
number of wretched books is one of the most conspicuous. -- Yet these are
either calculated for a particular public, or they are (...) buried in the
oblivion they deserve; while, on the other side, the beneficial consequences
resulting from this universal application to literature are greatly
preponderant. Besides the obvious advantages of destroying ignorance and
prejudice, of spreading liberality of sentiment, it keeps up the connection,
otherwise not sufficiently binding between the different parts of the empire,
it excites a spirit of emulation, it inspires a salutary dread to sovereigns to
commit such actions as might draw public censure upon them, it acquaints the
different classes of men with their rights, and gives energy to the voice and
the complaints of the public. The sciences in Germany appear in no unimportant
point of view, when considered as the means of affording a comfortable
subsistence to an astonishing number of people employed in teaching, or in
writing on the sciences, and to many thousands of paper-manufacturers,
printers, and booksellers. The book-trade is (...) where equally important; at
the Leipzick fair books are sold and exchanged to the value of several hundred
thousand dollars.

There are ^8 universities in Germany, of which 19 belong to the Protestants,
and 17 to the Roman Catholics; though the latter ought to have many more,
considering the proportion of their numbers (...) those of the Protestants,
which is as two to one. Of all the German institutions of education, the
universities are still the most faulty, considering the wants of our age; yet
most of the Protestant universities in Germany are the least exceptionable
institutions of that kind in Europe. The number of literary and scientifical
societies, public libraries, academies of arts, collections of pictures,
military academies, etc. is greater in Germany than in any other country.

HISTORY.] Charlemagne, or Charles the Great, king of France, was the founder
of the German Empire in A. D. 800. Leopold II. late Emperor died Feb. 1792. The
German Diet was to meet the 4th of July following for the Election of a
Successor to the crown.

Those who wish to acquaint themselves with the history of the German Empire
are referred to the Universal History. See also Encyclopedia, Brittannica,
Article, Germany -- Publishing in Philadelphia, by Mr. Thomas Dobson.

MONARCHY OF PRUSSIA.
BOUNDARIES AND NAME.] THIS country is bounded on the north by part of
Samogitia; south, by Poland proper and Masovia; east by part of Lithuania; west
by Polish Prussia and the Baltics.

The name of Prussia is probably derived from the Borussi, the ancient
inhabitants of the country.

The following Table from Zimmerman will furnish the reader with the best
information concerning the Divisions, Extent, Population, and Towns of the
Prussian Monarchy.

TABLE
As the Countries belonging to this Monarchy are scattered, and without any
natural Connection, one cannot ascertain very accurately their boundaries. The
latitude of Prussia goes to 55 lat. N. Square Miles. Population. Population for
every square mile. Chief Towns and Number of Inhabitants. DIVISIONS. 570 Towns.
A. Countries which are independent of the German Empire 57,600 but in another
place Mr. Hertzberg reckons 64,000 6,000,000 104 Capital Berlin 145,136 B.
Countries which are dependent 6,400,000 100 A. 1. Kingdom of Prussia, viz.
22,144 1,500,000 68 Towns 69 -- Villages 1,260 East Prussia 12,048 940,000 78
Konigsberg (...) the Capital of the kingdom of Prussia, is situated on the
river Prog^l, over which it has (...) bridges. According (...) miles (...) and
(...) 2,^00 (...). Its river being navigable, for ships, he has made (...)
(...).


54,000 Memel 5,765 West Prussia 10,096 560,000 55 (44 Towns.) Elbing 14,400
Graudenz 5,200 2. Duchies of Silesia and Glatz 10,240 1,582,000 154 (161
Towns.) Breslau 51,000 Glatz 4,250 Brig 5,000 Schweidenitz 6,250 Liegnitz 4,810
3. Principalities of Neufchatel and Valengin 240 40,500 169 (^ Towns.)
Neufchatel 6,000

DIVISIONS. Square Miles. Population. Population for every square mile. Chief
Towns and Number of Inhabitants. B. 1. The March of Bra^denburg, viz. 10,624
1,057,000 99 2. The Electoral March 7,10^ 795,000 112 Berlin, 6300 houses
Potsdam 20,000 Spandau 3,800 Brandenburg 9,200 Frankf. on the Oder 10,000
Salzwedel 4,150 Stendal 4,300 b. The New March 3,520 262,000 74 Custrin 4,400
Landsberg 6,000 2. Duchy of Pomerania. 8,112 465,000 132 (39 Towns.)Stettin
15,485 Colberg 4,090 Anklam 3,185 3. Duchy of Magdeburg. 1,664 280,000 168
Magdeburg 26,300 and 10,000 G. Halle 15,202 and 5,000 G. 4. Principality of
Halberstadt. 672 132,000 196 Halberstadt 11,200 M. 5. The possess. in
Westphalia, viz. 3,904 590,000 151

DIVISIONS. Square Miles. Population. Population for every square mile. Chief
Towns and Number of Inhabitants. 1. Duchy of Minden and County of Ravensberg
816 130,000 159 (6 Towns.) Minden 5,178 Bielefeld 2,900 2. Counties of
Fecklenburg and Lingon 208 45,000 216 (4 Towns.) Fecklenburg Lingen 1,800 3.
Principality of Ostfriesland or Frisra 864 103,000 119 (4 Towns.) Emden 7,900M.
4. Duchy of Cleve 640 95,000 149 (24 Towns.) Cleve 5,300 Wesel 4,600 Duisburg
5. County of Mark 896 125,000 140 Soerst 5,020 Lippstadt Iserlohe 5,000 6.
Principal. of Moeurs 96 17,000 177 Moeurs C^es^ld 5,^00 7. (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...)

WEALTH, COMMERCE, etc.] The different provinces of the Prussian monarchy are
by no means equal to one another with respect to fertility and the articles of
their produce. The kingdom of Prussia, being the most northern part of the
monarchy, is rich in corn, timber, ma^nagrass, flax and peltry of all sorts,
and exports these articles. -- Amber is exported annually, to the value of
20,000 dollars. Prussia wants salt, and has no metals but iron. The profits of
its fisheries are considerable. Silesia has silver, lead, tin, and iron; but
its mines are still in an infant state: It has likewise a great plenty of
pit-coal, different sorts, of salt, precious stones, and quarries of excellent
freestone. The sheep and goats of this province are remarkably good. Of
vegetables it produces large quantities of madder, some tobacco, wine, and
corn, sufficient for the consumption of this province. The March of
Brandenburg has excellent sheep, timber, flax, silk, saltpeter, alum, and a
very fine sort of clay, used in the china manufacture. Pomerania exports
timber, cattle, and corn. Halberstadt and Magdeburg are remarkable for corn and
silk, and Westphalia for corn and minerals. The provinces of Westphalia have
iron, calamine, pit-coal, and some lead and copper. The industry of the
Prussian nation, encouraged chiefly by the late king, the wonder of the age, is
at present so great, that not only 1,200 vessels and 12,000 seamen are
employed, in the maritime provinces, where trade was formerly at a very low
ebb, no more than 500 fishermen being employed in the herring fishery, but that
the produce of the mines is made to amount to 1,300,000 dollars, and gives
bread to 90,000 families. The sum accruing to the king from the mines amounts
to 800,000 dollars, and the profits of private proprietors to 500,000 dollars.
Before the commencement of the late reign, Prussia (according to Count
Herzberg) had but a few silk manufactures: At present they employ upwards of
5,000 hands; and the value of goods manufactured, amounts to 2,000,000 dollars
annually, one fourth of which is exported. Of 70,000lb. of raw silk, required
for this manufacture, 13,432 lb, are produced in the Prussian dominions. Large
water-mills are erected for spinning silk, wool and thread. The articles
supplied by these mills are of very great commercial consequence. Prussia
exports linen, to the value of six millions of dollars, chiefly to Spain and
Italy, and woollens to the value of four millions, some of which finds its way
even to China, through Russia. Eastern Prussia exports, annually, 100,000 stein
of flax, 10,000 stein of hemp, besides some thousand tons of flax and
hemp seed. West Prussia exports linen thread to the value of 500,000 dollars,
and 49,000 stein of flax. The iron works and founderies of the county of Mark
bring into circulation about one million of dollars. These articles added to
the timber and corn of Brandenburg and Pomerania, each of which articles is
exported to the value of one million of dollars: To the flax and timber of
Prussia, and to the important Polish trade carried on by the way of
Koenigsberg, Memel, Elbing, Dantzick, and Stettin, turn the balance of trade
considerably in favor of the Prussian dominions. There are in all about
123,000 hands employed in the manufactures of cloth, silk, linen, leather, etc.
The manufacture of porcelaine employs 5,000 people. The cotton manufacture,
with respect to the fineness and beauty of its goods, is one of the best in
Europe. Besides the above, there are many manufactures of glass, white lead,
hard-war, vitriol, alum, paper, sugar, tobacco, etc. The number of people
working in the principal manufactures of Prussia, is upwards of 165,000, and
the produce of their industry is estimated at upwards of 30 millions of
dollars. The small manufactures of starch, alum, vinegar, bleached wax,
tobacco pipes, arms, tapestry, gloves, are not included in this calculation,
yet they produce many millions of dollars. At Embden, an East India Company has
been established with tolerable success.

ARMY.] In 1783, the Army of Prussia amounted to 224,^^^ men, viz.

Infantry. Cavalry. In the March 46,488 4,189 In Prussia 33,947 12,229 In
Pomerania 12,670 8,430 In Magdeburg 16,907 3,790 In Westphalia 13,990 In
Silesia 40,168 13,860

In 1785 the army amounted to 192,377.

At Berlin there is an Ecole Militaire, and a school for cadets; Each regiment
has its court of justice. The Prussian troops are said to be the best
disciplined of any in the world.

FINANCES.] The Finances of Prussia amount to 23 millions of dollars: According
to Busching to 18,500,000 only.

From the Electorate or March of Brandenburg 6millions. From Prussia 4 From
Pomerania 2 From Magdeburg and Halberstadt 2 From Westphalia 2 From Silesia 6
23

According to Busching.
Pomerania 2,000,000 Prussia 4,000,000 Silesia 4,500,000 March of Brandenburg
3,300,000 Magdeburg 1,400,000 Halberts^adt 500,000 Clove, Mark, and Mocurs
1,000,000 Minden and Raves^berg 900,000 Ostfriesland 900,000 18,500,000

The revenues arise from demesnes of the king* his duties of custo^^ and tolls,
and the subsidies yearly granted by the several states. (...) alone is said to
bring him in 26,000 dollars annually.

GOVERNMENT.] His Prussian Majesty is absolute through (...) dominions: The
government of this kingdom is exercised by a (...) of four Chancellors of
State, viz. 1. The Great Master: 2. The Great Burgrave: 3. The Great
Chancellor: And 4. The Great ^^^shal. There are also some other councils, and
17 Bailiwicks. (...) states consist: 1. Of Counselors of State: 2. Of Deputies
from the Nobility: And 3. From the Commons. Besides these institutions, his
Majesty has erected a board for commerce and navigation.

GENERAL REMARKS.] The present flourishing state of Prussia, a country by no
means remarkable for its natural riches, is an astonishing proof of what a
single great man is able to effect, who unites extraordinary strength of
genius, with laborious and persevering activity. -- This monarchy resembles a
very complicated machine, which, by its ingenious and admirable construction,
produces the greatest effects with the greatest case, but in which the yielding
of a wheel, or the relaxation of a spring, will put a stop to the motion of the
whole. The united effects of flourishing finances, of prudent economy, of
accuracy and dispatch in every branch of administration, and of a formidable
military strength, have given to this state such a consequence, that the
tranquillity and security, not only of Germany, but of all Europe, depend in a
great measure on the politics of the Prussian cabinet. The administration of
justice is likewise admirably simplified and executed with unparalleled
quickness. Upon the whole, the reign of Frederick the Great may, indeed, be
considered as the most specious argument in favor of monarchical government.
Improvements have been made in one single reign, which, in a country where the
governing powers are less united and more limited, would have required several
ages, and the most favorable circumstances. Difference of religion in a state,
is commonly the cause of many disturbances: Under the late king, all
professions of faith lived peaceably together, because the established
religion, which is the reformed, had no power to oppress those of a different
persuasion* Roman Catholics and Jews are very numerous in the Prussian
dominions; they enjoy the most perfect freedom in the exercise of their
religion.

The progress which the arts and sciences, and especially elegant literature,
have made during the reign of this great man, is very considerable. It is no
more than about 40 years ago, that the Germans, though great proficients in
every branch of scientific knowledge, paid proper attention to the refinement
of their taste, and the cultivation of their language. Yet such is the
application peculiar to the Germans, and so well were they prepared for every
species of composition, by their intimate acquaintance with the best ancient
and modern writers of all nations, that having once laid aside the fashion of
writing in Latin, they were able to enumerate, in a short period, many
excellent poets and elegant writers in their native language. This is the more
to be wondered at, as the late king of Prussia, greatly neglected in his
education, and afterward constantly surrounded by foreigners, was unacquainted
with, and indifferent to the energy and copiousness of his own language, and to
the progress his countrymen made in taste and composition. He had, however, the
merit of encouraging the sciences and some branches of literature; and such is
the connection between the different branches, that if some of them are
patronized by great and powerful men, all the other branches will partake of
the animating influence.

HISTORY.] Prussia was anciently inhabited by an idolatrous and cruel people.
The barbarity and ravages they were continually making (...) their neighbors,
obliged Conrad, duke of Masovia, about the middle of the thirteenth century, to
call to his assistance the knights of the Teutonic order, who were just
returned from the holy land. -- These knights chose a grand master, attached
those people with success, and after a bloody war of fifty years reduced them
to obedience, and obliged them to embrace christianity. They maintained their
conquest till 1525, when Albert, Margrave of Blandenburg, their last grand
master, having made himself master of all Prussia, ceded the western part to
the king of Poland, and was acknowledged duke of the eastern part, but to be
held as a fief of that kingdom. The elector, Frederick-William, surnamed the
Great, by a treaty with Poland in 1656, obtained a confirmation of this part of
Prussia to him and his heirs, free from vassalage, and in 1663, he was declared
independent and sovereign duke. With these titles, and as grand master of the
Teutonics, they continued till 1701, when Frederick, son of Frederick-William
the Great, and grandfather of the late king, raised the duchy of Prussia to a
kingdom, and on January 18, 1701, in a solemn assembly of the states of the
empire, placed the crown with his own hand^ upon his head; soon after which, he
was acknowledged as king of Prussia by all the other European powers. Frederick
III. died August 17, 1786, and was succeeded by his nephew, Frederick-William
who was born 1744.

MONARCHY OF AUSTRIA.
THE Divisions, Extent, Population, and Chief Towns of this Monarchy, are
noticed in the following Table.

Division of all the Austrian dominions. Areas in square miles. Population.
Population for each single square mile. CHIEF TOWNS. Names. Number. of
inhabitants. 180,496 20,000,000 111 Vienna 206,000 19,611,000 St. T. 109 St. T.
Linz 15,200 A. Countries belonging to the German empire. Gratz 55,000 1. Circle
of Austria Clagenfurt 7,000 Laubach 9,500 34,320 4,182,000 122 Foria 1,900 B.
Triest 9,000 2. Kingdom of Bohemia 15,376 2,266,000 148 Prague, 80,000 Carlsbad
Eger 3. Marquisate of Moravia 6,336 1,137,000 179 Olmuz 11,000 Brunn 13,000 4.
Part of Silesia 1,296 200,000 154 Troppau 8,000 Teschen 5. Austrian Netherlands
7,504 1,880,000 250 Brussels 80,000 Louvaines 40,000 Antwerp 40,000 Malines
20,000 Ghent 40,000 Ostende 12,000 Mons 10,000 Namur 20,000 Luxemburg 8,000
Limburg 8,000

B. Countries independent of the German empire. Areas in squ. miles.
Population. Population for each single square mile. CHIEF TOWNS. 1. Lomba^dia
(Italy) 3,07^ 1,324,000 431 Names. Number of inhabitants. Milan 132,000 Pavia
27,600 Gremona 25,000 Mantua 23,000 (...). Hungary 59,536 3,170,000 53 Ofen
21,000 Presburg 27,000 Oedenburg 11,000 Therefienstadt 15,000 Pest 13,500
Chemnitz 8,000 Tyrnau 7,300 3. Illyria 12,928 620,030 49 Nartstadt,
Peterwaradein 4. Transylvania 16,800 1,250,000 74 Hemanstadt 15,000 Kronstadt
5. Buckowina 22,848 130,000 46 Czernowiz, Suezowa 6. Gall^^^, and Lodomiria
20,480 2,800,000 126 Lemberg 20,000 (...) (...) ^^,000

WEALTH, COMMERCE, etc.] The provinces of the Austrian monarchy are not only
favorably situated as to climate, but they may be reckoned among the most
fertile in Europe. There is scarce any valuable product which is not to be met
with in them. Bohemia produces and exports flax, wool, hides, skins, hops,
iron, steel, tin, cobalt, vitriol, brimstone, alum, garnets, and other
precious stones; it imports salt, wine, silk, cotton, spices, etc. upon the
whole, the value of exports exceeds that of the imports by two millions of
florins. Silesia exports large quantities of linen, and Moravia has a great
number of manufactures of all sorts, chiefly of cloth, the produce of which
amounts to the value of 13 millions of florins. Austria is certainly one of the
most fertile provinces of Germany. The lower division of it produces upwards of
60,000cwt. of salt, value 4 millions of florins, the expenses of the works not
exceeding one million. The saffron of this province is remarkably good. The
woollen manufacture at Lintz is very considerable, and employs upwards of
25,000 people. There are besides many other manufactures, viz. of glass, of
hardware, etc. The art of making iron-wire is carried to such a degree of
perfection, that 6130 fish-hooks, worth 26 florins, are made of half an ounce
of metal. -- Austria produces 2,000,000 eymers of wine, of which a great part
is exported. The exports of Lower Austria to the Levant, are computed at six
millions; but the imports, consisting of the articles of cotton, goats or camel
hair, spices and coffee, at nine millions. The district comprehending the
provinces of Stiria, Carinthia, and Carniola, called by the German geographers
Interior Austria, is famous for its minerals. Besides some gold, upwards of
1000 lb. of silver, 300,000 lb. of quicksilver, one million cwt. of iron,
150,000 cwt. of salt, 1500 cwt. of saltpetre, and great quantities of lead,
copper, vitriol, cobalt, brimstone, are the produce of these rich mines. In
Carniola the linen manufactures produce to the value of 400,000 florins of that
article. The center of the Austrian trade is the harbor of Trieste, declared a
free port by the present emperor, who is desirous to establish there an
East India company. Here is the market to which all the European nations resort
for the productions of the Austrian dominions. The province of Tyrol has also
rich mines; it produces wine, and has manufactures of glass, leather, and silk.
Lombardy, the population of which is prodigious, produces vast quantities of
silk, to the amount of 4,500,000 florins. It exports also corn and rice for
700,000 linen for 400,000 cattle and horses for 1,500,000 florins. All the
various articles of produce, scattered through the other provinces, are found
united, and in a much greater proportion, in the kingdom of Hungary, which, if
it was not too thinly peopled, would he the richest country of Europe. It
produces annually 25,000 lb. of silver, containing gold. In 1779, the mines of
Schemnitz and Cremnitz yielded 1215 lb. of gold. The gold-wash of the Bannat
yields upwards of 1000 ducats. It is supposed, that Hungary and Transylvania
together produce gold and silver to the value of 7,000,000 florins annually,
34,000 cwt. of copper, besides iron, quicksilver, salt, and marble. The value
of the mines of (...) Austrian Monarchy is computed to amount to 19,000,000
florins. It is well known that Hungary produces an incredible quantity of
excellent wines, the most delicious of which is the famous Tokay. If several
sorts of the Hungarian wines could be longer kept, and if the duties on them,
and the expenses of carriage were not so very high, the riches accruing from
them to this country would be immense. Among the other valuable productions of
Hungary, we shall men^^^ hemp, flax, and even cotton, baril^a, rice, and
tobacco. In 1779, (...) were exported from Trieste 100, 759 lb. of snuff, and
upwards of 3,000,000 lb. of tobacco in leaves, exclusive of 2,500,000 lb.
exported from Flume and Buhary. This province, rich in every inspect, sells
every year 150,000 head of live cattle, and 40,000 (...) Gallieia, besides
abounding in other minerals, is famous for its immense falt-works at Wielitzka.
This mine of salt-rock has been woked these 600 years past; it extends,
according to Mr. Coxe, (...) 669 feet in length, 1115 in breadth, and 743 in
depth. It yielding the crown of Poland, to which it belonged till 1773, a
revenue of three millions and a half of Polish florins annually: it has been
(...) to the emperor by the late treaty of partition. The quantity of (...) dug
out every year, amounted some years ago to 700,000 cwt. The falt works of
Sambor and Bochnia are also very rich, they yield (...) the value of one
million of florins. The few proceeding fact^ (...) clearly the value of these
provinces. When population shall be (...) creased, and manufactures
established, in proportion to the (...) riches of the country, the wealth of
the Austrian Monarchy (...) to be superior to that of any nation in Europe. At
present (...) great want of navigable canals and other conveniences for
i^^^^merce. Many of the spontaneous productions are not sufficiently attended
to, as for instance, Oil. The Austrian Netherlands have been long famous for
their fisheries, corn, madder, and flax of a (...) fineness, of which the
Brabant lace is made, which brings a great (...) of money into the country.

Vienna is the capital of the circle of Austria, and, bring the (...) of the
emperor, is supposed to be the capital of Germany. It is a (...) and a strong
city, and the princes of the house of Austria have (...) nothing that could
contribute to its grandeur and riches. (...) contains an excellent university,
a bank, which is in the management of her own magistrates, and a court of
commerce immediately (...) to the aulic council. Its religious buildings, with
the walks and (...) dens, occupy a sixth part of the town; but the suburbs are
larger (...) the city. It would be endless to enumerate the many palaces of
(...) capital, two of which are imperial; its squares, academies, and ^^ries;
and, among others, the fine one of prince Eugene, with (...) the imperial
cabinets of curiosities. Among its rich convents is (...) for the Scotch
nation, built in honor of their countryman, St. (...) the patron of Austria;
and one of the six gates of this city is called the Scots gate, in remembrance
of some notable exploit performed them (...) the troops of that nation. The
inhabitants of Vienna, including (...) suburbs, are computed at about three
hundred thousand; and the encouragement given them by their sovereigns, has
rendered this (...) rendezvous of all the nations around.

After all that has been said of this magnificent city, the most (...) and
sensible of those who have visited it, are far from being (...) its praise. The
streets, excepting those in the suburbs, are (...) dirty; the houses and
furniture of the citizens are greatly ^^^tioned to the magnificence of the
palaces, squares, and (...) (...) buildings; but above all, the excessive
imposts laid by the house of Austria upon every commodity in its dominions,
must always keep the manufacturing part of their subjects poor. His late
imperial majesty was sensible of these truths which were plain to all the world
but his predecessors and their counselors: He examined things with his own
eyes, and descended from that haughtiness of demeanor which rendered the
imperial court so long disagreeable, and indeed ridiculous, to the rest of
Europe. In general, the condition of the Austrian subjects has been greatly
meliorated since the accession of his late majesty to the imperial throne;
great encouragement has been given to the protestants, and many of the
Catholic religious houses, convents, etc. were suppressed by him.

FINANCES.] The Finances of the Austrian monarchy amount to above 90 millions
of florins, exclusive of the revenues of Galicia, Lodomiria, and Buckowina, viz.

Of Bohemia 15,736,069 Silesia 557,209 Austria 23,014,276 Moravia 5,793,120
Stiria 5,889,221 Carintia 2,386,834 Carniola 2,089,952 Friaul 357,368 Tyrol
3,658,712 Austria Interior 2,876,177 Hungary 18,004,153 Transylvania 3,941,707
Lombardia 2,909,171 Netherlands 3,184,135 Illyria 1,000,000 Schloez. Buckowina
300,000 Gallicia and Lodomiria 12,000,000

The debts of the Austrian monarchy amount to about 200 millions of florins. In
1770, the public expenditure amounted to 83 millions, and was exceeded by the
revenue by upwards of six millions remaining in the treasury.

ARMY.] The Austrian army, according to the new regulations of 1779, amount to
283,000 men. The infantry consists of 37 regiments, of 3120 men each, or in all
177,840 men.

Grenadiers 13,182 Cavalry 44,100 Artillery 11,000 Croats 400,000 Wallachian
Sclavonian troops Pontoniers 600 Mineurs 640 Sappeurs 280 Tchaiki^ts 1200
Engineers 200

There are besides the general, staff, or field engineers, etc. According to
others 300,000 men (in 1783).

Another statement.
Infantry 170,000 Cavalry 50,000 Garrisons and other corpse 60,000 280,000

There is at Wienerish Neustadt a famous military academy for 400 cadets; at
Vienna an academy of engineers, and each regiment (...) school, in which forty
sons of soldiers are educated.

GENERAL REMARKS.] The Austrian monarchy wants nothing but a long peace to
increase in population and industry. In both respec^^ the country has already
gained much by the wisdom of one of the (...) emperors, who removed one of the
greatest obstacles to internal improvement, religious intolerance. The Roman
Catholic religion (...) the established religion of the monarchy: There are,
however, at (...) 80,000 Protestants in the provinces belonging to the German
emp^^^. In Hungary the number of Protestants is so great, that since the act of
toleration has been published, no less than 200 churches have been allowed to
them. There are, besides many thousand Greeks, 223,^^^ Jews, and about 50,000
Egyptians or Gypsies, in the Austrian dominions. At the beginning of the
present reign, there were upwards of 2000 convents of monks and nuns, which are
now wisely reduced to 1143. The arts and sciences, hitherto greatly neglected,
begin to (...) considerable progress. The emperor Joseph appropriated the
greatest part of the revenues, arising from the estates of the ^ecularised
convents, to the improvement of the schools, and the encouragement (...)
literary merit. The universities of the Austrian dominions are (...) yet equal
to those of the Protestant countries of Germany; they are (...) in number, at
Vienna, Prague, Pest, Lemberg, Louvain, and Fr^bourg, in Brisgau. The
government is, in certain respects, stri^^ monarchical; however, in the
provinces of Hungary, Illyria, Transylvania, Tyrol, and the Netherlands, the
states have preserved so (...) of their ancient consequence, as to prevent new
taxes from being imposed on those provinces without their consent. The cities
of Bru^^^ and Milan are the seats of the two viceroys, or governor-generals
(...) the Netherlands and the Italian provinces. Joseph II. rendered (...)
essential service to humanity, in abolishing the servitude or vill^^^^ of the
peasants of Bohemia.

KINGDOM OF BOHEMIA, BELONGING TO THE AUSTRIAN MONARCHY.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 478 Miles. between Degrees. 48 and 52 north latitude. Breadth 3^2
Miles. Degrees. 12 and 19 east longitude.

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED by Saxony and Brandenburg, on the North; by Poland and
Hungary, on the East; by Austria and Bavaria, on the South; and by the
palatinate of Bava^^^ on the West; formerly comprehending, 1. Bohemia Proper;
2. Silesia; and, 3. Moravia.

To what we have already said of Bohemia under the head of Austria, we add the
following particulars: --

MOUNTAINS AND RIVERS.] Bohemia, though almost surrounded with mountains,
contains none of note or distinction: Its woods are many, and the chief rivers
are the Elbe, Muldaw, and Eger.

ARCHBISHOPRICS AND BISHOPRICS.] Prague is the only Bohemian archbishopric. The
bishoprics are Koningsgratz, Breslaw, and C^^^tz.

LANGUAGE.] The proper language of the Bohemians is a dialect of the
Sclavonian, but they generally speak German and High Dutch.

UNIVERSITY.] The only university in Bohemia is that of Prague.

CITIES AND TOWNS.] Prague, the capital of Bohemia, is one of the (...) and
most magnificent cities in Europe, and famous for its noble ^^^idge. Its
circumference is so large, that the grand Prussian army, in (...) last siege,
never could completely invest it. For this reason it is (...) (...) make a
vigorous defense in case of a regular siege. The inhabitants are thought not to
be proportioned to its capaciousness, being computed at 80,000. It contains 92
churches and chapels, and 40 ^^^isters. It is a place of little or no trade,
and therefore the middling inhabitants are not wealthy; but the Jews are said
to carry on a large ^^^^erce in jewels. Bohemia contains many other towns, some
of which are fortified, but they are neither remarkable for strength nor
manufactures. Olmutz is the capital of Moravia: It is well fortified, and has
manufactures of woollen, iron, glass, paper, and gunpowder. ^^re^law, the
capital of Silesia, has been already described.

COMMERCE AND MANUFACTURES.] See Austria.

CONSTITUTION AND GOVERNMENT.] The forms, and only the (...), of the old
Bohemian constitution still subsist; but the government, under the emperor, is
despotic. Their states are composed of (...) clergy, nobility, gentry, and
representatives of towns.

HISTORY.] The Bohemian nobility used to elect their own princes, ^^ugh the
emperors of Germany sometimes imposed a king upon them, (...) at length usurped
that throne themselves. In the year 1438, Al^^ II. of Austria, received three
crowns, that of Hungary, the Em^^re, and Bohemia.

In 1414 John Huss and Jerome of Prague, two of the first reformers, (...)
Bohemians, were burnt at the council of Constance, though the ^mperor of
Germany had given them his protection. This occasioned (...) insurrection in
Bohemia: The people of Prague, threw the emperor's officers out of the windows
of the council chamger; and the famous Zisca, assembling an army of 40,000
Bohemians, defeated the emperor's forces in several engagements, and drove the
Imp^^ali^^^ of the kingdom. The divisions of the Hussites among themselves
enabled the emperors to keep possession of Bohemia, though an (...) was made to
throw off the Imperial yoke, by electing, in the year (...) a protestant king,
in the person of the Prince Palatine, son-in-law (...) James I. of England. He
was driven from Bohemia by the emperor's generals, and, being stripped of his
other dominions, was forced ^^^pend on the court of England for a subsistence.
After a war of (...) years duration, which desolated the whole empire, the
Bohem^^ since that time, have remained subject to the house of Austria.

HUNGARY.
BELONGING TO THE AUSTRIAN MONARCHY.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 300 Miles. between Degrees. 17 and 23 east longitude. Breadth 200
Miles. Degrees. 45 and 49 north latitude.

BOUNDARIES.] THAT part of Hungary which belongs to (...) house of Austria (for
it formerly (...) Transylvania, Sclavonia, Croatia, Morlachia, Servia,
Walachia, and other countries) is bounded by Poland, on the North; by
Transylvania and Walachia, East; by Sclavonia, South; and by Aust^^^^ (...)
Moravia, West.

The kingdom of Hungary is usually divided into the Upper and Lower Hungary.

UPPER HUNGARY, NORTH OF THE DANUBE. LOWER HUNGARY, SOUTH OF THE DANUBE. Chief
Towns. Chief Towns. Presburg, situated on the Danube, E. lon. 17-30. N. lat.
48-20. Buda, on the Danube, E. lon^^^ 20. N. lat. 17-40. Newhausel, N. W. Gran,
on the Danube, above (...). Leopolsladt, N. W. Comorra, on the Danube, (...)
Chremnits, N. W. island of Schut. Schemnits, in the middle. Raab, on the
Danube, oppo^^^ Esperies, N. island of Schut. Chaschaw. N. Atlenburg, W.
opposite (...) Tokay, N. E. the island of Schut. Zotmar, N. E. Weissenburg, or
Alba Rega^^^ ^^^uated E. of the lake, call^^ (...) Unguar, N. E. Mongats, N. E.
Platten sea. Waradin Great, E. Kanisba, S. W. of the Pla^^ (...) Segedin, S. E.
Five Churches. N. of the (...) Agria, in the middle. Drove. Pest, on the
Danube, opposite to Buda.

To which may be added Temeswar, which has been consid^^^ (...) distinct from
Hungary, because it was formerly governed by an (...) pendent king; and it has
several times been in possession of the Turks: but the Austrians gaining
possession of it, it was incorporated into the kingdom of Hungary in 1778. The
province of Temeswar is 94 miles long, and 67 broad, containing about 3850
square miles: It has been divided into four districts, Csadat, Temeswar,
Werschez, and Lugos. Temeswar, the principal town, is situated E. lon. 22-15.
N. lat. 45-^4.

AIR, SOIL, AND PRODUCE.] The air, and consequently the climate of the southern
parts of Hungary, is found to be unhealthful, owing to its numerous lakes,
stagnated waters, and marshes; but the northern parts being mountainous and
barren, the air is sweet and wholesome. No country in the world can boast a
richer soil, than that plain which extends three hundred miles from Presburg to
Belgrade, and produces corn, grass, esculent plants, tobacco, saffron,
asparagus, mel^^^, hops, pulse, millet, buck-wheat, delicious wine, fruits, of
various kinds, peaches, mulberry-trees, chestnuts, and wood: Corn, is in such
plenty, that it sells for one sixth part of its price in England.

RIVERS.] These are the Danube, Drove, Save, Teysse, Merish and the T^^mes.

WATER.] Hungary contains several lakes, particularly four among the Carpathian
mountains of considerable extent, and abounding with fish. The Hungarian baths
and mineral waters are esteemed the most sovereign of any in Europe; but their
magnificent buildings, raised by the Turks, when in possession of the country,
particularly those of (...), are suffered to go to decay.

MOUNTAINS.] The Carpathian mountains which divide Hungary from Poland on the
north, are the chief in Hungary, though many detached mountains are found in
the country. Their tops are generally covered with wood, and on their sides
grow the richest grapes in the world.

METALS AND MINERALS.] Hungary is remarkably well stocked with both. It abounds
not only with gold and silver mines, but with plenty of excellent copper,
vitriol, iron, orpiment, quicksilver, crysocolla, and terra sigillata. Before
Hungary became the seat of destructive wars between the Turks and Christians,
or fell under the power of the house of Austria, those mines were furnished
with proper works and workmen, and produced vast revenues to the native
princes. -- The Hungarian gold and silver employed mint-houses, not only in
Hungary, but in Germany, and the continent of Europe; but all those mines are
now greatly diminished in their value, their works being destroyed or
demolished; some of them however still subsist, to the great emolument of the
natives.

VEGETABLE AND ANIMAL PRODUCTIONS.] Hungary is remarkable for a fine breed of
horses, generally mouse-coloured, and highly esteemed by military officers, so
that great numbers of them are exported. There is a remarkable breed of large
rams in the neighborhood of Presburg. Its other vegetable and animal
productions are in general the same with those of Germany, and the neighboring
countries. -- The Hungarian wines, however, particularly Tokay, are preferable
to these of any other country, at least in Europe.

POPULATION, INHABITANTS, MANNERS, CUSTOMS, AND DIVERSIONS.] Before the Turks
got possession of Constantinople, it is said, that Hungary was one of the most
populous and powerful kingdom in Europe; and if the house of Austria should
(...) proper encouragement to the inhabitants to repair their works, and clear
their fens, it might become so again a century hence. Hungary at present, is
thought to contain about three millions 170,000 inhabitants.

The Hungarians have manners peculiar to themselves. They pipe themselves on
being, descended from those heroes, who formeds the bulwark of Christendom
against the infidels. In their persons they are well made. Their fur caps,
their close-bodied coats, girded by fash, and their cloak, or mantle, which is
so contrived as to buch^^der the arm, so that the right hand may be always at
liberty, give (...) an air of military dignity. The men shave their beards, but
(...) their whiskers on their upper lips. Their usual arms are a broad-(...)
and a kind of pole-ax, besides their firearms. The ladies are rech^^ handsomer
than those of Austria, and they have a sable dress, with sleeves strait to
their arms, and their stays fastened before with (...) pearl, or diamond little
buttons. Both men and women, in what they call the mine towns, wear fur and
even sheep-skin, dresses. The (...) upon the roads are most miserable hovels,
and even those seldom to be met with. The hogs, which yield the chief animal
food for (...) peasants, and their poultry, live in the same apartment with
their ^^^ers. The gout and the fever, owing to the unwholesomeness of the air,
are the predominant diseases in Hungary. The natives in general lease trade and
manufactures to the Greeks and other strangers (...) in their country, the
flatness of which renders traveling comm^d^^^ either by land or water. The
diversions of the inhabitants are of the warlike and athletic kind. They are in
general a brave and maga^^mous people. Their ancestors, even since the
beginning of the (...) century, were so jealous of their liberties, that rather
than submit to the tyranny of the house of Austria, they often put themselves
under the protection of the Ottoman court; but their fidelity to the (...)
empress queen, notwithstanding the provocations they received (...) her house,
will be always remembered to their honor.

The inhabitants of Temeswar, a province lately incorporated into the kingdom
of Hungary, are computed at about 450,000. There (...) in this country many
faraons, or gyrsies, supposed to be real des^nants of the ancient Egyptians.
They are said to resemble the ancient Egyptians in their features, in their
propensity to melancholy, and it many of their manners and customs; and it is
asserted, that the lasc^^ous dances of Isis, the worship of onions, many famous
Egyptain ^^perstitions and specifies, and the Egyptian method of hatching eggs
by means of dung, are still in use among the female gypsies in Temeswar.

RELIGION.] The established religion of the Hungarians in the Roman Catholic,
though the major part of the inhabitants are pr^^^ants, or Greeks; and they now
enjoy the full exercise of their ^^^ous liberties.

ARCHBISHOPRICS, AND BISHOPRICS.] The archbishoprics are ^^^burg, Gran, and
Colocza. The bishoprics are, Great Waradin, (...) Vesprin, Raab, and five
Churches.

LANGUAGE.] As the Hungarians are mixed with Germans, (...) vonians, and
Walachians, they have a variety of dialects, and (...) them is said to approach
near the Hebrew. The better and (...) (...) speak German, and almost all even
of the common people speak Latin, either pure or barbarous, so that the Latin
may be said to be (...) still a living language.

UNIVERSITIES.] In the universities (if they can properly be so called) of
Firnan, Buda, Raab, and Caschaw, are professors of the several arts and
sciences, who used generally to be Jesuits; so that the Lutherans and
Calvinists, who are more numerous than the Roman Catholics in Hungary, go to
the German and other universities.

ANTIQUITIES AND CURIOSITIES, NATURAL AND ARTIFICIAL.} The artificial
curiosities of this country consist of its bridges, baths, and mines. The
bridge of Esseck, built over the Danube, and Drove, is properly speaking, a
continuation, of bridges, five miles it length, ^ortified with towers at
certain distances. It was an important pass during the wars between the Turks
and Hungarians. A ^^^idge of boats runs over the Danube, half a mile long,
between Buda and Pest; and about twenty Hungarian miles distant from Belgrade,
are the remains of a bridge, erected by the Romans, judged to be the must
magnificent of any in the world. The baths and mines here have nothing to
distinguish them from the like works in other countries.

One of the most remarkable natural curiosities of Hungary, is a cav^^^ in a
mountain near Szelitze; the aperture of this cavern, which (...) the south, is
eighteen fathoms, high, and eight broad; its subter^^^eous passages consist
entirely of solid rock, stretching away farther (...) than has been yet
discovered; as far as it is practicable to go, the (...) is found to be 50
fathoms, and the breadth 26. Many other wonderful particulars are related of
this cavern, which is an article in natural philosophy.

CITIES, TOWNS FORTS, AND OTHER IDIFICES, PUBLIC AND PRIVATE.} These are
greatly decaved from their ancient magnifi^^^ce but many of the fortifications
are still very strong, and kept in good order. Presburg is fortified. In it the
Hungarian regalia were kept, but were lately removed to Vienna. The crown was
sent in the year 1000 by pope Sylvester II. to Stephen, king of Hungary, and
was made after that of the Greek emperors; it is of solid gold, weighing nine
marks and three ounces, ornamented with 53 saphires, 50 rubies, one large
emerald, and 338 pearls. Besides these stones are the images of the apostles
and the patriarchs. The pope added to this crown a silver patriarchal cross,
which was afterward inserted in the arms of Hungary. At the ceremony of the
coronation, a bishop carries it before the king. From the cross is derived the
title of apostolic king: the use of which was renewed under the reign of the
empress queen Maria Theresa. The scepter and the globe of the kingdom are of
Arabian gold: the mantle, which is of fine linen, is the work of Gisele, spouse
of St. Stephen, who embroidered in gold the image of Jesus Christ crucified,
and many other images of the patriarchs, and apostles, with a number of
inscriptions. The sword is two edged, and rounded at the point. (...), formerly
the capital of Hungary, retains little of its ancient magnif^^^ce but its
strength and ^ortifications; and the same may be said of (...), which lies on
the opposite side of the Danube. Raab is like^ise a strong city, as are Gran
and Cormorra. Tokay has been already mentioned for the excellency of its wines.

COMMERCE AND MANUFACTURES.]See Austria.

CONSTITUTION AND GOVERNMENT.] The Hungarians dislike the term of Queen, and
even called their late sovereign king Theresa (...) Their government preserved
the remains of many checks upon the ^^^gal power. They have a diet or
parliament, a Hungary-office, which resemble out chancery, and which resides at
Vienna; as the ^^^der's council, which comes pretty near the British
privy council, (...) has a municipal jurisdiction, does at Presburg. Every
royal town (...) its senate: and the Gespan chafts resembles the English
justices of the peace. Besides this, they have an exchequer and nine chambers,
and other subordinate courts.

MILITARY STRENGTH AND REVENUE.] See Austria.

HISTORY.] The Huns, after subduing this country in the middle of the third
century, communicated their name to it, being then (...) of the ancient
Pannonia. They were succeeded by the Goths; the Goths were expelled by the
Lombards; they by the Avari, and the Sclavi were planted in their stead in the
beginning of the 9th century. At the close of it, the Anigours emigrated from
the banks of the Volga, and took possession of the country. Hungary was
formerly an assemblage of different states, and the first who assumed the title
of king, was Stephen, in the year 997, when he embraced christianity. In his
reign, the form of government was established, and the crown (...) be elective.
About the year 1310, king Charles Robert ascended (...) throne, and subdued
Bulgaria, Servia, Croatia, Dalmatia, Scla^^^ and many other provinces; but many
of those conquests were afterward reduced by the Venetians, Turks, and other
powers. In the 15th century. Huniades, who was guardian to the infant king
L^^^laus, bravely repulsed the Turks, when they invaded Hungary; and upon the
death of Ladislaus, the Hungarians, in 1438, raised (...) Corvinus, son of
Huniades, to their throne. Lewis, king of Hungary, in 1526, was killed in a
battle, fighting against Solomon, emperor of the Turks. This battle had almost
proved fatal to Hungary; but the archduke Ferdinand, brother to the emperor
Charles V. having married the sister of Lewis, he claimed the title of Hungary,
in which he succeeded, with some difficulty, and that kingdom has ever (...)
belonged to the house of Austria, though by its constitution, its (...) ought
to be elective.

TRANSYLVANIA, SOLAVONIA, CROATIA, AND HUNGARIAN DALMATIA.
WE have thrown those countries under one division, for several reasons, and
particularly because we have no account ^^siciently exact of their extent and
boundaries. The best account of them follows: Transylvania, belongs to the
house of Austria, and is bounded on the North, by the Carpathian mountains,
which (...) from Poland; on the East, by Moldavia and Walachia; on the (...) by
Walachia; and on the West, by Upper and Lower Hungary. (...) lies between 22
and 25 degrees of east longitude, and 45 and (...) north latitude. Its length
is extended about 185, and its (...) (...) miles: and contains nearly 14,400
square miles, but it is surrounded on all sides by high mountains. Its produce,
vegetables and animals, are almost the same with those of Hungary. The air is
wholesome and temperate; but their wine, though good, is not equal to the
Hungarian. Its chief city is Hermanstadt, and its interior government still
partakes greatly of the ancient feudal system, being composed of many
independent states and princes. They owe not much more than a nominal
subjection to the Austrians, who leave them in possession of most of their
privileges. Catholics, Lutherans, Calvinists Socinians, Arians, Greeks,
Mahometans, and other sectaries, here enjoy their several religions.
Transylvania is thought to add but little to the Austrian revenue, though it
exports some metals and salt to Hungary. The other large places are Sageswar,
Millenback, and ^^^^ark. All sorts of provision are very cheap, and excellent
in their kinds. Hermanstadt is a large, strong, and well built city, as are
Clau^^burg and Weissenburg. The seat of government is at Hermanstadt, and the
governor is assisted by a council made up of Roman Catholics, Calvinists, and
Lutherans. The diet, or parliament, meets by sum^^^ and received the commands
of their sovereign, to whom of late they have been more devoted than formerly.
They have a liberty of making remonstrances and representations in case of
grievances.

Transylvania is part of the ancient Dacia, the inhabitants of which (...)
employed the Roman arms, before they could be subdued. It was overrun by the
Goths on the decline of the Roman empire, and then by the Huns. Their
descendants retain the same military character. The population of the country
is not ascertained; but if the Transylvanians can bring to the field, as has
been asserted, 30,000 troops, the whole number of inhabitants must be
considerable. At present its military force is reduced to six regiments of 1500
men each; (...) it is well known, that during the last two wars, in which the
house of Austria was engaged, the Transylvanians did great services.
Hermanstadt is its only bishopric; and the Transylvanians at present seem to
trouble themselves little either about learning or religion, though the Roman
Catholic is the established church. Stephen I. king of Hungary, introduced
Christianity there about the year 1000, and it was afterward governed by an
Hungarian vaivod, or viceroy. The various revolutions in their government prove
their impatience under slavery; and though the treaty of Carlowitz in 1699,
gave the sovereignty of Transylvania, as also of Sclavonia, to the house of
Austria, yet the natives enjoy what we may call a loyal aristocracy, which
their sovereigns do not think proper to invade. In October, 1784, on account of
the real of feigned oppressions of the nobility, near 16,000 assembled and
committed great depredations on those whose conduct had been resented. Several
had their palaces burnt, and were glad to escape with their lives. The
revolters were disappointed in their attempt on Clausenburg; and afterward
offered to separate and go (...) in peace, on the terms of a general pardon,
better treatment from the nobility, and a freedom from vassalage. Little is
known of the ^^^^nation of this revolt, further than the account of several of
the (...) having been taken and executed, and the application of some (...)
measures, by which tranquillity was restored.

Salvonia lies between the 16th and 23d degrees of east longitude, and the 45th
and 47th of north latitude. It is thought to be about 200 miles in length, and
60 in breadth, and contains about (...) (...) square miles. It is bounded by
the Drove on the North, by the ^^nube on the East, by the Save on the South,
and by Kiria in (...) on the West. The reason why Hungary, Transylvania,
Sclavo^^^, and the other nation, subject to the house of Austrian in those
parts, (...) a surprising variety of people, differing in name, language, and
^^^ners, is because liberty here made its last stand against the Roman (...)
which they degrees forced the remains of the different nations they (...)
conquered into those quarters. The thickness of the woods, the ^^^pidity of the
rivers, and the strength of the country, favored their ^^^ance; and their
descendants notwithstanding the power of the (...) the Austrians, the
Hungarians, and the Poles, still retain the same ^^^rit of independency.
Without minding the arrangements made (...) the sovereigns of Europe, they are
quiet under the government (...) leaves them most at liberty. That they are
generous, as well as (...) appears from their attachment to the house of
Austria, which, (...) last two wars, never was sensible of their value and
valor; (...) that it is well known, that they preserved the pragmatic
sanction, (...) kept the imperial crown in that family. The Sclavonians (...)
gave so much work to the Roman arms, that it is thought the (...) slave took
its original from them, on account of the great number (...) them who were
carried into bondage, so late as the reign of ^^^magne. Though Sclavonia yields
neither in beauty nor fertili^^ Hungary and Transylvania, yet the ravages of
war are still (...) the face of the country, which lies in a great measure
unimproved (...). The Sclavonians are zealous Roman Cacholics, though Greeks
(...) Jews are tolerated. Here we meet with two bishoprics; that of ^^^ga,
which is the capital of the country, and Zagrab, which lies on the Drove; but
we know of no universities. Essek is a large and (...) town, remarkable, as
before noticed, for a wooden bridge over the Drove, and adjoining marshes five
miles long, and fifteen paces (...), built by the Turks. Wa^adin and
Peterwaradin are places noted in the wars between the Austrian and Turks. The
inhabitants are composed of Servians, Radzians, Croats, Walachians, Germans,
Hungarians, and a vast number of other people, whose names were (...) known
even to the Austrians themselves, but from the military (...) rolls, when they
poured their troops into the field during the two (...) wars. In 1746,
Sclavonia was united to Hungary, and the states (...) representatives to the
diet of Hungary.

Croatia lies between the 15th and 17th degrees of east longitude and the 45th
and 47th of north latitude. It is 80 miles in length, and 70 in breadth, and
contains about 2,500 square miles. The (...) government, religion, language,
and customs of the Croats, are similar (...) those of the Sclavonians and
Transylvania, who are their neighbors. They are excellent irregular troops and
as such are famed in (...) history, under the name of Pandours, and various
other designation. The truth is, the house of Austria finds its interest in
suffering than and the neighboring nations to live in their own manner. Their
towns are blended with each other, there scarcely being any distin^^^^ of
boundaries. Carol^^adt is a place of some note, but Zagrab is the capital of
Croatia. All the sovereignty exercised over them by the Austrians seems to
consist in the military arrangements for (...) (...) occasionally into the
field. A viceroy presides over Croatia, joi^^ly with Sclavonia, and

(...) DALMATIA: This lies in the upper part of the Adriatio (...) and consists
of five districts, in which the most remarkable places (...) the two following:
Segna, which is a royal free town, fortified both by nature and by art, and is
situated near the sea, in a bleak, ^^^^tainous and barren soil. The bishop of
this place is a suffragan (...) the archbishop of Spalatro. Here are twelve
churches, and two (...). The governor resides in the old palace, called the
Royal (...). 2. Ottoschatz, a frontier fortification on the river Gatzka. (...)
part of the fortress where the governor, and the greatest part of garrison
reside, is surrounded with a wall, and some towers: But the rest of the
buildings, which are mean, are erected on piles in the (...); so that one
neighbor cannot visit another without a boat.

^ear Segna dwell the Uscocs, a people, who being galled by op^^^^, escaped out
of Dalmatia, from whence they obtained the (...) of Uscocs, from the word
Scoco, which signifies a deserter. They (...) also called springers, or
leapers, from the agility with which they (...) rather than walk, along this
rugged and mountainous country, (...) of them live in scattered houses, and
others in large villages. They are a rough, savage people, large bodied,
courageous, and given (...); but their visible employment is grazing. They use
the Walachian language, and in their religious sentiments and mode of ^^^ship
approach nearest to the Greek church; but some of them are (...) Catholics.

A part of Walachia belongs also to the emperor, as well as to the Turks, which
lies to the east of Transylvania, and its principal towns (...) Tregonitz,
Bucharest, and Scverin.

POLAND, INCLUDING LITHUANIA.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 700 Miles. between Degrees. 16 and 34 east longitude. Breadth 680
Miles. Degrees. 46 30 and 57 35 north latitude.

BOUNDARIES.] BEFORE the late extraordinary partition of this country, the
kingdom of Poland, with the great ^^chy of Lithuania annexed (anciently called
Sarmatia) was bounded on the North by Livonia, Muscovy, and the Baltic sea; on
the east by Muscovy; on the South by Hungary, Turkey, and Little Tartary; on
the West by Germany: And had the form of its government been as (...) as its
situation was compact, it might have been probably one of the most powerful
kingdoms in the world. Its grand divisions are (...) in the following Table.

TABLE
Extent and Divisions. Square Miles. Population. Populat. for ev. sq. mile.
Chief Towns and Number of Inhabitants. 46 30 -- 57 30 latitude. 160,800
8,350,000 B. 16 -- 34 east longitude. 8,500,000 medium 53 230 Towns 9,000,000
C. A. Kingdom of POLAND 137,600 155 Towns a. Great Poland, divided into 12
Districts called Woldwodships. Warsaw, 50,000 inhabitants (8,000 Dissidents B.)
Posen, 4,650 Fraustadt, 4,000 Gnesen, b. Little Poland, divided into 563 houses
B. 1. Three Woidwodships Krakow, 18 -- 20,000 with the suburbs B. 2. Polachia,
properly Podlachin, divided into 3 Counties Sandonicerz, 2,060 3. Chelm, the
remaining part of Red Russia Lubbin, 26,614 4. Podolia and Bratzsaw Chelm, 875
5. Kow Koresk, 2,000 6. Volhynia Kaminiek, 1,120 B. B. Great Duchy of LITHUANIA
23,000 1. Lithuania, properly divided into two Woidwodships Wilna, 20,925 White
Russia, only a Woidwodships remaining after the partition Grodno, 2,400 Black
Russia, divided into 3 districts Kowno, 2,250 4. (...) (...), 2,790 5. (...)
(...)

The following states are also generally considered as belonging to Poland,
notwithstanding they are not its subjects.

1. The Republic of Danzig, 33 villages. The town contains about ^^,000
inhabitants.

2. The Republic of Thorn, 42 villages, almost all under the sovereignty of
Prussia. The town contains 20,000 inhabitants.

3. The Duchy of Courland and Semgallen.

Square Miles. Population Population for every square mile. Towns. ^. C^rlandia
^. Semgallen 4,112 300,000 73 Goldingen Liebau Mitau, the residence, has 11,000
inhabit.

There are in Poland 2,377 villages Noblemen's estates 22,032 Abbeys 37
Convents of Monks 579 -- Nuns 86 Houses in general 1,674,328 Peasants 1,243,000
Jews 500,000

CLIMATE.] The air of Poland is such as may be expected from so ^^^^sive but
level a country. In the north parts it is cold, but wealthy. The Carpathian
mountains, which separate Poland from Hungry, are covered with everlasting
snow, which has been known (...) in the midst of summer. Upon the whole,
however, the climate in Poland is temperate, and far from being so unsettled,
either in winter or summer, as might be supposed from so northerly a situation,
but (...) is rather insalubrious by reason of the numerous woods and ^^^^sses.

SOIL, PRODUCE AND WATERS.] Poland is in general a level country, and the soil
is fertile in corn, as appears from the vast quantities (...) are sent from
thence down the Vistula, to Dantzic, and which are ^^ght up by the Dutch, and
other nations. The pastures of Poland, ^^pecially in Podolia, are rich beyond
expression: and it is said one (...) hardly see the cattle that graze in the
meadows. Here are mines (...) silver, copper, iron, salt and coals. Lithuania
abounds in iron (...) black agate, several species of copper and iron pyrites,
and red (...) gray granite; false precious stones, and marine petrefactions.
The (...) parts of Poland contain forests, which furnish timber in such (...)
quantities, that it is employed in house building, instead of (...) stone, and
tiles. Various kinds of fruits and herbs, and some (...) are produced in
Poland, and are excellent when they meet ^^lture but their wine seldom or never
comes to perfection, (...) produces various kinds of clays fit for pipes and
earthen ware. The water of many springs is boiled into salt. The virtues of a
spring in the palatinate of Cracow, which increases and decreases with the
moon, are said to be wonderful for the preservation of life; and it is
reported, that the neighboring inhabitants commonly live to (...) some of them
150 years of age. This spring is inflammable, and by applying a torch to it, it
flames like the subtlest spirit of wine. The flame however dances on the
surface, without heating the water; and if neglected to be extinguished, which
is easily effected, it ^^^^^^cates itself, by subterraneous conduits, to the
roots of trees, in a ^^^^^bouring wood, which it consumes; and about 35 years
ago, the (...) are said to have lasted for three years, before they could be
(...) extinguished.

RIVERS.] The chief rivers of Poland are, the Vistula or (...) the Neister,
Neiper or Boristhenes, the Bog, and the Dwina.

LAKES.] The chief of the few lakes contained in Poland, is (...) in the
palatinate of Byzesty; and Birals, or the White Lake, (...) is said to dye
those who wash in it of a swarthy complexion.

ANIMAL PRODUCTIONS.] The forests of Warsovia or (...) contain plenty of uri,
or buffaloes, whose flesh the Poles (...) and esteem it an excellent dish.
Horses, wolves, boars, the (...) lynx, elks, and deer, all of them wild, are
common in the (...) forests; and there is a species of wild horses and asses,
(...) oxcn, that the nobility of the Ukraine, as well as native, (...) fond of.
A kind of wolf, resembling a heart, with spots on his (...) and legs, is found
here, and affords the best furs in the (...) but the elk which is common in
Poland, as well as in some (...) northern countries, is a very extraordinary
animal. The (...) the Polish elk forms the most delicious part of their
greatest (...) His body is of the deer make, but much thicker and longer; (...)
legs high, the feet broad and cloven, the horns large, rough (...) broad, like
a wild goat's. Naturalists have observed, that upon ^^secting an elk, there was
found in its head some large flies, (...) brains almost eaten away; and it is
an observation sufficiently (...) that in the large woods, and wildernesses of
the North, this ^^^^mal is attacked, toward the winter chiefly, by a larger
fort of (...) that, through its ears, attempt to take up their winter, quarter
in head^. This persecution is thought to affect the elk with the (...)
sickness, by which means it is taken, which would otherwise (...) easy matter.

Poland produces a creature called bohac: It resembles a (...) but seems to be
of the beaver kind. They are noted for digging (...) in the ground, which they
enter in October, and do not come ^^^^cept occasionally for food, till April:
They have separate (...) for their provisions, lodgings, and their dead; they
live together 10 or 12 in a herd. Lithuania is rich in ornitholygy; (...) birds
of prey are the eagle and vulture. The remix, or little (...) of titmouse, is
frequently found in these parts, famous for ^^^^drous structure of its pendent
nest, formed in the shape of a (...) with amazing art.

The Poles, in their persons, make a noble appearance; (...) ^^^plexion is
fair, and their shapes are well proportioned. (...) brave, honest, and
hospitable: And their women sprightly, (...) and submissive to their husbands.
Their diversions are warlike and (...): vaulting, dancing, and riding the great
horse, hunting, skaiting, bull and bear baiting. They usually travel on
horseback.

The Poles before the late revolution, were divided into nobles, clergy,
citizens, and peasants: The peasants were divided into two sorts, (...) of the
crown, and those belonging to individuals.

WEALTH AND COMMERCE.] Poland has been considered as one of the weakest states
in Europe, on account of the oppression of the ^^^^people in the towns, and the
slavery of the peasantry. The cir^^^^^^ specie is valued at only 13 millions
and a half of German dol^^^^; and interest is still as high as from 7 to 10 per
cent. If the skill of the natives in agriculture bore any proportion to the
fertility of the soil, Poland must needs be one of the richest countries in the
world; for though a large part of it lies uncultivated, it exports no
inconsiderable quantity of corn: The forests and mines of Poland, if duly
attended to, and also its furs and cattle, might produce a very large sum.
There are few manufactures in this kingdom excepting those at Grodnew. Want of
industry and of freedom, have been the chief reasons (...) the balance of trade
has been so much against Poland. The ex^^^^ are corn, hemp, flax, horses, some
of the them wild horses, cattle, (...) (about 100,000 oxen every year) peltry,
timber, metals, manna, wax, (...), and some other less considerably articles:
The value of them, (...) year 1777, amounted to nearly 30 millions of dollars:
The im^^^^ consisting chiefly in wine, cloth, silk, hardware, gold, silver,
(...) and West India goods, were supposed to amount to no less than (...)
millions of dollars.

LEARNING AND LEARNED MEN.] Though Copernicus, the great (...) of the true
astronomical systems. Vorstius, and some other (...) men, were natives of
Poland, yet its soil is far from being favorable to learning. Latin is spoken,
though incorrectly, by the common people in some provinces. But the contempt
which the nobility, who heretofore placed their chief importance in the
privileges of their (...) have ever shown for learning; the servitude of the
lower people, and the universal superstition among all ranks of men, these
circumstances have greatly retarded the progress of letters in this kingdom. --
However, of late, a taste for science has spread itself among the nobles,
(...) begins to be regarded as an accomplishment.

UNIVERSITIES.] The universities of Poland are those of Cracow, (...) and Posna
or Posen. The first consists of eleven colleges, and (...) the supervisorship
of 14 grammar schools dispersed through the (...) the number of students in
1778, amounted to 600. Wilna was (...) the superintendance of the Jesuits, but
since their suppression (...) king has established a committee of education,
who appoint pro^^^^^ and direct their salaries and studies: That of Posna was
rather (...) college than an university.

ANTIQUITIES AND CURIOSITIES, NATURAL AND ARTIFICIAL.] The frequent incursions
of the Tartars, and other barbari^^^ nations, into Poland, probably forced the
women sometimes to (...) their children exposed in the woods, where we must
suppose (...) were nursed by bears and other wild beasts, otherwise it is
difficult (...) for their subsistence. It is certain that such beings have
(...) found in the woods both of Poland and Germany, divested of almost all the
properties of humanity but the form. When taken, they generally went on
all-fours; but it is said that some of them have, by proper management,
attained to the use of speech.

The salt mines of Poland consist of wonderful caverns, several hundred yards
deep, at the bottom of which are many intricate windings and labyrinths. Out of
these are dug four different kinds of salt; (...) extremely hard, like crystal;
another softer, but clearer; a third (...), but brittle; these are all
brackish; but the fourth is somewhat (...). These four kinds are dug in
different mines, near the city Cracow; on one side of them is a stream of
salt water, and on the other, one of (...). The revenue arising from those, and
other salt mines, is very considerable, and formed part of the royal revenue
before seized by Aus^^^^; the annual average profit of those of Wiclit^ka,
eight miles from C^^cow was about 98,000l. sterling. Out of some mines at Itza,
about 70 miles north-east of Cracow, are dug several kinds of earth, which are
excellently adapted to the potter's use, and supply all Poland with earthen
were. Under the mountains adjoining to Kiow, in the de^^^^ of Podolia are
several grottos, where a great number of human bodies are preserved, though
buried a great number of years since, being ^^ither so hard nor so black as the
Egyptian mummies. Among them (...) two princes, in the habits they used to
wear. It is thought that this preserving quality is owing to the nature of the
soil, which is dry and sandy. Poland can boast of few antiquities, as old
Sarmatia was never perfectly known to the Romans themselves. Its artificial
rarities are but few, the chief being the gold, silver, and enamelled vessels,
presented by the kings and prelates of Poland, and preserved in the cathed^^ of
Gnesna.

CITIES, TOWNS, ^ORIS, AND OTHER EDIFICES, PUBLIC AND PRIVATE.] Warsaw lies on
the Vistula, and almost in the center of Poland. It is the royal residence; and
contains many magnificent places and other buildings, besides churches and
convents. It contains about 50,000 inhabitants, some say more, among whom is a
great number of foreigners. The streets are spacious but ill paved, and the
greatest part of the houses, particularly in the suburbs, are mean wooden
hovels. The city exhibits a strong contract of wealth and poverty, as did every
part of this (till the late happy revolutions in favor of liberty) unhappy and
oppressed country. It has little or no commerce. The same may be said of
Cracow, which is the capital (though that honor is disputed by Warsaw); for we
are told, that notwithstanding it lies in the neighborhood of the rich
salt-mines, and is said to contain fifty churches and convents, its commerce is
inconsiderable. The city stands in an extensive plain, watered by the vistula,
and with the suburbs occupies a vast space of ground, but all together contains
no more than 18 or 20,000 souls. It is surrounded with high brick walls,
strengthened with round and square towers in the ancient style of
fortification, and is garrisoned with 600 Russians. (...) though not the
capital, is the principal town in Lithuania, but a (...) and straggling place,
containing ruined palaces, falling houses, and wretched hovels, with about
2,200 inhabitants. [Zimmerma^^.] -- (Guthrie says 7,000.) A large proportion of
these are employed in new manufactures of cloths, camblets, linen, cotton,
silk, stuffs, etc. established there by the king in 1776. He has also
established in this place, an academy of physic for Lithuania, in which 10
students are instructed for physic, and so for surgery, all taught and
maintained at his own expense.

Dantzic is the capital of Polish Prussia, and is famous in history on many
accounts, particularly that of its being formerly at the head of the Hanseatic
association, commonly called the Hanse-towns. It is situated on the Vistula,
near five miles from the Baltic, and is a large, beautiful, populous city; its
houses generally are five stories high; and many of its streets are planted
with chesnut-trees. It has a fine harbor, and is still a most eminent
commercial city, although it seems to be some what past its meridian glory,
which was probably about the time that the president de Thou wrote his much
esteemed Historia (...) Temporis. wherein, under the year 1607, he so highly
celebrated its commerce and grandeur. It is a republic, claiming a small
adjacent territory about forty miles round it, which were under the protection
of the king and the republic of Poland. Its magistracy, and the majority of its
inhabitants, are Lutherans; although the Romanists and Calvinists are equally
tolerated in it. It is rich, and has 26 parishes, with many convents and
hospitals. The inhabitants have been computed to amount to 200,000; but later
computations fall very considerably short of it; as appears by its annual bill
of mortality, exhibited by Dr. Busching, who tells us, that in the year 1752,
there died but 1846 persons. Its own shipping is numerous; but the foreign
ships constantly resorting to it are more so, whereof 1014 arrived there in the
year 1752; in which year also 1288 Polish vessels came down the Vistula,
chiefly laden with corn, for its matchless grainaries; from whence that grain
is distributed to many foreign nations: Poland being justly deemed the greatest
magazine of corn in all Europe, and Dantzic the greatest port for distributing
it every where: Besides which, Dantzic exports great quantities of naval
stores, and a vast variety of other articles. Dr. Busching, affirms, that it
appears from ancient records, as early as the year ^^7, that Dantzic was a
large commercial city, and not a village or inconsiderable town, as some
pretend.

The inhabitants of Dantzic have often changed their masters, and have
sometimes been under the protection of the English and Dutch; but generally
have shown a great predilection for the kingdom and republic of Poland, as
being less likely to rival them in their trade, or abridge them of their
immunities, which reach even to the privilege of coining money. Though strongly
fortified, and possessed of 150 large brass cannon, it could not, through its
situation, stand a regular (...), being surrounded with eminences. In 1734, the
inhabitants discovered a remarkable attachment and fidelity toward Stanislaus,
king of Poland, not only, when his enemies, the Prussians, were at their gates,
but even in possession of the city.

The reason why Dantzic, Thorn, and Elbing, have enjoyed privileges, both civil
and religious, very different from those of the rest of ^^land, is, because not
being able to endure the tyranny of the Teu^^^ic knights, they put themselves
under the protection of Poland, reserving to themselves large and ample
privileges.

This city, as well as that of Thorn, were exempted by the king of Prussia from
those claims which he lately made on the neighboring countries;
notwithstanding which, his Prussian majesty, soon after, thought proper to
seize on the territories belonging to Dantzic, (...) pretense of their having
been formerly part of Polish Prussia. He (...) proceeded to possess himself of
the port-duties belonging to that (...) and erected a custom-house in the
harbor, where he laid ari^^^^^ and insupportable duties upon goods exported or
imported. To complete the system of oppression, custom-houses were erected at
the they gates of Dantzic, so that no persons should go in or out of the (...)
without being searched in the strictest manner. Such is the (...) which the
city of Dantzic has received from the king of Prussia, though few cities have
ever existed, which have been comprehended in, (...) many general and
particular treaties, and whose rights and liberties have been so frequently
secured and guaranteed by so many great powers, and by such a long and regular
succession of public acts, in that of Dantzic has been. In the year 1784, it
was blockaded by his troops, on various pretenses; by the interposition of the
(...) Russia, and of the king of Poland, they were withdrawn, and a ^^^^ciation
carried on by deputies at Warsaw; which was concluded in the 7th of September,
by which, if acceeded to by the citizens, (...) place and trade of the city are
to be restored to its former (...). The city of Thorn was also treated by the
king of Prussia in the same unjust and oppressive manner with that of Dantzic,
and is now (...) to his dominions.

ARMY.] In the year 1784, the Army of Poland consisted of 17,404 men.

A. Army of the Crown, or of Poland. General Staff 27 Cavalry 5,483 Infantry
7,762 13,272

B. Army of Lithuania. General Staff 26 Cavalry 2,425 Infantry 1,681 4,132

According to an act of the senate, in 1776, the crown army ought to amount to
13,409, and that of Lithuania to 4770 men. The whole military establishment is
subject to the regulations of the (...) permanent.

FINANCES.] The Revenue and Expenses on a medium of three year 1782 -- 1784 --
are as follows.

Revenue 3,193,635 German dollars. Expenses 2,825,453

Private chatuolle of the king, 1,333,000 florins.

The debts of Poland run high; the whole amount is (...) 130 million of
florins, of which only 1,144,000 florins were acknowledged by the diet, and
half a million of florins every year is appropriated to the payment of them.

RELIGION.] The established religion is the Roman Catholic (...) Protestants,
to whom the name of Dissidents is now confined, (...) ^^^erated. In former
times, the rights and numbers of the (...) were so great, that they claimed
equal authority with the Roman Catholics; and about 1573, both parties were
called dissidentes quoad re^^^^^^. Yet afterward, the Protestants suffered
very great oppression till after the late civil wars; their rights were, at
length, settled in 1778, by the interference of the neighboring powers.
Besides Calvinists and Lutherans, there are, in Poland, congregations of
Greeks, Unitarians and Arians, all of whom are now comprehended under the name
of Dissidents. In Poland, the power of the priests, and the authority of the
Pope, was lately very great. The Pope's nuncio had a very extensive
ecclesiastical jurisdiction. At the head of the Roman Catholic clergy is the
primate of Poland, who is archbishop of Gnesen: He styles himself a prince: He
had the first rank among the senators, and is legalus natus of the Holy Sec.
There were (1787) in Poland, 12 bishoprics, 37 abbeys, 579 convents of men,
and 86 of women. -- The knights of Malta, residing in Poland, belong likewise
to the clergy. The Lutheran church, is governed by a Presbytery, or
considerably of the Antistites of the church and the ministers: There are great
contests subsisting between the adherents of this church and the Catholics. --
The Calvinists have one senior general and three seniors, to whom the
government of their church is entrusted.

CONSTITUTION AND GOVERNMENT.] Whole volumes have been written upon this
subject. Before the last revolution, it differed little from an aristocracy;
hence Poland has been called a kingdom and commonwealth. The king was the head
of the republic, and was elected by the nobility and clergy in the plains of
Warsaw. They minority, the majority had no control over them, but to cut them
in pieces with their sabrcs, but if the minority were sufficiently strong, a
civil war ensued. Immediately after his election, he was to sign the pacta
conventa of the kingdom, by which he engaged to introduce no foreigners into
the army or government; so that in fact he was no more than president of the
senate, which war composed of the primate, the archbishop of Lemburg, fifteen
bishops, and 130 laymen, consisting of the great officers of state, the
Palatines, and Castellants.

The diets of Poland was ordinary and extraordinary: The former metonce in two,
and sometimes three years; the latter was summoned by the king upon critical
emergencies; but one dissenting voice rendered all their deliberations
ineffectual. But this form of government no longer exists in Poland. A glorious
revolution has lately been effected without bloodshed, and almost without
opposition, in favor of civil and religions liberty. Its commencement may be
dated from the 14th of April 1791, a day which will hereafter be memorable in
the annals of Poland. In the session of that day a law was unanimously passed
by the diet relative to cities and their inhabitants, which restores them to
their primitive rights, associates them with the legislative power, and will
serve as a basis for still more extensive regulations, to reduce the different
orders of citizens, to that relative equality, which constitutes the very soul
of a solid and just constitution. Upon this occasion, the plan of M.
Suchorzewskia, member from Kalish, was adopted. The substance of the principles
which have been decreed agreeable to this project, is, "To destroy the
difference of orders and classes; to grant liberty to all citizens, without
distinction; to restore Nobility to its true origin, that is, to the
prerogative of merit and virtue: But at the same time, to effect these
different changes by degrees, and with such precautions as will procure the
success of them." Poland may therefore date her restoration from that day; for,
with such principles as these, uniformly followed up, she will become powerful
from her external strength, and will be truly independent.

When the National Assembly of France reduced the Nobility to an equality with
the citizens, the greater number of its members consisted of the Tiers (...);
but when Poland raised her citizens to that equality, the diet consisted of
Nobility only. And yet there was no division within doors, nor commotion
without. Eloquent and persuasive as the king is on all occasions, on this he
seemed to out do himself. The subject touched his heart; he spoke with an
uncommon degree of fire and enthusiasm, and his hearers caught the flame.

Count Malachowsky and Prince Sapaicha, marshals of the diet, (...)
particularly animated and happy in the arrangement and solidity of their
arguments. Prince Adam Czartoryski Wawrzecki, and ^^^cewicz, members for
Livonia, also distinguished themselves in a remarkable manner: "None of us,"
said this last gentlemen, speaking of the exclusion of all such as are not
Nobles, from offices of trust and honors, "knows who were the ancestors, or
what was the religion of WASHINGTON and FRANKLIN; but all of us know what
important services these illustrious characters rendered to their country. Let
not, therefore, the modesty of citizens prescribe limits to our generosity. Let
us not ask, nor look into old papers to ascertain, what they have a right to
demand; but let us grant them, out of our own free accord, all that the welfare
of our own country requires that they should possess."

The new constitution for substance is as follows.

1. The Catholic Religion shall be the governing religion of the States, and
the king shall profess it. But all other forms of worship shall be admitted,
and a general toleration, civil and religious, shall be a fundamental law of
the kingdom.

2. The ancient privileges and rights of the noblesse are approved and
confirmed.

3. At the same time all the rights and privileges of the people asserted,
renewed or granted to them during the present diet, are equally ratified and
confirmed.

4. All strangers who arrive and settle in Poland, shall enjoy full and entire
liberty.

5. The peasantry are taken under the protection of the laws and of government.
They are relieved from all arbitrary impositions, and do not depend henceforth,
in what regards their rights and labors, only on the contracts which they
shall make with their seigniors. All foreign laborers are free to enter and
settle in Poland, or to depart, fulfiling only the obligations of the contracts
they may have made with the proprietors of the soil.

6. The government of Poland, shall be composed of three branches, or distinct
parts; the legislative power, the executive power, and the judicial power.

7. The legislative power belongs exclusively to the states assembled in the
diet, and composed of the two connected chambers, viz. the senate and the
chamber of Nuncios.

8. The king shall exercise the executive power with his council. This council
shall be composed of the primate and five ministers, who shall each have a
department. No order of the king can be put in execution unless it is signed by
the ministers, whose lives and fortunes shall be responsible to each diet for
the orders they shall sign. As soon at two thirds of the diet shall demand the
change of ministers, the king shall be bound to dismiss them, and to name
others in their place.

9. The election of king shall never fall hereafter on an individual. A whole
family shall be elected when the royal family shall be extinct

10. In case of the minority of the king, his tutelage and the regency, shall
be in the hands of the queen mother and the council, responsible to the diet.

11. The education of the King's children is confided in like manner.

12. The judicial power shall be fixed for each, palatinate, territory, and
district. The judges shall be elected at the dictines.

The following articles were afterward added to the new constitution, and have
received the unanimous sanction of the diet.

"No government, though it were the most perfect that can be imagined, can
subsist unless the executive power be enabled to act with the fullest energy.

Just and equitable laws are the foundation of national happiness. All the good
effects to be expected from them, must depend on their having been vigorously
executed.

Experience has taught us, that to a want of this executive energy; Poland owes
all its misfortunes.

For those reasons, after having insured liberty to the Polish nation, and
having made it independent; after having secured to it the right of making
laws, and of watching over the executive authority, and also of choosing all
public magistrates; we entrust the king, and his council, with the supreme
execution of the laws.

The executive power shall be under a strict obligation to superintend the
execution of the laws, and exemplar^ly to conform to them. It shall act in all
cases permitted by the law: In all such cases which require a superintendance,
execution, and even a coercive force. All magistrates are bound to obey it
implicitly; and by it they are liable to be punished for neglect of duty of
disobedience.

The executive power shall neither make laws nor explain them. I shall not
impose taxes, or lay contributions. It shall not contract debts, not make the
least alteration in the collection of the revenue, and finally, it shall
neither declare war, not make peace; nor make any treaties with other powers.
It shall only be enabled to have a temporary correspondence with foreign
courts, so far as the safety and tranquillity of the state may require; and for
this it shall be accountable to the following legislature."

The king declared that the constitution had been, formed out of the English
and American forms of government.

REMARKABLE EVENTS.] During the years 1760, 1770, and 1771, confusion,
devastation, and civil war, raged in Poland, by which they whole face of the
country was almost destroyed; many of the principal Polish families retired
into foreign states with their effects; and had it not been for a body of
Russian troops which acted as (...) (...) the king at Warsaw, that city had
likewise exhibited a scene of plunder and massacre. To these complicated evils,
were added, in the year 1770, that most dreadful scourge the pestilence, which
spread from (...) frontiers of Turkey, to the adjoining provinces of Podolia,
Volhinia (...) the Ukraine; and in these provinces it is said to have swept off
250,000 of the people. Meanwhile, some of the Polish confederates inter^^^^
with the Turks to assist them against their powerful oppressors; (...) war
ensued between the Russians and the Turks on account of Poland. But it has been
observed, that the conduct of the Grand Signi^^ (...) of the Ottoman Port
toward the distressed Poles, were strictly (...) and honorable, and the very
reverse of that of their Christian, Catholic, and Apostolic neighbors.

In 1764, the empress of Russia transmitted to the court of (...) an act of
renunciation, singed with her own hand, and sealed with (...) seal of the
empire, wherein she declares, "That she did by no (...) arrogate either to
herself, her heirs and successors, or to her empire any right or claim to the
districts or territories, which were actually by possession, or subject to the
authority of the kingdom of Poland (...) great duchy of Lithuania; but that, on
the contrary, her said majesty would guarantee to the said kingdom of Poland
and duchy of Lithuan^^ all the immunities, lands, territories, and districts,
which the said kingdom and duchy ought by right to possess, or did now actually
possess and would at all times, and for ever, maintain them in full and (...)
enjoyment thereof, against the attempts of all and every one who should at any
time, or on any pretext, endeavor to dispossess then of the same," In the same
year did the king of Prussia sign, with his own hand, an act, wherein he
declared, that he had no claims, (...) no pretensions on Poland, or any part
thereof: That he renounced all claims on that kingdom, either as king of
Prussia, elector of Brandenburg, or duke of Pomerania," In the same instrument
he guarantees, in the most solemn manner, the territories and rights of Poland
against every power whatever. The empress-queen of Hungary, so late as the
month of January 1771, wrote a letter with her-own hand to the king of Poland,
in which she gave him the strongest assurances. "That her friendship for him
and the republic was firm and una^^^^ble: That the motion of her troops ought
not to alarm him: That (...) had never entertained a thought of seizing any
part of his dominions, nor would even suffer any other power to do it." From
which, according to the political creed of princes, we may infer, that to
guarantee the rights, liberties, and revenues of a state, means to anni^^^
those liberties, seize upon those rights, and appropriate those reven^^^^ to
then own use. Such is the faith of princes, the instability of human polities,
and of human affairs.

On September 3d, 1791, an attempt was made by Kozinski, an officer among the
Polish confederates, and several others, to assassinate the king of Poland, in
the streets of Warsaw. His majesty receive two wounds on his head, one from a
ball, and the other from a (...) notwithstanding which he had the good fortune
to escape with (...) by Kozinski's relenting, for which his own life was saved,
and he now resides in the papal teritories, with an annual pension (...) the
king. Pulaski, another of the conspirators, distinguished himself in the
American service, and was killed in attacking the British lines at Savannah, in
1779.

The following year, 1772, it appeared, that the king of Prussia, the (...) and
empress-queen, and the empress of Russia, had entered into an alliance to
divide and dismember the kingdom of Poland: though Prussia was formerly in a
state of vassalage to Poland, and the those of king of Prussia was never
acknowledged by the Poles till 1764. Prussia in the beginning of the 17th
century saw its capital and throne possessed by the Poles, while Austria in
1683 was indebted to a king of (...) for the preservation of its metropolis,
and almost for its very ^^^ence. The three allied powers, acting in concert,
set up their for^^al pretensions to the respective districts which they had
allotted for and guaranteed to each other: Polish, or Western Prussia, and some
districts bordering upon Brandenburgh, for the king of Prussia; almost all of
the south-east parts of the kingdom bordering upon Hungary, together with the
rich salt-works of the crown, for the empress queen of Hungary and Bohemia; The
district claimed by Austria, was "all that tract of land lying on the right
side of the V^^^ula, from Silesia above Sandomir to the mouth of the San, and
from thence by (...); Zamoise, and Rubiessow, to the Bog; from the Bog along
the frontiers of Red (...) Zabras, on the borders of Vothinia and Podo^ia, and
from Zabras in a strait line to (...) (...), where it receives the Sbrytz,
taking in a part of Podolia, and then along the (...) separating Podolia from
Moldavia. This country is now incorporated with Aus^^^ under the appellation of
the kingdoms of Galicia and Lodomiria.
and a large district of country about Mo^^^^, upon the banks of the Dnieper,
for the empress of Russia. The Russia claims comprise Polish Livonia, that part
of the palatinate of Polo^sk to (...) of Duna -- the palatinates of Vi^eptk,
Micislaw and two portions of the palat^^^te of (...). This tract of land
(Polish Livonia excepted) is situated in White Russia, and (...) (...) one
third of Lithuania. It is now divided into the government of Polo^^k and (...)
of.
-- But though each of the powers pretended to have a legal title to the
^ortories which were allotted them respectively, and published man^^^ in
justification of the measures which they had taken, yet as they were conscious
that the fallacies by which they supported their pretensions were too gross to
impose upon mankind, they forced the (...) to call a new diet, and threatened
them, that if they did not consent unanimously to sign a treaty for the ceding
of those provinces as them respectively, the whole kingdom would by laid under
a military execution, and treated as a conquered state. In this extremity of
^^stress several of the Polish nobility protested against this violent act of
tyranny, and retired into foreign states, choosing rather to live in ^^ile, and
to have all their landed property confiscated, than be the instruments of
bringing their country to utter ruin; but the king of Poland was prevailed upon
to sign this act, and his example was followed by many of his subjects.

As to the king of Prussia, his conduct in Poland was the most tyran^^cal and
oppressive that can be conceived. It was in the year 1771 that his troops
entered into Great Poland, and during the space of that year be carried off
from that province, and its neighborhood, at a moderate computation, 12,000
families. On the 29th of October, in the same year, an edict was published by
his Prussian majesty, commonding every person, under the severest penalties,
and even corporal punishment, to take in payment for forage, provisions, corn,
horses, etc. the money offered by his troops and commissaries. This mone^^ was
either silver bearing the impression of Poland, and exactly want one-third of
its nominal value, or ducats struck in imitation of (...) ducats, seventeen per
cent, inferior to the real ducats of Holland. With this base money he bought up
corn and forage enough, not ^^ly to supply his army for two whole years, but to
stock magani^^^ in the country itself, where the inhabitants were forced to
(...) and re-purchase corn for their daily subsistence at an advanced (...),
and with good money, his commissaries refusing to take the (...) coin they had
paid. At the lowest calculation he gained, by (...) most wicked maneuver,
seven millions of dollars. Having ^^^ped the country of money and provisions,
his next attempt was to (...) it still more of its inhabitants. To people his
own dominions, at the expense of Poland, had been his great aim; for this
purpose he his upon a new contribution; every town and village was obliged to
^^^nish a certain number of marriageable girls; the parents to give as a
portion, a feather-bed, four pillows, a cow, two hogs, and three (...) in gold.
Some were bound hand and spot, and carried off as criminals. His exactions from
the abbeys, convents, cathedrals, and nobles, wen^ so heavy, and exceeded at
last their abilities so much, that their pri^sh abandoned their churches, and
the nobles their lands. These exactions continued with unabated rigor, from
the years 1771, to the aims the treaty of partition was declared, and
possession taken of the provinces usurped. From these proceedings it would
appear that his Prussian majesty knew no rights but his own; on pretentions but
those of Brandenburgh; no other rule of justice but his own pride and ^^^tion.

The violent dismemberment and partition of Poland The kingdom of Poland,
previous to its dismemberment, contained 14,000,000 inhabitants: At present
they are supposed not to contain 9,500,000; and of this different the Austrians
have acquired 2,500,^00 souls, by their surreptitious part of the (...) though
those now possessed by Russia are the moil extensive at territory.
has justly been considered as the first great beach in the modern political
system of Europe. The surprise of a town, the invasion of an insignificant
province, or the election of a prince, who had neither abilities to be feared,
nor virtues to be loved, would some years age have armed one half of Europe,
and called forth all the attention of the other. But the destruction of a great
kingdom, with the consequent derangement of power, dominion, and commerce, has
been beheld by the other na^^on of Europe with the most astonishing
indifference and unconcern. The courts of London, Paris, Stockholm, and
Copenhagen, remonstrated against the usurpations, but that was all. Poland was
forced to submit, and the partition was ratified by their diet, held under the
bribes and threats of the three powers. In the senate there was a majority of
six, but in the lower house, the assembly of nuncios, there was but one vote in
favor of the measure, 54 against 53. This is a very alarming circumstance, and
shows that a most important, though not happy change, has taken place in that
general system of policy, and arrangement of power and dominion, which had been
for some ages no object of unremitting attention with most of the states of
Europe. Former kings might, perhaps, on some occasions, discover rather (...)
anxiety about preserving the balance of power in Europe than was (...): but it
has been well remarked, that the idea of considering Europe as a vast
commonwealth, of the several parts being distinct and separate, though
politically and commercially united, of keeping them Independent, though
unequal in power, and of preventing any one, by any means, from becoming too
powerful for the rest, was great and (...), and, though the result of
barbarism, was sounded upon the most ^nlarged principles of the wisest policy.

^^nistans Augustus, the present king of Poland, whose memory is (...) to all
lovers of liberty, by the late memorable Revolution, was been in 1732, and
crowned king of Poland in 1764. This prince, while a private nobleman, resided
some time in London, and is a follow of the Royal Society. Long may he live!

SWITZERLAND.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 260 Miles. between Degrees. 6 and 11 east longitude. Breadth 100 Miles.
Degrees. 46 and 48 north latitude.

BOUNDARIES.] IT is bounded by Alsace and Suabia, in Germany, on the North; by
the lake of Constance, Tirol, and T^^nt on the East; by Italy, on the South;
and by France, on the West.

DIVISIONS.] Switzerland is divided into thirteen cantons, which send in point
of precedence as follows: 1. Zurich; 2. Berne; 3; Lucerne; 4. Uri; 5. Schweitz;
6. Underwalden; 7. Zug; 8. Glaris; 9. Basil; 10. Fribourg; 11. Soleure; 12.
Schaffhausen; 13. App^nsel.

The best account we have of the dimensions and principal towns of each canton,
is as follows: Switzerland. Countires Names. Square Miles. Length. Breadth.
Chief Cities. Calvinists. Berne 2,346 111 87 Berne Zurich 728 34 33 Zurich
Schaffhausen 140 23 9 Schaffhausen Basil 240 21 18 BASIL 47-4^^^,7-40E^^^
Catholics. Lucerne 460 33 35 Lucerne Underwalden 270 23 16 Stantz Uri 612 48 21
Altorf Suisse 250 27 13 Suisse Fribourg 370 24 21 Fribourg Zug 112 18 10 Zug
Soleure 253 31 24 Soleure or Sol^th^^ Calvinists and Catholics. Appen^el 270 23
21 Appen^el Glaris 257 24 18 Glaris The subjects of the Swiss, Calvinists and
Catholics. Baden 216 26 12 Baden Bremgarten Bremgarten Mellingen Mellingen
Rheinthal 40 20 5 Rheineck Thurgau 119 18 11 Frowanfield Lugano 850 52 30
Lugano Locarno Locarno Mendris Mendris Maggia Magia Swiss Allies. Calvinists
Grisons 2,270 100 62 Coire Subjects of the Grisons. Calvinists and Cath.
Chiavnna 472 42 34 Chiavanna Bormio and Valteine 360 27 19 Sondrio Calvinists.
Tockenburg 168 27 8 Liechtensteg Geneva 160 13 11 Geneva Neufchatel 320 32 20
Neufchatel Catholics. Valais 1,287 80 30 Sion Basle 270 13 16 Delsperg St. Gall
144 20 10 St. Gall Mulhausen, in (...) is also united to (...) Total 12,884

AIR, CLIMATE, SOIL, AND FACE OF THE COUNTRY.} This being a mountainous
country, lying upon the Alps, (which form an amphitheater of more than 100
miles) the fresh on consequently bitter in winter, the hills being covered with
sometimes all the year. In summer the inequality of the soil readens the same
province very unequal in its seasons; on one side of those maintains the
inhabitants are often reaping, while they are sowing an (...) other. The
valleys, however, are warm and fruitful, and well ^^^^vated, and nothing can be
more delightful than the summer (...) this charming country. It is subject to
rains and tempests; for (...) ^^nson public granaries are every where erected
to supply the failure of their crops. The water of Switzerland is generally
excellent, and often descends from the mountains in large of small cataracts,
which have a delightful effect.

There is, perhaps, no country in the world wherein the advantageous effects of
unwearied and persevering industry are more remarkably ocaspicuous than in
Switzerland. In passing over the mountainous parts of it, the traveller is
struck with admiration, to observe rocks that were formerly barren, now planted
with vines, or abounding with rich pasture; and to mark the traces of the
plough along the sides of precipices so steep, that a horse could not even
ascend them without great difficulty. In short, the inhabitants seem to have
surmounted every obstruction which soil, situation, and climate had thrown in
their way, and to have spread fertility over various spots of the country,
which nature seemed to have consigned to everlasting ^^renness. The feet of the
mountains, and sometimes also the very summits, are covered with vineyards,
cornfields, meadows, and pasture-grounds. Other parts of this country are more
dreary, consisting almost entirely of barren and inaccessible rocks, some of
which are continually covered with snow or ice. The valleys, between these icy
and snowy mountains, appear like so many smooth frozen lakes, and from them
vast fragments of ice frequently fall down into the more fruitful spots
beneath. In some parts, there is a regular gradation from extreme wildness, to
high cultivation; in others the transitions me very abrupt, and very striking.
Sometimes a continued chain of cultivated mountains, richly clothed with wood,
and studded all over with hamlets cottages above the clouds, pastures, which
appear suspended in the air, exhibit the most delightful landscape that can be
conceived; and in other places appear rugged rocks, cataracts, and mountains of
a prodigious height, covered with ice and snow. In short, Switzerland abounds
with the most picturesque scenes; and here are to be sound some of the sublime
exhibitions of nature, in her most awful and tremendous forms.

RIVERS AND LAKES.] The chief rivers are the Rhine, which rises is the chain of
mountains bordering on St. Gothard, the Aar, the R^uss, the Tesin, the Oglio,
and the Rhone. The lakes are those of Geneva, Constance, Thun, Lucerne, Zurich,
Biel, and Brien.

METALS AND MINDRALS.] The mountains contain mines of iron, crystal, virgin
sulphur, and springs of mineral waters.

VIGETABLE AND ANIMAL PRODUCTIONS.] Switzerland produces sheep and cattle,
wine, wheat, barley, oats, rye, flax, and hemp; plenty of apples, pears, nuts,
cherries, plums, and chestnuts; the parts toward ^^ly abound in peaches,
almonds, figs, citrons, and pomegrantes; and must of the cantons abound in
timber. Besides game, fish, and fowl, any also found, in some of the higher and
more inaccessible parts of the Alps, the bouquetin and the chamois; whose
activity in scouring along the steep and craggy rocks, and in leaping over the
precipices, ^^^irdly conceivable. The blood of both these animals is of so hot
^^^ature, that the inhabitants of some of these mountains, who are why subject
to pleurisies, take a few drops of it, mixed with water, (in remedy for that
disorder. The flesh of the chamois is esteemed (...) delicious. Among the Alps
is likewise found a species of hares, which in summer is said perfectly to
resemble other hares, but in winter becomes all over white, so that they are
scarcely distinguishable among the snow. But this idea has been lately
exploded, not is it certain whether the two species ever couple together. The
white hare seld^^ quits his rocky residence. Here are also yellow and white
(...) which in winter sometimes come down into the valleys.

POPULATION, INHABITANTS, MANNERS, CUSTOMS, AND DIVERSIONS.} According to the
(...) accounts, the cantana^^ Switzerland contain about 2,000,000 of
inhabitants, who are a brave hardy, industrious people, remarkable for their
fidelity, and their (...) attachment to the liberties of their country. Like
the old Roman they are equally inured to arms and agriculture. A general
simpli^^^ of manners, an open and unaffected frankness, together with an (...)
spirit of freedom, are the most distinguishing characteristicks of the
inhabitants of Switzerland. They are in general a very enlightened nation;
their common people are far more intelligent then the (...) rank of men in most
other countries; a taste for literature is very pu^^alent among those who are
in better circumstances, and even among many of the lowest rank; and a genuine
and unartful good breeding is very conspicuous in the Swiss gentry. On the
first entrance into this country, the traveller cannot but observe the air of
cont^^^ and satisfaction which appears in the countenances of the inhabitants.
The cleanliness of the houses, and of the people, is peculiarly strikings and
in all their manners, behavior, and dress, some strong out^^^^ may be traced,
which distinguish this happy people from the neighboring nations, who labor
under the oppressions of despotic government. Even the Swiss cottages convey
the liveliest image of cl^^^ness, ease, and simplicity, and cannot but strongly
impress upon (...) observer a most pleasing conviction of the peasant's
happiness. (...) some of the cantons, each cottage has its little territory,
consisting generally of the field or two of sine pasture ground, and frequently
skirted with trees, and well supplied with water. Sumptuary laws are in force
in most parts of Switzerland; and no dancing is allowed, except upon particular
occasions. Silk, lace and several other articles of luxury, are totally
prohibited in some of the cantons; and even the head-dresses of the ladies are
regulated. All games of hazard are also strictly prohibited; and in other
games, the party who loses above six florins, which is about nine shillings of
our money, incurs a considerable sine. Their diversions, therefore, are chiefly
of the active and warlike kind; and as their time is not wasted in games of
chance, many of them employ part of their leisure hours in reading, to the
great improvement of their understandings. The youth are diligently traic^ed to
all the martial exercises, such as running, wrestling, throwing the hammer, and
shooting both with the cross bow and musket.

RELIGION.] Though all the Swiss cantons form but one political republic, yet
they are not united in religion, as the reader, in the (...) prefixed, may
perceive. Those differences in religion formerly (...) many republican
commotions, which seem now to have subsided^^ Zuinglius was the apostle of
protestantism in Switzerland. He (...) a moderate reformer, and differed from
Luther and Calvin only (...) few speculative points; so that Calvinism is said
to be the relig^^^^ the protestant Swisses. But this must be understood chiefly
(...) ^pect to the mode of church government; for in some doctrinal points they
are far from being universally Calvinistical. There is, however, we much
religious bigotry prevalent among them; and though they are ardently attached
to the interests of civil liberty, their sentiments on the subject of religious
toleration are, in general, much less liberal.

LANGUAGE.] Several languages prevail in Switzerland; but the most common is
German. The Swisses who border upon France speak a bastard French, as those
near Italy do a corrupted Latin or Indian.

LEAENING AND LEARNES MEN.] Calvin, whose name is so well ^^own in all
protestant countries, institused laws for the city of Generaly, which are held
in high esteem by the most learned of that country. The ingenious and eloquent,
but deistical J. J. Rousseau too, whose works the present age have received
with so much approbation, was a ^^tiaen of Geneva. Rousseau gave a force to the
French language, which it was thought incapable of receiving. In England he is
generally known as a prose-writer only, but the French admire him as a poet^^^
opera of Devin du Village in particular is much esteemed. M. ^^^net, and Mess.
de Saussure, De Luc, De Lolme, the Marquis Bec^^ia and Lavater, also deserve to
be mentioned with applause, and will be remembered till the Alps shall be no
more.

UNIVERSITIES.] The university of Basil, which was founded in 1459, has a very
curious physic-garden, which contains the choicest exotics; and adjoining to
the library, which contains some valuable manuscripts, is a Museum well
furnished with natural and artificial curiosities, and with a great number of
medals or paintings. In the cabinets of Erasmus and Amerbach, which also belong
to this university, there are no less than twenty original pieces of Holbein;
for one of which, representing the death of our blessed Savior, a thousand
ducats have been ostered. The other universities, which indeed are commonly
only styled colleges, are those of Bern, Lausanne, and Zurich.

ANTIQUITIES AND CURIOSITIES, NATURAL AND ARTIFICIAL.} Every district of a
canton in this mountainous country, presents the traveller with a natural
curiosity; sometimes in the shape of wild but beautiful prospects, interspersed
with lofty buildings, and wonderful hermitages, especially one, two leagues
from Friburg. -- This was formed by the hands of a single hermit, who labored
on it far 25 years, and was living in 1709. It is the greatest curiosity of the
kind perhaps in the world, as it contains a chapel, a parlour 28 paces in
length, 12 in breadth, and 20 feet in height, a cabinet, a kitchen, a cellar,
and other apartments, with the altar, benches, flooring, ceiling, all cut out
of the rock. At the famous pass of Pierre Pertuis, the road is carried through
a solid rock, near 50 feet thick, the height of the arch 26, and its breadth
25. The marcafites, false diamonds, and other stones, found in those mountains,
are justly ranked among the natural curiosities of the country. The ruins of
Caesar's wall, (...) extended 18 miles in length, from Mount Jura to the banks
of (...) Lemon, are still discernible. Many monuments of antiquity have (...)
discovered near the baths of Baden, which were known to the (...) in the time
of Tacitus. Switzerland boasts of many noble re^^^^ buildings, particularly a
college of jesuits; and many cabinets of valuable manuscrip's, antiques, and
curiosities of all kinds. New Rosiniere, is a famous spring which rises in the
midst of a natural before of 12 square feet: The force that acts upon it must
be prodigious; after a great shower of rain, it carries up a column of water as
thick as a man's thigh, nearly a foot above its surface. Its temperature never
varies; its surface is clear as crystal, and its depth unfathomable; probably
the end of some subterraneous lake, that bath here found an issue for its
waters.

CITIES.] Of these the most considerable is the city o Born, standing on the
river Aar. This city and canton, it is said, forms almost a third of the
Helvetic confederacy, and can, upon occasion, fit out 100,000 armed men. All
the other cities in Switzerland are except lently well provided with arsenals,
bridges, and public edifices. Basil is accounted by some the capital of all
Switzerland. It is situated in a fertile and delightful country, on the banks
of the Rhine, and the confines of Alsace and the empire. It contains two
hundred and twenty streets, and six marketplaces. The townhouse, which stands
on the river Birsec, is supported by very large pillars, and its great hall is
finely painted by the celebrated Hans Holbein, who was a native of this city.
The situation of Basil is pleasing: The Rhine divides it into the upper and
lower town, and it is considered as one of the keys of Switzerland. Baden is
famous for its antiquity and baths. Zurich is far less considerable than Bern,
but in the arsenal is shown the bow of the famous William Tell, and in the
library is a manufacturing of excellent letters, written by the unfortunate
Lady Jane Gray, to the judicious reformer Bullinger, in elegant Latin and
German.

To prevent a repetition, I shall here mention the city of Geneva, which is an
associate of Switzerland, and is under the protection of the Helvetic body, but
within itself is an independent state, and republic. The city is well built,
and well fortified, and contains 24,000 inhabitants, most of whom are
Calvinists. It is situated upon the afflux of the Rhone from the large fine
lake of Geneva. It is celebrated for the learning of the professors of its
university, and the good government of its colleges, the purity of its air, and
the politeness of its inhabitants. By its situation, it is a thoroughfare from
Germany, France, and Italy. It contains a number of fine manufactures and
artists; so that the protestants, especially such as are of a liberal turn,
esteem it a most delightful place. But the fermentation of their politics, and
particularly the usurpation of the Senate, bath divided the citizens into
parties, and the late struggle of Patricians and Plebeians had nearly ruined
all. The city is now under the protections of France, or rather its magistrates
and council, the partisans of aristocracy; many of its valuable citizens have
accordingly let the place, and sought refuge and protection in Ireland and
other parts.

COMMERCE AND MANUFACTCRES.] The productions of the (...) linen, dimity, lace,
stockings, handkerchiefs, ribands, silk, and painted cottons, and gloves, are
common in Switzerland, and the inhabitants are now beginning, notwithstanding
their sumptuary laws, to fabri^^ silks, velvets, and woollen manufactures.
Their great progress in these manufactures, and in agriculture, gives them a
prospect of being able soon to make considerable exports.

CONSTITUTION AND GOVERNMENT.] These are very complicated heads, though
belonging to the same body, being partly aristocra^^^, and partly democratical.
Every canton is absolute in its own jurisdiction, but those of Bern, Zurich,
and Lucerne, with other dependencies, are aristocratical, with a certain
mixture of democracy, Bern excepted. These of Uri, Schweitz, Underwald, Zug,
Glaris, and Appenzel, are democratical. Basil, though it has the appearance of
an aristocracy, ^^ther inclines to a democracy. But even those aristocracies
and democracies differ in their particular modes of government. However, in all
of them the real interests of the people appear to be much attended (...), and
they enjoy a degree of happiness not to be expected in de^^^tic governments.
Each canton has prudently reconciled itself to (...) errors of its neighbor,
and cemented, on the basis of affection, a (...) of mutual defense.

The confederacy, considered as a republic, comprehends three divisions. The
first are the Swisses, properly so called. The second are the Grisons, or the
states confederated with the Swisses, for their common protection. The third
are those prefectures, which, though subject to the other two, by purchase or
otherwise, prefer^e each its (...) particular magistrates. Every canton forms
within itself a little republic; but when any controversy arises that may
affect the whole confederacy, it is referred to the general diet, which fits at
Baden, where each canton having a vote, every question is decided by the
majority. The general diet consists of two deputies from each canton, besides a
deputy from the abbot of St. Gall, and the cities of St. Gall (...). It is
observed by Mr. Coxe, to whom the public have been ^^^^^ted for the best
account of Switzerland that has appeared, that there is no country in which
happiness and content more universally (...) among the people: For whether the
government be aristocratical, democratical, or mixed, a general spirit of
liberty pervades and actuates the several constitutions; so that even the
oligarchical states (which, of all others, are usually the most tyrannical) are
here peculiarly mild; and the property of the subject is securely guarded
against every kind of violation. A harmony is maintained by the concurrence of
their mutual felicity; and their sumptuary laws, and equal division of their
fortunes among their children, seem to ensure its continuance. There is no part
of Europe which contains, within the (...) extent of region, so many
independent commonwealths, and such a variety of different governments, as are
collected together in this remarkable and delightful country; and yet, with
such wisdom was the Helvetic union composed, and so little have the Swiss, of
late yours, been actuated by the spirit of conquest, that since the firm and
complete establishment of their general confederacy, they have scarcely over
had occasion to employ their arms against a foreign enemy; and have had no
hostile commotions among themselves, that were not very (...) happily
terminated.

REVENUES AND TAXES.] The variety of cantons that constitute the Swiss
confederacy, renders it difficult to give a precise account of their revenues.
Those of the canton of Bern are said to amount annually to 300,000 crowns, and
those of Zurich to 150,000; the other (...) in proportion to their produce and
manufactures. Whatever (...) (...), after defraying the necessary expenses of
government, is ^^id up as a common stock; and it has been said, that the
Swisses (...) possessed of 500,000l. sterling in the English funds, besides
those (...) other banks.

The revenues arise, 1. From the profits of the demesne lands; 2. The tenth of
the produce of all the lands in the country; 3. Customs and duties on
merchandise; 4. The revenues arising from the salt of salt, and some casual
taxes.

MILITARY STRENGTH.] The internal strength of the Swiss canton, independent of
the militia, consists of 13,400 men, raised according to the population and
abilities of each. The economy and wisdom (...) which this force is raised and
employed, are truly admirable, as (...) the arrangements which are made by the
general diet, for keeping (...) that great body of militia, from which foreign
states and princes (...) supplied, so as to benefit the state, without any
prejudice to its population. Every burgher, peasant, and subject, is obliged to
(...) himself in the use of arms; to appear on the stated days for shooting
(...) mark* to furnish himself with proper clothing, accoutrements, powder, and
ball; and to be always ready for the defense of his country. The Swiss engage
in the service of foreign princes and states, either merely as guards, or as
marching regiments. In the latter case, the government permits the enlisting
volunteers, though only for such states (...) they are in alliance with, or
with whom they have entered into a previous agreement on that article. But no
subject is to be forced into foreign service, or even to be enlisted without
the concurrence of the magistracy.

HISTORY.] The present Swisses and Grisons, as has been already mentioned, are
the descendants of the ancient Helvetii, subdued by Julius Caesar. Their
mountainous, uninviting situation, formed a better security for their
liberties, than their forts or armies; and the same (...) the case at present.
They continued long under little better than a nominal subjection to the
Burgundians and Germans, till about the year 1300, when the emperor Albert I.
treated them with so much rigor, that they petitioned him against the cruelty
of his governors. This served only to double the hardships of the people; and
one of Albert's Austrain governors, Gresler, in the wantonness of tyranny, set
up a hat upon a pole, to which he ordered the natives to pay as much respect as
to himself. One William Tell, being observed to pass frequently without taking
notice of the hat, and being an excellent marksman, the tyrant condemned him to
be hanged, unless he cl^ft an apple upon his son's head, at a certain distance,
with an arrow. Tell cleft the apple; and Gresler asking him the meaning of
another arrow he saw stuck in his belt, he bluntly answered, that it was
intended for his [Gersler's] heart, if he had killed his son. Tell was
condemned in prison upon this; but making his escape, he watched his
opportunity. and shot the tyrant, and thereby laid the foundations of the
Helevic liberty.

It appears, however, that before this event, the revolt of the Swiss from the
Austrain tyranny had been planned by some noble patriots among them. Their
measures were so just, and their course so intrepid, that they soon effected a
union of several cantons.

Zurich, driven by oppression, sought first an alliance with Lucerne, Uri,
Suisse, and Underwald, on the principles of mutual defense; and the frequent
successes of their arms against Albert, duke of Austria, insensibly formed the
grand Helvetic union. They first Conquered Glaris and Zug, and admitted them to
an equal participation of their rights. Berne united itself in 1353: Friburg
and Soleure, 130 years after; Basil and Scaffhausen, in 1501; and Appenzel in
1513, completed the confederacy, which repeatedly defeated the united powers of
France and Germany; till by the treaty of Westphalia in 1648, their confederacy
was declared to be a free and independent state.

Neufchatel, since the year 1707, has been under the dominion of the king of
Prussia, but the inhabitants are free to serve any prince whatever, and by no
means bound to take an active part in his wars. The king has the power of
recruiting among them, and of naming a governor, but the revenue he derives is
not above 5000l. yearly, great part of which is laid out on the roads and other
public works of the country. With regard to the military character, and great
actions of the Swisses, we refer the reader to the histories of Europe.

NETHERLANDS.
THE seventeen provinces, which are known by the name of the Netherlands, were
formerly part of Gallia Belgica, and afterward of the circle of Belgium or
Burgundy, in the German empire. They obtained the general name of Netherlands,
Pais-Bas, or Low Countries, from their situation in respect of Germany.

EXTENT, SITUATION, AND BOUNDARIES OF THE SEVENTEEN PROVINCES.

Length 360 between 49 and 54 North lat.

Breadth 260 between 2 and 7 East lon.

They are bounded by the German sea on the North: by Germany, East; by Lorrain
and France, South; and by the British Channel, West.

We shall, for the sake of perspicuity, and to avoid repetition, treat of the
seventeen provinces under two great divisions: First, the Northern, which
contains the seven United Provinces, usually known by the name of HOLLAND:
Secondly, the Southern, containing the Austrian, and French Netherlands.

DIVISIONS, POPULATION, etc. of the Seven United Provinces, are as in the
following Table.

Extent, Divisions, and Possessions. Areas in squ. miles. Population Population
for each single sq. mile. CHIEF TOWNS. 51. 20. -- 53. 30. Latitude 10,000
2,000,000 Pestel. 200 113 Towns -- 1400 Villages. 2 -- 7. East Longitude
2,758,632 according to a public acc. given in 1785. 272 1. Province of GRIDER.
Subdivided into the districts of Nimweguen, Zutphen, and Arnheim 1840 20 Towns
in all. inhabitants. Nimweguen 12,000 Nutphen Arnheim 8000 2. HOLLAND, Viz,
2000 980,000 Pestel. 490 Amsterdam 212,000 North Holland Rotterdam 50,000 South
Holland Hang or Hague 37,000 Westfriesland Leyden 48,000 Dordrecht 19,000
Haarlem 39,000 Delft 20,000 Alckmar 7,800 Horn 12,000 Gouda 17,000 3. ZEELAND.
480 85,000 177 37 Towns -- 400 Villages. 1. Part near the East Scheld 5 Towns
-- 110 Villages. 2. Part near the West -- Utrecht ^0,000 (...) (...)

Extent, Divisions, and Possessions. Areas in squ. miles. Population. (...) for
each single sq. mile. CHIEF TOWNS. 4. UTREOHT. 512 75,000 Busching. 144 Towns.
Inhabitants. 1. The towns Middleburg 24,000 2. The flat country Vlissingen
(Flushing) 8,000 ^i^kzee 10,500 5. FRIESLAND. 880 140,000 Busching. 159 11
Towns -- 306 Villages. 1. The towns Leuwarden 2. Ostfriesland Franeker 3.
Westergo 4. Zeven Wonden 6. OVERYESSEL. 1791 Deventer 1. Sallard Zwool 2. Twent
3. Vollenhoven 7. GROENINGEN. 640 100,000 156 Groeningen 1. Town of Groeningen
Delfzyl 2. Ommeland 3 Towns -- 165 Villages Country of Drenthe, Under the
protection of the United provinces K^eronden (Fortress) ^7 Villages Lands of
the Generality. (Generalyteits Landen) Commonly Called Dutch Brabant 2000
435,000 217 Boisle Due 12,000 Breda 9,500 Bergen op Zoom 6,500 Mastricht 18,060
Venloo Sluis Hulst 2500

POSSESSIONS.
1. IN ASIA.
1. THE coasts of the island of Java; the capital of which is ^^^via, the seat
of the governor-general of all the East Indian settlements of the Dutch. 2.
Some settlements on the coasts of Sumatra. 3. The greatest part of the Molucca
or Spice Islands, chiefly Amboyna, (...), Ternate, Tidor, Motyr, Bachian;
settlements or factories on the island of Celebes, etc. 4. On the coasts of
Malabar and Coromandel; S^^^patam, Bimlipatam. Tegapatam, Cochin, and
Canannore; factories Surat, Petra, etc. also in the gulf of Persia, at Gamron,
Baffora, (...). 5. On the island of Ceylon: The chief place is Colombo; they
(...) besides Trinconomale, Jafnapatam, Negambo, and a great number of lodges
or factories.

2. IN AFRICA.
1. The Cape of Good Hope, a large settlement, of which the Cape^^^^, with its
fortress, is the capital. There is also a French colony at (...) Cape, called
Nouvelle Rochelle. The governor of the Cape does (...) depend on the governor
of Batavia, but is under the immediate control of the states of Holland. 2.
George de la Mina, and other fortresses and factories in Guinea.

3. IN AMERICA.
1. The Islands of St. Eustatia, Saba, Curacoa. 2. The colonies of Essequibo,
Demerara, Surinam, and Berbice, on the continent of Guiana.



RIVERS AND HARBORS.] The rivers are an important consideration to the United
Provinces; the chief of which are the Rhine, (...) of the largest and finest
rivers in Europe; the Maese, the Scheld, and the Vecht. There are many small
rivers that join these, and a prodigious number of canals; but there are few
good harbors in the United Provinces; the best, are those of Rotterdam,
Helvoetsluys, and Flushing; that of Amsterdam, though one of the largest and
safest i^ Europe, has ab^^ at the entrance of it, over which large vessels
can^^ pass without being lightened.

WEALTH AND COMMERCE.] The Seven United Provinces afford a striking process
that unwearied and persevering industry is capable of conquering every
disadvantage of climate and situation. The air and the water any here nearly
equally bad: The soil produces naturally scarcely any thing but turf; and the
possession of this very (...) is disputed by the Ocean, who rising considerably
above the level of the land, can only be prevented by strong and expensive die
(...), from overflowing a spot which seems to be stolen from his natural
domains. Notwithstanding these difficulties, which might seem insurmountable to
a less laborious race of inhabitants, the infinite labors of the patient
Dutchmen have rendered this small, and seemingly is significant territory, in
fact, one of the richest spots in Europe, (...) with respect to population and
property. In other countries, which are possessed of a variety of natural
productions, we are not surprised to find manufactures employed in multiplying
the riches which the bounty of the soil bestows. But to see, in a country like
Holland, large woollen manufactures, where there are scarce any flocks;
numberless artists employed in metals, where there is no mine; thousands of
saw-mills, where there is scarce any forest; an immense quantity of corn,
exported from a country where there is not agriculture enough (...) support
one-half of its inhabitants, is what must strike every attentive observer with
admiration. Among the most valuable natural productions of the United
Netherlands, we may reckon their excellent cattle. Of vegetables they export
large quantities of madder, which i^ chiefly cultivated in the province of
Zeeland. The island of Schouwen produces annually 2,000,000 lb. Formerly,
England bought of this article to the value of almost 300,000l. sterling. The
most considerable revenue arises from the fisheries. Sir William Temple says,
that in his time, the Dutch fisheries yielded a clear profit of many millions
of florins. At present, however, some branches of the fisheries, for instance,
the whale fishery, are become so insignificant, that, in order to keep them up
in some degree, the states are obliged to allow a bounty of 30 florins for
every man employed in the whale fishery. This branch, which formerly employed
250 vessels, requires, at present (...) more than 100. The number of ships
formerly engaged in the ^^^ring fishery is reduced from upwards of 2000 to less
than 200. and the profits earned by them do not quite amount to one million of
florins. This fishery maintains, however, even now, no less than 20,000 people.
Cod, another important article of the fishery, is caught near the Dogger Bank,
and near the coast of Holland. About 140 vessels are employed in that branch.

The Dutch were formerly in possession of the coasting trade and ^^ight of
almost all other trading nations: They were also the bankers for all Europe:
advantages by which they have gained immense sums. Yet these advantages did not
continue to be so lucrative, when the other European nations began to open
their eyes so far as to employ their own shipping in their trade, and to
establish banks of their own. Notwithstanding these deductions, the Dutch trade
is still immense: In consequence of their vast wealth, they regulate still the
exchange for all Europe; and their country is, as it were, the universal
warehouse of the commodities of every quarter of the globe.

The trade of Holland extends to every country of the world; and, i^ some of
its branches, they have totally excluded their European competitors. To begin
with the countries of Europe, the trade of the Dutch to Russia is considerable:
They exported to Petersburg alone, in 1754, goods to the value of 420,000
rubles, besides what was sent to Archangel, Riga, etc. They imported goods from
Russia to the value of about 300,000 rubles. The exports of the Dutch to
Dantzick, the center of the Polish trade, amounted, in 1771, to upwards of five
millions of florins; their imports from Dantzick to 2,500,000 florins. A
considerable trade is carried on with Sweden and Denmark. The (...) trade in
the Baltic, if not equal to the English, is, at least, next (...) in
importance; yet, in proportion as the other European nations (...) endeavoring
to share in the profits of the trade to the Baltic sea, the profits of the
Dutch have naturally decreased. In the Atlantic Ocean, the Dutch trade is of
very great extent: From Portugal and Spain they draw ready money, but to
France, on the contrary, they pay a large balance of it. They supply Italy with
most European and Indian goods; their trade to the Levant, though at present on
the decline, is still very profitable. A particular board of the Levant trade
was erected in 1624. The good fortune of the Dutch, i^ rendering themselves the
exclusive masters of the spice-trade, and of very large territories in the
East India will enable them to support for a long while, a very extensive trade
in Europe. Their East India Company was erected in the year 1602, by uniting
several small ^^^ing societies into one, to whom the states granted the
privilege of an exclusive trade. The original capital did not exceed 6,459,840
(...), divided into shares of 3000 florins each: with this small sum they
formed settlements, and conquered several provinces in Asia, much larger than
the Seven United Provinces together. The Company is now divided into six
chambers of proprietors, established at A^^^^dam, Middleburg, Delft, Rotterdam,
Hoorn, and Enkhuizen, each of which is under the management of their own
directors, called Bewi^^hebbers. The Stadtholder is the first of the directors
of each chamber, and consequently the head of the East India Company. The
governor-general of the Dutch possessions in the East Indies, is appointed by
the Company, and residing at Batavia, is invested with very (...) powers: He is
president of the council of Batavia, called the (...) or Council of India.
Among the monopolies of the East India Company, the spice-trade, comprehending
the articles of cloves, mace nutmeg, cinnamon, etc. is the most valuable, and
forms a very great branch of the Asiatic as well as European commerce of
Holland: 750,000 lb. of cloves are annually fold in India, and 360,000 carried
to Europe: The Company pays on the spot only eight stivers per pound, but the
freight and other charges raise this price to 43 stivers and the Company sells
it at no less than 75 stivers. 250,000 lb ^f nutmeg, the produce of the island
of Banda, are sold in Europe, and 100,000 lb. in India: The prime cost is
somewhat more than one stiver per pound; including charges, the pounds stands
the Company i^ about 25 stivers, and is sold by the Company at upwards of 50
stivers west of the Cape of Good Hope, and at about 40 stivers east of it. Of
cinnamon, 200,000 lb. are sold in India, and 400,000 in Europe. -- The Java
coffee is the best we know of after that of Mecca i^ Arabia. Other great
branches of this trade are rice, cotton, pepper, etc. articles of great
importance, but not in the exclusive possession of the Dutch. The whole profits
of the trade of the East India Company is computed at 12,700,000 florins
annually; but this statement seems to fall short of the real produce: Yet, upon
the (...), the affairs of the East India Company are very much on the (...).
The Dutch have hitherto been the only European nation permitted (...) carry on
a direct trade to Japan: The profits of this trade, however have also declined,
and are supposed to amount, at present, to no (...) than 20,000 florins. The
West India Company is, by no (...) considerable as the East India Company. It
carries on a trade (...) the West Indies and to the Coast of Guinea; on the
latter chiefly (...) slaves. Distinct from this company are the two companies
(...) trade to Surinam and Berbice: The Scadtholder is the head of (...) these
trading companies.

The town of Amsterdam has more than one-half of the trade of Holland; and in
this celebrated center of immense commerce, a bank is established of that
species called a Giro-bank, of very great wealth and greater credit.

In Holland, the inland trade is very much facilitated by means of the numerous
canals, which cross the country in every direction. -- The number of
manufactures established in the United Provinces is astonishing. Saardam, for
instance, a village in North Holland, con^^^^ about 900 windmills, partly
corn-mills, partly saw and paper-mills, and mills for the making of white lead,
etc. In former times, the Dutch were the exclusive possessors of several
ingenious manufactures and arts; for instance, the refining of camphor and
borax, the cutting and polishing of diamonds, the refining of sugar, etc. but
at present these mysteries, very few of them excepted, are in the hands of many
other nations; to whose commercial ignorance and want of industry in former
times, the Dutch were indebted for immense gains, which have decreased with
their causes: Among the rest, the woollen manufactory has suffered a prodigious
decrease. From these facts it appears, that the Dutch trade is no longer in its
ancient flourishing state, to which, even if the frugality and industry of the
nation had not been diminished by too great wealth, the rivalship of other
nations, and the commercial knowledge of the age, will never suffer it to rise
again.

POPULATION, INHABITANTS, MANNERS, CUSTOMS, AND DIVERSIONS,} The Seven United
Provinces are perhaps the best peopled of any spot of the same extent in the
world. This will appear from the table which is prefixed.

The manners, habits, and even the minds of the Dutch (for so the inhabitants
of the United Provinces are called in general) seem to be formed by their
situation, and to arise from their natural wants. Their country which is
preserved by mounds and dykes, is a perpetual incentive to labor; and the
artificial drains with which it is every where intersected, must be kept in
perpetual repair. Even what may be called their natural commodities, their
butter and cheese, are produced by a constant attention to the laborious arts
of life. Their principal food they earn out of the sex, by their herring
fisheries; for they dispose of most of their valuable fishes to the English,
and other nations, for the sake of gain. The air and temperature of their
climate incline them no Phlegmatic, flow dispositions, both of body and mind.

Their tradesmen in general are reckoned honest in their dealings, and very
sparing of their words. Smoking tobacco is practiced by old and young of both
sexes; and as they are generally plodding upon ^^ys and means of getting money,
it is said no people are so unsociable.

In whatever relates to the management of pecuniary affairs, the Dutch are
certainly the most expert of any people; as to the knowledge of acquiring
wealth, they unite the no less necessary science of preserving it. It is a kind
of general rule for every man to spend less than his income, be that what it
will; not does it often enter into the (...) of this sagacious people, that the
common course of expenses should equal the revenue; and when this happens, they
think at least they have lived that year to know purpose; and the report of it
used to (...) a man among them, as much as any vicious or prodigal extrava^^^^
does in other countries. But this rigid frugality is not so universal among the
Dutch as it was formerly; for a greater degree of luxury and extravagance has
been introduced among them, as well as the other nations of Europe. Gaming is
likewise practiced by many of their ^^^ionable ladies, and some of them
discover more propensity to gall^^^^ than was known here in former times. No
country can vie with Holland in the number of those inhabitants, whose lot, if
not riches, is at least a comfortable sufficiency; and where fewer failures or
bankruptcies occur. Hence, in the midst of a world of taxes and contributions,
(...) as no other country does experience, they flourish and grow rich. From
this systematic spirit of regularity and moderation, joined to the most
obstinate perseverance, they succeeded in the stupendous (...) of draining
their country of those immense deluges of water, that (...) overflowed so large
a part of it during many ages, while at the (...) time they brought under their
subjection and command the rivers and seas that surround them, by dykes of
incredible thickness and strength and made them the principal bulwarks on which
they rely for the ^^^tection and safety of their territories against the danger
of an (...). This they have done by covering their frontiers and cities with
i^^^erable sluices; by means of which, at the shortest notice, the most (...)
inundations are let in, and they become in a few hours inacce^^^^. From that
frugality and perseverance, by which they have been (...) much characterised,
they were enabled, though laboring (...) the difficulties, not only to throw
off the Spanish yoke, (...) attack that powerful nation in the most tender
parts, by (...) her rich galleons, and forming new establishments in Africa,
and (...). East and West Indies, at the expense of Spain, and thereby beco^^^
from a despicable province, a most powerful and formidable (...). Equally
wonderful was the rise of their military and marine establishments,
maintaining, during their celebrated contention with (...) XIV. and Charles II,
of England, not less than 150,000 men, and (...) wards of 80 ships of the line.
But a spirit of frugality being ^^^less universal among them, the rich traders
and mechanics begin (...) approximate to the luxuries of English and French
dressing and ^^ing; and their nobility and high magistrates, who have retired
(...) trade, rival those of any other part of Europe in their table, buildings,
furniture and equipages.

The diversions of the Dutch differ not much from those of the ^^^glish, who
seem to have borrowed from them the neatness of (...) drinking-booths, skittle
and other grounds, and small pieces of (...) which form the amusements of the
middling ranks, not to (...) their hand-organs, and other musical inventions.
They are the (...) skitters upon the ice in the world. It is amazing to see the
crowds i^ a hard frost upon the ice, and the great dexterity both of men and
women in darting along, or rather flying, with inconceivable vol^^^

LANGUAGE.] The natural language of the United Provinces is (...) Dutch, which
is a corrupt dialect of the German; but the people (...) fashion speak English
and French.

LEARNING AND LEARNED MEN.] Erasmus and Grotius, who (...) both natives of this
country, stand at the head almost of learning itself, as Boerhaave does of
medicine. Hearlem disputes the inventing of printing with the Germans, and the
magistrates keep two copies of a book entitled Speculum Salvationis, printed by
Koster in 1440; (...) the most elegant editions of the classics came from the
Dutch presses of Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Utrecht, Leyden, and other towns. The
Dutch have excelled in controversial divinity, which insinuated itself so much
into the state, that before principles of universal toleration prevailed, it
had almost proved fatal to the government; witness the (...) disputes about
Arminianism, free will, predestination, and the like. Besides Boerhaave, they
have produced excellent writers, in all branches of medicine. Graevius and
Burman stand at the head of their numerous commentators upon the classics.

The scientific and literary state of Holland seems to be involved in the
decline of its political consequence. Its universities were former^^ (...) more
attractive and frequented, but their improvements have (...) kept pace with the
progress and the wants of the age. They are (...) number, at Leyden, Franeker,
Utrecht, Groeningen, and Har^^yck; and some of their regulations are deserving
of much praise. ^^^des the universities, there are several good schools in the
United provinces, among which the Academical Gymnasium, or Athenaeum of
Amsterdam, is entitled to particular notice. Many respectable sci^^^ societies
are established in Holland, and one at Batavia. The (...) libraries of the
universities were more celebrated while scarce (...) and manuscripts were held
in more general estimation, but in (...) and extent, they are not to be
compared with the great libraries (...) countries: Yet numerous private
libraries supply their defi^^cies, and facilitate the researches of the
studious. Public and pri^^^ collections of natural curiosities, antiquities,
paintings, etc. are (...) numerous in a country were the habit of collecting
has been ren^^^ general by the spirit of commerce.

ANTIQUITIES AND CURIOSITIES, NATURAL AND ARTIFICIAL.} The prodigious dykes,
some of which are said to be 17 else of thickness; mounds, and canals,
constructed by the Dutch, to pre^^^ their country from those dreadful
inundations by which it for^^^ suffered so much, are stupendous and hardly to
be equalled. -- (...) quarry near Ma^stricht, under a hill, is worked into a
kind ^^^^^raneous palace, supported by pillars twenty feet high. The (...) of
Amsterdam is perhaps the best building of that kind in (...): It stands upon
13,659 large piles, driven into the ground; (...) inside is equally convenient
and magnificent. Several mu^^^, containing antiquities and curiosities,
artificial and natural, are (...) found in Holland and the other provinces,
particularly in the (...) of Leyden; such as the effigies of a peasant of
Russia, who (...) a knife ten inches in length, and is said to have lived eight
(...) it was cut out of his stomach; but the truth of this seems (...)
doubtful. A shirt made of the entrails of a man. Two Egyp^^ (...) being the
bodies of two princes of great antiquity. All (...) and tendons of the human
body, curiously set up, by pro^^^talpert Vander-Well.

(...) TOWNS, AND OTHER EDI^^^, PUBLIC AND PRIVATE.} Amsterdam, which is built
upon piles of wood, is thought (...) (...) to London, the most commercial city
in the world. Its (...) and the grandeur of its public works. (...). In this,
and all (...) of the (...) provinces, the (...) of the canals, and (...) trees
planted on their borders, are admirable; but above all, we are (...) with the
neatness and cleanliness that is every where observed with^^ doors. This city,
however, labors under two great disadvantages* bad air, and the want of fresh
wholesome water, which obliges the inhabitants to preserve the rain water in
reservoirs. Rotterdam is next to Amsterdam for commerce and wealth. The Hague,
though but a village, is the seat of government in the United Provinces, and is
celebrated for the magnificence and beauty of its buildings, the re^^^t of
foreign ambassadors and strangers of all distinctions who live in it, the
abundance and cheapness of its provisions, and the politeness of its
inhabitants. It is no place of trade, but it has been for many years ^^^ed as
an emporium of pleasure and politics. Leyden and Utrecht (...) fine cities, as
well as famous for their universities. Saardam, though a wealthy trading place,
is mentioned here as the workshop where ^^^ter the Great of Muscovy, in person,
served his apprenticeship to (...) building, and labored, as a common
handicraft. The upper part of Gelderland is subject to Prussia, and the capital
city Gelder.

INLAND NAVIGATION, CANALS, AND MANNER OF TRAVELING.} The usual way of passing
from town to town is by covered boats, called treckscuits, which are dragged
along the canals by horses, on a slow uniform trot, so that passengers reach
the different towns where they are to stop, precisely at the appointed instant
of time. This method of traveling, though to strangers rather (...) is
extremely convenient to the inhabitants, and very cheap. By means of these
canals, an extensive inland commerce is not only ^^^ried on through the whole
country, but as they communicate with the Rhine and other large rivers, the
productions of the whole earth are conveyed, at a small expense, into various
parts of Germany, and the Austrian and French Netherlands. A treckscuit is
divided into (...) different apartments, called the roof and the ruim; the
first for gentlemen, and the other for common people, who may read, smoke,
(...), drink, or converse with people of various nations, dresses, and
languages. Near Amsterdam and other large cities, a traveller is astonished
when he beholds the effects of an extensive and flourishing commerce. Here the
canals are lined for miles together with elegant, neat, country-houses, seated
in the midst of gardens and pleasure grounds intermixed with figures, busts,
statues, temples, etc. to the v^ry water's edge. Having no objects of amusement
beyond the limits of their own gardens, the families in fine weather spend much
of their time in these little temples, smoking, reading or viewing the
passengers, to whom they appear complaisant and polite.

GOVERNMENT.] Since the great confederation of Utrecht, made in the year 1579,
the Seven United Provinces must be looked upon (...) one political body, united
for the preservation of the whole, of which each single province is governed by
its own laws, and exercises most of the rights of a sovereign state. In
consequence of the union, (...) Seven Provinces guarantee each other's rights,
they make war (...) peace, they levy taxes, etc. in their joint capacity; but
as to (...) government, each province is independent of the other provinces,
(...) of the supreme power of the republic. The Seven Provinces (...) the same
order in which they are placed in the proceeding table. Th^^ send deputies,
chosen out of the provincial states, to the general-(...) (...), called the
States General, which is invested with the supreme legislative power of the
confederation. Each province has the right to send as many deputies as it
pleases, but it has only one voice in the assembly of the States. According to
the latest regulations, that assembly is composed of 58 deputies. In affairs of
great consequence, such as declaring war and making peace, a secret committee
is chosen out of these deputies, called the Secrette Besoigne, in which the
province of Holland has two voices.

At the head of this republican government there has usually been, and is at
present, the Prince Stadtholder or governor, who exercises a very considerable
part of the executive power of the state. It appears from history, that the
United Provinces were, at different times, without a Stadtholder; but these
periods were usually very turbulent; and whenever a war broke out, the republic
was always under the necessity of choosing again a Stadtholder. It should seem,
therefore, that the dignity and the power of a Stadtholder, is essential and
salutary to the constitution of the United Provinces. There have, however,
constantly been, and there are now, two opposite parties in the state, one of
which, who call themselves the patriots, are averse, and the other are attached
to the power of the Stadtholder. This dignity, though hereditary and of the
greatest weight in the state, cannot be considered otherwise than the first
office entrusted to a subject of the republic, and falls considerably short of
the most limited sovereignty. The Stadtholder is not entitled to a voice in the
supreme legislative assembly, but he may be present at their meetings. He is
captain general and high-admiral of the land and naval forces of the republic;
and he enjoyed, before the late troubles, a very ample patronage in consequence
of this military command. He is president of the East and West India Companies,
and Stadtholder of each single province, but with unequal prerogatives. In some
of the provinces he has the exclusive right of ^^^minating the magistrates of
the towns, and the power of pardoning criminals; in some he has a share in the
legislative power, and a voice in the assembly of the states of the province;
in others he has either not all or none of these rights. The party of the
patriots have, within these few years, been much intent on curtailing and
restraining within narrow limits the power of the Stadtholder. Another great
dignity in the republic, the influence of which is usually opposed to the
Stadtholder's interest, is the place of Grand Pensionary, formerly called the
advocate of the republic. The Grand Pensionary is, by virtue of his place,
perpetual member of the highest legislative assemblies, the states general and
the secret committee.

The departments which are employed in such public affairs as concern all the
Seven Provinces are the following: 1. The Council of State, composed of twelve
members, chosen by the Seven Provinces, under the presidency of the
Stadtholder. It has its treasurer and secretary, and is next in rank to the
States General. 2. The Department of the Revenue, consisting of fourteen
members. 3. The Army and Navy Treasury: This department has the revision of the
accounts of the military expenditure, and is composed of four members. Each
prov^^^ is governed by the assembly of its respective states. These states are,
i^ almost all the provinces, composed of the nobility, or great landholders,
and of the towns. In the assembly of the states of the province of Holland, the
Great pensionary presides: The towns are governed by their own elective
magistrates, whose jurisdiction is confined within the walls of the towns:
Certain districts in the provinces have their courts of justice, and each
province has a general court, to which appeal lies from the inferior courts and
the town magistrates. These tribunals are called by the name of the provinces
in which they are established, de Hof van Holland, de Hof van Geldren, etc.
each of then makes use of a particular code of laws, adapted to the ancient
customs and rights of the provinces: where these laws are deficient, recourse
must be had to the Roman law.

FINANCES.] The public revenue is to be considered in tow different points of
view, as it is raised for the use of the whole consideration, or for the
expenditure of each single province. According to the latest account, which is
believed to be authentic, the annual income of all the Seven Provinces amounts
to upwards of forty-five millions of florins, or nearly 4,500,000l. Sterling.
The revenue of the province of Holland, which is by far the richest, and the
most powerful of the Seven, is computed at upwards of twenty millions of
florins. Thirteen millions and a half of this sum, making the ordinary redinary
revenue of Holland, arise from the house and land tax, and from the excise and
stamp-duties: the remainder, or the extraordinary revenue of this province, is
made up by contributions of the hundredth, two hundredth and four hundredth
parts of the income of lands, annuities and capitals. The general finances of
the republic, for the support of the whole political body, arise, 1. From the
revenues of Dutch Brabant, or the lands of the generality: 2. From the duties
on exports and imports: 3. From confiscated goods, and the sums paid by the
privileged trading companies: 4. From the yearly contributions of the different
provinces, according to the following rates: Of every 100 florins contributed,
Flor. Stivers. Doits. The Province of Guelder pays 5 11 2 -- Holland 57 14 8 --
Zeeland 9 1 10 -- Utrecht 5 15 5 -- Friesland 11 10 11 -- Overyssel 3 10 8 --
Groeningen 5 15 6 -- County of Drenthe 0 19 10 100 0 0

The debts of the republic exceed 2000 millions of florins. The province of
Holland alone owed, in 1768, 450 millions, but almost the whole of this sum to
its own subjects; but, on the other side, has lent, on very advantageous
conditions, large sums of money to other states. In the year 1781, there were
due the following sums: 1. From England, 165 million of florins. 2. -- France,
170 3. -- Germany, Denmark, Sweden and Russia 250 585

The United Provinces draw more than 25 millions per annum from these countries
as the interest on the large capitals sent them.

ARMY.] In time of peace, the standing army is as follows: CAVAIRY.
Men. Regiments. -- Escadrons. -- 1. Guard of the Stadtholder 174 -- 3. Dutch
Guards 258 6. -- Cavalry (336 men each) 2016 3. -- Dragoons 1008 3456

INFANTRY.
1 Regiments of Dutch Guards 1,116 1 -- of Swiss Guards 1,120 19 -- of national
and Germ. troops (710 men each) 20,880 1 -- of Walloons 1,080 3 -- of Scotchmen
2,1^0 5 -- of Swiss 3,600 1 -- of Marines 720 1 -- of Artillery 1,800 ^
companies of Miners 208 Crops of Engineers 97 36,281

Some of the guards, and the three Scotch regiments, are at present ^^sbanded.
In the year 1784. when Holland was threatened with a war by the Emperor, the
army was increased to upwards of 50,000 men. Besides the Stadtholder, who is
the head of the Army, in times of war and danger, a field marshal general is
appointed.

NAVY.] The Navy of Holland, in 1782, consisted of 42 ships of the line -- 43
frigates, and to cut* s --

RATES.] 8 ships of 70 -- 71 guns. 22 -- -- 64 12 -- 50mdash;56 14 --
40mdash;44 13 -- 36 -- 16 -- 20mdash;24 Hist. Port. 1783. (In 1784) 43 ships of
the line. 43 frigates.

The five chambers of the admiralty have the management of all naval affairs.
The Stadtholder, in the capacity of high-admiral of the republic, presides in
the five chambers of admiralty. He formerly appointed the flag officers, but
this privilege has been of late disputed by the States General. He has a tenth
share of all the prizes made during a war. The fleet, which is divided into
three squadrons, is distributed between the harbors of Amsterdam, called the
Texel, and that of Rotterdam, in the province of Holland, and the seaport
towns of Zeeland.

RELIGION.] The Calvinist, or reformed religion, is established in Holland; the
Lutheran, the Roman Catholic, many other Christian sects, and the Jews, are
tolerated. The Synod of Dordrecht, or Dort held in 1618, made the strictest
notion of predestination an essential article of faith in the Dutch church.
None but Calvinists can hold any employment of trust or profit. There is,
properly speaking, no difference of rank among the clergy: The church is
governed by synods, composed of the ministers and antistites, or presbyters.
Besides nine synods for single provinces, there is one great national synod;
subject, however, to the control of the States General, which are considered as
the head of the church. The French and Walloon Calvinist churches have synods
of their own. There are, in the Seven Provinces, 1579 pastors or ministers of
the established church, 90 of the Walloon church, 800 Roman Catholic, 53
Lutheran, 43 Arminian, and 312 Anabaptist ministers. In the East Indies there
are 46, and in the West Indies nine clergymen of the established church.

GENERAL REMARKS.] The natural and political situation of the Dutch nation may
be compared with the colonies of Canadian beavers, who, by unwearied labor and
mutual assistance, are enabled to build secure habitations on the banks of
rapid rivers, and to form societies rendered durable and invincible by the tie
of firm union: Yet their wonderful fabric would, by dissension and separation,
soon sink into insignificance or annihilation. When we consider what Holland
was before the union of Utrecht, and when we afterward see the inhabitants of
that swampy spot assume, for no inconsiderable period of time, the arbitrium of
Europe and the Indies, it is not without regret we witness the decay of their
power, that most admirable monument of human exertion and industry. An
impartial observer, however, who cannot wish to see the benefits of activity
confined to one spot, and extorted from the ignorance and weakness of other
nations, will be comforted by the consideration, that Holland's exclusive
advantages are lessened by the general increase of industry and happiness
throughout all the states of Europe, and not by any of those great calamities
or revolutions, which have put a period to the power of other commercial
states. Its decline is gentle and gradual: Yet so high was the eminence Holland
was arrived at, that it is still possessed of great power and consequence. It
may long continue to be the center of union of the great European commerce and
the asylum of religious and civil liberty, if the most dangerous enemies of
this state, civil dissensions, and the extinction of public virtue, do not
hasten its gliding down the slope of ruin, and render it an easy prey to an
insidious neighbor, who seems even now to be willingly acknowledged as their
master, by a mistaken and corrupted part of the nation.

HISTORY.] These provinces were originally an assemblage of several lordships,
dependent upon the kings of Spain; from whose yoke they withdraw themselves
during the reign of Phillip II. in the year 1579, under the conduct of the
Prince of Orange, and formed the republic now called the Seven United
provinces, or Holland. The office of Stadtholder, or Captain General of the
United Provinces, was made hereditary in the Prince of Orange's family, not
excepting females 1747.

AUSTRIAN AND FRENCH NETHERLANDS.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 200 Miles. between Degrees. 49 and 52 north latitude. Breadth 200
Miles. Degrees. 2 and 7 east longitude.

BOUNDARIES. BOUNDED by the United Provinces, on the North; by Germany, East;
by Lorrain, Champaign, and Picardy, in France, South; and by another part of
Picardy, and the English sea, West.

As this country belongs to three different powers, the Austrians, French, and
(...), we shall be more particular in distinguishing the provinces and towns
belonging to each state.

1. Province of BARABANT.
Subdivisions. Chief Towns. 1. Dutch Brabant Boisleduc N. Breda Bergen-op-Zoom
Grave, N. E. Lillo N. W. Steenbergen 2. Austrian Brabant Brussels, E. lon. 4
degrees. 6 min. N. lat. 50-50. Louvain in the middle. Vilvorden Landen

2. ANTWERP; and, 3. MALINES, are provinces independent of Brabant, though
surrounded by it, and subject to the house of Austria.

4. Province of LIMBURGE, S. E.
Chief towns Limburg, E. lon. 6-5. N. lat. 50-37 subject to Aus. Maestricht
subject to the Dutch. Dalem Fauguemont, or Valkenburg

5. Province of LUXEMBURG.
Subdivisions. Chief Towns. Austrian Luxemburg Luxemburg, E. lon.6-8. N. lat.
49-45. French Luxemburg Thionville S. E. Montmedy

6. Province of NAMUR, in the middle, subject to Austria.
Chief towns Namur, on the Sambre and Maese, E. lon. 4-50. N. lat. 50-30.
Charleroy on the Sambre.

7. Province of HAINAULT.
Subdivisions. Chief Towns. Austrian Hainault Mons, E. lon. 3-53. N. lat. 50-30
in the middle. Aeth Enguien French Hainault Valenciennes Bouchain Conde S. W.
Landrecy

8. Province of CAMBRESIS.
Subject to France. Cambray, E. of Arras, F. lon. 3-15. N. lat. 50-15.
Crevecour, S. of Cambray.

9. Province of ARTOIS.
Subject to France. Arras, S. W. on the Scrape, E. lon. 2-5. N. lat. 51-20. St.
Omer, E. of Boulogne A^ie. S. of St. Omer S. Venant. E. of Air Bethune, S. E.
of Air Terouen, S. of St. Omer.

10. Province of FLANDERS.
Subdivisions. Chief Towns. Dutch Flanders Sluys, N. Axel, N. Hulst. N. Sas van
Ghent, N. Austrian Flanders Ghent, on the Scheld, E. lon. 3-36. N. lat. 51.
Bruges N. W. near the sea. Ostend Newport Oudenard on the Scheld. Courtray on
the Lis. Dixmude Ypres. N. of Lisle Tournay on the Scheld Menin on the Lis.
French Flanders Lisle, W. of Tournay Dunkirk, on the coast E. of Calais Douay,
W. of Arras Mardike, W. of Dunkirk St. Amand, N. of Valenciennes Gravelin, E.
of Calais.

AIR, SOIL, AND PRODUCE.] The air of Brabant, and upon the coast of Flanders,
is bad; that in the interior parts is more healthful, and the seasons more
settled, both in winter and summer, than they are in England. The soil and its
produce are rich, especially in corn and fruits. They have abundance of
pasture; and Flanders itself has been reckoned the granary of France and
Germany, and sometimes of England. The most barren parts for corn rear far more
profitable crops of flax, which is here cultivated to great perfection. Upon
the whole, the Austrian Netherlands, by the culture, commerce, and industry of
the inhabitants, was formerly the richest and most beautiful spot in Europe,
whether we regard the variety of its manufactures, the magnificence and riches
of its cities, the pleasantness of its roads and villages, or the fertility of
its land. If it has fallen off in later times, it is owing partly to the
neglect of its government, but chiefly to its vicinity to England and Holland;
but it is still a most desirable and agreeable country. There are few or no
mountains in the Netherlands: Flanders is a slat country, scarcely a single
hill in it. Brabant, and the rest of the provinces, consist of little hills and
valleys, woods, enclosed grounds, and champaign fields.

RIVERS, AND CANALS.] The chief rivers are the Maese, Sambre, Demer, Dyle,
Nethe, Geet, Sanne, Ruppel, Scheld, Lis, Scarpe, Deule, and Dender. The
principal canals are those of Brussels, Ghent, and offend.

METALS AND MINERALS.] Mines of iron, copper, lead and brimstone, are found in
Luxemburgh, and Limburg, as are some marble quarries; and in the province of
Namur there are coal-pits, and a species of bituminous fat earth, proper for
fuel, with great plenty of ^o^^ile nitre.

INHABITANTS, POPULATION, MANNERS, CUSTOMS, AND DIVERSIONS.} The Flemings (for
so the inhabitants of Flanders and the Austrian Low Countries are generally
called) are said to be a heavy, Munt, honest people; but their manners are
somewhat indelicate. -- Formerly they were known to sight desperately in
defense of their country; at present they make no great figure. The Austrian
Netherlands are extremely populous; but authors differ as to their numbers.
Perhaps we may six them at a medium at a million and a half. They are ignorant,
and fond of religious exhibitions and pageants. -- Their other diversions are
the same with those of the peasants of the neighboring countries.

DRESS AND LANGUAGE.] The inhabitants of French Flanders are mere Frenchmen and
women in both these particulars. The Flemings on the frontiers of Holland,
dress like the Dutch boors, and their language is the same; but the better sort
of people speak French, and dress in the same taste.

RELIGION.] The established religion here is the Roman Catholic; but
Protestants, and other sects, are not molested.

LEARNING, LEARNED MEN, AND ARTISTS.] The society of Jesuits formerly produced
the most learned (...) in the Austrian Low Countries, in which they had many
comfortable settlements. Works of theology, and the civil and canon law, Latin
poems and plays, were their chief productions. Strada is an elegant historian
and poet. The Flemish painters and sculptors have great merit, and form a
school by themselves. The works of Rubens and Vandyke cannot be sufficiently
admired. Fiamingo, or the Flemings models for heads, particularly those of
children, have never yet been equalled; and the Flemings formerly engrossed
tapestry-weaving to themselves.

UNIVERSITIES.] Louvain, Douay, Tournay, and St. Omer. The first was founded in
1426, by John IV. duke of Brabant, and enjoys great privileges. By a grant of
pope Sixtus IV. this university has the privilege of presenting to all the
livings in the Netherlands, which right they enjoy, except in Holland.

ANTIQUITIES AND CURIOSITIES, NATURAL AND ARTIFICIAL.} Some Roman monuments of
temples and other buildings are to be found in these provinces. Many curious
bells, churches, and the like, ancient and modern, are also found here; and the
magnificent old edifices of every kind, seen through all their cities, give
evidences of their former grandeur. In 1607, some laborers found 1600 gold
coins, and ancient medals of Antoninus Pius, Aurelius, and L^cius Verus.

CITIES.] This article has employed several large volumes, published by
different authors, but in times when the Austrian Netherlands were far more
flourishing than now. The walls of Ghent, formerly the capital of Flanders, and
celebrated for its linen and woollen manufactures, contain the circuit of ten
miles; but now unoccupied, and great part of it in a manner avoid. Bruges,
formerly so (...) for its trade and manufactures, but above all for its fine
canals, is (...) dwindled to an inconsiderable place. Ostend is a tolerably
convenient harbor for traders; and soon after the late rupture between Great
Britain and Holland, became more opulent and populous. In 1781 it was visited
by the emperor, who granted to it many privileges and franchises, and the free
exercise of the protestant religion. Y pres is only a strong garrison town. The
same may be said of Charleroy and Namur, which lie in the Austrian Hainault.

Louvain, the capital of the Austrian Brabant, instead of its flourishing
manufactories and places of trade, now contains pretty gardens, walks, and
arbours. Brussels retains somewhat of its ancient manufactures; and being the
residence of the governor or viceroy of the Austrian Netherlands, it is a
populous, lively place. Antwerp, once the emporium of the European continent,
is now reduced to be a tapestry and thread lace-shop, with the houses of some
bankers, jewellers, and painters adjoining. One of the first exploits of the
Dutch, soon after they threw of the Spanish yoke, was to ruin at once the
commerce of Antwerp, by sinking vessels, loaded with stone, in the mouth of the
Scheld; thus shutting up the entrance of that river to ships of large burden.
This was the more cruel, as the people of Antwerp had been their friends and
fellow sufferers in the cause of liberty, but they foresaw that the prosperity
of their own commerce was at stake.

It may be observed here, that every gentleman's house is a castle or chateau;
and that there are more strong towns in the Netherlands then in all the rest of
Europe; but since the decline of their trade, by the rise of the English and
Dutch, these towns are considerably diminished in size, and whole streets,
particularly in Antwerp, are in appearance uninhabited. In the Netherlands,
provisions are extremely good and cheap. A stranger may dine in Brussels, on
seven or eight dishes of meat, for less than a shilling English. Traveling is
safe, reasonable and delightful in this luxurious country. The roads are
generally a broad causeway, and run for some miles in a straight line, till
they terminate with the view of some noble buildings. At Cassel, in the French
Netherlands, may be seen thirty-two towns, itself being on a hill.

COMMERCE AND MANUFACTURES.] The chief manufactures of the French and Austrian
Netherlands, are their beautiful linens and laces; in which, notwithstanding
the boasted improvements of their neighbors, they are yet unrivalled;
particularly in that species called cambrics, from Cambray, the chief place of
its manufacture. These manufactures form the principal article of their
commerce.

CONSTITUTION AND GOVERNMENT.] The Austrian Netherlands are still considered as
a circle of the empire, of which the archducal house, as being sovereign of the
whole, is the sole director and summoning prince. This circle contributes its
share to the imposts of the empire, and sends an envoy to the diet, but is not
subject to the judicatories of the empire. It is under a governor-general,
appointed by the court of Vienna, who, at present, is his serene highness,
prince Charles of Lorrain, uncle to the late emperor. The face of an assembly,
or parliament, for each province is still kept up, and consists of the clergy,
nobility, and deputies of towns, who meet at Brussels. -- Each province claims
particular privileges, but they are of very little effect; and the governor
seldom or never finds any resistance to the will of his court. Every province
has a particular governor, subject to the regent: And causes are here decided
according to the civil and canon law.

REVENUES.] These rise from the demesne lands and customs; but so much is the
trade of the Austrian Flanders now reduced, that they are said not to defray
the expense of their government; but by the late reductions of the garrisons,
this is now altered. The French Netherlands bring in a considerable revenue to
the crown.

MILITARY STRENGTH.] The troops maintained here by the emperor are chiefly
employed in the frontier garrisons. Though, by the barrier treaty, the
Austrians were obliged to maintain three-fifths of those garrisons, and the
Dutch two; yet both of them were ^^^serably deficient in their quotas, the
whole requiring at least 30,000 men, and in time of war above 10,000 more. but
the present emperor has demolished the fortifications of most of the places,
and rendered the garrisons useless.

HISTORY.] Flanders, originally the country of the ancient Belgae, was
conquered by Julius Caesar, forty-seven years before Christ; passed into the
hands of France. A. D. 412; and was governed by its earls, subject to that
crown, from 8^^ to 1369. By marriage it then came into the house of Austria;
but was yielded to Spain in 1556. Shook off the Spanish yoke 1572, and in the
year 1725, by the treaty of Vienna, was annexed to the German empire. See
Universal History.

FRANCE.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 600 Miles. between Degrees. 5 west and 8 East longitude. Breadth 500
Miles. Degrees. 42 and 51 North latitude.

BOUNDARIES. IT is bounded by the English channel and the Netherlands, North;
by Germany, Switzerland, and Italy, East; by the Mediterranean and the Pyrenean
mountains, which divide it from Spain, South; and by the Bay of Biscay, West.

DIVISIONS.] As in the following Table.

EXTENT AND DIVISIONS. Areas in square miles. Population. Number. of Inhabitants
on each square mile. TOWNS. 42 -- 51 Latitude 163,200 St. Ueb. 25,300,000
Schloez 150 400 Cities. 5 -- 8 East Longitude 160,000 Busch. ^6,000,000 Busch.
162 1500 Smaller towns. 157,924 Necker. 24,800,000 Necker. 157 43,000 Parishes.
100,000 Villages. France (without Corsica) 155,332 Necker. 24,076,000 Necker.
160 Generalities according to Necker. Names. Number. Inh. 1. Aix Province 6,601
754,400 41 Marseille 80,500 Aix 24,000 Toulon 38,000 2. Amiens 2,038 533,000 71
Amiens 43,500 The greatest part of Picardie Calais 6,500 Abbeville 19,000 St.
Quentin 10,500 3. Auch and Pau 7,761 813,000 40 Auch 7,500 Oriental part of
Guienne Pau 9,000 4. Besanetc;cedil;on 5,019 678,800 49 Besanetc;cedil;on
25,500 Franche Comte 5. Bourdeaux and Bayonne 9,362 439,000 55 Bourdeaux 84,000
Western part of Guienne Bayonne 11,000 6. Bourges 3,954 512,500 47 Bourges
25,000 Berry and two little districts, one in the province of Bourbonnois, the
other in that of Nivernois 7. Chalons 7,063 812,800 44 Rheims 31,000 The
greatest part of Champagne and part of Brie Chalons 12,000 Troyes 32,000 8.
Dijon 6,821 087,300 57 Dijon 20,300 Bourgogne, Maetc;cedil;onnois, Gex, Bugey
Bresse, Dombe Maetc;cedil;on 9,000 9. Grenoble 5,898 664,600 40 Grenoble 24,300
Orange, Dauphine 10. La Rochelle 2,672 479,700 64 La Rochelle 16,000 Saintonge,
Aunis, part of Angoumois Rochefort 16,000 11. Lisle 2,385 734,600 110 Lisle
67,000 Artois, and almost the whole of Flanders Dunkirk 27,000 Arras 21,500
Douay 19,500 12. Limoges 4,919 646,500 47 Limoges 22,000 Limousin, and the
greatest part of Angoumois Angouleme 13,000 13. Lions 2,397 633,600 95 Lion
160,000 Lyonnois, Forez, Beaujolois St. Etienne 27,000 14. Metz 2,960 349,300
119 Metz 40,000 Metz, Toul, Verdun, the French Luxembourg. Sedan, Raucour, and
some districts of Alsace and Loraine Sedan 17,500 15. Montauban 3,362 530,200
160 Montauban 20,000 Rouergue and Guercy Cahors above 9,000 16. Montpellier
12,330 699,200 138 Montpellier 32,000 Languedoc ^oulouse 56,000 Nimes 50,000
17. Moulins 5,166 564,400 109 Moulins 16,500 Bourbonnois, the greatest part of
Nivernois, and a small part of Auvergne Nevers 14,000 18. Nancy 5,149 834,600
162 Nancy 34,000 Lorraine, Bar-le-Due Luneville 16,500 Bar-le-Due 10,800 19.
Orleans 5,882 709,400 121 Orleans 39,500 Orleannois, Sologne, Blaisois,
Vendomois, Lower Perch, Dunois, Beauce, Chartres, great part of Gatinois, a
small part of Nivernois Blois 12,000 20. Paris 6,664 1,781,700 266 Paris
680,000 The greatest part of the Isle de France and la Brie Versailles 60,000
21. Perpignan Roussillon, Foix 1,649 188,900 114 Perpignan 15,200 22. Poitiers
Upper and Lower Poiou 6,089 690,500 113 Poitiers 17,300 23. Rennes 10,221
^,276,000 222 Rennes 35,500 Bretagne Port l'Orient 16,500 St. Malo 17,500
Nantes 57,000 (...) ^0,000 24. Riom 3,749 681,500 181 ^ermont 24,000 Riom
14,800 25. Normandy Rouen 3,384 740,700 219 Rouen 72,500 Caen 3,361 644,000 1^0
Caen 32,000 Alenetc;cedil;on 2,672 528,300 198 Alenetc;cedil;on 13,500 Dieppe
17,000 26. Soissons Soissonnois, Laonnois, Thierache, part of Brie 2,566
437,200 174 Soissons 7500 27. Starsbourg 3,050 626,400 205 Strasbourg 46,000
Alsace Colmar 12,500 28, Tours 8,096 1,338,700 165 Tours 21,600 Touraine,
Anjou, Maine, a small part of Lower Angers 30,000 Poitou Le Man's 13,500 29.
Valenciennes 1,481 265,200 179 Valenciennes 19,500 Hainault, Cambresis, and a
small part of Flanders Cambrai 15,000 Total 155,333 24,676,000 Island of
Corsica 2,592 124,000 48 Bastia 600 Ajaccio 4000 Corte 3000

POSSESSIONS IN THE OTHER PARTS OF THE GLOBE.
1. In ASIA.
Some districts on the coast of Coromandel, of which Pondicherry is the
capital. Some less considerable settlements on the Malabar coast and in Bengal,
and several factories.

2. In AFRICA.
In Barbary, Bastion de France. The island of Goree, part of Se^egambia, Fort
(...) on the Senegal, and Podar, Galam, Portendic, Fort Arguin. On the coast of
Guinea, Fran^ois. In the Indian Sea, the islands of Bourbon and Isle de France.

3. In AMERICA.
The North-American islands of St. Pierre and Miqueion. In the West Indies, the
largest part of the island of St. Domingo, the islands of Martinique,
Guadaloupe, St. Lucia, Maria Galante, St. Martin and Tobago. In South-America,
some settlements in Guiana and the island of Cayenne.



All these possessions, according to Neckar, contain about 600,000 inhabitants.

Since the Revolution, a new division of the kingdom has been made as follows:
"Each district to be divided into cantons of about four square leagues each,
with at least one primary assembly in each canton. If the number of citizens in
a canton do not amount to 900, there is to be only one assembly; but if they
amount to that number, there are to be two assemblies of 450 each. Each
ordinary assembly to consist, as nearly as possible, of 600, which shall be the
mean number; the least to be 440. The number of deputies sent to the national
assembly by each district, to be in proportion to the population, taxes and
territory, jointly considered."

This new political division of France, corresponds, in some respects, with the
divisions of New England: Districts in France answer to counties in New England
-- cantons to townships, and assemblies to town-meetings.

NAME.] France took its name from the Frances or Freemen, a German nation,
restless and enterprising, who conquered the Gauls, the ancient inhabitants;
and the Roman force not being able to repress them, they were permitted to
settle in the country by treaty.

WATER.] No nation is better supplied than France is with wholesome springs and
water; of which the inhabitants make excellent use, by the help of art and
engines, for all the conveniences of life.

MOUNTAINS.] The chief mountains in France, or its borders, are, the Alps,
which divided France from Italy; the Pyren^es, which divide France from Spain;
Va^ge, which divided Lorrain from Burgundy and Alsace: Mount Juta, which
divides Franche Compte from Switzerland; the Cevennes, in the province of
Languedoc; and Mount Dor, in the province of Auvergne.

RIVERS AND LAKES.] The principal rivers in France are the Loire, the Rhone,
the Garonne, and the Seine. The Loire, takes its course north and north-west,
being, with all its windings, from its source to the sea, computed to run about
500 miles. The Rh^ne flows a^ south-west to Lions, and then runs on due south
till it falls into the Mediterranean. The Garronne rises in the Pyrenean
mountains, takes ^^s course, first, north-east, and has a communication with
the Mediterranean by means of a canal, the work of Lewis XIV. The Seine, sum
after its rise, runs to the north-west, visiting Troyes, Paris, and Rouen, in
its way, and falls into the English channel at Havre. To these we may add, the
Saone, which falls into the Rhone at Lions; the C^arente, which rises near
Havre de Grace, and discharges itself in the Bay of Biscay at Rochfort. The
Rhine, which rises in Switzerland, is the eastern boundary between France and
Germany, and receives the M^selle and the Sarte in its passage. The Sum,
which runs north-east through Picardy, and falls into the English channel below
Abbeville. The Var, which rises in the Alps, and runs south, dividing France
from Italy, and falling into the Mediterranean, west of Nice. The Adour runs
from east to west, through Cascoigne, and falls into the Bay of Biscay, below
Bayonne.

The vast advantage, both in commerce and convenience, which arises is France
from those rivers, is greatly improved by the artificial rivers and canals
which form the chief glory of the reign of Lewis XIV. That of Languedoc was
begun in the year 1666, and completed in (...): It was intended for a
communication between the ocean and the Mediterranean, for the speedier passage
of the French fleet; but though it was carried on at an immense expense, for
100 miles, over hills and valleys, and even through a mountain in one place, it
has not answered that purpose. By the canal of Calais, travelers easily pass
by water from ^^^^ce to St. Omer, Gravoline, Dunkirk, Ypres, and other places.
-- The canal of Orleans is another noble work, and runs a course of eighteen
leagues, to the immense benefit of the public and the royal (...). France
abounds with other canals of the like kind, which ^^^der her inland navigation
inexpressibly commodious and benefited.

Few lakes are found in this country. There is one at the top of a (...) near
Alegre, which the vulgar report to be bottomless. There is another at Issoire
in Auvergne; and one at La Besse, in which if you (...) a stone, it causes a
noise like thunder.

MINERAL WATERS AND REMARKABLE SPRINGS.} The waters of Bareges, which lie near
the borders of Spain, under the Pyrenean mountains, have of late been preferred
to all the others of France, for the recovery of health. Some think, however,
that the cures persumed by them, are more owing to their accidental success,
and the ^^^rity of the air and soil, than to the virtues of the waters. The
(...) of Sultzabach in Alsace are said to be cure the palsy, weak nerves, and
the stone. At Bagueits, not far from Hareg^s, are several wholesome minerals
and baths, to which people resort at spring and autumn. (...), in Normandy, is
celebrated for its mineral waters; and those (...). Amand cure the gravel and
obstructions. It would be endless ^^^^^erate all the other real or pretended
mineral wells in France. There is a spring near Aigne in Auvergne, which boils
violently, and (...) a noise like water thrown upon lime; it has little or no
taste, (...) a poisonous quality, and the birds that drink of it die in^^^^y.

METALS AND MINERALS.] Languedoe is said to contain veins of (...) and silver.
Alsace has mines of silver and copper, but they are ^^^^^sive to be wrought.
Alabaster, black marble, jasper, and coal, are found in many parts of the
kingdom. Bretagne abounds is mines of iron, copper, tin, and lead. At Laverdau,
in Cominges, (...) is a mine of chalk. At Berry there is a mine of oker, which
serves for melting of metals, and for dying, particularly the best drab-cl^^^
and in the province of Anjou are several quarries of fine white (...). Some
excellent turquoises (the only gem it is said that France p^^^ces) are found in
Languedoc; and great care is taken to keep the mines of marble and freestone
open all over the kingdom.

FORESTS.] The chief forests of France and those of Orl^^ which contain 14,000
acres of wood of various kinds, oak, elm, (...) etc. and the forest of
Fontainbleau near as large; and near Mo^^^moir is a forest of tall, straight
timber, of 4000 trees. Besides (...) large numbers of woods, some of them
deserving the name of forest lie in different provinces; but too remote from
sea carriage to be (...) much national utility.

WEALTH AND COMMERCE.] France is situated in a very mild climate; its soil is,
in most parts, very fertile; it is bounded by high ridges of mountains, the
lower branches of which cross the greatest part of the kingdom; it consequently
about with large rivers, 200 of which are navigable, and it is contiguous to
two oceans. These united advantages render this kingdom one of the richest
countries of Europe, both with respect to natural productions and commerce. One
of the most valuable articles (...) produce is wine, the great staple commodity
of France, 1,600,000 (...) ground are laid out in vineyards; and the net
profits from each (...) are estimated at from 4l. to 7l. sterling. According to
other ^^^^ments, the yearly value of all the wine made in France amounts to
(...) millions of livres; and that of the wine exported annually, to 24
million. The best sorts of French wine are, champaign, burgundy, pon^^^ muscat,
frontigniac, eremitage, cote roti, etc. of the inferior (...) brandy and
vinegar is made in large quantities. Vines prosper, thou^^^ not equally, in
almost every province of France, except Norma^^ and Picardy.

Great efforts are making to encourage and improve agriculture; yet there is
still a large portion of the ground in an uncultivated state. No more than
about 36 millions of acres are cultivated. France is therefore obliged to
import corn. During the administration of (...) Necker this disadvantage was
partly obviated; and there are (...) some provinces which export corn, for
instance, Alsace and Languedoc. Flax and hemp which is imported from the north,
might (...) more profitably cultivated in the kingdom in larger quantities than
hitherto. The silk raised in considerable quantities in some provinces does not
however sufficiently supply the numerous manufactures; about 200,000lb. are
produced in Languedoc, and not much less in Province. The most important silk
manufactures are (...) Lions and Tours; at the last mentioned place there are
said to be 7000 looms, and at the first as many as 18,000. This must be
understood however of the times preceding the repeal of the Edict of (...). By
this unjust and impolitic measure a very great number of ^^^^^tant manufactures
were expelled the kingdom, and carried their valuable arts to more liberal
countries. Next to these two cities, (...) of Paris, Chatillon, and Nimes, are
distinguished for their fist (...) ^^^^ures. The first silk manufacture was
established at Tours by Louis II, in the year 1470. At the large fair of
Beaucaire there used to be (...), in a few days, goods to the value of
6,000,000 livres, by far the ^^^est part of which were silks. Even now this
trade is of an amaz^^^ extent; 7000 balls of silk, of 160lb. each, of which
however a (...) part is imported from abroad, are conveyed annually to Lions.

Olive oil is one of the principal commodities of France; most of (...) is
produced in the provinces of Provence and Languedoc. The ^^^ty of Rousillon
alone gains annually 200,000 livres by this article; the consumption of it in
France is however so great, that some oil is (...) imported from Italy. The
inferior sort of oil is used in making (...) there are at Merseilles alone
thirty-six soap manufactures. France abounds in excellent and high-flavoured
fruits, as grapes, apples, lem^^^, oranges, chestnuts, etc. and likewise in
manna, saffron, and woad. A great quantity of kermes and soda in produced in
the most southerly parts. Salt is obtained in great plenty; the duties on this
article, though very oppressive to the subject, are one of the largest branches
of the revenue: They are farmed at 54 millions of livers annually. The salt
however is not remarkable for its purity. The consumption of tobacco in France
amounts to 20 millions of pounds; 15 millions is raised in the country, and
five millions imported by smuggling.

Horses, cattle, and asses, are not remarkably good, except in a few districts.
The stocks of sheep, though numerous, are not able to sup^^^ the large
woollen-manufactures. Picardy, alone, however, pro^^^ annually 600,000lb. of
wool; and so many live sheep have (...) smuggled over from England into
Normandy and Bretagne, that (...) flocks of those two provinces are thought to
be not inferior to (...) of England. By the same clandestine traffic English
wool is ^^^orted to the value of 100,000l. sterling. The French
cloth-manufactures are risen to very great consequence; the most considerable
^^^^ng them are those at Amiens, Abbeville, Lions, Sedan, Paris, (...) Ryssel,
etc. In the government of Lions woollens are manufactured to the value of
13,000,000 livres, two thirds of which are ex^^^d. In Bretagne there are 800
looms for light stuffs; the manufactures at Abbeville have considerably injured
those of England; (...) likewise those in Languedoc and Provence, especially by
their ^^^^currence and superior demand in the Levant market.

The mineral kingdom in France has hitherto not afforded very (...) treasures.
Some silver is found in Alsace, at St. Marie aux (...), and Moncrif; copper and
iron, almost sufficient for the demand of the manufactures, is found in
Roussillon, Bigorre, Foix, Na^^^^ Gascogne, Normandy, Bretagne, and Orleanois.
Many of (...) mines contain lead. However, steel is annually imported to the
(...) of 3,000,000 livres. Mineralogy has hitherto been in an infant (...); but
when duly attended to, the mines of France are likely to (...) very ample
profits.

There are manufactures of alum, vitriol, and saltpetre; in Franche (...)
1,200,000 lb. of the latter article are annually obtained.

Thence has very important fisheries. About 50,000 tons of herrings ^^^^ght
annually by the French fishermen; the fishery of ancho^^^ is said to be worth
two million of livres. The French fisheries on (...) North-American coasts were
estimated, before the year 1744, at 1,000,000l. sterling; they have since
decreased, but it is likely they will be soon worth nearly as much as before,
in consequence of the cessions made to France by the peace of 1783. In 1768,
the French sent 114 vessels to Newfoundland, which brought home a cargo of cod,
worth 3,000,000 livres; but the profits arising from this (...) of fishery are
not very considerable.

To enumerate the many manufactures of articles of luxury established in
France, would exceed the limits of this book; it is sufficiently known, that
France has long ago taken the lead in fashions, and (...) had the good fortune
of seeing them imitated and adopted by ^^st other nations of Europe. This
fortunate pre-eminence is a very great source of profits. In the year 1773,
there were in France 1500 silkmills, 21,000 looms for silk stuffs, 12,000 for
ribbands and lace, 20,00^ for silk stockings; and the different silk
manufactures employed 2,000,000 persons.

As a commercial state, France follows immediately after England and Holland.
Its trade is carried on with all Europe; that branches, it which was carried on
publicly with England was hitherto not very considerable. It exported to
England in the year 1785, goods by the value of 117,366l. sterling, and
imported from England to the value of 358,244l. sterling. But the smuggling
trade between both countries is carried on to a great amount. It was publicly
stated in (...) House of Commons, that only 60,000 cags of spirits paid the
(...) and 3,000,000 cags were smuggled; the greatest part of which (...) French
spirits. The French have made themselves masters of (...) manufactures, chiefly
woollens, and West Indian goods, from (...) seilles to Constantinople, Smyrna,
Syria, and Egypt. They (...) however, so large quantities of the produce of
these countries in (...) turn, that they are obliged to pay a balance in read
money. The French enjoy some valuable commercial privileges in Turkey. Th^^
African and East India trade is likewise unprofitable; but their W^^^ India
possessions, which are admirably cultivated and governed, make ample amends for
these losses by the many articles of commerce they supply, which are valued at
125,000,000 livres. Before the (...) American war, the balance of commerce in
favor of France was estimated at 70,000,000 livres, and it is said, that it
has not diminished since. Inland trade is greatly facilitated by numerous
navigable canals in several parts of the kingdom. The principal trading towns
(...) Paris, Lions, Marseilles, Bourdeaux, Nantes, Rouen, St. Ma^o, R^^chelle,
Ryssel, Havre de Grace, Dunkirk. etc.

The land trade of France to Switzerland and Italy is carried on by (...) of
Lions -- To Germany, through Metz and Strasburgh -- To the Netherlands, through
Lisle -- To Spain (a most profitable one,) through Bayonne and Pcrpignan. As
for the naval commerce, her ports in the channel, and on the western ocean, are
frequented by all the trading nations in Europe, to the great advantage of
France, more especially respecting what is carried on with England, Holland,
and Italy. The trade from her Mediterranean ports (more particularly from Mar
soil^^^d with Turkey and Africa has long been very considerable.

The West India islands, before the late disturbances, produced annually, on an
average, Sugar, 224,000,000lbs -- Coffee, 62,000,000lb Cotton, 7,700,000lbs --
Indign, 2,2000,000lbs with many other articles. Total value o West India
products, 190,000,000 livers, or ^^^,000l. Sterling. France exports to the
amount of 102,000,000 rivers, which deducted from 190,000,000 livres, (the
whole value) ^^^res 88,000,000 livres or 400,000l. sterling for home
consumption.

The New foundland Fisheries employ annually 264 ships, containing ^^,439 tons,
and 9,403 men. Total value of the Fishery, 6,000,000 (...) 270,000l. Sterling.

The East India importation is valued at 18,000,000 livers, or ^^,000l.
Sterling.

Total Exports of France 332,000,000 livers, or L.15,000,000 Sterling. Imports
256,000,000 livres, or L.11,640,000 Balance in favor of France L. 3,360,000

One great disadvantage to the commerce of France is, that the profession of a
merchant is not so honorable as in England and some other countries, so that
the French nobility think it below them; which is the reason that the church,
the law, and the army, are so full of that order. A great number of the cities
of France, till the late revolution, had the privilege of coinage, and each of
them a particular mark to distinguish their respective pieces; which was very
^^^^crassing, especially to strangers.

Trade was much benefited in France by the following circumstances and
regulations: First, By the great subordination the lower classes of the people
were kept in habits of sobriety and industry; this was perhaps (...) of the few
good consequences of the severity of a strict monarohied government, which may
in some measure palliate some other hard^^^ resulting from it. Secondly, No
goods were permitted to be of^^^d for sale which had not previously been
examined by proper of^^^^, in order to prevent impositions on the purchaser.
Thirdly, The French colonies were under the necessary of being supplied with
almost all necessaries from the mother country. Fourthly, In the ^^^ts, for
instance, at Bourdeaux, the commodities imported by merchants wore deposited in
the royal warehouses adjoining the custom^^^se, and the duties of the whole
purchase were not paid at once, but ^^^y the duties of such parts of it as the
merchant took out gradually (...) the warehouses for sale.

The bank of France, called the Caisse d'Escompte, enjoys considerable credit.
There is only one trading company, viz. the East India company; the stock of
which amounts to only ten millions of livres, and whose affairs are under the
management of twelve administrators.

LEARNING AND TEARNED MEN.] The sciences have risen to a very great height in
this kingdom, and this nation can boast of having pro^^^d great masterpieces
in almost every branch of scientific knowledge and elegant literature. The
influence of a superstitious religion on science has been less felt in France
than in other Catholic countries; ^^^^ably from the emulation of the Catholics
with their Protestant ^^^^trymen, who for many years enjoyed free exercise of
their religion, and who made great progress in sciences. During the last
hundred years, the French language has acquired the great privilege of being
generally introduced as a polite language into all (...) European countries.
Besides the excellence of the French writers of the age of (...) XV. the
circulation of that language must be attributed to the frequent wars and
negociations of the French, to the p^^^alence of their fashions, and to the
dispersion of several hundred thousand banished Protestants over other
countries, where the poss^^ness of their manners effected a predilection for
their language.

Lewis XIV. was the Augustus of France. The protection he give to letters, and
the pensions he bestowed on learned men, both at home and abroad, which, by
calculation, did not amount to above r^, (...) per annum, have gained him more
glory than all the military ^^^^prises, upon which he expended so many
millions. The learn^ss (...) who appeared in France during this reign, are too
numerous (...) mentioned. Their tragic poets, Racine and Corneille, have (...)
obtained a very high reputation: The first was distinguished (...) skill in
moving the passions; the second for majesty; and both, (...) the strength and
justness of their painting, the elegance of their (...) and their strict
adherence to the rules of the drama. Moliere (...) have exhausted the subjects
of comedy, were they not every (...) inexhaustible, and particularly in France.
In works of satire (...) criticism, Boileau, who was a close imitator of the
ancients, poss^^^ uncommon merit. But France has not yet produced an epic (...)
that can be mentioned with Milton's; nor a genius of the same ext^^ five and
universal kind with Shakespeare, equally fitted for the gay and the serious,
the humorous and the sublime. In the eloquence of (...) pulpit and of the bar,
the French are greatly superior to the England Bossuet, Bourdaloue, Flechier,
Massillon and Saurin, have carried (...) pit eloquence to a degree of
perfection which the English may ^^proach to, but can hardly be expected ever
to surpass. The ge^^^^ however, of their religion and government, was extremely
unfavou^^^ to all improvements in the most useful branches of Philosophy. (...)
establishments of Lewis XIV, for the advancement of science, were (...) able to
counterbalance the influence of the clergy, and that the (...) and ministry,
who had an equal interest in concealing the natural (...) of mankind, and every
sound principle of government. The Fr^^^ have not therefore so many good
writers on moral, religious, or po^^^cal subjects, as have appeared in Great
Britain. But France has produced some great men who do honor to humanity;
whose carver (...) obstacle could stop, whose freedom no government, however
(...) no religion however superstitious, could curb or restrain. At (...)
^^^^^orian, De Thou is entitled to the highest praise; and who is (...) of
Pascal, or of the archbishop of Cambray? Few men have (...) (...) service to
religion, either by their writings or their lives. (...) (...) Montesquieu, he
is an honor to human nature: He is the leg^^^^ of nations; his works are read
in every country and langu^^^^ wherever they go they enlighten and invigorated
the human mind.

In the Belles Letters and miscellaneous way, no nation over ^^^^ced more
agreeable writers; among whom we may place (...) D'Argens, Voltaire and
Marmontel, as the most considerable.

Descartes ranks among the greatest philosophers in mode^^^ (...) He was the
first who applied algebra to the solution of geo^^^^^ problems, which naturally
paved the way to the analytical dis^^^^ of Newton. Many of the present age are
excellent mathema^^^^ particularly D'Alembert, who, with all the precision of a
go^^^^^ has united the talents of a fine writer.

Since the beginning of the present century, the French have vied with the
English in natural philosophy. Busson is to be regarded as a philosophical
painter of nature; and, under this view, his Natural History is the first work
of its kind.

Their painters, Poussin, Le Brun, and above all Le Sueur, did honor to the
age of Lewis XIV. They have none at present to compare with them in the more
noble kinds of painting; but Mr. Greuse, for ^^^^traits and
conversation-pieces, never perhaps was excelled.

Sculpture is in general better understood in France than in most ^^er
countries of Europe. Their treatises on ship-building and engi^^^ring stand
unrivalled; but in the practice of both they are outdone by the English. No
genius has hitherto equalled Vauban in the theo^^^ or practice of
fortification. The French were long superior to the English in architecture.

We shall conclude this head with observing, that the French have (...)
finished the Encyclop^die, or general dictionary of arts and scien^^^, which
was draw up by the most able masters in each branch of ^^^^ture, in 28 volumes
in folio (six of which are copper plates) under (...) direction of Messieurs
D'Alembert and Diderot, and is one of the most complete collections of human
knowledge.

UNIVERSITIES AND PUBLIC COLLEGES.] Those literary institu^^^^ received a
present loss by the expulsion of the Jesuits, who made the languages, arts, and
science, their particular study, and taught than all over France; but as the
extinction of this body of men has ^^^ved to lessen the influence of
superstition in France, there is reason (...) believe that the interests of
real learning and science have, upon the ^^^le, been promoted by that event. It
is not within our plan to de^^^^e the different governments and constitutions
of every university public college in France; but they are in number
twenty-eight, as ^^ows: Aix, Anglers, Arles, Avignon, Besancon, Bourdeaux,
Bour^^^ Caen, Cahors, Dol, Douay, La Fleche, Montauban, Montpellier, ^^^tes,
Orange, Orleans, Paris, Perpignan, Poitiers, Pont-a-Mousson, ^^^lieu Rheims,
Soissons, Strasbourg, Toulouse, Tournoise, and ^^lence.

ACADEMIES.] There are eight academies in Paris, namely, three ^^rary ones, the
French Academy, that of Inscriptions, and that of the Sciences; one of painting
and sculpture, one of architecture, and (...) for riding the great horse, and
other military exercises.

ANIQUITIES AND CURIOSITIES, NATURAL AND ARTIFICIAL.} Few countries, if we
except Italy, can boast of more valuable remains of antiquity than France. Some
of the French antiquities (...) to the time of the Celts, and consequently,
compared to them, those of Rome are modern. Father Mabillon has given us a most
curious account of the sepulchers of their kings, which have been dis^^^^ed so
far back as Pharamond; and some of them, when broke (...), were found to
contain ornaments and jewels of value. At (...), and other parts of France, are
to be seen triumphal arches; (...) the most entire is at Orange, erected on
account of the victory ob^^^^ over the Cimbri and Teutones, by Caius Marius and
Luctatius (...). After Gaul was reduced to a Roman province, the Romans (...)
(...) delight in adorning it with magnificent edifices, both civil (...)
^^^^ed; some of which are more entire then any to be met with in Italy itself.
The ruins of an amphitheatre are to be found in (...) and likewise at Vienne.
Nismes, however, exhibits the most valuable remains of ancient architecture of
any place in France. The (...) Pont du Guard was raised in the Augustan age by
the Roman (...) of Nismes, to convey a stream of water between two mounttains
(...) the use of that city, and is as fresh to this day as Westminster-bridge.
It consists of three bridges, or tires of arches one above another; the height
is 174 feet, and the length extends to 723. The moderns (...) indebted for
this, and many other stupendous aqueducts, to the ignorance of the ancients,
that all streams will rise as high as their ho^^^. Many other ruins of
antiquity are found at Nismes; but the chi^^y (...) the temple of Diana, whose
vestiges are still remaining; the amphitheatre, which is thought to be the
finest and most entire of the kind (...) any in Europe; but above all, the
houses erected by the emperor Ad^^^ called the Maison Quarree. The architecture
and sculpture of (...) building are so exquisitely beautiful, that it enchants
even the (...) ignorant; and it is still entire, being very little affected
either by the ravages of time, or the havoc of war. At Paris, in La Rue the
(...) Harp, may be seen the remains of a palace, or Thermae, supposed as have
been built by the emperor Julian, surnamed the Apostate, about the year 356,
after the same model as the baths of Dioclesian. The remains of this ancient
edifice are many arches, and within them a large saloon. It is fabricated of a
kind of mastic, the composition of which is not now known, intermixed with
small square pieces of freestone and bricks.

In Arles in Provence is to be seen an obelisk of oriental granite, which is 52
feet high, and seven feet diameter at the base, and all but one stone. Roman
temples are frequent in France. The most particular are in Burgundy and
Guienne; and other places, besides the neighborhood of Nismes, contain
magnificent ruins of ^quodu^^. The passage ^ut through the middle of a rock
near Briancon in ^^^^phlary, is thought to be a Roman work, if not of greater
antiquity. The round buckler of massy silver, taken out of the Rhone in (...)
being twenty inches in diameter, and weighing twenty-one poun^^^ containing the
story of Scipio's continence, is thought to be co^^^al with that great general.
It would be endless to recount the different monuments of antiquity to be found
in France, particularly in the cabinets of the curious.

CITIES AND TOWNS.] These are numerous in France; of which we shall mention
only Paris, Lisle, and their principal seaports; street and Toulon.

Lisle, in French Flanders, is thought to be the most regular and strongest
fortification in Europe, and was the masterpiece of the famous Vauban. It is
generally garrisoned with above 10,000 regulars; and, for its magnificence and
elegance, it is called Little Paris. Its manufactures of silk, cambric, and
camblets, are very considerable; and its inhabitants amounts to about 100,000.
Dunkirk which the French were obliged by the treaty of Utrecht to de^^^lis^^ is
still a thorn in the side of the English, by being a harbor for their
smugglers, and may now, by an article in the lest treaty of peace, be put into
what condition the French ministry may please. The rest of French Flanders, and
its Netherlands, abound with fortified towns which carry on very gainful
manufactures.

Moving southward, we come to the Isle of France; the capital of which, and of
the whole kingdom, is Paris. The population of Paris, (...) to Guthrie does not
exceed 7 or 800,000; according to (...) 680,0000; so that if A^kin's conjecture
respecting the population of London be near the truth, (...) Note.
the population of Paris (...) that of London.

Parts is divided into three parts; the city, the university, and that which
was formerly called the Town. The city is old Paris; the university and the
town are the new. Paris is said to be the paradise of splendour and dissipation.
The tapestry of the Gobelines One (...), a noted dyer at Rheims, (...) the
first who settled in this place, in the (...) of Francis (...) and the (...)
has retained his name ever since; and here the great (...) about the year 1667,
established that valuable manufactory.
is unequalled for beauty and richness. The Louvre is a building that does
honor architecture itself; and the institution of the French academy far ^^^eds
any thing of the kind in England, or elsewhere. The Thuil^^^es, the palace of
Orlean's, or, as it is called, Luxembourg, where a ^^^able collection of
paintings are shown, the royal palace the king's (...), the guild hall, and the
hospital for the invalids, are superb to the highest degree. The city of Paris
is said to be fifteen miles in circumference. The hotels of the French noblesse
at Paris take up a grant deal of room with their court-yards and gardens; and
so do their (...) and churches. The streets are very narrow, and the houses way
high, many of them seven stories. The river Seine, runs through the center of
the city, but it is too far distant from the sea for the purposes of
navigation; over it are many stone and wooden bridges. The police of Paris is
so well attended to, that quarrels, accidents, or selo^^its, seldom happen; and
strangers, from all quarters of the globe, let their appearance be ever so
uncommon, meet with the most polite ^^^^ent. The streets are patrolled at night
by horse and foot; so judiciously stationed, that no offender can escape their
vigilance. They likewise visit the publicans precisely at the hour of twelve at
night, to (...) that the company are gone; for in Paris no liquor can be had
after (...) time. The public roads in France are under the same excellent,
regulation, which, with the torture of the rack, prevents robberies in, they
kingdom; but for the same reason, when robberies do happen, they are always
attended with the death of the unfortunate traveller.

The environs of Paris are very pleasant, and contain a number of (...) seats,
small towns, and villages; some of them being scattered on the edges of lofty
mountains rising from the Seine, are remarkably delightful.

The palace of Vers^i^ies, which stands twelve miles from Paris, though
magnificent and expensive beyond conception, and adorned with all that art can
furnish, is properly a collection of buildings, each of exquisite architecture,
but not forming a whole, agreeable to the grand and sub^^me of that art. The
gardens and waterworks. (which are supplied by means of prodigious engines
across the Seine at Marli, about th^^e miles distanced are astonishing proofs
the fertile genius of man, and highly worthy of a stranger's attention.
Tria^^^, Marli. St. Germain ^n Lave. Me^don, and other royal palaces, are laid
out with taste and judgment; each has its peculiar beauties for the
entertainment and amusement of a luxurious court.

Breast is a small, but very strong town, upon the English channel, with a most
spacious and fine fortified road and harbor, the best and safest in all the
kingdom: Its entrance however, is said to be difficult, by reason of many rocks
lying under water. At Breast is a court of admiralty, and academy for
sea-affairs, docks, and magazines for all kinds of naval stores, rope-yards,
storehouses, etc. insomuch that is may now be termed the capital receptacle
for the navy-royal of France, and is admirably well adapted for that end.

Lewis XIV. rendered Toulon, from a pitiful village, a seaport of great
importance. He fortified both the town and harbor, for the ^^ception and
protection of the navy-royal. Its old and its new harbor, lie contiguous; and
by means of a canal, ships pass from the one to other, both of them having an
outlet into the spacious outer harbor. Its arsenal, established also by that
king, has a particular storehouse for each ship of war, its guns, cordage, etc.
being separately laid up. Here are spacious workshops for blacksmiths, joiners,
carpent^^, locksmiths carvers, etc. Its ropewalk, of stone, is 320 toises or
fathoms in length, with three arched walks. Its general magazine supplies
whatever may be wanting in the particular storehouses, and contains an immense
quantity of all kinds of stores, disposed in the greatest order. The other
principal town in France are mentioned in the Table.

RELIGION.] The established religion of this kingdom before the late Revolution
was the Roman Catholic; and since the years 1685, in which the edict of Nantes
was repealed, greatly to the prejudice of the kingdom, no other Christian sect
was legally tolerated. In some parts of the kingdom, at Bourdeaux and Metz,
Jews were tolerated under certain restrictions. The sect of Jansenists are very
numerous. The Gallican church has always been able to defend its liberties
against the encroachments of papal power, and it adopted only such parts of the
canon law as did not militate against its rights. The bishoprics and prebends
were entirely in the gift of the king. No other Catholic state, except those of
Italy, had so numerous a clergy as France: then were in this kingdom so late as
1784, 18 archbishops, 111 bishops 166,000 clergymen, 5400 convents, containing
200,000 persons devoted to a monastic life. Since the Revolution all religion
houses have been suppressed, and their immense (...) appropriated to public
uses. The revenues of the ecclesiastics of all kinds amounted to L 6,000,000
sterling.
The numbers of the clergy were then, however, greatly decreasing, and
according to some statements, they did not amount to more the 130,000 persons.
The revenues amounted as 121 millions of livres, but they were subject to heavy
taxation. The income of the bishops alone was estimated at 6,000,000 of livres.
Every diocese had a court, called bureau d^^^esain, the jurisdiction of which
respected the contributions payable by the clergy, and was limited to sums
under 20 livres. From these courts appeal might be made to nine Chambres
ccelefiastiques superieures.

The unsettled state of affairs in France, render it difficult, if not
impossible, to give a just account of the present state of Religion in that
kingdom.

Statement of the Annual REVENUE and EXPENDITURE of France, made out by M.
Necker, first Minister of the Finances, and delivered by him to the Assembly of
the States General, on the 4th of May, 1789.
REVENUE.
Livres. Pounds Sterling. Revenue farmed, called fermes generates, being the duty
on salt, on tobacco, entries at Paris, etc. 150,107,000 or 6,254,458 Post duty
12,000,000 500,000 Hackney-coaches, stage-coaches, and other public carriages
1,100,000 45,833 Duties on cattle sold at the markets of Sceaux and Poissy
630,000 26,250 Duties of affinage 130,000 5,000 Duties at port Louis in Britany
47,000 1,958 Duties compounded for in some of the maritime parts of Flanders
823,000 34,291 Aides, or duties on wines and spirits, and a variety of other
duties united under the direction of the same persons 50,220,000 2,092,500 The
royal domains and forests 50,000,000 2,083,333 Revenue carried over 265,047,000
11,043,623

EXPENDITURE.
Livres. Pounds Sterling. Expense of the household of the king, the queen, the
king's sister Madame Elizabeth, and his two aunts 25,000,000 or 1,041,666 Of
the king's brother, Monsieur, 2,296,000 Of Madame, wise to Monsieur 1,360,000
3,656,000 152,333 Of the Count d'Artois 2,296,000 Of the Countess d'Artois
1,360,000 Of the duke of Angouleme Sons to the Count d Artois 400,000 Of the
duke of Berry 300,000 4,356,000 191,000 Expenditure carried over 33,012,000
1,384,999

REVENUE BROUGHT OVER.
Livres. Pounds Sterling. Brought over 265,017,000 11,043,623 Lotteries
14,000,000 583,333 Duty on wrought gold, called the ma^e d'or 1,500,000 62,500
Powder and salt petre 800,000 33,333 Taxes; including the poll-tax, landtax,
etc. in Paris, and in the provinces called the Pays d' Ele^tun and Pay^ conquis
155,655,000 6,485,625 In Languedo^ 9,767,250 406,968 Britany 6,611,460 275,477
Provence 2,892,460 120,519 Pau, Bayonne, and Foix 1,156,650 48,193 Branches of
the poll Tax and land Tax that are farmed 575,000 23,958 Profit of the Mint
500,000 20,833 Profit at the Royal forges 80,000 3,333 Duties received by the
board of Commerce 636,000 26,500 Revenue carried over 466,349,000 19,431,202

EXPENDITURE BROUGHT OVER.
Livres. Pounds Sterling. Brought over 33,012,000 1,384,999 Department of foreign
affairs, including the expense at home and abroad, the secretary of state, the
public offices, ambassadors, ministers, secret service, etc. 5,150,000
Subsidies and succors to the duke of Parma 375,000 To the duke of Deux Ponts
500,000 To the prince of Nassau Saatbruck 100,000 Succors and annual
allowances to different foreigners 375,000 6,500,000 League with the Swiss
830,000 7,330,000 306,416 Expense of the Army, and every thing belonging to the
war department 99,091,000 4,128,794 Expenditure carried over (...) (...)

REVENUE BROUGHT OVER.
Brought over 466,349,000 19,431,202 Interest on about 36,230,000 livres owing
by the States of America. 1,600,000 66,666 Interest on 6,000,000 lent to the
duke of Deux Ponts 300,000 12,500 Rent on ground and houses belonging to the
hospital of the Quinze Vingts 180,000 7,500 Poll Tax and tenths deducted from
pensions, etc. 6,290,000 26^,083 Particular duties at fortified towns 575,000
23,958 Total of Revenue 475,294,000 19,803,909

EXPENDITURE BROUGHT OVER.
Brought over 1^^,4^3,000 5,^20,16^ Marine department and colonies 40,500,000
1,687,500 Bridges and highways 5,680,000 236,666 Steeds for breeding horses
814,000 33,916 Pensions 29,954,000 1,248,083 Allowances to different persons by
way of indemnity, for rights and privileges relinguished 3,167,000 131,958
Salaries to Counselors of State, and Magistrates 2,815,000 117,291 Wages and
allowances to persons in different employments 351,000 14,625 Intendants in the
provinces, and persons under them 1,413,000 58,875 Police of Paris 1,569,000
65,375 Guards, horse and foot, for the police of Paris 1,136,000 47,333 The
guards called Marechaussee of the Isle de France 251,000 10,458 Paving the
streets of Paris 627,000 26,125 Work in the quarries under Paris 400,000 16,666
Remissions and deductions made on taxes, etc. comm. an. 7,123,000 296,791
Allowances to the receivers and farmers general, and other expenses on the
receipts 19,511,000 ^12,958 Expenditure 254,744,000 10,614,784

REVENUE BROUGHT OVER.
Brought over 475,294,000 or 19,803,909 N. B. In this statement, the ecu of
three livres, is reckoned at two shillings and six pence sterling; for though
the exchange with France has for some months past been sometimes even under
twenty-six pence for the ecu, the medium rate of exchange is from thirty to
thirty-one pence.

EXPENDITURE BROUGHT OVER.
Brought over 254,744,000 10,614,784 Board and clerks of the treasury, payers
of the annuities, etc. 3,372,000 140,500 Board of the general administration of
the finances 2,345,000 97,708 Board of commerce, the mint, mines, and the board
for settling the affairs of the late East India company 794,000 33,083 Funds
reserved for acts of charity to distressed families 173,000 7,208 Succors to
the Dutch refugees in France 829,000 34,541 Religious communities, convents,
and repairs of sacred edifices 2,082,000 86,750 Gifts, alms, hospitals,
including the hospital for foundlings 3,635,000 151,458 Persons employed out of
charity in times scarcity 1,911,000 79,625 Houses for vagabonds in different
parts of the kingdom 1,144,000 47,666 Prizes, etc. for encouraging commerce and
manuactures 3,862,000 160,916 Royal garden for plants, and cabinet of natural
history 129,000 5,375 Expenditure carried over 275,0^0,000 11,4^9,614

REVENUE BROUGHT OVER.
Brought over 475,294,000 19,803,909

EXPENDITURE BROUGHT OVER
Brought over 275,020,000 11,459,614 Royal library 159,000 6,625 Universities,
academies, colleges, arts and sciences 1,004,000 41,833 Passports and
exemptions from duties to foreign ministers, etc. estimated at 400,000 16,666
Keeping up and constructing public buildings 1,874,000 78,083 Expenses of
Plantations, etc. in the forests, etc. 817,000 34,041 Expense of criminal
prosecutions and maintenance of prisoners 3,180,000 132,500 Various expenses,
local and variable, made in the provinces, of succors in cases of inundations,
encouragements to different useful establishments, etc. 4,500,000 187,500
Extraordinary and unforseen expenses, estimated at 5,000,000 208,333 Perpetual
annuities 56,796,924 161,466,390, instead of 161,466,000, in the addition
stated by M. Necker.
161,466,390 2,366,538 Life annuities 101,469,586 4,227,899 Tontines 3,199,880
133,328 Carried over 453,320,390 18,892,960

REVENUE BROUGHT OVER.
Brought over 475,294,000 19,803,909 Desiciency or the amount of what the
expenditure exceeded the revenue 56,239,000 2,313,291 531,533,000 22,147,200
Difference for the fraction 9 22,147,209

EXPENDITURE BROUGHT OVER.
Brought over 453,320,390 18,892,960 Interest of sums borrowed at different
times 44,856,000 1,869,0^0 Money owing to the clergy 2,500,000 10,166 Wages and
salaries of places and offices, purchased, and which may be considered as
interest on money borrowed 14,729,000 613,708 Interest and expense of
anticipations, on the revenue of 1790 and 1791 15,800,000 658,333 Total livre,
531,205,390 22,138,167

PARIS, 1 st May, 1789. Signed, DUFRESNE, and examined, NECKER.



The foregoing statement of the Revenue and Expenditure of France before the
late revolution, may be considered as (...) most (...) of any that has been
laid before the public. The experience of the Minister of Finance, aided by the
(...) assistance of man who had long been in o^^^e, enabled him to produce the
exact^st information (...) the (...) (...) the (...) was produced precludes
every idea of (...).

ARMY.] In 1784 the whole French army consisted of infantry, 144,624 ^^alry,
58,176 M^^^rs, 9,798 ^^^^ers, 326 Total, 212,924

The following is said to be an actual statement of the French army, a reported
to the national assemble, in the summer of 1792, by a com^^^^ of twelve,
appointed for the purpose:

TROOPS OF THE LINE.
Marshal Luckner.
^^^^stive men in the field, 23,049 (...) the several garrisons, 15,375 Total,
38,424 To complete the regiment of which these troops consist, there are
wanting, 5409 (...) that when the regiments are complete, the number of
effective men will be, 43,833

M. la Fayette.
M^ssive men in the field, 23,227 In the several garrisons, 15,127 Total,
38,354 (...) to complete the several regimonts, 7020 Wanting complete they will
be, 45,374

M. Lamoliere.
(...) field, 20,94^ (...) ^^rison, 11,630 Total, 32,573 Wanting to complete
the several regiments, 4,924 (...) complete they will be, 37,497

M. Montesq^^ieu.
In the field, 23,380 (...), 10,841 Total, 34,221 Wanting to complete the
several regiments, 8,650 (...) complete they will be, 38,871

(...) four armies, the troops in the field, including some compa^^^ly joined,
are 90,599; in garrison 54,173; making, together, (...) Wanting to complete the
regiments 21,885; so that, when (...), the four armies will consist of 66,657.

^^^^interior of the kingdom are 21,375 men; and when the reg^^^^ completed
they will be 26,375.

(...) ^^^^ies them are 12,564.

The whole effective men of the troops of the line, are 178,518; and when
completed they will be 205,286.

NATIONAL GUARDS.
With Luckner 21,000 With Fayette 22,000 On the Rhine 26,000 In the South
25,000 In the Colonies 5,000 In the Interior 3,500 Total, 92,500

The troops lately voted by the national assembly, and partly raised, will
amount to 171,774. The troops of the line and volunteer national guards, when
completed will amount to 400,000; and of these 201,000 are actually in the
field, or in garrison.

NAVY.] In 1785, France had 256 ships, viz. Ships of the line 72 Frigates 74
Corvettes 28 Galleys 36 Cutters 27 Fire ships 19 256

In the year 1780, 1782, the number of ships was 266.

The navy department is divided into the western and eastern departments (du
Ponent and du Levant) the first of which has again three subdivisions. The
chief ports of the royal navy are those of Toulon, Breast, Port Louis,
Rochefort, and Havre de Grace; that of Cherb^^^^ has lately been repaired.

All naval affairs are under the management of the Secretaire de la Marine; the
chief commander of the fleet is the Lord Admiral France. There are in France
six naval academics, and many military schools, for the formation, of sea and
land officers.

CONSTITUTION.] The French constitution, finally decreed by the National
Assembly, and presented to the king on the 3d, and accepted by him on the 13th
of Sept. 1701, contains a declaration of the rights of a man and citizen; a
guarantee of natural and civil rights, and a frame of government. The
declaration asserts, among other things. That all men are born and remain free
and equal in rights -- That these rights are liberty, property, security and
resistance against oppression -- That the principle of sovereignty resides
essentially in the nation -- That liberty consists in the power of doing every
thing, except that which is hurtful to another -- That the law has a right to
forbid those action only that are hurtful to society -- That the law is the
expression of the general will -- That no person can be accused, arrested or
de^^^i^^ except in the cases, and according to the forms, prescribed by (...).
That no person shall be molested for his opinions, even such as are religious,
provided they be consistent with public order -- That (...) citizen may freely
speak, write and publish his sentiments; (...), however, to answer for the
abuse of that liberty, in cases dete^^^ by the law -- That society has a right
to demand from every (...) (...), an account of his administration -- That no
person can be deprived of his property, except when the public necessity,
legally ascertained, shall evidently require it, and on condition of a just and
pre^^^^ indemnification.

The constitution, established on these principles, declares. That there is no
longer nobility or peerage, or hereditary distinctions, or distinctions of
orders, or feudal system, or patrimonial jurisdiction or any of the titles,
denominations and prerogatives derived from them, or any g^^ers of chivalry,
corporations or decorations, for which proofs of (...) were required, or which
supposed distinctions of birth, or any (...) superiority, but that of public
officers, in the exercise of their ^^tions -- That no public office is any
longer saleable or hereditary -- That the law no longer recognizes religious
vows or any other engage^^^ts contrary to natural rights, or to the
constitution.

The constitution guarantees, as natural and civil rights, among others, That
all citizens are admissible to places and employments without any distinction,
but that of ability and virtue -- That all contributions shall be divided
equally among all the citizens in proportion to their mean -- That the same
crimes shall be subject to the same punishments without any distinction of
persons -- That the citizens have a right to choose the ministers of their
worship -- It promises that a national festival shall be established to
preserve the memory of the French revolution, (...) and that a code of civil
law small be framed for the common use of the whole kingdom.

By the constitution, the kingdom is one and indivisible; its territory ^or
administration, is divided into 83 departments, each department into districts,
each district into cantons. -- Those, by the constitution are French citizens
who are the offspring of French men or ^^ch women, whether born in the kingdom,
or in foreign countries, provided their fixed residence be in France. -- The
legislature may nat^^^ize a foreigner on no other condition than that of his
residing in ^^^ce, and taking the civic oath. -- The civic oath is -- * I swear
to be faithful to the nation, the law and the king; and to maintain with all my
(...) the constitution of the kingdom decreed by the National Assembly during
the years 1789,1790 and 1791.

(...) constitution declares. That the sovereignty is one, indivisible,
^^^^enable, and imprescriptible, and it belongs to the nation -- That the
nation, from which alone flow all powers, cannot exercise them (...) by
delegation -- The French constitution is representative -- The representatives
are the legislative body and the king.

The government is monarchical. The legislative power is delegated (...)
National Assembly, consisting of one chamber only; composed of representatives,
freely chosen by the people every two years, and to be exercised by this
assembly, with the sanction of the king, in manner (...) determined -- The
legislative body shall not be dissolved by (...) -- The executive power is
delegated to the king, to be exer^^^ under his authority, by ministers and
other responsible agents, in (...) afterward determined.

(...) constitution declares, that the number of representatives to the (...)
body shall be 745; and that they shall be distributed among (...) departments,
according to the three proportions of land, of (...), and the contribution
direct. -- Of the 745 representatives, 247 are attached to the land -- 249 to
the population, and 249 to (...) contribution. In order to form a legislative
National Assembly, the active citizens shall convene every two years on the
second Sunday (...) March, if not sooner convoked, in primary assemblies, in
the cities and cantons. To be an active citizen, it is necessary to be a
Frenchman, or to have become a Frenchman -- to have attained 25 years, complete
-- to have resided in the city or canton during the period determined by law --
to pay a contribution, to the value, at least, of 3 days labor -- (...) to be
a servant receiving wages -- to be inscribed in the municipality of the place
of his residence, in the list of the national guards -- and to have taken the
civic oath. -- Every 6 years the legislative body shall (...) the maximum and
minimum of the value of a days labor. The pri^^ry assemblies shall name
electors, in proportion to the number of (...) citizens residing in the city or
canton, viz. one elector for 100 (...) citizens; two electors, from 150 to 2^0,
and so on in this proportion. In order to be nominated an elector, a man crust
have the qualification of an active citizen, and also, in towns of above 6000
souls, must (...) property, or the usufruct or property, valued on the rolls of
contribution at a rent equal to the local value of ^00 days labor; or be the
^^^ter of a habitation, valued, on the same tolls, at a rent equal to the value
of 150 days labor. In towns of less than 6000 souls. -- must (...) property,
or the usufruct of property, valued as above, at a rent, equal to 150 days
labor; or be the render of a habitation, valued at a rent, equal to 100 days
labor; and in the country -- must possess property or the usufruct of
property, valued, as above, at a rent equal to 15o days labor; or of being
farmer or lessee of property valued at a rent equal to 400 days labor.

The electors named in each department shall convene, of full (...), if they
have not been convoked by the proper officers, on the last Sunday in March, to
choose the number of representatives, whose nomination shall belong to their
department, and a number of substituted equal to a third of the
representatives. The representatives and ^^^^tutes shall be chosen by a
majority of voters, from the active citi^^^ of the department. All active
citizens, whatever be their state, profession, or contribution, may be chosen
as representatives of the nation, except ministers and other agents of the
executive power, commi^^^ners of the national treasury, collectors and
receivers of the direct c^^^^ib^^ions, superintendants of the indirect
contributions and national domains, civil and military officers of the king's
household. The exercise of the municipal, ministrative and judiciary functions,
shall be incompatible with the function of a representative of the nation doing
every period of the legislature. The members of the legislative body may be
re-elected to a subsequent legislature, but not afterward, until an interval of
one legislature. The representatives named in the departments, shall not be
representatives of a particular department, but of the whole nation, and no
instructions can be given them.

No active citizen can enter or vote in an assembly, if he be equal. In no
case, under no pretext, shall be king, or any agents (...) by him, interfere in
questions relative to the regularity of the ^^^^tion, the sitting of
assemblies, the form of elections, or the (...) rights of citizens, without
prejudice to the functions of the king (...) missioners, in cases determined by
law, when questions relative to the political rights of citizens are to be
brought before the tribunals.

The representative shall convene on the first Monday of May, at the place of
the sitting of the last legislature. The eldest of their ^^mber shall preside
in order to verify the powers of the representation present. When 373
representative shall be present, and their powers verified, they shall
constitute themselves under the title of "The Legislative National Assembly" --
name a president, vice president, and secretaries, and enter on business. The
representatives shall pro^^^ce in a body, in the name of the French people, the
oath -- "To (...) (...), OR DIE." -- They shall then individually take the
civic (...). The representatives of the nation are inviolable.

The royalty is indivisible, and delegated hereditary to the race on the throne
from male to male, and by order of primogeniture to the ^^^^etual exclusion of
women, and their descendants. -- The person of (...) king is inviolable: His
only title is "KING OF THE FRENCH." There is no authority in France superior to
that of the law. The king (...) only by it, and it is only in the name of the
law that he can re^^^^ obedience. The king, one his accession to the throne, or
at the (...) of his majority, shall take to the nation, in the presence of the
legislative body, the oath. "To ^e faithful to the nation and the law, to
^^^loy all the power delegated to him, to maintain the constitution de^^^d by
the Constituent National Assembly to the years 1789, 1790, (...), and to cause
the laws to be executed." If the king does not (...) this oath within one month
after an invitation by the legislative (...), or if, after taking it, he shall
retract; if the king put himself at the land of an army, and direct the forces
of it against the nation, or if he do not oppose, by a formal act, any such
enterprise undertaken in his name; or if the king shall go out of the kingdom,
and if after ^^^ing invited by a proclamation of the legislative body, he do
not re^^^^, in the delay to be fixed by the proclamation, and not to be less
(...) two months; in either of these cases he shall be held to have ab^^^^ed
the throne, be ranked in the class of citizens, and may be accu^^^ and tried
like them, for acts posterior to his abdication. The con^^^tion provides for
the splendour of the throne by a civil list, and al^^^^ the king, besides the
guard of honor, a guard paid out of the civil (...), not exceeding 1200
infantry and 600 horse.

The king is a manor till the age of 13 complete; and during his ^^ority there
shall be a regent of the kingdom, who must be a relation of the king, the next
in degree according to the order of succession (...) the throne, 23 years of
age, a Frenchman, resident in the kingdom, (...) a presumptive heir to any
other crown, and have previously taken the civic oath; or if the minor king
have no relation thus qualified, a (...) shall be chosen by electors in each
district, appointed for the purpose. The regency of the kingdom confers no
right over the person of the minor king, the care of whom shall be confided to
his ^^^er* or, in case he have no mother, or she legally disqualified, (...)
the legislative body.

The presumptive heir to the crown shall bear the name of Royal (...). He
cannot go out of the kingdom, without a decree of the National Assembly and the
consent of the king: If, when out of the kingdom, (...) be required by the
legislative body to return to France, and (...), he is held to have abdicated
the right of succession to the (...). To the king alone, belongs the choice and
revocation of ministers; who are responsible for all the offenses committed by
them against the national safety and the constitution; and in no case can the
written or verbal order of a king, shelter a minister from responsibility.

The constitution delegates to the legislative body, the powers and functions
which are usually given to such bodies. The king can only invite the
legislative body to take an object into consideration. War cannot be resolved
on but by a decree of the National Assembly, passed on the formal and necessary
proposition of the king, and sanctioned by him. It belongs exclusively to the
legislative body to ratify treaties of peace, alliance and commerce. The
executive power cannot march, or quarter, or station any troops of the line
within 30,000 toises of the legislative body, without their consent. The
deliberations of the legislative body, shall be public, and the minutes of the
sittings be printed.

The decrees of the legislative body are presented to the king, who may refuse
them his assent; but his refusal is only suspensive. When the two following
legislatures shall successively present the same decree, in the same terms in
which it was originally decreed, the king shall be deemed to have given his
sanction. The king must express his assent or refusal within two months after
the decree is presented to him. If he assents, he must say -- "The king
consents and will cause it to be executed." -- If he refuses, he must say --
"The king will examine." --

When the legislative body is definitively constituted, it shall send a
deputation to inform the king. The king may every year open the session, and
propose the objects, which, during its continuance, he thinks ought to be taken
into consideration; this form, however, is not to be considered as necessary to
the activity of the legislative body. Eight days, at least, before the end of
each session, the legislative body shall send a depution to the king, to
announce to him the day on which it proposes to terminate its sittings: The
king may come in order to close the session.

The supreme executive power resides exclusively in the hands of the king, who
is the supreme head of the general administration of the kingdom, and also of
the land and sea forces. He appoints ambassadors -- bestows the command of
armies and fleets, and makes all other appointments, and transacts all other
business which commonly appertain to the office of supreme magistrate. The king
alone can interfere in foreign political connexions, conduct negotiations, make
preparations of war, distribute the land and sea forces, as he shall judge most
suitable, and regulate their direction in case of war. Every declaration of war
shall be made in these terms -- "By the king of the French, in the name of the
Nation." -- It belongs to the king to agree upon and sign, with all foreign
powers, all treaties of peace, alliance and commerce, and other conventions,
which he shall judge necessary for the welfare of the state, saving the
ratification of the legislative body.

The judicial power can, in no case, be exercised by the legislative body or
the king. Justice shall be gratuitously rendered by judges chosen for a time by
the people, instituted by letters patent of the king, who cannot refuse the
same; and who cannot be deposed, except from a forfeiture duly judged, or
suspended, except from an accusation admitted. The public accuser shall be
named by the people. The tribunals cannot either interfere in the exercise of
the legislative power, or suspend the execution of the laws, or undertake the
administrative functions. There shall be one or more judges of peace in the
cantons and in the cities. In the criminal matters, no citizen can be judged,
except on an accusation received by jurors or decreed by the legislative body
in the cases in which it belongs to it to prosecute the accusations. After the
accusation shall be admitted, the fact shall be examined, and declared by the
jurors. The party accused shall have the privilege of rejecting twenty. The
jurors who declare the fact shall not be fewer than twelve. The application of
the law shall be made by judges. The process shall be public, and the accused
cannot be denied counsel. No man acquitted by legal jury, can be apprehended or
accused again on account of the same fact.

For the whole kingdom there shall be one tribunal of errors, established near
the legislative body. Its functions shall be to pronounce, on applications to
quash judgments, tendered by the tribunals in the last resort -- On
applications to refer causes from one tribunal to another on lawful grounds of
suspicion -- On questions respecting jurisdiction or cognizance, and suits
brought against a whole tribunal for illegal or corrupt judgment -- The
tribunal of errors can never determine on the merits of a case.

A high national court, composed of members of the tribunal of errors and high
jurymen, shall have cognizance of crimes ministers and principal agan^s of the
executive power, and of crimes against the general safety of the state, when
the legislative body shall have issued a decree of accusation. They shall not
convene but on the proclamation of the legislative body, and at the distance of
30,000 toises at least from the place where the legislature shall hold its
sessions.

The constituent national assembly declares, that the nation has the
unalienable right of altering the constitution; and the constitution
accordingly, prescribes the mode in which alterations shall be made.

The French colonies and possession in Asia, Africa and America, although they
constitute a part of the French empire, are not included in the present
constitution.

The Constituent National Assembly, commits this deposit to the fidelity of the
legislative body, of the king and of the judges; to the vigilance of others of
families, to wives and mothers; to the affection of young citizens, and to the
courage of Frenchmen.

(Signed) VERNIER, President.

HISTORY OF THE DATE REVOLUTION.] To give some idea of the orig^ of this
memoriable event, we must take notice, that the liberties of France, as well as
those of Britain, were secured by their parliaments; but in the French
constitution there was this capital defect, that the offices of its members
were attached to particular families, titles or situations; so that though the
sanction of parliament was requisite for rendering every act of the king valid,
they never were in a condition to refuse it. By degrees it was generally
perceived by the people, that this excessive power with which the monarch was
invested did not originate either in the principles of the constitution, or the
natural rights of mankind; but, as the kings were always in possession of a
great standing army, any attempt at innovation would have been exceedingly
dangerous. After the conclusion of the treaty of Paris in 1763, the French
ministry seemed to adopt a plan different from, what they had formerly pursued.
Justly supposing that the immense trade carried on by the British was the true
source of their power, they lessened the army in order to increase the marine;
and in this they succeeded so well, that in the last war the French navy became
much more formidable to Britain than ever it had been. But by this improvement,
the power of the king, whose despotism could only be supported by a great
standing army, was lessened of course. The army which assisted the Americans
imbibed from them enthusiastic notions of liberty, which they would probably
diffuse among their countrymen, and consequently render them more impatient of
the tyranny they labored under than they were before. Besides this, the vast
expenses attending the war with Britain had augmented the national debt far
beyond every resource which the kingdom could afford, so that government were
put to the last shift in order to carry on the necessary operations. In 1776,
the finances had been put under the direction of M. Neckar, a native of
Switzerland, and a Protestant, by whom a general reformation was made
throughout every department in the revenue. In the beginning of the year 1780,
a variety of unnecessary offices in the royal household were abolished, as well
as many salutary regulations made for the public benefit. By his activity, the
excess of disbursements above the revenue, which in the year 1776, had amounted
to at least a million sterling, was converted into an excess of revenue above
the disbursements, amounting to 445,000l. These reformations, however, not
being calculated to please such as had found their interest in the abuses of
revenue, he was dismissed, and others more agrreable to the views of the
courtiers appointed. Succeeding ministers being endowed neither with the
integrity nor abilities of M. Neckar, the finances and credit of the nation
were on the point of being entirely ruined, when the assembly of notables was
convened. This assembly had been instituted in the early ages, and was composed
of archbishops, bishops, various presidents of the different parliaments, and
deputies of the different states. Thus it was a proper representation of the
whole kingdom, and as such had been frequently called in times of public danger
and distress. The minister at this time was M. de la Calonne, who is
acknowledged not to be possessed of that disinterestedness for which M. Neckar
was so eminently distinguished. He is said to have prevented the Assembly from
sitting, from the 2^th of January 1787, when it was convened, to the 22d of
February; and to this the subsequent revolution is said immediately to have
been owing; as, during then interval, an opportunity was given to the members
of conversing with each other, communicating their complaints, and forming
schemes for redress.

When the Assembly at last met for business, the king told them, that the
object of their meeting was to improve the revenues; to ascertain their freedom
by a more equal partition of taxes; to disengage the commerce of the kingdom
from some of its embarassments; and to support, as far as possible, the poorer
part of the community. M. de Calonne acknowledged the deficiency of the annual
revenue to be about 80 millions of livres (about three millions sterling) which
deficiency he traced as far back as the time of Cardinal Fleury, preceptor, and
afterward minister to Louis XV. The Abbe Terai, he said, had found the
deficiency at 74 millions, and left it at ^0; while M. Neckar, who had found it
at 37 in the year 1776, had (...) It it at 56* in 1780; and in 18 months after
that time it had risen to 80. M. Ne^^^^ offered to refute this charge; but
Calonne refused to enter into ^^y discussion of the matter, and the king would
not allow of an Inquiry. On a fair state of the case, however, it appeared that
the deficiency of the revenue was at least 130 millions; and this was the more
alarming, as during the administration of Calonne, no less than six hundred
millions of debt had fallen in. The remedy he proposed (...) a general tax on
land, and a stamp act. This last, called the Tim^^^, occasioned the greatest
alarm. It was even said, that every letter, which at any time might be adduced
as a proof in a process at law, was to be stamped. Calonne's speech was
published and severely criticized; he was supposed to have traced the
deficiency of the revenue very high, in order to conceal his own faults; and he
was opposed by the nobility and clergy; whose privileges he was supposed to
have invaded by his land tax. In short, so great were the difficulties and
embarra^^^^^ of the minister, that he appealed from this Assembly to the
people, ^^ming the Notables for their opposition, as he did not mean to (...)
any new tax on the people, but to relieve them. In a general (...), on the 23d
of April, the king expressed his sorrow for the (...) deficiency of revenue,
and promised a more exact economy for the (...); but concluded with mentioning
the stamp act. The Notables received the speech with the utmost applause, but
ventured to inquire into the necessity of a new tax, the proposed term of its
duration, and the nature and extent of the savings to be made by it. This
uncom^^^ boldness did not give offense: The king condescended to enter (...)
particulars, and calculated the increase of revenue at 40 millions: The
Notables proceeded in their inquiries, and it was now suggested that an
Assembly of the States should be called, as the Notables were (...) competent
to impose a new tax. As the deliberations of the Notables were not carried on
in secret, this proposal was instantly circulated through the capital, and
supposed to be a new discovery. The Notables were soon after dissolved, without
having accomplished any thing, excepting the justification of M. Neckar. During
their researches into (...) affairs of the revenue, it was found, that at the
end of his administration, there was an excess of ten millions annually; while
at present the six hundred millions which were fallen in* had not been
accounted (...), and a deficiency of between 130 and 140 millions was to be
supposed.

The Assembly of Notables was succeeded by the establishment of the Council of
Finance; a free passage for corn was allowed from one province to another; and
the Cor^ee^, or personal services to the (...) were abolished by edict; but at
the same time, the stamp act was established. It extended to all letters and
commissions for ev^^^ office and place, either honorary or useful; for every
grant, title, o^ concession; ^^^^cites for study; grants under the privy seal;
commissions in the (...) of the king; accounts and receipts of every king, etc.
etc.

The weight of this tax was looked upon to be so intolerable, that (...)
parliament refused to register it. Instead of this, they called, in (...), for
accounts, till, in the discussion of the affair, it was also (...) to be
discovered, that the parliament had no right to tax, but (...) existed only in
the States General. The peers were convened (...) parliament on the 30th, and
joined with them in all their views. A bed of justice was held by the king on
the 5th of August, at which the parliament was obliged to attend, and the edict
was registered notwithstanding their protest to the contrary. Ten days after,
they were banished to Troyes, and the edict registered, by authority, in the
Chamber of Accounts, and the Court of Aids; though each body joined the
parliament in their opposition and protests, applauding them for their firmness
and propriety of conduct.

The banishment of the parliament of Paris, was resented so much by the whole
nation, that in a short time it was found necessary to recall them, and matters
were for a time conciliated; though on this occasion* it is said, that the
parliament departed from the principles they had formerly proceeded upon.
Disturbances, however, were very soon revived. The parliament of Bourdeaux was
banished in the month of August, the same year, and the consequences were
similar to what have been related concerning that of Paris. The latter was
scarcely recalled, when they were desired to register a loan to be taken up by
gradual instalments, which, the minister pretended, would in 1792, render the
revenues more than equivalent to the expenses; but as this loan amounted to no
less than 340 millions, somewhat more than 15 millions sterling, the parliament
hesitated, notwithstanding all the man^^^^^ of the minister. At last the king
himself came to the house, and held what is called a Royal Session. The edicts
were now registered, but the duke of Orleans protested, in the presence of the
king, against the legality of the proceeding. The parliament protested against
the legality of the session itself, but to no purpose. The duke of Orleans,
with four others, were banished; the king called for the journals of the house,
destroyed the protest, and forbade it to be inserted again. Great clamours were
raised by the banishment of the duke of Orleans, and other members of
parliament; remonstrances were presented by the parliaments of Paris,
Bourdeaux, and Rennes, but the exiles were not recalled till the spring of 1788.

Toward the end of 1787, matters were apparently in a state of tranquillity,
the loans being filled, and the royal payments exact. Secret discontents and
commotions, however, had undoubtedly taken place; the passion for liberty,
which had already displayed itself in great freedom of speech, continued to
gain ground, and at last broke forth with irresistible fury in the month of
June, 1789. The National Assembly, or Estates of the Kingdom, were then
sitting* and had been so for some time, when on the 20th of the month, an
address to the king was presented by the nobility, complaining that "the
deputies of the Third Estate had attempted to center, in their own persons, the
whole authority of the States General, without waiting for the concurrence of
the other orders, or the sanction of his Majesty -- that they had attempted to
convert their decrees into laws; and had ordered them to be printed, published
and distributed in the provinces; had repealed, and re-enacted the taxes, and
seemed to attribute to themselves the united rights of the monarch, and the
three great orders who compose the States General." In consequence of this the
king issued a proclamation, intimating that he would hold a Royal Session in
two days. At (...) in the morning, Mr. Baillie, the president of the commons,
went to the hall with his two secretaries, but found the door shut, and guarded
by soldiers; the hall was also filled with soldiers, and all the benches (...).
The commanding officer informed them that he had orders to allow nobody to
enter the hall; to which the president replied, that he had no orders to
discontinue the meetings of the National Assembly; but was again told, that
positive orders had been given to allow nobody to enter the halls of the States
General before the Royal Sessions. It was then moved by Mr. Target, an eminent
lawyer, and member for Paris, that an oath should be taken by all the members
of the Assembly, that they were called together to six the constitution, and
operate the regeneration of public order; that nothing could prevent them from
continuing their deliberations, in whatever place they were compelled to hold
their meetings; that wheresoever the members are collected, there the National
Assembly is; and that each member take a solemn ^^th never to separate, but to
assemble together wherever circumstances require, until the constitution be
established, and consolidated on proper foundations.

This proposal was received with loud acclamations; the oath was signed by the
president and members, as well as by the deputies from St. Domingo, who
requested leave to do so; after which the National Assembly proceeded to
business. They began with resolving that an address should be presented to the
king, for augmenting the pay of the national troops of France, to an equality
with those of foreigners in the French service, viz. from four and a half to
six and half sous per dry; thus conciliating the army to their side, in case
there should be occasion for their assistance in the affair. These proceedings
were far from being agreeable to his Majesty. On the 23d of June, he held a
session of the Three Estates, to whom he made a speech, complaining that (...)
was not seconded in his benevolent intentions; that the States General had been
sitting more than two months, without having even agreed ^n the preliminaries
of their operations. Instead of consulting the (...) of their country, they had
raised an opposition, and made pre^^^sions to which they were not entitled. His
Majesty considered it (...) incumbent upon him to destroy the seeds of these
fatal divisions* and (...) called upon the two principal classes, the nobility
and clergy, to assist (...) in his endeavors, and to propose a reunion of
consultation and opinion, which ought to take place for the general good of the
kingdom. A declaration was then read by the keeper of the seals, consisting of
35 articles, by way of concession to his subjects, the most remarkable of which
were the abolition of lettres de cachet; the liberty of the press left to the
judgment of the States; the present States General to six the manner of
convening the next, and to form the provincial ^^^es; custom houses to be
removed to the frontiers; the salt duty to be softened till it could be
abolished; civil and criminal justice to be reformed by the king; corvees and
mortmain to be abolished, and no (...) imposed without the consent of the
States, etc. After this declaration* the king, and keeper of the seals left the
hall; but the Tiers Etat, or Commons, remained, with some of the nobility and
clergy who had joined them, and passed some very spirited resolutions in
support of (...) they had already done. Next day the oath was subscribed by the
duke of Orleans* at the head of 40 of the principal nobility, and (...) of the
clergy. They now began to exert themselves in the cause (...) with great
spirit. On the introduction of a deputation from (...) ^^bles, the president of
the commons was not allowed to address them in the usual terms, "I have the
honor to acquaint you;" but, "I am requested to acquaint you." In taking the
oath, it was insisted that the country should be put before the king. A
proposal of ^^nulling all the taxes, and laying them on by the authority of the
National Assembly was made by Mr. Target, and instantly agreed to without one
dissonting voice.

In the mean time, the commons had the satisfaction to find that their
proceedings were agreeable to the nation at large. Deputations were received,
not only from the inhabitants of Paris, but from the election of the provinces,
assuring the assembly of their firm support and denomination to stand or fall
with them in the cause they had undertakes. But while thus employed, to the
mutual satisfaction of themselves and of the people, the commons received a
message from the king, commanding them to depart from the hall. Some of them
replied, that they might be taken out dead, but would not go alive. The
soldiery were then commanded to interfere, but they positively refused; and the
king was informed by the commander in chief, the Duc de Chatelet, that he could
not answer for the safety of his royal person, if the orders given to the
troops were to be enforced. His Majesty then (...) a letter to the nobility and
clergy, desiring them to join the co^^^^ which was accordingly done; but any
little hope of accommodation which might now take place was entirely overthrown
by the following accident. Two soldiers of the French guards formed a design of
entering the National Assembly, in order to complain of the Duc de Chatelet,
their colonel, in the name of the whole regiment. With this view they had
dressed themselves in plain cloths; but being observed by the duke, they were
by him committed to prison. From (...) they sent a letter to the Assembly,
informing them of the danger in which they were, on account of the patriotic
behavior of the ^^^ment who had refused to fire on their countrymen. This
letter produced the most astonishing effect. A multitude of people set (...)
from the Palais royal, where the friends of liberty were assembled, with a
design to release the prisoners. As they proceeded on their journey, they were
joined by many thousands of others, among whom were a number of the French
guards. Having procured the necessary instruments, as they went along, the
gates and bolts of the prison were forced, and the prisoners released in less
than an hour. Troops of ^^goons and hussars were sent for, but they refused to
act, drank with the multitude, and joined in their acclamations.

Such an alarming tumult could not fail to affect even the bold^^^ patrsots. A
deputation was therefore sent, at the motion of Mr. Target, to the king,
requesting him to take effectual measures for putting an end to the present
troubles, and to forgive what was pact. His Majesty consented, and the Assembly
continued its proceedings, Some of the nobility and clergy attempted to enter a
protest against every thing that had been done, but they were overpowed by a
vast ^^^jority. The presidency of the Assembly was offered to the duke of
Orleans, but on his declining the office, it was offered to the archbishop of
Vienne, who accepted it. The king, however, perceiving his authority almost
annihilated, resolved to overawe the Assembly by (...) camping his troops in
the neighborhood. This excited a (...) alarm, and the Assembly became
tumultuous. M. Mirabeau now (...) (...) to distinguish himself as a speaker.
After taking notice that the nation of the troops was an infringement on the
liberty of the Assembly, and that the very finding them in provisions in such a
time of scarcity must be a grievance, they being no less than 35,000 in number,
he proposed an address to the king, praying that he would order back the troops
to the place from whence they came, together with the train of artillery they
had along with them; and informing him, that in case any disturbances were
apprehended at Paris or Versailles, he night raise companies of armed burghers,
who would be a sufficient protection. This address was presented, but the king
did not think proper to send away his troops, though he assured the Assembly
that they had nothing to fear, and offered to remove the place of their sitting
to Noyon, or Soissons.

These assurances seem to have removed the apprehensions of the Assembly. They
now proceeded to consider the dismission of M. Neck^^ and his associates in the
ministry; they presented an address to the king, in which they set forth the
virtues of the dismissed ministers, assuring his Majesty that the nation
neither could nor would have any confidence in the new ones. They represented
the horrors of the scene which must ensue, if the troops should act against the
Parisians, and ^^^posed to send a committee to the capital to prevent
bloodshed. To this an unfavourable answer was given; the king refusing either
to remove the troops, or to allow the committee to be sent to Paris. This
answer produced a number of spirited resolutions; among which was the
following: "That this Assembly, dreading the fatal consequences which this
Majesty's answer may produce, must continue to insist upon the removal of the
troops, drawn together in an extraordinary manner, in the neighborhood of
Paris and Versailles; and upon the establishment of armed bodies of citizens."
These resolutions were taken on the 13th of July, and next day the people began
to arm themselves; a party of troops entered the capital, but the French guards
having (...) the people, only a slight skirmish happened, in which two drag^^^,
of the duke de Choiseuil's regiment, were killed and two wounded. The troops
then left the city, and the people proceeded to act openly in support of the
cause of liberty. The police of the city was now entirely without influence,
and its place was supplied by armed ^^ighers; the shops were shut up: a general
consternation prevailed (...) over the city; and it was proposed to raise a
militia of 48,000 men.

The first exploit performed by these patriots, was forcing the convent of St.
Laylare, where they found a considerable quantity of corn, as well as of arms
and ammunition, supposed to have been brought ^^^ther from the arsenal, as to a
place of security. Next day the hospital of invalids was summoned to surrender,
and taken possession of (...) a slight resistance. The cannon, small arms, and
ammunition were seized, and thus all the citizens, who chose to arm themselves,
was supplied with what was necessary. The ammunition lodged in the Bastile was
then demanded the same evening. A flag of truce had ^^^^eded the body of people
who made the demand, and was answered (...) within; but, nevertheless, the
commandant gave orders to his (...) to fire, and killed several of them.
Enraged at this proceeding, they rushed forward to assault the place. The
governor than consent^^ to admit a certain number of them, upon condition that
they should make no disturbance. This being readily agreed to, about 40 passed
the draw bridge, which was instantly drawn up, and the whole party massacred,
Exasperated at this, the people assaulted the fortress with such violence that
it soon surrendered; and the governor, with some of the more active persons in
this treachery were put to death, and their heads carried on pikes round the
city. Only four or five prisoners were found in the Bastile. Some account say
seven.

This affair has been differently represented; and the public must patiently
wait for (...) authenticated account of this, and other particulars of this
interesting Revolution, till (...) shall be fully accomplished and national
tranquillity restored.
The king now perceiving that all the troops he could command would be
insufficient to quell the insurrection, repaired to the Assembly, and informed
them, that he had ordered the troops to retire to a certain distance from Paris
and Versailles. This speech was received with universal applause; and soon
after the troops had retired, the marquis de la Fayette, who distinguished
himself so much in the army of the United States, was appointed to command the
Paris militia, along with M. Bailly, Prevot de Marchands. The number of armed
men in the capital were now computed at 150,000. The king put himself into the
hands of the citizens, and passed through Paris to the Hotel de Ville, escorted
only by them. On entering that place, he declared that he appeared there only
to gratify the wishes of the people, and to assure them of his readiness to do
every thing in his power to restore tranquillity to the city. In return he
received every testimony of affection that could be expressed by a numerous and
orderly people. This was followed by a dismission of all his new servants, and
the recall of Mr. Neckar.

All this time the patriotic party continued to gain ground. The capital was
guarded by the militia; the troops removed speedily to the places from whence
they came: The Duc de Chatelet resigned his command; and several changes were
made in the ministry. The Duc de Liancourt was chosen president of the National
Assembly in room of the archbishop of Vienne, whose time was expired; and the
king, hearing that a number of his guards had joined the militia, granted leave
to the marquis de la Fayette to retain as many as chose to stay; at the same
time, he authorized the guards to enter among the militia* with a promise to
continue their pay and maintenance till the city was reduced into a state of
tranquillity.

Though this extraordinary revolution was attended with much less bloodshed
than what usually accompanies affairs of this kind, yet it was not wholly
bloodless. Besides those who perished immediately in the affair of the Bastile,
several other victims were offered up at the shrine of liberty. One of these
was M. de Foulon* late intendant of Paris, who was accused of having caused, or
increased the scarcity in that capital. To avoid the popular fury, he had
spread a report of his death, and retired to his house in the country. Here he
was discovered, and dragged to Paris, where he was first hanged, his head then
cut off, and carried upon a pole to meet his son-in-law, M. Berthier, the
intendant at that time, whose death had been already determined upon, and who
had been seized at Compeigne. The marquis de la Fayette interceded for Berthier
as far as he could with safety but to no purpose. In the provinces the most
grievous disorders took place. In Britanny several regiments laid down their
arms when ordered out against the insurgents. At Havre de Grace the whole
garrison left the fort on bearing what had happened at Paris, and the burghers
immediately took possession of it. A most melancholy affair happened at
Besancon, which at once discovered the greatest cruelty and depravity in the
perpetrators. The people there having resolved to celebrate the revolution at
Paris by rejoicings, a nobleman of the opposite party, by name M. de Mesmay*
projected the horrid scheme of pretending to enter into the views of the
people, with an intention of destroying them at once. For this purpose he
invited them to an entertainment at his castle of Quesnay. A great number of
the people attended, and were most barbariously massacred at once, by blowing
them up with gunpowder, by means of a concealed mine. The wretch himself
escaped, but his castle was demolished by the enraged populace, and not only
that of Quesnay, but many others in the neighborhood; and on this occasion, it
is not to be doubted, that several valuable buildings were destroyed. Among
these was the rich Abbey of the order of Citeaux, frequently animadverted upon
by Voltaire. On examining into this affair, however, by a committee of the
National Assembly, it was said to have happened by accident, though it is
difficult to conceive how it could be so.

While these disturbances were going on, the roads were beset by troops of
banditti and robbers, chiefly foreigners. At Montmartre 5000 desperadoes began
to level the platforms* with a view to erect batteries for destroying the city;
but being dispersed by the citizens, they formed themselves into several bands,
and committed many depredations; but at last, intelligence having been received
at the Hotel de Ville of these and other enormities, 200 citizens set out in
quest of the robbers, whom they ^ound dispersed in parties all over the
country. They attacked the citizens with stones, etc. but being soon put to
flight, and 200 taken prisoners, the country was restored to tranquillity.

The impatience of the nation for the return of M. Neckar now grew to such a
height* that the Assembly wrote a letter to the king, demanding it, in the
following terms:

SIRE,

You came yesterday among us, and testified your confidence in our counsels,
requiring us to give them in the present dreadful state of affairs. We were
yesterday in the capital, where we saw and heard everything. Your whole people
are afflicted at the fate of Mr. Neckar* and demand him of your Majesty. Every
body holds your present ministers in horror: the public indignation is at its
height; we therefore, Sire, for the happiness of your kingdom, for your own
happiness, advise you to recall Mr. Neckar.

We may judge of the state of humiliation to which the mighty sovereign of
France was now reduced, by his sending the following letter, addressed to Mr.
Neckar, unsealed, to the National Assembly* for their inspection:

The KING of FRANCE to Mr. NECKAR.

I have been deceived respecting you. Violence has been committed (...) my
character. Behold me at length enlightened. Come, Sir, come without delay, and
resume your claims to my confidence, which you have acquired forever. My heart
is known to you. I exp^^^ you with all my nation; and I very sincerely share in
its impatience. On which, I pray God, Sir, until you return, to take you into
his holy and worthy keeping.

In consequence of this letter, M. Neckar hastened to Paris, where he was
received by the people with the most excessive exultations, and by the king
with the greatest cordiality and affection. He was attended to the Hotel de
Ville, by M. de St. Priest, the secretary of state, and escorted by a numerous
company of the horse and foot militia. The people who were in the Place de
Greve, being impatient to see him, he was obliged to go into an adjacent room;
and during the short time of his absence, the Assembly came to a resolution of
passing a general amnesty, in consequence of the festival which existed by the
return of Mr. Neckar, and that the same should be read in all the churches of
France; which resolution was in the highest degree acceptable to the worthy
minister on his return. On the report of this transaction to the States General
at large, however, some disputes ensued, and it was urged by some, that the
electors of Paris had no right to grant a general amnesty, as such power
belonged only to the Assembly; and the same day a resolution was brought
forward, in which it was insisted, that a tribunal should be erected for
judging of the demerits of such offenders as should be brought before it, on
accusations of having attacked the safety, peace, or liberty of the public,
though the people had a right to pardon them if they thought proper.

During this time of trouble and confusion, the English nation had become
highly obnoxious to the French patriots. The reason of this was, that the
people of England were reported to be such enemies to the French, that they had
even denied them a morsel of bread in the time of their present calamity. The
duke of Dorset had written a letter to the count d'Artois, which was found
among the papers of the baron de Castelnau; and this was said to be in favor
of the noblest, and the party of the queen, who were inimical to the liberties
of the people; though, in truth, it was merely complimentary. News had likewise
been circulated of an English fleet sailing from Plymouth, to make an attempt
on Breast; and a pamphlet against the commons had been published by lord
Camelford. All these aspersions, however, were quickly wiped off, by a letter
from the earl of Dorset to the (...) de Montmorin, and which was read in the
National Assembly. On receipt of this letter, the Count de Liancourt, president
of the Assembly, wrote a letter to the Count de Montmorin, in which he
expressed the greatest satisfaction; and in consequence of this the English,
from ^^ing treated as enemies, were held as affectionate friends, and the
reconciliation was confirmed by some further correspondence between D^^sot and
Montmorin.

The national Assembly having now in a great measure overcome all opposition,
proceeded to new model the constitution. For this ^^^pose twenty two articles
were formed; in which were included (...) equal taxation; a renunciation of all
privileges, whether per^^^^^, provincial, or municipal; redemption of feudatory
rights; various suppressions and abolitions of particular jurisdictions,
duties, and services; abolition of the sale of offices; justice to be executed
(...) any expense to the people; admission of all citizens to civil and
military offices; his Majesty to be proclaimed the Restorer of French Liberty;
a medal to be struck, and T^ Deum celebrated in memory of this remarkable
event. On the representation of the minister, a loan of 30 millions was voted,
in order to provide for the pressing exigencies of the state, until the
finances could be properly regulated. The French guards were voted a medal of
50 livres; but, in the most patriotic manner, they sent three of their body to
the Hotel de Ville, begging leave to decline this honor, on account of its
expense; likewise refusing to accept of any pecuniary acknowledgement from
their fellow citizens; but, however, as a mark of their approbation, desiring a
medal of six livres each, to wear at their buttons. They were to be
incorporated with the city militia, and to have 20 sols per day.

While the assembly were thus proceeding vigorously in their work of
reformation, a report was spread of a mine having been formed from under the
stables of the count d'Artois, to the hall of the Assembly, with a design to
repeat the horrible scene at Quisnay. After the most diligent search, a vast
hole of great depth was discovered in one of the cellars, but which did not
appear to have any communication with any place in the neighborhood; though
from hence it was concluded, that some such horrid plot had been in agitation.
In other respects they were disturbed by intelligence of dreadful disorders
committed in the provinces; where among many other shameful proceedings, (...)
was proved, that a number of persons went from province to province, spreading
false news, and encouraging the populace to insurrection; and even the
authority of the king was pretended to be produced by these miscreants for
every species of disorder. To remedy this ^^^cious evil they passed a decree,
that all municipal bodies of the kingdom, as well in towns as in the country,
should watch over the maintenance of general tranquillity; that, at their
requisition, the national militia, and all the troops should come to their
assistance, in pursuing and apprehending all public disturbers of the peace,
etc. and to prevent any abuse of power, the national militia and soldiers
should take a certain oath, the form of which was mentioned. This scheme was at
first opposed by M. Mirabeau; but in a short time he dropped his opposition,
and the resolution was carried unanimously, and had, soon after, the sanction
of a royal proclamation to the same purpose.

The authority of the Assembly continuing still to increase, they next
proceeded to take into consideration the revenues of the clergy, to ex^^^e the
pension list, and to assign a particular sum of the royal revenue in time to
come. The utmost extent of a country clergyman's revenue was fixed at 1500
livers, or L. 62, their curates to L. 25; the city priests L. 100, and their
curates, L. 53. The bishops, and other beneficed clergymen to undergo a
proportionable reduction. They began also to consider the suppression of
monastic orders, from which, and the proposed reduction of the clerical
revenues, it was computed that the finances of the nation must be considerably
augmented. From some calculations it appeared that the number of ecclesiastics.
(...) and regular, with the nuns, amounted to 316,274; and (...) for their
support, an annual revenue, of 117,699,500 livers (...). Near 80,000 of both
sexes were supposed to belong to (...) ^^^ders, and there were 17,000
mendicants. The distressed (...) the national finances now began to draw the
attention, not only of the Assembly, but of the nation at large. In the
beginning of September, it was announced to the Assembly, that there was a
deputation of ladies from Paris, who came to offer their jewels and valuable
ornaments for the service of their county. These fair patriots were received
with the utmost politeness, and it was proposed by the ladies themselves, that
an office should be established, merely for the reception of jewels, which
should be fold, and the sum applied to the diminution of the national debt. An
address of thanks was voted by the Assembly to these generous females; their
names were ordered to be published in the votes of the Assembly; and they were
authorized to wear a badge of distinction, on account of their having made such
an honorable sacrifice. The example of the ladies of Paris, in giving up their
jewels, was followed by a vast number of individuals throughout the kingdom,
and many gifts of great value were every day brought in by patriots of all
denominations.

But while matters were thus going on, seemingly in the most successful manner
for the patriots* the king, at the head of the aristocrat^^ party, had so far
strengthened himself, that he ventured to give a very unfavourable answer to
most of the requisitions of the Assembly. This, however, was the last effort of
royalty. The commons, conscious of their own power, adhered strictly to the
principles they had laid down, and which the other two orders were by no means
able to oppose. The following articles were finally determined, as part of the
new constitution of the kingdom.

1. All powers slow essentially from, and can only emanate from the nation.

2. The legislative power resides in the National Assembly, composed, of the
representatives of the nation freely and legally elected.

3. No act of the legislative body shall be deemed law, unless consented to by
the representatives of the nation, and sanctioned by the king.

4. The supreme executive power resides in the hands of the king.

5. The judicial power can in no case be exercised by the king, not by the
legislative body; but justice shall be rendered in the name of the king, by the
tribunals established by the law, according to the Principles of the new
constitution.

The distressed state of the national finances at last overcame every other
consideration, and for sometime engrossed the attention of the Assembly. A bill
was brought in by Mr. Neckar, taking into consideration the urgent necessities
of the state; and proposing certain reductions in the royal households,
pensions, clergy, etc. requesting also a contribution from all the inhabitants
of the kingdom, but which was to be made only once, and not to be renewed on
any presence whatever. -- The contribution was restricted to a nett fourth of
the income, without any inquiry into the person's fortune; a list of
contributions to be (...) out, and the money returned to them, if alive, in the
year 1792, but their heirs not to be entitled to any benefit from it. None,
whose income did not exceed 400 livres, to be included in the tax. This was
followed by a donation of 100,000 livres from M. Neckar himself. -- The plan
was laid before the king, with the articles of the new constitution* but his
Majesty informed them, that though he assented to the plan of the new
constitution, it was on this positive condition, that the general result of
their deliberations should leave him in the full possession of the executive
power. However, after making some remarks on the constitution, he acquiesced in
it for the present, until a more perfect system could be adopted. This answer
was deemed insufficient, and a deputation was sent to his Majesty, requiring
his unequivocal assent to the new constitution.

This was followed by most violent tumults. A new regiment of troops happening
to arrive at Versailles, were sumptuously entertained by the Gardes du Corpse in
the palace. The king and queen themselves honored them with their presence, by
which the whole assembly were ^o elevated, that among other instances of their
exultation, they tore the national cockades, the badge of patriotism, from
their hats, trampled them under their feet, and supplied themselves with black
ones. This produced such disturbances at Paris, that all the districts of the
capital were summoned* and the marquis de la Fayette was ordered to proceed
immediately to Versailles, at the head of a large body of troops, and bring the
king under his guard to Paris. The marquis hesitated at first, but was soon
glad to comply, on hearing that a gibbet was prepared for himself, and another
for the mayor, in case of his refusal. In consequence of this preremptory
command, he set out at the head of ^0,000 men, and attended by several of the
magistrates of Paris. The flame of patriotism, however, had now extended itself
even to females of the lowest class. Eight thousand fish women had preceded the
marquis, and about two o'clock next morning had entered the palace with an
intention to seize and kill the queen. It was afterward ^ound, that several of
the French guards had mixed among them in women's dresses. On their arrival,
they forced their way to her Majesty's apartment, who instantly ran to that of
the king, with only her (...) on. The mob, however, were fortunately repulsed
by the guards, of whom a greater number than ordinary had been ordered to sleep
in the antichambers adjoining to the queen's apartment. On the arrival of the
Parisian troops, a skirmish ensued betwixt them and the guards, in which
several were killed on both sides, and among the rest several women who had
mixed themselves with the patriotic soldiers. The re^^^^nt of Flanders,
notwithstanding the affection they had pretended for the king, laid down their
arms, and refused to fire. The body guard resisted as long as they were able,
but at last were overpowered and put to flight; however, by the authority of
the marquis de la Fayette, the Parisians were prevented from entering the
palace. In a little time the marquis was introduced to the king, along with
some of the magistrates of Paris, by whom the desire of the people was
communicated to his Majesty that he should remove to the capital. As he knew
that ^^^stance would be vain, he complied with their desire on assurance of
protection; and, the royal equipages being ordered to be got ready, he (...)
^^t with the queen* the dauphin, Monsieur, the king's brother, and the king's
aunts, attended by the marquis de la Fayette and about 5000 ^^^ds. The road was
so crowded with people, that though 50,000 of the Parisian troops had been sent
out to keep the way clear, it was six (...) before they reached the Hotel de
Ville, though the distance is only twelve miles. In this humiliating
procession, it is not to be sup^^^d but their Majesty's must have met with many
insults, sufficiently disagreeable to people in their high station, abstracted
from all considerations of personal safety. Indeed even of this there seemed
now to be very considerable danger. The queen particularly was abused by the
patriots of her own sex, who called loudly for her to be given up to them, that
they might put out her eyes, and cut off her ears. On their arrival at the
Hotel de Ville, the king was harrangued by M. de St. Merry, who assured his
Majesty that he had only been conducted to Paris for his better security, and
that he would find himself more happy among his loyal children there than he
had been at Versailles; after which he was conducted to the palace of the
Thuilleries, an old and ruinous place, which had not been inhabited since the
time of Louis XIV, and where no preparations had been made for the reception of
the royal family.

Thus was the finishing stroke given to the authority of the French monarch. He
instantly caused it to be announced to the National Assembly, that he complied
with their demands in the fullest extent. Since that time he has continued a
kind of prisoner, insomuch, that he has not the freedom of going any where,
even to the shortest distance, for the purpose of amusement, without the
attendance of some persons under the name of guards. Having once spoke of
taking the diversion of the chase, he was instantly informed, that 1000 of the
Paris militia were ready to attend him; on which he declined the amusement. The
marquis de la Fayette, touched with the miserable situation to which his
sovereign was reduced, made a proposal for recalling his own guards; but this
excited such murmurs among the people at large, that it was thought proper to
drop the scheme altogether. At first the royal pair were overwhelmed with
addresses and congratulations, many of them of a very disagreeable king. The
queen was constrained to give audience to a deputation of females of the very
lowest class, some of whom were among those who had attempted to murder her a
few nights before. These, by one whom they had chosen for their president,
demanded the liberty of all prisoners who were not malefactors, deserters not
excepted. The Count de Luxemburg then demanded in the name of the queen, the
pardon of those princes of the blood royal who had been obliged to fly into
foreign countries, viz. the count d'Artois, the princes of Conde, and Conti,
which was agreed to. The fair president of this illustrious band is said to
have appeared so pretty in the eyes of the king, that he did not suffer her to
depart without a kiss.

The mob having thus presumed so far, soon ran into the greatest excesses; and,
assuming the power of life and death, showed a determination to proceed to
execution in a summary way against every (...) who was obnoxious to them; but
having put to death in this manner a baker, with some circumstances of
barbarity, the Assembly instantly determined to put the capital under martial
law. This was attended with so good an effect, that in a short time the
disturbances ceased, and the Assembly were no more interrupted in their
deliberations. Only a single attempt has been made to rescue the king, and this
ended very unfortunately for the projector, the marquis de Faveras. In
consequence of the discovery, this nobleman, with his wife, who is also
princess of Anhalt Chambourg, were taken into custody. One of the witnesses
against them was M. de St. Priest, secretary of state. He deposed, that, about
the middle of August, he was accosted by an unknown gentleman, who afterward
owned himself to be the marquis le Faveras. This stranger told him that he felt
for the king and royal family, and was ready to sacrifice himself if he could
preserve them from the disasters which threatened both them and the kingdom in
general. The privileges of the clergy and nobility, he said, ought to be
supported* and he had a force of 1200 men ready to act against the National
Assembly, and the marquis de la Fayette. The design is further said to have
been that the marquis, M. Bailli, and the mayor, should have been murdered in
the first place; after which the king and queen were to have been escorted to
Lisle, in Flanders, by a band of 3000 volunteers. The guard at the barrier
towns, it is said, had been gained over to this scheme, and a loan of three or
four millions procured for p^tting it in execution. A committee of inquiry was
set on foot, and it having appeared to them that the marquis was really
concerned in the affair, he was impeached, tried, and condemned by 21 judges
against 19, to make the Amend Honorable, and then to be hanged; but as the
new regulations required that four-fifths of the judges should be unanimous
before a prisoner could be condemned, the execution of the sentence was
suspended: But on the 18th of February 1790, he was again condemned to make the
Amend Honouarble before the gate of the cathedral of Nortre Dame, from thence
to be drawn in a cart to the Place de Greve, with his head and feet bare, a
lighted flambeau of two pounds weight in his hand, and clothed in a linen frock
covered with brimstone, having a label on his breast, with the words
CONSPIRATOR AGAINST THE STATE, wrote upon it in large characters. And lastly,
having confessed, on his knees, the crimes meditated against his country, and
begged pardon of God, his country, his sovereign, and justice, he was to be
hanged on a gallows erected for the purpose. This severe sentence was put in
execution next day, without the least mitigation.

No institution does the Assembly more honor than the unlimited toleration in
religious matters, which has at length taken place in that once intolerant
country; and, what is very remarkable, this important point was carried without
a division. By this act of toleration, every person, of whatever profession,
the Jewish only excepted, is entitled to bear offices in the state, whether
civil or military; nor can any thing be accounted an unlawful impediment,
except disobedience to some of the decrees of the National Assembly. Thus it
appears, that Catholics at last can show unlimited toleration to Protestants,
while the latter, in some countries, cannot bear with one another without the
security of a Test Act; and while they are thus new-modelling the government*
we cannot help observing, that every method is used (...) extinguish the debts
of the French nation, without overburthening the people with taxes; a
consideration which seems to have been long forgotten in Great Britain, where a
tax is seldom taken off after being once laid on; while the produce seems to be
employed for the purposes of luxury and idleness to individuals, rather than to
supply the exigences of the state. Even the Jews at Bourdeaux, and some other
places, have had their privileges confirmed to them, which are very
considerable viz. a liberty of partaking of the rights of citizens, of
purchasing property, voting at elections, serving offices military and civil,
and discharging the duties of them, even on the sabbath day. Another resolution
(...) passed, that there shall be no distinction of orders in France, in
consequence of which the whole body of nobility are annihilated. A third
resolution determines, that it shall not be lawful for the offices of the
police to imprison any person, by way of correction, for more than three days,
without bringing him to a trial.

Among the patriotic exertions of the people we must reckon the destruction of
the Bastile to have been the most remarkable.

"The mind," says Mr. Pain, "can hardly picture to itself a m^^tremendous
scene than what the city of Paris exhibited at the time of taking the Bastile,
and for two days before and after, nor conceive the possibility of its quieting
so soon. At distance, this transaction has appeared only as an act of heroism,
standing on itself; and the class political connection it had with the
Revolution is lost in the brilliancy of the achievement. But we are to
consider it as the strength of the parties, brought man to man, and contending
for the issue. The Bastile was to be either the prize or the prison of the
assailants. The downfall of it included the idea of the downfall of Despotism;
and this compounded image was become as figuratively united as Bunyan's
Doubting Castle and Giant Despair.

The National Assembly, before and at the time of taking the Bastile* was
sitting at Versailles, twelve miles distant from Paris. About a week before the
rising of the Parisians, and their taking the Bastile, it was discovered that a
plot was forming, at the head of which was the Count d'Artois, the King's
youngest brother, for demolishing the National Assembly, seizing its members,
and thereby crushing, by a coup de maine, all hopes and prospects of forming a
free government. For the sake of humanity, as well as of freedom, it is well
this plan did not succeed. Examples are not wanting to show how dreadfully
vindictive and cruel are all old governments, when they are successful against
what they call a revolt.

This plan must have been some time in contemplation; because, in order to
carry it into execution, it was necessary to collect a large military force
round Paris, and to cut off the communication between that city and the
National Assembly at Versailles. The troops destined for this service were
chiefly the foreign troops in the pay of France, and who, for this particular
purpose, were drawn from the distant provinces where they were then s^ationed.
When they were collected, to the amount of between twenty-five and thirty
thousand, it was judged time to put the plan into execution. The ministry who
were then in office, and who were friendly to the Revolution, were instantly
dismissed, and a new ministry formed of those who had concerted the project;
among whom was Count de Broglio, and to his share was given the command of
those troops. The character of this man, as described to me in a letter which I
communicated to Mr. Burke before he began to write his book, and from an
authority which Mr. Burke well knows was good, was that of "an high flying
aristocrat; cool, and capable of every mischief."

While these matters were agitating, the National Assembly stood in the most
perilous and critical situation that a body of men can be supposed to act in.
They were the devoted victims, and they knew it. They had the hearts and wishes
of their country on their side, but military authority they had none. The
guards of Broglio surrounded the hall where the Assembly sat, ready, at the
word of command, to seize their persons, as had been done the year before to
the Parliament in Paris. Had the National Assembly deserted their trust, or had
they exhibited signs of weakness or fear, their enemies had been encouraged,
and the country depressed. When the situation they stood in, the cause they
were engaged in, and the crisis then ready to burst which should determine
their personal and political fate, and that of their country, and probably of
Europe, are taken into one view, none but a heart callous with prejudice, or
corrupted by dependence, can avoid interesting itself in their success.

The Archbishop of Vienne was at this time President of the National Assembly;
a person too old to undergo the scene that a few days, or a few hours, might
bring forth. A man of more activity, and bolder fortitude, was necessary; and
the National Assembly chose (under the form of a Vice President, for the
presidency still resided in the archbishop) M. de la Fayette, and this is the
only instance of a Vice President being chosen. It was at the moment that this
storm was pending (July 11) that a declaration of rights was brought forward by
M. de la Fayette. It was hastily drawn up, and makes only a part of a more
extensive declaration of rights, agreed upon and adopted afterward by the
National Assembly. The particular reason for bringing it forward at this moment
(M. de la Fayette has since informed me) was, that if the National Assembly
should fall in the threatened destruction that then surrounded it, some traces
of its principles might have the chance of surviving the wreck.

Every thing now was drawing to a crisis. The event was freedom or slavery. On
one side* an army of nearly thirty thousand men; on the other, an unarmed body
of citizens; for the citizens of Paris, on whom the National Assembly must then
immediately depend, were as unarmed and as undisciplined as the citizens of
London are now. The French guards had given strong symptoms of their being
attached to the national cause; but their numbers were small, not a tenth part
of the force that Broglio commanded, and their officers were in the interest of
Broglio.

Matters being now ripe for execution, the new ministry made their appearance
in office. The reader will carry in his mind, that the Basple was taken the
14th of July; the point of time I am now speaking to, is the 12th. Immediately
on the news of the change of ministry reaching Paris in the afternoon, all the
play houses and places of entertainment, shops and houses, were shut up. The
change of ministry was considered as the prelude of hostilities, and the
opinion was rightly founded.

The foreign troops began to advance toward the city. The Prince de Lambesc,
who commanded a body of German cavalry, approached by the Place of Lewis XV.
which connects itself with some of the streets. In his march, he insulted and
struck an old man with his sword. The French are remarkable for their respect
to old age, and the insolence with which it appeared to be done, uniting with
the general fermentation they were in, produced a powerful effect, and a cry of
To arms! to arms! spread itself in a moment over the city.

Arms they had none, nor scarcely any who knew the use of them; but desperate
resolution, when every hope is at stake, supplies for a while, the want of
arms. Near where the Prince de Lambesc was drawn up, were large piles of stones
collected for building the new bridge, and with these the people attacked the
cavalry. A party of the French guards, upon hearing the firing, rushed from
their quarters and joined the people; and night coming on the cavalry retreated.

The streets of Paris, being narrow, are favorable for defense; and the
loftiness of the houses, consisting of many stories, from which great annoyance
might be given, secured them against nocturnal enterprises; and the night was
spent in providing themselves with every sort of weapon they could make or
procure: Guns* swords, blacksmith's hammers, carpenter's axes, iron crows,
pikes, halberts, pitchforks, spits, clubs, etc. etc.

The incredible numbers with which they assembled the next morning, and the
still more incredible resolution they exhibited, embarrassed and astonished
their enemies. Little did the new ministry expect such a salute. Accustomed to
slavery themselves, they had no idea that Liberty was capable of such
inspiration, or that a body of unarmed citizens would dare to face the military
force of thirty thousand men. Every moment of this day was employed in
collecting arms, concerting plans, and arranging themselves into the best order
which such an instantancous movement could afford. Broglio continued lying
round the city, but made no farther advances this day, and the succeeding night
passed with as much tranquillity as such a scene could possibly produce.

But defense only was not the object of the citizens. They had a cause at
stake, on which depended their freedom or their slavery. -- They every moment
expected an attack, or to hear of one made on the National Assembly; and in
such a situation, the most prompt measures are sometimes the best. The object
that now presented itself was the Bastile; and the eclat of carrying such a
fortress in the face of such an army, could not fail to strike a terror into
the new ministry, who had scarcely yet had time to meet. By some intercepted
correspondence this morning, it was discovered, that the Mayor of Paris, M.
Des^lesselles, who appeared to be in their interest, was betraying them; and
from this discovery, there remained no doubt that Broglio would reinforce the
Bastile the ensuing evening. It was therefore necessary to attack it that day;
but before this could be done, it was first necessary to procure a better
supply of arms then they were then possessed of.

There was adjoining to the city, a large magazine of arms deposited at the
hospital of the invalids, which the citizens summoned to surrender; and as the
place was not defensible, nor attempted much defense, they soon succeeded. Thus
supplied, they marched to attack the Bastile; a vast mixed multitude of all
ages, and of all degrees, and armed with all forts of weapons. Imagination
would fail in describing to itself the appearance of such a procession* and of
the anxiety for the event which a few hours or a few minutes might produce.
What plans the ministry was forming, were as unknown to the people within the
city, as what the citizens were doing was unknown to them; and what movements
Broglio might make for the support or relief of the place, were to the citizens
equally unknown. All was mystery and hazard.

That the Bastile was attacked with an enthusiasm of heroism, such only as the
highest animation of liberty could inspire, and carried in the space of a few
hours, is an event which the world is fully possessed of. I am not undertaking
a detail of the attack, but bringing into view the conspiracy against the
nation which provoked it, and which fell with the Bastile. The prison to which
the new ministry were dooming the National Assembly, in addition to its being
the high altar and castle of despotism, became the proper object to begin with.
This enterprise broke up the new ministry, who began now to fly from the ruin
they had prepared for others. The troops of Broglio dispersed, and himself fled
also.

It is much to be wished that a particular history and description of ^^is
celebrated engine of tyranny were made public. At present we can only inform
our readers in general, that in it were found the most horrible machines,
calculated for grinding to mummy those unhappy criminals whom the cruelty or
jealousy of the monarch, or even of his favorite mistress, had determined to
destroy. An iron cage, about twelve tons in weight, was found with the skeleton
of a man in it, who had probably lingered out a great part of his days in that
horrid mansion. Among the prisoners released by its destruction were major
White, a Scotsman* and the earl Mazarine an Irish nobleman. The former appeared
to have his intellectual faculties almost totally impaired by the long
confinement and miseries he had endured; and, by being ^^accustomed to converse
with any human creature, he had forgot the use of speech. Earl Mazarine, after
having left Paris, narrowly escaped being detained at Calais, but luckily
escaped the danger, possibly owing this good fortune to his being taken for a
madman. On his arrival at the British shorepunc; he eagerly jumped out of the
boat, fell down on the ground, and kissed it. It does not appear that any
remarkable particulars concerning the treatment of prisoners in the Bastile
have ^^^^pired from the accounts of these two persons. This cursed building is
now totally destroyed. The last stone of it was presented to the National
Assembly in the beginning of the month of February 1790, by those brave
soldiers and citizens who had exposed their lives in forming the place. M.
Maillard, who presented the gift of these patriots, made the following speech.
"Gentlemen, we are poor* and (...) therefore only offer the Poor Man's Mite,
but we accompany it with an offering which, we flatter ourselves, will prove
acceptable to our country, and, we hope, glorious to ourselves. It is the Last
Stone of the Bastile." The gift was received with the loudest applause."

The demolition of this place, where people, without any crime, except perhaps
having given offense to a strumpet, might be suddenly imprisoned for life, or
even destroyed in a short time, must give pleasure to every friend to humanity.
Unluckily great numbers of the papers belonging to it were burnt by the mob;
but such as have been preserv^^ abundantly show the way in which the prisoners
were sometimes (...). The following letter, from M. S -- e, intendant of the
police (...) Paris, to de Launay the governor of the Bastile, killed by the
mob, was much spoke of. "My dear de Launay, I send you F --, (...) offender.
Keep him eight days, after which order matter, i. e. let him be put to death. A
memorandum was found in de (...) hand writing, intimating, that, after the time
specified, he (...) sent to S -- e, to know under what name F -- should be
(...).

The destruction of the Bastile has again called the attention of the public to
a piece of history, which engaged the pens of several (...) of the last and
beginning of the present centuries. In the year (...) a short time after the
death of the cardinal Mazarine, an (...) prisoner was sent to the isle of St.
Margaret, in the Mediterr^^^^ near Provence. This person always wore a black
mask, supposed (...) of iron, but on examination found to consist of black
velvet and (...) bone. It was fastened on by steel springs, and fixed with a
(...) in such a manner, that he could not put it off himself, though he (...)
eat and drink without being greatly incommoded by it. He w^^^ed with the
greatest respect, insomuch, that the governor of the (...) where he was kept,
always waited on him bare-headed, and never (...) down in his presence, but it
was understood that any discovery of (...) self would be attended with
immediate death. He was exceeding well made, and had something engaging in the
sound of his voice (...) according to the account of an old physician, who had
seen the (...) part of his face, in examining his tongue when sick, his (...)
was very dark, and the skin of the rest of his body brownish. He ^^er
complained of his situation, or discovered the least inclination (...) liberty.
He amused himself with playing on the guitar, and (...) were given to supply
him with every thing he required; but his (...) passion seemed to be for fine
laces and linen. His rank and quality (...) undoubtedly very high, as appeared
from the respect showed him (...) only by the governor, but by the prime
minister of France, who (...) paid him a visit during his confinement in the
isle of St. Margaret, (...) never sat down in his presence. The prisoner
himself, however, (...) not at any time drop the least hint by which it might
be conjectured (...) be was; but it seems that had it been in his power to make
a dis^^^ry of himself, which might have been accounted accidental, it (...)
undoubtedly have been done. The room in which he was confined (...) but one
window, which looked toward the sea. A barber one day ^^ceived something white
floating under the prisoner's window, and ^^^ing it up, found it to be a very
fine shirt carelessly folded up, which (...) had filled from one end to the
other with writing. The unsuspe^^^ barber carried it to the governor, but his
officiousness cost him (...). He was found dead in his bed a few days after,
murdered undoubtedly by the cruel instruments of oppression and despotism by
whom (...) prisoner had been so long confined. Another time the prisoner with
some words with a fork upon a small silver dish, and threw it out of the window
toward a fishing boat which had approached almost (...) the foot of the wall;
but this being also carried to the governor, (...) fisherman was in danger of
sharing the same fate with the barber, (...) not the governor been assured that
he could not read. In School he (...) removed from this place of confinement to
the Bastile, where he ^^mained till the time of his death, November 19th, 1793.
After (...) death the head was separated from the body, cut into small pieces
(...) interred in different places. Orders were given to burn all his cloth
linen, mattress, and coverlets. Even the panes of glass in the windows of his
room were destroyed, the walls of it scraped and (...) p^^istered, left he
should have wrote something on them which ^^ter^d to a discovery.

Such extraordinary secrecy could not but excite the curiosity (...) public in
a proportionable degree; but it would have been death (...) (...) of those
concerned in it to divulge the least article. M. Chamil^^^ was the last
minister to whom the secret was known. When (...) death bed, his son in law,
Marshal de Feuillade, conjured him (...) (...) him who this prisoner was; but
he replied, that it was a stato (...), and he had sworn not to reveal it. While
the prisoner remain^^ the Bastile, he found means to converse with another
person con^^^ i^ an adjacent apartment, through the funnels of the chimnies.
(...) (...) asked him why he concealed his name, and why he was (...) there;
but he replied, that his confession would cost him his (...) (...) occasion the
destruction of all those to whom he might reveal (...). Many conjectures have
been formed concerning this ex^^^dinary personage. Some have imagined that he
was the duke of (...), a turbulent nobleman who took an active part in the
civil (...) during the minority of Louis XIV. and was said to have been (...)
by the Turks at the siege of Candia. But this opinion is un^^^^dly refuted by
the profound respect on all occasions shown to (...) by the greatest personages
in the kingdom. Other imagine that he was the count de Vermandois, a natural
son of Louis XIV. (...) (...) of his imprisonment is said to have been his
giving the dau^^^ a box in the ear; but this cannot be the case, if it be true
that the (...) with the iron mask was confined in 1661, and that the count de
^^^^dois was only born in 1667. A third party suppose him to (...) (...) the
duke of Monmouth, who rebelled against James II. He ^^^^nced to be beheaded,
and the sentence said to be put in execution* (...), however, went, that the
duke did not really suffer; but that one (...) followers, who resembled him,
had the courage to die in his stead. ^^^^inion is still more untenable than the
former; but it is now (...) (...) fully manifest, from an original letter from
the princess of (...) to the duke de Fronsac, that he was twin-brother of Louis
(...) and born only four hours after him. Thus the unfortunate (...), through
the jealousy and bigotry of the times, was forever con^^^^ from the eyes of the
world all his lifetime, and lingered out an (...) and melancholy life. This
account seems to be the only prob^^^^, as it explains at once the very great
respect shown to the pril^^^^ and likewise the circumstance, otherwise
unaccountable, that, at (...) time of his confinement, no person of consequence
disappeared in (...).

The foregoing account of the Revolution in France, is taken from (...)
Geographical Grammar. It has the appearance of being (...) by an impartial
hand; and we give it as the best account, in (...) of this event, so far as it
goes, of any that has come to our knowledge.

We are not furnished with materials sufficiently authentic and con^^^^ to
authorize a detail of the interesting events that have taken (...) in the
course of the two last years, 1791 and 1792. We can (...) (...) in general,
that the Revolution is not yet completed -- that a (...)-Revolution has been
set on foot by the French emigrants, in (...) the United powers of Austria,
Prussia, part of the Germanic (...) Naples and Sardinia, are engaged -- that
their forces, to the (...), it is said, of upwards 500,000 men, are now on the
borders of (...) -- that France is torn by violent internal dissensions -- that
the (...) Assembly, on the 9th of August, passed a decree, "revoking the
authority entrusted by the constitution to LOUIS XVI. (...) ^^^pending him from
that moment, until a National Convention (...) have decreed the measures
necessary to be pursued for preserving the National Independence -- that the
primary assemblies were to conv^^^ (...) the 26th of August, to elect their
delegates to the National Convention, which was to meet at Paris on the 26th of
September -- that (...) National Assembly have named four commissioners, for
the four (...) who have power to issue mandates of arrest, and pronounce the
(...) pension and dismission of the General and Staff Officers. who act (...)
the general safety -- and that the following decree of accusation (...) M. La
FAYETTE, was passed on the 18th of August.

I. It appears to this Assembly that there is just ground for accus^^^^ against
M. la Fayette, heretofore Commander of the Army of the North.

II. The Executive Power shall in the most expeditious manner possible, put the
present decree into execution; and all constituent authorities* all citizens,
and all soldiers, are hereby enjoined, by every (...) in their power* to secure
his person.

III. The Assembly forbids the Army of the North any longer to acknowledge him
as General, or to obey his orders; and strictly (...), that no person
whatsoever shall furnish any thing for the troops, or pay any money for their
use, but by the orders of M. Dumourier.

To give the reader some idea of the objects aimed to be accomplished by the
Counter Revolutionists we add the following summary of the MANIFESTO on the
part of the combined forces of AUSTRIA and PRUSSIA.

The King of France shall name the frontier town of his kingdom* which he
desires to repair. The Duke of Brunswick shall send (...) guard, besides his
Military Household, which will be appointed by (...) Princes, his brothers.

The Emperor and the King of Prussia do not desire that the kingdom of France
should be dismembered in any of its franchises; nor do they wish to intermeddle
in the government.

They desire the restoration of the King to his liberty and full authority, the
Ministers to their altars, and property to its proprietors.

The Deputies to the first and second Legislature shall be tried.

The National Assembly and the city of Paris are answerable, upon their heads
and effects, for the life of the King, and that of all the Royal Family, to
commence from the day of the publication of the Manifesto.

Every man who shall be taken with arms in his hands, shall be treated as a
rebel, and tried according to military law.

Every man taken in the act of firing or throwing stones from his windows,
shall be put to the sword, and his house burnt or demolished.

The National guards are enjoined to maintain good order, and (...)
responsible, as well as all administrators, both collectively and individually,
upon their heads and effects, for every event.

The Duke of Brunswick and the Prussian army, will protect all individuals that
shall declare for the King; and the said army is prohibited, under pain of
death, from committing any act of vengeance (...) justice, without receiving
orders.

The Duke of Brunswick will retain in his pay all regiments or milion (...)
shall declare for the King.

(...) p^^don will be granted to whoever shall oppose the King's de^^^^, and
his passage to the town that he may appoint.

Lewis XVI. king of France and Navarre, was born in 1754, suc^^^^ his
grandfather Lewis XV. in 1774, married, 1770, to Maria (...), sister of the
emperor of Germany, born 1755. Their is^^^^ (...) Madame Maria Theresa
Charlotte, born on the 19th of December 1778; and Lewis-Joseph-Xavier-Francis,
dauphin of France, ^^^^^ber 22, 1781.

N. B. The reader who wishes to obtain a knowledge of the history (...), may
consult Caesar's Commentaries, Rollin's Ancient Histo^^^ ^^iversal History,
Voltaire, and Sully's Memoirs.

SPAIN.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 700 Miles. between Degrees. 10 and 3 east longitude. Breadth 500 Miles.
Degrees. 36 and 44 north latitude.

BOUNDARIES.] IT is bounded on the West, by Portugal and the Atlantic Ocean; by
the Mediterranean, on the East; (...) the Bay of Biscay and the Pyrenean
Mountains, which separate it (...) France, on the North; and by the strait of
the sea at Gibraltar, (...) South.

(...) (...) now divided into fourteen districts, besides islands in the
Medi^^^^; as in the following table: TABLE.
DIVISIONS. Areas in square Miles. Population. Population for every square
Mile. TOWNS. 148,148 according to Lopez's map. 10,500,000 according to Ct.
Aranda. 70 Towns 139 Villages and Boroughs 21,08^ according to others 18,000
Inhabit 1. New Castile 28,000. Madrid 140,000 Toledo 16,000 Aranjuez 7,000 2.
Old Castile 11,840 Burgos 10,000 Segovia 9,500 3. Leon 12,880 Leon 6,000
Valladolid 19,000 Salamanca 13,000 4. Granada 9,280 500,000 53 Granada 52,000
Malaga 41,000 5. Andalusia, viz. 15,360 Seville (120,000) 80,000 Sevilla or
Seville 325,000 Cadiz 80,000 Cordova and Jaen Cordova 20,000 Jaen 27,000
Antequera 19,600 6. Murcia 3,000 Murcia 44,000 Cartagena 23,000 Inhabit. 7.
Valencia 7,850 716,000 Cavanilles 91 Valencia 80,000 Alicante 15,000 8.
Catalonia 9,280 Barcelona 115,000 Tarragona 7,500 Lerida 16,000 9. Arragonia or
Arragon 11,360 471,000 41 Sarragoca 36,000 Hues^a 6,800 10. Navarra or Navarre
2,880 Pampelona 11,000 Tudela 11. Biscaya, Guipuzca, and Alava 4,460 Bilbao
6,000 St. Sebastian 8,000 12. Asturia 3,840 Oviedo 7,000 13. Gallicia 10,240
St. Jago Compestella 10,000 Corunna 3,600 Ferrol 7,500 14. Estremadura Badayoz
6,000 Merida 15. Balearic Islands Palma 23,000 Majorca ^,440 Mahon Minorca 752
27,800 ^7 Ciudadella 2,500 Ivica Murray Ivica

POSSESSIONS IN OTHER PARTS OF THE GLOBE.
1. In Africa. On the Coast of Barbary, the towns of Ceuta, (...) Melilla* and
Masalquivir: the Canary Islands, viz. Canaria, Fe^^, Teneriffe, etc. The
islands of Aunabon and Delpo, under the Equator.

2. In Asia. The Philippine Islands; the principal of which is Luzon, whose
capital is Manilla. The Marian, the Caroline, and ^^laos Islands.

3. In America, immense provinces, much larger than all Europe, most of which
are astonishingly fertile.

(1.) In North America, Louisiana, California, Old Mexico, or New Spain, New
Mexico, both the Floridas.

(2.) In the West Indies, the island of Cuba, one half of St. Do^^^go,
Potorico, Trinidad, Margareta, Tortuga, etc.

(3.) In South-America, Terra-Firma, Peru, Chili, Tucuman, Part guay, Patagonia.

These extensive countries we have already described.



ANCIENT NAMES AND DIVISIONS.] Spain formerly included Portugal, and was known
to the ancients by the name of Iberia, and Hisperia, as well as Hispania. It
was about the time of the Punic wars divided into Citerior and Ulterior; the
Citerior contained the provinces lying north of the river Ebro; and the
Ulterior, which was (...) largest part, comprehended all that lay beyond that
river. Innumerable are the changes that it afterward underwent; but there is
no country of whose ancient history, at least the interior part of it, (...)
know less than that of Spain.

CLIMATE, AND WATER.] Excepting the period of the equino^ial rains, the air of
Spain is dry and serene, but excessively hot in the southern provinces in June,
July, and August. The vast mountains that run through Spain are, however, very
beneficial to the inhabitants, by the refreshing breezes that come from them in
the southernmost parts; though those toward the north and north-east are, in
the winter, very cold.

The waters of Spain, especially those that are medicinal, are little known;
but many salutiferous springs are found in Granada, Seville, and Cordova. All
over Spain the waters are found to have such healing qualities, that they are
outdone by those of no country in Europe; and the enclosing, and encouraging a
resort to them, grow every day more and more in vogue, especially at Alhamar in
Granada.

MOUNTAINS.] It is next to impossible to specify these, they are so numerous:
The chief, and the highest, are the Pyrenees, near 200 miles in length, which
extend from the Bay of Biscay to the Mediterranean, and divide Spain from
France. Over these mountains there are only five narrow passages to France, and
the road over the pass that separates Roussillon from Catalonia, reflects great
honor on the (...) who planned it. It formerly required the strenth of 30 men
to support, and nearly as many oxen to drag up a carriage, which four horses
now do with ease. The Cantabrian mountains are a continuation of the Pyrenees,
and reach to the Atlantic Ocean, south of Cape Finisterpe. The celebrated Mount
Calpe, now called the Hill of Gibraltar, was in former times, known under the
name of one of the pillars of Hercul^; the other, Mount Abyla, lies opposite to
it in Africa.

Among the mountains of Spain, Montserrat is particularly worthy the attention
of the curious traveller; one of the most singular in the (...), for situation,
shape and composition. It stands in a vast plain, (...) thirty miles from
Barcelona, and nearly in the center of the (...) of Catalonia. It is called by
the Catalonians Monte-serrado, or Mount Scie, words which signify a cut, or
sawed mountain; and (...) so called from its singular and extraordinary form:
For it is so brok^^ and dvided, and so crowned with an infinite number of
spiring (...) or pine heads, that it has the appearance, at a distant view, to
(...) (...) work of man; but, upon a nearer approach* to be evidently a (...)
production. It is a spot so admirably adapted for retirement (...)
contemplation, that it has, for many ages, been inhabited only by (...) and
hermits, whose first vow is, never to forsake it. When the mountain is first
seen at a distance, it has the appearance of an in^^^^ number of rocks cut into
conical forms, and built one upon (...) to a prodigious height, or like a pile
of grotto work, or Gothic (...). Upon a nearer view, each cone appears of
itself a mountain; (...) whole composes an enormous mass about 14 miles in
circum^^^^^; and the Spaniards compute it to be two leagues in height. (...)
(...) estimates its height at only 3,300 feet, and observes that the arms of
the (...), the Virgin Mary sitting at the foot of a rock, half cut through by a
saw.
(...) like no other mountain, so it stands quite unconnected with (...) though
not very distant from some that are very lofty. A con^^^^ (...) erected on the
mountain, dedicated to our lady of Montserrat, (...) which pilgrims resort from
the farthest parts of Europe. All the (...) who come here are fed gratis for
three days, and all the sick re^^^^ into the hospital. Sometimes, on particular
festivals, seven (...) persons arrive in one day; but people of condition pay a
rea^^^^ price for what they eat. On different parts of the mountain (...) a
number of hermitages, all of which have their little chapels, or^^^^^s for
saying mass, water cisterns, and most of them little gar^^^. The inhabitant of
one of these hermitages, which is dedicated (...) (...). Benito, has the
privilege of making an annual entertainment on a (...) day, on which day all
the other hermits are invited, when they (...) the sacrament from the hands of
the mountain vicar; and after (...) service, dine together. They meet also at
this hermitage, (...) (...) days of the saints ^o which their several
hermitages are dedicat^^ (...) say mass, and commune with each other. But at
other times (...) live in a very solitary and recluse manner, perform various
pen^^^^, and adhere to very rigid rules of abstinence, nor do they ever (...)
(...). Nor are they allowed to keep within their walls either dog, (...), or
any living thing, lest their attention should be withdrawn (...) (...) to
earthly objects. The number of professed monks (...) in 76, of lay brothers 28,
and of singing boys 25, besides a phy^^^^, surgeon, and servants. Mr.
Thickness, who has published (...) (...) particular description of this
extraordinary mountain, was inform^^^^ of the hermits, that he often faw from
his habitation, the (...) of Minorca, Majorca, and Ivica, and the kingdoms of
Valencia (...).

RIVERS AND LAKES.] These are the Duero, formerly D^rius, which falls into the
Atlantic ocean below Oporto in Portugal; the Togo or Tagus, which falls into
the Atlantic ocean below Lisbon; the Guardiana falls into the same ocean near
Cape Finisterre; as does the Guadalquiver, now Turio, at St. Lucar; and the
Ebro, the ancient Iberus, falls into the Mediterranean sea below Tortosa.

The river Tinto, the qualities of which are very extraordinary, (...) in
Sierra Morena, and empties itself into the Mediterranean, near Huelva, having
the name of Tinto given it from the tinge of its waters, which are as yellow as
a topaz, hardening the sand, and petrifying (...) in a most surprising manner.
If a stone happen to fall in, and (...) another, they both become, in a year's
time, perfectly united. This river withers all the plants on its banks, as well
as the roots of (...), which it dies of the same hue as its waters. No kind of
verdure will come up where it reaches, nor any fish live in its stream. It
kills worms in cattle when given them to drink; but in general no animals will
drink out of this river, excepting goats, whose flesh nevertheless has an
excellent flavor. These singular properties continue till (...) rivulets run
into it, and alter its nature: For when it passes by Ni^^la, it is not
different from other rivers, and falls into the Mediterranean sea six leagues
lower down.

There are several lakes in Spain. That of Beneventa, abounds with fishes,
particularly with excellent trout. Of the water of a lake near Antiquera salt
is made by the heat of the sun.

BAYS.] The chief bays are those of Biscay, Ferrol, Corunna, (commonly called
the Groyne,) Vigo, Cadiz, Gibraltar, Carthagena, A^cant, Altea, Valencia,
Roses, Majorca in that island, and the harbor of Port-Mahon, in the island of
Minorca. The strait of Gibraltar divides Europe from Africa.

WEALTH AND COMMERCE.] The kingdom of Spain might be one of the richest
countries in Europe. It borders, like France, upon two seas; it is intersected
by six large streams, and by upwards of (...) smaller rivers; it has very
considerable mountains, and its climate (...) in some respects, still finer
than that of France. With respect to its size, it is somewhat smaller than the
latter; however, the advantages just enumerated, added to the immense extent
and wealth of the Indies, ought to raise this monarchy high above all the other
powers of Europe. And yet the reverse is the case; Spain is thinly peopled, has
but little commerce, few manufactures, and what commerce it has is almost
entirely in the hands of strangers, notwithstanding the impediments thrown in
their way by government. With respect to the industry and fertility of the
several provinces, AbbE Cavaniles distinguishes between the central and outward
provinces; the latter, (...) Gallicia, Asturia, Navarre, Arragon, Catalonia,
Valencia, (...) Granada, and the south of Andalusia, are better watered and
wo^^^ consequently less hot, and upon the whole much more fertile, than (...)
middle provinces; most of them have besides, the advantage of (...) maritime
provinces. As a favorable instance of the fertility and industry of Spain, the
same author has stated the produce of the provinces of Valencia, in the
following manner: French Livers. Silk, 2,000,000 lb. valued at 30,000,000 Hemp,
1,500,000 Flax, 1,500,000 Wool, of the coarser sort, 23,000 cwt. 920,000 ^ite,
5,180,000 Oil, 1000,000 cwt. 4,500,000 Wine, 3,000,000 cantaros, 2,250,000
(...) raisins, 60,000 cwt. 600,000 (...), 480,000 Dutes, 300,000 46,730,000

The articles of corn, oil, maize, almonds, soda, salt, and the fisheries of
the same province, amounted 1770, to 65,000,000 livres. The amount (...)
variety of these productions is really astonishing; yet it must be ^^^ed, that
this province is perhaps the richest in Spain. One of the ^^^test obstacles to
agriculture in this kingdom is the breeding very (...) flocks of sheep, the
value of which is estimated in Spain at ^^,000,000 livres. They take up too
great an extent of ground for their subsistence, to the prejudice of
agriculture and population. The number of those sheep whose wool is of the
finest sort, is estimated at ^,000,000; the profits arising from them amount,
annually, to 8,500,000 livres, of which 2,200,000 are paid to the king*
5,600,000 must be de^^led from the necessary expenses, and only 700,000 livers
are the (...) benefit to the proprietors. Of this sine wool, 40,000 cwt. is
annually sent off to London and Bristol; about the same quantity to ^^^en;
20,000 cwt. to Amsterdam, of which only 6000 cwt. Receipt in Holland; the rest
is exported chiefly to different parts of (...). The principal towns which
carry on the wool-trade, (...) harbors of Bilboa and Santander, where wool is
shipped for ^^^portation; and those which produce the finest sorts of wool, are
(...), Segovia, (which alone produces 25,000 cwt.) Avila, Burgos, (...) Seria.

Agriculture flourishes most in the provinces of Castile and Estremadu^^; but,
upon the whole, Spain does not produce corn enough for its consumption, and is
under the necessity of importing large quantities.

Spain produces excellent fruit, as oranges, lemons, almonds, figs, and (...).
In 1764, they were exported from the harbor of Malaga, (...) chests of lemons
and oranges, holding from 1000 to 1500, each; (...) barrels of figs, at 75 --
150 lb. each; 400 barrels of almonds, of (...) -- 300 lb. each; 500 balls of
orange and lemon peel; 15 balls of (...) the ball weighing 750 lb.
Pomegranates, dates pistachios (...) the kernel of this fruit, which resembles
an almond in flavor, (...) of it are used in Spain; they are boiled down to a
resinous (...) which serves instead of frankincense). Capers, chestnuts, of
(...) 30,000 shiplasts are produced in the province of Asturia; fil^^^ 30,000
bags of which, sold at 1l. sterling each, are sent over to (...). The
sugar-cane, which at present is little cultivated, on ac^^^ of the importation
of West India sugar: Only four sugar-mills (...) remaining in the province of
Granada. Soda, saffron, tobacco. The greatest tobacco-manufacture is at
Seville; it employs 1000 workmen, and 180 mules, used to put 28 mills in
motion. The building used for this purpose resembles a palace in magnificence,
and the profits it yields, amount to 6,000,000 of dollars: Every day 24,000 lb.
of tobacco are dried. Tobacco is mixed in this manufacture with a sort of red
earth, called Almagra (rubrica frabrilis) which is found (...) Carthagena, in
the province of Murcia. Upwards of 1000 lb. of ho^^^ is exported; but the
consumption of wax is so great, that a great (...) must be imported from the
West Indies. Salt is very plentiful i^ Spain; there are not only many rich
brine-springs, but large quantities of rock salt; and much salt is also
extracted from the sea-wa^^^, Unhappily, the salt trade is a monopoly of the
crown. Saltpetre abounds in this country; the soil is impregnated with it, and
many p^^ants have saltpetre pits: If properly attended to, considerable
quantities for exportation might be produced. The wines of Spain are celebrated
for their rich and delicious flavor, and they form very considerable articles
of exportation.

Next to the province of Valencia, those of Arragon, Granada, (...) Murcia, are
distinguished for the large quantities of silk the supply. The whole produce of
silk, within these four provinces, was estimated about 30 years ago, at about
1,500,000 lb. annually. This produce has increased of late: In 1776, Granada
and Murcia produced 700,000^^ and Valencia upwards of 1,000,000. In 1762, the
silk raised in Valencia, amounted to 1,150,000 lb. in Murcia to 400,000, in
Arragon (...) 170,000, in Granada to 100,000 lb. Notwithstanding these vast
quantities of silk, the silk manufactures are few and inconsiderable in
^^^portion; scarcely the fourth part of those remain which were in a
flourishing state in the 16th century. Of 70,000 looms, which Spain formerly
had, Ustariz found only 10,000 remaining in the year 1724. Since that time,
their number has again increased.

Cotton in likewise one of the many productions of this kingdom; Valencia, in
good years, produces 120,500 cwt. most of which is exported raw. The best
cotton-manufactures are in Valencia, Arragon, and Catalonia.

Gold and silver was found in the mines in very considerable quantities during
the times of the Roman dominion, and even afterward by the industrious Moors.
At present only a few silver mines are worked, among which, that at
Guadalcornal, in the province of Estre^^dura, is the most important. It was
formerly worked to very great advantage by German adventurers, but it is at
present greatly on the decline: It is said to have produced, while in a
flourishing state, to the amount of 60,000 ducats a week. A few silver mines
are found in the provinces of Granada, Arragon, and Catalonia. Arragon produces
a great deal of iron, most of which is exported as it is brought from the
mines, and is imported again when manufactured abroad. This province produces
likewise very large quantities of load; the (...) profits of one of these lead
mines, at Binares, amounted to 3,000 (...) dollars in seven years. Quicksilver
is found in the rich mines of Guadalcornal and Almada. The first who worked
them were Germa^^ the celebrated Fuger, so conspicuous for his wealth in
Charles (...) Fifth's time, got most of his riches from the mine of Almada. In
the middle of the present century, the produce of quicksilver, amounted to
18,000 cwt. the whole of which is sent over to America for the purpose of
almagamating; and the sale of quicksilver to strangers is severely prohibited.

Spain is indebted to German mincralgolists for the discovery of some (...)
mines of cobalt: The most important of them is that of Gistan, in A^^^gon.
Besides metals, the mineral kingdom affords many valuable articles, among which
the quarries of marble, alabaster, and other useful (...), deserve to be
mentioned.

Spain now first begins to think of facilitating trade, by the establishment of
a bank, and by the improvement of the inland communication, by means of good
roads and canals. A paper-bank was established in 178^, in East India Company
incorporated in 1785, and a large canal (...) near Zaragoetc;cedil;a in 1784.

All the exports of Spain, most articles of which no other European country can
supply, are estimated at only 80,000,000 livers, or ^^^,^^^,833l. Sterling* a
very inconsiderable amount, as will appear (...) the above specification of the
excellent and various articles of production. The most important trade of Spain
is that which it car^^^ with its American provinces. The chief imports from
these (...) countries consist of gold, silver, precious stones, pearls, cotton
cocoa, cochineal, red wood, skins, rice, medicinal herbs and barks, (...)
Peruvian bark, etc. Vanilla, Vicunna wool, sugar, and to^^^^. In 1784, the
total amount of the value of Spanish goods ex^^^^d to America, was 195,000,000
reales de vellon; foreign com^^di^^s, 238,000,000. r. d. v. The imports from
America were valued ^^,000,000, reales de vellon, in gold, silver, and precious
stones; (...) upwards, of 300,000,000 in goods. In the Gazeta de Madrid, 1787,
(...), 20th) it was stated, that the exports to America (the Indies) from the
following twelve harbors: Cadiz, Corunna, Malaga, Seville, St. (...),
Santander, Canarias, Alicante, Barcelona, Tortosa, Gipon, St. (...), amounted,
in 1785, to 767,249,787 reales de vellon; the (...) paid on these exports
amounted to 28,543,702 reales de vellon. The imports, both in goods and money,
from America and the West Indies islands, amounted in the same year to
1,266,071,067 reales de vellon, and the duties to 65,472,195 reales de vellon.
The profits of the ^^^^ants from the whole American trade was valued at
5,000,000 dollars.

With respect to European commerce, the balance is generally against Spain, and
those losses must be made up by the produce of its America provinces. All the
exports from Spain to Great Britain, amounted, i^ 1785, to 607,712l. sterling;
the imports from Great Britain, to ^^064l. sterling. In 1784, the exports were
646,526; the imports (...)l. sterling.

^^^^AL PAODUCTIONS BY SEA AND LAND.] The Spanish horses, especially those of
Andalusia, are thought to be the handsomest (...) in Europe, and at the same
time very fleet and serviceable. The (...) does all he can to monoplise the
finest breed for his own stables (...) service. Spain furnishes likewise mules
and black cattle; and (...) wild bulls have so much ferocity, that their
bull-feasts were the magnificent spectacle the court of Spain could exhibit,
nor are (...) disused. Wolves are the chief beasts of prey that infest (...),
which is well stored with all the game and wild fowl that are (...) found in
the neighboring countries already described. The (...) seas afford excellent
fish of all kinds, especially anchovies, (...) are here cured in great
perfection.

POPULATION, INHABITANTS, MANNERS, CUSTOMS, DIVERSIONS, AND DRESS.} Spain,
formerly the (...) populous kingdom in Europe, is now but thinly inhabited.
This is owing partly to the (...) drains of people sent to America, and partly
to the indolence of the natives, who are at no pains to raise food for their
families. Another cause may be assigned, and that is, the vast numbers of
ecclesiastics of both sexes, who lead a life of celibacy. Some writers have
gives several other causes, such as their wars with the Moors, and the final
expulsion of that people. The present inhabitants of this kingdom have been
computed by Feyjoo, a Spanish writer, to amount to 9,250,^^^ count Aranda makes
them as stated in the Table.

The persons of the Spaniards are generally tall, especially the Castilians;
Their hair and complexions swarthy, but their counten^^^^ are very expressive.
The court of Madrid has of late been at (...) pains to clear their upper lips
of mustachoes, and to introduce among them the French dress, instead of their
black cloaks, their short jerkin, strait breeches, and long Toledo swords,
which dress is now chiefly confined to the lower ranks. The Spaniards, before
the accession of the house of Bourbon to their throne, affected that antiquated
dress in hatred and contempt of the French; and the government, probably, will
find some difficulty in abolishing it quite, as the same spirit i^ the from
being extinguished. An Old Castilian, or Spaniard, who (...) none above him,
thinks, himself the most important being in nature* and the same pride is
commonly communicated to his descendants.

Ridiculous, however, as this pride is, it is productive of the must valuable
effects. It inspires the nation with generous, humane, and virtuous sentiments;
it being seldom found that a Spanish nobleman, gentleman, or even trader, is
guilty of a mean action. During th^^ most embittered wars they have had with
England for near 70 years past, there is no instance known of their taking
advantages (as they might easily have done) of confiscating the British
properly on board their galleons and Plate fleet, which was equally secure in
time of war as in peace.

By the best and most credible accounts of the late wars, it appears that the
Spaniards, in America, gave the most humane and noble relief to all British
subjects who were in distress, and sell into their hands, not only by supplying
them with necessaries, but money; and treating them in the most hospitable
manner while they remained among them

Having said thus much, we are carefully to distinguish between the Spanish
nobility, gentry, and traders, and their government, which is to be put on the
same footing with the lower ranks of Spaniards, who are as mean and rapacious
as those of any other country. The kings of Spain of the house of Bourbon, have
seldom, ventured to employ native Spaniards of great families, as their
ministers. These are generally French or Italians, but most commonly the
latter, who rise into power by the most infamous arts, and of late times, from
the most abject stations. Hence it is that the French kings of Spain, since
their accession to that monarchy, have been but very indifferently served in
the cabinet. Alberoni, who had the greatest genius among them, embroiled his
master with all Europe, till he was driven into exile and disgrace; and
Grimaldi, the last of their Italian ministers, hazarded a rebellion in the
capital, by his oppressive and unpopular measures.

The common people who live on the coasts, partake of all the bad politics that
are to be found in other nations. They are an assembl^^ of Jews, French,
Russians, Irish adventures, and English smuggler; who being unable to live in
their own country, mingle with the Spaniards. In time of war, they follow
privateering with great success; and when peace returns, they engage in all
illicit practices, and (...) enter into the Irish and Walloon guards in the
Spanish service. There are about 40,000 gypsies, and who, besides their fortune
telling, are innkeepers in the small towns and villages. The character of the
Spaniards, is thus drawn by Mr. Swinburne, after his late travels through the
country: "The Catalans appear to be the most active during set of men, the best
calculated for business, traveling, and manufactures. The Valencians a more
sullen, sedate race, better adapted to the occupations of husbandmen, less
eager to change place, and of a much more timid, suspicious cast of mind than
the former. The An^^^^ans seem to be the greatest talkers and rhodomontadoes of
Spain. The Castilians have a manly frankness, and less appearance of cunning
and deceit. The new Castilians are perhaps the least industrious of the whole
nation; the old Castilians are laborious, and retain more of (...) simplicity
of manner; both are of a firm determined spirit. -- The Arragonese are a
mixture of the Castilian and Catalan, rather in^^^g to the former. The
Biscayners are acute and diligent, fiery and impatient of control, more
resembling a colony of republicans th^n a province of an absolute monarchy; and
the Galicians are a p^^dding pains-taking race of mortals, that roam over Spain
in search (...) hardly earned subsistence."

Notwithstanding the pride and ostentation of the Spaniards, their (...) is
easily discernible, but their wants are few, and their appe^^^ easily
satisfied. The inferior orders, even in the greatest cities, ^^^iserably
lodged, and those lodgings wretchedly furnished. Many o^ the poorer sort, both
men and women, wear neither shoes nor stock^g^, and coarse bread steeped in oil
and occasionally seasoned with vinegar, is the common food of the country
people through several provinces. A traveller in Spain must carry provisions
and bedding (...) him, and if per chance he meets with the appearance of an
inn, he must even cook his victuals, it being beneath the dignity of a Spaniard
to perform these offices to strangers; but lately some tolerable inns have been
opened by Irish and Frenchmen in cities, and upon the high roads. The pride,
indolence, and laziness of the Spaniards, are powerful inducements to their
more industrious neighbors the French, who are to be found in all parts of the
kingdom; and here a wonderful contrast distinguishes the character of two
neighboring nations. The Spaniard seldom stirs from home, or puts his hand to
work of any kind. He sleeps, goes to mass, takes his evening walk. While the
industrious Frenchman becomes a thorough domestic; he is butch^^, cook, and
tailor, all in the same family; he powders the hair, cuts the corns, wipes the
shoes, and after making himself useful in a thousand different shapes, the
returns to his native country loaded with dollars and laughs out the remainder
of his days at the expense of his (...) benefactor.

The Spaniards are universally known to have refined notions and excellent
sense; and this, if improved by study and traveling, which they now stand in
great need of, would render them superior to the French themselves. Their slow,
deliberate manner of proceeding of (...) in council or war, has of late years
worn off to such a degree, (...) during the two last wars, they were found to
be as quick both in res^^^ing and executing, if not more so than their enemies.
Their (...) constancy and patience, have always been deemed exemplary; and in
several of their provinces, particularly Galacia, Granada, and An^^^^sia the
common people have, for some time, assiduously applied themselves to
agriculture and labor.

Among the many good qualities possessed by the Spaniards, their ^^briety in
eating and drinking is remarkable. They frequently (...) fast, as well as sup
in bed; their breakfast is usually chocolate, (...) ^^^ing very seldom drank.
Their dinner in generally beef, mutton, veal, pork, and bacon, greens, etc. all
boiled together. They live much upon garlic, chives, sallad and radishes;
which, according to one of their proverbs, are food for a gentleman. The men
drink very little wine; and the women use water or chocolate. Both sexes
usually sleep (...) dinner and take the air in the cool of the evenings.
Dancing is so much their favorite entertainment, that you may see a
grandmother, mother, and daughter, all in the same country-dance. Many of their
theatrical exhibitions are insipid and ridiculous bombast. The ^^^^ter's head
sometimes appears through a trap-door above the level of the stage, and he
reads the play loud enough to be heard by the (...), Gallantry is a ruling
passion in Spain. Jealously, since the accession of the house of Bourbon, has
slept in peace. The nightly, musical ^^renades of mistresses by their lovers
are still in use. The fights of the cavaliers, or bull-feasts, are almost
peculiar to this country, and (...) a capital figure in painting the genius and
manners of the Spaniards. On these occasions, young gentlemen have an
opportunity of showing their courage and activity before their mistresses; and
the valor of the cavalier is proclaimed, honored, and rewarded, according to
the number and fierceness of the bulls he has killed in these encounters. Great
pains are used in settling the forms and weapons of the combat, so as (...)
give a relief to the gallantry of the cavalier. The diversion itself, which is
attended with circumstances of great barbarity, is undoubtedly of Moorish
original, and (...) adopted by the Spaniards when upon good terms with that
nation, partly through complaisance, and partly through ^ivalship.

There (...) a town in Spain but what has a large square for the purpose of
exhibiting bull-lights; and it is said that even the poorest inhabitants of the
smallest villages, will often club together, in order to procure a cow or an
ox, and fight them riding upon asses, for want of horses.

GOVERNMENT.] Spain is at present an absolute monarchy. The meeting of the
deputies of the towns, whenever a new tax is to be imposed, is a more matter of
form. Some provinces, however, as Navarre, Biscay, and Arragon, have preserved
some of their ancient immunities. The king's edicts, before they require the
force of laws, must be registered in the court of Castile. The crown is
hereditary, both in the male and female line. By a law made in 1715, female
heirs cannot succeed till after the whole male line is extinct.

Public business is managed by the following departments: The council of State,
or the Cabinet: of the ministers belonging to it, the (...) of state for
foreign affairs is considered as the first. The Su^^^^ Royal Court, or Chamber
of Castile, occupied with the internal administration. It is likewise the
Supreme Court of justice in the kingdom, and is divided into four chambers: The
Council of War, the Royal Council of the Indies, and the Council of Finances.
There are as tribunals in the different provinces of Spain, called
Chancillerias, ^^^sejois, or Audiencias. In the smaller towns, the judges of
the in^^^ courts of justice are called Alcaides or Bayles; in the larger (...),
Corregidores, and their assessors Regidores. Lawsuits in this country are
exceedingly expensive, and of long duration.

The civil, criminal, and police laws, are partly derived from the an^^^ Gothic
laws, and partly contained in the edicts of the kings. In (...) where these
laws are deficient, the Roman laws are made use of* by ecclesiastical matters,
the canon or papal law, in its full extent, is adopted as the rule of right.

Fundamental laws of the monarchy are the following: 1. The indi^^bility of the
Spanish dominions. 2. The right of primogeniture, which put an end to the
custom of dividing the kingdom between the sums of the king. And, 3. The
abovementioned clause concerning the succession of the female line.

The provinces are governed by viceroys (Virreyes); and all the American
dominions of Spain are divided into three royal governments, under the viceroys
of New-Granada, Mexico, and Peru. There (...) nine superior courts of justice,
or Audiencias, in America, and one in the Philippine Islands.

FINANCES.] The king's revenue from old Spain amounts to upwards of 5,000,000l.
sterling. The whole of the revenue from Spain, America, and the Philippine
Islands, is said to amount to 100 millions of posters.

The public revenue is divided into the general and provincial revenue. The
first arises. 1. From the customs and the duties on imported goods from abroad,
as well as on those imported from one province into ^^other. 2. From the
monopolies of the crown, viz. those of tobacco, salt, lead, quicksilver, and
gunpowder. 3. From stamp duties, contributions, a tax on landed estates, taxed
levied on the estates of the clergy, from the sale of papal absolutions and
indulgences, reduced to the price of 40 sous each, from the posts, deductions
from the salaries of public officers, and the mint. 4. The crown revenue from
America. 5. The crown revenue from Arragon, Valencia, Catalonia, Majorca, and
Minorca. What is called the provincial revenue arises from the as provinces,
into which the kingdom of Castile has been divided; it consists of various
tithes* and duties on soap, brandy, wine, and other (...). Part of the
provincial contributions are assigned over to the creditors of the crown, in
lien of interest on their capitals. Many branches of the revenue are farmed out
to companies. The farm of tobacco alone employs no less than 53,000 collectors.
Before the year 1770, the public expenditure was nearly equal to the revenue,
but has (...) found since to exceed it. In the year 1770, a deficiency of five
millions of piasters was made good, by withholding the sums destined for the
extraordinary expense of the colonies.

Spain is burdened with considerable public debts; they are at present divided
into the old and new debts: The former are those contracted by the wars of
Charles V. and his successors, amounting to (...) millions of piasters; the new
debts have been chiefly incurred by the last war with England, and they are
stated by Mr. Neckar to amount to 120 millions of French livres, which will be
paid off by the year 1800, if no new war should happen.

ARMY.] The army of Spain, in 1783, amounted to between 60 and 70,000 men;
besides 20,000 militia. According to others, the regular troops did not then
actually exceed 50,000 men; and more recent accounts reduce the army to only
20,000 effective men. The army establishment, as published in the year 1776,
amounted to 132,73^ men on the lists, viz.

Royal guards, 9,900 Forty-six regiments of foot, 61,425 Artillery, 3,355
Engineers, 150 Horse and dragoons, 13,200 Militia, 29,700 Invalids and militia
of the town. 15,000 Total, 132,730

This number, if actually raised in time of war, would be very moderate,
considering the great extent of the kingdom. There are military schools at
Segovia, Barcelona, and Oran, chiefly for artillery. A tactic school is
established at Avila. There are, on the French frontiers, 15 strong fortresses,
and as many on the frontiers of Portugal.

NAVY.] In 1778, Spain had ships of war of all sorts 144. Other accounts say
only 126. In 1784, there were said to be 62 ships of the line, from 120 to 64
guns. The naval troops consisted, in 1783, of three companies of guardias
marinas, and 12 batallions of marines, both together, 5712 men, a naval
artillery corpse of 20,000 men; a corpse of naval engineers, a corpse of pilo^s.

All naval affairs are managed by a board, divided into three departments,
those of Cadiz, Carthagena, and Ferrol, which are the chief harbors of the
navy. The whole is under the administration of a secretary of the marine; and
each department has its naval academy.

RELIGION.] The Roman Catholic religion is the exclusive religion of the
Spanish monarchy, and it is in these countries of the most bigoted,
superstitious, and tyrannical character. All other denominations of Christians,
as well as the Jews, are exposed to all the severities of persecution; and the
least deviation from what is called the orthodox, faith, is liable to be
punished with loss of liberty, and even of life. The power of the Court of
inquisition, established in Spain in 1478, has however been considerably
diminished in some respects by the interference of the civil power. Besides the
Supreme Court of Inquisition at Madrid, there are 18 inferior tribunals in the
several provinces of the monarchy, which entertain a numerous host of spies or
familiars, amounting to about 20,000 persons, who, on the slightest suspicious
of heresy, denounce persons of every condition, sex, and age. The proceedings
of this arbitrary court are unlike those of all other courts of justice, by
deviating from every law of equity and humanity; they do not even inform the
accused party of the crime laid to his charge, nor confront him with his
accuser, but endeavor to extort by imprisonment, and by still harsher methods,
a confession of heretical opinions.

The public worship is loaded with an enormous number of ceremonies, calculated
to support the blind aeal of the people for their religion, and the reverence
for their spiritual tyrants. The whole of the canon law is here in ^^rce, and
the power of the pope is still very extensive. It is supposed that the clergy
of this kingdom amount to 200,000 persons, half of whom are monks and nuns,
distributed through 3000 convents. The possessions of the clergy are very
large* the revenue of the archbishop of Toledo amounts to 100,000l. sterling,
per annum. There are in the kingdom of Spain eight archbishops and 46 bishops;
in America six archbishops and 23 bishops; in the Philippine Islands, one
archbishop and three bishops. All these dignities are in the gift of the king.
Fifty-two inferior ecclesiastical dignities and offices are in the gift of the
pope.

To the Spanish clergy there belong three spiritual orders of knighthood: The
orders of Santiago, Calatrava, and Alcantara, possessed of very large estates.

ANTIQUITIES AND CURIOSITIES, ARTIFICIAL AND NATURAL.] The former of these
consist chiefly of Roman and Moorish antiquities. Near Segovia, a grand
aqueduct, erected by Trajan, extends over a deep valley between two hills, and
is supported by a double row of 152 arches. Other Roman aqueducts, theaters,
and cir^^, are to be found at Terrago, and different parts of Spain. Near the
city of Salamanca are the remains of a Roman way, paved with large flat stones;
it was continued to Merida, and from thence to Seville. At Toledo are the
remains of an old Roman theater, which is now converted into a church, said to
be one of the greatest curiosities of antiquity. It is 600 feet in length, 500
in breadth, and of a proportionable height; the roof, which is amazingly bold
and lofty, is supported by 350 pillars of fine marble, in ten rows, forming
eleven ailes, in which are 366 altars, and 24 gates; every part being enriched
and adorned with the most noble and costly ornaments. At Martorel, a large
town, where much black lace is manufactured, is a very high bridge, built in
1768, out of the ruins of a decayed one that had existed 1985 years from its
erection by Hannibal. At the north end is a triumphal arch or gateway, said to
have been raised by that general in honor of his father Hamilcar. It is almost
entire, well proportioned and simple, without any kind of ornament, except a
rim or two of hewn stone. Near Mu^viedro (once the faithful Saguntum) destroyed
by Hannibal, are some Roman remains -- as the runs of the theater, an ^^act
semicircle about 82 yards diameter, some of the galleries are cut out of the
rock, and 9000 persons might attend the exhibitions without inconvenience.

The Moorish antiquities are rich and magnificent. Among the most distinguished
of these is the royal palace of the Alhambra at Granada, which is one of the
most entire, as well as the most stately, of may of the edifices which the
Moors erected in Spain, It was built in (...), by the second Moorish king of
Granada; and, in 1422, in the (...) of their eighteenth king, was taken by the
Spaniards. It is situated on a hill, which is ascended by a road bordered with
hedges of double or imperial myrtles, and rows of elms. On this hill, (...) the
walls of the Alhambra, the emperor Charles V. began a new p^^ace in 1568, which
was never finished, though the shell of it (...). It is built of yellow stone;
the outside forms a square of one hundred and ninety feet. The inside is a
grand circular court, with a portion of the Tuscan, and a gallery of the Doric
order, each supported by thirty-two columns, made of as many single pieces of
marble. The grand entrance is ornamented with columns of jasper, on the
pedestals of which are representations of battles, in marble basso relievo. The
Alhambra itself is a mass of many houses and towers, walled round, and built of
large stones of different dimensions. Almost all the (...) have stucco walls
and ceilings, some carved, some painted, and some gilt, and covered with
various Arabic sentences. It is the most curious place within, that perhaps
exists in Europe. Here are several baths, the walls, floor, and cieling of
which are of white marble. The gardens abound with orange and lemon trees,
pomegranates, and myrtles. At the end of the gardens is another palace called
Ginaraliph, situated on a more elevated station than the Alhambra. From the
balconies of this palace is one of the finest prospects in Europe, over the
whole fertile plain of Granada, bounded by the snowy mountains. The Moors to
this day regret the loss of Granada, and still offer up prayers to God for the
recovery of the city. Many other noble monuments, erected in the Moorish times,
remain in Spain; some of them in tolerable preservation, and others exhibiting
superb ruins.

Among the natural curiosities, the medicinal springs, and some noisy lakes,
form a principal part; but we must not forget the River Guadiana, which, like
the Mole in England, runs under ground, and then is said to emerge. The royal
cabinet or natural history at Madrid, was opened to the public by his majesty's
orders in 1775. Every thing in this collection is arranged with neatness and
elegance, and the apartments are opened twice a week for the public, besides
being shown privately to strangers of rank. The mineral part of the cabinet,
containing precious stones, marbles, ores, etc. is very perfect; but the
collection of birds and beasts at present is not large, though it may be
expected to improve apace, if care be taken to get the productions of the
Spanish, American colonies. Here is also a curious collection of vases, basins,
ewers, cups, plates, and ornamental pieces of the finest agates, amethysts,
rock crystals, etc. mounted in gold, and enamel, set with cameos, intaglios,
etc. in an elegant taste, and of very sine workmanship, said to have been
brought from France by Philip V. The cabinet also contains specimens of Mexican
and Peruvian vases and utensils.

In blowing up the rock of Gibraltar, many pieces of bones and teeth have been
sound incorporated with the stone. On the west side of the mountain is the
cave, called St. Michael's, eleven hundred and ten feet above the horizon. Many
pillars of various sizes, some of them two feet in diameter, have been formed
in it by the droppings of water, which have petrified in falling. The water
perpetually drips from the roof, and forms an infinite number of stalactitae of
a whitish color, composed of several coasts or crusts, and which, as well as
the pillars, continually increase in bulk, and may probably in time fill the
whole cavern. From the summit of the rock, in clear weather, not only the town
of Gibralter may be seen, but the bay, the straits, the towns of St. Roque and
Algesiras, and the Alpuzara mountains, mount Abyla on the African shore, with
its snowy top, the cities of Ceuta, T^gier, and great part of the Barbary coast.

CHIEF, CITIES, etc.] Madrid, which is enclosed by a mud wall, is the capital
of Spain. It is surrounded with very lofty mountains, whose summits are
frequently covered with snow. It is well paved and lighted, and some of the
streets are spacious and handsome. The houses of Madrid are of brick, and are
laid out chiefly for show, convenience being little considered: Thus you will
pass through usually two or three large apartments of no use, in order to come
at a small (...) at the end where the family sit. The houses, in general, look
more like prisons than the habitations of people at their liberty; the windows,
besides having a balcony, being grated with iron bars, particularly the lower
range, and sometimes all the rest. Separate families generally inhabit the same
house, as in Paris and Edinburgh. -- Foreigners are very much distressed for
lodgings at Madrid, as the Spaniards are not fond of taking strangers into
their houses, especially if they are not catholics. Its greatest excellency is
the cheapness of its provisions; but neither tavern, coffee-house, nor news
paper, excepting the Madrid Gazette, are to be found in the whole city. The
royal palace stands on an eminence, on the west side of the city; it is a
spacious, magnificent structure, consisting of three courts, and commands a
very fine prospect. Each of the fronts is 470 feet in length, 100 high, and
there is no palace in Europe fitted up with greater magnificence; the great
audience chamber especially, which is 120 feet long, and long with crimson
velvet, richly embroidered with gold. Ornamented also with 12 looking-glasses,
made at St. Ildefonso, each 10 feet high, with 12 tables of the finest Spanish
marbles. The other royal palaces round it are designed for hunting seats or
houses of retirement (...) their kings. Some of them contain fine paintings and
good statues. The chief of those palaces are the Buen Retiro (now stripped of
all i^ best pictures and furniture,) Cassa del Campo, Aranjuez, and St.
Ildefonso.

A late traveller has represented the palace of Aranjuez, and its gardens, as
extremely delightful. Here is also a park many leagues round, cut across in
different parts by alleys of two, three, and even four miles in extent. Each of
these alleys is formed by two double rows of elm trees; one double row on the
right and one on the left, which renders the shade thicker. The alleys are wide
enough to ad^^ of four coaches abreast, and betwixt each double row there is a
narrow channel, through which runs a stream of water. Between these allies
there are thick groves of smaller trees of various kinds, and thousands of deer
and wild boars wander there at large, besides numberless hares, rabbits,
pheasants, partridges, and several other kinds of kinds. The river Tagus runs
through this place, and divides it into two unequal parts. The central point of
this great park is the king's palace, which is partly surrounded by the garden,
and is exceedingly pleasant, adorned with fountains and statues, and it also
contains a vast variety of the most beautiful flowers, both American and
European. As to the palace of Aranjuez itself, it is rather an elegant than a
magnificent building.

The palace of St. Ildefonso is built of brick, plaistered, and pointed, but no
part of the architecture is agreeable. It is two stories high, and the
garden-front has thirty-one windows, and twelve rooms in a suite. The gardens
are on a slope, on the top of which is a great reservoir of water, called here
El Mar, the sea, which supplies the fountains: -- This reservoir is furnished
from the torrents which pour down the mountains. The waterworks are excellent,
and far surpass those at Versailles. The great entry of the palace, is somewhat
similar to that of Versailles, and with a large iron pallisade. In the gardens
are twenty-seven fountains; the basins are of white marble, and the statues,
many of which are excellent, are of lead, bronzed and gilt. -- These gardens
are in the formal French style, but ornamented with sixty-one very fine marble
statues, as large as the life, with twenty-eight marble vases, and twenty
leaden vases gilt. The Upper part of the palace contains many valuable
paintings, and the lower part antique statues, busts, and basso relievos.

The pride of Spain, however, is the Escurial; and the natives say, perhaps
with justice, that the building of it cost more than that of any other palace
in Europe. The description of this palace forms a sizable quarto volume, and it
is said, that Philip II. who was its founder, expended upon it six millions of
ducats. It contains a prodigious number of windows, 200 in the west front, and
in the east, 366, and the apartments are decorated with an astonishing variety
of paintings, sculpture, tapestry, ornaments of gold and silver, marble,
jasper, gents, and other curious stones, surpassing all imagination. The
Spaniards say, that this building, besides its palace, contains a church, large
and richly ornamented, a mausoleum, cloisters, a convent, a college, and a
library, containing about thirty thousand volumes, besides large apartments for
all kinds of artists and mechanics, noble walks, with extensive parks and
gardens, beautified with fountains and costly ornaments. The fathers that live
in the convent are 200, and they have an annual revenue of 12000l. The
mausoleum, or burying-place of the kings and queens of Spain, is called the
Pantheon, because it is built upon the plan of that temple at Rome, as the
church to which it belongs is upon the model of St. Peter's. It is 36 feet in
diameter incrusted with fine marbles.

But this fabric, notwithstanding the incredible sums bestowed on it,
discovers, upon the whole, a bad taste. The conceit of building it in the form
of a gridiron, because St. Lawrence, to whom it is dedicated, was broiled on
such a utensil, and multiplying the same figure through its principal
ornaments, could have been formed only in the brain of a tasteless bigot, such
as Philip II. who erected it to commemorate the victory he obtained over the
French at St. Quintin, on St. Lawrence's day, in the year 1557. The apartment
where the king resides, forms the handle of the gridiron. The building is a
long square of 640 feet by 580. The height to the roof is 60 feet. It has been
enriched and adorned by his successors; but its outside has a gloomy
appearance, and the inside is composed of different structures, some of which
are masterpieces of architecture, but forming a disagreeable whole. It must
however be confessed, that the pictures and statues that have found admission
here, are excellent in their kind, and some of (...) not to be equalled even in
Italy itself.

Cadiz is the great emporium of Spanish commerce. It stands on an Island
separated from the continent of Andalusia, without the straits of Gibraltar, by
a very narrow arm of the sea, over which a fortified bridge is thrown, and
joins it to the main land. The entrance into the bay is about 500 sathoms wide,
and guarded by two forts, called the Puntals. The streets are narrow, ill paved
and filthy, and full of (...) in the night. The houses lofty with flat roofs,
and few are without a turret for a view of the sea. The cathedral has been
already (...) years building, and the roof a few years since, was not half
finished. The environs are beautifully rural.

Seville, the Julia of the Romans, is next to Madrid, the largest city in
Spain, but is greatly decayed both in riches and population. The shape is
circular, and the walls seem of Moorish construction; its circumference is five
miles and a half. The suburb of Triana, is as large as many towns, and
remarkable for its gloomy Gothic castle, where, in 1481, the inquisition was
first established in Spain. Manufactures is wool and silk, which formerly
amounted to 16,000, are now reduced to 400, and its great office of commerce to
Spanish America is re^^ed to Cadiz. The cathedral of Seville is a fine Gothic
building, with a curious steeple or tower, having a movable figure of a women
at top, called La Giralda, which turns round with the wind; and which is
referred to in Don Quixote.

Barcelona, formerly Barcino, said to be founded by Hamilcar Barons, is a large
circular trading city, containing 15,000 houses, is situated on the
Mediterranean facing Minorca, and is said to be the hand^^^ place in Spain; the
houses are lofty and plain, and the streets ^^ll lighted, and paved. The
citadel is strong, and the place and inhabitants famous for the siege they
sustained in 1714 against a formidable army, when deserted both by England and
the Emperor for whom they had taken up arms.

A singular custom prevails among them on the 1st of November, the (...) of All
Souls; they run about from house to house to eat chestnuts, believing that for
every chestnut they swallow, with proper faith and ^^^tion, they shall deliver a
soul out of purgatory.

Carthagena is a large city, but has very good streets, and fewer remarkbl^
buildings. The port is very complete, formed by nature in the figure of a
heart, and the arsenal is a spacious square south-west of the town, with forty
pieces of cannon to defend it toward the sea. When Mr. Swinburne visited it, in
1775, there were 800 Spanish criminals, and 600 Barbary slaves working at the
pumps to keep the docks dry, etc. and treated with great inhumanity. The crimes
for which the Spaniards were sent there, deserved indeed exemplary punishments.

Granada stands on two hills, and the ancient palace of the Alhambra towns the
double summit between two rivers, the Dauro, and the Xe^^l. The former glories
of this city are passed away with its old inhabitants; the streets are now
filthy and the aqueducts crumbled to (...), and its trade is lost. Of 50,000
inhabitants, only 18,000 are rec^^^ed useful, the surplus is made up of
superfluous clergy, lawyers, children, and beggars. The amphitheatre, for bull
feasts, is built of (...) and one of the best in Spain, and the environs of the
city are (...) pleasing and healthful.

(...) is situated on the banks of the river Ybaizabal, and is about (...)
leagues from the sea. It contains about eight hundred houses, with a large
square by the water side, well shaded with pleasant (...) which extend to the
outlets, on the banks of the river; where there (...) great numbers of houses
and gardens, which form a most pleasing ^^^pect, particularly in sailing up the
river; for, besides the beautiful ^^^dure, numerous objects open gradually to
the eye, and the town (...) pears as an amphitheatre, which enlivens the
landscape, and (...) the scenery. The houses are solid and lofty, and the
streets well ^^^ed and level; and the water is so conveyed into the streets,
that (...) may be wa^l^ed at pleasure; which renders Bilboa one of the (...)
towns in Europe.

Malaga is an ancient city, and not less remarkable for its (...) and extensive
commerce than for the luxuriance of its soil, yielding (...) great abundance
the most delicious fruits; whilst its rugged ^^^^tains afford those luscious
grapes, which give such reputation to the Malaga wine, known in England by the
name of Mountain. The city is large and populous, and of a circular form,
surrounded with double wall, strengthened by stately towers, and has nine
gates. A Moorish castle, on the point of a rock, commands every part of (...).
The streets are narrow, and the most remarkable building in it is a ^^^pendous
cathedral, begun by Philip II. said to be as large as that of (...) Paul's in
London. The bishop's income is 16,000l. sterling.

The city of Salamanca is of a circular form, but on three hills and two
valleys, and on every side surrounded with prospects of fine houses, noble
feats, gardens, orchards, fields, and distant villages; and it ancient, large,
rich, and populous. Over some of the arches of (...) houses are medallions,
with busts of the kings of Spain, and of several eminent men, in stone
basso-relievo, among which are those of Fernando Cortez, Francis Pizarro,
Davila, and Cid Ruv. In this (...) the bull-fights are exhibited for three days
only, in the month of June. The river Tormes runs by this city, and has a
bridge over it of 25 arches, built by the Romans, and yet entire.

Toledo is one of the most ancient cities in Spain, and during several
centuries it held the rank of its metropolis. But the neighborhood of Madrid
has by degrees, stripped it of its numerous inhabitants. It is now exceedingly
ill built, poor and mean, and the streets very steep.

Burgos was the ancient capital of the kingdom of Castile, but (...) in
obscurity.

Gibraltar, once a celebrated town and fortress of Andalusia, is a^ present in
the possession of Great Britain. It was taken from (...) Spaniards by a
combined fleet of English and Dutch ships, under the command of Sir George
Rooke, in 1704; and after many fruitless attempts to recover it, was confirmed
to the English by the treaty of Utrecht, in 1713. Repeated attempts have been
since made to wrest it from England, but without success: The last war has
made it more famous than ever, when it underwent a long siege against the
united forces of Spain and France by land and sea, and was gallantly defeated
by general Elliot and his garrison, to the great loss and disgrace of the
assailants: Though it must be granted, the place is by nature almost
impregnable. Near three hundred pieces of cannon of different bores, and
chiefly brass, which were sunk before the port in the ^^^^ing batteries, have
been raised, and sold, to be distributed among the garrison. It is a commodious
port, and formed naturally for con^^^ding the passage of the Straits, or, in
other words, the entrance into the Mediterranean and Levant seas. But the road
is neither safe against an enemy nor storms: The bay is about twenty leagues in
circumference. The straits are 24 miles long, and 15 broad; through which sets
a current from the Atlantic ocean into the Mediterranean, and for the stemming
of it a brisk gale is required. The town was rather large nor beautiful, and in
the last siege was totally destroyed by the enemies bombs, but on account of
its fortifications, is esteemed ^^ey of Spain, and is always furnished with a
garrison well pro^^^ for its defense. The harbor is formed by a mole, which is
well fortified and planted with guns. Gibraltar is accessible on the (...) side
only by a narrow passage between the rock and the sea, but (...) walled and
fortified both by art and nature, and so enclosed by (...) steep hills, as to
be almost inaccessible that way. It has but two (...) on that side, and as many
toward the sea. Across this isthmus the Spaniards have drawn fortified line,
chiefly with a view to hin^^ the garrison of Gibraltar from having any
intercourse with the country behind them: Notwithstanding which they carry on a
^^estine trade, particularly in tobacco, of which the Spaniards are ^^eedingly
fond. The garrison is, however, confined within very (...) limits; and, as the
ground produces scarcely any thing, all (...) provisions are brought them
either from England, or from Ceuta, o^ the opposite coast of Barbary. Formerly
Gibraltar was entirely (...) military government; but that power producing
those abuses which are naturally attendant on it, the parliament thought proper
to (...) it into a body corporate, and the civil power is now lodged in its
magistrates.

The chief islands belonging to Spain in Europe, are those of Major^^ and
Yvica, of which we have nothing particular to say. Minorca, which was taken by
the English in 1708, was retaken by the Spaniards the last war, and is now
become a Spanish island again, containing about 23,000 inhabitants.

GENERAL REMARKS.] Whoever considers the climate, the fertility, all the
immense extent of the dominions belonging to the crown of Spain, must be
grieved to find the accumulated natural treasures of so (...) a part of the
globe, turn out to so little advantage to the human (...). A comparison of this
kingdom with France or England, (...) its inferiority in a very striking light.
It seems, that the want of vigor and happiness of the Spanish monarchy, is to
be attributed chiefly to three causes. 1. To the depopulation of Old Spain,
occasioned by the injudicious and cruel expulsion of the industrious Moors. 2.
To the religious oppression still prevailing in Spain, and discouraging
foreigners from settling in that kingdom. 3. To the discovery of so very rich a
country as America, and to the sudden influx of (...) much gold and silver from
thence. It appears from several ^^^dations, that some thousand millions of
ducats have been brought (...) to Spain since the discovery of America. These
riches being ac^^^ without any other trouble than that of plundering and
oppression natives, proved extremely prejudicial to the mother country, (...)
great numbers of inhabitants to emigrate from Old Spain, (...) to exchange
labor and industry for rapine; and by render^^ ancient sources of wealth,
agriculture and manufactures, con^^^able, when compared to the riches to be
acquired in America. In consequence of this revolution, the useful arts,
rendered perhaps more difficult in this kingdom by the influence of the
climate, (...) into neglect and insignificancy, from which they have not yet
^^^ed. It is to be hoped, however, that this fatal consequence (...) rapid and
influx of money, especially if the latter should not be ^^^^nent in its nature,
will in future be guarded against by other con^^^cial nations, to whom the
present state of Spain, may serve as ^^ful warning.

While the Moors were masters of Spain, agriculture and the (...) arts were in
a very flourishing state, and sciences were arrived ^^^^gree of luster the more
conspicuous, by being contrasted with the ignorance spread over the rest of
Europe.

Several old fathers of the church were Spaniards; and (...) owes a great deal
to Isidore, bishop of Seville, and cardinal (...) Spain has likewise produced
some excellent physicians. Such (...) the gloom of the Austrian government,
that took place with the ^^peror Charles V. that the inimitable Cervantes, the
author of (...) Quixote, born at Alcala, in 1549, listed in a station little
superior to that of a common soldier, and died neglected, after fighting (...)
for his country at the battle of Lepanto, in which be lost his loss (...). His
satire upon knight-errantry, in his adventures of Don Quixote (...) as much
service to his country be curing them of that ridiculous spirit as it now does
honor to his own memory. He was in (...) debt, when he composed the first part
of his history. Perhaps he (...) be placed at the head of moral and humourous
satirists.

Tostatus, a divine, the most voluminous perhaps that ever (...) was a
Spaniard; but his works have been long distinguished only by their bulk.
Herrera, and some other historians, particularly De (...) have shown great
abilities in history, by investigating the antiqu^^^ of America, and writing
the history of its conquest by their countrymen. Among the writers who have
lately appeared in Spain, Father Po^joo has been one of the most distinguished.
His performances display great ingenuity, very extensive reading, and uncommon
liberality of sentiment; especially when his situation and country are ^^^ered.
Many of his pieces have been translated into English, and published in four
volumes. Don Francisco Perez Bayer, arch^^^^ of Valencia, and author of a
dissertation on the Phenician language, may be placed in the first line of the
Spanish literati. Spain has likewise produced many travelers and voyagers to
both the Indies, who are equally amusing and instructive.

Some of the Spaniards have distinguished themselves in the police arts, and
not only the cities, but the places, especially the Escuri^^, discover many
striking specimens of their abilities as sculpture and architects. Palomino in
an elaborate treatise on the art of painting, in two volumes, folio, has
inserted the lives of two hundred and thirty three painters and sculptors, who
flourished in Spain from the (...) of Ferdinand the Catholic, to the conclusion
of the reigns of (...) the Fourth. Among the most eminent Spanish painters,
were ^^^ques, Nurillo, who is commonly called the Spanish Vandyke, (...) and
Caludio Coello, whose style of painting was very similar (...) of Paul Veronese.

The present state of sciences in Spain is fat from being (...) There are, it
is true, near thirty universities in the Spanish (...) Among which, those of
Madrid, Salamanca, Seville, Valladolid, Zara^^ea, and Toledo, are the most
celebrated; but Aristotelic and scholastic philosophy, subservient to the
absurd doctrines of a superstitious church, is still prevailing in these
seminaries, with very little change over since the restoration of ancient
learning. While sciences are exclusively taught by monks and priests, while the
productions of ge^^^ are subject to the rigorous censure of an inquisition,
which is by (...) nature an enemy to free discussion and to the prevalence of
reason, (...) not to be expected that philosophy will make any progress under
(...) terrors of prisons and autos da fe. Yet poetry and the arts have (...) a
considerable figure in Spain. There are several societies at (...), Valencia,
Barcelona, Valladolid, intended for the improvement of the Castilian language,
the study of the cannon law, and the li^^^gy; of history, the latin language,
medicine, the arts of design and ^^^eraphy. Great hopes are entertained of the
progress of science and philosophy in a future reign, from the attachment of
the present ^^^ince of Austria to natural history and the political sciences.

HISTORY.] The first inhabitants of Spain were the Celtae a people of Gaul;
after them the Phoenicians possessed themselves of the (...) southern parts of
the country, and may well be supposed to have (...) the first civilizers of
this kingdom, and the founders of the most ancient cities. After these followed
the Grecians; then the Cartha^^iant, on whose departure, sixteen years before
Christ, it became ^^bject to the Romans, till the year 400, when the Goths,
Vandal^, (...), Alans and Sillingi, on Constantine's withdrawing his forces
(...) that kingdom to the East, invaded it, and divided it amongst themselves;
but the Goths in a little time were sole masters of it under their king Alarick
I. who founded the Spanish monarchy. After (...) succession of monarchs, we
come to the present king, Charles (...) who ascended the throne upon the death
of his half brother, Fer^^nd VI in the year 1759.

As the best histories of Spain and her American Colonies, the reader is
referred to Rollin's Ancient History -- Universal History -- Rob^^in's
Histories of Charles Vth. and of South America, and the Ab^^^ Clavigero's
History of New Mexico.

PORTUGAL.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 300 Miles. between Degrees. 37 and 42 north lat. Breadth 100 Miles.
Degrees. 7 and 10 west long.

BOUNDARIES.] IT is bounded by Spain on the North and East, and on the South
and West by the Atlantic Ocean, (...) the most westerly kingdom on the
continent of Europe.

ANCIENT NAMES AND DIVISIONS.] This kingdom was, in the (...) the Romans,
called Lusitania. The etymology of the modern (...) uncertain. It most Probably
is derived from some noted har^^^ (...) to which the Gauls (for so strangers
are called in the Cel^^^ (...). By the form of the country it is naturally
divided in^^ (...); the north, middle, and south provinces.

(...) (...) of this kingdom are more particularly specified in the (...)
^^^ble.

TABLE.
DIVISIONS. Areas in square miles. Population. Population for each single
square mile. CHIEF TOWNS. The whole kingdom, with the Atlantic Islands 32,000
-- 2,360,000 74 2,500,000 Portugal, without the Islands 27,376 -- 2,300,000 80
10 Towns. 2,200,000 527 Villages. 3343 Parishes 1,800,000 65 5,440 -- above
350,000 in the year 1732. Names Number. Inh. 1. The Province of Estrem^dura 64
Lisbon 120,000 7,200 -- According to others 180,000 2. Beira 550,856 76 Coimbra
12,000 1,840 -- Aveiro 4,400 3 Province Enter Minho e Duero 430,300 the most
populous Province. 234 Oporto 40,000 2,400 -- Braga 12,000 4. Tras loz Mentes
180,800 74 Braganza 2,700 7,800 -- Miranda 5. Alentejo 262,223 30 Evora 10,000
Villa Viciosa 3,700 1,600 -- Estremoz 6,500 6. The kingdom of Algarviz 63,700
40 Lago^ 2,800 4,608 Tavira 4,700 Islands in the Atlantic Ocean, Viz. 130,000
28 Isle Port Santo 1,200 Port Santo 600 Madeina 65,000 Funchal The A^ores St.
Mig^^ol 52,900 Ponta Delgada ^orceien (...) Royal (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...)

POSSESSIONS OF THE CROWN OF PORTUGAL IN OTHER PARTS OF THE GLOBE.
1. In Asia. Some settlements along the western coast of the Indian peninsula
within the Ganges, as Diu, Chaoul, Goa, of which the latter i^ the most
important, and the seat of the governor of the Portuguese possessions in the
East Indies. Macao, a small town on the coast of (...)

2. In Africa. The islands called Azores; the islands Maderia and (...) Santo;
the islands of Cape Verde; several forts along the Gam^^^, and on the coast of
Guinea; the islands of St. Thomas and do ^^^ciple; some settlements in Congo,
Loango, and Angola: (the Portuguese are almost the only nation acquainted with
these Provinces, with which they carry on a very lucrative trade;) several
settlements on the coast of Zanguebar and Sofala, and farther in the country.
Mosambique is the most important of these places.

3. In America. The large province of Brasil, divided into 14 capi^^^ or
governments; and small possessions on the coast of Guiana, and in Paraguay. The
colony of San Sacramento, on the river de la ^^^ta, was taken by the Spaniards
in 1777.



MOUNTAINS.] The face of Portugal is mountainous, or rather rocky, for their
mountains are generally barren: The chief are those which divide Algarva from
Alentejo; those of Tralos Montes, and the rock of Lisbon, at the mouth of the
Tajo.

WATER AND RIVERS.] Though every brook in Portugal is reckoned a river, yet the
chief Portuguese rivers are mentioned in Spain, all of them falling into the
Atlantic ocean. The Tagus, or Tajo, was celebrated for its golden sand.
Portugal contains several roaring lakes and springs; some of them are absorbent
even of the lightest substances, such as wood, cork, and feathers; some,
particularly one about 45 miles from Lisbon, are medicinal and sanative; and
some hot baths are found in the little kingdom or rather province of Algarva.

WEALTH AND COMMERCE.] Portugal, situated in the same genial climate with
Spain, abounds like the latter in excellent natural productions; it is well
watered, and a great part of it bounded by the ocean. It is possessed of very
rich provinces beyond the seas. It is however not proportionably powerful; its
inhabitants are indigent, and the balance of trade is against it. It is even
obliged to import the necessaries of life, chiefly corn, from other countries.
In point of population, it has rather the advantage of Spain.

Portugal produces wine, wool, oil, silk, honey, aniseed, sumac; all the finer
sorts of fruit enumerated in the preceding table of Spain; some corn, flax,
cork. These articles of produce might, with a little industry, be raised in
great abundance. There are in this kingdom several evident traces of very rich
mines; they continue however to be unregarded. Portugal has very little silver
in circulation; it is not ^^^sual to find it difficult to make up a sum of
twenty pounds in silver. This scarcity was in a great measure owing to an
injudicious possession of exporting coined silver.

The exports of Portugal are not inconsiderable; but they are greatly exceeded
by the imports. The soil produces no more corn annually than what is barely
sufficient for three months consumption; corn, therefore is the most
considerable article of importation from abroad. As no manufactures of any
importance are in a thriving state, the Portuguese are supplied by the industry
of other nations, chiefly the English, with almost every article of dress, and
with most other articles of use and convenience. It seems, that the efforts of
government (...) encourage industry have hitherto been ineffectual. The late
minister of state, M. de Pombal, found it impracticable to raise a glass
manufacture into consequence, notwithstanding he laid out 80,000 crusades, or
54,000 crowns upon this scheme, and doubled the duties of foreign glass, in
order to encourage the manufacture. A linen manufacture established at Oporto,
cannot easily be expected to thrive, while the materials used in it must be
imported from the Baltic.

To the abovementioned disadvantages we must add the want of fisheries, which
obliges this country to buy, by far the greatest part of the fish it consumes,
from other nations. Its commerce is almost, entirely in the hands of strangers.
It has imposed very heavy duties upon the necessaries of life, a measure which
is very unfavourable to industry. In the year 1784, the Portuguese government,
in order to encourage the freighting trade, lowered the duties on all goods
imported and exported in Portuguese bottoms by 10 per cent. which probably will
be of great use of commerce.

In 1785, the goods imported from Great Britain and Ireland into Portugal,
consisting of woollens, corn, fish, wood, and hard-ware, amounted to upwards of
960,000l. sterling. The English took in return of the produce of Portugal and
Brasil to the amount of 728,000l. sterling. To support a trade which is, upon
the whole, much against Portugal, this kingdom has the resource of ready money
drawn from Brasil: If these supplies should ever fail, it would be soon
entirely ruined, if it had nothing to rely upon but its present industry. Only
15 millions of livres, in ready money, are supposed to circulate in a country
which draws annually upwards of 1,500,000l. sterling, or 36 millions of livres,
from the mines of Brasil. Since the discovery of these mines, that is, within
the last sixty years, Portugal has brought from Brasil about 2400 millions of
livres, or 100,000,000l. sterling. Besides these large sums of money, Portugal
imports from Brasil large quantities of cocoa, sugar, rice, train-oil,
whalebone, coffee, and medicinal drugs.

No commercial companies have hitherto been established. The principal trading
places are, the towns of Lisbon, Oporto, and Setuval. In former times, when the
Portuguese had an extensive commerce and settlements in the East Indies; their
trade to China was important, but it has lately greatly decreased.

CHARACTER.] The modern Portuguese retain nothing of that adventurous,
enterprising spirit that rendered their forefathers so illustrious 300 years
ago. They have, ever since the house o Braganza mounted the throne, degenerated
in all their virtues; though some noble exceptions are still remaining among
them, and no people are so little obliged as the Portuguese are, to the rep^^s
of historians and travelers. Their degeneracy is evidently owing to the
weakness of their monarchy, which renders them inactive, for fear of
disobliging their powerful neighbors. Treachery has been laid to their charge,
as well as ingratitude: and above all, an intemperate passion for revenge. They
are, if possible, more superstitious, and, both in high and common life, affect
more state than the Spaniards.

The Portuguese ladies are thin and small of stature. Their complexion is
olive, their eyes black and expressive, and their features generally regular.
They are esteemed to be generous, modest, and (...). They dress like the
Spanish ladies, with much awkwardness and assessed gravity, but in general more
magnificently; and they are might by their husbands to exact from their
servants an homage, that in other countries is paid only to royal personages.
The furniture of the houses, especially of their grandees, is rich and superb
to excess; and they maintain an incredible number of domestics, as they never
^^^arge any who survive, after serving their ancestors. The poorer (...) have
scarcely any furniture at all, for they, in imitation of the ^^ors, fit always
cross-legged on the ground.

LEARNING AND LEARNED MEN.] These are so few, that they are mentioned with
indignation, even by those of the Portuguese themselves, who have the smallest
tincture of literature. Some efforts, though very weak, have of late been made
by a few, to draw their countrymen from this deplorable state of ignorance. It
is universally allowed (...) the defect is not owing to the want of genius, but
of a proper education. The ancestors of the present Portuguese were certainly
possessed of more true knowledge, with regard to astronomy, geography, and
navigation, than all the world besides, about the middle of the 16th century,
and for some time after. Camoens, who himself was a great adventurer and
voyager, was possessed of a true, but neglected poetical genius.

UNIVERSITIES.] These are Coimbra, founded in 1291 by king ^^^nis; and which
had fifty professors; but it has been lately put under some new regulations.
Evora, founded in 1559; and the col^^^ of the nobles at Lisbon, where the young
nobility are educated in every branch of polite learning and the sciences. All
the books that did belong to the banished Jesuits are kept here, which compose
a very large library. The English language is likewise taught in this college.
Here is also a college where young gentlemen are educated in the ^ince of
engineering, and when qualified get commissions in that corpse.

CURIOSITIES.] The lakes and fountains which have been already mentioned form
the chief of these. The remains of some castles in the Moorish taste are still
standing. The Roman bridge and aqueduct at Coimbra are almost entire, and
deservedly admired. The walls of San^^een are said to be of Roman work
likewise. The church and ^^^stery near Lisbon, where the kings of Portugal are
buried, are inexpressibly magnificent, and several monasteries in Portugal are
dug cut of the hard rock. The chapel of St. Roch, is probably one of the (...)
and richest in the world; the paintings are mosaic work, so curiously wrought
with stones of all colors, as to astonish the beholders. In these curiosities
we may add, that the king is possessed of the largest diamond (which was found
in Brasil) that perhaps ever was seen in the world.

CHIEF CITIES.] Lisbon is the Capital of Portugal, a great part of (...) was
ruined by an earthquake, which also set the remainder on fire, upon All Saints
day, 1755. It still contains many magnificent palaces, churches, and public
buildings. Its situation (rising from the Tagus in the form of a crescent)
renders its appearance at once delightful and superb, and it is deservedly
accounted the greatest port in Europe, next to London and Amsterdam. The
harbor is spacious and secure, and the city itself is guarded from any sudden
attack, toward the sea, by forts, though they would make but a poor defense
against ships of war. All that part of the city that was demolished by the
earthquake, is planned out in the most regular and commodious form. Some large
squares, and many streets are already built. The streets form right angles, and
are broad and spacious. The houses are lofty, elegant, and uniform; and being
built of white stone, make a beautiful appearance. The second city in this
kingdom is Oporto, which is computed to contain 40,000 inhabitants. The chief
article of commerce in this city is wine; and the inhabitants of half the shops
are coopers. The merchants assemble daily in the chief street, to transact
business; and are protected from the sun by sail-cloths, hung across from the
opposite houses. About thirty English families reside here, who are chiefly
concerned in the wine trade.

GOVERNMENT.] Toward the latter end of the last century, the diets, or
meetings of the states, were discontinued, and the council of the three estates
( Junta dos tres estados) viz. the clergy, the nobility, and the cities, now
substituted, in lieu of those assemblies, is composed only of such members as
are nominated by the king himself. Since that time, the government of the
kingdom of Portugal is absolutely monarchical; yet the political influence of
the two first estates is still now and then perceived.

The fundamental laws of Portugal are: 1. The statutes of Alphonsus, published
at Lamego in 1143, consisting of 22 regulations relative to the royal
succession, to the rights of jurisdiction, the independence of the kingdom, and
the rights of the nobility. 2. The manifesto of the states, published in 1641,
immediately after the revolution relating to the order of succession.

The civil laws of Portugal are contained in the edicts of the kings; and where
these are deficient, the Roman laws are consulted. In ecclesiastical matters,
the canon law in its full extent is adopted, and the power and authority of the
pope is very great in this kingdom.

The chief departments of government are the following: The Council of State,
the Council of War, the Aulic Council ( Disembarge do Paetc;cedil;o) or Supreme
Court of Justice, the Council of Finances, and the Royal Board of Censure (
Regia Mesa censoria.)

In the inferior courts of justice the judges are nominated by the king, or by
the possessors of the large estates; in the superior courts, by the king
exclusively. There are two courts of appeal at Lisbon and Oporto; from which
appeal may be made in the last instance to the Aulic Council. The magistrates
of the towns have likewise an inferior jurisdiction in matters of less
importance. The proceedings in the courts of justice are slow and arbitrary;
and the number of lawyers and law-officers is exceedingly great.

FINANCES.] The revenue of the crown is 1,800,000l. sterling; and arises from
the customs and duties, from several internal taxes; from the mines of Brazil,
of the produce of which one fifth belongs to the king, estimated at 350,000l.
sterling; from other duties on the produce of Brazil; from a tax on the rent of
lands, which is to per cent. of the yearly income; from duties on imported
goods, at 16 per cent. and duties of 5 per cent. on exported goods.

The public debts were estimated in 1774 at only 28 millions of crusades.

ARMY.] The army consists of 25,000 men. According to the establishment of the
year 1772. the army ought to consist of 35,998 men, viz. 38 regiments of foot,
at 811 men each; and of 12 regiments of cavalry, of 400 men each. The late
Count of Lip Buckeburg has made considerable improvements in the military
discipline of Portugal.

Besides the regular army they have a country militia formed of peasant.

NAVY.] The navy consists of 24 ships, viz. 13 ships of the line and (...)
frigates. Five ships of the line are stationed on the coast of Brazil. There
are two regiments of marines and a corpse of naval artillery.

RELIGION.] The state of religion in Portugal exactly resembles that of Spain;
the intolerant bigotry of the established Roman Catholic religion is no less
prejudicial to the Portuguese, than to the Spanish nation. There are several
tribunals of Inquisition, viz. at Lisbon. Coimbra, Evora, and at Goa in the
East Indies. A great number of Jews are however in the country, who conform
outwardly with the established religion: It is said that many of them are even
among the clergy.

The Portuguese clergy consist of one Patriarch, a dignity granted to the
church of Portugal in the year 1716, of three archbishops and 15 bishops; the
number of ecclesiastical persons in the whole amounts to 200,000; 30,000 of
which are monks and nuns: According to others there are 60,000 monks and nuns,
and 745 convents. The proportion of clerical persons to that of laymen, is as 1
to 11. There are three spiritual orders of knighthood in Portugal, that of
Avis, of Santiago, and of Christ; the last is by far the most opulent.

HISTORY.] Portugal was anciently called Lusitania, and inhabited by tribes of
wandering people, till it became subject to the Carthaginians and Phoenicians,
who were dispossessed by the Romans 250 years before Christ. In the fifth
century it fell under the yoke of the Suevi and Vandals, who were driven out by
the Goths of Spain, in the year 589; but when the Moors of Africa made
themselves masters of the greatest part of Spain, in the beginning of the
eighth century, they penetrated into Lusitania; there they established
governors, who made themselves kings. After many fruitless attempts made by the
kings of laon on this part of Spain, Alonzo V. king of Castile and Leon,
carried here his victorious arms, and to insure his conquest, he gave it, in
the year 1088, with the title of count. or earl, to Henry, grandson of Robert
king of France, who had married Theresa, Alonzo's natural daughter. Henry was
succeeded in his earldom by his son Alonzo, who, encouraged by his conquests
over the Moors, in the year 1139 allowed the title of King of Portugal. His
successors, continued till 1580, when, upon the death of Henry, surnamed the
Cardinal, it was (...) upon by Philip II. king of Spain, after a war of two or
three years; but in 1640, the people rebelled, shook off the Spanish Yoke, and
elected for their king the duke of Braganza, who took the name of John IV. in
whose family it has ever since remained independent of Spain. Her present
Majesty's name is Mary Frances Isabella, who acceded to the throne in the year
1777. See Universal History.

ITALY.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 600 Miles. between Degrees. 38 and 47 north latitude. Breadth 400
Miles. Degrees. 7 and 19 east longitude.

THE form of Italy, readers it very difficult to ascertain its extent and
dimensions; for, according to some accounts, it is, from the frontiers, of
Switzerland to the extremity of the kingdom of Naples, about 750 miles in
length; and from the frontiers of the duchy of Savoy, (...) those of the
dominions of the states of Venice, which is its greatest breadth, about 400
miles, though in some parts it is a scarcely 100.

BOUNDARIES.] Nature has fixed the boundaries of Italy; for toward the East it
is bounded by the Gulf of Venice, or Adriatic sea; on the South and West by
the Mediterranean sea, and on the North, by the lofty mountains of the Alps,
which divide it from France and Switzerland.

The whole of the Italian dominions, comprehending Corsica, Sardinia, the
Venetian and other islands, are divided and exhibited in the following table:
Countries Names. Squ. Miles. Length. Breadth. Chief Cities. Italy. To the king
of Sardinia Piedmont 6619 140 98 Turin Savoy 357^ 87 60 Chambery Montserrat 446
40 2^ Cassal Alessandrine 204 27 20 Alexandria Oneglia 132 24 7 Oneglia
Sardinia Island 6600 135 57 Cagliari To the king of Naples Naples ^2,000 275
200 Naples Sicily I. 9400 180 92 Palermo To the Emperor Milan 5431 155 70 Milan
Mantua 700 47 27 Mantua Mirandola 120 19 10 Mirandola Pope's dominions 14,348
^35 143 Rome N. lat.41 54 E. lon.12 45 To their respective princes Tuscany 6640
115 94 Florence Massa 82 16 11 Massa Parma 1225 48 37 Parma Modena 1560 65 39
Modena Piombino 100 ^2 18 Piombino Monaco 24 12 4 Monaco Republics Lucca 286 28
15 Lucca St. Marino 8 St. Marino Genoa 2400 160 25 Genoa To France Corsica I.
2520 90 38 Bastia To the republic of Venice Venice 8434 175 95 Venice Istria P.
1245 6 32 Capo d'Istria Dalmatia P. 1400 135 20 Zara Isles of Dalmatia 1364
Islands in the Venetian dominions. Cephalonia 428 40 18 Cephalonia Corfu, or
Corcyra 194 31 10 Corfu Zant, or Zacynthus 120 23 12 Zant St. Maura 56 12 7 St.
Maura Little Cephalonia 14 7 3 Ithaca olim Total ^5,056

SUBDIVISIONS.
The King of SARDINIA, possesses Piedmont, Savoy, Montserrat, (...) Island of
Sardinia, part of the Milanese, and of Genoa.
The subdivisions in these territories are,
Subdivisions. Titles. Chief towns. Piedmont. Piedmont Proper Turin, Pignerol,
Carign^^ Verceil Lordship Verceil Masseran Principality Masseran Ivrea
Marquisate Ivrea Asti County Asti Susa Marquisate Susa Saluzzo Marquisate
Saluzzo, Coni Vaudois Valleys Pragelas, or Cluson Nice Territory Nice Tend
County Tend Aouste County Aouste Savoy. Savoy Proper Chambery, Montmelian
Geneva County Annacy Chablais County Tonor, or Thonon Tarantaise Moustriers
Maurienne Valley St. John de Mauriene Fossigny Bonneville Genoa Milanese Monts.
Montserrat Duchy Casal, Albi, Aqui Tortonese Tortona Alessandrine Alexandria
Laumelin Laumello Oneglia Territory Oneglia

The dominions of the King of NAPLES.
Subdivisions. Chief towns. Lavora Naples, Capua Gaeta Ultra Princip. Benevento
Citra Princip. Salerno Molise Bojano Basilicata Cerenza Citra Calabria Cosenza
Ult. Calabria Reggio Ult. Abruzzo Aquila Citra Abruzzo Chieti Capitinate, or
Manfredonia Apulia Lucera Bari Bari Otranto Otranto Brundifi Tarenta Island of
Sicily Val de Mazara Palermo Val de Demona Messina Val de Noto Catania,
Syracuse, Noto

LIPARI ISLANDS, North of Sicily. Lipari, Strombulo, Rotto, P^naria, Elicusa.

ISLANDS on the West Coast of Italy. Capri, Ischia, Ponaz, Pianosa, etc.

The House of AUSTRIA possesses the Milanese, the Mantua and Tuscany.

The subdivisions and chief towns in these territories are, Subdivisions.
Titles. Chief towns. Milanese Milanese Proper Milan Pavesan Pavia Navnaesc
Navara Comas^o Como Lodesan Lodi Cremonese Cremona Tuscany Florentina Florence
Siennese Sienna Pisa Pisa, Leghorn, Piombino Mantuan Mantua Proper Mantua

In Tuscany is contained the republic of Lucca, and the principality of Massa
Carara, subject to its own prince; also the coast del Persidii, of which the
capital is Orbitello, subject to the king of Naples.

The Duke of PARMA (of the House of Bourbon) is Sovereign of the Duchies of
Parma Chief towns. Parma Placentia Placentia Guastalla Guastalla, Castiglione,
Luzzara,

The subdivisions of the Genoese territories, with their chief towns, are,
Subdivisions. Chief towns. Genoa, Proper Genoa Savona, Territory Savona Vado,
Territory Vado Noli, Territory Noli Final, Territory Final Albenga, Territory
Albenga Oneglia to Sardina Oneglia St. Remo, Territory St. Remo Ventimiglia,
Teritory, Ventimiglia Monaco, Principality Monaco Rapallo, Territory Rapallo
Lavigna Lavigna Spezia Spezia

The Duchy of MODENA is subject to its own Duke, and contains Dutchies. Chief
towns. Modena Modena Mirandola Mirandola Rhegio Rhegio, Borsello, Carpi.

The Republic of VENICE is subdivided in the following manner (...)
Subdivisions. Chief towns. Venice Venice Paduan Padua Veronese Verona Bresciano
Brescia Cremafno Cremu Bergamasco Bergamo Vincentino Vincenza Rovigno Rovigno
Trevegiano Treviso Bellunese Belluno Friuli Aquile^ Udinese Udia Istria, part.
Capo de Istria

The Patria^^^ate, or the dominions of the POPE, are subdivided than:
Subdivisions. Chief towns. Compania of Rome Rome Tivoli Frescati Ostia Athano
St. Peter's Patrimony Viterbo Civita Voechia Bracciano Castro Orvietto
Aquapendente Ora^^in, or Spoletto Spoletto Narni Terni Pe^ugia Ancona, Marquis
Ancona Loret^^ Urbino, Duchy Urbino Pefaro Semig^li^ Romania Rav^nna Rimi^i
Bolognese Bologn^ Fer^arese Ferrara Co^^^sia Republic of St. Marino St. Marino

Island of Corsica, subject to the French.

Chief towns Bastia and Bonifacio.

Island of Malta, subject to the Knights. Chief town, Valett^.

SOIL AND AIR.] The happy soil of Italy produces the comforts and luxuries of
life in great abundance; each district has its peculiar excellency and
commodity; wines, the most delicious fruits, and oil, are the most general
productions. As much corn grows here as (...) the inhabitants; and were the
ground properly cultivated, the Italians might export it to their neighbors.
The Italian cheeses, particularly those called Parmesans, and their native
silk, form a principal part of their commerce. There is here a great variety of
air; and some parts of Italy bear melancholy proofs of the alterations that
accidental causes make on the face of nature; for the Campagna di Roma, where
the ancient Romans enjoyed the most salubrious air of any place perhaps on the
globe, is now almost pestilential, through the decrease of inhabitants, which
has occasioned a stagnation of waters, and putrid exhalations. The air of the
northern parts, which lie among the Alps, or in their neighborhood, is keen
and piercing, the ground being, in many places, covered with snow in winter.
The Appennines, which are a ridge of mountains that longitudinally almost
divide Italy, have great effects on its climate; the countries on the South
being warm, those on the North mild and temperate. The sea-breezes refresh the
kingdom of Naples so much, that no remarkable inconveniency of air is found
there, notwithstanding its southern situation. In general, the air of Italy may
be said to be dry and pure.

MOUNTAINS.] We have already mentioned the Alps and Appen^^^, which form the
chief mountains of Italy. The famous volcano of Mount Vesuvius lies in the
neighborhood of Naples.

RIVERS AND LAKES.] The rivers of Italy are the Po, the Var, the Ad^ge, the
Trebbia, the Arno, and the Tiber, which runs through the city of Rome. The
famous Rubicon forms the southern boundary ^^^^cen Italy and the ancient
Cisalpine Gaul.

The lakes of Italy are, the Maggiore, Lugano, Como, Iseo, and Gar^^^ in the
North; the Perugia or Tharsimene, Bracciana, Terni, and C^la^o, in the middle.

(...), GULFS, OR BAYS, CAPES, PROMONTORIES, AND STRAITS.} Without a knowledge
of these, neither the ancient Roman authors, nor the history nor geography of
Italy, can be understood. The sons of Italy are, the gulfs of Venice, or the
Adriatic sea; the (...) of Naples, Tuscany, and Genoa; the bays or harbors of
Nice, (...) Franca, Oneglia, Final, Savona, Vado, Spe^^ia, Luca, Pisa, Legh^^^,
Piombino, Civita, Vecchia, Gaeta, Naples, Salerno, Polic^^ stro^^^gio, Quilace,
Tarento, Manfredonia, Ravenna, Venice, Trieste, Is^^, and Fiume; Cape
Spartavento del Alice, Otranto, and Ancona (...) and the strait of Messina,
between Italy and Sicily.

The gulfs and bays in the Italian islands are those of Fiorenzo, Basi^^,
Taluda, Porto Novo, Cape Corso, Bonifacio, and Ferro, in Corsi^^^ and the
strait of Bonifacio, between Corsica and Sardinia. The (...) of Caligari and
Oristagni; Cape de Sardis, Cavello, Monte Santo, and Polo, in Sardinia. The
gulfs of Messina, Melazzo, Palermo, Ma^^^ra, Syracuse, and Satania: capes Furo,
Melazzo, Orlando, Gallo, Trapano, Passaro, and Allessia, in Sicily; and the
bays of Porto Fe^^i^, and Porto Longone, in the island of E^^a.

METALS AND MINERALS.] Many places of Italy abound in mineral springs; some
hot, some warm, and many of sulphurous, chaly^^^^e, and medicinal qualities.
Many of its mountains abound in mines the produce great quantities of emeralds,
jusper, aga^e, porphyry, lap^l^^ali, and other valuable stones. Beautiful
marble of all kinds is one of the chief productions of Italy.

POPULATION AND CHARACTER.] Authors are greatly divided on (...) (...) of
Italian population. This may be owing, in a great measure, to the partiality
which every Italian has for the honor of his own province. The king of
Sardinia's subjects, according to Zimmermann. (...) to 3,170,000, viz. in the
duchy of Piedmont 2,450,000, in the duchy of Savoy 300,000, in the kingdom of
Sardinia 420,000. Na^^^ has about 4,500,000 souls, and Sicily about 1,300,000.
The city (...) itself, by the best accounts, contains 300,000, and the duchy a
proportionably populous. As to the other provinces of Italy, geographers and
travelers have paid very little attention to the numbers (...) that live in
the country, and inform us by conjecture only, of (...) who inhabit the great
cities. Some doubts have arisen (...) Italy is as populous now as it was in the
time of Pliny, when it contained 14,000,000 of inhabitants. It is however
believed that the present inhabitants exceed that number. The Campagna d^ ^^ma,
and some other of the most beautiful parts of Italy, are at present in a manner
desolate; but we are to consider that the modern Italians are in a great
measure free from the unremitting wars, not to mention the transmigration of
colonies, which formerly, even down to the 16th of century, depopulated their
country. Add to this, that the princes and states of Italy now encourage
agriculture and manufactures of all kinds, which undoubtedly promotes
population; so that it may not perhaps be extravagant, if we assign to Italy
20,000,000 of inhabitants; but some calculations greatly exceed that number.

The national character of the Italians, lately been given by the Abb^
Jagemann, member of the Florentine Academy of Agriculture, as follows:
"Considering the mildness of the climate, the uncommon fertility of the soil,
the situation of most towns and boroughs on hills, the excellent spring water
from the Alps and the Appennines, the number of mineral waters and baths, the
spaciousness of the streets and houses, the delightful views, the frequent
residence of the Italians on their villas, the fragrancy and healthiness of the
air, the temperate diet, the facility of getting cured of deseases in the
hospitals, one is inclined to think that the corporeal frame of an Italian, if
not enervated in early youth, cannot but be strong, healthy and beautiful. The
handsomest persons of either sex, are found in Tuscany. The Italians, in
general are also endowed with good sense, and discernment; apt to despise mere
theoretical speculations, and to judge by their own feelings and experience:
But education is rather neglected. The chief part of their religion consists in
an external observance and practice of ecclesiastical rites, ceremonies, and
injunctions. An Italian, not enlightened by reflection and experience, will
sooner commit adultery than eat any flesh-meat on a Friday; but a foreigner,
who wishes to pass for us Roman catholic, needs only to stick to his window an
attestation, by a physician, that his state of health requires a flesh-meat
diet; and (...) may, without any risk, eat flesh-meat in Lent. Such
attestations may be purchased in coffee-houses, at Florence. The Italians are
very sensual; exceedingly fond of music; little addicted to drunkenness and
coarse jokes; impatient of delay in their passion for the fair sex; jealous of
the French, but fond of the national characters of the English and the Germans.
They still breathe their ancient spirit of liberty and republicanism, and are
averse to monarchical government, to which they were subjected by force. Hence
a true-born Italian, of an independent fortune, seldom courts public
employments; hence their best geniuses too are little known; hence also their
almost general inclination to sa^ire, and the bitterness of their satires.
Hence their general hatred and contempt for the military service, and for the
ministers and executors of criminal jurisdiction. Their dress and their whole
conduct, prove their fondness of liberty and ease, and their aversion to
constraint, ceremony and compliments. As so great a variety of enjoyments and
conveniences are, for an Italian, so many necessaries of life, he must be a
rigid economist; but those most famous for their economical management, are the
Florentines and the Gonoese. Hence their habitual custom of entering into the
most minute details and calculations, and of strictly adhering to rules. Hence
their peculiar talents and skill for commerce, trade, political economy,
finances, their avidity for gain, and their envy at the prosperity of other
people. -- Their resentment lasts only till they have produced a satisfaction
adequate to a wrong sustained; they are less irascible than many other nations:
But when grossly injured in their character or fortunes, they are capable of
every excess. Of assassinations, however, Abbe ^^ge^^an recollects only three
instances in Tuscany, in fifteen years. From their mutual distrust, an Italian
indeed seldom becomes an intimate friend to another Italian; but then their
friendship proves the mo^e cordial and lasting. No nation is more compassionate
to the distressed, or more ready to serve strangers; yet letters of
recommendation ^^ght not to be neglected by travelers."

RELIGION.] The religion of the Italians is Roman Catholic. The inquisition
here is little more than a sound; and persons of all religions five unmolested
in Italy, provided no gross insult is offered to their worship. The
ecclesiastical government of the papacy has employed many volumes in describing
it. The cardinals, who are next in dignity to his holiness, are seventy: But
that number is seldom or never complete: They are appointed by the pope, who
takes care to have a ^^ority of Italian cardinals, that the chair may not be
removed from (...), as it was once to Avignon in France, the then pope being a
Frenchman. In promoting foreign prelates to the cardinalship, the pope
regulates himself according to the nomination of the princes who p^^sess that
religion. His chief minister is the cardinal patron, generally his nephew, or
near relation, who improves the time of the pope's (...) by amassing what he
can. When met in a consistory, the cardinals pretend to control the pope, in
matters both spiritual and temporal, and have been sometimes known to prevail.
The reign of a (...) is seldom of long duration, being generally old men at the
time of their election. The conclave is a scene where the cardinals principally
endeavor to display their parts, and where many transactions (...), which
hardly show their inspiration to be from the Holy Ghost. ^^ing the election of
a pope in 1721, the animosities ran so high, that they came to blows with both
their hands and feet, and threw the ^^^^ndishes at each other. We shall here
give an extract from the (...) of pope Pius IV. 1560, before his elevation to
the chair, which ^^^ains the principal points wherein the church of Rome
differs from the protestant churches. After declaring his belief in one God,
and (...) heads wherein Christians in general are agreed, he proceeds as
follows:

I most firmly admit and embrace the apostolical and ecclesiastical ^^^^tions,
and all other constitutions of the church of Rome.

I do admit the holy scriptures in the same sense that holy mother^^^ch does,
whose business it is to judge of the true sense and inter^^^tation of them; and
I will interpret them according to the unani^^^ consent of the fathers.

I do profess and believe that there are seven sacraments of the (...) truly
and properly so called, instituted by Jesus Christ our Lord, (...) necessary to
the salvation of mankind, though not all of them to (...) one; namely, baptism,
confirmation, eucharist, penance, ex^^^ction, orders and marriage, and that
they do confer grace; and (...) of these, baptism, confirmation, and orders,
may not be repeated without sacrilege. I do also receive and admit, the
received and approved rites of the catholic church in her solemn administration
of the abovesaid sacraments.

I do embrace and receive all and every thing that has been defined and
declared by the holy council of Trent A convocation of Roman-catholic
cardinals, archbishops, bishops and divines, who assembled at Trent, by virtue
of a bull from the pope, anno 1546, and devoted to him, to determine on certain
points of faith, and to suppress what they were pleased to term the Rising
Heresies in the church.
concerning original fin and justification.

I do also profess that in the mass there is offered unto God^^ true, proper
and propitiatory sacrifice for the quick and the dead; and that in the most
holy sacrament of the ^ucharist there is truly, really and substantially, the
body and blood, together with the soul and divinity, of our Lord Jesus Christ;
and that there is a conversion made of the whole substance of the bread into
the body, and of the whole substance of the wine into the blood; which
conversion the catholic church calls Transubstantiation. I confess that under
one kind only, whole and entire, Christ and a true sacrament is taken and
received.

I do firmly believe that there is a purgatory; and that the souls kept
prisoners there do receive help by the suffrages of the faithful.

I do likewise believe that the saints reigning together with Christ, are to be
worshipped and prayed unto; and that they do offer prayers unto God for us, and
that their relics are to be had in veneration.

I do most firmly assert, that the images of Christ, of the blessed Virgin the
mother of God, and of other saints, ought to be had and retained, and that due
honor and veneration ought to be given unto them.

I do likewise affirm, that the power of indulgencies was left by Christ to the
church, and that the use of them is very beneficial to christian people.

I do acknowledge the holy catholic, and apostolical Roman church to be the
mother and mistress of all churches; and I do promise and swear true obedience
to the bishop of Rome, the successor of St. Peter, the prince of the apostles,
and vicar of Jesus Christ.

I do undoubtedly receive and profess all other things which have been
delivered, defined and declared by the sacred canons, and oe^^^^nical councils,
and especially by the holy synod of Trent. And all other things contrary
thereto, and all heresies condemned, rejected, and anathematised by the church,
I do likewise condemn, reject and anathematise.

The established religion is not quite so intolerant in the kingdom of
Sardinia, as in some other states: The wisdom of government has greatly limited
the power of the Pope and of the inquisition. A stop is likewise put to the
persecutions of the harmless Protestants, in the valleys of Lucern, Peyrouse,
and St. Martin, formerly so famous, by the name of Vaudois, on account of their
sufferings and firm adherence to the cause of truth: Their number amounts to
about 20,000. The very numerous clergy in this kingdom are not rich. The church
is governed by five archbishops and 26 bishops: The whole number of clerical
persons, including monks and nuns, is said to amount to 350,000; but this
statement, probably, is too large. They are obliged to pay the same taxes with
the laity, besides other burdens which the king has it in his power to impose
on them. The clergy are indeed entirely dependent on the king, and subject to
the secular jurisdiction: The church preferments are all in the gift of the
king.

The inhabitants of Naples and Sicily are bigoted Roman Catholics, and more
zealous than those of Rome. There is, however, no inquisition established in
the country. The power of the Pope in these kingdoms is not great. In Naples,
some prebends are in his gift; but in Sicily, all church preferment is in the
gift of the king. The clergy are very numerous; and so rich, that not less than
one half of the riches of the ^^^^ntry are in the possession of the church.
There are, in Naples, 20 archbishops and 107 bishops: In Sicily, three
archbishops and eight bishops. In the year 1782, there were in Naples alone
45,525 priests, 24,694 monks, 20,793 nuns. In 1783, government resolved to
dissolve 466 convents of nuns, and the beginning has been actually made to
carry this resolution into execution.

LEARNING AND LEARNED MEN, PAINTERS, ^^ATUARIES, ARCHITECTS, AND ARTISTS.}
Since the revival of learning, some Italians have shone in controversial
learning, but they are chiefly celebrated by those of their own persuasion. The
mathematics and natural philosophy owe much to Galileo, Toricelli, Malpighi,
Borelli, and several other Italians. Strada is an excellent historian; and the
history of the council of Trent, by the celebrated father Paul, is a standard
work. Machiavel is equally famous as an historian and as a political writer.
Among the prose writers in the Italian language, Boccace has been thought one
of the most pure and correct in point of style: He was a very natural painter
of life and manners, but his productions are (...) licentious. Petrarch, who
wrote both in Latin and Italian, revived among the moderns the spirit and
genius of ancient literature: But among the Italian poets, Dante, Ariosto, and
Tasso, are the most distinguished. Metastasio has acquired a great reputation
by writing dramatic pieces set to music. Socinus, who was so much distinguished
by the opposition to the doctrine of the Trinity, was a native of Italy.

The Italian painters, sculptors, architects, and musicians, are unrivalled,
not only in their numbers, but their excellencies. The revival of learning,
after the sack of Constantinople by the Turks, revived taste likewise, and gave
mankind a relish for truth and beauty in design and coloring. Raphael, from
his own ideas, assisted by the ancients, struck out a new creation with his
pencil, and still stands at the head of the art of painting. Michael Angelo
Buonaroti united in his own person painting, sculpture, and architecture. The
coloring of Titian, has perhaps never yet been equalled. Bramante, Bernini,
and many other Italians, carried sculpture and architecture to an amazing
height. Julio Romano, Correggio, Caraccio, Veronese, and others, are, as
painters, unequalled in their several manners. The same may be said of Corelli,
and other Italians, in music. At present, Italy cannot justly boast of any
remarkable genius in the fine arts.

UNIVERSITIES.] Those of Italy are, Rome, Venice, Florence, Mantua, Padua,
Parma, Verona, Milan, Pavia, Bologna, Perusia, Fer^^a, Pisa, which has 46
Professors, Naples, Salerno, Palermo, Catania; the four last are in Naples and
Sicily.

ANTIQUITIES AND CURIOSITIES, NATURAL AND ARTIFICIAL.} Italy is the native
country of all that is stupendous, great or beautiful, either in ancient or
modern times. A library might be filled by descriptions and delineations of all
that is rare and curious in arts; nor do the bounds of this work admit of
enlarging upon this subjects. We can give but a very brief account of those
objects that are most distinguished either for antiquity or excellence.

The amphitheatres claim the first rank, as a species of the most stri^^ing
magnificence: There are at Rome considerable remains of that which was erected
by Vespasian, and finished by Domitian, called (...) Colisseo. Twelve thousand
Jewish captives were employed by Vespasian in this building; and it is said to
have been capable of containing eighty seven thousand spectators seated, and
twenty thousand standing. The architecture of this amphitheatre is perfectly
light, and its proportions are so just, that it does not appear near so large
as it really is. But it has been stripped of all its magnificent pillars and
ornaments, at various times and by various enemies. The amphitheatre of Verona,
erected by the consul Flaminius, is thought to be the most entire of any in
Italy. There are forty-five rows of steps carried all round, formed of fine
blocks of marble about a foot and a half high each, and above two feet broad.
Twenty-two thousand persons may be seated here at their case, allowing one foot
and a half for each person. This amphitheatre is quite perfect, and has been
lately repaired with the greatest care, at the expense of the inhabitants. They
frequently give public spectacles in it, such as horse races, combats of wild
beasts, etc. The ruins of theaters and amphitheatres are also visible in other
places. The triumphal arches of Vespasian, Septimius Severus, and Constantine
the Great, are still standing, though decayed. The ruins of the baths, palaces,
and temples, answer all the ideas we can form of the Roman grandeur. The
Pantheon, which is at present converted into a modern church, and which from
its circular figure is commonly called the Rotunda, is more entire than any
other Roman temple which is now remaining. There are still left several of the
niches which anciently contained the statues of the heathen deities. The
outside of the building is of Tivoli freestone, and within it is incrusted
with marble. The roof of the Pantheon is a round dome, without pillars, the
diameter of which is a hundred and forty-four feet; and though it has no
windows, but only a round aperture in the center of this dome, it is very light
in every part. The pavement consists of large square stones (...) porphyry,
sloping round toward the center, where the rain water, falling down through
the aperture on the top of the dome, is conveyed away by a proper drain covered
with a stone full of holes. The calonnade in the front, which consists of
sixteen columns of granite, thirty-seven feet high, exclusive of the pedestals
and capitals, each cut out of a single block, and which are of the Corinthian
order, can hardly be viewed without astonishment. The entrance of the church is
adorned with columns forty-eight feet high, and the architrave is formed of a
single piece of granite. On the left hand, on entering the portico, is a large
antique vase of Numidian marble; and in the area before the church is a
fountain, with an antique basin of porphyry. The pillars of Trajan and
Antonine, the former 175 feet high, and the latter covered with instructive
sculptures, are still remaining. A traveller forgets the devastations of the
northern barbarians, when he sees the rost^ated column erected by D^illius, in
commemoration of the first naval victory which the Romans gained over the
Carthaginians; the statue of the wolf giving suck to Romulus and Remus, with
visible marks of the stroke of lightning mentioned by Cicero; the very original
brass p^^^es containing the laws of the twelve tables; and a thousand other
^^entical antiquities, some of them transmitted unhurt to the present (...);
not to mention medals and the infinite variety of seals and engraved stones
which abound in the cabinets of the curious. Many p^^ces, all over Italy, are
furnished with busts and statues fabricated in the times of the republic and
the higher empire.

The Appian, Flaminian, and AEmilian roads, the first 200 miles, the second
130, and the third 50 miles in length, are in many places still entire; and
magnificent ruins of villas, reservoirs, bridges, and the like, present
themselves all over the country of Italy.

The subterraneous constructions of Italy are as stupendous as those above
ground; witness the cloacae, and the catacombs, or repositories (...) dead
bodies, in the neighborhood of Rome and Naples. It is not above 30 years
since, a painter's apprentice discovered the ancient city of Paestum or
Posidonia, in the kingdom of Naples, still standing; for so indifferent are the
country people of Italy about objects of antiquity, that it was a new discovery
to the learned. An inexhaustible ^^ne of curiosities are daily dug out of the
ruins of Herculaneum, a city lying between Naples and Vesuvius, which in the
reign of Nero (...) almost destroyed by an earthquake, and afterward, in the
first (...) of the reign of Titus, overwhelmed by a stream of the lava of
Vesuvius. The melted lava in its course filled up the streets and houses in
some places to the height of sixty-eight feet above the tops of the latter, and
in others one hundred and ten feet. The lava is now of a consistency which
renders it extremely difficult to be removed or cleared away: It is composed of
bituminous particles, mixed with cinders, minerals, metallics, and vitrified
sandy substances, which all together (...) a close and heavy mass. In the year
1713, upon digging into these parts, somewhat of this unfortunate city was
discovered, and many antiquities were dug out; but the search was afterward
discontinued, till the year 1736, when the king of Naples employed men to dig
perpendicularly eighty feet deep, whereupon not only the city made (...)
appearance, but also the bed of the river which ran through it. The temple of
Jupiter was then brought to light, and the whole of the theater. In the temple
was found a statue of gold, and the inscription that decorated the great doors
of entrance. In the theater the fragments of a gilt chariot of bronze, with
horses of the same metal, likewise gilt: This had been placed over the
principal door of entrance. They likewise sound among the ruins of this city
multitudes of statues, bustos, pillars, paintings, manuscripts, furniture, and
various (...), and the search is still continued. The streets of the town
appear ^here been quite straight and regular, and the houses well built and
much (...); some of the rooms paved with mosaic, others with fine marbles,
(...) again with bricks, three feet long and six inches thick. It ap^^^^ that
the town was not filled up so unexpectedly with the melted (...) to prevent the
greatest part of the inhabitants from escaping (...) of their richest effects;
for when the excavations were (...) there were not more than a dozen skeletons
found, and but lit^^^^ gold, silver, or precious stones.

The town of Pompeia was destroyed by the same eruption of mount* Vesuvius,
which occasioned the destruction of Herculaneum; but it was not discovered till
near forty years after the discovery of Herculancum. One street, and a few
detached buildings of this town, have been cleared: The street is well paved
with the same kind of stone of which the ancient roads are made, and narrow
causeways are raised a foot and a half on each side for the convenience of foot
passengers. -- The street is narrow, and is supposed to have been inhabited by
trades people. The traces of wheels of carriages are to be seen on the
pavement. The houses are small, but give an idea of neatness and convenience.
The best paintings, hitherto found at Pompeia, are those found in the temple of
the goddess Isis; they have been cut out of the walls; and removed to Portici.
Few skeletons were found in the streets of this town, but a considerable number
in the houses. Mr. Gawin Hamilton has lately made a very extraordinary
discovery of an ancient city in Italy, on the verge of a mountain near
Fresc^^e. Having obtained permission from Prince Borghese, to dig upon his
territories for vestiges of antiquity, after an expensive research, the workmen
came to the roofs of buildings which were more perfect than those discovered,
within the present century at Herculaneum. As they descended in their
operations, they found several of the houses entire, and also many of their
utensils, and numberless skelet^^ of the inhabitants in various positions. This
newly discovered city, from various inscription discovered among its ruins,
appears to be ancient Gabia: A city of this name according to some Roman
historians, having formerly been engulphed by an earthquake. In this (...)
(...) of Gabia differed from that of the Herculaneum and Pompeia, the two last
mentioned (...) having been destroyed by eruptions from Mount Vesuvius. Sir
William Hamilton, (...) gone from Naples to explore this wonderful curiosity.


With regard to modern curiosities in Italy, they are as bewildering as the
remains of antiquity. Rome itself contains 300 churches, filled with all that
is rare in architecture, painting and sculpture. Each city and town of Italy
contains a proportionable number. The church of St. Peter, at Rome, is the most
astonishing, bold and regular fabric, that ever perhaps existed; and when
examined by the rules of art, it may be termed faultless. The house and chapel
of Loretto is rich beyond imagination, notwithstanding the ridiculous romance
that composes its history.

The natural curiosities of Italy, though remarkable, are not so numerous as
its artificial. Mount Vesuvius, which is five Italian miles distant from the
city of Naples, and Mount AEtna, in Sicily, are remarkable for emitting fire
from their tops. The declivity of Mount Vesuvius toward the sea, is every
where planted with vines and fruit trees, and it is equally fertile toward the
bottom. The circumjacent plain affords a delightful prospect, and the air is
clear and wholesome. The South and West sides of the mountain form very
different views, being like the top, covered with black cinders and stones. The
height of Mount Vesuvius has been computed to be 3900 feet above the surface of
the sea. It has been a volcano, beyond the reach of history or tradition. An
animated description of its ravages in the year 79, is given by the younger
Pliny, who was a witness to what he wrote. From that time to the year 1631, its
eruptions were but small and moderate, however, then it broke out with
accumulated fury, and desolated several miles around. In 169^ was a great
eruption, which continued near a month, when burning matter was thrown out with
so much force, that some of it fell at thirty miles distance, and a vast
quantity of melted minerals, mixed with other matter, ran down like a river for
three miles, carrying every thing before it which lay in its way. In 1707, when
there was another eruption, such quantities of cinders and ashes were thrown
out, that it was dark at Naples at noonday. In 1767, a violent eruption
happened, which is reckoned to be the 27th from that which destroyed
Herculaneum in the time of Titus. In this last eruption, the ashes, or rather
small cinders, showered down so fast at Naples, that the people in the streets
were obliged to use umbrellas, or adopt some other expedient, to guard
themselves against them. The tops of the houses, and the balconies, were
covered with these cinders, and ships at sea, twenty leagues from Naples, were
covered with them to the great astonishment of the sailors. An eruption
happened also in 1766, and another in 1779, which has been particularly
described by Sir William Hamilton, in the Philosophical Transactions. It has
been observed by a modern traveller, that though Mount Vesuvius often fills the
neighboring country with terror, yet as few things in nature are so absolutely
noxious as not to produce some good; even this raging volcano, by its
sulphurous and nitrous manure, and the heat of its sub^^raneous fires,
contributes not a little to the uncommon fertility of the country about it, and
to the profusion of fruits and herbage with which it is every where covered.
Besides, it is supposed that open and active, the mountain is less hostile to
Naples, than it would be, if its eruptions were to cease, and its struggles
confined to its own bowels, for then might ensue the most fatal shocks to the
unstable foundation of the whole district of ^^erra di Lavora. sir William
Hamilton, in his account of the earthquakes in Calabria Ultra, in Sicily, (...)
February 8th, to May, 1783, gives several reasons for believing that they were
occasioned by the operations of a volcano, the seat of which lay deep either
under the bottom of (...), between Stromboli, and the coast of Calabria, or
under the parts of the plain to^^^^ Oppido and Terra Nuova. He plainly observed
a gradation in the damage done to the buildings, as also in the degree of
mortality, in proportion as the countries were more or (...) distant from this
supposed center of the evil. One circumstance he particularly remark^^ (...)
two towns were situated at an equal distance from this center, the one on a
hill, (...) on a plain, or in a bottom, the latter had always suffered greatly
more by the shocks (...) earthquakes than the former; a sufficient proof to him
of the cause coming from (...) as this must naturally have been productive of
such an effect.


Mount AEtna is 10,9^4 feet in height, and has been computed to be so miles in
circumference. It stands separate from all other mountains, its figure is
circular, and it terminates in a cone. The lower parts of it are very fruitful
in corn and sugar canes; the middle abounds with woods, olive trees, and vines;
and the upper part is almost the whole year covered with snow. Its fiery
^ruptions have always rendered it famous: In one of these, which happened in
1669, fourteen towns and villages were destroyed, and there have been several
terrible eruptions since that time. There is generally an earthquake before any
great eruption. In 1693, the port town of Catania was overturned, and 18,000
people perished.

Between the lakes Agnano and Pozzuoli, there is a valley called Sol^tara,
because vast quantities of sulphur are continually forced out of the clifts by
subterranean fires. The grotto del Cane is remarkable for its poisonous steams,
and is so called from their killing dogs that enter it, if forced to remain
there. Scorpions, vipers, and serpents are said to be common in Apulia.

Among the natural curiosities of Italy, those vast bodies of snow and ice,
which are called the Glaciers of Savoy, deserve to be particularly mentioned.
There are five glaciers, which extend almost to the plain of the vale of
Chomouny, and are separated by wild forests, corn fie^^s, and rich meadows; so
that immense tracts of ice are blended with (...) highest cultivation, and
perpetually succeed to each other, in the most singular and striking
vicissitude. All these several valleys of ice, which lie chiefly in the hollows
of the mountains, and are some leagues in length, unite together at the foot of
Mont Blanc; the highest mountain in Europe, and probably of the ancient world.
Accounting to the calculations of Mr. de Luc, the height of (...) mountain,
above the level of the sea, is 15,303 English (...)* "I am convinced," says Mr.
Coxe, "from the situation of Mont Blanc, from the heights of the mountains
around it, from its superior elevation above them, and its being seen at a
great dis^^^ed from all sides, that it is higher than any mountain in
Switzerland; which, beyond a doubt, is, next to Mont Blanc, the highest ground
in Europe."

STATES OF ITALY, CONSTITUTION AND CHIEF CITIES.} Thus far, of Italy in
general; but as the Italian States are not, like the republics of Holland or
Switzerland, or the empire of Germany, cemented by a political confederacy, to
which every member i^ accountable, for every Italian state has distinct forms
of government, trade and interests, we shall be obliged to take a separate view
of each to assist the reader in forming an idea of the whole.

The duke of Savoy, or, as he is now styled, king of Sardinia; taking his royal
title from that island, is a powerful prince in Italy, of which he is called
the Janus, or keeper, against the French. His capital, Turin, is strongly
fortified, and one of the finest cities in Europe; -- containing 84,000
inhabitants.

Of the dominions of his Sardinian majesty, the duchy of Savoy alone is not
fertile. The island of Sardinia, and the provinces of Piedmont and Montferrat,
abound in corn, wine, oil, oranges, lemons, almonds, figs, maize, rice, hemp,
and flax. Sardinia has large flocks of sheep; the number of sheep is said to
amount to 1,600,000: It is remarkable, that in this island there subsists still
a species of wild sheep, called the muston. The fisheries on the coast of
Sardinia produce, even in the worst years, upwards of 60,000 scudi, in the
article of tunny-fish, and a considerable sum for black fish (sepia ^in^^;) and
anchovies, besides other species of fish. Some mines in this island produce
iron, and a small quantity of silver: Salt, sufficient for the consumption of
the country, is made of seawater: There are likewise quarries of marble,
alabaster, and other valuable stones. Savoy is celebrated on account of its
breed of mules, many of which are sent abroad. Piedmont raises large quantities
of the finest silk; single peasants often raise 100lb. each every year. Upwards
of 100,000lb. are required to supply the silk manufactures at Turin, where
there are about 600 looms for silk stockings. In the village of Torre, in
Piedmont, upwards of 50,000lb. of silk are spun. About 300,000lb, of raw and
spun silk are annually sent to Switzerland: The whole produce of raw silk in
the Sardinian dominions, is estimated at 650,000lb. Piedmont has woollen
manufactures, which supply the clothing of the army. There is a manufacture of
ropes and tackle in this province, a large quantity of which articles is
exported from Nizza to Marse^^les, Toulon and Genoa. Of the Piedmontese wines,
a considerable quantity is exported to Genoa and Milan, and several delicate
spirituous liquors are distilled, known by the name of ros^oli. The imports of
the Sardinian provinces, which are nearly the same with those of the (...) of
Italy, consist in hardware, metals, cotton, woollen, and silk (...), linen,
leather, whalebone, train oil, herrings, cod, tar, pitch, ^i^ber porcelaine,
etc. The goods imported from England into Italy amount annually to about
513,000l. sterling. and England takes in re^^^ for 687,155l. sterling, which
leaves a considerable balance in favor of Italy. Trade is much discouraged in
Italy by the heavy duties ^^^posed on it; and in the islands of Sardinia and
Sicily it is still more stagnating. A great fair is kept every year at
Alessandria.

The government in the Sardinian states is absolutely monarchical. In the
island of Sardinia, however, the states assemble; but merely to grant free
gifts or subsidies to the king, in whose hands the whole legislative, as well
as executive power, is vested. As the provinces which compose this kingdom have
been united under the same government at different periods of time, and had
formed independent states before, (...) of them has its peculiar laws and
customs, which were suffered to continue in force as far as they did not
militate against the king's edi^^^. Among the state departments, the council of
state is the highest. Sardinia forms a separate government, under a viceroy.
Justice is a^^^istred by a number of inferior and territorial courts, in which
for proprietors of large estates appoint the judges: The judges of the superior
courts are appointed by the king: From these courts appeal (...) to several
courts of appeal, the highest of which is il supremo real (...), at Turin.

The revenne of the king amounts to 1,000,000 sterling nearly. The royal
revenues are raised from the crown domains, from the customs, the mint, the
posts, land tax, salt-duty, stamps, a monopoly of tobacco, and a lottery of
that sort called Lotto di Genoa. All matters of finance are under the direction
of a minister, or intendant-general of finances.

The army of his Sardinian majesty, in time of peace, consists of 11,000 men,
and in time of war, of upwards of 30,000.

The provinces of Savoy and Piedmont are, by their situation, the (...) to
Italy; and they are of the greatest consequence in wars between the house of
Austria and France. Both these powers have, therefore, always courted the
alliance of the princes possessed of these provinces; and the latter have
wisely availed themselves of this favorable situation, to increase their own
power, by joining with either of the two, (...) it best suited their views. At
present the king of Sardinia is the most powerful prince in Italy. Under the
present reign, which is distinguished by its wisdom and activity, the state is
in a rising and pros^^^ condition. Its revenue is increasing, and its progress
in opulence would be rapid, if it were not for the great impediments thrown
into the way of commerce. The sciences are likewise in a flourishing (...).
Turin has a university, a society of sciences, and fine libraries, and
collections of paintings and statues. Two other universities are established at
Cagliari and Sassari: The other institutions of education (...) greatly
improving, in consequence of a regulation enjoining ^^^^asters to undergo a
strict examination at the university, before they are permitted to give
instructions.

The Milanese, belonging to the house of Austria, is a most formida^^ state,
and formerly gave law to all Italy, when under the government of its own dukes.
The fertility and beauty of the country are almost incredible. Milan, the
capital, and its citadel, is very strong, and furnished with a magnificent
cathedral in the Gothic taste, which contains a very rich treasury, consisting
chiefly of ecclesiastical furniture, composed of gold, silver, and precious
stones. The revenue of the duchy is above 300,000l. annually, which is supposed
to maintain an army of 30,000 men. The natives are fond of literary and
political assemblies, where they converse on almost all subjects. With all its
natural and acquired advantages, the natives of Milan make but few exports; so
that its revenue, unless the court of Vienna should pursue some other system of
improvement, cannot be much bettered. The duchy of Mantua, being now
incorporated with it, the province is to take the name of Austrian Lombardy.

The republic of Genoa is vastly degenerated from its ancient power and
opulence, though the spirit of trade still continues among its nobility and
citizens. Genoa is a most superb city, and contains some very magnificent
palaces, particularly those of Doria Andrew Doria, the head of this family,
famous for his military exploits, and the delivery of Genoa, was born in the
territory of Genoa, in the year 1468: He was offered the sovereignty of the
state, but refused it, and gave to the people that republican form of
government which still subsists; he lived to the age of 93, the refuge and
friend of the unfortunate.
and Duraz^o. The inhabitants of distinction dress in black, in a plain, if not
an uncouth manner. Their chief manufactures are velvets, damasks, gold and
silver tissues, and paper. The city of Genoa contains above 150,000 inhabitants
(but some writers greatly diminish that number) among whom are many rich
trading individuals. Its maritime power is dwind^ed down to six galleys. The
chief safety of this republic consists in the jealousy of other European
powers, because to any one of them it would be a most valuable acquisition. The
common people are wretched beyond expression. The soil of its territory is
poor. -- Near the sea some parts are tolerably well cultivated. The government
of Genoa is aristocratical, being vested in the nobility: The chief person is
called the Doge, or Duke; to which dignity no person is promoted till he is
fifty years of age. Every two years a new Doge is chosen, and the former is
incapable, during five years, of holding the same post again. The doge gives
audience to ambassadors, all orders of government are issued in his name, and
he is allowed a body guard of two hundred Germans.

Venice is one of the most celebrated republics in the world, on account both
of its constitution and former power. It is composed of several fine provinces
on the continent of Italy, some islands in the Adriatic, and part of Dalmatia.
The city of Venice is feated on 7^ islands at the bottom of the north end of
the Adriatic sea, and is separated from the continent by a marshy lake of five
Italian miles in breadth, too shallow for large ships to navigate, which forms
its principal strength. Venice preserves the vestiges of its ancient
magnificence, but is in every respect degenerated, except in the passion which
its inhabitants still retain for music and mummery during their carnivals. They
seem to have lost their ancient taste for painting and architecture, and to be
returning to Gothicism. Lately* however, they have had some spirited
differences with the court of Rome, and seem to be disposed to throw off their
obedience to its head.

The constitution of the republic was originally democratical, the magistrates
being chosen by a general assembly of the people, and so continued for one
hundred and fifty years; but various changes afterward took place; doges* or
dukes, were appointed, who were invested with great power, which they often
grossly abused, and some of them were assassinated by the people. By degrees a
body of hereditary legislative nobility was formed, continued and progressive
encroachments were made on the rights of the people, and a complete aristocracy
was at length established upon the ruins of the ancient popular government. The
nobility are divided into six classes, amounting in the whole to 2500, each of
whom, when twenty-five years of age, has a right to be a member of the grand
council. These elect a doge or chief magistrate, in a peculiar manner by
ballot, which is managed by gold and silver balls. The doge is invested with
great state and with emblems of supreme authority, but has very little power,
and is not permitted to stir from the city without the permission of the grand
council. The government and laws are managed by different councils of the
nobles.

The college, otherwise called the seignoty, is the supreme cabinet council of
the state, and also the representative of the republic. This court gives
audience, and delivers answers, in the name of the republic, to foreign
ambassadors, to the deputies of towns and provinces, and to the generals of the
army. It also receives all requests and me^orial^ on state affairs, summons the
senate at pleasure, and arranges the business to be discussed in that assembly.
The council of ten takes ^^izance of state crimes, and has the power of seizing
accused persons, examining them in prison, and taking their answers in writing,
with the evidence against them. But the tribunal of state inquisitors, which
consists only of three members, and which is in the highest degree despotic in
its manner of proceeding, has the power of deciding without appeal, on the
lives of every citizen belonging to the Venetian state; the highest of the
nobility, even the doge himself, not being excepted. To these three inquisitors
is given the right of employing spies, considering secret intelligence, issuing
orders to seize all persons whose words or actions they think reprehensible,
and afterward trying them, and ordering them to be executed, when they think
proper. They have keys to every apartment of the ducal palace, and can,
whenever they please, penetrate into the very bedchamber of the doge, open his
cabinet, and examine his papers; and of course, they may command access to the
house of every individual in the state.

They continue in office only one year, but are not responsible afterward for
their conduct whilst they are in authority. So much distrust and jealousy are
displayed by this government, that the noble Venetians are afraid of having any
intercourse with foreign ambassadors, or with foreigners of any kind, and are
even cautious of visiting at each other's houses.

All the orders of Venetian nobility are dressed in black gowns, large wigs,
and caps which they bold in their hands. The ceremony of the Doge's marrying
the Adriatic once a year, by dropping into it a ring, from his bucentaur or
state-barge, attended by those of all the nobility, is the most superb
exhibition in Venice, but not comparable for magnificence to a lord mayor's
show in London. The inhabitants of Venice are said to amount to 200,000. The
grandeur and convenience of the city, particularly the public palaces, the
treasury, and the arsenal, are beyond expression. Over the several canals of
Venice, are laid near 500 bridges, the greatest part of which are stone. The
Venetians still have some manufacturer, in scarlet cloth, gold and silver
stuffs, and above all, fine looking glasses, all which bring in a considerable
revenue (...) the owners; that of the state annually is said to amount to
8,000,000 of Italian ducats, each valued at twenty pence of English money. Out
of this are defrayed the expenses of the state and the pay of the army, which
in the time of peace consists of 16,000 regular troops (always commanded by a
foreign general) and 10,000 militia. They keep up a small fleet for curbing the
infolencies of the piratical states of Barbury, and they have among them some
orders of knighthood, the chief of which are those of the Stolo doro, so called
from the Robe they wear, which is conferred only on the first quality, and the
military order of St. Mark.

In ecclesiastical matters the Venetians have two patriarchs; the authority of
one reaches over all the provinces, but neither of them have much power: And
both of them are chosen by the senate; and all religious sects, even the
Mohammedan and Pagan, excepting Protestants, are here tolerated in the free
exercise of their religion.

The Venetians are a lively, ingenious people, extravagantly fond of public
amusements, with an uncommon relish for humor. They are in general tall and
well made; and many fine, manly countenance^ are met with in the streets of
Venice, resembling those transmitted to us by the pencils of Paul Veronese and
Titian. The women are of a fine style of countenance, with expressive features,
and are of an easy address. The common people are remarkably sober, obliging to
strangers, and gentle in their intercourse with each other. As it is very much
the custom to go about in masks at Venice, and great liberties are taken during
the time of the carnival, an idea has prevailed, that there is much more
licentiousness of manners here than in other places; but this opinion seems to
have been carried too far. Great numbers of strangers visit Venice during the
time of the carnival, and there are eight or nine theaters here, including the
opera-houses.

The dominions of Venice consist of a considerable part of Dalmatia, of four
towns in Greece, and of the islands of Corfu, Pachfu, Antipach, su, Santa,
Maura, Curzolari, Val di Compare, Cephalonia and Zant^^. The Venetian
territories in Italy contain the duchy of Venice, the P^duanese, the peninsula
of Romo, Cremasco, and the Marca Trevigian^, with part of the country of
Friuli. The subjects of the Venetian republic are not oppressed: The senate has
found that mild treatment, and good usuage are the best policy, and more
effectual than armies, in preventing revolts.

The principal city of Tuscany is Florence, which is now possessed by a younger
branch of the house of Austria, after being long held by the illustrious house
of Medicis, who made their capital the cabinet of all that is valuable, rich,
and masterly in architecture, literature, and the arts, especially those of
painting and sculpture. It is thought to contain above 70,000 inhabitants. The
beauties and riches of the grand duke's palaces have been often described; but
all description falls short of their contents, so that in every respect it is
reckoned, after Rome, the second city in Italy. The celebrated Venus of Medici,
which, on the those, is thought to be the standard of taste in female beauty
and proportion, stands in a room called the Tribunal. The inscription on its
(...) mentions its being made by Cleomenes an Athenian, the son of ^p^llodorus.
It is of white marble, and surrounded by other master (...) of sculpture, some
of which are said to be the works of Praxi^^^^, and other Greek masters. Every
corner of this beautiful city, ^^^ink stands between mountains covered with
olive trees, vineyards, and delightful villas, and divided by the Arno, is full
of wonders in the arts of painting, statuary, and architecture. It is a place
of some ^^^ngth, and contains an archbishop's see, and an university. The
inhabitants boast of the improvements they have made in the Italian (...), by
means of the Academia della Crusca; and several other ^^^^^ies are now
established at Florence. Though the Florentines (...) great state, yet their
nobility and gentry drive a retail trade in ^^in^, which they sell from their
cellar windows, and sometimes they (...) hang out a broken flask, as a sign
where it may be bought. They (...) also in fruits, in gold and silver stuffs.
Since the accession (...) archduke Peter Leopold, brother to the present
emperor, to this (...), a great reformation has been introduced, both into the
government and manufactures, to the great benefit of the finances. It is (...)
that the great duchy of Tuscany could bring to the field, upon ^^^^on, 30,000
lighting men, and that its present revenues are above ^^000l. a year. The other
principal towns of Tuscany are Pisa, Leg^^^ and Sienna: the first and last are
much decayed; but Leghorn (...) very handsome city, built in the modern taste,
and with such regu^^ity, that both gates are seen from the market place. It is
well for^^^^^, having two forts toward the sea, besides the citadel. The
ram^^^^^ afford a very agreeable prospect of the sea, and of many villas on
(...) land side. Here all nations, and even the Mahometans, have free (...),
and may settle. The number of inhabitants is computed at (...), among whom are
said to be 20,000 Jews, who live in a partic^^^^ quarter of the city, have a
handsome synagogue, and though sub^^^^ to very heavy impost, are in a thriving
condition, the greatest part (...) commerce of this city going through their
hands.

The inhabitants of Lucca, which is a small free commonwealth, ly^^^ on the
Tuscan sea, in a most delightful plain, are the most indus^^^^ of all the
Italians. They have improved their country into a ^^^tiful garden, so that
though they do not exceed 120,000, their an^^^^ revenue amounts to 80,000l.
sterling. Their capital is Lucca, (...) contains about 40,000 inhabitants, who
deal in mercenary goods, (...), and fruits, especially olives. This republic is
under the protec^^^ of the emperor. The vicinity of the grand duchy of Tuscany
(...) the people of Lucca constantly on their guard, in order to pre^^^^ their
freedom; for in such a situation, an universal concord and (...) can alone
enable them to transmit to posterity the blessings of (...) ^^rling liberty,
whose name they ^ear on their arms, and whose (...) is not only impressed on
their coin, but also on the city gates, (...) their public buildings. It is
also observable, that the inhabitants of this little republic, being in
possession of freedom, appear with (...) of cheerfulness and plenty, seldom to
be found among those of neighboring countries.

The republic of St. Marino is here mentioned as a geographical curiosity. Its
territories consist of a high, craggy mountain, with a few eminences at the
bottom, and the inhabitants boast of having preserved their liberties, as a
republic, for 1300 years. It is under the production of the pope; and the
inoffensive manners of the inhabitants, who are not above 5000 in all, with the
small value of their territory, have preserved its constitution.

The duchy and city of Parma, together with the duchies of Placentia and
Guastalla, now form one of the most flourishing states in Italy of its extent.
The soils of Parma and Placentia, are fertile, and produce the richest fruits
and pasturages, and contain considerable manufactures of silk. It is the seat
of a bishop's fee, and an university; and some of its magnificent churches are
painted by the famous Corregg^^. The present duke of Parma is a prince of the
house of Bourbon, and son to the late Don Philip, the king of Spain's younger
brother. This country was, some years past, the feat of a bloody war between
the Austrians, Spaniards, and Neapolitans. The cities of Parma and Placentia
are enriched with magnificent buildings; but his catholic majesty, on his
accession to the throne of Naples, is said to have carried with him thither the
most remarkable pictures and moveable curiosities. The duke's court is thought
to be the politest of any in Italy, and it is said that his revenues exceed
100,000l. sterling a year, a (...) rather exaggerated. The city of Parma is
supposed to contain 50,000 inhabitants.

Mantua, formerly a rich duchy, bringing to its own dukes 500,000 crowns a
year, is now much decayed. The government of it is annexed to that of the
Milanese, in possession of the house of Austria. The capital is one of the
strongest fortresses in Europe, and contains about 16,000 inhabitants, who
boast that Virgil was a native of their country. By an order of the emperor in
1785, the duchy is incorporated with that of Milan into one province, and, as
before mentioned, is now to be called Austrian Lombardy.

The duchy of Modena (formerly Mutina) is still governed by its own duke, the
head of the house of Este, from whom the family of Brunswic descended. The duke
is absolute within his own dominions, which are fruitful. The duke is under the
protection of the house of Austria, and is a vassal of the empire. His
dominions are far from being flourishing, though very improveable, they having
been alternately wasted by the late belligerent powers in Italy.

The Ecclesiastical State, which contains Rome, formerly the celebrated capital
of the world, lies about the middle of Italy. Those spots, which under the
masters of the world were formed into so many terrestial paradises, surrounding
their magnificent villas, and enriched with all the luxuries that art and
nature could produce, are now converted into noxious, pestilential marshes and
quagmires; and the Campagna di Roma, that formerly contained a million of
inhabitants, would afford, at present, of itself, but a miserable subsistence
for five hundred. Notwithstanding this, the pope is a considerable temporal
prince, and some suppose that his annual revenue amounts to above a million
sterling; other authors calculate them to be much higher. When we speak
comparatively, the sum of a million sterling is too high a revenue to arise
from his territorial possessions; his accidental income, which formerly far
exceeded that sum, is now diminished by the suppression of the order of the
Jesuits, from whom he drew vast supplies, and the measures taken by the
catholic powers, for preventing the great ecclesiastical issues of money to
Rome. According to the best and latest accounts, the taxes upon the provisions
and lodgings, furnished to foreigners, who spend immense sums in visiting his
d^^^nions, form now the greatest part of his accidental revenues. From what has
happened, within these thirty years past, there it rea^^^ to believe that the
pope's territories will be reduced to the limits which the houses of Austria
and Bourbon shall please to prescribe. Some late popes have aimed at the
improvement of their territories, (...) their labors have had no great effect.
The discouragement of industry and agriculture seems to be interwoven in the
constitution of the papal government, which is vested in proud, lazy
ecclesiastics. Their indolence, and the fanaticism of their worship, infect
their inferiors, who prefer begging, and imposing upon strangers, to industry
and agriculture, especially as they must hold their properties by the
^^^carious tenure of the will of their superiors. In short, the inhabitants of
many parts of the ecclesiastical state, must perish through their (...), did
not the fertility of their soil spontaneously afford them subsistence. However,
it may be proper to make one general remark (...) Italy, which is, that the
poverty and sloth of the lower ranks do not take their rise from their natural
dispositions.

This observation is not confined to the papal dominions. The Italian princes
affected to be the patrons of all the curious and costly arts, and each vied
with the other to make his court the repository of taste and magnificence. This
passion disabled them from laying out money upon works of public utility, or
from encouraging the industry, or relieving the wants of their subjects; and
its miserable effects are sum in many parts of Italy. The splendor and
furniture of the churches in the papal dominions are inexpressible, and partly
account for the misery of the subjects. But this censure admits of exceptions,
^en in a manner at the gates of Rome.

Modern Rome contains, within its circuit, a vast number of gardens and
vineyards. We have already touched upon its curiosities and antiquities. It
stands upon the Tyber, an inconsiderable river when compared to the Thames, and
navigated by small boats, barges and lighters. The castle of St. Angelo, though
its chief fortress, would be (...) to be a place of small strength, were it
regularly besieged. The city standing upon the ruins of ancient Rome lies much
higher, so that it is difficult to distinguish the seven hills on which it was
originally built. When we consider Rome as it now stands, there is the
strongest reason to believe that it exceeds ancient Rome itself in the
magnificence of its structures; nothing in the old city, when mistress of the
world, could come in competition with St. Peter's church; and per^^gs many
other churches in Rome exceed, in beauty of architecture, and value of
materials, utensils and furniture, her ancient temples; though it must be
acknowledged that the Panthcon must have been an ^^^^ing structure. The
inhabitants of Rome, in 1714, amounted to (...). If we consider that the spirit
of traveling is much increased (...) that time, we cannot reasonably suppose
them to be diminished ^^^^sent.

There is nothing very particular in the pope's temporal government at Rome.
Like other princes he has his guards, or sbirri, who take care of the peace of
the city, under proper magistrates, both ecclesiastical and civil. The Campagna
di Roma, which contains Rome, is under the inspection of his holiness. In the
other provinces he governs by legates and vice legates. He monopolises all the
corn in his territories, and he has always a sufficient number of troops on
(...), under proper officers, to keep the provinces in awe. Pope Cl^mo^^ XIV.
wisely disclaimed all intention of opposing any arms to that neighboring
princes, but those of prayers and supplications.

We have, under the head of religion, mentioned the ecclesiastical government
of the papacy. As to the rota, and other subordi^^^ chambers of this
complicated jurisdiction, they are too numerous to be even named, and do not
fall properly under our plan. Under a government so constituted, it cannot be
supposed that the commercial (...) ports of the ecclesiastical state are of
much value.

Next to Rome, Bologna, the capital of the Bolognese, is the most considerable
city in the ecclesiastical state, and an exception to the indolence of its
other inhabitants. The government is under a legate (...) latere, who is always
a cardinal, and changed every three years. The people here live more sociably
and comfortably than the other subjects of the pope; and perhaps their distance
from Rome, which is (...) miles north-west, has contributed to their ease. The
rest of the ecclesiastical state contains many towns celebrated in ancient
history, (...) even now exhibiting the most striking vestiges of their
flourishing state, about the beginning of the 16th century; but they are at
present little better than desolate, though here and there a luxurious
magnificent church and convent may be found, which is supported by the toil and
sweat of the neighboring peasants.

The grandeur of Ferrara, Ravenna, Rimini, Urbino (the native city of the
celebrated painter Raphael) Ancona, and many other states and cities,
illustrious in former times, are now to be seen only in their rui^^ and ancient
history. Loretto, on the other hand, an obscure sp^^ never thought or heard of
in times of antiquity, is now the admiration of the world, for the riches it
contains, and the prodigious resort to is of pilgrims, and other devotees, from
a notion industriously propagated by the Romish clergy, that the house in which
the Virgin Mary is said to have dwelt at Nazareth, was carried thither through
the air by angels, attended with many other miraculous circumstances, (...) as
that all the tress, on the arrival of the sacred mansion, bowed with the
profoundest reverence; and great care is taken to prevent any bits of the
materials of this house from being carried to other places; and exposed as
relics to the prejudice of Loretto. The image of the Virgin Mary, and of the
divine infant, are of cedar, placed in a small apartment, separated from the
others by a silver ballustrade, which have gate of the same metal. It is
impossible to describe the gold ch^i^^ the rings and jewels, emeralds, pearls,
and rubies, wherewith this (...) age is or was loaded; and the angels of solid
gold, who are here p^^^^ed on every side, are equally enriched with the most
precious ^^^^monds. To the superstition of Roman catholic princes, Loretto
in^^^debted for this mass of treasure. It has been matter of surprise, (...) no
attempt has yet been made by the Turks or Barbary states (...) Loretto,
especially (...) fortified, and stands near the sea; but it is now generally
supposed, that the real treasure is withdrawn, and metals and stones of less
value substituted in its place.

The king of Naples and Sicily, o^, as he is more properly called, the king of
the two Sicilies (the name of Sicily being common to both,) is possessed of the
largest dominions of any prince in Italy, as they comprehend the ancient
countries of Samnium, Campania, Apulia, ^^gna Craecia, and the island of
Sicily, containing in all about ^^,000 square miles. They are bounded on all
sides by the Mediter^^^an and the Adriatic, except on the north east, where
Naples ter^^nates on the ecclesiastical state. The Appennine runs through it
(...) north to south, and its surface is estimated at 3,500 square leagues. The
air is hot, and its soil fruitful of every thing produced in Italy. -- The
wines called Vino Greco, and Lachrymae Christi, are excellent. The city of
Naples, its capital, which is extremely superb, and adorned with all the
profusion of art and riches, and its neighborhood, (...) be one of the most
delightful places in Europe to live in, were (...) for their vicinity to the
volcano of Vesuvius, which sometimes ^^^^^ens the city with destruction, and
the insects and reptiles which (...) it, some of which are venomous. The houses
in Naples are in^^^^te to the population, but in general, are five or six
stories in ^^i^nt, and flat at the ton; on which are placed numbers of flower
(...), or fruit tress, in boxes of earth, producing a very gay and agree^^^^
effect. Some of the streets are very handsome: No street in (...) equals in
beauty the Strada di Toledo at Naples; and still less (...) any of them ^e
compared with those beautiful streets that lie open (...) the bay. The richest
and most commodious convents in Europe, (...) for male and female votaries, are
in this city; the most fertile and beautiful hills of the environs are covered
with them; and a small (...) of their revenue is spent in seeding the poor, the
monk distributing bread and soup to a certain number every day before the doors
of (...) convents.

Though above two-thirds of the property of the kingdom is in the (...) of the
ecclesiastics, the protestants live here with great freedom; and though his
N^ap^li^an majesty presents to his holiness every year ^^^^rey, as an
acknowledgment that his kingdom is a fief of the pon^^te, yet no inquisition is
established in Naples. The present rev^^^ of the king amount to about 5
millions dollars; of which Naples raises 4 millions, and Sicily 1 million. The
army consists of (...) men, and some say (...), and the navy of 25 armed ships.

The fertility of both Naples and Sicily is so great, that nature pro^^^^ her
gifts almost spontaneously, and little assisted by the industry (...) the
inhabitants. In both countries the natural productions, as well (...) the
climates, are nearly the same with those in Spain, except (...) at (...)
former, and more especially the island of Sicily, are much richer (...). Naples
exports annually, 1,500,000 tornoli of wheat, equal (...) ^^,000 Winchester
bushels: 200,000 cassisi of oil, weighing (...) ^^oirdupois each. It is
reckoned that the average amount of ^^^portation of oil exceeds in value four
millions of florins. Saf^^^ raised in the province of Abruzzo, is exported
annually to the (...) of 30,000 ducats, the ducat equal to ^s 9d. Sicily
exports 2,000 (...) of oranges. The environs of Syracuse produce near 40
different sorts of excellent wine and 84,000 cwt. of almonds, and great
quantities of pistachios peculiar to that district. Messina sends off 6,000
chests of lemons, and the rest of the kingdom about as much more: 280 barrels
of lemon juice weighing ten salme each, and 27 cwt. of bergamot juice. The
quantity of silk raised in the kingdom of Naples amounts to 800,000 lb. and
Sicily produces annually to the value of 187,000l. sterling. The latter country
produces likewise manna, barilla, oil of of turpentine, the sugar cane, cotton,
and many other vegetable productions of the warmer climates, which, however,
are of inferior commercial importance. The mineral kingdom is remarkable for
the extraordinary variety of its productions: Of metals, Naples has silver,
iron, copper; and Sicily, tin and lead; yet excepting the marble quarries and
falt, very little advantage has hitherto been derived from minerals.

The imports of Naples and Sicily consist in woollens, linen, hardware,
articles of luxury, and East and West India productions. There are but few
manufactures in proportion to the riches of the soil; and the wool raised in
these kingdoms is exported to other countries. Naples is the center of trade;
but trade and navigation is almost entirely in the hands of foreigners. The
fisheries are valuable, especially those of the tunny-fish, anchovies, and
corals: From the silk of the pin marina, gloves are manufactured.

In this kingdom the breed of horses and of mules is very excellent and
celebrated.

The king has a numerous but generally poor nobility, consisting of princes,
dukes, marquises, and other high sounding titles; and his capital, by far the
most populous in Italy, contains at least, 350,000 inhabitants. Among these are
about 30,000 lazaroni, or black guards, the greater part of which have no
dwelling houses, but sleep every night in summer under porticoes, piazzas, or
any kind of shelter they can find, and in the winter or rainy time of the year,
which lasts several weeks, the rain falling by pailfuls, they resort to the
caves under Capo di Monte, where they sleep in crowds like sheep in a pinfold.
Those of them who have wives and children, live in the suburbs of Naples near
Pausrlippo, in huts, or in caverns or chambers dug out of that mountain. Some
gain a livelihood by fishing, others by carrying burdens to and from the
shipping; many walk about the streets ready to run on errands, or to perform
any labor in their power for a very small recompense. As they do not meet with
constant employment, their wages are not sufficient for their maintenance; but
the deficiency is in some degree supplied by the soup and bread which are
distributed at the doors of the convents.

But though there is so much poverty among the lower people, there is a great
appearance of wealth among some of the great. The Neapolitan nobility are
excessively fond of show and splendor. This appears in the brilliancy of their
equinages, the number of their attendants, the richness of their dress, and the
grandeur of their titles. According to a late traveller (Mr. Swinburne), luxury
of late has advanced with gigantic strides in Naples. Forty years ago the
Neapolitan ladies wore nets and ribands on their heads, as the Spanish women do
to this day, and not twenty of them were possessed of a cap; but hair plainly
dressed is a mode now confined to the lowest order of inhabitants, and all
distinction of dress between the wise of a nobleman and that of a citizen is
entirely laid aside. Expense and extravagance are here in the extreme.

Through every spot of the kingdom of Naples, the traveller may be said to
tread on classic ground, and no country presents the eye with more beautiful
prospects. There are still traces of the memorable town of Cannae, as fragments
of altars, cornices, gates, walls, vaults, and underground granaties; and the
scene of action between Hannibal and the Romans, is still marked out to
posterity by the name of pezzo di sangue, "field of blood." Taranto, a city
that was once the rival of Rome, is now remarkable for little else than its
fisheries. Sorento i^ a city placed on the brink of steep rocks, that over-hang
the bay, and of all the places in the kingdom, has the most delightful
climate. Nola, once famous for its amphitheatre, and as the place where
Augustus Caesar died, is now hardly worth observation.

Brundusium, now Brindisi, was the great supplier of oysters for the Roman
tables. It has a fine port, but the buildings are poor and ruinous; and the
fall of the Grecian empire under the Turks reduced i^ to a state of inactivity
and poverty, from which it has not yet emerged. Except Rome, no city can boast
of so many remains of ancient sculpture as Benevento: Here the arch of Trajan,
one of the most magnificent remains of Roman grandeur out of Rome, erected in
the year 114, is still in tolerable preservation. Reggio has nothing
remarkable but a Gothic cathedral. It was destroyed by an earthquake before the
Marcian war, and rebuilt by Julius Caesar; part of the wall still remains, and
was very roughly handled by the earthquake in 1783, but not destroyed: Only 126
lost their lives out of 10,000 inhabitants. The ancient city of Oppido was
entirely ruined by the earthquake of the 5th of February, and the greatest
force thereof seems to have been exerted near that spot, and at Casal Nuova and
Terra Nuova. From Tropea to Sq^illace, most of the towns and villages were
either totally ^^in part over thrown, and many of the inhabitants buried in the
ruins. To ascertain the extent of the ravages, sir William Hamilton, who
surveyed it, gives the following description: "If on a map of Italy, and with
your compasses on the scale of Italian miles, you were to measure of 22, and
then fixing your central point in the city of Oppiddo (which appeared to me to
be the spot on which the earthquake had ^^^erted its greatest force) form a
circle (the radii of which will be, as (...) just said, 22 miles) you will then
include all the towns and villages that have been utterly ruined, and the spots
where the greatest mortality has happened, and where there have been the most
visible alterations on the face of the earth. Then extend your compass on the
(...) scale to 72 miles, preserving the same center, and form another circle,
you will include the whole of the country that has any mark of having been
affected by the earthquake."

Naples is a fief of the Holy See, and a trifling annual tribute is paid in
acknowledgment of the Pope's rights; yet the dependence of the king, who is
legatus natus of the sea of Rome, on his feudal lord, is ^^^^ly nominal. The
government is monarchical, but not quite absolute; for though the king's power
is very great, the states have preserved the right of meeting every other year,
in order to grant subsi^^, or a don gra^uit, to the king. This assembly is
called a parliament; it is composed of deputies from the nobility, the order of
citizens, and of the prelates who are possessed of baronies. Royal edicts,
behave they acquire the force of laws, must be registered by another assembly
of the nobility and the order of citizens, it consists of six seggi, or wards,
five, of which are governed by a committee of nobles; the last belongs
exclusively to the Plebeian; and is governed by six eletti, who are likewise
the chief civil magistrates of the city of Naples.

Both the ancients and moderns have maintained, that Sicily was originally
joined to the continent of Italy, but gradually separated from it by the
encroachments of the sea, and the shocks of earthquakes, so as to become a
perfect island. The climate of Sicily is so hot, that even the beginning of
January the shade is refreshing; and chilling winds are only felt a few days in
March. The only appearance of winter of found toward the summit of Mount
Altna, where snow falls, convents, and religious foundations are extremely
numerous have; the buildings are handsome, and the revenues considerable. If
this island were better cultivated, and its government more equitable, it would
in many respects be a delightful place of residence. There are great number of
fine remains of antiquity here. Some parts of this island are remarkable for
the beauty of the female inhabitants. Pale^mo, the capital of Sicily, is
computed to contain 120,000 inhabitants. The two principal streets, and which
cross each other, are very fine. This is said to be the only town in all Italy
which is lighted at night at the public expense. It carries on a considerable
trade; as also did Messina, which before the earthquake in 1783, was a large
and wellbuilt city, containing many churches and convents, generally elegant
structure. By that earthquake a great part of the lower district of the city
and of the port was destroyed, (...) considerable damage done to the lofty
uniform building called the Pa^^z^a^^, in the shape of a crescent; but the
force of the earthquakes; though violent, was nothing at Messina or Reggio, to
what it was in the plain, for of 30,000, the supposed population of the city,
only 700 are said to have perished. The greatest mortality fell upon those
towns and countries situated in the plain of Calabria Ultra, on the western
side of the mountains Deje, Sacro, and Caulone. At Casal Nuova, the princess
Gerace. and upwards of 4000 of the inhabitants, lost their lives; at Bagnara,
the number of dead amounts to 3017; Radicina and palad count their loss at
about 3000 each: Terra Nu^va about 1400: Seminars still more. The sum total of
the mortality in both Calabrias and in Sicily, by the earthquakes alone,
according to the returns in the secretary of state's office at Naples, is
32,367: But sir William Hamilton faith he has good reason to believe, that,
including strangers, the number of lives lost must have been considerably
greater; 40,000 at least may be allowed, he believes, without exaggeration.

In Sicily states have likewise a share in government, by the right which they
possess of granting subsidies to the crown. They are composed of three classes,
or bracci, the nobility or military class the clergy and the royal demesne
lands, viz. 42 royal towns.

The great state officers are nominated by the king: the highest department of
government is the state council, composed of four ministers or secretaries of
state. Next of this council is that called (...) and several departments for
particular branches of public business. Sicily is governed by a viceroy. The
late king has published a new code of laws, called Codex Carolinus; yet,
notwithstanding the improvements it contains, the proceedings of justice in
this country are still very dilatory. It is said there are not less than 30,000
lawyers at Naples, (Swinburne). In some parts of the kingdom the possessors of
large estates have a territorial jurisdiction, in others the king: From the
provincial courts appeals may be made to the Gran Corte della V^^^^a; and, in
the last instance, to the Supreme Court of Appeal at Naples.

The present government seems to have the welfare of the country more at heart
than any former. There are, in Naples and Sicily, four universities, viz. those
of Naples, Salerno, Palermo, and Catania, of which the first is the most
useful. At the capital there is likewise an academy of sciences, and
magnificent collections of antiquities. Naples has long (...) the principal and
favorite seat of music. Education is greatly neglected; the schools are still
in the hands of monks, whose interest it is that superstition and ignorance
should prevail, and who are the greatest enemies to the liberty of thinking and
writing.

The island of SARDINIA, which gives a royal title to the duke of Savoy, lies
about 150 miles west of Legborn, and has seven cities or towns. Its capital,
Cagliari, has an university, and archbishopric, and the seat of the viceroy,
containing about 24,000 inhabitants. It is thought his Sardinian majesty's
revenues, from this island, do not exced 5000l. sterling a year, though it
yields plenty of corn and wine, and has a coral fishery. Its air is bad, from
its marshes and high mountains on the North, and therefore was a place of exile
for the humans. It was formerly annexed to the crown of Spain, but at the peace
of Utrecht it was given to the emperor, and in 1719 to the house of Savoy.

The islands of C^RSICA lies opposite to the Genoese continent, between the
gulf of Cenoa and the Island of Sardinia, and is better known by the noble
stand which the inhabitants made for their liberty against their Genoese
tyrants, and afterward against the base and ungenerous efforts of the French
to enslave them, than from any advantages they enjoy, from nature of situation.
Though mountainous and woody, it produces corn, wine, figs, almonds, chestnuts,
olives, and other fruits. It has also some cattle and horses, and is
plentifully supplied, both by sea and rivers with fish. The inhabitants are
said to amount to 120,000. Bastia, the capital, is a place of some strength;
though other towns of the island, that were in possession of the male contents,
appear to have been but poorly fortified.

CAPR^, the ancient CAPREA, is an island to which Augustus Caesar then came for
his health and recreation, and which Tiberius made a scene of the most infamous
pleasures. It lies three Italian miles from that part of the main land which
projects farthest into the sea. It extends four miles in length from East to
West, and about one in breadth. The western part is, for about two miles, a
continued rock, vastly high, and inaccessible next the sea; yet Ano Capri, the
largest town of the island, is situated here; and in this part are several
places covered with a very fruitful soil. The eastern end of the island also
rises up in precipices that are neatly as high, though not quite so long as the
western, Between the rocky mountains, at each end, is a slip of lower ground
that runs across the island, and is one of the pleasantest spots that can
easily be conceived. It is covered with myrtles, olives, almonds, oranges,
figs, vineyards, and corn fields, which look extremely fresh and beautiful, and
afford a most delightful little landscape, when viewed from the tops of the
neighboring mountains. Here is situated the town of Caprea, two or there
convents, and the bishop's palace. In the midst of this settle tract rises a
hill, which in the reign of ^iberius was probably covered with buildings, some
remains of which are still to be seen. But the most considerable ruins are at
the very extremity of the eastern premontory.

From this place there is a very noble prospect: On one side of it the sea
extends farther than the eye can reach; just opposite is the green promontory
of Sarentum, and on the other side the bay of Naples.

ISCHIA, and some other islands on the coasts of Naples and Italy, have nothing
to distinguish them but the ruins of their antiquities, and their being now
beautiful summer retreats for their owners. ELBA has been renowned for its
mines from a period beyond the reach of history. Virgil and Aristotle mention
it. Its situation is about ten miles S. W. from Tuscany, and 80 miles in
circumference, containing near 7000 inhabitants; it is divided between the king
of Naples, to whom Porto Longone belongs, and the great duke of Tuscany, who is
master of Forto, Ferraio, and the prince of Piombino. The fruits and wine of
the island are very good, and the tunnery, fishery, and salt, produce a good
revenue.

I shall here mention the isle of MALTA, though it is not properly ranked with
the Italian islands. It was formerly called Melita, and is situated in 15
degrees E. lon. and 45 degrees N. lat. 60 miles south of Cape Passaro in
Sicily, and is of an oval figure, 20 miles long, and 12 broad. Its air is
clear, but excessively hot: The whole island seems to be a white rock, covered
with a thin surface of earth, which is however amazingly productive of
excellent fruits and vegetables, and garden-stuff of all kinds. This island, or
rather rock, was given to the knights of St. John of Jerusalem, in 1530, by the
emperor Charles V. when the Turks drove them out of Rhodes; under the tender of
one falcon yearly to the viceroy of Sicily, and to acknowledge the kings of
Spain and Sicily for their protectors: They are now known by the distinction of
the Knights of Malta. They are under vows of celibacy and chastity; but they
keep the former much better than the latter. They have considerable possessions
in the Roman Catholic countries on the continent, and are under the government
of a grand-master, who is elected for life. The lord-prior of the order, was
formerly accounted the prime baron in England. The knights are in number 1000:
500 are to reside on the island, the remainder are in their seminaries in other
countries, but at any summons are to make a personal appearance. They had a
seminary in England, till it was suppressed by Henry VIII.

When the great master dies, they suffer no ve^^el to go out of the island till
another is chosen, to prevent the pope from interfering in the election. Out of
the 16 great crosses, the great-master is elected, whose title, is "The most
illustrious, and most reverend prince, the lord-friar A. B. great master of the
hospital of St. John of Jerusalem, prince of Malta and Gaza." All the knights
are sworn to defend the church, to obey their superiors, and to live on the
revenues of their order only. Not only their chief town Valetta, or Malta, and
its harbor, but their whole island is so well fortified, as to be deemed
impregnable. On the 8th of Sept. there is an annual procession at Malta, in
memory of the Turks raising the siege on that day, 1663, after four months
assault, leaving their artillery, etc. behind.

HISTORY.] See Rollin's Ancient and Roman Histories -- Gibbon's Decline of the
Roman Empire -- and Goldsmith's Roman History.

TURKEY.
The Grand Signior's Dominions are divided into
1. TURKEY in EUROPE. inhabitants, 49,000,000 Sq. Miles, 2. TURKEY in ASIA.
960,060, Guthrie. 3. TURKEY in AFRICA. 800,000, Zimmermann.

TURKEY IN EUROPE.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 1000 Miles. between Degrees. 17 and 40 east longitude. Sq.
Miles.182,562 Breadth 900Miles. Degrees. 34 and 49 north latitude. Sq.
Miles.182,562

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED by Russia, Poland, and Sclavonia, on the North; by
Circassia, the Black Sea, the Pr^pontis, Hellespont, and Archipelago, on the
East; by the Mediterreanean, on the South; by the same sea, and the Venetian
and Austrian territories, on the West.

Divisions. Subdivisions. Chief towns. Sq. M. On the north coast of the Black
Sea are the provinces of Crim and Little Tartary, and the ancient Taurica
Cherfonesus The Russians in 1783, seized on the Crimea, the principal part of
this division, and by a (...) signed January 9th, 1784, the Turks ceded it to
them with the isle of Taman, and the part of Cuban which is bounded by the
river of that name. The Turks have now only the Tartar nations beyond the river
Cuban, and from the Black Sea. So that the pres^^^^ boundaries between the
Turkish and Russian Empires are formed by the river (...) in (...) and in the
river Cuban in Asia.
Precop Brachiseria Kaffa 26,200 Budziac Tartary Oczakow 12,000 North of the
Danube are the Provinces of Bessarabia Bender 8,000 Belgorod Moldavia, olim
Dacia lazy Choczim Falczin 26,000 Walachia, another part of the ancient Dacia
Buckaretch 60,000ir. Tergovisto19,000 South of the Danube are Bulgaria, the
east part of the ancient Myfia Widin 17,000 Nicopoli Siliftra, Scopia Servia,
the west part of Myf^a Belgrade 22,57^ Semendria Nissa Bosnia, part of the
ancient Illyricum Seraio 8,640 On the Bosphorus and Hellespont Romania olim
Thrace Constantinopel, N. L., 4. E. L. 29. 21,200 Adrianople South of Mount
Rhodope or Argentum, the north part of the ancient Greece Macedonia Strymon
18,980 Contessa Thessaly, now Janua Salonichi 4,650 Larissa Achaia and Boeotia,
now Livadia Athens 3,420 Thebes Lepanto On the Adriatic Sea or Gulf of Venice,
the ancient IIIyricum Epirus Chimaera 7,953 Burtinto Scodra Albania Durazzo
6,375 Duleigno Dalmatia Zara 4,560 Narenza Ragusa republic The republic of
Ragusa, though reckoned by geographers part of Turkey in Europe, is not under
the Turkish government. it is an aristocratical state, formed nearly after the
model of that of Venice. The government is in the hands of the nobility; and
the chief of the republic, who is styled rector, is changed every month, and
elected by scrutiny of lot. During his short administration, he lives in the
palace, and wears a ducal habit. As the Regusans are unable to protect
themselves, they make use of their wealth to procure them protector the chief
of whom, for many years, was the grand-seignor. They endeavored also to keep
upon good terms with the Venetians, and other neighboring states. But in the
year 1783, a dispute arose between them and the king of Naples, respecting a
claim of right to his appointing a commander of the Ragusan troops. It was
terminated by the republic's putting itself under that king's protection. The
city of Ragusa is not above two miles in circumference, but it is well built
and contains some handsome edifices. The ancient Epidaurus was situated not far
from this city. The Ragusans profess the Ro^^ish religion, but Greeks,
Armenians and Turks are tolerated. Almost all the citizens are traders, and
they keep so watchful an eye over their freedom, that the gates of the city of
Ragusare allowed to be open only a few hours in the day. The language chiefly
in use among the Ragusans is the Sclavonian, but the greatest part of them
speak the Italian. They have many trading vessels, and are carriers in the
Mediterranean, like the Dutch, being constantly at peace with the piratical
states of Barbary. The city of Gravosa, and Stagns, 30 miles N. E. of Ragusa,
are within the territories of this republic, and there are also five small
islands belonging so it, the principal of which is Melida.
Ragusa 430 in the Morea, the ancient Peloponnesus, being the south division of
Greece, are Corinthia Corinth 7,220 Argos Argos Sparta Napoli de Romania
Lacedaemon, now Misitria, on the river Eurosas Olympia, where the games were
held Olympia, or Longinica, on the river Alpheus Arcadia Modon Coron Elis
Patras Elis, or Belvidere, on the river Peneus.

MOUNTAINS.] These are the most celebrated of any in the world, and at the same
time often most fruitful. Mount Athos lies on a peninsula, running into the
Egean sea; the Mounts Pindus and Olympus, celebrated in Grecian fables,
separate Thessaly from Epirus. Parnassus, in Achaia, so famous for being
consecrated to the Muses, is well known. Mount Haemus is likewise often
mentioned by the poets; but not of the other mountains have changed their
names; for instance the mountains Shua, Witoska, Staras, Plamina, and many
others. Even the most celebrated mountains above mentioned have held modern
names imposed upon them by the Turks, their new masters, and others in their
neighborhood.

SEAS.] The Euxine or Black Sea; the Palus Maeotis, or Sea of Asoph; the sea of
Marmora, which separates Europe from Asia; the Archipelago; the Ionian sea, and
the Levant, are so many evidences, that Turkey in Europe, particularly that
part of it where Constanti^^ple stands, of all other countries, had the best
claim to be mistress of the world.

STRAITS.] Those of the Hellespont and Bosphorus are joined to the sea of
Marmora, and are remarkable in modern as well as ancient history.

RIVERS.] The Danube, the Save, the Neister, the Neiper, and the Don, are the
best known rivers in this country; though many others have been celebrated by
poets and historians.

LAKES.] These are not extremely remarkable, nor are they mentioned with any
great applause, either by the ancients or moderns. The Lago di Sentari, lies in
Albania. It communicates with the Lago di Plave and the Lago di Holti. The
Stymphalus, so famous for its harpies and ravenous birds, lies in the Morea;
and Peneus, from its qualities, is thought to be the lake from which the Styx
issues, conceived by the ancients to be the passage into hell.

ANTIQUITIES AND CURIOSITICS, NATURAL AND ARTIFICIAL.} Almost every spot of
ground, every river, and every fountain in Greece presents the traveller with
the ruins of a celebrated antiquity. On the Isthmus of Corinth, the ruins of
Neptune's temple, and the theater where the Isthmean games were celebrated, are
still visible. Athens, which contains at present above 10,000 inhabitants, is a
fruitful source of the most magnificent and celebrated antiquities in the
world, a minute account of which would exceed the limits of this work; but it
will be proper to mention some of the most considerable. On the south-west of
Athens is a beautiful structure, commonly called the Lantern of Demosthenes:
This is a small round edifice of white marble, the roof of which is supported
by six fluted columns of the Corinthian order, nine feet and an half high; in
the space between the columns are pannels of marble; and the whole is covered
with a cupola, carved with the resemblance of scales; and on the frieze are
beautifully represented in relievo the labors of Hercules. Here are also to be
seen the temple of Winds; the remains of the theater of Bacchus; of the
magnificent aqueduct of the emperor Adrian; and of the temples of Jupiter
Olympius, and Augustus. The remains of the temple of the oracle of Apollo are
still visible at Castri, on the south side of mount Parnassus, and the marble
steps that descend to a pleasant running water, supposed to be the renowned
Castalian spring, with the niches for statues in the rock, are still
discernible. The famous cave of Trophonius is still a natural curiosity in
Livadiae, the old Boeotia.

Mount Athos, which has been already mentioned, and which is commonly called
Monto Santo, lies on a peninsula which extends into the AEgean sea, and is
indeed a chain of mountains, reaching the whole length of the peninsula, seven
Turkish miles in length, and three in breadth; but it is only a single mountain
that is properly called Athos. This is so lofty, that on the top, as the
ancients relate, the sunrising was beheld four hours sooner than by the
inhabitants of the coats; and, at the solstice, its shade reached into the
Agora or market place of Myrina, a town in Lemnos, which island was distant
eighty-seven miles eastward. There are twenty-two convents on mount Athos,
besides a great number of cells and grottos, with the habitations of no less
than six thousand monks and hermits; though the proper hermits, who live in
grottos, are not above twenty; the other monks are anchorites or such as live
in cells. These Greek monks, who call themselves the inhabitants of the holy
mountain, are so far from being a set of slothful people, that, besides their
daily offices of religion, they cultivate the olive and vineyards, are
carpenters, masons, stone-cutters, clothworkers, tailors, etc. They also live a
very austere life; their usual food, instead of flesh, being vegetables, dried
olives, figs, and other fruit; onions, cheese, and on certain days, Lent
excepted, fish. Their fasts are many and severe; which, with the healthfulness
of the air, ^eaders longevity so common there, that many of them live above an
hundred years. It appears from AElian, that anciently the mountain in general,
and particularly the summit, was accounted very healthy, and conducive to long
life; whence the inhabitants were called Ma^^^^i or long lived. We are farther
informed by Philostratus, in the life of Apollonius, that numbers of
philosophers used to retire to this mountain, for the better contemplation of
the heavens, and of nature; and after their example the monks doubtless built
their cells.

CITIES.] Constantinople, the capital of this great empire, is situated on the
European side of the Bosphours. It was built upon the ruins of the ancient
Byzantium, by the Roman emperor Constantine the Great, as a more inviting
situation than Rome for the seat of empire. It become afterward the capital of
the Greek empire, and having escaped the destructive rage of the barbarous
nations, it was the greatest as well as the most beautiful city in Europe, and
the only one during the Gothic ages, in which their remained any image of the
ancient elegance in manners and arts. While it remained in the possession of
the Greek emperors, it was the only mart in Europe for the commodities of the
East Indies. It derived great advantages from its being the rendezvous of the
crusaders, and being then in the meridian of its glory, the European writers,
in the ages of the crusades, speak of it with astonishment. "O what a vast city
is Constantinople (exclaims one when he first behold it) and how beautiful? How
many monasteries are there in it, and how many palaces built with wonderful
art! How (...) manufactures are there in the city amazing to behold! It would
^e astonishing to relate how it abounds with all the good things, with gold,
silver, and stuffs of various kinds; for every hour ships arrive in the port
with all things necessary for the use of man." Constantinople is at this day
one of the finest cities in the world by its situation and its port. The
prospect from it is noble. The most regular part, is the Besestin enclosed with
walls and gates where the merchants have their shops excellently ranged. In
another part of the city is the Hippodrome, an oblong square of 400 paces by
200, where they exer^^^ an horseback. The Meidan, or parade, is a large
spacious square, the general resort of all ranks. On the opposite side of the
port are four towns, but considered as a part of the suburbs, their distance
being so small, a person may easily be heard on the other side. They are (...)
Pera, Galata, Pecha, and Tophana. In Pera, the foreign ambassadors and all the
Franks or strangers reside, not being permitted to live in the city; Galata
also in mostly inhabited by Franks and Jews, and is a place of great trade. The
city abounds with antiquities; the (...) of Constantine the Great is still
preserved. The mosque of St. Sophia once a Christian church, is thought in some
respects to exceed in grandeur and architecture St. Peter's at Rome. The city
is built in a triangular form, with the Seraglio standing on a point of one of
the angles, from whence there is a prospect of the delightful coast of the
lesser Asia, which is not to be equalled. When we speak of the seraglio, we do
not mean the apartments in which the grand signior's (...) are confined, as is
commonly imagined, but the whole inclo^^^e of the Ottoman palace, which might
well suffice for a moderate (...). The wall which surrounds the seraglio is
thirty feet high, having ^^^lements, embrasures, and towers, in the style of
the ancient fortifications. There are in it nine gates, but only two of them
magnificent; and from one of these the Ottoman court takes the name of the
Port, or the Sublime Port, in all public transactions and records. Both the
magnitude and population of Constantinople have been greatly exaggerated by
credulous travelers. It is surrounded by a high and thick wall with
battlements after the oriental manner, and towers, defended by a lined but
shallow ditch, the works of which are double on the land side. The best authors
think that it contains a million of inhabitants, among them are reckoned
200,000 Greeks, 40,000 A^^^nians, and 60,000 Jews.

The city has been frequently assailed by fires, either owing to the
narrowness of the streets and the structure of the houses, or the arts of the
Janissaries. In August, 1784, a fire broke out in the quarter situate toward
the harbor, and spread into other quarters, and about 10,000 houses (most of
which had been rebuilt since the fire in 1782) were consumed.

Opposite to the seraglio, on the Asian side, and about a mile and a half
distant across the water, is Scutari, adorned with a royal mosque, and a
pleasure house of the grand signior. On the brow of an adjacent hill is a grand
prospect* in one view are the cities of Constantinople, Galata, and Pera, and
small seas of the Bosphorus and Proponti^, with the adjacent countries on each
shore.

As to the population, manners, religion, government, revenues, learning,
military strength, commerce, and manufactures of the Turks, these several heads
depending on the same principles all over the empire, shall be mentioned under
TURKEY in ASIA.

ISLANDS belonging to TURKEY in EUROPE, being Part of Ancient GREECE.
WE shall mention these Islands chiefly for the use of such readers as are
conversant with ancient history, of which they make so distinguished a part.

Negropont, the ancient Euboea, stretches from the south east to the north
west, and on the eastern coast of Achaia or Livadia. It is 90 miles long, and
25 broad, and contains about 1300 square miles. Here the Turkish galleys lie.
The tides on its coasts are irregular; and the island itself is very fertile,
producing corn, wine, fruit, and cattle, in such abundance, that all kinds of
provisions are extremely cheap. The chief towns in the island are, Negropont,
called by the Greeks Egripos, situated on the south west coast of the island,
on the narrowest part of the strait; and Castle Rosso the ancient Craystus.

LEMNOS, or STALIMENE, lies on the north part of the Egean sea or Archipelago,
and is almost a square of 25 miles in length and breadth. Though it produces
corn and wine, yet it principal riches arise from its mineral earth, much used
in medicine, sometimes called ^erra Lemna or sigillata, because it is sealed up
by the Turks, who receive therefrom a considerable revenue.

TENEDOS is remarkable only for its lying opposite to old Troy, and its being
mentioned by Virgil as the place to which the Greeks retired, and left the
Trojans in a fatal security; it has a town of the same name.

S^TROS is about 60 miles in circumference, and is remarkable chiefly for the
remains of antiquity which it contains; about 300 Greek families inhabit it.

LISBOS, or MYTELENE, is about 60 miles long, and is famous for the number of
philosophers and poets it produced. The inhabitants were formerly noted for
their prodigality.

SCIO, or CHIOS, lies about 80 miles west of Smyrna, and is about 100 miles in
circumference. This island, though rocky and mountainous, produces excellent
wine, but no corn. It is inhabited by 100,000 Greeks, 10,000 Turks, and above
3,000 Latins. It has 300 churches besides chapels and monasteries; and a
Turkish garrison of (...) men. The inhabitants have manufactures of silk,
velvet, gold and silver stuffs. The island likewise produces oil and silk, and
the (...), or mastic, from which the government draws its chief rev^^^. The
women of this, and almost all the other Greek islands, (...) in all ages been
celebrated for their beauty, and their persons (...) been the most perfect
models of Symmetry to painters and statua^^. A late learned traveller, Dr.
Richard Chandler, says, "The beautiful Greek girls are the most striking
ornaments of Scio. Many of these were sitting at the doors and windows,
twisting cotton or silk, or employed in spinning and needle work, and accosted
us with fa^^^iarity, bidding us welcome, as we passed. The streets on Sundays
and holidays are filled with them in groups. They wear short petticoats,
reaching only to their knees, with white silk or cotton hose. Their head-dress,
which is peculiar to the island, is a kind of turban, ^^linen so white and thin
in seemed snow. Their slippers are chiefly yellow, with a knot of red fringe at
the heel. Some wore them fas^^^d with a thong. Their garments were of silk of
various colors; and their whole appearance so fantastic and lively, as to
afford us (...) entertainment. The Turks inhabit a separate quarter, and their
women are concealed." Among the poets and historians said to be (...) here, the
inhabitants reckon Homer, and show a little square house which they call
Homer's school.

SAMOS lies opposite to Ephesus, on the coast of the Lesser Asia, (...) seven
miles from the continent. It is 30 miles long, and 15 (...). This island gave
birth to Pythagoras, and is inhabited by Greek Christians, who are well treated
by the Turks, their masters. The muscadine Samian wine is in high request; and
the island also produces wool, which they fell to the French; oil,
pomegranates, and (...). This island is supposed to have been the native
country of Juno; and some travelers think that the ruins of her temple, and of
the ancient city Samos, are the finest remains of antiquity in the Levant.

To the south of Samos lies PATMOS, about 20 miles in circumference, but so
barren and dreary, that it may be called a rock rather than (...) island. It
has, however, a convenient haven; and the few Greek (...) who are upon the
island show a cave where St. John is suppo^^^ have written the Apocalypse.

The CYCLADES island lie like a circle round Delos, the chief of (...) which is
south of the islands Mycone and Tirfe, and almost mid^^^ between the continent
of Asia and Europe. Though Delos is (...) six miles in circumference, it is one
of the most celebrated (...) Grecian islands, as being the birthplace of
Apollo and Diana, the magnificent ruins of whose temples are still visible.
This island is almost destitute of inhabitants.

PAROS lies between the islands of Luxia and Melos. Like all the other Greek
islands, it contains the most striking and magnificent ruins of antiquity; but
is chiefly renowned for the beauty and whiteness of its marble.

CERIGO, or CYTHERA, lies south-east of the Morea, and is about 50 miles in
circumference, but rocky and mountainous, and chiefly remarkable for being the
favorite residence of Venus.

SANTORIN is one of the most southern islands in the Archipelago, and was
formerly called Calista, and afterward Thera. Though seemingly covered with
pumice-stones, yet, through the industry of the inhabitants, who are about
10,000, it produces barley and wine, with some wheat. One-third of the people
are of the Latin church, and subject to a catholic bishop. Near this island
another arose of the same name, from the bottom of the sea, in 1707. At the
time of its birth there was an earthquake, attended with most dreadful
lightnings and thunders, and boilings of the sea for several days, so that when
it arose out of the sea, it was a more volcano, but the burning soon, ceased.
It is about 200 feet above the sea; and at the time of its first emerging, was
about a mile broad, and five miles in circumference, but it has since
increased. Several other islands of the Archipelago appear to have had the like
original, and the sea in their neighborhood is so deep as not to be fathomed.

The famous island of RHODES is situated in the 28th degree of east, longitude,
and 36 degrees 20 minutes north latitude, about 20 miles south-west of the
continent of Lesser Asia, being about 60 miles long, and 25 broad. This island
is healthful and pleasant, abounds in wine, and many of the necessaries of
life; but the inhabitants import their corn from the neighboring country. The
chief town of the same name, stands on the side of a hill fronting the sea, and
is 3 miles in circumference, interspersed with gardens, minarets, churches, and
towers. The harbor is the Grand Signior's principal arsenal for shipping, and
the place is esteemed among the strongest fortresses belonging to the Turks.
The colossu^ of brass, which anciently stood at the mouth of the harbor, and
was 50 fathom wide, was deservedly accounted one of the wonders of the world:
One foot being placed on each side of the harbor, ships passing between its
legs; and it held in one hand a light-house for the direction of mariners. The
face of the colo^us represented the sun, to whom this image was dedicated; and
its height was about 135 feet. The inhabitants of this island were formerly
masters of the sea; and the Rhodian law was the directory of the Romans in
maritime affairs. The knights of St. John of Jerusalem, after losing Palestine,
look this island from the Turks in 1308, but lost it in 1522 after a brave
defense, and afterward retired to Malta.

CANDIA, the ancient Crete, is still renowned for its hundred cities, for its
being the birthplace of Jupiter, the seat of legislature to all Greece, and
many other historical and political distinctions. It lies between 35 and 36
degrees of north latitude, being 200 miles long, and 60 broad, almost equally
distant from Europe, Asia, and Africa, and contains 3220 square miles. The
famous Mount Ida^^ stands in the middle of the island, and is no better than a
barren rock; and Lethe, the river of oblivion, is a torpid stream. Some of the
valleys of this island produce wine, fruits, and corn; all of them remarkably
excellent in their kinds. The siege of Candia, the capital of the island, in
modern times, was far more wonderful and bloody than that of Troy. The Turks
invested it in the beginning of the year 1645, and its Venetian garrison, after
bravely defending itself against 56 storms, till the latter end of September
1669, made, at last, an honorable capitulation. The siege cost the Turks
180,000 men, and the Venetians 80,000.

CYPRUS lies in the Levant sea, about thirty miles distant from the coasts of
Syria and Palestine. It is 150 miles long, and 70 broad, and lies at almost an
equal distance from Europe and Africa. It was formerly famous for the worship
of Venus, the Cyprian goddess; and during the time of the Crusades, was a rich
flourishing kingdom, inhabited by Christians. Its wine, especially that which
grows at the ^^^^om of the celebrated Mount Olympus, is the most palatable, and
the richest of all that grows in the Greek islands. Nicosia is the capital, in
the midst of the country, and the sea of a Greek archbishop, induced most part
of the inhabitants of the island are Greeks. Famagusta, is ancient capital, has
a good harbor; and the natural produce of the island is so rich, that many
European nations find their account in keeping consuls residing upon it; but
the oppressions of the Turks (...) depopulated and impoverished it to such a
surprising degree, that the revenue they get from it does not exceed 1250l. a
year. The island produces great quantities of grapes, from which excellent wine
is made, and also cotton of a very fine quality is here cultivated, and oil,
silk, and turpentine. Its female inhabitants do not degenerate from their
ancestors as devotees to Venus; and Paphos, that ancient seat of pleasure and
corruption, is one of the divisions of the island. Richard king of England,
subdued Cyprus, on account of its king's treach^^ and its royal title was
transferred to Guy Lusignan, king of Jerusalem, from whence it passed to the
Venetians, who still hold that empty honor.

The islands in the Ionian sea are, SAPIENZA, STIVALI, ZANTE, CE^^LONIA,
SANTAMAURA, CORFU, FANNU, and others of smaller note, particularly ISOLA DEL
COMPARE, which would not deserve mention, had it not been the ancient Ithaca,
the birthplace and kingdom of (...). These islands in general are fruitful,
and belong to the Ve^^^^ns.

Z^^^te has a populous capital of the same name, and is a place of considerable
trade, especially in currents, grapes, and wine. The cita^^^ is erected on the
top of a large hill, strong by nature, but now little better than a heap of
ruins. Here is a garrison of 500 men, but their chief dependence is on their
fleet and the island of Corfu. The inhabitants of Zante are about 30,000,
mostly Greeks, and friendly to (...). Corfu, which is the capital of that
island, and the residence of the governor-general over all the other islands,
is a place of great (...), and its circumference about 4 miles. The Venetians
are (...) concern themselves very little about the welfare or government (...)
islands, so that the inhabitants, who are generally Greeks, bear (...)
indifferent character. Their number at Corfu is estimated at (...) and their
manners more severe than at Zante.

ASIA.
AS Asia exceeds Europe and Africa in the extent of its territories, it is also
superior to them in the serenity of its air, the fertility of its soil, the
deliciousness of its fruits, the fragrancy and balsamic qualities of its
plants, spices and gums; the salubrity of its drugs; the quantity, variety,
beauty, and value of gems; the richness of its metals, and the fineness of its
silks and cottons. It was in Asia, according to the sacred records, that the
all-wife Creator planted the garden of Eden, in which he formed the first man
and first woman, from whom the race of mankind was to spring. Asia became again
the nursery of the world after the deluge, whence the descendants of Noah
dispersed their various colonies into all the other parts of the globe. It was
in Asia that God placed his once favorite people, the Hebrews, whom he
enlightened by revelations delivered by the prophets, and to whom he gave the
Oracles of Truth. It was here that the great and merciful work of our
Redemption was accomplished by his divine Son; and it was from hence that the
light of his glorious gospel was carried with amazing rapidity into all the
known nations by his disciples and followers. Here the first Christian churches
were founded, and the Christian faith miraculously propagated and cherished
even with the blood of innumerable martyrs. It was in Asia that the first
edifices were reared, and the first empires founded, while the other parts of
the globe were inhabited only by wild animals. On all these account, this
quarter claims a superiority over the rest; but it must be owned, that a great
change has happened in that part of it called Turkey, which has lost much of
its ancient splendour, and from the most populous and best cultivated spot in
Asia, is become a wild and uncultivated desert. The other parts of Asia
continue much in their former condition, the soil being as remarkable for its
fertility, as most of the inhabitants for their indolence, effeminacy, and
luxury. This effeminacy is chiefly owing to the warmth of the climate, though
in some measure heightened by custom and education; and the symptoms of it are
more or less, visible, as the several nations are seated nearer or farther from
the north. What is wanting in the robust frame of their bodies among the
Chinese, Mogul Indians, and all the inhabitants of the more southern regions,
is in a great measure made up to them by the vivacity of their minds, and
ingenuity in various kinds of workmanship, which our most skillful mechanics
have in vain endeavored to imitate.

This vast extend of territory was successively governed in past times by the
Assyrians, the Medes, the Persians, and the Greeks; but the immense regions of
India and China were the little known to Alexander, or the conquerors of the
ancient world. Upon the decline of those empires, great part of Asia submitted
to the Roman arms; and afterward; in the middle ages, the successors of
Mahomet, or as they are ASIA
map of Asia usually called, Saracens, founded in Asia, in Africa, and in
Europe, a more extensive empire than that of Cyrus. Alexander, or even the
Roman when in its height of power. The Saracen greatness ended with the death
of Tamerlane; and the Turks, conquerors on every side, took possession of the
middle regions of Asia, which they still enjoy. Besides the countries possessed
by the Turks and Russians, Asia contains at present three large empires, the
Chinese, the Mogul, and the Persian, upon which the lesser kingdoms and
sovereignties of Asia generally depend. The prevailing form of government in
this division of the globe is absolute monarchy. If any of them can be said to
enjoy some share of liberty, it is the wandering tribes, as the Tartars and
Arabs. Many of the Asiatic nations, when the Dutch first came among them, could
not conceive how it was possible for any people to live under any other form of
government than that of a despotic monarchy. Turkey, Arabia, Persia, part of
Tartary, and part of India, profess Mahometanism. The Persian and Indian
Mahometans are of the sect of Hali, and the others of that of Omar; but both
own Mahomet for their lawgiver, and the Koran for their rule of faith and
life. In the other parts of Tartary, India, China, Japan, and the Asiatic
islands, they are generally heathens and idolaters. Jews are to be found every
where in Asia. Christianity, though planted here with wonderful rapidity by the
apostles and primitive fathers, suffered an almost total eclipse by the
conquests of the Saracens, and afterward of the Turks. Incredible indeed have
been the hazards, perils, and sufferings of catholic missionaries, to propagate
their doctrines in the most distant regions, and among the grossest idolaters;
but their labors have hitherto failed of success, owing in a great measure to
their own avarice, and the avarice and profligacy of the Europeans, who resort
thither in search of wealth and dominion.

The principal languages spoken in Asia are, the modern Greek, the Turki^^, the
Russian, the Tartarian, the Persian, the Arabic, the Mal^yan the Chinese, and
the Japanese. The European languages are also spoken upon the coasts of India
and China.

The continent of Asia is situated between 25 and 180 degrees of (...)
longitude, and between the equator, and 80 degrees of north latitude. It is
about 4740 miles in length, from the Dardanelles on the (...) the eastern shore
of Tartary; and about 4380 miles in (...), from the most southern part of
Malacca, to the most north^^^ cape of Nova Zembla. It is bounded by the Frozen
Ocean on (...) north; on the west it is separated from Africa by the Red Sea,
and from Europe by the Levant or Mediterranean, the Archipelago, (...)
Hellespont, the sea of Ma^mora, the Bosphorus, the Black Sea, (...) river Don,
and a line drawn from it to the river Tobol, and from ^^ence to the river Oby,
which falls into the Frozen Ocean. On the (...), it is bounded by the Pacific
Ocean, or South Sea, which separates it from America; and on the south, by the
Indian Ocean; so that it is almost surrounded by the sea. The principal regions
which (...) this country are as follow*

Nations. Leng. Bread. Square Miles. Chief Cities. Diff. and bearing fr. Land.
Diff. of time from London. Religions Tartary. Russian The bounds of these parts
are unlimited, each power pushing on hisconquests as far as he can 3,050,000
Tobolsk 2160 N. E. 4 10 bef. Chapter and Page Chinese 644,000 Chynian 4480 N. E. 8 4
bef. Pagans Mogulean 185,350 TIbet 3780 E. 5 40 bef. Pagans Independ. 600,060
Samareand 2800 E. 4310 4 36 bef. Pagans China 144 1000 1,105,000 Peking 4320 S.
E. 7 24 bef. Pagans Magols 2000 1500 1,916,500 Delhi 3720 S. E. 5 10 bef. Moh.
and P. Ind. beyond the Ganres 2000 1000 741,500 Siam Pegu 5040 S. E. 6 44 bef.
M. and Page Persia 1300 1100 800,000 ^^ahan 2460 S. E. 3 20 bef. Mahom. Turkey
in Asia. Pt. of Arabia (...) 1300 1200 700,000 ^^cca 2640 S. E. 2 52 bef.
Mahom. Syr^a. 270 160 29,000 ^^eppo 1860 S. E. 2 30 bef. Chapter and M^. Holy land
210 90 7,600 Jerusalem 1920 S. E. 2 24 bef. Chapter and M^. Natolia 750 390 195,000
Burla or ^myrn^ 1440 S. E. 1 48 bef. Mahom. Diarbeck or Mesopotam. 240 210
27,600 Diarbeck 2060 S. E. 2 56 bef. Mahametans with some few Christians. trac,
or Chalde^ 420 240 50,400 Bagdad 2240 Turcumania of Armenia 360 300 55,000
Erzerum 1860 S. E. 2 44 bef. Georgia 240 180 25,600 Te^^rs 1920 E. 3 10 bef.
Curditan or Assivia 210 20^ 23,900 Scherazer 2220 E. 3 00 bef. Maham.

All the islands of Asia (except Cyprus, already described, in the Levant,
belonging to the Turks) lie in the Pacific or Eastern Ocean, and the Indian
Seas, of which the principal, where the Europeans trade, or have settlements,
are, Islands. Towns. Sq. Miles. Tradewith or belon. The Japanese isles Jeddo,
Meaco 138,000 Dutch The Ladrones Guam Spain Formosa Tai-ouan-fou 17,000 China
Anian Kionteheow 11,900 The Philippines Minills 133,700 Spain The Molucca or
Clove isles Victoria fort, Ternate Dutch The Banda, or Nutmeg isles Lantor
Dutch Amboyna surrounding the Molucca and Banda isles Amboyna 400 Dutch Celebes
Macassar 68,400 Dutch Gilolo, etc. Gilolo 10,400 Dutch The Sunda isles Borneo
Borneo, Cayteng^e 228,000 All nations Sumatra Achen, Bencoolen 129,000 English
and Dutch Java, etc. Baravia, Bantam 38,250 Dutch The Andama and Nicobar isles
Andaman, Nicobar All nations Ceylon Candy 27,730 Du^^s The Maldives Caridon All
nation Bombay Bombay English The Kurile isles, and those in the sea of
Kamtschatka, lately discovered by the Russians. Russia

Georgia has lately claimed independence, and put itself under the protection
of Russia.
TURKEY IN ASIA.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length ^000 Miles. between Degrees. 27 and 46 east longitude. Sq. Miles.
520,820. Breadth 800 Miles. Degrees. 28 and 45 north latitude. Sq. Miles.
520,820.

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED by the Black Sea and Circassia, on the north; by Persia,
on the east; by Arabic and the Levant Sea, on the south; and by the
Archipelago, the H^llespont, and Propontis, which separate it from Europe, on
the west.

Divisions. Subdivisions. Chief towns. The eastern provinces are 1. Eyraca of
Arabic or Chaldea Bassora and Bagdad. 2. Diarbec or Mesopotamia Diarbec, Orfa
and Mousul. 3. Curdistan or Assyria Nineveh and Betlis. 4. Turcomanla or
Armenia Erzerun and Van. 5. Georgia, including Mengrelia and Imaretta, and part
of Circassia. Teflis, Amarchia, and Gonie. K^^^lia, or the Lesser Asia, on the
west. 1. Natolia Proper Bursa, Nici, Smyrna, and Ephesus. 2. Amasia Amasia,
Trapesond, and Sinope. 3. Aladulia Ajazzo and Marat. 4. Caramania Satalia and
Taresso, West of the Levant Sea. Saria, with Palestine, or the Holy Land.
Aleppo, Antioch, Damascus, Tire, Sidon, Tripoli, Scanderoon and Jerusalem,

MOUNTAINS.] These are famous in sacred as well as profane writings. The most
remarkable are, Olympus, Taurus and Anti^^arus; Caucasus and Ararat; Lebanon
and Hermon.

RIVERS.] The same may be observed of the rivers, which are the ^^phrates,
Tigris, Orontos, Meander, Sarabat; Kara; and Jordan.

WEALTH AND COMMERCE.] The Turkish dominions, including, besides, the above
specified possessions in Europe, the provinces of Asia Minor, Georgia,
Mingrelia, Armenia, Bagdad, Aleppo, Damascus, Palaestina, part of Arabia and
Egypt, belong to those parts of the world, which enjoy the most delightful
climate, and the happiest situation for commerce and the acquisition of
opulence. Nature has poured out her gifts on these provinces with profusion.
But the ty^^nical government now prevailing in this large part of the world
being hostile to industry and population, renders this immense empire wretched
and indigent.

Besides the finest natural productions which are found in Spain and (...)
Turkey in Europe abounds in horses, and in various sorts of excellent peltry,
supplied by the wild beasts in the mountainous and ^^cedy parts of the
provinces. It produces also a great deal of cotton. (...), manna, goats hair,
which resembles silk in softness, especially (...) fort called camel-hair.

The province of Walachia in particular, produces, in good years, 5,000,000
cymers of wine, the cymer weighing 22lb. Three small islands in the
Archipelago, Methalika, Patrazzo, and Rostizza, yield about 800,000lb. of
currants. Honey and wax is produced in great abundance in Moldavia; the tenth
part of the profits from the hires yields a revenue of 200,000 dollars to the
Hospodar, or prince of Moldavia. (Sulzer.) Livadia, Macedonia, and Candia,
produce annually upwards 3,000,000lb. of honey, of which about one-fourth is
exported. (Sprengel.) Most provinces raise, or might raise, excellent silk in
considerable quantities. That which is raised in the province of Macedonia is
estimated to amount to 100,000lb. and at Thessalonica, or Salonichi, to the
amount of 500,000 piasters, is annually sold. Cotton is likewise found chiefly
in Macedonia, which province exports 120,000 balls, sold at 80 piasters each.
The French purchase annually 12,000 balls at Salonichi, the English for 400,000
piasters, the Italians for 240,000, and the Germans for 1,700,000 piasters,
(Sprengel.) Tobacco is exported from the same place to Italy, to the amount of
290,000 piasters.

The provinces of Moldavia and Wallachia possess immense masses of salt-rock,
connected with the great rock strata of Gallicia and Transylvania; and the
prince of Wallachia gains upwards of 500,000 florins annually by the salt-works
at Riamick. (Sulzer.) Moldavia abounds in buffalos and oxen, of which 40,000
head are sold to the neighboring provinces; nearly as many horses are annually
sold in this province. (Boscowich.) In the same fertile districts, great
numbers of sheep are bred, reckoned to amount to 4,000,000. Besides the profits
arising from the wool, the skins of these sheep, and skins of goats, are used
in making Sassian and Morocco leather. Bosnia and Servia sell about 40,000 hogs
annually to Hungary. The wines of Greece, and its olive oil, are very
celebrated for their excellence.

In the extensive dominions of Turkey, which are bordered by great ridges of
mountains, the mineral kingdom might yield extraordinary riches; but the
science of mining is as much neglected by the Turks as all other sciences. They
have, however, begun to search for copper and iron in Wallachia; and the gold
dust, washed down by the rivers of that province, gives sufficient indication
of what may be expected to be found in its mountains. The several sorts of
marble found in Greece have been highly esteemed in ancient and modern times.
Sulphur, alum, saltpetre, asphaltes, and other valuable minerals, are found in
plenty.

If we consider the natural riches of the Asiatic provinces and of Egypt, we
cease to wonder how the Turks, notwithstanding their aversion to industry and
manufactures, are no losers by their trade, of which the balance is rather in
their favor. From Turkey the following goods are exported: Cotton, Silk, wool,
camel yarn, leather, coffee, wine, rice, fruits, tobacco, honey, wax, cattle,
marble, etc. The imports consist in woollens, corn, indigo, (...) coche^ille,
spices, glass, hard-ware, and East India goods. The Turks are no great losers
by their trade with France; they lose not much by their trade with the Dutch;
and they seem to be gainers by that with England. In 1785, the goods exported
from Turkey to England amounted to 146,906l. sterling. the goods imported from
England into Turkey to only ^^,499l. sterling. They are likewise gainers; by their
trade to Germany and Hungary: The imports from the latter kingdom into Turkey
amounted, in 1778, to only 241,773 florins, whereas the Turkish goods sold to
Hungary amounted to 1,328,337 florins. From these benefits derived from trade,
even with the present inconsiderable shipping employed in it, and
notwithstanding the want of manufactures, we may infer how great the profits of
commerce might be rendered, if industry should ever be so far encouraged as to
bear a just proportion to the natural wealth of the country.

The principal trading towns in Turkey are the cities of Constantinople,
Smyrna, Aleppo, Damascus, Alexandria, and Salonichi.

GOVERNMENT.] The government of the Turkish empire is desp^tical; the life and
property of the subject depend on the will of the Sultan, who is the only free
man in his dominions, and who exacts a blind obedience to his will as a civil
and religious duty. Yet the emperor is restrained, in some measure, by the same
religious system on which his arbitrary power is founded, and still more by the
intrigues of the principal officers of his court or seraglio, who are possessed
of the actual power of which the Sultan enjoys only the appearance. The great
influence of the army, and, now and then, a sense of oppression which rouses
the people to rebellion, are likewise objects of error, and have often proved
fatal to these arbitrary monarchs. The Turkish throne is hereditary in the
family of Osman: After the extinction of the lineal descendants of this prince,
of whom there are few remaining, the right of succession devolves on the family
of Ghe^^^, Chan of the Crimea.

The supreme council of state is called the divan. The regular of ordinary
divan is composed of the high officers of state; and, on particular
emergencies, an extraordinary divan is held, which consists, besides these
officers, of other persons of experience and knowledge of the law, called in by
the ministers to assist in their deliberations. At both meetings the Grand
Sultan is usually present, but only in an adjoining apartment, where he many
hear the advice of his ministers: The president of the divan is the grand
vizier as first minister, whose power in the state is exceedingly great, but
whose place is very precarious, and generally fatal to the possessor. The
provinces of the empire are ruled by governors, called Bashaws, who exercise
nearly the same arbitrary power over the subject provinces, which the Sultan
has over the whole empire. The connection of the distant provinces with the seat
of the empire is very weak, and often shaken by rebellions, and the quarrels of
the Bashaws. All public offices are bought, and of course generally filled with
the worst and most rapacious persons. The Hospodars, or princes of Wallachia
and Moldavia, pay very large (...) to the Grand Sultan for their dignities, and
they indemnify themselves by extortions from their subjects.

The Turkish laws are contained in the Koran, in the code of laws collected by
Soliman II. and, in dubious cases, the decisions of the (...), the chief of the
Mohometan church, have the authority of (...). Each town has its court of
justice, consisting the superior Judge or cadi, who is called molla in the
larger towns, under whom there is an inferior judge and a clerk. In the
provinces, the Bashaws are supreme judges. From the decisions of the
magistrates of the towns, appeal may be made to the Cadi (...). or superior
judges of the army, in Rumilia and Anadoli. From these, appeal li^^ in the last
instance to a divan, held expressly, for that purpose, by the Grand Vizier, at
his own house.

The Greeks, subject to the Grand Sultan, have their own courts of justice.

FINANCES.] The public revenue amounts to 30,000,000 dollars, o^ ^9,9^5 purses,
at 500 p^^^ters each.

It is very difficult to state the revenue of the Turkish emperor with any
degree of accuracy, as a very considerable part of it is irregularly levied on
the subject, and liable to great variations. The ^^i^i, or public treasury, is
reckoned to receive annually about ^0,000,000 dollars. But there are, besides
the miri, two other treasuries, the private cha^oustle of the emperor, called
chasna, and the treasury of the (...). The ordinary revenue paid annually into
the chasns, (...) to 600,000 dollars; but a much larger sum arises from
confiscated (...) and property, from the exchange and the sale of public
offices from seizures of the fortunes of rich private persons, to whom the
emperor declares himself heir, and from various other extortions.

In 1776, the revenues was collected in the following manner: 1. Amount of the
Charatsch, or capitation of such subjects in Europe, as are not mussulmen, and
who are not under the immediate protection of foreign ambassadors. Florins
11,^^^,000 2. Charatsch of Asia, 8,16^,000 3. -- of Cyprus, Candia, and the
Archipelago 1,3^^,000 4. -- of Egypt. 7^^,000 5. Other revenues from Asia and
Egypt. 850,000 6. Contributions of the tributary nations of Asia. 2,^^0,^00 7.
Tribute of the Hospodars of Wallachia and Moldavia 1,400,000 8. Domaine of the
emperor, including the revenues from fisheries 2,390,000 9. Customs a^
Constantinople, and duty on tobacco 2,^^0,000 10. Farm of the salt and mines
12,500,000 11. Revenue from Mecca and Medina 1,640,000 12. Extraordinary
revenue from inheritance and confiscation. ^,17^,000 Upwards of 53,000,000

In the same year the public expenditure was said to amount only to 44,495,000
florins. This statement is taken from the statistical tables, published at
Vi^una, the author of which, from the vicinity of that capital to Turkey, was
likely to be best acquainted with the present state of the latter. The
department of the treasury, (...) is divided into twelve bureaux: The first
minister of finances is called Desterdar. In every province the officers and
collectors of the revenue are very numerous and oppressive.

ARMY.] It is usually estimated at 300,000 men, nor is it at all difficult to
raise so large a number of men in time of war, if all those (...) disciplined
crowds are taken into the account, which flock together from all parts to the
standard of Mahomet. But even a regular (...) disciplined army of 300,000 men,
would not be 100 large for an empire of south extent, and which contains such
great numbers of inhabitants. About one half of the above number may be
considered as of real use; and this was the actual force of the empire in the
beginning of the into Russian war.

NAVY.] About 60 ships of war.

In the year 1786, the Turks had actually 30 ships of the line, of two men
each, and 40 galleys, 140 men each; and this number was intended to be
increased.

In any extraordinary exigency the Turks are able to fit out 40 ships of the
line of 800 men each 40 galleys 140 20 caravellas 300 100 galliots 60

Total 200 ships of war, and 50,000 sea troops, or leventi. The (...) under the
protection of the Port, viz. Algiers, Tunis, and Tri^^^^, are obliged to
furnish ten ships of the line.

RELIGION.] The established religion in this empire is the Ma^^^tan, of the
sect of the Sunnites: The heretical sect of the Sha^^^ in, however, tolerated;
all other religions are likewise included in this system of toleration, on
paying a certain capitation. Among the Christians residing in Turkey, those of
the orthodox Greek religion are the most numerous, and they enjoy several
priviliges; they (...), for instance, be advanced to dignities and posts of
trust and prof^^ on to the princely dignity of Moldavia and Wallachia, to the
place of body physicians and interpreters of the imperial court. The (...) are,
in religious matters, subject to the patriarch of Constanti^^^, who is
considered as the chief of the Greek church and nation, and whose authority and
jurisdiction is extensive. Other branches of (...) Greek church are the
Armenians, Nestorians, Maronites, Coptes, and others.

The Turkish clergy is numerous: This body is composed of all the ^^^ed in that
empire; and they are likewise the only teachers of (...) law, who must be
consulted in all important cases. In their capacity of lawyers, or interpreters
of the Koran, which, in most ca^^ in the code of laws, the clergy are called
ylana, or the instructed in the law. The Grand Sultan himself as caliph, or
successor to the (...) Mahomet, is their head; but their actual chief is the
Mufti, (...) of great authority and political influence. The Sultan has the
power of deposing the Mufti, but he cannot take his property (...), which is
considered as sacred. The successors or descend^^^ of Mahomet, who are called
emirs, or sheriffs, enjoy the same (...). Those persons or priests, who are
employed in the rises of (...) worship, are called Imans; and the Mohammedan
temples (...) by the name of Mosques. There are, among the Turks, (...)
religious orders; their Monks are called Dervises, and lead, in general, a very
austere life. The Mosques are very richly endowed, (...) estates which they
have acquired are become sacred, and can^^^ taken away even by the most
arbitrary despots. Many opulent (...) assign their estates over to the Mosques,
even in their life (...) and pay them a small annual rent, which ensures them
the pos^^^ during life; after their death, the whole is the property of the
(...)*

Jews are very numerous in Turkey: They are subject to a chief of their own
nation, called Cochan Pascha, whose power over them is even greater than that
which the Patriarch exercises over the Greek Christians. Gypsies are found in
all provinces. Upon the whole, the number of Mahometans is greater than that of
the subjects of other religious denominations.

POPULATION, INHABITANTS, MANNERS, CUSTOMS, AND DIVERSIONS.} The population of
this great country is by no (...) equal either to its extent or fertility, not
have the best geographers been able to ascertain it, because of the uncertainty
of its limits. It certainly is not so great as it was before the Christian
era, or even under the Roman emperors; owing to various causes, and above all,
so the tyranny under which the natives live, and their polygamy, which is
undoubtedly an enemy to population; as may be evinced from many reasons, and
particularly because the Greeks and Armenians, among whom it is not practiced,
are incomparably more p^oli^ie than the Turks, notwithstanding the rigid
subjection in which they are kept by the latter. The plague is another cause of
depopulation. The Turkish emperor, however, has more subjects than any two
European (...). The probable number of inhabitants we have mentioned in the
table.

As to the inhabitants, they are generally well made and robust men; when
young; their complexions are fair, and their faces handsome; their hair and
eyes are black or dark brown. The women, when young; are commonly handsome, but
they generally look old at thirty. In their demeanor, the Turks are rather
hypoch^ndraic, grave, ^^date, and passive: In matters of religion, tenacious,
superstitions, and morose. The morals of the Asiatic Turks are preferable to
those of the European. They are hospitable to strangers: They are likewise said
to be charitable to one another, and punctual in their dealings. Their charity
and public spirit is most conspicuous in their building c^tavanferas, or places
of entertainment, on roads that are destitute of accommodations, for the
refreshment of poor pilgrims or travelers. With the same laudable view they
search out the best springs, and dig well as which in those countries are a
luxury to weary travelers. The Turks sit cross legged upon mats, not only at
their meals but in company. Their ideas, except what they acquire from opium,
are simple and confined, seldom reaching without the walls of their own houses;
where they fit conversing with their women, drinking coffee, smoking tobacco,
or chewing opium. They have little curiosity to be informed of the state of
their own or any other country. If a vizier, bashaw, or other officer, is
turned out, or strangled, they say no more on the occasion, than that there
will be a new vizier or governor, seldom inquiring into the reason of the
disgrace of the former minister. They have few printed books, and seldom read
any other than the Koran, and the comments upon it. Nothing is negociated in
Turkey without p^^^ents; and here justice may commonly be bought and sold.

The Turks dine about eleven o'clock in the forenoon, and they (...) at five in
the winter, and six in the summer, and this is their principal meal. Among the
great people, their dishes are served up one by (...); but they have neither
knife nor fork, and they are not permitted by other religion to use gold or
silver spoons. Their victuals are always high seasoned. Rice is the common food
of the lower sort, and sometimes it is boiled up with gravy; but their chief
dish is pilau, which is mutton and fowl boiled to rags, and the rice being
boiled quite dry, the soup is high seasoned, and poured upon it. They drink
water, (...), and coffee; and the only debauch they know is in opium, which
gives them sensations resembling those of intoxication. Guests of higher rank
sometimes have their beard perfumed by a female slave of the family. They are
temperate and sober from a principle of their religion, which forbids them the
use of wine; though in private many of them indulge themselves in the use of
strong liquors. Their common salutation is by an inclination of the head, and
laying their right hand on their breast. They sleep in linen waistcoats and
drawers upon (...), and cover themselves with a quilt. Few or none of the
considerable inhabitants of this vast empire have any notion of walking or
riding either for health or diversion. The most religious among them (...),
however, sufficient exercise when they conform themselves to the frequent
ablutions, prayers, and rites prescribed them by Mahomet.

Their active diversions consist in shooting at a mark, or tilting it with
darts, at which they are very expert. Some of their great men are fond of
hunting, and take the field with numerous equipages, which are joined by their
inferiors; but this is often done for political purposes, that they may know
the strength of their dependants. Within doors, the chess or draught board are
their usual amusements; and if they play at chance games they never bet money,
that being exhibited by the Koran.

DRESS.] The men shave their heads, leaving a lock on the crown, and wear their
beards long. They cover their heads with a turban, and never put it off but
when they sleep. Their shirts are without collar or wristband, and over them
they throw a long vest, which they tie with a sash, and over the vest they wear
a loose gown somewhat shorter. Their breeches, or drawers, are of a piece with
their stockings; and instead of shoes they wear slippers, which they put off
when they enter a temple or house. They suffer no Christians, or other people,
to wear white turbans. The dress of the women differs little from that of the
men, only they wear stiffened caps upon their heads with ^^rns something like a
mi^re, and wear their hair down. When they appear abroad, they are so muffled
up as not to be known by their nearest relations. Such of the women as are
virtuous make no use of paint (...) heighten their beauty, or to disguise their
complexion; but they (...) tinge their hands and feet with kenna, which gives
them a deep yellow. The men make use of the same expedient to color their
(...).

MARRIAGES.] Marriages in this country are chiefly negociated by the ladies.
When the terms are agreed upon, the bridegroom pays (...) a sum of money, a
license is taken out from the cadi, or proper magistrate, and the parties are
married. The bargain is celebrated, as in other nations, with mirth and
jollity; and the money is generally employed in furnishing the house of the
young couple. They are not (...) by their law more than four wives, but they
may have as many ^^^^^^bines as they can maintain. Accordingly, besides their
wives, (...) wealthy Turks keep a kind of Seraglio of women; but all these
^^^^lgencies are sometimes insufficient to gratify their unnatural (...).

FUNERALS.] The burials of the Turks are decent. The (...) is attended by the
relations, chanting passages from the Koran; and (...) being deposited in a
mosque (for so they call their temples) they are buried in a field by the iman
or priest, who pronounces a funeral ^^^mon at the time of the interment. The
male relations express their sorrow by alms and prayers; the women, by decking
the (...) (...) certain days with flowers and green leaves; and in mourning
(...) husband they wear a particular head dress, and leave of all (...) the
twelve months.

LEARNING AND LEARNED MEN.] The Turks till of late (...) a sovereign contempt
for our learning. Greece, which was the (...) country of genius, arts, and
sciences, produces at present, (...) Turks, numerous, bands of Christian
bishops, priests, and months, (...) in general are as ignorant as the Turks
themselves, and are divided (...) to various absurd sects of what they call
Christianity. The education of the Turks seldom extends farther than reading
the Turkish language and the Koran, and writing a common letter. Some (...)
understand astronomy, so far as to calculate the time of an (...) but the
number of these being very small, they are looked upon (...) extraordinary
persons.

ANTIQUITIES AND CURIOSITIES, NATURAL AND ARTIFICIAL.} These are so various,
(...) have furnished matter for (...) voluminous publications, and others are
appearing every day. Th^^^ countries contained all that was rich and
magnificent in archi^^^^^^ and sculpture; and neither the barbarity of the
Turks, nor the d^^^dations they have suffered from the Europeans, seem to have
di^^^^^ed their number. They are more of less perfect, according to the (...),
soil, or climate, in which they stand, and all of them bear (...) marks of
neglect. Many of the finest temples are converted into Turkish mosques, or
Greek churches, and are more disfigured than (...) which remain in ruins.
Amidst such a plenitude of curiosities, and that can be done here is to select
some of the most striking; and I shall begin with Balbec and Palmyra, which
form the pride of all anti^^^^^^.

Balbec is situated on a rising plain, between Tripoli in Syria and (...)
mascus, at the foot of Mount Libanu^, and in the Heliopolis of (...) Syria. Its
remains of antiquity display, according to the best judging the boldest plan
that ever was attempted in architecture. The portion of the temple of
Heliopolis is inexpressibly superb, though dis^^^^^d by two Turkish towers. The
hexagonal court behind it to (...) known only by the magnificence of its ruins.
Their walls were adorned with Corinthian pilasters and statues, and it opens
into a quadrangular court of the same tasto and grandour. The great temples
(...) which this leads is now so ruined, that it is known only by an
^^^^^^ture, supported by nine lofty columns, each consisting of three (...)
joined together, by iron pins, without cement. Some of these (...) (...) a foot
long, and a foot in diameter; and the forded Turks are (...) (...) work to
destroy the columns, for the sake of the iron. A small (...) is still standing,
with a pedestal of eight columns in front, and (...) (...) flank, and every
where richly ornamented with figures in (...) (...) expressing the heads of
gods, horses, and emperors, and part of the ancient mythology. To the west of
this temple is another, of a (...) form, of the Corinthian and Ionic order, but
disfigured with Turkish mosques and houses. The other parts of this ancient
city are propor^^^ably beautiful and stupendous.

Various have been the conjectures concerning the founders of these immense
buildings. The inhabitants of Asia ascribe them to Solomon, (...) some make
them so modern as the time of Antoninus Pius. Perhaps they are of different
aeras; and though that prince and his successors may have rebuilt some part of
them, yet the boldness of their architecture, the beauty of their ornaments,
and the stupendous examination of the whole, seem to fix their foundation to a
period before the Christian era, but without mounting to the ancient times of
the Jews of the phoenicians, who probably knew little of the Greek style in
building and ornamenting. Balbec, is at present a little city, encompassed with
a wall. The inhabitants, who are about 5000 in number, chiefly Greeks, live in
or near the circular temple, in houses built out of the (...) ruins. A free
stone quarry, in the neighborhood, furnished the (...) for the body of the
temple; and one of the stones not quite (...) from the bottom of the quarry, is
70 feet long, 14 broad, and (...) (...) five inches deep, and reduced to our
measure in 1135 tons. A course, white marble quarry, at a greater distance,
furnished the ornamental parts.

P^^myra, or, as it was called by the ancients. Tadmor in the Desert, situated
in the wilds of Arabia Petrae, about 33 degrees. N. lat. and 200 miles to the south
east of Aleppo. It is approached through a narrow (...), lined as it were with
the remains of antiquity; and, opening (...) at once, the eye is presented with
the most striking objects that are in (...) found in the world. The temple of
the Sun lies in ruins; but the access to it is through a vast number of
beautiful Corinthian column of white marble, the grandeur and beauty of which
can only be ^^own by the plates of it, which have been drawn and published by
Mr. (...), who, with his friends, paid it a visit some years ago, purposely to
preserve some remembrance of such a curiosity. As those drawings, (...) copies
from them are now common, we must refer the reader (...) them, especially as he
can form no very adequate ideas of (...) from a printed relation. Superb
arches, amazing columns, a (...) extending 4000 feet in length, terminated by a
noble mau^^^^^, temples, fine porticos, peristyles, intercolumniations, and
en^^^^tures, all of them in the highest style, and finished with the most
beautiful materials, appear on all hands, but so dispersed and disjointed, that
it is impossible from them to form an idea of the whole when per^^^^. These
striking ruins are contrasted by the miserable huts of the (...) Arabs, who
reside in or near them.

Nothing but ocular proof could convince any man, that so superb (...) only,
formerly 10 miles in circumference, could exist in the midst of that now are
tracts of barren uninhabitable sands. Nothing however is there certain, than
that Palmyra was formerly the capital of a great (...); that it was the pride
as well as the emporium of the eastern (...), and that its merchants dealt with
the Romans, and the western (...), for the merchandises and luxuries of India
and Arabia. Its (...) altered situation, therefore, can be accounted for only
by nat^, which, have turned the more fertile tracts into barren (...) The
Asiatics think that Palmyra, as well as Balbec, owes its (...) to Solomon; and
in this they receive some countenance from (...) history. In profane history it
is not mentioned before the time of Mavc Anthony; and its most superb
buildings, are thought (...) of the lower empire, about the time of Gallienus.
Odenathus, the (...) king of Palmyra, was highly caressed by that emperor, and
(...) declared Augustus. His widow Zenobia reigned in great glory^^ for some
time, and Longinus, the celebrated critic, was her secret^^^ Not being able to
brook the Roman tyranny, she declared war against the emperor Aurelian, who
took her prisoner, led her in triumph ^o (...) and butchered her principal
nobility, and among others the (...) Longinus. He afterward destroyed her
city, and massacred its inhabitants, but expended large sums out of Zenobia^s
treasures in (...) the temple of the Sun, the majestic ruins of which have been
mentioned. This, it must be acknowledged, is but a very lame account (...)
celebrated city; nor do any of the Palmyrene inscriptions reach, (...) the
Christian era, though there can be no doubt that the city itself, (...) of
much higher antiquity. The emperor Justinian, made some, (...) to restore it to
its ancient splendour, but without effect, for it (...) by degrees to its
present wretched state. It has been observed (...) Justly, that its
architecture, and the proportions of its columns* (...) by no means equal in
purity to those of Balbec.

Nothing can be more futile than the boasted antiquities (...) the Greek and
Armenian priests in and near Jerusalem, which (...) ^^own to have been so often
razed to the ground, and rebuilt (...) that no scene of our Savior's life and
sufferings can be a (...) and yet those ecclesiastics subsist by their
forgeries, and pretending (...) guide travelers to every spot mentioned in the
Old and New Te^^^ment. They are, it is true, under severe contributions to the
Turks, but the trade still goes on, though much diminished in its profits,
(...) church of the Holy sepulcher, as it is called, said to be built by,
H^^^na, mother to Constantine the Great, is still standing, and of (...) good
architecture; but its different divisions, and the (...) made round it, are
chiefly calculated to support the forgeries of the keepers. Other churches,
built by the same lady, are found in Palestine; but the country is so altered
in its appearance and qualities, that it is one of the most despicable of any
in Asia, and it is in vain for a modern traveller to attempt to (...) in it any
vestiges of the kingdom, of David and Solomon. But let a fertile country be
under the frowns of heaven, and abandoned to tyranny an ^^^vild Arabs, it (...)
in time become a desert. Thus oppression soon thinned the (...) plains of
Italy, and the noted countries of Greece and Asia the (...) once the glory of
the world, are now nearly destitute of learning, (...) and people.

Mecca and Modina are curiosities only through the superstition (...) the
Mahometans. Their buildings are mean, when compared (...) rope^^ houses or
churches; and even the temple of Mecca, in point of architecture, makes but a
sorry appearance, though erected on the (...) where the great prophet is said
to have been born. The same (...) said of the mosque at Modina, where that
impostor was buried (...) the vast sums spent yearly by Mahomet^n pilgrims, in
visiting (...) places, are undoubtedly converted to temporal uses. I shall not
(...) the reader with any accounts of the spot which is said to have (...)
Paradise, and to have been situated between the river Euphra^^^ and Tigris,
where there are some tracts which undoubtedly (...) that (...). The different
ruins, some of them inexpressibly magnificent, (...) are to be found in those
immense regions, cannot be appropriated with any certainty to their original
founders; so great is the ignorance i^ which they have been buried for these
thousand years past. It is indeed easy to pronounce whether the style of their
buildings be Greek, Roman, or Saracen; but all other information must come
(...) their inscriptions.

The neighborhood of Smyrna (now called Ismir) contains many ^^^ble
antiquities. The same many be said of Aleppo, and a number (...) places
celebrated in antiquity, and now known only by geographical observations. The
seat of Old Troy cannot be distinguished by the smallest vestige, and is known
only by its b^ing opposite to the (...) of Tenedos, and the name of a brook,
which the poets magnified, into a wonderful river. A temple of marble built in
honor of Au^^^^ Caesar, at Milasso in Caria, and a few structures of the same
(...), in the neighborhood, are among the antiquities that are still en^^^.
Three theaters of white marble, and a noble circus near Laodi^^^, now Latichea,
have suffered very little from time or barbarism; and some travelers think
that they discern the ruins of the celebrated (...) of Diana, near Ephesus.

CHIEF CITIES, MOSQUES, AND OTHER BUILDINGS.} These are very numerous, and at
the same time very insignificant, be^^^^ they have little or no trade, and are
greatly decayed from their ^^^^ent grandeur. Scanderoon stands upon the site of
Old Alexan^^^ but it is now almost depopulated. Superb remains of antiquity are
(...) in its neighborhood. Aleppo, however, preserves a respecta^^^ ^ank among
the cities of the Asiatic Turkey. It is still the capital of Syria, and is
superior in its buildings and conveniences to most of the Turkish cities. Its
houses, as usual in the East, consist of a large (...), with a dead wall to the
street, an arcade or piazza running ^^^nd it, paved with marble, and an elegant
fountain of the same in the middle. Aleppo and its ^^burbs are seven miles in
compass, standing on eight small hills, on the highest top of which the citadel
or (...) is erected, but of no great strength. An old wall and a broad (...),
now in many places turned into gardens, surround the city, which contains
235,000 inhabitants, of whom 30,000 are Christians, (...) 5000 are Jew. It is
furnished with most of the conveniences of (...) excepting good water, within
the walls, and even that is supplied ^^an aqueduct, distant about four miles,
said to have been erected by (...) empress Helena. The streets are narrow, but
well paved with (...) square stones, and are kept very clean. Their gardens are
pleas^^^, being laid out in vineyards, olive, fig, and pistachio trees; but the
country round it rough and barren. Foreign merchants are numerous (...), and
transact their business in caravanseras, or large square buildings, containing
their warehouses, lodging-rooms, and compting^^^ses. The city abounds in neat,
and some of them magnificent ^^^ques, public bagnios, which are very
refreshing, and bazars, or (...) places, which are formed into long, narrow,
arched or covered (...), with little shops, as in other parts of the East.
Their coffee is ^^^^ent, and considered by the Turks as a high luxury; and
their (...) meats and fruits are delicious. European merchants ^ye here in
(...) splendour and safety than in any other city of the Turkish empire, which
is owing to particular capitulations with the (...) Coaches or carriages are
not used here, but persons of quality ride on horseback with a number of
servants before them according to their rank. The English, French and Dutch,
have consuls, who are much respected, and appear abroad, the English
especially, with mar^^s or distinction.

The heat of the country makes it convenient for the inhabitants (...) sleep in
the open air, here, over all Arabia, and many other parts of the East, for
which reason their houses are flat on the top. This practice accounts for the
early acquaintance those nations had with astronomy, and the motions of the
heavenly bodies, and explains some (...) of the holy scripture. As the Turks
are very uniform in their way of living, this account of Aleppo may give the
reader an idea of the other Turkish cities.

Bagdad, built upon the Tigris, not far, it is supposed, from the (...) of
ancient Babylon, is the capital of the ancient Chaldea, and was the metropolis
of the caliphate, under the Saracens in the twelfth century. This city retains
but few marks of its ancient grandeur. It is in the form of an irregular
square, and rudely fortified, but the convenience of its situation renders it
one of the seats of the Turkish government, and it has still a considerable
trade, being annually visited by the Smyrna, Aleppo, and western caravans. The
houses of Bagdad are generally large, built of brick and cement, and arched
over to admit the freer circulation of the air; many of their windows are made
of elegant Venetian glass, and the ceiling ornamented with chequ^^^^ work. Most
of the houses have also a courtyard before them, in the middle of which is a
small plantation of orange trees. The number of houses is computed at 80,000,
each of which pays an annual tribute (...) the Bashaw, which is calculated to
produce 300,000l. sterling. Their bazars, in which the tradesmen have their
shops, are tolerably handsome, large and extensive, filled with shops of all
kinds of merchandise, to the number of 12,000. These were erected by the
Persians, when they were in possession of the place, as were also their
bagnios, and almost every thing here worthy the notice of a traveller. In this
city are five mosques, two of which are well built, and have handsome domes,
covered with varnished tiles of different colors. Two chapels are permitted
for those of the Romish and Greek persuasions. On the north-west corner of the
city stands the castle, which is of white stone, and commands the river,
consisting of curtains and bastions, on which some large canon are mounted,
with two mortars in each b^stion, but in the year 1779, they were so
honey-combed and bad, as to be supposed not to support firing. Below the castle
by the waterside, is the palace of the Turkish governor; and there are several
summer-houses on the river, which make a fine appearance. The Arabians, who
inhabited this city under the caliphs, were remarkable for the purity and
elegance of their dialect.

Ancient Affyria is now called the Turkish Curdistan, though part of it is
subject to the Persians. The capital is Curdistan; the ancient Nineveh being
now a heap of ruins. Curdistan is said to be for the most part cut out of a
mountain, and is the residence of a vic^r^y, ^^beglerbeg. Orfa, formerly
Edessa, is the capital of the fine province of Mesocpotamia. It is now a mean
place, and chiefly supported by a manufacture of Turkey leather. Mousul is also
in the same province, a large place situated on the west shore of the Tigris,
opposite to where Nineveh formerly stood.

Georgia, or Gurgistan, now no longer subject to the Turks, is chiefly peopled
by Christians, a brave, warlike race of men. Their capital, Teflis, i^ a
handsome city, and makes a fine appearance, its inhabitants being (...) 30,000.
It is situated at the foot of a mountain, by the side of the river Kur, and is
surrounded by strong walls, except on the side of the river. It has a large
fortress on the declivity of the mountain, which is a place of refuge for
criminals and debtors, and the garrison consists of native Persians. There are
fourteen churches in Teflis, fix of which belong to the Georgians, and the rest
to the Armenians; the Mahometans who are here, have no mosques. In the
neighborhood of the city are many pleasant houses, and fine gardens. The
Georgians in general are by some travelers said to be the handsomest people in
the world; and some think that they early received the practice of inoculation
for the smallpox. They make no scruple o^ ^^^^ing and drinking wines in their
capital, and other towns; and their ^^^our has procured them many
distinguishing liberties and privileges. Lately they have formed an alliance
with Russia, and claimed its protection.

The ancient cities of Damafcus, Tire, and Sidon* still retain part of their
former trade. Damascus is called Sham, and the approach to it by the river is
inexpressibly beautiful. It contains a fine mosque, which was formerly a
Christian church. It still is famous for its steel ^^^ks, such as sword blades,
knives, and the like; the excellent temper of which is said to be owing to a
quality in the water. The inhabitants manufacture also those beautiful silks
called Damasks, from their city, and carry on a considerable traffic in raw and
worked silk, (...) water extracted from the famous damask roses, fruits and
wine. The neighborhood of this city is still beautiful, especially to the
Turks, who delight in verdure and gardens. Sidon, now Said, which likewise lies
within the ancient Phoenicia, has still some trade, and a ^^^derable harbor.
The town is surrounded with a stone wall, a cita^^^ on the land side, and
another toward the sea. The houses are (...) chiefly of stone, and are two
stories high. The inhabitants are (...) 16,000, chiefly Christians of the Greek
church, and the place is the seat of a bishop of that persuasion. There are in
the town two public baths, and two mosques. It stands on a neck of land over
against Tire, and both form a bay of about 16 miles in breadth. Tire, (...)
called Sur, about 20 miles distant from Sidon, so famous formerly (...) its
rich dye, is now inhabited by scarcely any but a few fishermen, who live in the
ruins of its ancient grandeur. There are strong walls, (...) the land side, of
stone, 18 feet high, and seven broad. The circumference of the place is not
more than a mile and a half; and Christians (...) Mahometans make the number of
500. Some of the ruins of ancient Tire are still visible.

Na^olia, or Asia Minor, comprehending the ancient provinces of (...)
Pampirylia, Pisidia, Lycaonia, Cilicia, Cappadocia, and Pontus, (...) ^^^^sia,
all of them territories celebrated in the Greek and Roman (...), are now,
through the Turkish indolence and tyranny, either (...), (...) a theater of
ruins. The sites of ancient cities are still discernible; and so luxurious is
nature in those countries, that in many places she triumphs over her forlorn
condition. The selfish Turks cultivate no more land than maintains themselves;
and their gardens and summer-houses fill up the circuit of their most
flourishing cities. The most judicious travelers, upon an attentive survey of
these countries, fully vindicate all that has been said by sacred and profane
writers of their beauty, strength, fertility and population. Even Palestine and
Judaea, the most despicable at present of all those countries, lie ^uried
within the luxuries of their own soil. The Turks seem particularly ^ond of
representing Judea in the most dreadful colors, and have formed a thousand
falsehoods concerning it, which being artfully propagated by some European
writers, have imposed upon weak Christians. The late reverend Dr. Show,
professor of Greek at Oxford, who seems to have examined that country with ^n
uncommon degree of accuracy, and was qualities by the soundest philosophy to
make a most just observation, says, that were the Holy Land as well cultivated
as in former times, it would be more fertile than the very best parts of Syria
and Phoenicia, because the so^l is generally much richer, and, every thing
considered, yields larger crop^. Therefore the barrenness, say, he, of which
some authors complain, does not proceed from the natural unfruitfulness of the
country, but from the want of inhabitants, the indolence which prevails among
the few who possess it, and the perpetual discords and depredations of the
petty princes who share this ^ine country. Indeed the inhabitants can have but
little inclination to cultivate the earth. "In Palestine, says Mr. Wood, we
have often seen the husbandman sowing, accompanied by an armed friend, to
prevent his being robbed of the seed." And, after all, whoever sows, is
uncertain whether he shall ever reap the harvest.


Under the government of Sheik Daher, the ally of the famous Al^ Bey, some part
of Palestine revived. He enlarged the buildings and walls of St. John dc Acre,
formerly Ptolemais, and showed great indulgence to the Christians. Its
inhabitants were lately computed at 40,000. Caifa, which stands on the
declivity of mount Carmel, distant about 20 miles from Acre, was also new built
and enlarged by Daher. The ancient Joppa, now Jaffa, 50 miles west from
Jerusalem, stands on a rocky hill, has an harbor for small vessels, and its
circumference is about two miles. The number of inhabitants is 7000; the
western part of the town is inhabited by Christians. The present state of Ramah
is deplorable, its walls in decay, and most of the houses empty, though the
number of inhabitants is still between 3 and 4000. Not a house is standing of
the once magnificent city of Cesarea, but the remains of the walls testify its
former grandeur. Azotus is about two miles in circumference, the inhabitants
are near 3000, and mostly Mahometans: An old structure is shown here, with fine
marble pillars, which is said to be the house that Sampson pulled down, when
insulted by the Philistines. Gaza is still respectable, it extends from east to
west three miles, and is a mile in breadth, divided into the old and new town.
The last is inhabited by the inferior Turks and Arabs: The number of the
inhabitants is reckoned to be 26,000. It is about five miles from the sea, and
outside the town is a market for the country people to dispose of their
commodities to the inhabitants, for they are not permitted to enter the town.
The country around is very fertile, but its chief produce is corn, oil, wine,
honey, beeswax, flax, and cotton.

TITLES.] The emperor's titles are swelled with all the pomp of eastern
magnificence. He is styled by his subjects, the Shadow of God, a God on Earth,
B^^^her to the Sun and Moon, Disp^s^r of all earthly Crow^s, etc.

COURT AND SERAG^^O.] Great care is taken in the education of the youths who
are designe^ for the state, the army, or the navy; but they are seldom
preferred till about 40 years of age, and they rise by their merit. They are
generally the children of Christian parents* either taken in war, purchased, or
presents from the viceroys and governors of distant provinces, the most
beautiful, and well made* and sprightly children that can be met with, and are
always reviewed and approved of by the grand-signior, before they are sent to
the colleges or seminaries, where they are educated for employments according
to their genius and abilities.

The ladies of the seraglio are a collection of beautiful young women, chiefly
sent as presents from the provinces and the Greek islands* most of them the
children of Christian parents. The brave prince Hera^^^^s, has for some years
past abolished the infamous tribute of children of both sexes, which Georgia
formerly paid every year to the ^^^te. The number of women in the Harem,
depends on the taste of the reigning monarch or sultan. Selim had 2000, Achmet
had but (...), and the present sultan has nearly 1600. On their admission they
are committed to the care of old ladies* taught to sew and embroider, music,
dancing, and other accomplishments, and furnished with the richest clothes and
ornaments. They all sleep in separate ^^ds, and between every fifth there is a
preceptress. Their chief governess is called Katon Kiaga* or governess of the
noble young ladies. There is not one servant among them, for they are obliged
to wait on one another by rotation; the last that is entered serves her who
pre^^ded her, and herself. These ladies are scarcely ever suffered to go
abroad, except when the grand-signior removes from one place to another, when a
troop of black eunuchs conveys them to the boats, which are enclosed with
lattices and linen curtains; and when they (...) by land they are put into
close chariots, and signals are made at certain distances, to give notice that
none approach the roads through which they march. The boats of the Harem, which
carry the grand signior's wives* are manned with 24 rowers, and have white
covered (...), shut alternately by Venetian blinds. Among the emperor's
at^^dants are a number of mutes, who act and converse by signs with great
quickness, and some dwarfs who are exhibited for the diversion of his majesty.

When he permits the women to walk in the gardens of the seraglio, all people
are ordered to retire* and on every side there is a guard of black (...), with
(...) in their hands, while others go the rounds in order to hinder any person
from seeing them. If unfortunately any (...) is found in the garden* even
through ignorance or inadvertence, (...) is certainly k^^ed, and his head
brought to the feet of the grand signior, who gives a great reward to the guard
for their vigilance. Sometimes the grand-signior passes into the gardens to
amuse himself, when the women are there: And it is then that they make use of
their most efforts, by dancing, singing, seducing gestures, and amorous
^^^^dishments* to ensnare the affoctions of the monarch. It is not ^^rmitted
that the monarch should take a virgin to his bed except during the solemn
festival, and on occasions of some extraordinary rejoicings, or the arrival of
some good news. Upon such occasions, if the sultan chooses a new companion to
his bed, he enters into the apartment of the women, who are ranged in files by
the governesses, to whom he speaks, and intimates the person he likes best: The
ceremony of the handkerchief, which the grand-signior is said to throw at the
girl that he elects, is an idle tale, without any foundation. As soon as the
grand-signior has chosen the girl that he has destined to be the partner of his
bed, all the others follow her to the bath, washing and perfuming her, and
dressing her superbly, conducting her singing, dancing* and rejoicing to the
bedchamber of the grand-signior, who is generally, on such an occasion,
already in bed. Scarcely has the new-elected favorite entered the chamber,
introduced by the grand eunuch who is upon guard, than she kneels down, and
when the sultan calls her, she creeps into bed to him at the foot of the bed,
if the sultan does not order her by special grace, to approach by the side:
After a certain time, upon a signal given by the sultan, the governess of the
girls, with all her suite, enter the apartment* and take her back again,
conducting her with the same ceremony to the women's apartments; and if by good
fortune she becomes pregnant, and is delivered of a boy, she is called asaki
sultaness, that is to say, sultaness-mother; for the first son she has the
honor to be crowned, and she has the liberty of forming her court. Eunuchs are
also assigned for her guard, and for her particular service. No other ladies,
though delivered of boys, are either crowned, or maintained with such costly
distinction as the first: However, they have their service apart, and handsome
appointments. After the death of the sultan, the mothers of the male children
are shut up in the old seraglio, from whence they can never come out any more,
unless some one of their sons ascend the throne. Baron de Tott informs us, that
the female slave who becomes the mother of a sultan, and lives long enough to
see her son mount the throne, is the only woman who, at that period, acquires
the distinction of Sultana Mother: She is till then in the interior of her
prison, with her son. -- The title of Bache Kadun* principal women, is the
first dignity of the grand-signior's Harem, and she has a larger allowance than
those who have the title of second, third, and fourth woman, which are the four
free women the Koran allows.

HISTORY.] For the best history of the Turks, the reader is referred to "The
History of the Turkish or Ottoman Empire," in 4 vols. 8vo. Translated from the
French of MIGNOT, by A. HAWKINS, Esquire. Printed in 1787, and sold by Mr.
Stockdale, London.

TARTARY IN ASIA.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 4000 Miles. between Degrees. 50 and 150 east long. Breadth 2400 Miles.
Degrees. 30 and 72 north lat.

BOUNDARIES. IT would be deceiving the reader to desire him to depend upon the
accounts given us by geographers* of the extent, limits, and situation of these
vast regions. Even the empress of Russia and her ministry are ignorant of her
precise limits with the Chinese, the Persians, and other nations. Tartary,
taken in its fullest extent, is bounded by the Frozen Ocean, on the North; by
the Pacific Ocean, on the East; by China, India, Persia, and the Caspian (...),
on the South; and by Muscovy, on the West.

Grand divisions. Subdivisions. Chief towns. Sq. M. North-east division
Kamtschatka Tartars Kamtschatka Jastutskoi Tartars Jakutskoi South-east
division Bra^ski Bra^ski 985,380 Thibet Thibet and Mogul Polon Tartars Kudak
North-west division Samoieda Mangasia Ostia^k Kortskoi South-west division
Cir^assian and Astrachan Tartary Terki Astrachan Middle division. Siberia
Tobolsk Kalmuc Tartary Bokharia 850.000 Usbeck Tartary Samarcand 339.840

Kamtschatka is a great peninsula* which extends from North to South about
seven degrees thirty minutes. It is divided into four districts, Bolcheresk,
Tigilskaia Krepost. Verchnei or Upper Kamtschatkoi Ostrog, and Nishnei or Lower
Kamtschatkoi Ostrog.

MOUNTAINS.] The principal mountains are Caucasus in Circassia, and the
mountains of Taurus and Ararat so contiguous to it, that they appear like a
continuation of the same mountain, which crosses all ^^^sia, from Mongrelia to
the Indies; and the mountains of Stolp, in the North.

SEAS.] These are the Frozen Ocean, the Pacific Ocean, and the ^alpian Sea.

RIVERS.] The principal rivers are, the Wolga, which runs a ^^^rse of two
thousand miles: The Oby, which divides Asia from ^^^^pe; the Tabol, Irtis,
Genesa or Jenska; the Burrumpooter, the (...), and the Argun, which divides the
Russian and Chinese empires.

AIR, CLIMATE, SOIL, AND PRODUCE.] The air of this country is very different,
by reason of its vast extent from north to (...); the northern parts reaching
beyond the arctic polar circle* and southern being in the same latitudes with
Spain, France, Italy, and of Turkey.

Nova Zembla and the Russia Lapland are most uncomfortable regions; the earth,
which is covered with snow nine months in the year, being extremely barren, and
every where incumbered with unwholesome marshes, uninhabited mountains, and
impenetrable thicknesses. The climate of Siberia is cold, but the air pure and
wholesome; and Mr. Took observes, that its inhabitants in all probability
would live to an extreme old age, if they were not so much addicted to an
immoderate use of intoxicating liquors. Siberia produces rye, oats, and barley,
almost to the 60th degree of northern latitude. Cabbages, radishes, turnips,
and cucumbers, thrive here tolerably well; but scarcely any other greens. All
experiments to bring fruit trees to bear, have hitherto been in vain; but there
is reason to believe that industry and patience may at length overcome the
rudeness of the climate. Currants and strawberries of several sorts are said to
grow here in as great perfection as in the English gardens. Herbs, as well
medicinal as common, together with various eatable roots, are found very
generally here; but there are no bees in all Siberia. Astrachan, and the
southern parts of Tartary, are extremely fertile, owing more to nature than
industry. The parts that are cultivated produce excellent fruits of almost all
the kinds known in Europe, especially grapes, which are reckoned the largest
and finest in the world. Their summers are very d^y* and from the end of July
to the beginning of October, the air is pestered* and the soil sometimes
ruined, by incredible quantities of locusts. Mr. B^ll, who traveled with the
Russian ambassador to China, represents some parts of Tartary as desirable and
fertile countries* the grass growing spontaneously to an amazing height. The
country of Thibet is the highest in Asia, and is a part of that elevated tract
which gives rise to the rivers of India and China, and those of Siberia and
other parts of Tartary.

METALS AND MINERALS.] It is said that Siberia contains mines of gold, silver,
copper, iron, jasper, lapis lazuli, and loadstones; a sort of large teeth found
here, creates some dispute among the naturalists, whether they belong to
elephants, or are a marine production; their appearance is certainly whimsical
and curious, when polished with art and skill.

ANIMALS.] These are camels, dromedaries, bears, wolves, and all the other land
and amphibious animals that are common in the north parts of Europe. Their
horses are of a good size for the saddle, and very hardy: As they run wild till
they are five or six years old, they are generally headstrong. Nea^ Ast^achan
there is a bird called by the Russians baba, of a gray color* and something
larger than a swan* he has a broad bill, under which hangs a bag that may
contain a quart or more* he wades near the edge of a river, and on seeing a
shoal, or fry of small fishes, spreads his wings and drives them to a shallow,
where he gobbles as many of them as he can into his bag, and then going ashore,
eats them, or carries them to the young. Some travelers take this bird to be
the pelican.

The forests of Siberia are well stocked with a variety of animals, some of
which are not to be found in other countries. These supply the inhabitants with
food and clothes; and, at the same time, furnish them with commodities, for an
advantageous trade. Siberia may be considered as the native country of black
foxes, sables, and ermines, the skins of which are superior to those of any
part of the world. -- Horses and cattle are in great plenty* and sold at low
prices.

POPULATION, INHABITANTS, MANNERS, CUSTOMS, DIVERSIONS, AND DRESS.] We can form
no probable guess as to the number of inhabitants in Tartary: but from many
circumstances we must conclude, that they are (...) from being proportioned to
the extent of their country. They are in general strong made, stout men; their
fa^^^ broad, their (...) (...), their eyes small and black, but very ^^ick;
their beards are scarcely visible, as they continually thin them by pulling out
the hairs by the roots. M. le Clerc's account of the Tartars (or Tatars as he
calls them) just published, is curious. He obtained the information on which it
is founded, from two princes and ^everal Mou^zas of that nation. Their origin
is the same with that of (...) ancient Turks; and Turk was the general
denomination of this people until the time that Zingis-Khan made himself master
of the North of Asia: nay, they still retain this title among themselves,
though, after the period now mentioned* the neighboring nations (...) to all
their ^^bes the general appellation of Tartars. The term (...), according to
him, does not signify properly a tribe; it denotes a (...) assembled, either to
march against the enemy, or for other political reasons.

The beauty of the Circassian women is a kind of staple commodity in that
country* for parents there make no scruple of selling their daughters to
recruit (...) seraglios, or ^ather haren^s, of the great men of Turkey and
Persia. They are purchased, when young, by merchants, and taught such
accomplishments as suit their capacities, to render them more valuable against
they day of sale.

According to Mr. Bruce, the Circassian women are extremely well ^^ped, with
exceeding fine features, smooth, clear complexions, and beautiful black eyes,
which with their black hair hanging in two tres^^^, one on each side the ^ace,
give them a most lovely appearance: They wear a black ^oi^ on their heads*
covered with a fine white cloth (...) under the (...) During the summer they go
almost naked. They have the reputation of being very chaste, though they seldom
want opportunity to be otherwise* for it is an established point of good
manners among them, that as soon as any person comes in to speak to the (...),
the husband goes out of the house; but whether this continency of theirs
proceeds from their own generosity, to recompense their husbands for the
confidence they put in them* or has its foundation only (...) same, I pretend
not to determine. Their language they have in common with the (...)
neighboring Tartars* although the chief people among them are not ignorant of
the Russian: The apparel of the men of Circassia is much the same with that of
the Nagayans, only their caps are something larger, and their cloaks being
likewise of ^^^se cloth or sheepskins, are fastened only at the neck with a
string, (...) as they are not large enough to cover the whole body, they turn
(...) round according to the wind and weather.

The Tartars are in general a wandering sort of people; in their pe^^^inations
they ^et out in the spring, their number in one body be^^^ frequently 10,000,
pr^ceded by their flocks and herds. When (...) come to an inviting spot, they
live upon it till all its grass and (...) is eaten up. They have little money,
except what they get from their neighbors the Russians, Persians, or Turks in
exchange for cattle; with this they purchase cloths, silks, stuffs, and other
apparel for their women. They have few mechanics, except those who make arms.
They avoid all labor as the greatest slavery; their only employment is tending
their flocks, hunting, and managing their horses. If they are angry with a
person, they wish he may live in one (...) place* and work like a Russian.
Among themselves they are very hospitable, and wonderfully so to strangers and
travelers, who confidentially put themselves under their protection. They are
naturally of an easy, cheerful temper, always disposed to laughter, and seldom
depressed by care and melancholy. When any of their people are infirm through
great age, or seized with distempers reckoned incurable, it is said, they make
a small hut for the patient near some river, in which they leave him with some
provisions, and seldom or never return to visit him. On such occasions they say
they do their parents a good office, in sending them to a better world.
Notwithstanding this behavior, many nations of the Tartars, especially toward
the south, are tractable, humane, and are susceptible of pious and virtuous
sentiments. Their affection for their fathers, and their submission to their
authority, cannot be exceeded; and this noble quality of filial love has
distinguished them in all ages. History tells us, that Darius, king of Persia,
having invaded them with all the forces of his empire, and the Scythians
retiring by little and little, Darius sent an ambassador to demand where it was
they proposed to conclude their retreat, and when they intended to begin
fighting. They returned for answer, with a spirit peculiar to that people,
"They had no cities or cultivated fields, for the defense of which they should
give him battle; but when once he was come to the place of their fathers
monuments, he should understand in what manner the Scythians used to fight."

The Tartars are inured to horsemanship from their infancy: they seldom appear
on foot. They are dextrous in shooting at a mark, insomuch that a Tartar, while
at full gallop, will split a pole with an arrow, though at a considerable
distance. The dress of the men is very simple and fit for action; it generally
consists of a short jacket, with narrow sleeves made of deer's skin, both of
one piece, and light to the limbs. The Tartars live in huts half sunk under
ground; they have a fire in the middle, with a hole in the top to let out the
smoke, and benches round the fire to sit or lie upon. This seems to be the
common method of living among all the northern nations, from Lapland eastward,
to the Japanese ocean. In the extreme northern provinces, during the winter,
every family burrows itself as it were under ground; and we are told, that so
sociable are they in their dispositions, that they make subterraneous
communications with each other, so that they may be said to live in an
invisible city. The Tartars are immoderately fond of horseflesh, especially if
it be young* and a little tainted, which makes their cabbins extremely
nauseous. Though horseflesh be preferred raw by some northern tribes, the
general way of eating it is after it has been smoked and dried. The Tartars
purchase their wives with cattle. In their marriages they are not very
delicate. Little or no difference is made between the child of a concubine or
slave, and that of the wise; but among the heads of tribes the wife's son is
always preferred to the succession. After a wife is turned of forty, she is
employed in menial duties as another servant, and as such must attend the young
wives who succeed to their places; nor is it uncommon, in some of the more
barbarous tribes, for a father to marry his own daughter.

The descendants of the old inhabitants of Siberia are still most of (...)
idolaters. They consist of many nations, entirely differing from each other in
their manner of living, religion, language, and counte^^^ces. But in this they
agree, that none of them follow agriculture, which is carried on by some
Tartars, and such as are converted to Christianity. A few of them breed cattle,
and others follow hunting. The population of Siberia has been much increased
since it became a Russian province* for the Russians have founded therein a
number of towns, fortresses, and villages. Notwithstanding which it presents
^ut a void and desert view; since, by its extent it is capable of supporting
several millions more than it at present contains. For the manners and customs
of the other Tartars belonging to the Russian empire, we refer to our account
of that country.

RELIGION.] The religion of the Tartars somewhat resembles their civil
government, and is commonly accommodated to that of their neighbors; for it
partakes of the Mohammedan, the Gentoo, the Greek, and even the Catholic
religions. Some of them are the grossest idolaters, and worship little rude
images dressed up in ^^gs. Each has his own deity, with whom they make very
free when matters do not go according to their own mind.

The Circassian religion is Paganism, for notwithstanding they use circumcision
among them, they have neither priest, alcoran, or mosque, like other
Mahometans. Every body here offers his own sacrifice at pleasure, for which,
however, they have certain days, established rather by custom than any positive
command. Their most solemn sacrifice is ^^ered at the death of their nearest
friends, upon which occasion both (...) and women meet in the field to be
present at the offering, which is a he-goat* and having killed, they flay it,
and stretch the skin with the head and horns on, upon a cross at the top of a
long pole, placed commonly in a quickset hedge (to keep the cattle from it,)
and near the place the sacrifice is offered by boiling and roasting the flesh,
which they afterward eat. When the feast is over, the men rise, and hav^^^
paid their adoration to the skin, and muttered over some certain ^^yers, the
women withdraw, and the men conclude the ceremony with drinking a great
quantity of aqua vitae, and this generally ends in a quarrel before they part.

But the religion and government of the kingdom of Thibet, and ^^ssa, a large
tract of Tartary, bordering upon China, are the most remarkable, and the most
worthy of attention. The Thibetians are governed by the Grand Lama, or Delai
Lama, who is not only submitted (...), and adored by them, but is also the
great object of adoration for the various tribes of Heathen Tartars, who roam
through the vast ^^ct of continent which stretches from the banks of the Wolga,
to Lama on the sea of Japan. He is not only the sovereign pontiff, the
^^^gerent of the Deity on earth; but, as superstition is ever the ^^^gest,
where it is most removed from its object, the more remote (...) absolutely
regard him as they Deity himself. They believe (...) to be immortal, and
endowed with all knowledge and virtue. Every year they come up from different
parts, to worship and make rich offerings at his shrine: Even the emperor of
China, who is a Manchou Tartar, does not fail in acknowledgements to him in his
religious capacity* though the Lama is tributary to him, and actually
entertains, at a great expense, in the palace of Peking, an inferior Lama,
deputed as his nuncio from Thibet. The opinion of those who are reputed the
most orthodox among the Thibetians is, that when the grand Lama seems to die,
either of old age or infirmity, his soul in fact only quit^ a crazy habitation,
to look for another younger or better, and it is discovered again in the body
of some child, by certain tokens known only to the Lamas or priests, in which
order he always appears. In 1774, the Grand Lama was an infant, which had been
discovered some time before by the Tayshoo Lama, who in authority and sanctity
of character is next to the Grand Lama, and during his minority acts as chief.
The lamas, who form the most numerous, as well as the most powerful body in the
state* have the priesthood entirely in their hands; and, besides, fill up many
monastic orders, which are held in great vene^^^^^ among them. The residence of
the Grand Lama is at Pato^^ a vast palace on a mountain near the banks of the
Barampooter, about seven miles from Lassa. The English East India Company made
a treaty with the Lama in 1774. The sort of Dellmacotta which commanded the
principal ^ass through the ridge of the Bootan mountains, was taken by storm,
by Captain Jones in 1773, and the fame of this exploit made the Thibetians sue
for p^^^e.
The religion of Thibet, though in many respects it differs from that of the
Indian Bramins, yet in others has a great ^^^inity to it. The Thibetians have a
great veneration for the cow, and highly respect the waters of the Ganges, the
source of which they believe to be in heaven. The Sunniasses, or Indian
pilgrims, often visit Thibet as an holy place, and the Lama always entertains a
body of two or three hundred in his pay. Besides his religious influence and
authority, the Grand Lama is possessed of unlimited power throughout his
dominions, which are very extensive, and stretch to Bengal.

Another religion* which is very prevalent among the Tartars, is that of
Schamanism. The professors of this religious sect believe in one supreme God,
the Creator of all things. They believe that he loves his creation* and all his
creatures; that he knows every thing, and is all powerful; but that he pays no
attention to the particular actions of men, being too great for them to be able
to offend him, or to do any thing that can be meritorious in his sight. But
they also maintain, that the Supreme Being has divided the government of the
world, and the destiny of men, among a great number of subaltern divinities,
under his command and control, but who nevertheless generally act according to
their own fancies; and therefore mankind cannot dispense with ^^sing all the
means in their power for obtaining their favor. They likewise suppose, that,
for the most part, these inferior deities abominate and punish premeditated
villainy, fraud, and cruelty. They are all firmly persuaded of a future
existence; but they have many superstitious notions and practices. Among all
the Schamanes, women are considered as beings vastly inferior to men, and are
thought to have been created only for their sensual pleasure, to people the
world, and to look after household affairs: And in consequence of these
principles, they are treated with much severity and contempt.

CURIOSITIES.] These are comprehended in the remains of the buildings, left by
the above mentioned great conquerors and their successors. Remains of ditches
and ramparts are frequently met with, which heretofore either surrounded small
towns, now quite demolished, o^ were designed for the defense of camps, forts,
o^ castles* the vestiges of which are often to be discovered upon the spot, as
well as other traces of decayed importance. Many of them are in tolerable
preservation, and make some figure even at present.

The desert of Kirgurs abounds in the relics of opulent cities. Some gold and
silver coins have been found, with several manuscripts neatly written, which
have been carried to Petersburg. In 1720, says M. Voltaire* in his history of
Peter the Great, there were found in Kalmuc Tartary a subterraneous house of
stone, some urns, lamps, and ear^^^gs, an equestrian statue, an oriental prince
with a diadem on his head, two women scared on thrones, and a roll of
manuscripts, which was sent by Peter the Great to the Academy of Inscriptions
at Paris, and proved to be in the language of Thibet. About 80 miles from Lassa
is the lake Palte, or Jangso; of that extent, the natives say it requires 18
days to walk round it. In the middle of it are islands, one of which is the
seat of the Lamassa Turcepama, or the Great Regenerate, in whom the Thebetians
think a divine spirit inhabits as in the Great Lama.

CITIES AND TOWNS.] Of these we know little but the names, and that they are in
general no better than fixed hordes. They may be said to be places of a^ode
rather than towns or cities, for we do not find that they are under any regular
government, or that they can make a defense against any enemy. The few places,
however, that are mentioned in the preceding divisions of this country* m^rit
notice. Tobolsk and Astrachan are considerable cities, the first containing
15,000 and the latter 70,^00 inhabitants. Forts, villages, and towns have also
lately been erected in different parts of Siberia, for civilizing the
inhabitants, and rendering them obedient to the Russian government.

Terki, the capital of Circassian Tartary, is seated in a spacious plain on an
island formed by the rivers Terki and Bustrow, and is garrisoned by 2000
regular^^ and 1000 Cossa^ks. It is well fortified with ramparts and bastions in
the modern style* well stored with cannon, and has always a considerable
garrison in it* under the command of a governor. The Carcassian prince who
resides here, is allowed five hundred Russians for his guard, but none of his
own subjects are permitted to dwell within any part of the fortifications. Ever
since the reduction of those parts to the obedience of Russia, they have put in
all places of strength, not only Russian garrisons and governors, but
magistrates* and priests for the exercise of the Christian religion; yet the
Circassian Tartars are governed by their own princes, lords, and judges, but
these administer justice in the name of the emperor* and in matters of
importance* not without the presence of the Russian governors, being all
obliged (...) take the oath of allegiance to his imperial majesty.

Tark^ is the capital of Dagestan* and contains 3000 houses, two stories high,
platfo^^ed at the top for walking. The Tartars of this province are numerous,
and Mahometans, governed by a sheskel, whose office is elective. The city of
Derbent is situated on the Caspian shore, and called the frontier of Persia. It
is said to have been first built by Alexander the Great* and that he here
received the visit from the Amazonian queen Thalestris. It is now enclosed with
a broad strong wall, built with large square stones, hard as marble, from the
quarries in Caucasus. Lassa is a small city, but the houses are of stone, and
are spacious and lofty.

COMMERCE AND MANUFACTURES.] This head makes no figure in the history of
Tartary, their chief traffic consisting in cattle, skins, beavers, rhubarb,
musk, and fish. The As^rachans, notwithstanding their interruptions by the wild
Tartars, carry on a considerable traffic into Persia, to which they export
leather, woollen and linen cloth, and some European manufactures.

HISTORY.] Though it is certain that Tartary, formerly known by the name of
Scythia, peopled the northern parts of Europe, and furnished those amazing
numbers who, under various names, destroyed the Roman empire* yet it is now but
very thinly inhabited; and those fine provinces, where learning and the arts
re^^ded, are now scenes of horror and barbarity. This must have been owing to
the dreadful massacres made among the nations by the two above mentioned
conquerors and their descendants; for nothing is more common in their histories
than their putting to the sword three or four hundred thousand people in a few
days.

The country of Usbec Tartary was once the seat of a more powerful empire than
that of Rome or Greece. It was not only the native country, but the favorite
residence of Zingis, or Jenghis Khan and Tamerlane, who enriched it with the
spoils of India and the eastern world. But some authors have absurdly
questioned the veracity of the historians of these great conquerors, though it
be better established than that of the Greek or Roman writers. The former,
about the year 1200 made himself master of those regions, which form at this
day the Asiatic part of the Russian empire; and his son Batou Sagin made
himself master of Southern Russia* and peopled it with Tartar colonies, which
are now confounded or blended with the Russians. Long and heavily did the
Tartar yoke gall the neck of Russia* till alleviated by the divisions among
themselves. But not till Ivan III. who ascended the Russian throne in 1462,
were they delivered from these warlike invaders. He repeatedly defeated them,
subdued the kingdom of Kasan and othther provinces, and made his name respected
in all that quarter.

Tamerlane's memory has been more permanent than that of Zingis Khan, his
defeat of the Turkish emperor Bajazet has been before noticed in the history
of that nation, and great were his conquests, and his name, far beyond the
limits of his porper dominions. His descent is claimed not only by all the
Khans and petty princes of Tartary, but by the emperor of Indostan himself. The
capital of this country is Bokharia, which was known to the ancients by the
name of Bucharia; situated in the latitude of 39 degrees 15 minutes, and 13
miles distant from the once famous city of Samarcand, the birthplace of
Tamerlane the Great, and who died in the year 1405.

The present inhabitants of this immense common, compose innumerable tribes,
who range at pleasure with their flocks and their herds, in the old patriarchal
manner. Their tribes are commanded by separate, Khans or leaders, that, upon
particular emergencies, elect a great Khan, who claims a paramount power over
strangers as well as natives, and who can bring into the field from 20 to 100
000 horsemen. Their chief residence is a kind of military station, which is
moved and shifted according to the chance of war and other occasions.

Besides what may be learned from their history and traditions, the standard or
colors of the respective tribes form a distinctive mark, whereby each Tartar
knows the tribe to which he belongs. These marks of distinction consist of a
piece of Chinese linen, or other colored stuff, suspended on a lance, twelve
feet in length, among the Pagan Tartars. The Mohammedan Tartars write upon their
standards the name of God, in the Arabic language. The Kalmucs and the Mogul
Tartars, distinguish theirs by the name of some animal; and, as all the
branches or divisions of a tribe preserve always the figure drawn upon the
standard of that tribe* adding only the particular denomination of each branch,
those standards answer the purpose of a genealogical table or tree, by which
each individual knows his origin and descent.

They are bounded on every side by the Russian, the Chinese, the Mogul, the
Persian, and the Turkish empires; each of whom are pushing on their conquests,
in this extensive, and in some places, fertile country. The Khans pay a
tribute, or acknowledgement of their dependency upon one or other of their
powerful neighbors, who treat them with caution and lenity; as the friendship
of these barbarians is of the utmost consequence to the powers with whom they
are allied. Some tribes, however, affect independency; and when united they
form a powerful body, and of late have been very formidable to their
neighbors, particularly to the Chinese, as we shall mention in our account of
that empire. The method of carrying on war, by wasting the country* is very
ancient among the Tartars, and practiced by all of them from the Danube
eastward. This circumstance, renders them a dreadful enemy to regular troops,
who must thereby be deprived of all subsistence, while the Tartars, having
always many spare horses to kill and eat, are at no loss for provisions.

See Univer. Hist.

THE EMPIRE OF CHINA.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 1450 Miles. between Degrees. 20 and 42 north latitude. Sq. Miles.
1,105,000 Breadth 1260 Miles. Degrees. 98 and 123 east longitude. Sq. Miles.
1,105,000

To which should be added Chinese Tartary. 644,000

BOUNDARIES. IT is bounded by the Chinese Tartary, and an amazing stone wall,
on the North; by the Pacific Ocean, which divides it from North America, on the
East; by the Chinesian Sea, South; and by Tonquin, and the Tartarian countries
and mountains of Thibet and Russia, on the West.

DIVISIONS.] The great divisions of this empire, according to the authors of
the Universal History, is into fifteen provinces (exclusive of that of
Lyau-tong, which is situated without the Great Wall, though under the same
dominion;) each of which might, for their largeness, fertility, populousness,
and opulence, pass for so many distinct kingdoms.

But it is necessary to acquaint the reader, that the information contained in
Du Aalde's volumin^u^ account of China, are drawn from the papers of Jesuits,
and others sent thither by the pope, whose missions have been at an end for
above half a century. Some of those fathers were men of penetration and
judgment, and had great opportunities of being informed about a century ago*
but even their accounts of this empire are justly to be suspected. They had
powerful enemies at the court of Rome, where they maintained their footing only
by magnifying their own labors and successes, as well as the importance of the
Chinese empire.

NAME.] It is probably owing to a Chinese word signifying Middle, from a notion
the natives had that their country lay in the middle of the world.

MOUNTAINS.] China, excepting to the north, is a plain country, and contains no
remarkable mountains.

RIVERS AND WATER.] The chief are the Yamour and the Argun, which are the
boundary between the Russian and Chinese Tartary; the Crocceus, or Whambo, or
the Yellow River; the Kiam, or the Blue River, and the Tay. Common water in
China is very indifferent, and is in some places boiled to make it sit for use.

BAYS.] The chief are those of Nankin and Canton.

CANALS.] These are sufficient to entitle the ancient Chinese to the character
of being the wisest and most industrious people in the world. The
commodiousness and length of their canals are incredible. The chief of them are
lined with hewn stone on the sides, and they are so deep, that they carry large
vessels, and sometimes they extend above 1000 miles in length. Those vessels
are fitted up for all the conveniences of life; and it has been thought by
some, that in China the water contains as many inhabitants as the land. They
are furnished with stone quays, and sometimes with bridges of an amazing
construction. The navigation is flow, and the vessels sometimes drawn by men.
About 10,000 boats from 200 tons and under, are kept at the public expense. No
precautions are wanting* that could be formed by art or perseverance* for the
(...) of the passengers* in case a canal is crossed by a rapid river, or
exposed to (...) from the mountains. These canals* and the variety that is seen
upon the border^* render China the most delightful to the eye, of any country
in the world, as well as fertile, in places that are not so by nature.

FORESTS.] Such is the industry of the Chinese, that they are not ^^cumbered
with forests or wood, though no country is better fitted for producing tim^er
of all kinds. They (...)* however, none to grow but for ornament and use, or on
the sides of mountains, from whence the trees, when cut down, can be conveyed
to any place by water.

AIR, SOIL, AND PRODUCE.] The air of this empire is according to the situation
of (...). Toward the north it is sharp, in the middle mild, and in the south
hot. The soil it, either by nature or art, fruitful of every thing that can
minister to the necessities, conveniences or luxuries of life. The culture of
the cotton* and the rice ^^lds, from which the bulk of the inhabitants are
clothed and fed, is ingenious almost beyond description. The rare trees, and
aromatic productions, either ornamental or medicinal, that abound in other
^^^ts of the world, are to be found in China, and some others peculiar to
itself; but even a catalogue of them would form a little volume. Some, however,
must be mentioned.

The tallow tree has a short trunk, a smooth bark, crooked branches, ^^d
leaves, shaped like a heart, and is about the height of a common cherry-tree.
The fruit it produces have all the qualities of our tallow, and when
manufactured with oil serve the natives as candles; ^^t they smell strong* nor
is their light clear. Of the other trees peculiar to China, are some which
yield a kind of flour; some partake of the nature of pepper. The gum of some is
poisonous, but affords the ^^est varnish in the world. After all that can be
said of these, and many other beautiful and useful trees, the Chinese,
notwithstanding their industry, are so wedded to their ancient customs, that
they are very little, if at all, meliorated by cultivation. The same may be
said of their richest fruits, which, in general, are far from being so
delicious (...) those of Europe, and indeed of America. This is owing to the
Chinese never practicing grafting, or inoculation of trees, and knowing nothing
of experimental gardening.

It would be unpardonable here not to mention the raw-silk, which so much
abounds in China, and above all, the tea-plant, or shrub. It is planted in
rows* and pruned to prevent its luxuriancy. Notwithstanding our long
intercourse with China, writers are still divided about the different species
and culture of this plant. It is generally thought that the green and boheateas
grow on the same shrub, but that the ^^tter admits of some kind of preparation,
which takes away its raking qualities, and gives it a deeper color. The other
kinds, which go by the names of imperial, congo, singlo, and the like, are
occasioned probably by the nature of the soils, and from the provinces in which
they grow. The culture of this plant seems to be very simple; and it is certain
that some kinds are of a much higher and delicious slavour then others. It is
thought that the finest, which is called the flower of the tea, is imported
over land to Russia; but we know of little difference in their effects on the
human body. The greatest is between the ^ohea and the green.

It is supposed, that the Portuguese had the use of tea long before the
English, but it was introduced among the latter before the Restoration, as
mention of it is made in the first act of parliament, that settled the ^^ci^e
on the king for life in 1660. Catharine of Lisbon* wife to Charles II. rendered
the use of it common at court. The ginfeng, so ^^^^ous among the Chinese as the
universal remedy, and monopolized (...) by their emperors, is now found to be
but a common root, and is plentiful in America. When brought to Europe, it is
little distinguished for its healing qualities; and this instance alone ought
to (...) us with what caution the former accounts of China are to be (...). The
ginseng, however, is a native of the Chinese Tartary.

METALS AND MINERALS.] China (if we are to believe naturalists) produces all
metals and minerals that are known in the world. White copper is peculiar to
itself, but we know of no extraordinary quality it possesses. One of the
fundamental maxims of the Chinese government is, that of not introducing a
superabundancy of gold and silver, for sear of hurting industry. The gold
mines, therefore, are but slightly worked, and the currency of that metal is
supplied by the grains the people pick up in the sand of rivers and mountains.
The silver specie is furnished from the mines of Honan.

POPULATION AND INHABITANTS.] Much has been said of the population of China. It
is undoubtedly great. According to Le Compte the 15 Provinces contain 2357
fortified towns, 10,128,789 families, 58,916,783 men. But this subject has been
treated with the utmost attention and industry by M. Amiot, in a desertation
dated Sept. 1777, and inserted in the 6th vol. of the "Memoirs concernant les
Chinois." By estimates of the inhabitants of each Province made by authority,
and communicated to the late M. Allerstain, President of the Mathematical
department, it appears that this great Empire contains at least two hundred
millions of inhabitants. Notwithstanding the industry of the people, their
amazing population frequently occasions a dearth. Parents, who cannot support
their female children, are allowed to cast them into the river; but they fasten
a gourd to the child, that it may float on the water; and there are often
compassionate people of fortune, who are moved by the cries of the children to
save them from death. The Chinese* in their persons, are middle sized, their
(...) broad, their eyes black and small, their noses rather short. The Chinese
have particular ideas of beauty. They pluck up the hairs of the lower part of
their faces by the roots with tweezers, leaving a few straggling ones by way of
beard. Their Tartar princes compel them to cut off the hair of their heads, and
like Mahometans, to wear only a lock on the crown. Their complexion toward the
north is fair, toward the south, swarthy, and the fatter a man is* they think
him the handsomer. Men of quality and learning, who are not much exposed to the
sun, are delicately complexioned, and they who are bred to letters let the
nails of their fingers grow to an enormous length, to show that they are not
employed in manual labor.

The women have little eyes, plump rosy lips, black hair, regular features, and
a delicate though florid complexion. The smallness of their feet is reckoned a
principal part of their beauty, and no swathing is omitted, when they are
young, to give them that accomplishment, so that when they grow up, they may be
said to totter rather than to walk. This fanciful piece of beauty was probably
invented by the ancient. Chinese, to palliate their jealousy.

DRESS.] This varies according to the degrees among them. The men wear caps on
their heads of the fashion of a bell; those of quality are ornamented with
jewels. The rest of their dress is easy and loose, consisting of a vest and a
sash, a coat or gown thrown over them, silk boots quilted with cotton, and a
pair of drawers. The ladies toward the south wear nothing on their head.
Sometimes their hair is (...) up in a net, and sometimes it is dishevelled.
Their dress differs but little from that of the men, only their gown or upper
garment has very large open sleeves. -- The dress both of men and women varies,
however, according to the temperature of the climate.

MARRIAGES.] The parties never see each other, in China, till the ^^^gain is
concluded by the parents, and that is generally when the parties are perfect
children. Next to being barren, the greatest scandal is to bring females into
the world; and if a woman of a poor family happens to have three or four girls
successively, it not unfreqently happens that she will expose them on the high
roads, or cast them into a river.

FUNERALS.] People of note cause their coffins to be made, and their tombs to
be built in their life time. No persons are buried within the walls of a city,
nor is a dead corpse suffered to be brought into a town, if a person died in
the country. Every Chinese keeps in his (...) a table, upon which are written
the names of his father, grandfather, and great grandfather, before which they
frequently burn incense, and prostrate themselves; and when the father of a
family dies, the name of the great grandfather is taken away, and that of the
deceased i^ added.

LANGUAGE.] The Chinese language contains only three hundred and thirty words,
all of one syllable: But then each word is pronoun^^^ with such various
modulations, and each with a different meaning, (...) it becomes more copious
than could be easily imagined, and enables them to express themselves very well
on the common occasions of life. The missionaries, who adapt the European
characters, as well as they (...), to the expression of Chinese words, have
devised eleven different, and some of them very compounded, marks and
aspirations, to signify the various modulations, elevations, and depressions of
the voice, which distinguish the several meanings of the same monosyllable. The
Chinese oral language being thus barren and contracted, is unfit for
literature, and therefore, their literature is all comprised in arbitrary
characters, which are amazingly complicated and numerous; according to some of
their writers they amount to twenty-five thousand; (...) thirty or forty
thousand, according, to others; but the later writers say they amount to eighty
thousand, though he is reckoned a very (...) man, who is master of fifteen or
twenty thousand. This language being wholly addressed to the eye, and having no
affinity with their tongue, as spoken, the latter has still continued in its
original (...), uncultivated state, while the former has received all possible
improvements.

The Chinese characters, Mr. Astle observes, which are by length of (...)
become symbolic, were originally imitative; they still partake so (...) of
their original hieroglyphic nature, that they do not combine (...) words like
letters or marks for sounds; but we find one mark for (...), another for a
horse, a third for a dog, and in short a separate and distinct mark for each
thing which has a corporeal form. The Chinese also use a great number of marks
entirely of a symbolic nature, (...) impress on the eye the conceptions of the
mind, which have no cor^^^^ forms, though they do not combine these last marks
into words, (...) ^arks for sounds or letters; but a separate mark is made to
rep^^^ or stand for each idea, and they use them in the same manner as (...) ^o
their abridged picture-characters, which were originally imi^^^ or hieroglyphic.

The Chinese books begin from the right hand; their letters are (...) in
perpendicular columns, of which there are generally ten in a page. They are
read downwards, beginning from the right hand side of the paper. Sometimes a
title is placed horiaontally, and this is likewise read from the right hand.

GENIUS AND LEARNING.] The genius of the Chinese, it is said, in peculiar to
themselves. They have no conception of what is beautiful in writing* regular in
architecture, or natural in painting; and yet in their gardening* and planning
their grounds, they hit upon the (...) sublime and beautiful. They perform all
the operations of arithmetic with prodigious quickness, but differently from
the Europeans. Till the latter came among them* they were ignorant of
mathematical learning* and all its depending arts. They had no proper apparatus
for astronomical observations; and the metaphysical learning, which existed
among them, was only known to their philosophers; but even the arts introduced
by the Jesuits were of very short duration (...) them, and lasted very little
longer than the reign of Cang-hi, who (...) contemporary with Charles II. of
England, nor is it very probable they ^ver will be revived. It has been
generally said, that they ^^^^^stood printing before the Europeans* but that
can be only app^^^^^ block printing, for the (...) and moveable types were
undoubtedly Dutch or German inventions. The Chinese, however, had (...), which
were stamped from plates or blocks, many hundred years before printing was
discovered in Europe.

The difficulty of mastering and retaining such a number of arbitrary marks and
characters as there are in what may be called the Chinese written language,
greatly retards the progress of their erudition. But there is no part of the
globe where learning is attended with such honors and rewards, and where there
are more powerful inducements to cultivate and pursue it. The literati are
reverenced as men of another species* and are the only nobility known in China.
If their birth be ever so mean and low* they become mandarins of the highest
rank, in proportion to the extent of their learning. On the other hand, however
exalted their birth may be, they quickly sink into poverty and obscurity, if
they neglect those studies which raised their fathers. It has been observed,
that there is no nation in the would where the first honors of the state lie
so open to the lowest of the people, and where there is less of hereditary
greatness. The Chinese range all their works of literature into four classes.
The first i^ the class of King, or the sacred books, which contains the
principles of the Chinese religion, morality, and government, and several
curious and obscure records, relative to these important subjects. History
(...) a class apart; yet, in this first class, there are place I some
historical monuments on account of their relation to religion and government,
and among others the Tekun-tsicou, a work of Confucius, which contains the
annals of twelve kings of Low, the native country of that illustrious sage. The
second class is that of the Su, or Che, that is, of history and the historians.
The third class, called Tsu, or Tse, comprehends philosophy and the
philosophers, and contains all the works of the Chinese literati, the
productions also of foreign sects and religions, which the Chinese consider
only in the light of philosophical opinions* and all books relative to
mathematics, astronomy, physic, ^^^^^ry science, the art of divination,
agriculture, and the arts and sciences in general. The fourth class is called
T^^e, or Miscell^^^^^, and ^^^tains all the poetical books of the Chinese,
their pieces of eloquence, their songs, romances, tragedies, and comedies. The
Chinese literati, in all the periods of their monarchy, have applied themselves
less to (...) study of nature, and to the researches of natural philosophy,
than (...) moral inquiries, the practical science of life, and internal polity
and (...). It is said, that it was not before the dynasty of the Song, in the
^^th and 11th centuries after Christ, that the Chinese philosophers (...)
hypothesis concerning the natural system of the universe, and (...) into
discussions of a scholastic kind, in consequence, perhaps, of the intercourse
they had long kept up with the Arabians, who (...) with ardour the works of
Aristotle. And since the Chinese have begun to pay some attention to natural
philosophy, their progress in it has been much inferior to that of the
Europeans.

The invention of gunpowder is justly claimed by the Chinese, who (...) use of
it against Zinghis Khan and Tamerlane. They seem to have known nothing of small
firearms, and to have been acquainted only with the cannon, which they call
the fire-pan. Their industry i^ their manufactures of stuffs, porcelane,
japanning, and the like sed^^^^ry trades is amazing, and can be equalled only
by their labors in (...) field, in making canals, levelling mountains, raising
gardens, and navigating their junks and boats.

ANTIQUITIES AND CURIOSITIES.] Few natural curiosities present themselves in
China, that have not been comprehended under foreign (...). Some volcanos, and
rivers and lakes of particular qualities, (...) to be sound in different parts
of the empire. The volcano of (...) is said sometimes to make so furious a
discharge of fire and (...), as to occasion a tempest in the air; and some of
their lakes are (...) to petrify fishes when put into them. The artificial
curiosities of China are stupendous. The great wall, separating China from
Tarta^^^ ^o prevent the incursions of the Tartars, is supposed to extend from
(...) to 1500 miles. It is carried over mountains and valleys, and ^^ches from
the province of Xensi to the Kang sea, between the ^^^vinces of Pekin and
Laenotum. It is in most places built of brick (...) mortar, which is so well
tempered, that though it has stood for 1800 (...), it is but little decayed.
The beginning of this wall is a large (...) of stone raised in the sea, in the
province of Petcheli, to the (...) of Pekin, and almost in the same latitude:
It is built like the (...) of the capital city of the empire, but much wider,
being ^^rrassed (...) cased with bricks, and is from twenty to twenty-five feet
high^^^ (...), and the other gentleman, who took a map of these provin^^^ often
stretched a line on the top, to measure the basis of triangles, (...) to take
distant points with an instrument. They always sound it (...) wide enough for
five or six horsemen to travel abreast with ease, (...) has been already made
of the prodigious canals and roads (...) are cut through this empire.

The artificial mountains present on their tops, temples, monasteries, (...)
other edifices. Some part, however, of what we are told con^^^^ the cavities in
these mountains, seems to be fabulous. The (...) bridges cannot be sufficiently
admired. They are built some^^^^ ^^on barges strongly chained together, yet so
as to be parted, (...) lot the vessels pass that sail up and down the river.
Some of (...) from mountain to mountain, and consist only of one arch; that
over the river Saffrany is 400 cubits long, and 500 high, through a single
arch, and joins two mountains; and some in the interior parts of the empire are
said to be still more stupendous. The triumphal arches of this country form the
next species of artificial curiosities. Though they are not built in the Greek
or Roman style of architecture, yet they are superb and beautiful, and erected
to the memories of their great men, with vast labor and expense. They are said
in the wh^^e to be eleven hundred, two hundred of which are particularly
magnificent. Their sepulchral monuments make likewise a great figure. Their
towers, the models of which are now so common in Europe under the name of
pagodas, are vast embellishments to the face of their country. They seem to be
constructed by a regular order, and all of them are finished with exquisite
carvings and gildings, and other ornaments. That at Nankin, which is 200 feet
high, and 40 in diameter, i^ the most admired. It is called the Porcelane
Tower, because it is lined with Chinese ^iles. Their temples are chiefly
remarkable for the disagreeable taste in which they are built, for their
capaciousness, their w^^imfical ornaments, and the ugliness of the idols they
contain. The Chinese are remarkably fond of bells, which gave name to one of
their principal festivals. A bell of Pekin weighs 120,000 pounds, but its sound
is said to be disagreeable. The last curiosity I shall mention, is their fire
works, which in China exceed those of all other nations. In short, every
province of China is a scene of curiosities. Their buildings, except their
pagodas, being confined to no order, and susceptible of all kinds of ornaments,
have a wild variety, and a pleasing elegance, not void of magnificence,
agreeable to the eye and the imagination, and present a diversity of objects
not to be found in European architecture.

CHIEF CITIES.] Little can be said of these more than that some of them are
immensely large. The empire is said to contain 4400 (...) cities; Le Compte
says but 2357; the chief of which are Pekin, Nankin, and Canton. Pekin, the
capital of the whole empire of China, and the ordinary residence of the
emperors, is situated in a very fertile plain, 20 leagues distant from the
great wall. It is an oblong square, and is divided into two cities: That which
contains the emperor's palace is called the Tartar city, because the houses
were given to the Tartars when the present family came to the throne; and they
refusing to suffer the Chinese to inhabit it, forced them to live without the
walls, where they in a short time built a new city; which, by being joined to
the other, renders the whole of an irregular form, six leagues in compass. The
walls and gates of Pekin are of the surprising height of (...) cubits, so that
they hide the whole city; and are so broad, that c^^^^ne^s are placed upon them
on horseback; for there are slopes within the city of considerable length, by
which horsemen may ascend the walls, and in several places there are houses
built for the guard. The gates, which are nine in number, are neither
embellished with (...), nor other carving, all their beauty consisting in their
prodigious height, which at a distance gives them a noble appearance. The
arches of the gates are built of marble, and the rest with large bricks (...)
with excellent mortar. Most of the streets are built in a direct (...), the
largest are about 120 feet broad, and a league in length. The shops, where they
(...) silks and china-ware, generally take up the whole street, and afford a
very agreeable prospect. Each shopkeeper places before his shop, on a small
kind of pedestal, a board about twenty feet high, painted, varnished, and often
guilt, on which are written in large characters the names of the several
commodities he fells. These being placed on each side of the street at nearly
an equal distance from each other, have a very pretty appearance; but the
houses are poorly built in front, and very low, most of them having only a
ground floor, and none exceeding one story above it. Of all the buildings in
this great city, the most remarkable is the imperial palace, the grandeur of
which does not consist so much in the nobleness and elegance of the
architecture, as in the multitude of its buildings, courts, and gardens, all
regularly disposed; for within the walls are not only the emperor's house, but
a little town, inhabited by the officers of the court, and a multitude of
artificers, employed and kept by the emperor; but the houses of the courtiers
and artificers are low and ill contrived. F. Attiret, a French Jesuit, who was
indulged with a sight of the palace and gardens, says, that the palace is more
than three miles in circumference, and that the front of the buildings shines
with gilding, paint, and varnish, while the inside is set off and furnished
with every thing that is most beautiful and precious in China, the Indies, and
Europe. The gardens of this palace are large tracts of ground, in which are
raised, at proper distances, artificial mountains, from 20 to (...) feet high,
which form a number of small valleys, plentifully watered by canals, which
uniting, form lakes and meres. Beautiful and magnificent barks sail on these
pieces of water, and the banks are ornamented with ranges of buildings, not any
two of which are said to have any resemblance to each other, which diversity
produces a very pleasing effect. Every valley has its house of pleasure, very
large: Many of these houses are built with cedar, brought, at a vast expense,
the distance of 500 leagues. Of these palaces, or houses of pleasure, there are
more than 200 in this vast enclosure. In the middle of a (...), which is near
half a league in a diameter every way, is a rocky ^^and, on which is built a
palace, containing more than a hundred apartments. It has four fronts, and is a
very elegant and magnificent structure. The mountains and hills are covered
with tress, particularly such as produce beautiful and aromatic flowers; and
the canals are ^^ged with rustic pieces of rock, disposed with such art, as
exactly to resemble the wildness of nature. The city of Pekin is said to
contain (...) million inhabitants.

Nankin is said to exceed Pekin, both in extent and population. But (...) we
may judge from the account which M. Bourgeois, missionary at Pekin, gives of
it, in a letter of his, dated in 1777, we are to believe (...) there is nothing
remarkable in this celebrated city, but its famous ^^^ple, its vast
circumference, the barren hills, and uncultivated tracts of land that are
enclosed within its walls, and which make a stranger (...) that he has left it
far behind him when he is in the midst of it.

Canton is the greatest port in China, and the only port that has (...) much
frequented by Europeans. The city wall is about five (...) in circumference,
with very pleasant walks around it. From (...) top of some adjacent hills, on
which forts are built, you have a fine (...) of the country. It is beautifully
interpersed with mountains, little hills, and valleys, all green; and these
again pleasantly diversified with small towns, villages, high towers, temples,
the seats of mandarins and other great men, which are watered with delightful
lakes, canals, and small branches from the river T^^ on which are numberless
boats and junks, sailing different ways through the most fertile parts of the
country. The city is entered by seven iron gates, and within-side of each there
is a guard-house. The streets of Canton are very straight, but generally
narrow, and paved with slag-stones. There are many pretty buildings in this
city, great numbers of triumphal arches, and temples well stocked with images.
The streets of Canton are so crowded* that it is difficult to walk in them; yet
a woman of any fashion is seldom to be seen, unless by chance when coming out
of their chairs. There are great numbers of marketplaces for fish, flesh,
poultry, vegetables, and all kinds of provisions, which are sold very cheap.
There are many private walks about the skirts of the town, where those of the
better sort have their houses, which are very little frequented by Europeans,
whose business lies chiefly in the trading parts of the city, where there are
only shops and warehouses. Few of the Chinese traders of any substance keep
their families in the house where they do business, but either in the city, in
the more remote suburbs, or farther up in the country. They have all such a
regard to privacy, that no windows are made toward the streets, but in shops
and places of public business, nor do any of their windows look toward those
of their neighbors. The shops of those that deal in silk are very neat, make a
fine show, and are all in one place; for tradesmen, or dealers in one kind of
goods, herd together in the same street. It is computed that there are in this
city, and its suburbs, 1,200,000 people; and there are often 5000 trading
vessels lying before the city.

TRADE AND MANUFACTURES.] China is so happily situated, and produces such a
variety of materials for manufactures, that it may be said to be the native
land of industry; and which is exercised with vast art and neatness. They make
paper of the bark of bamboo, and other trees; as well as of cotton, but not
comparable for records, or printing, to the European. Their ink, for the use of
drawing, is well known in England, and is said to be made of oil and
lamp-black. We have already mentioned the antiquity of their printing, which
they still do by cutting their characters on blocks of wood. The manufacture of
that earthen ware, generally known by the name of China, was long a secret in
Europe, and brought immense sums to that country. The ancients knew and
esteemed it highly under the name of porcelane, but it was of a much better
fabric than the modern. Though the Chinese affect to keep that manufacture
still a secret* yet it is well known that the principal material is a prepared
pulverized earth, and that several European countries far exceed the Chinese in
manufacturing this commodity. The English in particular have carried this
branch to a high degree of perfection, (...) appears from the commissions which
have been received of late from several princes of Europe; and we hope that a
manufacture so generally useful, will meet with encouragement from every true
patriot in every country where the raw material is found.
The Chinese silks are generally plain and flowered gaus^^, and they are said
to have been originally fabricated in that country, where the art of rearing
silkworms was first discovered. They manufacture silks likewise of a more
durable kind, and their cotton, and other cloths, are famous for furnishing a
light warm wear.

Their trade, it is well known, is open to Americans and to all the European
nations, with whom they deal for ready money; for such us the pride and avarice
of the Chinese, that they think no manufactures equal to their own. But it is
certain, that since the discovery of the porcelane manufactures, and the vast
improvements the Europeans have made in the weaving branches, the Chinese
commerce has been on the decline.

CONSTITUTION AND GOVERNMENT.] This was a very instructive, entertaining
article, before the conquest of China by the Tartars; for though their princes
retain many fundamental maxims of the old Chinese, the Tartars have obliged the
inhabitants to deviate from the ancient discipline in many respects. Perhaps
their acquaintance with the Europeans may have contributed to their degeneracy.
The original plan of the Chinese government was patriarchical, almost in the
strictest sense of the word. Duty and obedience to the father of each family
was recommended and enforced in the most rigorous manner; but, at the same
time, the emperor was considered as the father of the whole. His mandarins, or
great officers of state, were looked upon as his substitutes, and the degrees
of submission which were due from the inferior ranks to the superior, were
settled and observed with the most scrupulous precision, and in a manner that
to us seems highly ridiculous. This simple claim of obedience required great
address and knowledge of human nature to render it effectual; and the Chinese
legislators, Confucius particularly, appear to have been possessed of wonderful
abilities. They enveloped their dictates in a number of mystical appearances,
so as to strike the people with awe and veneration. The mandarins had modes of
speaking and writing different from those of other subjects, and the people
were taught to believe that their princes partook of divinity, so that they
were seldom seen, and more seldom approached.

Though this system preserved the public tranquillity for an incredible number
of years, yet it had a fundamental defect that often convulsed, and at last
proved fatal to the state, because the same attention was* not paid to the
military as to the civil duties. The Chinese had passions like other men, and
sometimes a weak or wicked administration dove them into arms, and a revolution
easily succeeded which they justified by saying, that their sovereign had
ceased to be their father. During those commotions, one of the parties
naturally invited their neighbors the Tartars to their assistance, and it was
thus those barbar^^^, who had great sagacity, became acquainted with the weak
side of their constitution, and they availed themselves accordingly, by
in^^ding and conquering the empire.

Besides the great doctrine of patriarchal obedience, the Chinese had sumptuary
laws, and regulations for the expenses of all degrees of subjects, which were
very useful in preserving the public tranquillity, and preventing the effects
of ambition. By their institutions likewise the mandarins might remonstrate to
the emperor, but in the most submissive manner, upon the errors of his
government, and when he was a ^^^^^ous prince, this freedom was often attended
with the most salutary effects. No country in the world is so well provided
with magistrates (...) the discharge of justice, both in civil and criminal
matters, as Chi^^; but they are often ineffectual through want of public virtue
in the execution. The emperor is styled "Holy Son of Heaven, Sole Governor of
the Earth, Great Father of his People."

RELIGION.] This article is nearly connected with the preceding. Though the
ancient Chinese worshipped idols, yet their philosophers and legislators had
juster sentiments of the Diety, and indulged the people in the worship of
sensible objects, only to make them more submissive to government. The Jesuits
made little opposition to this when they attempted to convert the Chinese; and
suffered their proselytes to worship Tien, pretending that it was no other than
the name of God. The truth is, Cor^ucius, and the Chinese legislators,
introduced a most excellent system of morals among the people, and endeavored
to supply the want of just ideas of a future state, by prescribing to them the
worship of inferior deities. Their morality approximated to that of
Christianity; but as we know little of their religion, only through the
Jesuits, we cannot adopt for truth the numerous instances which they tell us of
the conformity of the Chinese with the Christian religion. Those fathers, it
must be owned, were men of great abilities, and made a wonderful progress about
a century ago in their conversions; but they mistook the true character of the
emperor who was their patron; for he no sooner found that they were in fact
aspiring to the civil direction of the government, than he expelled them,
levelled their churches with the ground, and prohibited the exercise of their
religion; since which time Christianity has made no progress in China.

REVENUES.] These are said by some to amount to twenty millions sterling a
year; but this cannot be meant in money, which does not at all abound in China.
The taxes collected for the use of government in rice, and other commodities,
are certainly very great, and may be easily imposed, as an account of every
man's family and substance is annually enrolled, and very possibly may amount
to that sum.

MILITARY AND MARINE STRENGTH.] China is, at this time, a far more powerful
empire than it was before its conquest by the eastern Tartars in 644. This is
owing to the consummate policy of Chuntchi, the first Tartarian emperor of
China, who obliged his hereditary subjects to conform themselves to the Chinese
manners and policy, and the Chinese to wear the Tartar dress and arms. The two
nations were thereby incorporated. The Chinese were appointed to all the civil
offices of the empire. The emperor made pekin the seat of his government, and
the Tartars quietly submitted to a change of their country and condition, which
was so much in their favor.

This security, however, of the Chinese from the Tartars, takes from them all
military objects: the Tartar power alone, being formidable to that empire. The
only danger that threatens it at present is the disuse of arms. The Chinese
land army is said to consist of five millions of men: but in these are
comprehended all who are employed in the collection of the revenue, and the
preservation of the canals, the great roads, and the public peace. The imperial
guards amount to about 30,000. As to the marine force, it is composed chiefly
of the junks, we have already mentioned, and other small ships, that trade
coastways, or to the neighboring countries, or to prevent sudden descents.

A treatise on the military art, translated from the Chinese into the French
language, was published at Paris in 1772, from which it appears that the
Chinese are well versed in the theory of the art of war: But caution, and care,
and circumspection, are much recommended to their generals; and one of their
maxims is, never to fight with enemies either more numerous or better armed
than themselves.

HISTORY.] The Chinese pretend as a nation to an antiquity beyond all measure
of credibility; and their annals have been carried beyond the period to which
the scripture chronology assigns the creation of the world. Poan-Kou is said by
them to have been the first man, and the interval of time betwixt him and the
death of the celebrated Confucius, which was in the year before Christ, 479,
has been reckoned from 276,000 to 96,961,740 years. But upon an accurate
investigation of this subject, these extravagant pretensions to antiquity,
appear to be wholly unsupported. A correspondence has been carried on, for a
number of years past, with the missionaries of China, and with two young
Chinese, whom, the desire of being useful to their country, engaged to leave it
for some time, that they might learn, in France the European languages and
sciences. After a residence of several years there, where they applied
themselves with singular attention to the study of natural philosophy,
chemistry, etc. and also acquired a considerable knowledge of trade,
manufactures, and the mechanic arts, they returned to China in 1765, carrying
with them instructions and questions, relating to a variety of objects, which
the learned and others, desired to have elucidated. On their arrival in China,
they joined their labors, with those of the missionaries, and thus, since the
year 1766, a variety of pieces have been annually sent, containing answers to
the questions that had been proposed to them.

In 1776, was printed in a 4to vol. at Paris, the first of a series of volume
(some of which have since been published) which we are allowed to expect from
this annual correspondence. This volume contains among other valuable things,
an ample memoir concerning the antiquity of the Chinese nation. It is replete
with learned researches, and shows a very extensive degree of erudition. The
authors give a mortal blow to the pretended antiquity of the Chinese empire,
and the authenticity of its ancient history. They prove that all historical
relations of events prior to the reign of YAO, who lived 2057 years before
Christ, are entirely fabulous, composed in modern times, unsupported by
authentic records, and full of contradictions.

The same volume contains the translation of two books of great antiquity, the
one entitled Tahio, or the Grand Science: The other Tsongy^ng, or the exact
middle way, with a preface and notes. These two pieces of morality contain the
most excellent precepts of wisdom and virtue, expressed with the greatest
eloquence, elegance and precision. In the preface to them we are told, they
were composed by the grandson of Confucius, and one of his disciples, from the
lessons of that great Philosopher. If so, they are indeed uncommonly curious,
and are equal to the noblest philosophical remains of Grecian antiquity, of
which they bear, in several places, a very strong resemblance. But one of the
passages, which is very striking, and which far exceeds, in clearness, the
prophesy of Socrates, is that which follows. "How sublime are the ways of the
Holy One! His virtue shall fill the universe -- shall vivify all things, and
shall rise to the Tier or Supreme Deity. What a noble course is opening to our
view! What new laws and obligations! What august rites and sacred solemnities!
But how shall mortals observe them, if He does not first give them the example?
His coming alone can prepare us for the performance of these sublime duties.
Hence that saying, known and repeated in all ages. "the paths of perfection
shall never be frequented, until the Holy One, by way of eminence, shall have
consecrated them by the traces of his footsteps."

This certainly is a remarkable passage, especially if it has been translated
with precision and fidelity, from an authentic production, of so early a date
as the time of Confucius.

The origin of the Chinese empire cannot be placed higher than two or three
generations before Yao. But even this is carrying the empire of China to a very
high antiquity, and it is certain that the materials for Chinese history are
extremely ample. The grand annals of the empire of China are comprehended in
668 volumes, and consist of the pieces that have been composed by the tribunal
or department of history, established in China for transmitting to posterity
the public events of the empire, and the lives, characters, and transactions of
its sovereigns. It is said, that all the facts, which concern the monarchy
since its foundation, have been deposited in this department, and from age to
age have been arranged according to the order of time, under the inspection of
government, and with all the precautions against illusion or partiality that
could be suggested. These precautions have been carried so far, that the
history of the reign of each imperial family, has only been published after the
extinction of that family, and was kept profound secret during the dynasty,
that neither fear nor flattery might adulterate the truth. It is asserted, that
many of the Chinese historians exposed themselves to exile, and even to death,
rather then disguise the defects and vices of the sovereign. But the emperor
^hi-hoangti, at whose command the great wall was built, in the year 213 before
the Christian era, ordered all the historical books and records, which
contained the fundamental laws and principles of the ancient government, with
the medals, inscriptions, and monuments of antiquity, to be burnt, that they
might not be employed by the learned to oppose his authority, and the changes
he proposed to introduce into the monarchy, and that there might remain no
earlier record, date, or authority, relative to religion, science, or politics,
than those of his own reign, and he be considered as the founder of the empire.
Four hundred literati were burnt with their books; yet this barbarous edict had
not its full effect; several books were concealed, and escaped the general
ruin. After this period, strict search was made for the ancient books and
records that yet remained; but though much industry was employed for this
purpose, it appears that the authentic historical sources of the Chinese, for
the times anterior to the year 200 before Christ, are very few, and that they
are still in smaller number for more remote periods. But notwithstanding the
depredations that have been made upon the Chinese history, it is still
immensely voluminous, and has been judged by some writers superior to that of
all other nations. Of the grand annals before mentioned, which amount to 668
volumes, a copy is preserved in the library of the French king. A chronological
abridgment of this great work, in one hundred volumes, was published in the 42d
year of the reign of Kanghi; that is, in the year 1703. This work is generally
called Ka^^-(...), or the abridgment.

But the limits to which our work is confined will not permit us to enlarge
upon so copious a subject as that of the Chinese history; nor would we have
said even so much on this subject, could we have referred the reader to any
good history of this Empire. It seems, that the original form of government,
was monarchical; and a succession of excellent princes, and a duration of
domestic tranquillity, united legislation with philosophy, and produced their
Fo-hi, whose history is wrapped up in mysteries, their Li-Loakum, and above all
their Confucius, at once the Solon and Socrates of China. After all, the
continued wars for several centuries between the Chinese and Tartars, and the
internal revolutions of the empire, produced the most dreadful effects, in
proportion as its constitution was pacific, and they were attended with the
most bloody exterminations in some provinces; so that though the Chinese empire
is hereditary, the imperial succession was often broken into, and altered.
Upwards of twenty dynasties, or different lines and families of succession, are
enumerated in their annals.

In the year 1771, all the Tartars which composed the nation of the ^^^rgouths,
left the settlements which they had under the Russian government on the banks
of the Wolga, and the Iaick, at a small distance from the Caspian sea, and in a
vast body of fifty thousand families, they passed through the country of the
Hasacks. After a march of eight months, in which they surmounted innumerable
difficulties and dangers, they arrived in the plains that lie on the frontier
of Carapen, not far from the banks of the river Ily, and offered themselves as
subjects to Kien-long, emperor of China, who was then in the thirty-sixth year
of his reign. He received them graciously, furnished them with provisions,
cloths and money, and allotted to each family a portion of and for agriculture
and pasturage. The year following there was a ^^^cond emigration of about
thirty thousand other Tartar families, who (...) quitted the settlements which
they enjoyed under the Russian government, and submitted to the Chinese
scepter. The emperor ^^^^^sed the history of the emigrations to be engraven
upon stone, in (...) different languages.

INDOSTAN, HINDOOSTAN, or INDIA on this side the GANGES.
SITUATION AND BOUNDARIES.} THIS fine country, one of the most celebrated in
the world for its antiquity, population and opulence, is situated between 66
and 92 30 of eastern longitude, and between the 8th and 36th Degrees of
northern latitude, and is consequently, partly in the torrid, and partly in the
northern temper^^^ Zone.

It is washed on the South west by that part of the Indian Ocean, (...) the
Arabian sea, on the south-east by another large inlet of the (...) ocean called
the Bay of Bengal, and bounded on all other sides (...), Independent Tartary,
Thibet, and India beyond the Ganges.

DIVISIONS.] In the year 1596, the dominions of the Emperor of (...), consisted
of 105 Sircars or Provinces, subdivided into 2737 (...) or townships. The
Empire at that period was parcelled into twelve grand divisions, and each was
committed to the government of a Soobadar or Viceroy. The names of the Soobahs
or Viceroyalties, were Allahabad Ahmedabad Cabul Agra Bahar Lahoor Owdh Bengal
Multan Ajmeer Dehly Malwa. To those were added, by conquest, Berar, Khandeess,
and A^^^^nagur, which were formed into three Soobahs, increasing the number to
fifteen. Ayeen Akberry or the institutes of the Emperor Akber, translated from
the original Persian, by Francis Gladwin, and published in 3 vols. 4^^, at
Calcutta, 1783, and 1784.


The divisions of Indostan have been very erroneously stated in most
Geographi^^ therefore published. The divisions a^ above given were obtained
from a gentleman of acknowledged acquaintance with the subject, and are
according to the celebrated Map and (...) of Major Rennell, which are esteemed
of the first authority.
Indostan is usually divided into Indostan Proper, to thenorth; and the
peninsula called the Deccan, to the south.

These contain a variety of provinces, whose limits have been at all times
every fluctuating, from the unsettled state of government.

The Tartar princes, the successors of Tamarlane, as they subdued this country,
divided it into large provinces called Soubahs, which (...) subdivided into
Circars and Purgunnahs: The boundaries of these Soubahs having been fixed by
the emperor Akber in the 16th century are tolerably well known.

Of these Soubahs Indostan Proper contained thirteen, viz,

Soubahs or Provinces Chief Towns, etc. Cabul The western part of this Soubah
is inhabited by a barbarous nation called (...) transported hither by Tamerlane
from the western coast of the Caspian sea; they have (...) alternately
dependent on Indostan and Pcrs^^, and nearly overturned the latter empl^^ a
(...) years since, having taken and pillaged the city of Ispohan. No less than
eleven (...) languages are spoken in this Soubah.

The country of Cashmire was a circar of Cabul: This celebrated country is
(...) all sides by mountains, and watered by the R. Behat or Hydaspes, here
called (...): (...) supposed to have been originally a large lake, until an
earthquake opened a passage (...) the surrounding mountains for the waters to
flow off: The fineness of the climate, and industry of the inhabitants, have
rendered it so beautiful, that it is called that (...) radise of Indoston; Its
capital is Cashmere or Serinagur.


Cabul, a very ancient and beautiful city, lat. 34 30. lon. 104. 40. Gazna or
Ghuzneen, situated in the second climate, a barren place. Lahoor This Soubah is
very populous, highly cultivated, and very healthy. The (...) lands are chiefly
supplied with water from walls. Ice is brought from the northern ^^^^ta^^, and
sold here all the year.
or the Penjab Lahoor on the Rauvee, lat. 31. 50. lon. 109. 22 -- a very large,
populous city. Attock on the Indus, here called the R. of Attock, has one of
the strongest fortresses in the empire, built to secure the passage of the
rivers. Moultan Moultan or Multan is one of the most ancient cities of
Indostan, and is in lat. 29. 25. lon. 107. 35. Sindy Tatta, Patala, on the
Indus, here called the R. of Mehran, lat. 29. 25. long. 107. 35.

Provinces Chief Towns. etc. Delhi or Dehly Dehly or Gehan-abad on the R.
Jumna, lat 28. 15 lon. 114. 38. Agra The eastern part of Agra between the
Ganges and Jumna, is called the Dcab, or coun^^ between the two rivers. In this
Soubah agriculture is in perfection.
Agra on the R. Jumna. It contains 500 stone buildings, of surprising
construction, and exquisite workmanship Canoge on the R. Ganges Azmere of
Agimere Azmere on the Puddar was a royal residence Chitore Oude, Owdh or Ahored
Oude or Owhd, (...) this city are two sepulchral monuments, o^^e 7 the other 6
cubits in length. The (...) pretend that they are the tombs of Seth and J^h,
and relate wonderful stories of them.
on the Dewah or Gogra, one of the largest cities of Indostan, was the ancient
capital, lat 27. 22. lon. 118. 6. Fyzabad on the same R. is the present capital
Lucknow ^^^ar Patna on the Ganges Tirhoot, the ancient residence of Hindoo
learning ^^^gal Ruins of Gour or Lucknouti; Gange-regia, of immense extent,
situated formerly on the Ganges, though the main channel of the river is now 5
miles from it; it was the capital of Bengal 2270 years; the seat of government
was in 1540 removed to Tanda on the Ganges, now in ruins Rajemal have succeeded
to Tanda and become successively the capitals of Bengal Dacca Moorshedabad
Hoogly on the River Hoogly. Chittacong Two emporiums 1 mile, distant from each
other; both in possession of Europeans. The latter famous for pomegranates.
Sa^gong Allahabad Allahabad Helialas at the conflux of the Ganges and Jumna The
Hindoos call this spot the King of worshipped places. "It is astonishing that
(...) the planet Jupiter enters the constellation Leo, a hill arises out of the
middle of the (...), and remains for a month; so that people go upon it and
perform divine worship."
Bennares on the Ganges ^^^leva ^^^^erat or Gujej^^t Ahmedabad, on the R.
Sabermutty, lat. 23 containing 1000 stone mosques Cambay and Ghogch are
seaports Surat on the R. Tapte, an emporium, formed into 9 divisions, each
inhabited by a different tribe, and they spoke different languages.

THE DECCAN.] This name, which signifies the south, in the most ^^^^ive
signification includes the whole peninsula south of Indostan ^^^^er, but in its
more limited sense it only comprehends the provinc^^ of Candeisn, Berar,
Golconda, Amednagur, and Visiapour; thus excluding the provinces of Orissa, the
Carnatic, and the Malabar states, which comprehend that long narrow tract
between the Gauts and the western coast, a considerable part of which was never
subjected by the Mogul emperors.

Provinces. Chief Towns, etc. Candeish Burhanpour Berar Shawpour, ancient
capital -- Nagpour, present capital Golconda That part of Golcond, between the
Godavery and Krishna was formerly called Tell^^gana, and its capital was
Warringole or Oringal, a fortress of vast extent.
Hydrabad or Bagnagar -- Golconda -- Masulipatam Amednagur, The western part of
this country is called Baglaua.
Ballagate or Dowlatabad Amednagur Aurungabad Dowlatabad, a strong fortress
Visiapour or Bejapour Visiapour Orssia Cattac on the Mahanada Balasore Carnatic
Bisnaghar -- Chandeghere Arect -- Trichinapoli Scringapatam -- Gingee Malabar
states comprehend Cochin Malabar proper Calicut Canara Goa Concan Mangalore

PRESENT DIVISION.] Such was the general division of Indostan under the Mogul
emperors, but the celebrated Persian usurper Thamas Kouli Khan, having in the
year 1738 defeated the emperor Mahomed Shaw, plundered Delhi, and pillaged the
empire of treasure to the amount of more than 70 millions sterling, restored
the unhappy prince his dominions, but annexed to Persia all the countries
westward of the Indus.

This dreadful incursion so weakened the authority of the emperor, that the
Viceroys of the different provinces either threw off their allegiance or
acknowledged a very precarious dependence; and engaging in wars with each
other, called in as allies the East India companies of France and England, who
had been originally permitted as traders, to form establishments on the coasts:
These, from the great superiority of European discipline, from allies became in
a short time principals in an obstinate contest, that at length terminated in
the expulsion of the French from Indostan; and thus a company of British
merchants have acquired, partly by cessions from the country powers, and partly
by injustice and usurpation, territories equal in extent, and superior in
wealth and population to most of the kingdoms of Europe.

The Mahrattas originally possessed several provinces of Indostan, from whence
they were driven by the arms of the Mogul conquerors; they were never wholly
subjected, but retiring to the northern part of the Gauts, made frequent
irruptions from these inaccessible mountains; taking advantage of the anarchy
of the empire, they have extended their frontiers, and are at present possessed
of a tract of country 1000 British miles long by 700 wide.

Hyder Alley, a soldier of fortune, who had learned the art of war from the
Europeans, having possessed of himself of that part of the ancient Carnatic,
called the kingdom of Mysore, has within a few years acquired by continual
conquests, a considerable portion of the southern part of the Peninsula; this
able and active prince, the most formidable enemy that the English ever
experienced in Indostan, dying in 1783 left to his son Tippo Saib, the peaceful
possession of his dominions, superior in extent to the kingdom of England.

These extraordinary revolutions, with others of less importance, under the
following account of the present division of property in this unhappy empire,
absolutely necessary, in order to understand its modern history.

PRESENT DIVISION OF INDOSTAN.
Such is the instability of human greatness, that the present Great Mogul, Shaw
Alum, the descendant of the Great Tamerlane, is merely a nominal prince, of no
importance in the politics of Indostan: He is permitted to reside at Delhi,
which, with a small adjacent Territory, is (...) that remains to him of that
vast empire, which his ancestors governed more than 350 years.

The principal Divisions of this country, as they stood in 1782, are (...)
follow, viz. The British possessions; States in alliance with Britain; Tippo
Saib's Territories; Mahratta states and their tributaries; and the Territories
of the Subah of the Deccan.

BRITISH POSSESSIONS.] The British possessions contain about ^^,000 square
British miles, (which is about 18,000 more than in con^^^ed in Great Britain
and Ireland) and about 10 millions of inhabitants. They consist of three
distinct governments, viz.

Government of Calcutta or Bengal Bengal Subah On the Ganges. Bahar Subah
Benares Zemindary Northern Circars On the coast of Orissa. Government of
Madrass The Jaghire On the coast of Coromandel. Territory of Cuddalore -- of
Devicotta -- of Nagapatam Government of Bombay On the Gulf of Cambay.

GOVERNMENT OF BENGAL.] This government was rich, flourishing and populous
before the late usurpations in Indostan; it is finely ^^^^ed by the Ganges and
Burrampooter with their numerous navigable channels, and the several navigable
rivers they receive: It is fer^^^ by their periodical inundations; and by its
natural situation is (...) secured against foreign enemies: On the east and
north it is (...) by stupendous mountains, large rivers, and extensive wastes;
(...) south by a seacoast guarded by shallows and impenetrable (...), where it
is accessible only by the River of Hoogly; and on (...) ^est, though more
exposed, the natural barrier is strong. The capital and seat of government is
CALCUTTA, on the River of Hoogly, navigable by ships of the line; it is a
modern city, and though in an unhealthy situation, it is at present one of the
most rich, flourishing, and commercial cities in Indostan.

GOVERNMENT OF MADRAS.] The great defects of this government, are not only the
want of connection between its parts, which are scattered along an extensive
coast, and separated from each other by states frequently hostile, but being
totally devoid of good harbors: Hopes however have been entertained of
removing this last defect, by removing the bar at the mouth of that branch of
the Caveri called Coleroon, which falls into the sea at Devicotta. The capital
and seat of government is MADRAS in the Jaghire, called also Fort St. George;
it is illy situated without a harbor, and badly fortified, yet contains
upwards of 200,000 inhabitants. -- Fort St. DAVID in the Territory of Cuddalore
is rich, flourishing, and contains 60,000 inhabitants. -- MASULIPATAN in the
northern Circars, at one of the mouths of the Krishna, was formerly the most
flourishing and commercial city on this coast, and though much declined, is
still considerable.

The northern Circars, which are denominated from the towns of Cicacole,
Rajamundry, Elore and Condapily, are defended inland by a strong barrier of
mountains and extensive forests, beyond which the country is totally unknown
for a considerable space.

GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY.] This government is watered by the Tapee and Nerbudda.
Its capital and seat of government is BOMBAY, in a small island in an unhealthy
situation, but well fortified and on a fine harbor. -- SURAT on the Tapte
which forms an indifferent port, is one of the most rich and commercial cities
in Indostan. T^^^^CHE^RY on the Malabar coast, is dependent on Bombay.

ALLIES OF THE BRITISH.
Dominions of the Nabob of Oude Fyzabad Lucknow Dominions of the Nabob of
Arcot, comprehend the eastern part only of the ancient Carnatic. Arcot on the
Paliar is the capital, though the Nabobusually resides at Madrass. Gingee, the
strongest Indian fortress in the Carnatic. Trichinapoli near the Caveri well
fortified in the Indian manner, was rich and populous, containing near 400,000
inhabitants, now almost ruined by the numerous sieges it has sustained.
Seringham Pagoda, in an island of the Caveri, is famons throughout Indostan for
its sanctity and has no less than 40,000 priests who constantly reside here in
voluptuous indolence. Chandegeri, the ancient capital of the empire of
Narzzingua, formerly rich, powerful, and populous; near it is the famons Pagoda
of Tripetti, the Lorretto of Indostan, the offerings of the numerous Pilgrims
who resort hither bring in an immense revenue. Tanjore, Madura, and Tinivelly
are the capitals of small states of the same name, which with Marawar, are
dependent on the Nabob of Arcot. Territory of Futty Sing Guicker in the Soubah
of Guttrat. Amedabad Cambay. Territory of the Rajah of Ghod Gwalior a
celebrated fortress.

TIPPO SAIB'S TERRITORIES.
Kingdom of Mysore Seringapatam on the Caveri Bednore Bednore or Hyder Nuggar
Canara Mangalore Part of Malabar proper Calicut

Chitteldroog, Sanore, Harponelly, Roydroog, Gooty, Condanore, (...), C^ddapa,
etc. are the capitals of Territories of the same name, which have been
successively conquered by Hyder Ally.

MAHRATTA STATES AND THEIR TRIBUTARIES.
The extensive country is divided among a number of chiefs or (...), who have
one common head called the Paishwa or Nana, to (...) however their obedience is
merely nominal, as they often was (...) each other, and are seldom confederated
except for mutual de^^^.

Southern Poonah Mahrattas, or the Territories of Paishwa, are naturally
strong, being intersected by the various branches of the Gauts. Satara the
nominal capital of Mahratta states, the Paishwa at present resides at Poonah
Aurungabad, Amednagur, and Visiapour, are in his Territories.

The Concan or tract between the Gauts and the sea is sometimes called the
Pirate coast, as it was subject to the celebrated Pirate Angria and his
successors, whose capital was the strong fortress of Gheria, taken by the
English and Mahrattas in 1755; by the acquisition of this coast the Mahrattas
have become a maritime power, and dangerous enemies to the government of Bombay.

Berar Mahrattas, their country is very little known to Europeans. Nagpour is
the capital Balasore has considerable trade Cuttack on the Mahanda, an
important post which renders this nation a formidable enemy to the British, as
it cuts off the communication between the governments of Bengal and Madrass.
Northern Ponah Mahrattas governed at present by Sindia, Holkar, and some other
less considerable princes. O^gein, the residence of Sindia Indoor, the
residence of Holkar Calpy, the residence of Gungdar Punt Sagur, the residence
of Ballagec. Territory of the Soubah of the Deccan Ado^^ is dependant on the
Soubah.
Hydrabad is the capital.

Country of the Abdalli. This government, which includes the Soubah of Cabul,
and the neighboring parts of Persia, was formed by Abdalla, one of the
generals of Thamas Kouli Kan, when on the death of that usurper his empire was
dismembered: Its capital is Candahar in Persia.

Country of the Seiks: They are said to consist of a number of small states
independent of each other, but united by a federal union.

Country of the Jats or Getes, very little known to Europeans.

Country of Zabeda Cawn, an Afguan Rohilla.

Territory of Agra on the Jumna.

Furrukabad, or country of the Patan Rohillas, on the Ganges, surrounded by the
dominions of Oude.

Bundelclund.

Travancore near C. Commorin.

AIR AND SEASONS.] The winds in this climate generally blow for six months from
the south, and six from the north. April, May, and the beginning of June, are
excessively hot, but refreshed by sea br^^^ts; and in some dry seasons, the
hurricanes, which tear up the sands, ^^od let them fall in dry showers, are
excessively disagreeable. The (...) ^^sh, and consequently the Europeans in
general, who arrive at Indoston, are commonly seized with some illness, such as
flux or fever, in their different appearances; but when properly treated,
especially if the patients are abstemious, they recover, and afterward prove
healthy. About the end of June, a south-west wind begins to blow from the sea,
on the coast of Malabar, which, with continual rains, last four months, during
which time all is serene upon the coast of Coromandel (the western and eastern
coasts being so denominated.) Toward the end of October, the rainy season, and
the change of the monsoon begins on the Coromandel coast, which being destitute
of good harbors, renders is extremely dangerous for ships to remain there,
during that time; and to this is owing the periodical returns of the English
shipping to Bombay, upon the Malabar coast. The air is naturally hot in this
peninsula, but is refreshed by breezes, the wind altering every 12 hours; that
is from raidnight to noon it blows off the land, when it is tolerably hot, and
during the other twelve hours from the sea, which last proves a great
refreshment to the inhabitants of the coast. -- The produce of the soil is the
same with that of the other parts of the ^^est-Indies. The like may be said of
their quadrupeds, fish, fowl, and ^^^ious creatures and insects.

MOUNTAINS.] At C. Camorin commences a range of steep and lofty mountains,
called the Gauts or Gettes, which run parallel to the western coast, and
assumes various names as it advances northward: These mountains rise abruptly
from the low Country on the west, like a stupendous wall, that supports a vast
extent of fertile and populous plains, which are so much elevated as to render
the air, though in the ^rid Zone, cool, and pleasant. Indostan is separated
from the countries that environ it to the northward by several ranges of
stupendous mountains that have no general appellation, but are distinguished by
various names, in different parts: Of these the most remarkable are the
mountains Hindoo-Koh, the ancient Paropamisus and Indian Cau^^^^s, on the
confines of Persia and Independent Tartary. The mountains of Thibet, on the
confines of that country are very lofty, and ^^^^^ected with others farther
north, of such great height, that they (...) supposed the highest in Asia.

RIVERS.] Of the rivers of Indostan three far exceed the rest in ^^^^^itude and
utility; the Indus, the Ganges, and the Burrampooter. The Indus, called Sindeh
by the Natives, issues from the mountains of Hindoo-Koh, and soon becoming
navigable is called the River of At^^^k; in the upper part of its course it
receives several fine, navigable ^^^ers, but none in the lower, where it
crosses a flat, open country, and ^^lls into the Arabian sea, by several
channels, the chief of which is called the River of Mehran. These channels form
and intersect a (...) triangular island which they fertilize by their
periodical inundatio^^. The principal rivers it receives are the Behat, or
Hydaspes, (...) the Hyphasis, which formed the eastern boundary of the
conquests (...) Alexander.

The Ganges, one of the finest rivers in the world, issues from Ken^^, one of
the vast mountains of Thibet, and after a course of about ^^^^les, through
mountainous regions little known, enters Indostan (...) Defile of Kupele,
supposed by the natives to be its source; from (...) this fine river (which is
revered by the Hindoos as a deity that is to wash away all their stains, and
who say that is flows from the hair of Mahadeo) passes through delightful
plains, with a smooth navigable stream, from one to three miles wide, during
the remainder of its course, which is about 2350 miles, to the bay of Bengal,
into which it falls by two larger, and a multitude of lesser channels, that
form and intersect a large triangular island, whose base at the sea is near 200
miles in extent. The entire course of the Ganges is 2100 miles, and is to that
of the Thames as 9frac12; to 1. The navigation of the eastern branch being
dangerous is little frequented. The western branch, called the little Ganges,
or R. of Hoogly, is navigable by large ships, and most generally frequented.
The Ganges receives 11 rivers, some of which are equal to the Rhine, and none
inferior to the Thames, in England. The learned among the Hindoos, have
composed volumes in praise of these waters, all parts of which they consider as
holy; but some particular parts are esteemed more so than others. People of
high rank have the water of the Ganges brought to them from vast distances, it
being thought necessary to the performance of some religious rites. The water
of the Ganges has been celebrated in all ages, not only for its sanctity, but
also on account of its sweetness, lightness, and wholesomeness, and because it
does not become putrid though kept for years.

The Burrampooter, is called Sanpoo in the upper part of its course. This rival
sister of the Ganges issues from the same mountains that give birth to that
river; but taking a contrary direction through Thibet, winds to the south west,
through A^^am and entering Indostan, flows to the south, assumes the name of
Megna, and joins the western branch of the Ganges, with an immense body of
water, equal if not superior to the Ganges itself.

These two noble Rivers when they approach the sea, divide into such a
multitude, of channels, and receive such a number of navigable streams, that a
tract of country, nearly equal to Great Britain in extent, enjoys by their
means the finest inland navigation that can be conceived, and which gives
constant employment to 30,000 boatmen: These channels are so numerous that very
few places in this tract are even in the dry season 25 miles from a navigable
stream; and in the season of the periodical rains, they overflow their banks to
the depth of 30 feet, and form and inundation that fertilizes the soil to the
extent of more than 100 miles.

POPULATION, INHABITANTS, RELIGION AND GOVERNMENT.} The Mahometans (says Mr.
Orme) who are called Moors, of Indostan, are compared to be about ten millions,
and the Indians about an hundred millions.

The original inhabitants of India are called Gentoos; or, as others call them,
Hin^o^^, and the country Hindoostan. They pretend that Brumma, who was their
legislator both in politics and religion, was inferior only to (...), and that
be existed many thousand years before our account of the creation. This Brumma,
probably, was some great and good genius, whole beneficence, like that of the
pagan legislators, led his people and their posterity to pay him divine
honors. The Bramins for so the Gentoo priests are called pretend that he
bequeathed to them a book called the Vidam, containing his doctrines and
institutions; and that though the original is lost, they are still possessed of
a sacred commentary upon it, called the Shahstah, which is written in the
Shanscrita language, now a dead language, and known only (...) the Bramins, who
study it, even as our sacred scriptures are written (...) Greek and Hebrew. But
whether that language was originally different from that of the country, or
whether it has only now become unintelligible to the people, through that
change which is incident to all living languages, is not well known.

The foundation of Brumman's doctrine consisted in the belief of a Supreme
Being, who created a regular gradation of beings, some superior, and some
inferior to man; in the immortality of the soul, and a future state of rewards
and punishments, which is to consist of a transmigration into different bodies,
according to the lives they have led in their pre-existent state. From this it
appears more than probable, that the Pythagorean metempsychosis took its rise
in India. The necessity of inculcating this sublime, but otherwise complicated
doctrine, into the lower ranks, induced the Bramins, who are by no means
unanimous in their doctrines, to have recourse to sensible representations of
the Deity and his attributes; so that the original doctrines of Brumma have
degenerated to rank ridiculous idolatry, in the worship of different animals,
and various images, and of the most hideous figures, delineated of carved.
Wooden images are placed in all their temples, and on certain festivals are
exhibited in the high roads and in the streets of towns. The human figures,
with elephants heads, which are the objects of their devotion, have many hands,
and are enormously corpulent.

The Hindoos have, from time immemorial, been divided into four great tribes.
The ^^st and most noble tribe are the Bramins, who alone can officiate in the
priesthood, like the Jewish tribe of Levi. They are not, however, excluded from
government, trade, or agriculture, though they are strictly prohibited from all
menial offices by their laws. The second in order is the Sittri tribe, who,
according to their original institution, ought to be all military men; but they
frequently follow other professions. The third is the tribe of Beise, who are
chiefly merchants, bankers, and banias or shopkeepers. The fourth tribe is that
of ^^^der, who ought to be menial servants; and they are incapable of raising
themselves to any superior rank. If any one of them should be excommunicated
from any of the four tribes, he and his posterity are for ever shut out from
the society of every body in the nation, excepting that of the Harri cast, who
are held in utter detestation by all the other tribes, and are employed only in
the meanest and vilest offices. This circumstance renders excommunication so
dreadful, that any Hindoo will suffer the torture, and even death itself,
rather than deviate from one article of his faith.

Besides this division into tribes, the Gentoos are also subdivided into ca^^s,
or smaller classes and tribes; and it has been computed that there are eight
four of these casts, though some have supposed there was a greater number. The
order of pre-eminence of all the casts, in a particular city on province, is
generally indisputably decided. The lndian of an inferior would think himself
honored by adopting the customs of a superior cast; but this last would give
battle sooner than not vindicate its prerogatives: The inferior receives the
victuals prepared by a superior cast with respect, but the superior will not
partake of a meal which has been prepared by the hands of an inferior cast.
Their marriages are circumscribed by the same barriers as the rest of their
intercourses; and hence, besides the national physiognomy, the ^^^^^eres of
each cast, preserve an air of still greater resemblance to one another. There
are some casts remarkable for their beauty, and others as remarkable for their
ugliness. The most striking features in the character of the Hindoos, are their
superstition, and veneration for the institutions and tenets of their
forefathers.

In India, the dominion of religion extends to a thousand particulars, which in
other countries are governed either by the civil laws, or by taste, custom, or
fashion. Dress, food, the common intercourses of life, marriages, professions,
all are under the jurisdiction of religion. There is scarcely any thing that is
not regulated by superstition. It prescribes rules of conduct in all
circumstances and situations; nor is there any thing almost so trifling or
minute as to be considered as a matter of indifference. The original government
of the Hindoos, was in reality an hierarchy; for among that religious people,
the highest authority was possessed by the priesthood, or the Bramin cast. Nor
is it in this instance only, that we find a resemblance between the natives of
India and them. Not only were the governments of both nations hierarchical, but
in both there was a vast variety of religious observances and ceremonies
extending to many particulars, which in other countries are matters of choice
or of indifference; and both entertained the most profound respect and
veneration for their ancestors. All the cast acknowledge the Bramins for their
priests, and from them derive their belief of the transmigration; which leads
many of them to afflict themselves even at the death of a fly, although
occasioned by inadvertence. But the greater number of casts are less
scrupulous, and eat, although very sparingly, both of fish and flesh; but, like
the Jews, not of all kinds indifferently. The food of the Hindoos is simple,
consisting chiefly of rice, ghee, which is a kind of imperfect butter, milk,
vegetables, and oriental spices of different kinds, but chiefly what is called
in the East, chilly, and in the West, green or Cayen, pepper. The warrior cast,
may eat of the flesh of goats, mutton, and poultry. Other superior casts may
eat poultry and fish; but the inferior casts are prohibited from eating flesh
or fish of any kind. Their greatest luxury, consists in the use of the richest
spiccries and perfumes, of which the great people are very lavish, and which
grow almost spontaneously in their gardens. They esteem milk the purest of
foods, because they think it partakes of some of the properties of the nectar
of their gods, and because they esteem the cow itself almost like a divinity.

Their manners are gentle; their happiness consists in the solaces of a
domestic life; and they are taught by their religion, that matrimony is an
indispensable duty in every man, who does not entirely separate himself from
the world from a principle of devotion. Their religion also permits them to
have several wives; but they seldom have more than one: And it has been
observed, that their wives are distinguished by a decency of demeanor, a
solicitude in their families, and a fidelity to their vows, which might do
honor to human nature in the most civilized countries. The amusements of the
Hindoos consist in going to their pagodas, in assisting at religious shows, and
in fulfilling a variety of ceremonies prescribed to them by the Bramins. Their
religion seems to forbid them to quit their own shores, The Gentoos are
persuaded, that the waters of the three great rivers, Ganges, K^i^^^, and
Indus, have the sacred virtue of purifying those who baths in them, from all
pollutions and (...). This religious idea seems to be founded on a principle of
policy, and intended to ^^^^in the natives from migrating into distant
countries; for it is remarkable, that the (...) rivers are to situated, that
there is not any part of the India where the inhabitants (...) not have an
opportunity of washing away their fins. The Ganges, which rises in the ^^^^ions
of Thibet, with its different branches, runs through the kingdom of Bengal,
(...) and Orics, and the upper provinces of Oade, Rohilcund, Agra, Delhi, and
Lahore. (...) divides the Carnatic from Golconda, and runs through Visiapore
into the interior (...) the Deccan. And the Indus, bounding the Guzarat
provinces, separates (...) stan (...) dominions of Persia.
nor do they want any thing from abroad. They might, therefore, have lived in
much tranquillity and happiness, if others had looked on them with the same
indifference with which they regard the rest of the world.

The soldiers, are commonly called Rajah-poots, or persons descended from
rajahs, and reside chiefly in the northern provinces, and are generally more
fair-complexioned than the people of the southern provinces, who are quite
black. These rajah-poots are a robust, brave, faithful people, and enter into
the service of those who will pay them; but when their leader falls in battle,
they think that their engagements to him are finished, and they run off the
field without any stain upon their reputation.

The custom of women burning themselves, upon the death of their husbands,
still continues to be practiced among some of high cast and condition, though
much less frequently than formerly, and it is said, that the Bramins now do not
encourage it.

One particular class of women are allowed to be openly prostituted: These are
the famous dancing girls. Their attitudes and movements are very easy, and not
ungraceful. Their persons are delicately formed, gaudily decorated, and highly
perfumed. By the continuation of wanton attitudes, they acquire, as they grow
warm in the dance, a frantic lasciviousness themselves, and communicate, by a
natural contagion, the most voluptuous desires to the beholders.

The Gentoos are as careful of the cultivation of their lands, and their public
works and conveniences, as the Chinese; and remarkably honest and humane: There
scarcely is an instance of a robbery in all Indostan, though the diamond
merchants travel without defensive weapons. According to a late writer, the
Hindoos, as well as the Persians, Tartars, and adjoining nations, who have
inhabited Indostan since it was invaded by Tamerlane, though of different
nations, religions, laws, and customs, possess nevertheless, in equal degrees,
hospitality, politeness, and address. In refinement and ease they are superior
to any people to the westward of them. In politeness and address, in
gracefulness of deportment, and speech, an Indian is as much superior to a
Frenchman of fashion, as a French courier is to a Dutch burgo-master of Dort. A
Frenchman's ease is mixed with forward familiarity, with confidence, and
self-conceit; but the Hindoos, especially those of the higher casts, are in
their demeanor easy and unconstrained, still more than even a French courtier,
and their ease and freedom is reserved, ^^dest, and respectful.

Their persons are straight and elegant, their limbs finely proportioned, their
fingers long and tapering, their countenances open and pleasant, and their
features exhibit the most delicate lines of beauty in the females, and in the
males a kind of manly softness. Their walk and gait, as well as their whole
deportment, is in the highest degree graceful. The dress of the men is a kind
of close-bodies gown, like our women's gowns, and wide trowsers, resembling
petticoats, reaching down to their slippers. Such of the women as appear in
public, have shawls over their heads and shoulders, short close jackets, and
the tight drawers which come down to their ankles. Hence the dress of the men
gives them, in the eyes of Europeans, an appearance of effeminacy; whereas that
of the women will appear rather masculine: Such is the influence of habit and
custom on sentiments; an influence which extends to matters of taste, and to
objects of higher importance.

Their houses cover much ground, and have spacious galleries and accommodations
of various kinds. The apartments are small, and the furniture not very elegant,
if we except the rich Persian carpets. The grandeur of their palaces consists
in baths, perfumes, temples, gods, and harams. The harams or zenanas, that is,
the residences of the women, are removed from the front of the house, and
lighted only from a square space in the center of the whole building. The
apparel of the women is inconceivably rich; they have jewels on their fingers
and about their necks, and also in their ears and nostrils, with bracelets on
their wrists and arms, and around their ankles.

The temples or pagodas of the Gentoos are stupendous but disgustful stone
buildings, erected in every capital, and under the direction of the Bramins. If
the Bramins are masters of any uncommon art or science, they frequently (...)
to the purposes of profit from their ignorant votaries. Mr. Scraston says, that
they know how to calculate eclipses; and that judicial (...) is so prevalent
among them, that half the year is taken up with unlucky days; the head
astrologer being always consulted in their councils. The Mahometans likewise
encourage these superstitions, and look upon all the fruits of the Gentoo
industry as belonging to the ^^^^^ves. Though the Gentoos are entirely passive
under all their opp^^^^, and by their state of existence, the practice of their
religion, and the scant^^, is of their food, have nothing of that resentment in
their nature that animates the rest of mankind; yet they are susceptible of
(...), and somet^^^ (...) their money, and rather than (...) (...) put
themselves to death by poison or otherwise. This practice, which it ^^uns is
not uncommon, accounts lot the vast scarcity of silver that (...) or late
prevailed in Indostan.

The reasons above (...) (...) account likewise (...) their being less under
the influence of their passions than the inhabitants of other countries. The
perpetual use of rice, their (...) food, gives them but little (...) (...) and
their (...) early, the male before (...), and then women at ten (...) keeps
them low and (...) in their persons. A man (...) in the declare of life at
(...), and the beauty of the women (...) at eighteen: At (...) five they have
all the (...) of old age. We are not therefore to wonder at then being (...) to
all (...) ^^^tion and vigor of mind: And whatever may be the cause, a recent
travelier among them, observes, it is certain, that death is regarded with less
ho^^or in India than in any other country in the world. The origin and the end
of all things, (...) the philosophers o^ India of the (...) times, i^ a (...)
(...). A state of repose is the (...) of greatest perfection; and (...) is the
(...) after which a wise men aspire. It is better, say the (...), to (...) than
to walk, and to (...) than to wake; but death is the best of all. According to
the Gentoo laws, (...) sentenced to death are not to be strangled, suffocated,
or poisoned, but to be cut off by the sword: because, without an effusion of
blood, malefactors are supposed to die with all their sins about them; but the
shedding of their blood, it is thought, expiates their crimes.

The Mahometans, who, in Indostan, are called Moors, are of Persian, Turkish.
Arabic, and other extractions. They early began, in the reigns of the caliphs
of Bagad, to invade Indostan. They penetrated as far as Delhi, which they made
then capital. They settled colonies in several places, whose descendants are
called Pytans; but their empire was overthrown by Tamerlane, who founded the
Mogul government, which still subsists. Those princes being strict Mahometans,
received under their protection all that professed the same religion, and who
being a brave, active people, counterbalanced the numbers of the natives. They
are said to have introduced the division of provinces, over which they
appointed soubadars; and those provinces, each of which might be styled an
empire, were subdivided into nabobships; each nabob being immediately
accountable to his soubadar, who in process of time became almost independent
on the emperor, or, as he is called, the Great Mug^l, upon their paying him an
annual tribute. The vast resort of Pers^n and Tartar tribes has likewise
strengthened the Mohammedan government: But it is observable, that in two or
three generations, the progeny of all those adventurers, who brought nothing
with them but their horses and their swords, degenerated into all the eastern
indolence and sensuality.

Of all those tribes, the Marattas at present make the greatest figure. They
commonly serve on horseback, and, when well commanded, they have been known to
give law even to the court of Delhi. Though they are originally Gentoos, yet
they are of bold, active spirit, and pay great respect to the principles of
their religion. Mr. Scraston says, that the Mahometans of Moors are generally
of so detestable a character, that he never knew above two or three exceptions,
and those were among the Tartar and Persian officers of the army. These are
void, we are told, of every principle even of their own religion; and if they
have a virtue, it is an appearance of hospitality, but it is an appearance
only; for while they are drinking with, and embracing a friend, they will stab
him to the heart. But it is probable, that these representations of their moral
depravity are carried beyond the bounds of truth.

The manner of drinking among the Gentoos is remarkable. They religiously avoid
touching the vessel that contains the liquor with their ^ps, and pour it into
their mouths, holding the bottle, or other vessel, at least at a foot's
distance. Their idea is, that they would be polluted by stagnating water. They
will drink from a pump, or of any running stream, but not out of a pool.

Mr. Dalry^ple observes, according to the Gentoo constitution, land (houses and
gardens excepted) is not private properly, but belongs to the community, in the
several villages; each of which are supplied with their respective public
officers, as the headman, to execute justice; the con^^poly, to keep the
accounts of the village; the corn^ter, smith, barber, doctor, astrologer, etc.
The grounds are cultivated by the community, and the produce shared out in
certain proportions to all. One is allotted to the Pagodas and Bramins, one to
the government, another to the public officers, one to the repair of tanks, or
reservoirs of water, and the rest distributed among the community: But we
understand that the Mohammedan government, and the intrusion of Europeans, have
introduced some innovations in this ancient constitution, particularly, by
farming the circar, or government shares.

Such are the outlines of the government by which this great empire long
subsisted without almost the semblance of virtue among its great officers,
either civil or military. It was shaken, however, after the overthrow of
Mahomet Shah, by Kouli Khan, which was attended by so great a diminution of the
imperial authority that the soubahs and nabobs became absolute in their own
governments. Though they could not alter the fundamental laws of property, yet
they invented new taxes, which beggared the people, to pay their armies and
support their power; so that many of the people, a few years ago, alter being
unmercifully plundered by collectors and tax-masters, were left to perish
through want. To sum up the misery of the inhabitants, those soubadars and
nabobs, and other Mohammedan governors, employ the Gentoos themselves, and some
even of the Bramins, as the ministers of their rapaciousness and cruelties.
Upon the whole, ever since the invasion of Kouli Khan, Indostan, from being a
well regulated government, is become a scene of mere anarchy; every great man
protects himself in his tyranny by his soldiers, whose pay far exceeds the
natural riches of his government. As private assassinations and other murders
are here committed with impunity, the people, who know they can be in no worse
state, concern themselves very little in the revolutions of government. To the
above causes are owing the late successes of the English in Indostan. The
reader, from this representation, may perceive, that all the English have
acquired in point of territory, has been gained from usurpers and robbers; and
their possession of it being guranteed by the present lawful emperor, is said
to be founded upon the laws and constitutions of that country. We are, however,
sorry to be obliged to remark, that the conduct of many of the servants of the
East India Company toward the natives, and not properly punished or checked,
either by the directors or the British legislature, has in too many instances
been highly dishonorable to the English name, and totally inconsistent with
that humanity which was formerly their national characteristic.

It may be here proper just to observe, that the complexion of the Gentoos is
black, their hair long, and the features of both sexes regular. At court,
however, the great families are ambitious of intermarying with Persians and
Tartars, on account of the fairness of their complexion, resembling that of
their conqueror Tamerlane and his great generals.

PROVINCES, CITIES, AND OTHER BUILDINGS, PUBLIC AND PRIVATE.} The province of
Agra is the largest in all Indostan, containing 40 large towns and 340
villages. Agra is the greatest city, and its castle the largest fortification
in all the Indies. The Dutch have a factory there, but the English have none.

The city of Delhi or Dehly, which is the capital of that province, is likewise
the capital of Indostan. It is described as being a fine city, and containing
the imperial palace, which is adorned with the usual magnaficence of the East.
Its stables formerly contained 12,000 horses, brought from Arabia, Persia, and
Tartary; and 500 elephants. When the forage is burnt up by the heats of the
season, as is often the case, these horses are said to be fed in the morning
with bread, butter, and sugar, and in the evening with rice-milk properly
prepared.

Tatta, the capital of Sindy, is a large city; and it is said that a plague
which happened there in 1699, carried off above 80,000 of its manufactures in
silk and cotton. It is still famous for the manufacture of palanquins, which
are a kind of canopied couches, on which the great men all over India,
Europeans as well as natives, repose when they appear abroad. They are carried
by sour men, who will out along, morning and evening 40 miles a day; 10 being
usually hired, who carry the palanquin by turns, four at a time. Though a
palanquin is dear at first cost, yet the porters may be hired for nine or ten
shillings a month each, out of which they maintain themselves. -- The Indus, at
Tatta, is about a mile broad, and famous for its fine carp (...).

Though the province of Moultan is not very fruitful, yet it yields excellent
iron and canes; and the inhabitants, by their situation are enabled to deal
with the Persians and Tartars yearly for above 60,000 horses. The capital is
Moultan, about 800 miles, by the course of the river, from the sea.

The province of Cassimere, being surrounded with mountains, is difficult of
access, but when entered, it appears to be the paradise of the Indies. It is
said to contain 100,000 villages, to be stored with cattle and game, without
any beasts of prey. The capital (Cassimere) stands by a large lake; and both
sexes, the women especially, are almost as fair as the Europeans, and are said
to be witty and ingenious.

The province and city of Lahor formerly made a great figure in the Indian
history, and is still one of the largest and finest provinces in the Indies,
producing the best sugars of any in Indostan. Its capital was once about nine
miles long, but is now much decaved. We know little of the provinces of Ayud,
Varad, Bekar, and Hallabas, that is not in common with the other provinces of
Indostan, excepting that they are inhabited by a hardy race of men, who seem
never to have been conquered, and though they submit to the Moguls, live in an
easy independent state. In some of those provinces many of the European fruits,
plants, and flowers thrive, as in their native soil.

Bengal, of all the Indian provinces, is perhaps the most interesting (...) an
English reader. Its natural situation, (as described by Major Rennel, late
surveyor-general in Bengal) is singularly happy with respect to security from
the attack of foreign enemies. On the north and east it has no warlike
neighbors, and has moreover a formidable barrier of mountains, rivers, or
extensive wastes toward those q^^^rters, should an enemy start up. On the
south is a sea coast guarded by shallows and impenetrable woods, and with only
one port, which is of difficult access, in an extent of 300 miles. Only on the
(...), can an enemy be apprehended, but there the natural barrier is (...), and
with its population and resources, and the usual proportion of British troops,
Bengal might bid defiance to any part of Indostan which was inclined to become
its enemy. It is considered as (...) ^^^ehouse of the Fast Indies. Its
fertility exceeds that of Egypt (...) being overflowed by the Nile; and the
produce of its soil consists of rice, sugarcanes, corn, sesamum, small
mulberry, and other trees. "Most of the rivers of Bengal," says the author of
Ayeen Akberry, "have their banks cultivated with rice, of which there are a
variety of species. The soil is so fertile in some places, that a single grain
of rice will yield a measure of 2 or 3 Seer. Some lands will produce three
crops in a year. Vegetation is here so extremely quick, that as fast as the
water rises, the plants of rice grow above it, so that the ear is never above
it. Men of experience affirm that a single stalk will grow six cubits in one
night." (Ayeen Akberry.) Its calicoes, silks, salt-p^tre, lakka, opium, wax,
and civet, go all over the world; and provisions here are in vast plenty, and
incredibly cheap, especially pullets, ducks, and geese. The country is
intersected by canals cut out of the Ganges for the benefit of commerce; and
extends near 100 leagues on both sides the Ganges, full of cities, towns,
villages, and castles.

In Bengal, the worship of the Gentoos is practiced in its greatest purity; and
their sacred river (Ganges) is in a manner lined with their magnificent pagodas
or temples. The women, notwithstanding their religion, are said by some to be
lascivious and enticing.

The principal English factory in Bengal is at Calcutta, and is called Fort
William: It is situated on the river Hoogly, the most westerly branch of the
Ganges. The fort itself is said to be irregular, and untenable against
disciplined troops; but the servants of the company have provided themselves
with an excellent house, and most convenient apartments for their own
accommodation. As the town itself has been in fact for some time in possession
of the Company, an English civil government, by a mayor and aldermen, was
introduced into it. This was immediately under the authority of the Company.
But in 1773, an act of parliament was passed to regulate the affairs of the
East India Company, as well in India as in Europe. By this act the
governor-general and four counselors were appointed, and chosen by the
parliament, with whom was vested the whole civil and military government of the
presidency of Fort William; and the ordering, management, and government of all
the territorial acquisitions and revenues in the kingdom of Bengal, Bahar, and
Orissa, so long as the Company should remain possessed of them. The
governor-general and council to appointed, are invested with the power of
superintending and controlling the government and management of the
presidencies of Madras, Bombay, and Benco^len. The governor-general and council
to pay obedience to the orders of the court of directors, and to correspond
with them. The governor-general and counselors were likewise empowered to
establish a court of judicature at Fort William; to consist of a chief justice,
and three other judges, to be named from (...) to time by his majesty: These
are to exercise all criminal, admiralty, and ecclesiastical (...)* to be a
court of record and a court of (...) and terminer for the town of Calcutta, and
factory of fort William, and its limits, and the factories Inbordinate thereto.
-- But the establishment of this supreme court does not appear to have promoted
either the interests of the East India Company, or the felicity of the people
of the country. No proper attention has been paid to the manners and customs of
the people; acts of great ^ppression and injustice have been committed; and the
supreme court has been a (...) and confusion.

In 1756, an unhappy event took place at Calcutta, which is too remarkable to
be omitted. The Indian nabob or soubadar, quarrelled with the company, and
invested Calcutta with a large body of black troops. The governor, and some of
the principal persons of the place, threw themselves, with their chief effects,
on board the ships in the river; they who remained for some hours, bravely
defended the place; but their ammunition being expended, they surrendered upon
terms. The soubadar, a capricious, unfeeling tyrant, instead if observing the
capitulation, forced Mr. Holwell, the governor's chief servant, and 145 British
subjects, into a little but secure prison, called the Blackhole, a place about
eighteen feet square, and shut up from almost all communication of free air.
Their miseries during the night were inexpressible, and before morning no more
than twenty three were found alive, the rest dying of suffocation, which was
generally attended with a horrible frenzy. Among those saved was Mr. Holwell
himself, who has written a most affecting account of the catastrophe. The
insensible nabob returned to his capital, after plundering the place, imagining
he had rooted the English out of his dominions; but the seasonable arrival of
admiral W^^son, and colonel afterward lord. Clive, put them once more, with
some difficulty, in possession of the place; and the war was soon concluded by
the battle of ^^alty, gained by the colonel, and the death of the nabob Suraja
Dowla, in whose place ^hir Jaffeir, one of his generals, and who had previously
signed a secret treaty with Clive to desert his master, and amply reward the
English, was advanced to the soubahship.

The capital of Bengal, where the nabob keeps his court, is Muxadahad, or
Moorsh^d^^^d: Lenares, lying in the same province, is the Gentoo university,
and celebrated for its sanctity. This zemindary which includes also the circars
of Gazype^^ and Chunar, constituted a part of the dominions of Oude or Owdh
till 177^, when its tribute a^ quit-rent of 24 lacks was transferred to the
English.

Chandenagore is the principal place possessed by the French in Bengal: It
(...) higher up the river than Calcutta. But though strongly fortified,
furnished with a garrison of 500 Europeans, and 1^00 Indians, and defended by
the 123 pieces of cannon and three mortars, it was taken by the English
admirals Watson and Pococke, and colonel Clive, and also was obliged to
surrender in the last war, but reserved by the peace. Hoogly, which lies fifty
miles to the north of Calcutta, upon the Ganges, is a place of prodigious trade
for the richest of all Indian commodities. The Dutch have here a well fortified
factory. The (...) for diamonds is carried on by about 10,000 people from
(...), which lies thirty leagues to the North of Hoogly, for about fifty miles
farther. Daccan is laid to be the largest city of Bengal, and the tide comes up
to its walls. It contains an English and a Dutch factory. The other chief towns
are ^assum^azar, Chin^^ra, Barn^^gua, and Maldo; besides a number of other
place of less (...), but all of them (...) in the Indian manufactories.

We know (...) co^^^^^ning the province o^ (...) of Malva, which (...) to the
west of Bengal: Sindia and Holkar divide the largest part of it. The capital of
the former is Ougein, and of Holkar, the city of labor. It (...) as fertile as
the other provinces, and its chief city is (...). The province of ^andish
included that of Be^^ and part of Orixa, and its capital is Brampur, or
Burhanpoor, a flourishing city, and it carries on a vast trade in chintzes,
callicoes, and embroidered stuffs. Cattack is the capital of Orixa, and lies in
the only road between Bengal and the Northern circars, and belongs to the Berar
Rajah Moodajee Boosla, whose dominions are very extensive. Of the five Northern
circars, Cicacole, Rajamundry, Ellore, and Condapilly are in possession of the
English, and Gunton is in the hands of the Nizam.

We shall speak of those provinces, belonging to the Malabar, or Coromandel
coast, the two great objects of English commerce in that country; and first, of
the eastern, or Coromandel coast.

Madura begins at Cape Comorin, the southernmost point of the peninsula. It is
about the bigness of the kingdom of Portugal, and i^ said to have been governed
by a sovereign king, who had under him seventy tributary princes, each of them
independent in his own dominions, but paying him a tax; now, the case is much
altered, the prince of the country being scarcely able to protect himself and
his people from the depredations of his neighbors, but by a tribute to buy
them off; the capital is Tritchinopoly. The chief value of this kingdom seems
to consist of a pearl fishery upon its coast. Tanjore is a little kingdom,
lying to the east of Madura. The soil is fertile, and its prince rich, till
plundered by the nabob of Arcot, and some British subjects connected with him.
Within it lies the Danish East India settlement of Tanquebar, and the fortress
of Negapatam, which was taken from the Dutch the last war, and confirmed to the
English by the late treaty of peace. The capital city is Tanjore, governed by a
rajah under the English protection.

The Carnatic, as it is now called, is well known to the English. It is bounded
on the east by the bay of Bengal, on the north by the river Christina, which
divides it from Golconda; on the west by Visapur, or Visipour, and, on the
south, by the kingdoms of Messaur and Tanjore; being in length, from south to
north, about 345 miles. It Tanjore, Marrawar, Tritchinopoly, Madura, and
Tinevelly be included, and they are all appendages of the Carnatic, the length
of it from north to south is 570 miles, but no where more than 110 wide, and
chiefly no more than 80. The capital of the Carnatic is Bisnagar, and of the
English ally the nabob, Arcot, whose dominions commence on the south of the
Guntoo circar, and extend along the whole coast of Coromandel to Cape Comorin.
The country in general is esteemed healthful, fertile, and populous. Within
this country, upon the Coromandel coast, lies fort St. David's, or Cuddalore,
belonging to the English, with a district round it. The fort is strong, and of
great importance to the English trade. Five leagues to the north lies
Pondicherry, once the emporium of the French in the East Indies, but which had
been repeatedly taken by the English, and as often restored by the treaties of
peace.

Fort St. George, better known by the name of Madras, is the capital of the
English East India company's dominions in that part of the East Indies, and is
distant eastward from London, about 4800 miles. Great complaints have been made
of the situation of this fort; but no pains have been spared by the company, in
rendering it impregnable to any force that can be brought against it by the
natives. It protects two towns, called, from the complexions of their several
inhabitants, the White and the Black. The white town is fortified, and contains
an English corporation of a mayor and aldermen. Nothing has been omitted to
mend the natural badness of its situation, which seems originally to be owing
to the neighborhood of the diamond mines, that are but a week's journey
distant. These mines are under the direction of a Mogul officer, who lets them
out by admeasurement, enclosing the contents by pallisadoes; all diamonds above
a certain weight originally belonged to the emperor. The district belonging to
Madras, does not extend much more than 40 miles round, and is of little value
for its produce. Eighty thousand inhabitants, of various nations, are said to
be dependant upon Madras; but its safety consists in the superiority of the
English by sea. It carries on a considerable trade with China, Persia, and
Mocha.

The reader needs not be informed of the immense fortunes acquired by the
English, upon this coast, within these thirty years; but some of these fortunes
appear to have been obtained by the most iniquitous practices. There seems to
have been some fundamental errors in the constitution of the East India
Company. The directors considered the riches acquired by their governors and
other servants as being plundered from the company, and accordingly sent out
superintendents to control their governors and overgrown servants, and have
from time to time changed their governors and members of the coun^^ there. As
this is a subject of the greatest importance that ever perhaps occurred in the
geography of a commercial country, the reader (...) indulge us in one or two
reflections.

The English East India company, through the distractions of the Mogul empire,
the support of their government, and the undaunted, (...) fortunate successes,
of their military officers, have acquired so amax^^^g a property in this
peninsula, and in Indostan, that it is superior to the ^^^^^ues of many crowned
heads: And some of their own servants (...), that when all their expenses are
paid, their clear revenue ^^^^nts to near two millions sterling; out of which
they were to pay ^^^^,000l. annually to the government, while suffered to enjoy
their ^^^^ues. How that revenue is collected, or from whence it arises, is
(...) known to the company: Part of it, however, has been granted in ^^^^perty,
and part of it is secured on mortgages, for discharging their ^^^p^ses in
supporting the interests of their friends, the emperor, and (...) respective
soubadars and nabobs they have assisted.

This company has exercised many rights appropriated to sovereignty; such as
those of holding forts, coining money, and the like. Those ^^^^ers were thought
incompatible with the principles of a commercial (...) company, and therefore
the English ministry and parliament (...) repeatedly interfered: In order to
regulate the affairs of the company, a board of control at home is at length
established. It has (...) ^^en hoped, that in consequence of this interference
of the government, such measures may be taken with the Eastern princes and
(...), as may render the acquisitions of the company permanent national.

(...) have already mentioned the kingdom of Golconda, which, be^^^ diamonds,
is famous for the cheapness of its provisions, and for (...) white wine of
grapes that are ripe in January. Golconda is subject to a prince called Ni^^m
or soubadar of the Deccan, who is rich, and can raise 100,000 men. The famous
diamond mine, Raoloconda, is in this province. The capital of his dominions is
called Bagnagur, or Hyderabad, but the kingdom takes its name from the city of
Golconda, and comprises the eastern part of Dowletabad. East south-east of
Golconda lies Masulipatam, where the English and Dutch have factories, the
English have also factories at Ganjam and Visagapatam, in this coast; and the
Dutch at Narsipore. The province of Orissa, from whence the English company
draw some part of their revenues, lies to the north of Golconda, extending in
length from east to west about 550 miles, and in breadth about 240. It is
governed chiefly by Moodajee Boonslah, and his brother Bembajee, allies to the
Marattas. In this province stands the idolatrous temple of Jaganaut, which they
say is attended by 500 priests. The idol is an irregular pyra^^^ical black
stone, of about 4 or 500lb. weight, with two rich diamonds near the top, to
represent eyes, and the nose and mouth painted with vermillion. Near this is
the temple of the Sun, one of the most magnificent buildings is the world.

Major Rennell observes, that there is a void space between the known parts of
Berar, Golconda, Orissa, and the northern circars of near 300 miles in length,
and 250 in breadth, and that it is not likely to be filled up unless a great
change takes place in European politics in India. The British possessions in
the northern circars, extend only 70 miles by land, and in some places not more
than 30, which form a slip of 350 miles in length, bounded toward the
continent, by a ridge of mountains. Within these, and toward Berar is an
extensive tract of woody and mountainous country, with which the adjacent
provinces appear to have scarcely any communication. Though surrounded by
people highly civilized, and who abound in useful manufactures, it is said,
that the few specimens of the miserable inhabitants of this tract who have
appeared in the circars, use no covering but a wisp of straw. This wild country
extends about 100 miles, and the first civilized people beyond them are the
Barar Marattas.

The country of the Deccan comprehends several large provinces, and some
kingdoms; particularly those of Baglana, Balagate, Telenga, and the kingdom of
Vis^apour. The truth is, the names, dependencies, and governments of those
provinces, are extremely unsettled; and since their reduction by Aniengz^be, or
his father, have been subject to almost annual revolutions and alterations. The
principal towns are Aurun^^bad, and Dolta^^^^, or Dowlataba^: The latter is the
strongest place in all Incost^^. Near at (...) famous paged of Elora, in a
plain of about two leagues square. The tombs, chapels, temples, (...) and many
thousand (...) (...) surround it, are said to be cut out of the natural neck,
and to ^^rpa^s all the other efforts of human art. Telenga lies on the east of
Golconda, and its capital, Beder, contains a garrison of 3000 men. The
inhabitants of this province speak a language peculiar to themselves.

Guzerat or Gujerat is a maritime province on the gulf of Camb^y^, and one of
the finest in India, but inhabited by a fierce rapacious people. It is said to
contain 35 cities. Amedba^ is the capital of the province, where there is an
English factory, and is said, in wealth, (...) with the richest towns in
Europe. About 43 French leagues distant lies Surat, where the English have a
flourishing factory.

Visiapour is a large province, the western part is called Konhan, which is
intermingled with the Portuguese possessions. The rajah of Visiapour is said to
have had a yearly revenue of six millions sterling, and to bring to the field
150,000 soldiers. The capital is of the same name, and the country very
fruitful. The principal places on this coast are Damam, Bassaim Tropor, or
Tarapor, Chawl, Dandi-Rajah^^^^, Dabul-Rajahpur, Gheriah, and Vingorla. The
Portuguese have lost several valuable possessions on this coast, and those
which remain are on the decline.

Among the islands lying upon the same coast is that of Bombay, belonging to
the English East India company. Its harbor can conveniently hold 1000 ships at
anchor. The island itself is about seven miles in length, and twenty in
circumference; but its situation and harbor are its chief recommendations,
being destitute of almost all the conve^^encies of life. The town is about a
mile long, and poorly built; and the climate was fatal to English
constitutions, till experience, caution, and temperance taught them
preservatives against its unwholesomeness. The best water there is preserved in
tanks, which receive it in the rainy seasons. The fort is a regular quadrangle,
and well built of (...). Many black merchants reside here. This island was part
of the portions paid with the infanta of Portugal to Charles II. who gave it to
the East India company; and the island is still divided into three Roman
catholic parishes, inhabited by Portuguese, and what are called catholic
Mestizos and Canarins; the former being a mixed breed of the natives and
Portuguese, and the other the Aborigines of the country. The English have
fallen upon methods to render this island and town, under all their
disadvantages, (...), if not an agreeable residence. The governor and council
of Bombay have lucrative posts, as well as the offers under them. The troops on
the island are commanded by English offices; and the natives, when formed into
regular companies, and disciplined, are here, and all over the East Indies,
called Sea poys. The inhabitants of the island amount to near 60,000 of
different nations; each of whom enjoys the practice of his religion unmolested.
Have, besides Europeans of all countries, you meet with Turks, Persians,
Arabians, Armenians, a mixed race, the vilest of their species, descended from
the Portuguese, and the outcasts from the Gentoo religion, etc. and also
captives that are slaves to every other tribe. The Turks that resort to this
place on account of trade, are like the rest of their countrymen, stately,
grave, and reserved; and honest in their (...). The Persians are more gay,
lively, and convertible, but less (...) in matters of trade, than the saturnine
Turks. The Arabians are (...) life and fire, and when they treat with you on
any subject, will make (...) a fine oration in flowing numbers, and a musical
cadence; but they (...) the most dishonest of all. The Armenians are generally
handsome (...) their features, mild in their tempers, and in their nature kind
and (...). They are a kind of Christians, and an honor to that sect, (...)
numbers that go from England.

Near Bombay are several other islands, one of which, called Ele^^^^, contains
the most inexplicable antiquity perhaps in the world. (...) of an elephant, of
the natural size, cut coarsely in stone, pre^^^^ itself on the landing-place,
near the bottom of a mountain. An easy slope then Lads to a stupendous temple
hewn out of the solid rock, eighty or ninety feet long, and forty broad. The
roof, which is cut flat, is supported by regular rows of pillars, about ten
feet high, with capitals, resembling round cushions, as if pressed by the
weight of the incumbent mountain. At the farther end are three gigantic
figures, which have been multiplied by the blind zeal of the Portuguese.
Besides the temple, are various images, and groupes of each hand cut in the
stone: one of the latter bearing a rude resemblance of the judgment of Solomon;
also a colonnade, with a door of regular architecture; but the whole bears no
manner of resemblance to any of the Gentoo works.

The island and city of Goa, the capital of the Portuguese settlements in the
East Indies, lies about 30 miles south of Vingorla. The island is about
twenty-seven miles in compass. It has one of the finest and best fortified
ports in the Indies. This was formerly a most superb settlement, and was
surpassed either in bulk or beauty by few of the European cities. It is said
that the revenues of the Jesuits, upon this island, equalled those of the crown
of Portugal. Goa, as well as the rest of the Portuguese settlements on this
coast, is under a viceroy, who still keeps up the remains of the ancient
splendor of the government. The rich peninsula of Salvett is dependent on Goa.
Sunda lies south of the Portuguese territories, and is governed by a rajah,
tributary to the Mogul. Canorce lies about forty miles to the south of Goa, and
reaches to Calicut. Its soil is famous for producing rice, that supplies many
parts of Europe, and some of the Indies. The Ca^^rines are said generally to be
governed by a lady, whose son has the title of rajah; and her subjects are
accounted the bravest and most civilized of any in that peninsula, and
remarkably devoted to commerce.

The celebrated Hyder Ally, with whom the Company formerly made a peace, but
with whom their servants soon after embroiled them, and who lately made a
violent irruption into the Carnatic, took many of its chief places, obtained
great advantages over the company's troops, and brought his forces to the gates
of Madras, but died before the conclusion of the war, is said to be a native of
Mysore, which lies to the south-west of the Carnatic; and the Christians of the
apostle St. Thomas, live at the foot of the Gatti mountains. The dominions of
Tippoo Saib, son of Hyder Ally, comprehend generally the provinces of Mysore,
Bednore, Zaimbetore, Zanare, and Dindigal, besides his acquisition to the
northward from the Marattas: They are at least 400 miles in length, and in the
breadth from 290 to 130, so that he has the largest share in the Peninsula.

Though Malabar gives name to the whole south-west coast of the peninsula, yet
it is confined at present to the country so called, lying on the west of Cape
Commorin, and called the Dominions of the Samorin. The Malabar language,
however, is common in the Car^^^ic; and the country itself is rich and fertile,
but pestered with green address, whose poison is incurable. It was somerly a
large kingdom of itself. The most remarkable places in Malabar are Cranganore,
containing a Dutch factory and fort; Tellichery, where the English have a small
settlement, keeping a constant garrison of thirty or forty soldiers. Calicut,
where the French and Portuguese have small factories, besides various other
distinct territories and cities. Caps Com^^^in, which is the southern most part
of this peninsula, though not above three leagues in extent; is famous for
uniting in the same garden the two seasons of the year; the trees being loaded
with blossoms and fruit on the one side, while on the other side they are
stripped of all their leaves. This surprising phenomenon is owing to the ridge
of mountains so often mentioned, which traverse the whole peninsula from south
to north. On the opposite sides of the Cape, the winds are constantly at
variance, blowing from the west on the west side, and from the east on the
eastern side.

Before we take out leave of India, it may be proper to observe, that in the
district of Cochin, within Malabar, are to be found some thousands of Jews, who
pretend to be of the tribe of Manasseh, and to have ^^cords engraven on copper
plates in Hebrew characters. They are said to be so poor, that many of them
embrace the Gentoo religion. The like discoveries of the Jews and their records
have been made in China, and other places of Asia, which have occasioned
various speculations among the learned.

It appears to be the interest of the East India Company, that their
governments in India should interfere as little as possible in the domestic or
national quarrels of the country powers, and that they should always endeavor
to be in a state of peace and tranquillity with their neighbors. But these
maxims of sound policy they have not adherod to; the governors and servants of
the East India Company have unnecessarily, and sometimes very iniquitously,
embroiled themselves with the country powers, and engaged in wars of a very
per^icious and indefensible nature. The wars into which they have en^^^ed with
the Marattas, and with that enterprising prince Hyder Ally now dead, but
succeeded by a warlike son, Tippo Saib, have been ^^^^ded with an enormous
expense, and been extremely prejudicial to the interests of the company, and
the nation at home. By temporary (...) of violence and injustice, and sometimes
disregarding their own (...), they have forfeited the good opinion of the
natives; and by ^^^iting the indignation of the country princes against them,
greatly (...) the security of the possessions of the company.

The emperor of Indostan, or Great Mogul (so called from being de^^^^^ed from
Tameriane the Mongul, or Mogul Tartar) on his advancement to the throne,
assumes some grand title; as The Conqueror of the World; the Ornament; of the
Throne, etc. but he is never crowned.

HISTORY.] The reader will find much entertaining and useful in^^^^tion both
historical and Geographical, concerning this country, in a work, in three
quarto volumes, published at Calcutta, in 1784, entitled "Ayeen Akberry, or the
Institutes of the Emperor Akber." Trans^^^ed from the original Persian, by
Francis Gladwin. This valuable work is in Harvard College Library, at Cambridge.

The PENINSULA of INDIA beyond the GANGES, called the FARTHER PENINSULA.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 2000 Miles. between Degrees. 1 and 30 north lat. Sq. M. 741,500 Breadth
1000 Miles. Degrees. 92 and 109 east long. Sq. M. 741,500

BOUNDARIES.] THIS peninsula is bounded by Thibet and China, on the North; by
China and the Chinese sea, on the East; by the same sea and the straits of
Malacca, on the South; and by the bay of Bengal and the Hither India, on the
West. The space between Bengal and China is now called the province of Mecklus,
and other districts, subject to the king of Ava or Burmah.

Grand divisions. Subdivisions. Chief towns. Sq. M. On the north west Acham
Camdara 180,000 Ava Ava Arracan Arracan. On the south-west Pegu Pegu. E. ^0.
97. N. la. 17-30. 50,000 Martaban Martaban Siam Siam, E. l. 100-55. N. la.
14-18. 170,000 Malacca Malacca, E. l. 101. N. la. 2-12. 48,000 On the
north-east Tonquin Cachao, or Keccio, E. lon. 105. N. lat. 21-30. 112,000 Laos
Lanchang. 59,400 Cochin China Thoanoa 61,900 On the south-east Cambodia
Cambodia 60,000 Chiampa Padram

NAME.] The name of India is taken from the river Indus, which of all others
was best known to the Persians. The whole of this peninsula was unknown to the
ancients, and is partly so to the moderns.

AIR AND CLIMATE.] Authors differ concerning the air of this country, some
preferring that of the southern, and some that of the northern parts. It is
generally agreed, that the air of the former is hot and dry, but in some places
moist, and consequently unhealthy. The climate is subject to hurricanes,
lightnings, and inundations, so that the people build their houses upon high
pillars to defend them from floods; and they have no other idea of seasons, but
wet and dry. Easterly and westerly monsoons (which is an Indian word) prevail
in this country.

MOUNTAINS.] Those run from North to South almost the whole length of the
country; but the lands near the sea are low, and annually overflowed in the
rainy season.

RIVERS.] The chief are Sanpoo or Burrumpooter, Domea, (...), Menan, and Ava,
or the great river Nou Kian.

BAYS AND STRAITS.] The bays of Bengal, Siam, and Cochin-China. The straits of
Malacca and Sineapora. The promontories of Siam, Romana, and Bansac.

SOIL AND PRODUCT OF THE DIFFERENT NATIONS.} The soil of this peninsula is
fruitful in general, and produces all the delicious fruits that are found in
other countries contiguous to the Ganges, as well as roots and vegetables; and
in Ava; a quantity of saltpetre, and the best teek timber; or Indian oak, which
for ship-building in warm climates is of much longer duration than any European
oak. Teek ships of 40 years old are no uncommon objects in the Indian seas.
This peninsula abounds likewise in silks, elephants, and quadrupeds, both
domestic and wild, that are common in the southern kingdoms of Asia. The
natives drive a great trade in gold, diamonds, rubies, topazes, amethysts, and
other precious stones. Tonquin produces little or no corn or wine, but is the
most healthful country of all the peninsula. In some places, especially toward
the north, the inhabitants have swellings in their throats, said to be owing to
the badness of their (...).

INHABITANTS, CUSTOMS, AND DIVERSIONS.} The Tonquinese are excellent mechanics
and fair traders; but greatly oppressed by their king and great lords. His
majesty engrosses the trade, and his factors sell by retail to the Dutch and
other nations. The Tonquinese are fond of lacker houses, which are unwholesome
and poisonous. The people in the south are a savage race, and go almost naked,
with large silver and gold earrings, and coral, amber, or shell bracelets. In
Tonquin and Cochin-China, the two sexes are scarcely distinguishable by their
dress, which resembles that of the Persians. The people of quality are fond of
English broad-cloth, red or green; and others wear a dark-colored cotton
cloth. In Azem, which is thought one of the (...) countries in Asia, the
inhabitants prefer dogs-flesh to all other animal food. The people of that
kingdom pay no taxes, because the king is (...) proprietor of all the gold and
silver, and other metals, found in his kingdom. They live, however, easy and
comfortably. Almost every house keeper has an elephant for the convenience of
his wives and women, polygamy being practiced all over India.

It is unquestionable that those Indians, as well as the Chinese, had the use
of gunpowder before it was known in Europe; and the in^^^^on is generally
ascribed to the Azemese. The inhabitants of the southern division of this
peninsula go under the the name of Malayans, from the neighboring country of
Malacca.

Though the religious superstitions that prevail in this peninsula are (...)
gross, yet the people believe in a future state; and when their kings are
interred, a number of animals are buried with them, and such vessels of gold
and silver as they think can be of use of them for their future life. The
people in this peninsula are commonly very (...) of show, and often make an
appearance beyond their circumstances. They are delicate in no part of their
dress but in their hair, which they buckle up in a very agreeable manner. In
their food they (...) ^^^^some; for besides dogs, they eat rats, mice,
serpents, and (...) fish. The people of Arracan are equally indelicate in their
(...), for they hire Dutch and other foreigners to consummate the (...) with
their virgins, and value their women most when in a (...) of pregnancy. Their
treatment of the sick, is ridiculous beyond (...); and in many places, when a
patient is judged to be incurable; (...) is exposed on the bank of some river,
where he is either drowned, (...) by birds or beasts of prey. Notwithstanding
the great (...) of most Indian nations, it is said, on the veracity of some who
have seen them, that on the confines of Arracan and Pegu, there is a people (if
solitary savages roaming through woods in quest of prey; deserve the name of
people) that appear to be in the very first stage of society. They are the only
people in the known world that go absolutely naked, without the smallest
covering on any part of their bodies. They live on fruit, which grows
spontaneously, in the uncultivated desert they inhabit, in great abundance; and
on the flesh of animals, which they tear alive and devour raw. They fit on
their hams, with their legs and arms disposed in the manner of monkeys. At the
approach of men, they fly into their woods: They take care of their offspring,
and live in families, but seem to have no ideas of subordination of rank or
civil government.

The diversions common in this country are fishing and hunting, the celebrating
of festivals, and acting comedies, by torch light, from evening to morning.

LANGUAGE.] The language of the court of Delhi is Persian, but in this
peninsula it is chiefly Malayan, interspersed with other dialects.

LEARNING AND LEARNED MEN.] The Bramins, who are the tribe of the priesthood,
descend from those Brachmans who are mentioned to us with so much reverence by
antiquity; and although much inferior, either as philosophers or men of
learning, to the reputation of their ancestors, as priests, their religious
doctrines are still implicitly followed by the whole nation; and as preceptors,
they are the source of all the knowledge which exists in Indostan. But the
utmost stretch of their mathematical knowledge seems to be the calculation of
eclipses. They have a good idea of logic; but it does not appear they have any
treatises on rhetoric; their ideas of music, if we may judge from their
practice, are barbarous; and in medicine they derive no assistance from the
knowledge of anatomy, since dissections are repugnant to their religion.

The poetry of the Asiatics is too turgid, and full of conceits, and the
diction of their historians very diffuse and verbose; but though the manner of
eastern compositions differs from the correct taste of Europe, there are many
things in the writings of Asiatic authors worthy the attention of literary men.
Mr. Dow observes, that in the Shanscrita, or learned language of the Bramins,
which is the grand repository of (the religion, philosophy, and history of the
Hindoos, there are in particular many hundred volumes in prose which treat of
the ancient Indians and their history. The same writer also remarks, that the
Shanscrita records contain accounts of the affairs of Western Asia very
different from what any tribe of the Arabians have transmitted to posterity;
and that it is more than probable, that, upon examination, the former will
appear to bear the marks of more authenticity, and of greater antiquity than
the latter. The Arabian writers have been generally so much prejudiced against
the Hindoos, that their accounts of them are by no means to be implicitly
relied on.

Mr. Dow observes, that the small progress, which correctness and elegance of
sentiment and diction have made in the East, did not proceed from a want of
encouragement to literature. On the contrary, it appears, that no princes in
the world patronized men of letters with more generosity and respect than the
Mohammedan emperors of Indostan. A literary genius was not only the certain
means to acquire a degree of wealth which must astonish Europeans, but an
infallible road for rising to the first offices of the state. The character of
the learned was at the same time so sacred, that tyrants, who made a pastime of
^^bruing their hands in the blood of their other subjects, not only abstained
from offering violence to men of genius, but stood in fear of their strength.

MANUFACTURES AND COMMERCE.] These vary in the different countries of this
peninsula; but the chief branches have been already mentioned. The inhabitants,
in some parts, are said to manufacture their salt out of ashes. In all
handicraft trades that they understand, the people are more industrious, and
better workmen, than most of the Europeans; and in weaving, sewing,
embroidering, and some other manufactures, it is said that the Indians do as
much work with their feet as their hands. Their painting, though they are
ignorant of drawing, is amazingly vivid in its colors. The fineness of their
linen, and and their fillagree work in gold and silver, are beyond any thing of
those kinds to be found in other parts of the world. The commerce of India, in
short, is courted by all trading nations in the world, and probably has been so
from the earliest ages: It was not unknown even in Solomon's time; and the
Greeks and Romans drew from thence their highest materials of luxury. The
greatest share of it, through events foreign in this part of our work, is now
centered in England, though that of the Dutch is still very considerable; that
of the French has for some time declined, nor is that of the Swedes and D^^^s
of much importance.

CONSTITUTENT, GOVERNMENT, RARITIES, AND CITIES.} This article is so extensive,
that it requires a slight review of the kingdoms that form this peninsula. In
Azem, it has already been observed, the king is proprietor of all the gold and
silver; he pays little or nothing to the Great Mogul; his capital is Ghergong
or Kirga^^. We know little or nothing of the kingdom of Tipra, but that it was
anciently subject to the kinds of Arracan; and that they send to the Chinese
gold and silk, for which they receive silver in return. Arracan lies to the
south of Tipra, and is governed by twelve princes, subject to the chief king,
who resides in his capital. His palace is very large, and contains, as we are
told, seven idols cast, in gold of two inches thick, each of a man's height,
and covered over with diamonds and other precious stones. Pegu is about 350
English miles in length, and almost the same in breadth. The riches of the king
when an independent state, were almost incredible; some of his idols, as big as
life, being of massy gold and silver. His revenues arose from the rents of
loads, of which he was sole proprietor, and from duties on merchandise; so that
some thought him to be the richest monarch in the world, excepting the Chinese
emperor. He was said to be able to being a million, and on occasion, a million
and a half of soldiers to the (...), well clothed and armed; and to be master
of 800 trained elephants, each with a castle on his back, holding four
soldiers. -- The constitution of this empire is of the feudal kind, for he
assigns (...) and towns to his nobles upon military tenures. In the year ^^^4
Pegu was reduced to the state of a dependent province by the (...) of Ava.
Macao is the great mart of trade in that province.

We know little of the kingdom of Ava. Moncha^^^ was the residence of the king,
and not Ava, in 1755. It is said, the honors the king assumes are next to
divine. His subjects trade chiefly in musk and jewels, rubies and saphires. In
other particulars, the inhabitants resemble those of Pegu. In those kingdoms,
and indeed in the greatest part of this peninsula, the doctrines of the Grand
Lama of Thibet prevail. as well as those of the Bramins.

The kingdom of Laos or Lahos, formerly included that of Jang^^^ or Jangomay,
but that is now subject to Ava; we know few partieculars of it that can be
depended upon. It is said to be immensely populous, to abound in all the rich
commodities as well as the gross superstitions of the East, and to be divided
into a number of petty kingdoms, all of them holding of one sovereign, who,
like his oriental brethren, is absolutely despotic, and lives in inexpressible
pomp and magnificence; but is of the Lama religion, and often the slave of his
priests and ministers.

The kingdom of Siam has been often described by missionaries and pretended
travelers in the most romantic terms; and therefore we can pay little other
credit to their accounts, farther than that it is a rich and flourishing
kingdom, and that it approaches, in its government, policy, and the quickness
and acuteness of its inhabitants, very near to the Chinese. The kingdom of Siam
is surrounded by high mountains, which, on the east side, separate it from the
kingdoms of Camboja and Laos; on the west, from Pegu; and on the north, from
Ava, or, more properly, from Jangoma; on the south it is washed by the river
Siam, and has the peninsula o Malacca, the north-west part whereof is under its
dominion. The extent of the country, however, is very uncertain, and it is but
indifferently peopled. The inhabitants of both sexes are more modest than any
found in the rest of this peninsula. Great care is taken of the education of
their children. Their marriages are simple, and performed by their talapoins,
or priests, sprinkling holy water upon the couple, and repeating some prayers.
We are told that gold is so abundant in this country, that their most ponderous
images are made of it; and that it is seen in vast quantities on the outside of
the king's palace. These relations are found, by modern travelers, to be the
fictions of French and other missionaries; for though the country has mines of
gold, their ornaments are either excessively thin plates of that metal, or a
very bright lacker that cover wooden or other materials. The government here is
extremely despotic; even servants must appear before their masters in a
kneeling posture; and the madarins are prostrate before the king. Siam, the
capital, is represented as a large city, but scarcely a sixth part of it is
inhabited; and the palace is about a mile and a half in circuit. Bankok, which
stands about 18 leagues to the south of Siam, and 12 miles from the sea, is the
only place toward the coast that is fortified with walls, batteries. and brass
cannon: and the Dutch have a factory at Ligor, which stands on the east side of
the peninsula of Malacca, but belonging to Siam.

The peninsula of Malacca is a large country, and contains several kingdoms or
provinces. The Dutch, however, are said to be real masters and sovereigns of
the whole peninsula, being in possession of the capital (Malacca.) The
inhabitants differ but little from brutes in their manner of living; and yet
the Malayan language is reckoned the purest of any spoken in all the Indies. We
are told by the latest travelers that its chief produce is tin, pepper,
elephants teeth, canes, and gums. Some missionaries pretend that it is the
Golden Chersonesus, or peninsula of the ancients, and that the inhabitants used
to measure their riches by bars of gold. The truth is, that the excellent
situation of this country admits of a trade with India; so that when it was
first discovered by the Portuguese, who were afterward expelled by the Dutch,
Malacca was the richest city in the East, next to Goa and Or^^^s, being the key
of the China, the Japan, the Moluccas, and the S^nda trade. The country,
however, at present, is chiefly valuable for its trade with the Chinese. This
degeneracy of the Malayans, who were formerly an industrious, ingenious people,
is easily accounted for, by the tyranny of the Dutch, whose interest it is that
they should never recover from their present state of ignorance and slavery.

The English carry on a smuggling kind of trade in their country ships, from
the coast of Coromandel and the Bay of Bengal to Malac^^. This commerce is
connived at by the Dutch governor and council among them, who little regard the
orders of their superiors, provided they can enrich themselves.

Cambodia, or Camboja, is a country little known to the Europeans; but,
according to the best information, its greatest length, from north to south, is
about 520 English miles; and its greatest breadth, from west to east, about 398
miles. This kingdom has a spacious river running through it, the banks of which
are the only habitable parts of the nation, on account of its sultry air, and
the pestiferous gnats, serpents, and other animals bred in the woods. Its soil,
commodities, trade, animals, and products by sea and land, are much the same
with the other kingdoms of this vast peninsula. The betel, a creeping plant a
particular flavor, and, as they say, an excellent remedy for all those
diseases that are common to the inhabitants of the East Indies, is the highest
luxury of the Cambodians, from the king to the peasant; but is very unpalatable
and disagreeable to the Europeans. The same barbarous magnificence, the
despotism of their king, and the ignorance of the people, prevail here as
throughout the rest of the peninsula. Between Cambodia and Cochin-China lies
the little kingdom of Chiampa, the inhabitants of which trade with the Chinese,
and seem therefore to be somewhat more civilized than their neighbors.

Cochin-China, or the western China, is situated under the torrid (...), and
extends, according to some authors, about 500 miles in length; but it is much
less extensive in its breadth from east to west. Laos, Cambodia, and Chiampa,
as well as some other smaller kingdoms, are said to the tributary to
Cochin-China; some particulars of which we have mentioned in the general view
of this peninsula. The manners and religion of the people seem to be originally
Chinese; and they are much given to trade. Their king is said to be immensely
rich, and his kingdom enjoys all the advantages of commerce that are found in
the other parts of the East Indies; but at the same time we are told, that this
mighty prince, as well as the king of Tonquin, is subject to the Chinese
emperor. It is reasonable to suppose, that all those rich countries were
peopled from China, or at least that they had, some time or other, been
governed by one head, till the mother empire became so large, that it might be
convenient to parcel it out, preserving to itself a kind of feudal superiority
over them all.

Tonquin has been already mentioned, and little can be added to what has been
said, unless we adopt the fictions of the catholic missionaries. The government
of this kingdom, however, is particular. The Tonquinese had revolted from the
Chinese, which was attended by a civil war. A compromise at last took place
between the chief of the revolt and the representative of the ancient kings, by
which the former was to have all the executive powers of the government, under
the name of the Chouah; but that the Bua, or real king, should retain the royal
titles, and be permitted some inconsiderable civil prerogatives within his
palace, from which neither he nor any of his family can stir without the
permission of the chouah.

The chouah resides generally in the capital Cachao, which is situated near the
center of the kingdom. The bua's palace is a vast structure, and has a fine
arsenal. The English have a very flourishing house on the north-side of the
city, conveniently fitted up with store, houses and office-houses, a noble
dining room, and handsome apartments for the merchants, factors, and officers
of the company.

The above is the best account we have been able to give of this vast
peninsula. Its rarities, consisting of houses overlaid with gold, and solid
idols of the same metal, adorned with an infinite number of precious stones and
jewels, are mentioned by many travelers; but it is difficult to give them
credit, when we consider the undisciplined weakness of the inhabitants, their
superstition, indolence, ignorance, and native timidity; which must render them
a prey not only to European adventurers, but to the Tartar conquerors of China.
To this we may add, the universally admitted passion of those people for
oftentation, and the many discoveries that have been made by candid travelers,
of their displaying plated or gilded furniture and ornaments, at which they are
wonderfully expert, for those of massy gold.

The possession of rubies, and other precious stones of an extraordinary size,
and even of white and party-colored elephants, conveys among those credulous
people a pre-eminence of rank and royalty, and has sometimes occasioned bloody
wars. After all, it must be acknowledged, that, however dark the accounts we
have of those kingdoms may be, yet there is sufficient evidence to prove, that
they are immensely rich in all the treasures of nature; but that those
advantages are attended with many natural calamities, such as floods, volcanos,
earthquakes, tempests, and above all, rapacious and poisonous animals, which
render the possession of life, even for an hour, precarious and uncertain.

PERSIA.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 1300 Miles. between Degrees. 44 and 70 east longitude. Sq.
Miles.800,000 Breadth 1100 Miles. Degrees. 25 and 44 north latitude. Sq.
Miles.800,000.

BOUNDARIES.] MODERN Persia is bounded by the mountains of Ararat, or
Daghistan, which divide it from Circassian Tartary, on the North-West; by the
Caspian sea, which divides it from Russia, on the North; by the river Oxus,
which divides it from Usbec Tartary, on the North-East; by India, on the East;
and by the Indian Ocean, and the gulfs of Persia and Ormus, on the South; and
by Arabia and Turkey, on the West.

This kingdom is divided into the following provinces: On the frontiers of
India are Chorasan, part of the ancient Hyrcania, including Herat and
Esterabad; Sableustan, including the ancient Bacteria^a and Candahor; and
Sagistan the ancient Drangiana. The southern division contains Makeran, kerman,
the ancient Godiossia, and Farsi^tan, the ancient Persia. The south west
division, on the frontiers of Turkey, contains the provinces of Chusistan, the
ancient Susiana, and Irac-Agem the ancient Parthia. The north-west division,
lying between the Caspian sea and the frontiers of Turkey in Asia, contains the
provinces of Aderbeitzen, the ancient Media; Gangea, Daghistan part of the
ancient Iberia and Colchis; Ghilan part of the ancient Hyrcania; Shirvan, and
Mazanderan.

NAME.] Persia, according to the poets, derived its name from Perseus, the son
of Jupiter and Danae. Lets fabulous authors suppose it derived from Paras,
which signifies a horseman; the Persians, or Parthians, being always celebrated
for their skill in horsemanship.

AIR.] In so extensive an empire this is very different. Those parts which
border upon Caucasus and Daghistan, and the mountains near the Caspian sea, are
cold, as lying in the neighborhood of those mountains which are commonly
covered with snow. The air in the midland provinces of Persia is serene, pure,
and exhilarating, but in the southern provinces it is hot, and sometimes
communicates noxious blasts to the midland parts, which are so often mortal,
that the inhabitants fortify their heads with very thick turbans.

SOIL AND PRODUCTIONS.] These vary like the air. The soil is far from being
luxuriant toward Tartary and Caspian sea, but with cultivation it might
produce abundance of corn and fruits. -- South of mount Taurus, the fertility
of the country in corn, fruits, wine, and other luxuries of life, is equalled
by few countries. It produces wine and oil in plenty, senna, rhubarb, and the
finest of drugs. The fruits are delicious, especially their dates, oranges,
pistachio nuts, melons, cucumbers, and garden-stuff, not to mention vast
quantities of excellent silk; and the gulf of Bassora formerly furnished great
part of Europe and Asia with very fine pearls. Some parts, near Ispahan
especially, produce almost all the flowers that are valued in Europe: and from
some of them, the roses especially, they extract waters of a salubrious and
odorific kind, which form a gainful commodity in trade. In short, the fruits,
vegetables, and flowers of Persia, are of a most excellent flavor; and had the
natives the art of horticulture to as great perfection as some nations in
Europe, by transplanting, engrafting, and other meliorations, they would add
greatly to the natural riches of the country. The Persian assafoetida flows
from a plant called Hil^ot, and turns into a gum. Some of it is white, and some
black; but the former is so much valued, that the natives make very rich sauces
of it, and sometimes eat it as a rarity.

MOUNTAINS.] These are Caucasus and Ararat, which are called the mountains of
Daghistan; and the vast collection of mountains called Taurus, and their
divisions, run through the middle of the country from Natolia to India.

RIVERS.] It has been observed, that no country, of so great an extent, has so
few navigable rivers as Persia. The most considerable are those of the Kur,
anciently Cyrus; and Aras, anciently Araxes, which rises in or near the
mountains of Ararat, and, joining their streams, fall into the Caspian sea.
Some small rivulets falling from the mountains water the country; but their
streams are so inconsiderable, that few or none of them can be navigated even
with boats. The Oxus can scarcely be called a Persian river, though it divides
Persia from Usbec Tartary. Persia has the river Indus on the east, and the
Euphrates and Tigris on the west.

WATER.] The scarcity of rivers in Persia, is joined to a scarcity of water;
but the defect, where it prevails, is admirably well supplied by means of
reservoirs, aqueducts, canals, and other ingenious methods.

METALS AND MINERALS.] Persia contains mines of iron, copper, lead, and above
all, turquoise stones, which are found in Chorasan -- Sulphur, saltpeter, and
antimony, are found in the mountains. Quarries of red, white, and black marble,
have also been discovered near Tauris.

POPULATION, INHABITANTS, MANNERS, CUSTOMS, AND DIVERSIONS.] It is impossible
to speak with any certainty concerning the population of a country so little
known as that of Persia. If we are to judge by the vast armies, in modern as
well as ancient times, raised there, the numbers it contains must be very
great. The Persians of both sexes are generally handsome; the men being fond of
Georgian and Circassian women. Their complexions toward the south are somewhat
swarthy. The men shave their heads, but the young men suffer a lock of hair to
grow on each side, and the beard of their chin to reach up to their temples;
but religious people wear long beards. Men of rank and quality wear very
magnificent turbans; many of them cost twenty-five pounds, and few under nine
or ten -- They have a maxim to keep their heads very warm, so that they never
pull of their caps or their turbans out of respect even to the king. Their
dress is very simple. Next to their skin they wear callico shirts, over them a
vest, which reaches below the knee, girt with a sash, and over that a loose
garment somewhat shorter. The materials of their clothes, however, are commonly
very expensive; consisting of the richest furs, silks, muslin, cottons, and the
like valuable stuffs, richly embroidered with gold and silver. They wear a kind
of loose boots on their legs, and slippers on their feet. They are fond of
riding, and very expensive in their equipages. They wear at all times a dagger
in their sash, and linen trowsers. The collars of their shirts and clothes are
open; so that their dress upon the whole is far better adapted for the purposes
both of health and activity, than the long flowing robes of the Turks. The
dress of the women is not much different; their wear, as well as that of the
men, is very costly; and they are at great pains to heighten their beauty by
art, colors, and washes.

The Persians accustom themselves to frequent washings and ablutions, which are
the more necessary, as they seldom change their linen. In the morning early
they drink coffee, about eleven go to dinner, upon fruits, sweatmeats, and
milk. Their chief meal is at night. They out at their repasts cakes of rice,
and others of wheat flour; and as they esteem it an abomination to cut either
bread, or any kind of meat, after it is dressed, these cakes are made thin,
that they may be easily broken with the hand; and their meat, which is
generally mutton, or fowls is so prepared, that they divide it with their
fingers. When every thing is set in order before them, they cat fast, and
without any ceremony. But it is observed by a late traveller, that when the
oldest man in the company speaks, though he be poor and set at the lower end of
the room, they all give a strict attention to his words. They are temperate,
but use opium, though not in such abundance as the Turks; not are they very
delicate in their entertainments of eating and drinking. They are great masters
of ceremony toward their superiors, and so polite, that they accommodate
Europeans who visit them, with stools, that they may not be forced to fit
cross-legged. They are so immoderately fond of tobacco, which they smoke
through a tube fixed in water, so as to be cool in the mouth, that when it has
been prohibited by their princes, they have been known to leave their country
rather than be debarred from that enjoyment. The Persians are naturally fond of
poetry, moral sentences, and hyperbole. Their long wars, and their national
revolutions have mingled the native Persians with barbarous nations, and are
said to have taught them dissimulation; but they are still pleasing and
plausible in their behavior, and in all ages have been remarkable for
hospitality.

The Persians write like the Hebrews, from the right to the left; are (...) in
their seals and materials for writing, and wonderfully expeditious in the art.
The number of people employed on their manuscripts (for no printing is allowed
there) is incredible. They great ^^^ble seems to be ostentation in their
equipages and dresses; not are they less jealous of their women than the Turks,
and other eastern nations. They are fond of music, and take a pleasure in
conversing in large companies; but their chief diversions are those of the
field, (...) hawking, horsemanship, and the exercise of arms, in all which they
are very dexterous. They excel, as their ancestors the P^^^hians did, in
archery. They are fond of rope-dancers, jugglers, and fighting of wild beasts;
and privately playing at games of chance.

Men may marry for life, or for any determined time, in Persia, as well as
through all Tartary; and travelers or merchants, who intend to stay some time
in any city, commonly apply to the cadee, or (...) for a wife during the time
they propose to stay. The cadee for (...) gratuity, produces a number of girls,
whom he declares to be honest, and free from diseases; and he becomes surety
for them. A gentleman who lately attended the Russian embassy to Persia
declares, that, amongst thousands, there has not been one instance of their
dishonesty during the time agreed upon.

RELIGION.] The Persians are Mahometans of the sect of Ali; for which reason
the Turks, who follow the succession of Omar and Abu Bekr, call them heretics.
Their religion is, if possible, in some things more fantastical and sensual
than that of the Turks; but in many points it is mingled with some bramin
superstitions. When they are taxed by the Christians with drinking strong
liquors, as many of them do, they answer very sensible, "You Christians whore
and get drunk, though you know you are committing sins, which is the very case
with us." Having mentioned the bramins, the comparison between them and the
Persian guebres or gaurs, who pretend to be the disciples and successors of the
ancient magi, the followers of Zoroaster, may be highly worth a learned
disquisition: That both of them held originally pure and simple ideas of a
Supreme Being, may be easily proved; but the Indian bramins and parse^s accuse
the gaurs, who still worship the fire, of having sensualized those ideas, and
of introducing and evil principle into the government of the world. A
combustible ground, about ten miles distant from Baku, a city in the north of
Persia, is the scene of the guebres devotions. It must be admitted, that this
ground is impregnated with very surprising inflammatory qualities, and contains
several old little temples; in one of which the guebres pretend to preserve the
sacred flame of the universal fire, which rises from the end, and a large
hollow cane stuck in the ground, resembling a lamp burning with very pure
spirits. The Mahometans are the declared enemies of the gaurs, who were
banished out of Persia by Shah Abbas. Their sect is said to be numerous, though
tolerated in very few places.

The long wars between the Persians and the Romans seem early to have driven
the ancient Christians into Persia, and the neighboring countries. Even to
this day, many sects are found that evidently have Christianity for the ground
work of their religion. Some of them, called Souffccs, who are a kind of
quietists, sacrifice their passions to God, and profess the moral duties. The
Sabean Christians have, in their religion, a mixture of Judaism and
Mahometanism; and are numerous toward the Persian gulf. We have already
mentioned the Armenian and Georgian Christians, who are very numerous in
Persia. The present race of Persians are said to be very cool in the doctrines
of Mahomet, owing chiefly to their late wars with the Turks.

LEARNING AND LEARNED MEN.] The Persians, in ancient times, were famous for
both; and their poets renowned all over the East. There is a manuscript at
Oxford (Eng.) containing the lives of an hundred and thirty-five of the finest
Persian poets. Ferdusi and Sadi were among the most celebrated of the Persian
poets. The former comprised the history of Persia in a series of epic poems,
which employed him for near thirty years, and which are said by Mr. Jones to be
"a glorious monument of Eastern genius and learning." Sadi was a native of
Schiras, and flourished in the thirteenth century, and wrote many fine pieces,
both in prose and verse. Shemseddin was one of the most eminent lyric poets
that Asia has produced; and Nakhsbeb wrote in Persian a book called the "Tales
of a Parrot," not unlike the Decameron of Boccace. Jami was a most animated and
elegant poet, who flourished in the middle of the fifteenth century, and whose
beautiful compositions, on a great variety of subjects, are preserved at
Oxford, in twenty-two volumes. Hariri composed in a rich, elegant, and flowery
style, a moral work, in fifty dissertations, on the changes of fortune, and the
various conditions of human life, interspersed with a number of agreeable
adventures, and several fine pieces of poetry.

At present, learning is at a very low ebb among the Persians. Their boasted
skill in astronomy is now reduced to a mere smattering in that science, and
terminates in judicial astrology; so that no people in the world are more
superstitious than the Persians. The learned professions in greatest esteem
among them is that of medicine; which is at perpetual variance with astrology,
because every dose must be in the lucky hour fixed by the astrologer, which
often defeats the ends of the prescription. It is said, however, that the
Persian physicians are acute and sagacious. Their drugs are excellent, and they
are no strangers to the practices of Galen and Avicenna. Add to this, that the
plague is but little known in this country; as equally rare are many other
diseases that are fatal in other places; such as the gout, the stone, the
smallpox, consumptions, and apoplexies. The Persian practice of physic is
therefore pretty much circumscribed, and they are very ignorant in surgery,
which is exercised by barbars, whose chief knowledge of it is in letting blood;
for they trust the healing of green wounds to the excellency of the air, and
the good habit of the patient's body.

ANTIQUITIES AND CURIOSITIES, NATURAL AND ARTIFICIAL.} The monuments of
antiquity in Persia, are more celebrated for their magnificence and expense,
than their beauty or taste. No more than nineteen columns, which formerly
belonged to the famous palace of Persepolis, are now remaining. Each is about
fifteen feet high, and composed of excellent Parian marble. The ruins of other
ancient buildings are found in many parts of Persia, but void of that elegance
and beauty which is displayed in the Greek architecture. The tombs at the kings
of Persia are stupendous works; being cut out of a rock, and highly ornamented
with sculptures. The chief of the modern edifices is a pillar to be seen at
Ispahan, sixty feet high, consisting of the skulls of beasts, erected by Shah
Abbas, after the suppression of a rebellion. Abbas had vowed to erect such a
column of human skulls; but upon the submissions of the rebels, he performed
his vow by substituting those of brutes, each of the rebels furnishing one.

The baths near Gombroon work such cures, that they are esteemed among the
natural curiosities of Persia. The springs of the famous Naphtha near Baku, are
mentioned often in natural history for their surprising qualities; but the
chief of the natural curiosities in this country, is the burning phenomenon,
and its inflammatory neighborhood, already mentioned under the article of
Religion.

HOUSES, CITIES, AND PUCLIC EDIFICES.] The houses of men, of quality in Persia,
are in the same taste with those of the Asiatic Turks already described. They
are seldom above one story high, built of bricks, with flat roofs for walking
on, and thick walls. The hall is arched, the doors are clumsey and narrow, and
the rooms have no communication but with the hall; the kitchens and
office-houses being built apart. Few of them have chimnies, but a round hole in
the middle of the room. Their furniture chiefly consists of carpets, and their
beds are two thick cotton quilts, which serve them likewise as coverlids, with
carpets under them.

Ispahan or Spahawn, the capital of Persia, is seated on a fine plain, within a
mile of the river Zenderhend, which supplies it with water. It is said to be
twelve miles in circumference. The streets are narrow and crooked, and the
chief amusement of the inhabitants is on the flat roofs of their houses, where
they spend their summer evenings; and different families associate together.
The royal square is a third of a mile in length, and about half as much in
breadth; and we are ^old, that the royal palace, with the buildings and gardens
belonging to it, is three miles in circumference. There are in Ispahan 160
mosques, 1800 caravanseras, 260 public baths, a prodigious number of (...)
squares, streets, and palaces, in which are canals, and tress planned to shade
and better accommodate the people. This capital is said formerly to have
contained 650,000 inhabitants; but was often depopulated by Kouli Khan during
his wars, so that we may easily suppose, that it has lost great part of its
magnificence. In 1744, when Mr. Hanway was there, it was thought that not above
5000 of its houses were inhabited.

Schiras lies about 200 miles to the south of Astrachan. It is an open town,
but its neighborhood is inexpressibly rich and beautiful, being laid out for
many miles in gardens, the flowers, fruits, and vi^^^ of which are
incomparable. The vines of Shiras are reckoned the best of any in Persia. This
town is the capital of Pars, the ancient Persia, and has a college for the
study of eastern learning. It contains an uncommon number of mosques, and is
adorned by many noble buildings, but its streets are narrow and inconvenient,
and not above 4000 of its houses are inhabited.

The cities of Ormus and Gombroon, on the narrow part of the Persian Gulf, were
formerly places of great commerce and importance. The English, and other
Europeans, have factories at Gombroon, where they trade with the Persians.
Arabians, Banyans, Armenians, Turks, and Tartars, who come hither with the
caravans which set out from various inland cities of Asia, under the convoy of
guards.

Mosques are religions buildings, square, and generally of stone; and are
pretty much the same in all Mohammedan countries. Before the chief gate there is
a square court, paved with white marble, and low galleries round it, whole roof
is supported by marble pillars. These galleries serve for places of ablution
before the Mahometans go into the mosque. About every mosque there are six high
towers, called minarets, each of which has three little open galleries, one
above another. These towers, as well as the mosques, are covered with land, and
adorned with gilding and other ornaments; and from thence instead of a bell,
the people are called to prayer by certain officers appointed for that purpose.
No woman is allowed to enter the mosque; nor can a man with his shoes or
stockings on. Near most mosque is a place of entertainment for strangers during
three days; and the (...) of the founder, with conveniences for reading the
Koran, and praying.

The bagnios in the Mohammedan countries are wonderfully well constructed for
the purpose of bathing. Sometimes they are square, but oftener circular, built
of white well polished stone or marble. Each ^^gnio contains three rooms; the
first for dressing and underssing; the second contains the water, and the third
the bath; all of them paved with black and white marble. The operation of the
bath is very curious but wholesome; though to those not accustomed to it, it is
pain^^^. The water rubs the patient with great vigor, then handles and
stretches his limbs as if he was dislocating every bone in the body; all which
exercises are, in those inert warm countries, very conductive to health. In
public bagnios, the men bathe from morning to four in the afternoon; when, all
male attendants being removed, the ladies succeed and when coming out of the
bath display their finest clothes.

We might here attempt to describe the eastern seraglios or harams, the women's
apartments; but from the most credible accounts, they on contrived according to
the taste and convenience of the owner, and divided into a certain number of
apartments, which are seldom or never entered by strangers; and there is no
country where women are (...) strictly guarded and confined as among the great
men in Persia.

MANUFACTURES AND COMMERCE.] The Persians equal, if not ex^^^d, all the
manufactures in the world in silk, woollen, mohair, car^^t and leather. Their
works in these join fancy, taste, and elegance, to richness, neatness, and
show: and yet they are ignorant of painting, and their drawings are very rude.
Their dying excels that of Europe. Their silver and gold laces, and threads,
are admirable for preserving their luster. Their embroideries and horse
furniture are not to be equalled; not are they ignorant of the pottery and
window glass manufactures On the other hand, their carpenters are very
indifferent artists, which is said to be owing to the scarcity of timber all
over Persia. Their jewellers and goldsmiths are clumsy workmen; and they are
ignorant of lock-making, and the manufacture of looking-glasses. Upon the
whole, they lie under inexpressible disadvantages from the (...) of their
government, which renders them slaves to their kings, who often engross either
their labor or their profits.

The trade of the Persians, who have little or no shipping of their own, is
carried on in foreign bottoms. That between the English and other nations, by
the gulf of Ormus at Gombroon, was the most gainful they had; but the perpetual
wars they have been engaged in have (...) their commerce. The great scheme of
the English, in trading with the Persians through Russia, promised vast
advantages to both nations, but it has hitherto answered the expectations of
neither. Perhaps the court of Petersburgh is not fond of suffering the English
to ^^^ddish themselves upon the Caspian sea, the navigation of which is (...)
possessed by the Russians; but nothing can be said with certainty (...) that
head, till the government of Persia is in a more settled condi^^^^ th^n it is
at present.

CONSTITUTION AND GOVERNMENT.] Both these are extremely (...), as resting in
the breast of a despotic, and often capricious (...). The Persians however had
some fundamental rules of government. They excluded from their throne females,
but not their (...) progeny. Blindness likewise was a disqualification for the
roy^^^ ^^^^ssion. In other respects the king's will was a law for the people.
The instances that have been given of the cruelties and inhumanities practiced
by the Mohammedan kings of Persia, are almost incredible, especially during the
two last centuries. The reason given to the Christian ambassadors, by Shah
Abbas, one of their most celebrated princes, was, that the Persians were such
brutes, and so insensible by nature, that they could not be governed without
the exercise of exemplary cruelties. But this was only a wretched and
ill-grounded apology for his own barbarity. The favorites of the prince,
female as well as male, are his only counselors, and the smallest disobedience
to their will is attended with immediate death. The Persians have no degrees of
nobility, so that the respect due to every man, on account of his high station,
expires with himself. The king has been known to prefer a younger son to his
throne, by putting out the eyes of the elder brother.

REVENUES.] The crown claims one third of the cattle, corn, and fruits of his
subjects, and likewise a third of silk and cotton. No rank or condition of
Persians is exempted from severe taxations and services. The governors of
provinces have particular lands assigned to them for maintaining their retinues
and troops; and the crown lands defray the expenses of the court, king's
household, and great officers of state. After saying thus much, the reader
cannot doubt that the revenues of the Persian kings were prodigious; but
nothing can be said with any certainty in the present distracted state of that
country. Even the water that is let into fields and gardens is subject to a
tax; and foreigners, who are not Mahometans, pay each a ducat a head.

MILITARY STRENGTH.] This consisted formerly of cavalry, and it is now thought
to exceed that of the Turks. Since the beginning of this century, however,
their kings have raised bodies of infantry. The regular troops of both brought
to the field, even under Kouli Khan, did not exceed 60,000; but according to
the modern histories of Persia, they are easily recruited in case of a defeat.
The Persians have few fortified towns; not had they any ships of war, until
Kouli Khan built a royal navy; but since his death we hear no more of their
fleet.

ARMS AND TITLES.] The arms of the Persian monarch are a lion couchant looking
at the rising sun. His title is Shah, or the Disposer of Kingdoms. Shah or
Khan, and Sultan, which he assumes likewise are Tartar titles. To acts of state
the Persian monarch does not subscribe his name, but the grant runs in this
manner. This act is given by whom the universe obeys.

HISTORY.] All ancient historians mention the Persian monarchs and their
grandeur; and no empire has undergone a greater variety of governments. It is
here sufficient to say, that the Persian empire succeeded the Assyrian or
Babylonian, and that Cyrus said its foundation about 556 years before Christ,
and restored the Israelites, who had been captive at Babylon, to liberty. It
ended in the person of Darius, who was conquered by Alexander 329 years before
Christ. When Alexander's empire was divided among his great general officers,
their posterity were conquered by the Romans. These last, however, never fully
subdued Persia, and the natives had princes of their own, by the name of
A^saces, who more than once defeated the Roman legions. The successors of these
princes survived the Roman empire itself, but were subdued by the famous
Tamerlene, whose posterity were supplanted by a doctor of law, Cheki Adir, the
ancestor of the Sefi or Sophi family, and who pretended to be descended from
Mahomet himself. His successors, though some of them were valiant and politic,
and enlarged the empire, and from him sometimes called Sophis, proved in
general to be a disgrace to humanity, by their cruelty, The instances of wanton
cruelty, and the most savage barbarity, recorded of some of the kings of
Persia, are shocking to humanity, and a striking evidence of the miseries and
cal^^ities occasioned by despotic power. Shab Abbas, surnamed the Great, having
three sons, ^^sed the eyes of the two youngest to be put out, and afterward
put the eldest to death. He was succeeded by his grandson, who began his reign
by ordering the eyes of his only brother to be cut out, and he also cast from a
rock his two uncles, who had before been blinded by (...) of Shah Abbas. The
instances of his cruelty were innumerable. He buried alive forty (...) women of
his H^ram, though when he was not hunting, or over his cups, be used to (...)
his time with them. Saffie, or Suliman, who ascended the throne of Persia in
1666, (...) was a brutal tyrant, when he was intoxicated either with wine or
anger, often ordered (...) hands, feet, ears, and noses, of those near him to
be cut off, their eyes to be plucked out, (...) their lives to be sacrificed,
as if it were his pastime.
ignorance and indolence, which brought them into such disrepute with their
subjects, barbarous as they were, that Hassein, a prince of the Sesi race, who
succeeded in 1694, was murdered by Mahmud, son and successor to the famous
Miriweis; as Mahmud himself was by Esref, one of his general officers, who
usurped the throne. Prince Tahmas, the representative of the Sefi family, had
escaped from the rebels, and assembling an army, took into his service Nadir
Shah, who defeated and killed Esref, and re-annexed to the Persian monarchy all
the places dismembered from it by the Turks and Tartars during their late
rebellions. At last the secret ambition of Nadir broke out, and after assuming
the name of Thamas Kouli Khan, and pretending that his services were not
sufficiently rewarded, he rebelled against his sovereign, made him a prisoner,
and it is supposed, put him to death.

This usurper afterward mounted the throne, under the title of Shah Nadir;
made a successful expedition into Indostan, where he acquired an amazing booty,
but brought back an inconsiderable part of this booty from India, losing great
part of it upon his return, by the Marrattas and various accidents. He next
conquered Usbec Tartary; but was not so successful against the Daghestan
Tartars, whose country he found to be inaccessible. He beat the Turks in
several engagements, but was unable to take Bagdad. The great principle of his
government was to strike terror into all his subjects by the most cruel
executions. His conduct became so intolerable, that it was thought his brain
was touched; and he was assassinated in his own tent, partly is self-defence,
by his chief officers and his relations, in the year 1747. Many pretenders,
upon his death, started up; but the fortunate candidate was Kerim Khan, who was
crowned at Tauris in 1763, and, according to the latest accounts, still keeps
possession of the throne.

ARABIA.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 1430 Miles. between Degrees. 35 and 60 east longitude. Sq. Miles.
700,000 Breadth 1200 Miles. Degrees. 12 and 30 north latitude. Sq. Miles.
700,000

BOUNDARIES.] BOUNDED by Turkey on the North; by the gulfs of Persia or
Basfora, and Ormus, which separate it from Persia, on the East; by the Indian
Ocean, South; and the Red Sea, which divides it from Africa, on the West.

Divisions. Subdivisions. Chief towns. 1. Arabia Petraea, N. W. -- -- SUEZ, E.
lon. 33-27. N. lat. 29*50. 2. Arabia Deserta, in the middle. Haggiaz or Mecca
MECCA, E. lon. 43-30 lat. 21-20. Siden -- Medina Tehama Dhafar 3. Arabia Felix,
S. E. Mocha MOCHA, E. long. 44-4. N. lat.13-45. Sibit Hadramut Hadramut Casseen
Casseen Segur Segur Oman or Muscat Muscat Jamama Jamama Bahara Elcalf.

NAME.] It is remarkable that this country has always preserved in ancient
name. The word Arab, it is generally said, signifies a robb^^, or freebooter.
The word Saracen, by which one tribe is called, it said to signify both a thief
and an inhabitant of the desert. These names justly belong to the Arabians, for
they seldom let any merchandise pass through and country without extorting
something from the owners, if they do not rob them.

MOUNTAINS.] The mountains of Sinai and Horeb, lying in Arabia Petraea, east of
the Red Sea, and those called Gabel el Ared, in Arabia Felix, are the most
noted.

RIVERS, SEAS, GULFS, AND CAP^S.] There are few fountains springs, or rivers in
this country, except the Euphrates, which washes the north-east limits of it.
It is almost surrounded with seas; as the Indian Ocean, the Red Sea, the gulfs
of Persia and Ormus. The chief capes or Promontories are those of Rosalgate and
Mussedon.

CLIMATE, AIR, SOIL, AND PRODUCE.] As a considerable part of this country lies
under the Torrid Zone, and the Tropic of Cancer passes over Arabia Felix, the
air is excessively dry and hot, and the country is subject to hot poisonous
winds, like those on the opposite shores of Persia, which often prove fatal,
especially to strangers. The soil, in some parts, is nothing more than immense
sands, which, when agitated by the winds, roll like the troubled ocean, and
sometimes form mountains by which whole caravans have been buried or lost. In
these deserts, the caravans, having no tracks, are guided, as at sea, by a
compass, or by the stars, for they travel chiefly in the night. Here, says Dr.
Shaw, are no pastures clothed with stocks, nor valleys standing thick with
corn; here are no vineyards or oliveyards; but the whole is a lonesome desolate
wilderness, no otherways diversified than by plains covered with sand, and
mountains that are made up of naked rocks and precipices. Neither is this
country ever, unless sometimes at the equinoxes, refreshed with rain; and the
intenseness of the cold in the night is almost equal to that of the heat in the
daytime. But the southern part of Arabia, deservedly called the Happy, is
blessed with an excellent soil, and, in general, is very fertile. There the
cultivated lands, which are chiefly about the towns near the seacoast, produce
balm of Gilead, manna, myrrh, cassia, aloes, frankincense, spikenard, and other
valuable gums; cinnamon, pepper, cardamum, oranges, lemons, pomegranates, figs,
and other fruits; honey and wax in plenty, with a small quantity of corn and
wine. This country is famous for its coffee and its dates, which last are found
scarcely any where in such perfection as here and in Persia. There are few
trees fit for timber in Arabia, and little wood of any kind.

ANIMALS.] The most useful animals in Arabia are camels and dromedaries; they
are amazingly fitted by Providence for traveling the dry and parched deserts
of this country, for they are so formed, that they can throw up the liquor from
their stomach into their throat, by which means they can travel six or eight
days without water. The camels usually carry 800lb. weight upon their backs,
which is not taken off during the whole journey, for they naturally kneel down
to rest, and in due time rise with their load. The dromedary is a small camel
that will travel many miles a day. It is an observation among the Arabs, that
wherever there are trees, the water is not far off; and when they draw near a
pool, their camels will small it at a distance, and set up their great trot
till they come to it. The Arabian horses are well known in Europe, and have
contributed to improve the breed of those in England. They are only fit for the
saddle, and are admired for their make as much as for their swiftness and high
mettle. The (...) breed is in the kingdom of Sunnaa, in which Mocha is situated.

INHABITANTS, MANNERS, CUSIOMS, AND DRESS.} The Arabians, like most of the
nations, of Asia, are of a middle stature, thin, and of a swarthy complexion,
with black hair and black eyes. They are swift of foot, excellent horsemen, and
are said to be in general a brave people, expert at the bow and lance, and
since they became acquainted with fire arms, good marksmen. The inhabitants of
the in^^id country live in tents, and remove from place to place with their
sacks and herds, as they have ever done since they become a nation.

The Arabians in general are such thieves, that travelers and pilgrims, who
are led thither from all nations through motives of devotion (...) curiosity,
are struck with terror on their approaches toward the deserts. Those robbers,
headed by a captain, traverse the country in considerable troops on horseback,
and assault and plunder the caravans; and we are told, that so late as the year
1750, a body of 50,000 ^^^ians attacked a caravan of merchants and pilgrims
returning from Mecca, killed about 60,000 persons, and plundered it of every
thing valuable, though escorted by a Turkish army.

It has been contended says Mr. Bruce, that Polygamy is unnatural and
detrimental to the population of a country. This has been founded upon a
calculation from the bills of mortality of particular countries, by which it
appears that the number of the sexes is equal. In England the proportion is
found to be, as thirteen to twelve: Nature having provided a greater proportion
of men, in order to make up for the havoc occasioned by war, murder,
drunkenness, and all species of violence to which women are not so subject as
men. These arguments however, do not apply to this country and many others:
From a diligent enquiry, it appears, that from the Isthmus of Suei to the
Straits of Babelmandeb, which contains the three Arabias, the proportion is
fully four women to one man.

Without allowing Mahomet all the abilities some have done, we may surely
suppose him to have seen this great disproportion of four women born to one
man: And from its obvious consequences, we are not to wonder that one of his
first cares was to rectify it, as if struck at the very root of his Empire,
Power and Religion; with this view, he enacted, or rather revived, the law
which gave liberty to every individual to marry four wives, each of whom was to
be equal in rank and honor, without any preference but what the predilection
of the husband gave her. By this he secured civil rights to each woman, and
procured a means of doing away that reproach, of dring without issue, to which
the minds of the whole sex have always been sensible, whatever their religion
was, or from whatever past of the world they came. Many, have taxed this
permission of a plurality of wives, (one of the most political and necessary
measures of that Legislator) with a tendency to encourage lewdness, from which
it was very far distant. The expediency of the measure will further appear, by
drawing a comparison between the state of women in those countries in which the
former calculations are made, and the one we are now describing. Women in those
countries are commonly capable of child bearing at fourteen, let the other term
be forty eight, when they bear no more: Thirty four years therefore these women
bear children. At the age of fourteen or fifteen they are objects of our love;
they are endca^ed by bearing us children after that time, and none will
pretend, that at forty eight and fifty years a woman is not an agreeable
companion. Perhaps the last years to thinking minds, are fully as agreeable as
the first. We grow old together, we have a near prospect of dying together;
nothing can present a more agreeable picture of social life, than monogamy in
these countries.

The Arab on the other hand begins to bear children at eleven, and seldom or
never has a child after twenty. The time then of her childbearing is nine
years, and four women taken together. have then the term of thirty six; so that
the women in the former case, who bear children for thirty four years, have
only two years less than the wives whom Mahomet has allowed. But there are
other grievous differences. An Arabian girl, at eleven years old, is the object
of man's desire; being an infant however in understanding, she is not a
rational companion for him. A man marries there, say at twenty, and before he
is thirty, his wife improved as a companion, ceases to be an object of his
desires, and a mother of children; so that the best and most vigorous of his
days are spent with a woman he cannot love, and with her he would be destined
to live forty or forty-five years without comfort to himself by increase of
family, or utility to the public.

The reasons them against poligamy, which subsists in the countries first
mentioned, do by no means subsist in Arabia. Bruce- Tru^^^.


The habit of the roving Arabs is a kind of blue shirt, tied about them with a
white sash or girdle; and some of them have a vest of furs or sheepskins over
it; they also wear drawers, and sometimes slippers, but no stockings; and have
a cap or turban on their head. Many of them go almost naked: but, as in the
eastern countries, the women are so wrapped up, that nothing can be discerned
but their eyes. Like other Mahometans, the Arabs eat all manner of flesh,
except that of hogs; and prefer the flesh of camels, as we prefer venison, to
other meat. They take care to drain the blood from the flesh, as the Jews do,
and like them refuse such fish as have no scales. Coffee and tea, water, and
sherbet made of oranges, water and sugar, is their usual drink: they have no
strong liquors.

RELIGION.] Of this the reader will find an account in the following history of
Mahomet their countryman. Many of the wild Arabs are still Pagans, but the
people in general profess Mahometanism.

LEARNING AND LANGUAGE.] Though the Arabians in former ages were famous for
their learning and skill in all the liberal arts, there is scarcely a country
at present where the people are so universally ignorant. The vulgar language
used in the three Arabias is the Arabesk, or corrupt Arabian, which is likewise
spoken, with some variation of dialect, over great part of the East, from Egypt
to the court of the Great Mogul. The pure old grammatical Arabic, which is said
to be a dialect of the Hebrew, and by the people of the East accounted the
richest, most energetic, and copious language in the world, is taught in their
schools, as Greek and Latin are among Europeans, and used by Mahometans in
their worship; for as the Koran was written in this language, they will not
suffer it to be read in any other: They look upon it to have been the language
of Paradise, and think no man can be master of it without a miracle, as
consisting of several millions of words. The books which treat of it say, they
have no sewer than a thousand terms to express the word, camel, and five
hundred for that of a Lion.

In the Temple of Mecca, of suspended on its walls and gates, are seven Arabian
poems, called the Mcalakat, a fine specimen of Oriental poetry, as to the
dramatic pastoral, which have been lately translated into English by sir
William Jones: The following stanzas of one of the poems are transcribed, as
they serve to gratify the curiosity, and also display a lively and entertaining
view of the Arabian customs and modes living.

1. Desolate are the mansions of the fair, the stations in Minia, where they
rested, and those where they fixed their abodes! Wild are the hills of Goul,
and deserted is the summit of Rijaam.

2. The canabs of Rayann are destroyed; the remains of them are laid bare, and
smoothed by the floods, like characters engraved on the solid rocks.

3. Dear ruins! Many a year has been closed, many a month, holy and unhallowed,
has elapsed since I exchanged tender vows wish the fair inhabitants.

4. The rainy constellations of spring have made their hills green and
luxuriant: The drops from the thunder-clouds have drenched them with profuse as
well as gentle showers:

5. Showers from every nightly cloud, from every cloud veiling the horizon at
daybreak, and from every evening cloud, responsive with hoarse murmurs.

6. Here the wild eringo-plants raise their heads; here the antelopes bring
forth their young by the sides of the valley; and here the ostriches drop their
eggs.

7. The large-eyed wild cows lie suckling their young a few days old; their
young, who will soon become and herd on the plain.

8. The torrents have cleared the rubbish, and disclosed the traces of
habitations, as the reeds of a writer restore effaced letters in a book.

9. Or as the black dust, sprinkled over the varied marks on a fair hand,
brings to view, with a brighter tint, the blue stains of wo^d.

10. I stood asking news of the ruins concerning their lovely habitants; but
what avail my questions to dreary rocks, who answer them only by their echo?

11. In the plains, which now are naked, a populous city once stood; but they
decamped at early dawn, and nothing of them remains but the canals, which
encircled their tents, and the Thuma^^plants, with which they were repaired.

12. How were they tender affections raised, when the damsels of the tribe
departed; when they hid themselves in carriages of cotton, like antelopes in
their lair; and the tents, as they were struck, gave a piercing sound!

13. They were concealed in vehicles, whose sides were well covered with
awnings and carpets, with fine spun curtains, and pictured veils.

14. A company of maidens were seated in them, with black-eyes and graceful
motions, like the wild heifers of Tudah, or the roes of Wegera, tenderly gazing
on their young.

15. They hastened their camels, till the sultry vapor gradually stole them
from they sight; and they seemed to pass through a vale, wild with tamarisks,
and rough with large stones, like the valley of Beista."

CHIEF CITIES, CURIOSITIES, AND ARTS.} What is called the Desert of Sinai, is a
beautiful plain near nine miles long, and above three in breadth; it lies open
to the north-east, but to the southward is closed by some of the lower
eminences of Mount Sinai; and other parts of that mountain make such
encroachments upon the plain as to divide it into two, each so capacious as to
be sufficient to receive the whole camp of the Israelites.

From Mount Sinai may be seen Mount Horeb, where Moses kept the flocks of
Jethro, his father-in-law, when he saw the burning bush. On those mountains,
are many chapels and cells, possessed by the Greek and Latin monks, who, like
the religious at Jerusalem, pretend to show the very spot where every miracle
or transaction recorded in scripture happened.

The chief cities in Arabic are Mocha, Aden, Muschat, Suez, and Juddah or
Jidda. Mocha is well built, the houses very lofty, and are with the walls and
forts covered with a chinam or stucco that gives a dazzling whiteness to them.
The harbor is semicircular, the circuit of the wall is two miles, and there
are several handsome mosques in the city. Suez, the Arsinoe of the ancients, is
surrounded by the desert, and but a shabby place. The ships are forced to
anchor a league from the town, to which the leading channel has only about nine
feet water. Juddah is the place of the greatest trade in the Red Sea, for there
the commerce between Arabia and Europe meets and is interchanged, the former
sending her gums, drugs, coffee, etc. and from Europe come cloths, iron, furs
and other articles by the way Cairo. The port of Juddah, according to Mr.
Bruce, is very extensive, consisting of numberless shoals, small islands, and
sunken rocks, with deep channels between them. The harbor is very secure, but
difficult of entrance: The pilots, however, are very skilful, and no incidents
ever happen.

We cannot omit here to mention the astonishing manner in which trade is
carried on at this place. While Mr. Bruce was there in May, 1769, nine ships
arrived from India, some of them worth perhaps L 200,000. One merchant, a Turk,
living at Mecca, thirty hours journey off, where no christian dares go, while
the whole continent is open to the Turk for escape, offers to purchase the
cargoes of four out of nine of these Ships himself: Another of the same cast,
comes and says he will buy none, unless he has them all. The samples are shown,
and the cargoes of the whole nine ships are carried into the wildest part of
Arabia, by men with whom one would not wish to trust himself alone in the
field. This is not all; two India Brokers come into the room to settle the
price. One on the part of the India Captain, the other on that of the buyer the
Turk. They are neither Mahome^^^s nor Christians, but have credit with both.
They sit down on a carpet, and take an India shawl, which they carry on their
shoulder like a napkin, and spread it over their hands. They talk in the mean
time, on different subjects; of the arrival of the ships from India, or of the
news of the day, as if they were employed in no serious business whatever.
There never was one instance of a dispute happening in these sales.

Matters are to be carried still further, and the money is to be paid. A
private Moor, who has nothing to support him but his character, becomes
responsible for the payment of these cargoes. This man delivers a number of
hempen bags full of what is supposed to be money. He marks the contents upon
the bag, and puts his seal upon the string that ties the mouth of it. This is
received for what is marked upon it, without any one ever having opened the
bag, and in India, it is current for the value marked upon it, as long as the
bag lasts.

Juddah being the most unwholesome part of Arabia, is at the same time, in the
most barren and desert situation. This, and many other inconveniences under
which it labors, would probably have occasioned its being abandoned
altogether, were it not for its vicinity to Mecca, and the great and sudden
influx of wealth from the India (...), which once a year, arrives in this part,
but does not continue, (...) on as through a turnpike to Mecca, whence it is
dispersed all over the east. Very little advantage however accrues to Juddah.
The customs are all immediately sent to a needy sovereign, and a hungry set of
relations, dependents and ministers at Mecca. The gold is returned in bags and
in boxes, and passes on as rapidly to the ships as the goods do to the market,
and leaves as little profit behind. In the mean time provisions rise to a
prodigious price, and this falls upon the townsmen, while all the profit of the
traffic is in the hands of strangers, most of whom, after the market is over,
retire to Yemca, and other neighboring countries, which abound in every sort
of provision. Though Jidda or Juddah is the country of their Prophet, yet no
where are there so many unmarried women; and the permission of marrying four
wives was allowed in this district in the first instance, and afterward
communicated to all the tribes. But Mahomet, in his permission of plurality of
wives, seems constantly to have been on his guard against suffering that, which
was intended for the welfare of his people, from operating in a different
manner. He did not permit a man to marry two, three or four wives, unless he
could maintain them: And the man who married them was obliged to show before
the Cadi or some equivalent officer, that it was in his power to support them.
From this great scarcity of provisions, which is the result of an extraordinary
concourse of people to a place almost destitute of the necessaries of life, few
inhabitants of Jidda can avail themselves of the privileges granted by Mahomet,
as they cannot maintain more than one wife. From this cause arises the want of
people here, and the large number of unmarried women.

Mecca the capital of all Arabia, and Medina, deserve particular notice. At
Mecca, the birthplace of Mahomet, is a mosque so glorious, that it is
generally counted the most magnificent of any temple in the Turkish dominions:
Its lofty roof being raised in fashion of a do^^, and covered with gold, with
two beautiful towers at the end, of extraordinary height and architecture, make
a delightful appearance, and are conspicuous at a great distance. The mosque
has a hundred gates, with a window over each; and the whole building within is
decorated with the finest gildings and tapestry. The number of pilgrims who
yearly visit this place is almost incredible, every Muss^lman being obliged by
his religion to come hither once in his life time, or send a deputy. At Medina,
about fifty miles from the Red Sea, the city to which Mahomet fled when he was
drive out of Mecca, and the place where he was buried, is a stately mosque,
supported by 400 pillars, and furnished with 300 silver lamps, which are
continually burning. It is called the Most Holy by the Turks, because in it is
placed the coffin of their prophet Mahomet, covered with cloth of gold, under a
canopy of silver tissue, which the bashaw of Egypt, by order of the
grand-signior, renews every year. The camel which carries it derives a sort of
sanctity from it, and is never to be used in any drudgery afterward. Over the
foot of the coffin is a rich golden crescent, so curiously wrought, and adorned
with precious stones, that it is esteemed a masterpiece of great value.
Thither the Pilgrims resort, as to Mecca, but not in such numbers.

GOVERNMENT.] The inland country of Arabia is under the government of many
petty princes, who are styled xe^ifs and imans both of them including offices
of king and priest, in the same manner as the (...) of the Saracens, the
successors of Mahomet. These monarchs appear to be absolute, both in spirituals
and temporals; the succession is hereditary, and they have no other laws than
those found in the Koran, and the comments upon it. The northern Arabs owe
subjection to the Turks, and are governed by bashaws residing among them; but
it is certain they receive large gratuities from the grand-signior for
protecting the pilgrims that pass through their country from the robberies of
their countrymen. The Arabians have no standing regular militia, but their
kings command both the persons and the purses of their subjects, as the
necessity of affairs requires.

HISTORY.] The Arabs are descended from Ishmael, of whose posterity it was
foretold, that they shall be invincible, "have their hands against every man,
and every man's hands against theirs." They are at present, and have remained
from the remotest ages, during the various conquests of the Greeks, Romans and
Tartars, a convincing proof of the divinity of this prediction. The conquests
of the Arabs (...) as wonderful a part of their history, as the independence
and freedom which they have ever continued to enjoy. These, as well as their
religion, began with one man, whose character forms a very singular phenomenon
in the history of mankind. This was the famous Mahomet a native of Mecca, a
city of that division of Arabia, which, for the luxuriancy of its soil, and
happy temperature of its climate, has ever been esteemed the loveliest and
sweetest region of the world, and is distinguished by the epithet of Happy.

Mahomet was born in the sixth century, anno 569, in the reign of Justinian II.
emperor of Constantinople. Though descended of mean parentage, illiterate and
poor, Mahomet was endowed with a subtle genius, like those of the same
country. and possessed a degree of enterprise and ambition peculiar to himself,
and much beyond his condition. He had been employed, in the early part of his
life, by an uncle, Abu^^^h, as a factor, and had occasion, in this capacity, to
travel into Syria, Palestine, and Egypt. He was afterward taken into the
service of a rich merchant, upon whose death he married his widow, Cadiga, and
by her means came to be possessed or great wealth, and of a numerous family.
During his peregrinations into Egypt and the East, he had observed the vast
variety of sects in religion, whose hatred against each other was strong and
inveterate, while at the same time there were many particulars in which the
greater part of them were agreed. He carefully laid hold of these particulars,
by means of which, and by addressing himself to the love of power, riches, and
pleasure, passions universal among them, he expected to raise a new system of
religion, (...) general than any which hitherto had been established. In this
design he was assisted by a Sergian monk, whose libertine disposition had made
him forsake his cloister and profession, and engage in the service of Cadiga,
with whom he remained as a domestic when Mahomet was taken to her bed. This
monk was perfectly qualified by his great learning, for supplying the defects
which his master, for (...) of a liberal education, labored under, and which
in all probability, must have obstructed the execution of his design. It was
(...), however, that the religion they proposed to establish should (...) a
divine sanction; and for this purpose Mahomet turned a cala^^^^, with which he
was afflicted, to his advantage. He was often subject to fits of the epilepsy,
a disease which those whom it afflicts are desirous to conceal; Mahomet gave
out therefore that these fits were trances, into which he was miraculously
thrown by God Almighty, during which he was instructed in his well, which he
was commanded to publish to the world. By this strange story, and by leading a
retired, abstemious, and austere life, he easily acquired a character for
superior sanctity among his acquaintance and neighbors. When he thought
himself sufficiently fortified by the numbers, and the enthusiasm of his
followers, he boldly declared himself a prophet, sent by God into the world,
not only to teach his will, but to compel mankind to obey it.

As we have already mentioned, he did not lay the foundation of his system so
narrow as only to comprehend the natives of his own country. His mind, though
rude and enthusiastic, was enlarged by traveling into distant nations, whose
manners and religion he had made a peculiar study. He proposed that the system
he established should extend over all the neighboring nations, to whose
doctrines and prejudices he had taken care to adapt it. Many of the inhabitants
of the Eastern countries were at this time much addicted to the opinions of
Arius, who denied that Jesus Christ was coequal with God the Father, as is
declared in the Athanasian creed. Egypt and Arabia were filled with Jews, who
had fled into these corners of the world from the persecution of the emperor
Adrian, who threatened the total extinction of that people. The other
inhabitants of these countries were pagans. These, however, had little
attachment to their decayed and derided idolatry; and, like men whose religious
principle is weak, had given themselves over to pleasure and sensuality, or to
the acquisition of riches, to be the better able to indulge in the
gratifications of sense, which, together with the doctrine of predestination,
composed the sole principles of their religion and philosophy. Mahomet's system
was exactly suited to these three kinds of men. To gratify the two former, he
declared that there was one God, who created the world and governed all things
in it; that he had sent various prophets into the world to teach his will to
mankind, among whom Moses and Jesus Christ were the most eminent; but the
endeavors of these had proved ineffectual, and God had therefore now sent his
last and greatest prophet, with a commission more ample than that Moses or
Christ had been entrusted with. He had commanded him not only to publish his
laws, but to subdue those who were unwilling to believe or obey them; and for
this end to establish a kingdom upon earth which should propagate the divine
law throughout the world; that God had designed utter ruin and destruction to
those who should refuse to submit to him; but to his faithful followers, he had
given the spoils and possessions of all the earth, as a reward in this life,
and had provided for them hereafter a paradise of all sensual enjoyments,
specially those of love; that the pleasures of such as died in propagating the
faith, would be peculiarly intense, and vastly transcend those of the rest.
These, together with the prohibition of drinking strong liquors (a restraint
not very severe in warm climates), and the doctrine of predestination, were the
capital articles of Mahomet's creed. They were no sooner published than a vast
many of his countrymen embraced them with implicit faith. They were written by
the priest we formerly mentioned, and compose a book called the Koran, or
Alkoran, by way of eminence, as we say the Bible, which means the Book. The
person of Mahomet, however, was familiar to the inhabitants of Mecca; so that
the greater part of them were sufficiently convinced of the deceit. The more
enlightened and leading men entered into a design to cut him off; but Mahomet
getting notice of their intention, fled from his native city to Medina
Tahmachi, or the city of the Prophet. The same of his miracles and doctrine
was, according to custom, greatest at a distance, and the inhabitants of Medina
received him with open arms. From this flight. which happened in the 622d year
of Christ, the fifty-fourth year of Mahomet's age, and the tenth of his
ministry, his followers, the Mahometans, compute their time, and the era is
called in Arabic, Hegira, "the Flight."

Mahomet, by the assistance of the inhabitants of Medina, and of others whom
his insinuation and address daily attached to him, brought over all his
countrymen to a belief, or at least to an acquiescence in his doctrines. The
speedy propagation of his system among the Arabians, was a new argument in its
behalf among the inhabitants of Egypt, and the East, who were previously
disposed to it. Arians, Jews, and Gentiles, all forsook their ancient faith,
and became Mahometans. In a word, the contagion spread over Arabia, Syria,
Egypt, and Persia; and Mahomet, from a deceitful hypocrite, became the most
powerful monarch in his time. He was proclaimed king at Medina in the year 627,
and after subduing part of Arabia and Syria, he died in 632, leaving two
branches of his race, both esteemed divine among their subjects. These were the
caliphs of Persia and of Egypt, under the last of which Arabia was included.
The former of these turned their arms to the East, and made conquests of many
countries.

The caliphs of Egypt and Arabia directed their ravages toward Europe, and
under the name of Saracens or Moors (which they obtained because they entered
Europe from Mauritania in Africa, the country of the Moors) reduced most of
Spain, France, Italy, and the islands in the Mediterranean.

In this manner did the successors of that impostor spread their religion and
conquests over the greatest part of Asia, Africa, and Europe; and they still
give law to a very considerable part of mankind.

See "The History of the Turkish or Ottoman Empire, from its foundation in
1300, to the peace of Belgrade in 1740; to which is prefixed as Historical
Discourse on Mahomet and his successors;" translated from the French of Mignot,
by A. Hawkins, Esquire. published 1787.

THE INDIAN AND ORIENTAL ISLANDS.
THE JAPAN ISLANDS, Japan or Nipham, Bongo, Tonsa, and Dezima, form together
what has been called the empire of JAPAN, and are governed by a most despotic
prince, who is sometimes called emperor and sometimes king. They are situated
about 150 miles east of China, and extend from the 30th to the 41st degree of
north latitude, and from the 130th to the 147th of east longitude. The chief
town is Jeddo, in the 141st degree of east longitude, and the 30th of north
latitude.

The soil and productions of the country are pretty much the same with those of
China; and the inhabitants are famous for their lacker ware, known by the name
of Japan. The islands themselves are very inaccessible, through their high
rocks and tempestuous seas; they are subject to earthquakes, and have some
volcanos. The Dutch expelled the Portuguese from this gainful trade. The
Japanese are idolaters, and so irreconcilable to Christianity, that it is
commonly said the Dutch, who are the only European people with whom they now
trade, pretend themselves to be no Christians, and humor the Japanese in the
most absurd superstitions. Notwithstanding all this compliance, the natives are
very shy and rigorous in all their dealings with the Dutch; and Nagasacci, in
the Island of Dezima, is the only place where they are suffered to trade. The
complexions of the Japanese are in general yellowish, although some few,
chiefly women, are almost white. Their narrow eyes, and high eyebrows, are
like those of the Chinese and Tartars; and their noses are short and thick.
Their hair is universally black; and such a sameness of fashion reigns
throughout this whole empire, that the head-dress is the same from the emperor
to the peasant. The fashion of their clothes has also remained the same from
very high antiquity. They consist of one or more loose gowns, tied about the
middle with a sash. People of rank have them made of silk, but the lower class
of cotton stuffs. Women generally wear a greater number of them than men, and
much longer, and have them more ornamented, often with gold or silver flowers
woven into the stuff.

Their houses are built with upright posts, crossed and wattled with bamboo,
plaistered both without and within, and white-washed. They generally have two
stories; but the uppermost is low, and seldom inhabited. The roofs are covered
with pantiles, large and heavy, but neatly made. The floors are elevated two
feet from the ground, and covered with planks, on which mats are laid. They
have no furniture in their rooms; neither tables, chairs, stools, benches,
cupboards, or even beds. Their custom is to sit down on their heels upon the
mats, which are always soft and clean. Their food is served up to them on a low
board, raised but a few inches from the sloor, and one dish only at a time.
They have mirrors, but never fix them up in their houses as ornamental
furniture; they are made of a compound metal, and used only at their toilets.
Notwithstanding the severity of their winters, which obliges them to warm their
houses from November to March, they have neither fire-places nor stoves:
instead of these they use large copper pots standing upon legs. These are lined
on the inside with loam, on which ashes are laid to some depth, and charcoal
lighted upon them, which seems to be prepared in some manner which renders the
fumes of it not at all dangerous. The first compliment offered to a stranger in
their houses, is a dish of tea, and a pipe of tobacco. Fans are used by both
sexes equally; and are, within or without doors, their inseparable companions.
The whole nation are naturally cleanly: every house, whether public or private,
has a bath, of which constant and daily use is made by the whole family.
Obedience to parents, and respect to superiors, are the characteristics of this
nation. Their salutations and conversations, between equals, abound also with
civility and politeness: to this children are early accustomed by the example
of their parents. Their penal laws are very severe; but punishments are seldom
inflicted. Perhaps there is no country where fewer crimes against society are
committed. Commerce and manufactures flourish here, though, as these people
have few wants, they are not carried to the extent which they are in Europe.
Agriculture is so well understood, that the whole country, even to the tops of
the hills is cultivated. They trade with no foreigners but the Dutch and
Chinese, and in both cases with companies of privileged merchants. Besides the
sugars, spices, and manufactured goods which the Dutch send to Japan, they
carry thither annually upwards of 200,000 deer skins, and more than 100,000
hides, the greatest part of which they get from Siam, where they pay for them
in money. The merchandise they export from these islands, both for Bengal and
Europe, consist in 9000 chests of copper, each weighing 120 pounds, and from 25
to 30,000 weight of camphor. Their profits on imports and exports are valued at
40 or 45 per cent. As the Dutch company do not pay duty in Japan, either on
their exports or imports, they send an annual present to the emperor,
consisting of cloth, chintz, succotas, cottons, stuffs and trinkets.

The L^DRONE ISLANDS, of which the chief town is said to be Guam, (...)
longitude 140, north latitude 14: they are about twelve in number. The people
took their name from their pilfering qualities. We know nothing of them worth a
particular mention, except that lord Anson landed upon one of them (Tinian),
where the found great refreshment for himself and his crew.

FORMOSA is likewise an Oriental Island. It is situated to the east of China,
near the province of Fo-kien, and is divided into two parts by a chain of
mountains, which runs through the middle, beginning at the south coast, and
ending at the north. This, is a very fine island, and abounds with all the
necessaries of life. That part of the island which lies to the west of the
mountains, belongs to the Chinese, who consider the inhabitants of the eastern
parts as savages, though they are said to be a very inoffensive people. The
inhabitants of the cultivated parts are the same with the Chinese, already
described. The Chinese, have likewise made themselves masters of several other
islands in these seas, of which we scarcely know the names; that of Ainan is
between sixty and seventy leagues long, and between fifty and sixty in breadth,
and but twelve miles from the province of Canton. The original inhabitants are
a shy, cowardly people, and live in the most unwholesome part of the island,
the coast and cultivated parts, which are very valuable, being possessed by the
Chinese.

The PHILIPPINES, are said to be 1100 in number, lying in the Chinese sea (part
of the Pacific Ocean), 300 miles south-east of China, of which Manilla, the
chief, is 400 miles long and 200 broad. The inhabitants consist of Chinese,
Ethiopians, Malays, Spaniards, Portuguese, Pintudos, or painted people, and
Mestes, a mixture of all these. The property of the islands belongs to the king
of Spain, they having been discovered by Magellan, and afterward conquered by
the Spaniards in the reign of Philip II. from whom they take their name. Their
situation is such, between the eastern and western continents, that the
inhabitants trade with Mexico and Peru as well as with all the islands and
places of the East Indies. Two ships from Acapulco, in Mexico, carry on this
commerce for the Spaniards, who make 400 per cent. profit. The country is
fruitful in all the necessaries of life, and beautiful to the eye. Venison of
all kinds, buffaloes, hogs, sheep, goats, and a particular large species of
monkeys, are found here in great plenty. The nest of the bird saligan affords
that dissolving jelly, which is so voluptuous a rarity at European tables. Many
European fruits and flowers thrive surprisingly in those islands. If a sprig of
an orange or lemon tree is planted there, it becomes within the year a
fruit-bearing tree; so that the verdure and luxuriancy of the soil are almost
incredible. The tree amet supplies the natives with water; and there is also a
kind of cane, which if cut, yields fair water enough for a draught, of which
there is plenty in the mountains, where water is most wanted.

The city of Manilla contains about 3000 inhabitants; its port is Cavite, lying
at the distance of three leagues, and defended by the castle of St. Philip. In
the year 1762, Manilla was reduced by the English under general Draper and
admiral Cornish, who took it by storm, and humanely suffered the archbishop,
who was the Spanish viceroy at the same time, to ransom the place for about a
million sterling. The bargain, however, was ungenerously disowned by him and
the court of Spain, so that great part of the ransom is still unpaid. The
Spanish government is settled there, but the Indian inhabitants pay a
capitation tax. The other islands, particularly Mindanao, the largest next to
Manilla, are governed by petty princes of their own, whom they call sultans.
The sultan of Mindanao is a Mohammedan.

Upon the whole, though these islands are enriched with all the profusion of
nature, yet they are subject to most dreadful earthquakes, thunder, rains, and
lightning; and the soil is pestered with many noxious and venomous creatures,
and even herbs and flowers, whose poisons kill almost instantaneously. Some of
their mountains are volcanos.

The MOLUCCAS, commonly called the SPICE or CLOVE ISLANDS. These are not out of
sight of each other, and lie all within the compass of twenty five leagues to
the south of the Philippines, in 125 degrees of east longitude, and between one
degree south, and two north latitude. They are in number five, viz. Bachian,
Machian, Motyr, Ternate, and Tydore. These islands produce neither corn
norrice, so that the inhabitants live upon a bread made of sagoe. Their chief
produce consists of cloves, mace, and nutmegs* in vast quantities; which are
monopolized by the Dutch with so much jealousy, that they destroy the plants
lest they natives should sell the supernumerary spices to other nations. These
islands, after being subject to various powers, are now governed by three
kings, subordinate to the Dutch. Ternate is the largest of these islands,
though no more than thirty miles in circumference. The Dutch have here a fort
called Victoria, and another called Fort Orange in Machian.

AMBOYNA. This island, taken in a large sense, is one, and the most
considerable, of the Moluccas, which, in fact, it commands. It is situated in
the Archipelago of St. Lazarus, between the third and fourth degree of south
latitude, and 120 leagues to the eastward of Batavia, Amboyna is about seventy
miles in circumference, and defended by a Dutch garrison of 7 or 800 men,
besides small forts, which protest their clove plantations. It is well known
that when the Portuguese were driven off this island, the trade of it was
carried on by the English and Dutch, and the barbarities of the latter in first
torturing and then murdering the English, and thereby engrossing the whole
trade, and that of Banda, can never be forgotten; but must be transmitted as a
memorial of Dutch infamy at that period, to all posterity. This tragi^^l event
happened in 1622.

The BANDA, or NUTMEG ISLANDS, are situated between 127 and 128 degrees east
longitude, and between four and five south latitude, comprehending the islands
of Lantor, (the chief town of which is Lantor, ^^leron) Rosinging, Pooloway,
and Gonapi. The chief forts belonging to the Dutch on these islands, are those
of Revenge and Nassau. The nutmeg, covered with mace, grows on these islands
only, and they are entirely subject to the Dutch. In several islands that lie
near Banda, and Amboyna, the nutmeg and clove would grow, because, as
naturalists tell us, birds, especially doves and pigeons, swallow the nutmeg
and clove whole, and void them in the same state; which is one of the reasons
why the Dutch declare war against both those birds in their wild plantations.
The great nutmeg harvest is in June and August.

The island of CELEBES, or MACASSAR, is situated under the equator, between the
island of Borneo and the Spice islands, at the distance of ^60 leagues from
Batavia, and is 500 miles long, and 200 broad. This island, notwithstanding its
heat, is rendered habitable by breezes from the north, and periodical rains.
Its chief product is pepper and opi^^; and the natives are expert in the study
of poisons, with a variety of which nature has furnished them. The Dutch have a
fortification on this island; but the internal part of it is governed by three
kings, the chief of whom resides in the town of Macassar. In this, and indeed
in almost all the Oriental islands, the inhabitants live in houses built on
large posts, which are accessible only by ladders, which they pull up in the
night time, for their security against venomous animals. They are said to be
hospitable and faithful, if not provoked. They carry on a large trade with the
Chinese; and if their chiefs were not perpetually at war with each other, they
might easily drive the Dutch from their island. Their port of Jampoden is the
most capacious of any in that part of the world.

The Dutch have likewise fortified GILOLO and CERAM, two other spice islands
lying under the equator, and will sink any ships that attempt to traffic in
those seas.

The SUNDA ISLANDS. These are situated in the Indian Ocean, between 93 and 120
degrees of east longitude, and between eight degrees north and eight degrees
south latitude, comprehending the islands of Borneo, Sumatra, Java Bally,
Lamboe, Banca; etc. The three first, from their great extent and importance,
require to be separately described.

BORNEO is said to be 800 miles long, and 700 broad, and has therefore been
thought to be the largest island in the world. The inland part of the country
is marshy and unhealthy; and the inhabitants live in towns built upon floats in
the middle of the rivers. The soil produces rice, cotton, canes, pepper,
camphor, the tropical fruits, gold, and excellent diamonds. The famous
ouran-outang, one of which (...) dissected by Dr. Tyson at Oxford, is a native
of this country, and (...) thought, of all irrational beings, to resemble a man
the most. The original inhabitants are said to live in the mountains, and make
use of poisoned darts; but the seacoast is governed by Mohammedan princes; the
chief port of this island is Benjar-Masseen, and carries on a commerce with all
trading nations.

SUMAIRA has Malacca on the north, Borneo on the east, and Java on the
south-east, from which it is divided by the straits of Sunda; it is divided
into two equal parts by the equator, extending five degrees, and upwards,
north-west of it, and five on the south-east; and is 1000 miles long, and 100
broad. This island produces so much gold, that it is thought by some to be the
Ophir mentioned in the scriptures; but Mr. Marsden in his late history of the
island, thinks it was unknown to the ancients. The highest mountain in Sumatra,
is called Ophir by the Europeans, whose summit above the level of the sea is
13,842 feet, exceeding in height the Peak of Teneriffe by 577 feet. The
Portuguese were the first discoverers and settlers, but met with disgrace in
their attempts against Acheen. The first English fleet that made its appearance
in this part of the world, and laid the foundation of a commerce that was to
eclipse that of every other European state, visited Acheen in the year 1602,
under captain Lancaster, who carried a letter from queen Elizabeth to the king
of that place. The English East India company have two settlements here,
Bencoolen, and Fort-Marlborough; from whence they bring their chief cargoes of
pepper. The king of Acheen is the chief of the Mohammedan princes who possess
the seacoasts. The interior parts are governed by Pagan princes, whose
governments are all independent, and their language and manners are very
different. The natural products of Sumatra are pretty much the same with those
of the adjacent islands, but this island is surpassed by few in rice, pepper,
and camphor, and in the bountiful indulgence of nature. It is from this country
that most of the cassia sent to Europe is produced. The cassia tree grows to
fifty or sixty feet, with a stem of about two feet diameter, and a beautiful
and regular spreading head. The quantity of pepper produced in the East India
company's districts on Sumatra, is annually 1200 tons; of which the greater
part comes to Europe, and the rest is sent to China.

Rain is very frequent here; sometimes very heavy, and almost always attended
with thunder and lightning. Earthquakes are not uncommon, and there are several
volcanos on the island. The people who inhabit the coast are Malays, who came
hither from the peninsula of Malacca; but the interior parts are inhabited by a
very different people, and who have hitherto had no connection with the
Europeans. Their language and character differ much from those of the Malays;
the latter using the Arabic character, as do the Acheenese. The principal
internal languages of the island are the Rejang and Batha, each containing
characters essentially different from each other. The people between the
districts of the English company, and those of the Dutch at Palembang, on the
other side the island, write on long narrow slips of the bark of a tree, with a
piece of bamboo. They begin at the bottom, and write from the left hand to the
right, contrary to the custom of other eastern nations. These inhabitants of
the interior parts of Sumatra are a free people, and live in small villages,
called Dooso^^, independent of each other, and governed each by its own chief.
All of them have laws, some written ones, by which they punish offenders, and
terminate disputes. They have almost all of them, particularly the women, large
swellings in their throat, some nearly as big as a man's head, but in general
as big as an ostrich's egg, like the goitres of the Alps. That part of this
island which is called the Cassia country, is well inhabited by a people called
Battas, who differ from all the other inhabitants of Sumatra in language,
manners and customs. They have no king, but live in villages, independently of
each other, and generally at variance with one another. They fortify their
villages very strongly with double fences of camphor plank pointed, and placed
with their points projecting outward; and between these fences they place
pieces of bamboo, hardened by fire, and likewise pointed, which are concealed
by the grass, but which will run quite through a man's foot. Such of their
enemies whom they take prisoners, they put to death and eat, and their skulls
they hang up as trophies, in the houses where the unmarried men and boys eat
and sleep. They allow of polygamy: a man may purchase as many wives as he
pleases; but Mr. Marsden observes, it is extremely rare, that an instance
occurs of their having more than one, and that only among a few of their
chiefs; but this continence is attributed to their poverty. The original
clothing of the Sumatrans is the same with that of the inhabitants of the
South Sea islands, generally styled Otheitean cloth. The Buffalo ( carbow)
constitutes a principal part of their food, and is the only animal employed in
their domestic labors. The Sumatran pheasant is a bird of uncommon beauty.

Within about ninety miles of Sumatra is the island of ENGANHO, which is very
little known, on account of the terrible rocks and breakers that entirely
surround it. It is inhabited by naked savages, who are tall and well made, and
who generally appear armed with lances and clubs, and speak a different
language from the inhabitants of any of the neighboring islands.

The greatest part of JAVA belongs to the Dutch, who have here erected a kind
of commercial monarchy, the capital of which is Batavia, a noble and populous
city, lying in the latitude of six degrees south, at the mouth of the river
Jucata, and furnished with one of the finest harbors in the world. The town
itself is built in the manner of those in Holland, and is about a league and a
half in circumference, with five gates, and surrounded by regular
fortifications; but its suburbs are said to be ten times more populous than
itself. The government here is a mixture of Eastern magnificence and European
police, and held by the Dutch governor-general of the Indies. When he appears
abroad, he is attended by his guards and officers, and with a splendour superior
to that of any European potentate, except on some solemn occasions. The city is
as beautiful as it is strong, and its fine canals, bridges, and avenues, render
it a most agreeable residence. The description of it, its government, and
public edifices, have employed whole volumes. The citadel, where the governor
had his palace, commands the town and the suburbs, which are inhabited by
natives of almost every nation in the world; the Chinese residing in this
island are computed at 100,000; but about 30,000 of that nation were bar^^^^sly
massacred, without the smallest offense ever proved upon (...), in 1740. This
massacre was too unprovoked and detestable to (...) defended even by the Dutch,
who, when the governor arrived in Europe, sent him back to be tried at Batavia;
but he never has been heard of since. A Dutch garrison of 3000 men constantly
resides at Batavia; and about 15,000 troops are quartered in the island and the
neighborhood of the city. Their government is admirably well calculated to
prevent the independency either of the civil or military power.

THE ANDAMAN and NICOBAR islands.] These islands lie at the entrance of the bay
of Bengal, and furnish provisions, consisting of tropical fruits and other
necessaries, for the ships that touch there. They are otherwise too
inconsiderable to be mentioned. They are inhabited by a harmless, inoffensive,
but idolatrous people.

CEYLON, OR SEIEN-DIVE.] This island, though not the largest, i^ thought to be
by nature the richest, and finest island in the world; and is celebrated for
being the only place which produces the true Cinnamon. It is separated by the
Gulf of Manora, from the continent of Indostan, to which it is supposed to have
been joined, till torn from it by the force of the waves, or earthquakes; and
the shallowness of the intervening channel seems to favor this opinion, for a
land-bank, called Adam's bridge, (on which only a few feet water runs,)
interrupts all navigation except by boats. On this bank, and the neighboring
coast, is a pearl fishery formerly considerable, but now much declined.

This island, which is happily situated for commerce, is inhabited by two
distinct nations, the Bedas to the north, and the Cinglasses to the south; it
is about 250 miles long, and 200 broad; the natives call it, with some show of
reason, the terrestrial paradise; and it produces, besides excellent fruits of
all kinds, long pepper, fine cotton, ivory, silk, tobacco, ebony, musk,
crystal, saltpeter, sulphur, lead, iron, steel, copper; besides cinnamon,
gold, and silver, and all kinds of precious stones, except diamonds. All kinds
of fowls and fish abound here. Every part of the island is well wooded and
watered; and besides some curious animals peculiar to itself, it has plenty of
cows, buffaloes, goats, hogs, deer, hares, dogs, and other quadrupeds. The
Ceylon elephant is preferred to all others, especially if spotted; but several
noxious animals, such as serpents and ants, are likewise found here. The chief
commodity of the island is its cinnamon, which is by far the best in all Asia.
Though its trees grow in great profusion, yet the best is found in the
neighborhood of Columbo, and Negambo.

Mountains, covered with impossible forests, intersect it in all directions,
amongst which Adam's pic rises like a lofty cone, far superior to the rest in
elevation, and visible, (it is said) at the distance of more then 100 miles.
From this mountain issues the Mowil-ganga, the largest river in the island,
which visiting Candy the ancient capital, falls after a course of several miles
into the bay of Trinconom^le, the finest not only in Ceylon, but in all
Indostan; it is capable of receiving, 1000 sail of the largest ships in perfect
security. Ceylon, though formerly divided into several petty kingdoms, has now
but one prince, who possesses only the internal parts of the island, and
resides at D^glige, but is called the king of Candy, from the ancient capital,
which having suffered much in the wars, between the Portuguese, and natives,
has ceased to be the royal residence.

The Dutch, who expelled the Portuguese, have possessed themselves of the
entire coast, in order to exclude all other nations from the cinnamon trade:
this valuable spice, however, is cultivated only in the south-west coast, in a
tract called the Cinnamon coast, in which the principal places are, COLUMBO,
the capital of the Dutch settlements, in the island, regularly fortified, on a
tolerable harbor formerly very considerable, but much declined. Columbo root,
an article lately introduced into the materia mediea, originally grew in
America, and was thence transplanted to this town, which gives name to it, and
supplies all India, and Europe with it. It is a bitter, rather ungrateful ^o
the taste, but when received into the stomach, it appears to be corroberant,
antiseptic, sedative and powerfully antieme^ic. It has been used with great
success in the cholera morbus and other bilious complaints. POINT DE GALLE, on
a small indifferent harbor, is fortified, and become the center of the Dutch
trade in the island.

It may be here proper to observe, that the cinnamon-tree, which is a native of
the island, has two, if not three barks, which form the true cinnamon; (...)
trees of a middling growth and age afford the best; and the body of the tree,
which when stripped is white, serves for building and other uses. In 1656, the
Dutch were invited by the natives of this delicious island, to defend them
against the Portuguese, whom they expelled, and have monopolized it ever since
to themselves. Indeed, in January 1782, Trinconomale, the chief seaport of the
island was taken by the English, but soon afterward retaken by the French, and
restored to the Dutch by the last treaty of peace.

The MALDIVES. These are a vast cluster of small islands or little rocks just
above the water, lying between the equator and eight degrees north latitude,
near Cape Comorin. They are chiefly resorted to by the Dutch, who drive on a
profitable trade with the natives for couries, a kind of small shells, which
go, or rather formerly went for money upon the coasts of Guinea and other parts
of Africa. The cocoa of the Maldives is an excellent commodity in a medicinal
capacity: "Of this tree (says a well-informed author) they build vessels of
twenty or thirty tons; their hulls, masts, sails, rigging, anchors, cables,
provisions, and firing, are all from this useful tree.

We have already mentioned BOMBAY on the Malabar coast, in speaking of India.
With regard to the language of all the Oriental islands, nothing certain can be
said. Each island has a particular tongue; but the Malayan, Chinese,
Portuguese, Dutch, and Indian words, are so frequent among them, that it is
difficult for an European, who is not very expert in those matters, to know the
radical language. The same may be almost said of their religion; for though its
original is certainly Pagan, yet it is intermixed with many Mohammedan, Jewish,
Christian religions, and with many foreign superstitions.

The sea which (...) the southern point of the peninsula of Kam^^^^^a from
Japan, contains a number of islands in a position from north-north-east to
south-south-east, which are called the KURILE ISLANDS. They are upwards of
twenty in number, are all mountainous, and in several of them are volcanoes and
hot springs. The principal of these islands are inhabited; but some of the
little ones are entirely desert and unpeopled. They differ much from each other
in respect both to their situation and national constitution. The forests in
the more northern ones are composed of laryx and pines; those to the southward
produce canes, bamboos, vines, etc. In some of them are (...) and (...)

The sea-otter appears on the coasts of all these islands, as well as whales,
sea-horses, seals, and other amphibious animals. Some of the inhabitants of
these islands have a great likeness to the Japanese in their manners, language,
and personal appearance; others very much resemble the Kamtschadales. The
northern islands acknowledge the sovereignty of the empire of Russia; but those
to the south pay homage to Japan. The Kurilians discover much humanity and
probity in their conduct, and are courteous and hospitable; but adversity
renders them timid, and prompts them to suicide. They have a particular
veneration for old age. They reverence an old man whoever he be, but have an
especial affection for those of their respective families. Their language is
agreeable to the ear, and they speak and pronounce it slowly. The men are
employed in hunting, fishing for sea animals and whales, and catching fowl.
Their canoes are made of wood that their forests produce, or that the sea casts
upon their shores. The women have charge of the kitchen, and make clothes. In
the northern islands they sew, and make different cloths of the thread of
nettles. The southern islanders are more refined and polished than the
northern, and carry on a sort of commerce with Japan, whither they export
whaleoil, furs, and, eagles feathers to fledge arrows with. In return, they
bring Japanese utensils of metal and varnished wood, skillets, sabres,
different stuffs, ornaments of luxury and parade, tobacco, all sorts of
trinkets, and small wares.

AFRICA
map of Africa

AFRICA.
AFRICA, the third grand division of the globe, is generally represented as
bearing some resemblance to the form of a pyramid, the base being the northern
part of it, which runs along the shores of the Mediterranean, and the point or
top of the pyramid, the Cape of Good Hope. Africa is a peninsula of a
prodigious extent, joined to Asia only by a neck of land, about sixty miles
over, between the Red Sea and the Mediterranean, usually called the Isthmus of
Suez, and its utmost length from north to south, from Cape Bona in the
Mediterranean, in 37 degrees north, to the Cape of Good Hope in 3^7 south
latitude, is 4300 miles; and the broadest part from Cape Verd, in 17-20
degrees, to Cape Gurdafui, near the straits of Babel-Mandeb, in 51-20 east
longitude, is 3500 miles from east to west. It is bounded on the north by the
Mediterranean sea, which separates it from Europe; on the east by the Isthmus
of Suez, the Red Sea, and the Indian ocean, which divides it from Asia; on the
south by the southern ocean: and on the west by the great Atlantic ocean, which
separates it from America. As the equator divides this extensive country almost
in the middle, and the far greater part of it is within the tropics, the heat
is in many places almost insupportable to an European* it being there increased
by the rays of the sun from vast deserts of burning sands. The coasts, however,
and banks of rivers, such as the Nile, are generally fertile; and most parts of
this region are inhabited, though it is far from being so populous as Europe or
Asia. From what has been said, the reader cannot expect to find here a variety
of climates. In many parts of Africa, snow seldom falls in the plains: and it
is generally never found but on the tops of the highest mountains. The natives,
in these scorching regions, would as soon expect that marble should melt, and
slow in liquid streams, as that water by freezing should lose its slu^dity, be
arrested by the cold, and ceasing to slow, become like the solid rock.

The most considerable rivers in Africa. are the Niger, which falls into the
Atlantic or western ocean at Senegal, after a course of 2800 miles. It
increases and decreases as the Nile, fertilizes the country, and has grams of
gold in many parts of it. The Gambia and Senegal are only branches of this
river. The Nile which dividing Egypt into two parts, discharges itself into the
Mediterranean, after a prodigious course from its source in Abyssinia. The most
considerable mountains in Africa are the Atlas, a ridge exten^ing from the
western ocean, to which it gives the name of Atlantic Ocean, as far as Egypt,
and had its name from a king of Mauritania, a great lover of astronomy, who
used to observe the stars from its summit; on which account the poets represent
him as bearing the heavens on his shoulders. The mountains of the moon,
extending themselves between Abyssinia and Monomopata, and are still higher
than those of Atlas. Those of Sie^^a Leona, or the mountains of the Lions,
which divide Nigritia from Guinea, and extend as far as Ethiopia. These were
styled by the ancients the Mountains of God, on account of their being subject
to thunder and lightning. The Peak of Teneriffe, which the Dutch make their
first meridian, is about two miles high, in the form of a sugar loaf, and is
situated on an island of the same name near the coast. The most noted capes, or
promontories, in this country, are Cape Verd, so called, because the land is
always covered with green trees and mossy grounds. It is the most westerly
point of the continent of Africa. The Cape of Good Hope, so denominated by the
Portuguese, when they first went round it in 1498, and discovered the passage
to Asia. It is the south extremity of Africa, in the country of the Hottentots;
at present in the possession of the Dutch; and the general rendezvous of ships
of every nation who trade to India, being about half way from Europe. There is
but one strait in Africa, which is called Babel-Mandeb, and is the
communication between the Red Sea and the Indian ocean.

The situation of Africa for commerce is extremely favorable, standing as it
were in the center of the globe, and having thereby a much nearer communication
with Europe, Asia, and America, than any of the other quarters has with the
rest. That it abounds with gold, we have not only the testimony of the
Portuguese, the Dutch, the English and the French, who have settlements on the
coast of Africa, but that of the most authentic historians. It is however the
misfortune of Africa, that, though it has 10,000 miles of seacoast, with
noble, large, deep rivers, penetrating into the very center of the country, it
should have no navigation, nor receive any benefit from them; that it should be
inhabited by an innumerable people, ignorant of commerce, and of each other. At
the mouths of these rivers are the most excellent harbors, deep, safe, calm,
and sheltered from the wind, and capable of being made perfectly secure by
fortifications; but quite destitute of shipping, trade, and merchants, even
where there is plenty of merchandise. In short, Africa, though a full quarter
of the globe, stored with an inexhaustible treasure, and capable, under proper
improvements, of producing so many things delightful, as well as convenient,
within itself, seems to be almost entirely neglected, not only by the natives,
who are quite unsolicitous of reaping the benefits which Nature has provided
for them, but also by the more civilized Europeans who are settled in it,
particularly the Portuguese.

Africa once contained several kingdoms and states, eminent for the liberal
arts, for wealth and power, and the most extensive commerce. The kingdoms of
Egypt and Ethiopia, in particular, were much celebrated; and the rich and
powerful state of Carthage, that once formidable rival to Rome itself, extended
her commerce to every part of the then known world; even the British shores
were visited by her fleets, till Juba, who was king of Mauritania, but
tributary to the republic of Carthage, unhappily called in the Romans, who,
with the assistance of the Mauritanians, subdued Carthage, and by degrees all
the neighboring kingdoms and states. After this, the natives, constantly
plundered, and consequently impoverished, by the governors sent from Rome,
neglected their trade, and cultivated no more of their lands than might serve
for their subsistence. Upon the decline of the Roman empire, in the fifth
century, the north of Africa was overrun by the Vandals, who contributed still
more to the destruction of arts and sciences; and, to add to this country's
calamity, the Saracens made a sudden conquest of all the coasts of Egypt and
Barbary, in the seventh century. These were succeeded by the Turks; and both
being of the Mohammedan religion, whose professors carried desolation with them
wherever they came, the ruin of that once flourishing part of the world was
thereby completed.

The inhabitants of this continent, with respect to religion, may be divided
into three sorts: namely, Pagans, Mahometans, and Christians. The first are the
most numerous, possessing the greatest part of the country, from the tropic of
Cancer to the Cape of Good Hope, and they are generally black. The Mahometans,
who are of a tawny complexion, possess Egypt, and almost all the northern
shores of Africa, or what is called the Barbary coast. The people of Abyssinia,
or the Upper Ethiopia, are denominated Christians, but retain many Pagan and
Jewish rites. There are also some Jews, on the north of Africa, who manage all
the little trade that part of the country is possessed of.

There are scarcely any two nations, or indeed any two of the learned, that
agree in the modern divisions of Africa: and for this very reason, that
scarcely any traveller has penetrated into the heart of the country; and
consequently we must acknowledge our ignorance of the bounds, and even the
names of several of the inland nations, which may be still reckoned among the
unknown and undiscovered parts of the world; but according to the best accounts
and conjectures, Africa may be divided according to the following Table.

Nations. leng. ^rea. Chief cities. Did. and bear. from London. Religions.
Morocco, 500 480 Fez 1080 S. Mahom. Barbary. Tafilet, etc. Algiers 480 100
Algiers 920 S. Mahom. Tunis 220 170 Tunis 990 S. E. Mahom. Tripoli 700 240
Tripoli 1260 S. E. Mahom. Barca 400 300 Tolemeta 1440 S. E. Mahom. Egypt 600
250 Grand Cairo 1920 S. E. Mahom. Biledulgerid 2500 350 Dara 1565 S. Pagans
Zaara 3400 660 Tegessa 1800 S. Pagans Negroland 2200 840 Madinga 2500 S. Pagans
Guinea 1800 360 Benin 2700 S. Pagans Up. Ethiop. Nubia ^40 600 Nubia 2418 S.
Ma. and Pa. Abyssinia 900 800 Gondar 2880 S. E. Christian. Abex 540 130 Doncal^
3580 S. E. Chapter and Pa. The middle parts, called the Lower Ethiopia, are very
little known to the Europeans, but are computed at 1,200,000 square miles.
Loango 410 300 Loango 3300 S. Chapter and Pa. Low Guinea. Congo 540 420 St.
Salva^or 3480 S. Chapter and Pa. Angola 3^0 250 Loando 3750 S. Chapter and Pa. Beng^ela
1^0 180 Benguela 3900 S. Pagans. Matemen 150 240 No Towns *** Pagans. Ajz^ ^00
^00 Brava 370 S. E. Pagans. Zanguebar 1400 350 Melinda or Mo z^moique 4440 S.
E. Pagans. Monomot^pa 900 660 Monomot^pa 4500 S. Pagans. Monemugi 90^ ^00
^^nco^a 4260 S. Pagans. So^ala 480 300 So^ala 4600 S. E. Pagans. Terra de Not.
600 3^0 No Towns *** Pagans. Caffraria or Hotten^or 708 660 Cape of Good Hope
5200 S. Pagans.

The (...) islands (...) At^icaly in the (...) (...) and Atlantic Ocean; of
w^^n the (...) belong, to, or trade with, the European, (...) serve to refresh
their shipping to and from (...).

Island. Sq. Mi. (...) Trad. with or belon. Babel Mande^, at the entrance of
the Red Sea. Babel ^^and^ All Nations Soco^^, in the Indian Ocean 3,600 ^^^usia
Ditto The C^mera Is^es, ditto 1,000 Jo^nna Ditto Mada^asear, ditto 168,000 St.
Austin Ditto Mau^^^us, ditto 1,840 M^^ritius French Bou^^^an, ditto 2,100 (...)
Ditto St. Helena, in the Atlantic Ocean St. Helena English Ascension, ditto
Uninhabited St. Ma^^^w, do Ditto St. (...), Anab^a, Princes island, Fe^dinan^^
(...) ditto St. (...) (...) Portuguese Cape Verd Islands, ditto 2,000 St.
D^^^go, Ditto (...) ditto Fort St. (...) French Can^^ies, ditto (...) Spanish
(...), ditto 1,500 (...) Portuguese The (...) Amer. ditto. 2,^00 Angra. St.
Michael (...)

Having given the reader some idea of Africa, in general, with the principal
kingdoms, and their supposed dimensions, we shall now consider it under three
grand divisions: First, Egypt; secondly, the states, of Barbary, stretching
along the coast of the Mediterranean, from Egypt on the east, to the Atlantic
Ocean, west; and, lastly, that part of Africa, between the tropic of Cancer and
the Cape of Good Hope; the last of these divisions, indeed, is vastly greater
than the other two; but the nations, which it contains, are so little known,
and so barbarous, and, like all barbarous nations, so similar in most respects
to one another, that they may, without impropriety, be thrown under one general
head.

EGYPT.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 600 Miles. between Degrees. 20 and 32 North latitude. Breadth 250
Miles. Degrees. 28 and 36 east longitude. 140,700.

BOUNDARIES.] IT is bounded by the Mediterranean Sea, North; by the Red Sea,
East; by Abyssinia, or the Upper Ethiopia, on the South; and by the Desert of
Barca, and the unknown parts of Africa, West.

Divisions. Subdivisions. Chief towns. Northern division contains Lower Egypt
GRAND CA^RO, E. lon. 32 N. Lat. 30. Bulac Alexandria Rosetto Damietta Southern
division contains Upper Egypt Saved or Thebes Cossiar

(...). It is observed by M. Volney, that during eight months of the ye^^ (from
March to November) the heat is almost insupportable by an European. "During the
whole of this season, the air is inflamed, the sky sparkling, and the heat
oppressive to all unaccustomed to it". The oth^^ months are more temperate. The
southerly winds which sometimes blow in Egypt, are by the natives called
poisonous winds, or the (...). They are of such extreme heat and aridity than
no ^^mated body exposed to it can withstand its fatal influence. During the
three days which it generally lasts, the streets are deserted; and woe to the
traveller whom this wind surprises remote from shelter* when it exceeds three
days it is insupportable.

RIVERS, SOIL AND PRODUCE.] The sources of this celebrated river were so much
unknown to the ancients, that to search for them became a proverb to express
any ridiculous or impossible attempt. By the Jesuit missionaries, however, who
formerly passed into Abyssinia, they certainly were explored; and the very
reason given by Mr. Bruce for ^^p^^sing that the missionaries never were there,
must be a convincing proof to every rational person that they really did visit
them. The reason he gives, is a small difference betwixt his calculation and
that of the missionaries in the latitude of the fountains from which the
principal branch of the Nile proceeds, and which, according to his map, is
exactly in 11 degrees north latitude. The difference is not quite a degree; it
is impossible to know which of the travelers are in the right, and we may as
well make this difference an argument against Mr. Bruce, as against the
missionaries. According to both accounts, it rises in the territory of Gojam in
Abyssinia, runs first northward, then changing its course to north-east, falls
into the great lake of Dembea, from whence taking a circle south and westward,
it again assumes a northerly direction, and being joined by two other large
rivers, named the White River and the Atbara, or Astaboras, it passes through
the great desert of Nubia, enters Egypt at the south west corner under the
Tropic of Cancer, and continues its course between two rows of mountains,
fertilizing, annually the low ground between them; for the whole of Upper
Egypt, as has already been mentioned, is a long and not very broad valley. The
fountains are situated, as has already been mentioned, in a long and not very
broad valley. The fountains are situated, as has already been said, in 11
degrees north latitude; and almost 37 east longitude; and are three in number,
rising out of the marshy ground at the foot of a mountain; the water is fine,
and issues in considerable quantity. About two miles from its source the stream
becomes sufficiently large to turn a mill, but soon afterward increases
greatly, though even after a course of 60 miles it is fordable at certain
seasons.

The natives, at the head of the Nile, pay divine honors to it. Thousands of
cattle are offered, supposed to reside at its source. The Lake Dembea is much
the largest known in this country. Its greatest breadth is thirty-five miles;
but it decreases greatly at each extremity, where it is not sometimes above ten
miles broad. Its greatest length is forty nine miles from north to south. In
the dry months, from October to march, the Lake shrinks greatly in size; but
after all these rivers are fail which are on every side of it, and fall into
the lake, like Radii drawn to a center, then it swells, and extends itself into
the plain country, and has of course a much larger surface.

The fertility of Egypt is well known to arise entirely from the annual
overflowing of the Nile, and this is now equally well known to arise from the
rains which fall periodically in Abyssinia. By these its waters are augmented,
and begin to rise about the middle of June, and continue so to do until the
middle of September, or the end of that month, the inundation taking up 100
days to arrive at its height. After that time it gradually decreases, and
returns to its former channel, and so great is the influence of the sun, that
even the vast quantity of water which at all times runs in its channel, becomes
corrupted and heated to such a degree, that it can scarce be used before the
return of the flood. No notice, however, is taken of the rise of the river till
the end of June, when it has usually swelled to five or six cubits beyond its
former standard. This is publicly proclaimed through the streets of Cairo by a
crier, and the daily increase continues to be proclaimed in like manner, till
it has attained the height of 16 peeks, when great rejoinings are made, and the
inhabitants cry out Wassah Ullah, "God has given us abundance." This commonly
happens about the end of July, or before the 20th of August, and the sooner it
rises to the height just mentioned, the greater hope they have of a plentiful
harvest. Sometimes, however, they are disappointed, as was the case in 1705,
when it did not rise to the requisite height, till the 10th of September; the
consequence of which was, that a famine and pestilence ensued. After the
inundation has risen to this height, the banks are cut to let it into the
canals which water the country, and prepare it for the reception of the seed.
The height to which it rises is different, depending entirely on the quantity
of rain that falls in Abyssinia. If it does not attain to 16 peeks, the
inhabitants are exempted from paying tribute. Eighteen cubits produces but an
indifferent crop; 22 a very good one; put, if the inundation exceeds 24, a
famine ensues, because the waters do not retire in time for sowing the corn.

The waters of the Nile are mightily extolled by the Egyptians, on account of
their wholesome and light qualities, and likewise their pleasant taste; but
these commendations are naturally to be expected from people who never saw any
other water; though it is certain that by the great length of its course, the
Nile must be very perfectly deprived of every saline and earthly taint,
excepting only the mud which happens to be accidentally mixed with it. This
indeed is so abundant in the dry season, that it cannot be used without
filtration, and even then has a putrid quality, which were it to continue long,
would undoubtedly bring on dangerous diseases, but the waters of the inundation
are always pure and wholesome.

SOIL AND PRODUCE.] The fertility of the soil of Egypt has been celebrated in
all ages, and if proper care was taken, there is not the least reason to doubt
that it would now be the same as ever. In the dry months indeed the whole of
this country is a dusty desert; though this is owing to nothing but the want of
water; for the gardens which are artificially watered afford a perpetual
verdure. As some parts of the country lie too high to be reached by the
inundation, artificial means are likewise used for watering the corn grounds,
though by reason of the unartful methods made use of, very little produce can
be expected. One of the ways in which the water is generally raised is by the
Sakiah, or Persian wheel, turned by oxen, and having several earthen vessels
fastened to it by a rope, which empty themselves as the wheel turns round, into
a cistern at top. In places where the banks of the river are high, they
sometimes make basins in the side of them, near which they fix an upright pole,
on the top of which is another moving upon an axle. At one end of the cross
pole hangs a great stone, and at the other a leathern bucket; and the latter
being pulled down by two men, is raised by the weight of the stone, and emptied
into a proper cistern. From these cisterns the water is conveyed to the
gardens, or plantations, and allowed to run in several little trenches, from
whence it is conducted all round the beds in rills, which the gardener easily
stops by raising the earth with his foot, and diverts the current another way.

Throughout all Egypt the soil is remarkably impregnated with that species of
salt called Mineral Alkali, mingled with some common salt, and this may be
supposed a reason of the extraordinary quickness of vegetation in this country,
which is so remarkable, that a certain species of gourd, named Kara, will send
out in one night a shoot four inches in length: but for the same reason in all
probability it is, that foreign plants will not thrive here. Thus the European
merchants, residing at Cairo, are obliged annually to send to Malta for the
seeds of their garden stuffs; and always observe, that though they thrive very
well, and bear seed the first year, yet if that seed is sown, the succeeding
plants are too weak and slender. All kinds of grain are produced in plenty in
Egypt, and the harvest months are march and April, during which the people reap
three crops, viz. one of lettuces and cucumbers (the latter being a principal
article of food with them) another of melons, and a third of corn. Dates, figs,
plantanes, etc. are produced here in great plenty, as well as palm trees, from
which wine is made.

ANIMALS.] Egypt abounds in black cattle; and it is said, that the inhabitants
employ every day 20,000 oxen in raising water for their grounds. They have a
fine large breed of asses, upon which the Christians ride, these people not
being suffered by the Turks to ride on any other beast. The Egyptain horses are
very fine; they never trot, but walk well, and gallop with great speed, turn
short, stop in a moment, and are extremely tractable. The hippopotamus, or
river-horse, an amphibious-animal, resembling an ox in its hinder parts, with
the head like a horse, is common in Upper Egypt. Tigers, hyenas, camels,
antelopes, apes, with the head like a dog, and the rat, called Ichneumon, are
natives of Egypt. The camelion, a little animal something resembling a lizard,
that changes color as you stand to look upon him, is found he^^ as well as in
other countries The crocodile was formerly thought peculiar to this country:
but there does not seem to be any material difference between it and the
alligators of India and America.

This country produces likewise great numbers of eagles, hawks, pelicans, and
water-fowls of all kinds. The ibis, a creature (according to Mr. Norden)
somewhat resembling a duck, was deified by the ancient Egyptians for its
destroying serpents and pestiferous insects.

They were thought to be peculiar to Egypt, but a species of them is said to
have been lately discovered in other parts of Africa. Ostriches are common
here, and are so strong that the Arabs sometimes ride upon their backs.

POPULATION, MANNERS, CUSTOMS, AND DIVERSIONS.] As the population of Egypt is
almost confined to the banks of the Nile, and the rest of the country inhabited
by Arabs, and other nations, we can say little upon this head with precision.
It seems to be certain, that Egypt is at present not near so populous as
formerly; according to M. Volney, the number of inhabitants may amount at
present to 2,300,000, of which Cairo contains about 250,000.

The descendants of the original Egyptians are represented as slovenly,
indolent people, and are here distinguished by the name of Coptis; in their
complexions, they are rather sunburned than swarthy or black. Their ancestors
were once Christians, and in general they still pretend to be of that religion.
Mahometanism is the prevailing worship among the natives. The Arabs who inhabit
the villages and fields, at any considerable distance from the Nile, are of a
deep swarthy complexion (...) are represented by the best authorities, as
retaining the patriarchal mode of tending their flocks, and many of them have
no fixed place of abode. The Turks, who reside in Egypt, retain all their
Ottoman pride and insolence, and the Turkish habit, to distinguish themselves
from the Arabs and coptis, who dress very plain, their chief finery being an
upper garment of white linen, and linen drawers; but their ordinary dress is of
blue linen, with a long cloth coat, either over or under it. The Christians and
Arabs of the meaner kind content themselves with a linen or woollen wrapper,
which they fold, blanket like, round their body. The Jews wear blue leather
slippers, the other natives of their country wear red, and the foreign
Christians yellow. The dress of the women is tawdry and unbecoming; but their
cloths are silk, when they can afford it; and such of them as are not exposed
to the sun, have delicate complexions and features. The Coptis are generally
excellent accomptants, and many of them live by teaching the other natives to
read and write. Their exercises and diversions are much the same as those made
use of in Persia, and other Asiatic dominions. All Egypt is overrun with
jugglers, fortune tellers, mountebanks, and traveling slight-of-hand men.

RELIGION.] The bulk of the Mahometans are enthusiasts, and have among them
their santos, or fellows who pretend to a superior degree of holiness, and
without any ceremony intrude into the best houses, where it would be dangerous
to turn them out. The Egyptian Turks mind religious affairs very little, and it
would be hard to say what species of Christianity is professed by the Christian
Coptis, which are here numerous, but they profess themselves to be of the Greek
church, and enemies to that of Rome. In religious, and indeed many civil
matters, they are under the jurisdiction of the patriarch of Alexandria, who by
the dint of money, generally purchases a protection at the Ottoman court.

LANGUAGE.] The Coptic is the most ancient language of Egypt. This was
succeeded by the Greek, about the time of Alexander the Great; and that by the
Arabic, upon the commencement of the califate, when the Arabs dispossessed the
Greeks of Egypt. Arabic or Arabesque, as it is called, is still the current
language, but the Coptic and modern Greek continue to be spoken.

LEARNING AND LEARNED MEN.] Though it is past dispute that the Greeks derived
all their knowledge from the ancient Egyptians, yet scarcely a vestige of it
remains among their descendants. This is owing to the bigotry and ignorance of
their Mohammedan masters. Here it is proper to make one observation which is of
general use. The califs or Saracens who subdued Egypt, were of three kinds. The
first, who were the immediate successors of Mahomet, made war from conscience
and principle upon all kinds of literature, excepting the Koran; and hence it
was, that when they took possession of Alexandria, which contained the most
magnificent library the world ever beheld, its valuable manuscripts were
applied for some months in cooking their victuals, and warming their baths. The
same fate attended the other magnificent Egyptian libraries. The califs of the
second race were men of taste and learning, but of a peculiar strain. They
bought up all the manuscripts that survived the general conflagration, relating
to astronomy, medicine, and some useless parts of philosophy; but they had no
taste for the Greek arts of architecture, sculpture, painting, or poetry, and
learning was confined to their own courts and colleges, without ever finding
its way back to Egypt. The lower race of califs, especially those who called
themselves califs of Egypt, disgraced human nature; and the Turks have riveted
the chains of barbarous ignorance which they imposed.

All the learning therefore possessed by the modern Egyptians consists in
arithmetical calculations for the dispatch of business, the jargon of
astrology, a few nostrums in medicine, and some knowledge of Arabesque or the
Mohammedan religion.

CURIOSITIES AND ANTIQUITIES.] Egypt abounds with these. Its pyramids have been
often described. Their antiquity is beyond the researches of history itself,
and their original uses are still unknown. The basis of the largest, covers
eleven acres of ground, and its perpendicular height is 500 feet, but if
measured obliquely to the terminating point, 700 feet. M. Volney, says, that a
late mensuration assigns to each face of the Great Pyramid, six hundred feet;
and its perpendicular height, four hundred and eighty feet.
It contains a room thirty four feet long, and seventeen broad, in which is a
marble chest, but without either cover or contents, supposed to have been
designed for the tomb of the founder. In short, the pyramids of Egypt are the
most stupendous, and to appearance, the most useless structures that ever were
raised by the hands of men.

Among the greatest curiosities in this country, or perhaps in the whole world,
we may reckon those people called Psylli, who have the faculty, either natural
or acquired, of enchanting the most venomous serpents, so that they shall have
no power to bite or hurt them, though they retain all their mischievous
qualities with regard to others. Accounts of these have been transmitted by the
Roman historians, but were looked upon as false till confirmed by those of
modern travelers. Mr. Hasselquist asserts, that he has seen one of these
people handling the most venomous reptiles of this kind as if they had been
laces; nay, Mr. Bruce not only assures us of this fact, but that he has seen a
fellow eat a living serpent, beginning at its tail, and proceeding all the way
up to its head, without the creature offering to resent such a violent injury.
In what manner this extraordinary enchantment is performed we know not; for
those who practice it will not speak upon the subject.

The mummy pits, so called for their containing the mummies or embalmed bodies
of the ancient Egyptians, are subterraneous vaults of a prodigious extent; but
the art of preparing the mummies is now loft. It is said that some of the
bodies thus embalmed, are perfect and distinct at this day, though buried 3000
years ago. The labyrinth in Upper Egypt is a curiosity thought to be more
wonderful than the pyramids themselves. It is partly under ground, and cut out
of a marble rock consisting of twelve palaces, and 1000 houses, the intricacies
of which occasion its name. The lake Moeris was dug by order of an Egyptian
king, to correct the irregularities of the Nile, and to communicate with that
river, by canals and ditches which still subsist, and are evidences of the
utility, as well as grandeur of the work. Wonderful grottos and excavations,
mostly artificial, abound in Egypt. The whole country toward Grand Cairo, is a
continued scene of antiquities, of which the oldest are the most stupendous,
but the more modern the most beautiful. Cleopatra's needle, and its sculptures,
are admirable. Pompey's pillar is a fine regular column of the Corinthian
order, the shast of which is one stone, being eighty-eight feet nine inches in
height, or ten diameters of the column; the whole height is 114 feet, including
the capital and the pedestal. The Sphynx, as it is called, is no more than the
head and part of the shoulders of a woman hewn out of the rock, and about
thirty feet high, near one of the pyramids.

The papyrns is one of the natural curiosities of Egypt, and served the
ancients to write upon, but we know not the manner of preparing it. The pith of
it is a nourishing food. The manner of hatching chickens in ovens, is common in
Egypt, and now practiced in some parts of Europe. The construction of the oven
is very curious.

CITIES, TOWNS, AND PUBLIC EDIFICIES.} Even a slight review of these would
amount to a large volume. In many places, not only temples, but the walls of
cities, built before the time of Alexander the Great, are still entire, and
many of their ornaments, particularly the colors of their paintings, are as
fresh and vivid as when first laid on.

Alexandria, which lies on the Levant coast, was once the emporium of all the
world, and by means of the Red Sea furnished Europe and great part of Asia with
the riches of India. It owes its name to its founder Alexander the Great. It
stands forty miles west from the Nile, and a hundred and twenty north-west of
Cairo. It rose upon the ruins of Tire and Carthage, and is famous for the
light-house erected on the opposite island of Pharos, for the direction of
mariners, deservedly esteemed one of the wonders of the world. The mole which
was built to form a communication with the island of Pharos is 1000 yards in
length, and though near 2000 years old, such were its excellent materials as to
resist in a great measure the violence of wind^ and waves ever since. All the
parts of the city were magnificent in proportion, as appears from their ruins,
particularly the cisterns and aqueducts. Many of the materials of the old city,
however, have been employed in building New Alexandria, which at present is a
very ordinary seaport, known by the name of Scanderoon. Notwithstanding the
poverty, ignorance, and indolence of the inhabitants, then mosques, bagnios,
and the like buildings, erected within these ruins, preserve an inexpressible
air of majesty. Some think that Old Alexandria was built from the materials of
the ancient Memphis.

Rosetta, or Raschid, stands twenty-five miles to the north-west of Alexandria,
and is recommended for its beautiful situation, and delightful prospects, which
command the fine country, or island of Delta, formed by the Nile, near its
mouth. It is likewise a place of great trade. The length of the city is two
miles, but only half a mile broad. In the environs are many country houses
belonging to Christian merchants, with fine gardens, producing the choicest
fruits of the East. The Mohammedan inhabitants are here also particularly civil
and polite.

Cairo, now Masr, the present capital of Egypt, is a large and populous, but a
disagreeable residence, on account of its pestilential air, and narrow streets.
It is divided into two towns, the Old and the New and defended by an old
castle, the works of which are said to be three miles in circumference. This
castle is said to have been built by Saladine; at the west end are the remains
of very noble apartments, some of which are covered with domes, and adorned
with pictures in Mosaic work; but these apartments are now only used for
weaving embroidery, and preparing the hangings and coverings annually sent to
Mecca. The well, called Joseph's well, is a curious piece of mechanism, about
300 feet deep. The memory of that patriarch is still revered in Egypt, where
they show granaries, and many other works of public utility, that go under his
name. They are certainly of vast antiquity; but it is very questionable whether
they were erected by him. One of his granaries is shown in Old Cairo, but
Captain Norden suspects it is a Saracen work, nor does he give us any high idea
of the buildings of the city itself. On the bank of the Nile, facing Cairo,
lies the village of Gize, which is thought to be the ancient Memphis. Two miles
west, is Bulac, called the port of Cairo. The Christians of Cairo practice a
holy cheat, during the Easter holidays, by pretending that the limbs and bodies
of the dead arise from their graves, to which they return peaceably. The
streets of Cairo are pestered with the jugglers and fortune tellers already
mentioned. One of their favorite exhibitions is their dancing camels, which,
when young, they place upon a large heated floor: The intense heat makes the
poor creatures caper, and being plied all the time with the sound of drums, the
noise of that instrument sets them a dancing all their lives after.

The other towns of note in Egypt are Damietta, supposed to be the ancient
Pelusium: Said, on the west banks of the Nile, 200 miles south of Cairo, said
to be the ancient Egyptian Thebes; by the few who have visited it, it is
reported to be the most capital antique curiosity that is now extant; and
Cossiar, on the west coast of the Red Sea. The general practice of strangers,
who visit those places, is to hire a Janizary, whose authority commonly
protects them from the insults of the other natives. Suez, formerly a place of
great trade, is now a small city, and gives name to the Is^hmus, that joins
Africa with Asia. The children of Israel are supposed to have marched near this
city, when they left Egypt, in their way toward the Red Sea; almost every
object and village in this country presents some amazing piece of antiquity.
The difficulties in visiting it are great; so that the accounts we can depend
upon are but few, nor do they always agree.

MANUFACTURES AND COMMERCE.] They Egyptians export prodigious quantities of
unmanufactured as well as prepared flax, thread, cotton, and leather of all
forts, callicoes, yellow wax, sal ammoniac, saffron, sugar, fenna, and cassia.
They trade with the Arabs for coffee, drugs, spices, callicoes, and other
merchandises, which are landed at Suez, from whence they fend them to Europe.
Several European states have consuls resident in Egypt, but the customs of the
Turkish government are managed by Jews. The trade of the English with this
country is almost annihilated, as the French are able to undersell them in the
principal articles of trade, particularly in light cloths of Languedo^, called
first and second Londries. which yield a good profit.

CONSTITUTION AND GOVERNMENT.] A viceroy is sent to Egypt, from the Port,
under the title of the bashaw of Cairo, and is one of the greatest officers of
the Ottoman empire. It is generally agreed, that the bashaw is very careful how
he provokes the little princes, or beys, who have parcelled out Egypt among
themselves, and whom he governs chiefly by playing one against another. It has
sometimes happened, that those bashaws have employed their arms against their
masters; and they are often displaced by the Port, upon complaint from those
petty princes. These circumstances may account for the reason why Egypt is not
overloaded with taxes. Captain Norden and Dr. Pococke have given us the best,
and indeed a very favorable account of those petty princes, who are called the
Schechs or Sheiks of the Bedonians, or wandering Arabs, and are generally too
powerful to receive laws from the Turkish government.

Egypt is now divided into 24 provinces, each of which is governed by a
Sangiack, or Bey, so that the government of Egypt is both monarchical and
republican. The monarchical is executed by the bashaw, and the republican by
the mamalukes or sangiacs. The bashaw is appointed by the grand signior as his
viceroy. The republican, or rather the aristocratical part of the government of
Egypt, consists of a divan, composed of these twenty-four sangiacks, beys, or
lords. The head of them is called the sheik bellet, who is chosen by the divan,
and confirmed by the bashaw. Every one of the sangiacks is arbitrary in his own
territory, and exerts sovereign power; the major part of them reside at Cairo.
If the grand signior's bashaw acts in opposition to the sense of the divan, or
attempts to violate their privileges, they will not suffer him to continue in
his post, the Port is obliged to send another. They have an authentic grant of
privileges, dated in the year 1517, in which year sultan Selim conquered Egypt
from the Mamalukes.

REVENUES.] From the nature of this divided government it must be difficult, if
not impossible to form a judgment of the amount of the revenue of this country;
according to the most probable conjecture, it exceeds two millions annually at
present.

MILITARY STRENGTH.] Authors are greatly divided on this article. Captain
Norden tells us, that it is divided into two corpse of janissaries, and as^afs
which are the chief; the former amounting to about six or eight thousand, and
the latter to between three and four thousand. The other troops are of little
account. After all, it does not appear, that the bashaw ever ventures to employ
those troops against the Arab or Egyptian beys already mentioned, and who have
separate armies of their own; so that, in fact, their dependence upon the Port
is little more than nominal, and amounts at most to feudal services. According
to M. Volney, the principal military strength of the country is now in the
hands of the Mamlouks, as scarce a vestige remains of the corpse of janissaries,
etc. which formerly kept Egypt in subjection.


HISTORY. See Ro^hn's Ancient History.

THE STATES of BARBARY.
UNDER this head we shall rank the countries of, 1. Morocco and Fez; 2.
Algiers; 3. Tunis; 4. Tripoli and Barca.

The empire of Morocco, including Fez, is bounded o^ the North by the
Mediterranean sea; on the South, by Tafilet; and on the East, by Segelmessa and
the kingdom of Algiers, being 500 miles in length, and 480 in breadth.

Fez, which is now united to Morocco, is about 125 miles in length, and much
the same in breadth. It lies between the kingdom of Algiers to the East, and
Morocco on the south, and is surrounded in other parts by the sea.

Algiers, formerly a kingdom, is bounded on the East by the kingdom of Tunis,
on the North by the Mediterranean, on the South by Mount Atlas, and on the West
by the kingdoms of Morocco and Tafilet. According to Dr. Shaw, who resided 12
years at Algiers in quality of chaplain to the British factory, and has
corrected many errors of ancient and modern geographers respecting the states
of Barbary, this country extends in length 480 miles along the coast of the
Mediterranean, and is between 40 and 100 miles in breadth.

Tunis is bounded by the Mediterranean on the North and East; by the kingdom of
Algiers on the West; and by Tripoli, with part of Biledulgerid, on the South;
being 220 miles in length from North to South, and 170 in breadth from East to
West.

Tripoli, including Barca, is bounded on the North by the Mediterranean sea; on
the South by the country of the Beriberies; on the West by the kingdom of
Tunis, Biledulgerid, and a territory of the Gadamis; and on the East by Egypt;
extending about 1100 miles along the seacoast; and the breadth is from 1 to
300 miles.

Each capital bears the name of the state or kingdom to which it belongs, but
the capital of Biledulgerid (the ancient Numidia) is Dara.

This being permised, I shall consider the Barbary states as forming (which
they really do) a great political confederacy, however independent each may be
as to the exercise of its internal policy; nor is there a greater difference
than happens in different provinces of the same kingdom, in the customs and
manners of the inhabitants.

AIR AND SEASONS.] The air of Morocco is mild, as is that of Algiers, and
indeed all the other states, except in the months of July and August.

SOIL, VEGETABLE AND ANIMAL PRODUCTIONS, BY SEA AND LAND.} These states, under
the Roman empire were justly denominated the garden of the world; and to have a
residence there, was considered as the highest state of luxury. The produce of
their soil formed those magazines, which furnished all Italy, and great part of
the Roman empire, with corn, wine, and oil. Though the lands are now
uncultivated, through the oppression and barbarity of their constitution, yet
they are still fertile, not only in the above mentioned commodities, but in
dates, figs, raisins, almonds, apples, pears, cherries, plums, citrons, lemons,
oranges, pomegranates, with plenty of roots and herbs in their kitchen-gardens.
Excellent hemp and flax grow on their plains; and by the report of Europeans,
who have lived there for some time, the country abounds with all that can add
to the pleasures of life; for their great people find means to evade the
sobriety prescribed by the Mohammedan law, and make free with excellent wines,
and spirits of their own growth and manufacture. Algiers produces saltpeter,
and great quantities of excellent salt; and lead and iron have been found in
several places of Barbary.

Neither the elephant nor the rhinoceros are to be found in the states of
Barbary; but their deserts abound with lions, tigers, leopards, hyaenas, and
monstrous serpents. The Barbary horses were formerly very valuable, and thought
equal to the Arabian. Though their breed is now said to be decayed, yet some
very fine ones are occasionally imported into England. Camels and dromedaries,
asses, mules, and kum^ahs, a most serviceable creature, begot by an ass upon a
cow, are their beasts of burden. Their cows are but small, and barren of milk.
Their sheep yield but indifferent fleeces, but are very large, as are their
goats. Bears, porcupines, foxes, apes, hares, rabbits, ferrets, weasels, moles,
camelions, and all kinds of reptiles are found here. Besides vermin, says Dr.
Shaw (speaking of his travels through Barbary) the apprehensions we were under,
in some parts at least of this country, of being bitten or stung by the
scorpion, the viper, or the venomous spider, rarely failed to interrupt our
repose; a refreshment so very grateful, and so highly necessary to a weary
traveller. Partridges and quails, angles, hawks, and all kinds of wild fowl,
are found on this coast; and of the smaller birds, the capsa-sparrow is
remarkable for its beauty, and sweetness of its note, which is thought to
exceed that of any other bird, but it cannot live out of its own climate. The
seas and bays of Barbary abound with the finest and most delicious fish of
every kind, and were preferred by the ancients to those of Europe.

POPULATION, INHABITANTS, MANNERS, CUSTOMS, AND DIVERSIONS.} Morocco was
certainly far more populous than it is now, if, as travelers say, its cepital
contained 100,000 houses, whereas at present it is thought not to contain above
25,000 inhabitants; nor can we think that the other parts of the country are
more populous, if it is true that their king or emperor has 80,000 horse and
foot, of foreign negroes, in his armies.

The city of Algiers is said to contain 100,000 Mahometans, 15,000 Jews, and
2000 Christian slaves; but no estimate can be formed as to the populousness of
its territory. Some travelers report, that it is inhabited by a friendly
hospitable people, who are very different in their manners and character from
those of the metropolis.

Tunis is the most polished republic of all the Barbary states. The capital
contains 10,000 families, and above 3000 tradesmen's shops, and its suburbs
consist of 1000 houses. The Tunisines are indeed exceptions to the other states
of Barbary; for even the most civilized of the European government might
improve from their manners. Their distinctions are well kept up, and proper
respect is paid to the military, mercantile, and learned professions. They
cultivate friendship with the European states; arts and manufactures have been
lately introduced among them; and the inhabitants are said at present to be
well acquainted with the various labors of the loom. The Tunisine women are
very handsome in their persons; and though the men are sunburnt, the complexion
of the ladies is very delicate, nor are they less neat and elegant in their
dress; but they improve the beauty of their eyes by art, particularly the
powder of lead-ore, the same pigment, according to the opinion of the learned
Dr. Shaw, that Jezebel made use of when she is said (2 Kings, chap. ix. verse
30.) to have painted her face; the words of the original being, that she set
off her eyes with the powder of lead-ore. The gentlemen in general are sober,
orderly, and clean in their persons, their behavior genteel and complaisant,
and great regularity appears through all the streets and city.

Tripoli was once the richest, most populous, and opulent of all the states on
the coast; but it is now much reduced, and the inhabitants, who are said to
amount to between 4 and 500,000, have all the vices of the Algerines.

Their manners are much of a piece with those of the Egyptians. The subjects of
the Barbary states, in general subsisting by piracy, are allowed to be bold
intrepid mariners, and will fight desperately when they meet with a prize at
sea. They are notwithstanding far inferior to the Europeans, both in the
construction and management of their vessels. They are, if we except the
Tunifines, void of all arts and literature. The misery and poverty of the
inhabitants of Morocco, who are not immediately in the emperor's service, are
beyond all description; but those who inhabit the inland parts of the country
are an hospitable, inoffence people; and indeed it is a general observation,
that the more distant the inhabitants of those states are from the seats of
their government, the more pure are their manners. Notwithstanding their
poverty, they have a liveliness about them, especially those who are of the
Arabic descent, that gives them an air of contentment; and having nothing to
lose, they are peaceable among themselves. The Moors are supposed to be the
original inhabitants, but are now blended with the Arabs, and both are cruelly
oppressed by a handful of insolent domineering Turks, the refuse of the streets
of Constantinople.

DRESS.] The dress of these people is a linen shirt, over which they tie a silk
or cloth vestment with a sash, and over that a loose coat. Their drawers are
made of linen. The arms and legs of the wearer are bare, but they have slippers
on their feet; and persons of condition sometimes wear buskins. They never move
their turbans, but pull off their slippers when they attend religious duties,
or the person of their sovereign. They are fond of striped and fancied silks.
The dress of the women is not very different from that of the men, but their
drawers are longer, and they wear a sort of cawl on their heads instead of a
turban. The chief furniture of their houses consists of carpets and mattrasses,
on which they sit and lie. In eating, their slovenliness is shocking. They are
prohibited gold and silver vessels; and their meat is boiled or roasted to rags.

RELIGION.] All foreigners are here allowed the open profession of their
religion, but the inhabitants of these states are Mahometans; and many subjects
of Morocco follow the tenets of one Hamed, a modern sectarist, and an enemy to
the ancient doctrine of the califs. All of them are very fond of idiots; and in
some cases their protection screens offenders from punishment, for the most
notorious crimes. In the main, however, the Moors of Barbary, as the
inhabitants of these states are now promiscuously called (because the Saracens
first entered Europe from Mauritania, the country of the Moors) have adopted
the very worst parts of the Mohammedan religion, and seem to have retained only
as much of it as countenances their vices. Adultery in the women is punished
with death; but though the men are indulged with a plurality of wives and
concubines, they commit the most unnatural crimes with impunity.

LANGUAGE.] As the states of Barbary possess those countries that formerly went
by the name of Mauritania and Numidia, the ancient African language is still
spoken in some of the inland countries, and even by some inhabitants of the
city of Morocco. In the seaport towns, and maritime countries, a bastard kind
of Arabic is spoken; and seafaring people are no strangers to that medly of
living and dead languages, Italian, French, Spanish, etc. that is so well known
in all the ports of the Mediterranean, by the name of Lingua Franca.

ANTIQUITIES AND CURIOSITIES, NATURAL AND ARTIFICIAL.} This article is well
worth the study of an antiquary, but the subjects of it are difficult of
access. The reader can scarcely doubt that the countries which contained
Carthage, and the Pride of the Phaenician, Greek, and Roman works, are replete
with the most curious remains of antiquity; but they lie scattered amidst
ignorant, barbarous inhabitants; and but few curious persons, except Dr. Shaw,
have visited the country. Some remains of the Mauritanian and Nu^idian
greatness are still to be met with, and many ruins which bear evidences of
their ancient grandeur and populousness. These point out the old Julia Caesarea
of the Romans, which was little inferior in magnificence to Carthage itself. A
few of the aqueducts of Carthage are said to be still remaining, but no vestige
of its walls. The same is the fate of Urica, and many other renowned cities of
antiquity; and so overrun is the country with barbarism, that their very sites
are not known, even by their ruins, amphitheatres, and other public buildings
which remain still in tolerable preservation. Besides those of classical
antiquity, many Saracen monuments, of the most stupendous magnificence, are
likewise found in this vast tract; these were erected under the califs of
Bagdad, and the ancient kings of the country, before it was subdued by the
Turks, or reduced to its present form of government. Their walls form the
principal fortifications in the country, both inland and maritime. We know of
few or no natural curiosities belonging to this country, excepting its
salt pits, which in some places take up an area of six miles. Dr. Shaw mentions
springs found here that are so hot as to boil a large piece of mutton very
tender in a quarter of an hour.

CITIES AND PUBLIC BDILDINGS.] Mention has already been made of Morocco, the
capital of that kingdom, but now almost in ruins, the court having removed to
Mequinez, a city of Fez, 30 miles distant, and very populous. Incredible things
are recorded of the magnificent palaces in both cities; but by the best
accounts the common people live in a dirty, slovenly manner.

The city of Algiers is not above a mile and an half in circuit, though it is
computed to contain near 120,000 inhabitants, 15,000 houses, and 107 mosques.
Their public baths are large, and handsomely paved with marble. The prospect of
the country and sea from Algiers is very beautiful, being built on the
declivity of a mountain; but the city, though for several ages it has braved
some of the greatest powers in Christendom, it is said, could make but a faint
defense against a regular siege, and that three English fifty-gun ships might
batter it about the ears of its inhabitants from the harbor. If so, the
Spaniards must have been very deficient either in courage or conduct. They
attacked it in the year 1775, by land and by sea, but were repulsed with great
loss, though they had near 20,000 foot and 2000 horse, and 47 king's ships of
different rates, and 346 transports. In the year 1783 and 84, they also renewed
their attacks by sea to destroy the city and galleys, but after spending a
quantity of ammunition, bombs, etc. were forced to retire without either it*
capture or extinction. The mole of the harbor is 500 paces in length,
extending from the continent to a small island were there is a castle and large
battery.

The kingdom of Tunis, which is naturally the finest of all these states,
contains the remains of many noble cities, some of them still in good
condition. The capital, about 30 miles south of old Carthage, has
fortifications, and is about three miles in circumference. The houses are not
magnificent, but neat and commodious; as is the public exchange for merchants
and their goods; but, like Algiers, it is distressed for want of fresh water.

The city of Tripoli consists of an old and new town, the latter being the most
flourishing; but never can make any considerable figure, on account of the
inconveniences attending its situation, particularly the want of sweet water.
The city of Oran, lying upon this coast, is about a mile in circumference, and
is fortified both by art and nature. It was a place of considerable trade, and
the object of many bloody disputes between the Spaniards and the Moors.
Constantina was the ancient Cirta, and one of the strongest cities of Numidia,
being inaccessible on all sides, excepting the south-west.

Besides the above towns and cities, many others, formerly of great renown, lie
scattered up and down this immense tract of country. The city of Fez, at
present the capital of the kingdom so called, is said to contain near 300,000
inhabitants, besides merchants and foreigners.

Its mosqes amount to 500: one of them magnificent beyond description, and
about a mile and a half in circumference. Mequinez i^ esteemed the great
eporium of all Barbary. Sallee was formerly famous for the piracy of its
inhabitants. Tangier, situated about two miles within the straits of Gibraltar,
was given by the crown of Portugal as part of the dowry of queen Catharine,
consort of Charles II. of England. It was intended to be to the English what
Gibralter is now; and it must have been a most noble acquisition, had not the
misunderstandings between the king and his parliament occasioned him to blow up
its fortifications and demolish its harbor; so that from being one of the
finest cities in Africa, it is now little better than a fishing town. Ceuta,
upon the same strait, almost opposite to Gibraltar, is still in the hands of
the Spaniards, but often, if not always, besieged or blocked up by the Moors.
Tetuan, which lies within twenty miles of Ceuta is now but an ordinary town,
containing about 800 houses; but the inhabitants are said to be rich, and
tolerably civilized in their manners.

The provinces of Suz, Taffilet, and Cesula, form no part of the states of
Barbary, though the king of Morocco pretends to be their sovereign; nor do they
contain any thing that is particularly curious.

Zaara, is a desert country, thinly peopled, and nearly destitute of both water
and provisions.

MANUFACTURES AND COMMERCE.] The lower subjects of these states know very few
imaginary wants, and depend partly upon their piracies to be supplied with
necessary utensils and manufactures; so that their exports consist chiefly of
leather, fine mats, embroidered handkerchiefs, sword-nots, and carpets, which
are cheaper and softer than those of Turkey, though not so good in other
respects. As they leave almost all their commercial affairs to the Jews and
christans settled among them, the latter have established silk and linen works,
which supply the higher ranks of their own subjects. They have no ships that,
properly speaking, are employed in commerce; so that the French and English
carry on the greatest part of their trade. Their exports, besides those already
mentioned, consist in elephants teeth, ostrich feathers, copper, tin, wool,
hides, honey, wax, dates, raisins, olives, almonds, gum arabic, and sandrac.
The inhabitants of Morocco are likewise said to carry on a considerable trade
by caravans to Mecca, Medina, and some inland parts of Africa, from whence they
bring back vast numbers of negroes, who serve in their armies, and are slaves
in their houses and fields.

In return for their exports, the Europeans furnish them with timber, artillery
of all kinds, gunpowder, and whatever they want, either in their public or
private capacities; the particulars of which are too many to specify. The
duties paid by the English in the ports of Morocco, are but half those paid by
other Europeans. It is a general observation, that no nation is fond of trading
with these states, not only on account of their capricious despotism, but the
villainy of their individuals, both natives and Jews, many of whom take all
opportunities of cheating, and when detected are seldom punished.

It has often been thought surprising, that the Christian powers should suffer
their marine to be insulted by those barbarians, who take the ships of all
nations with whom they are at peace, or rather who do not pay them a subsidy
either in money or commodities. We cannot account for this forbearance
otherwise than by supposing, first, that a breach with them might provoke the
Port, who pretends to be their lord paramount: secondly, that no christian
power would be fond of seeing Algiers, and the rest of that coast, in
possession of another; and, thirdly, that nothing could be got by a bombardment
of any of their towns, as the inhabitants would instantly carry their effects
to their deserts and mountains, so that the benefit, resulting from the
conquest, must be tedious and precarious. Indeed expeditions against Algiers
have been undertaken by the Spaniards, but they were ill-conducted and
unsuccessful: of th^se some account has already been given.

CONSTITUTION AND GOVERNMENT.] In Morocco, government cannot be said to exist.
The emperors have for some ages been parties, judges, and even executioners
with their own hands, in all criminal matters; nor is their brutality more
incredible than the submission with which their subjects bear it. In the
absence of the emperor, every military officer has the power of life and death
in his hand, and it is seldom that they mind the form of a judicial proceeding.
Some vestiges, however of the cali^ate government still continue; for in places
where no military officer resides, the mufti or high priest is the fountain of
all justice, and under him the cad^^, or civil officers, who act as our
justices of the peace. Though the emperor of Morocco is not immediately subject
to the Port, yet he acknowledges the Grand Signior to be his superior, and he
pays him a distant allegiance as the chief representative of Mahomet. What we
have said of Morocco is applicable to Fez, both kingdoms being now under one
emperor.

Though Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoli, have each of them a Turkish bashaw or dey,
who governs in the name of the Grand Signior, yet very little regard is paid by
his ferocious subjects to his authority. He cannot even be said to be nominated
by the Port. When a vacancy of the government happens, which commonly does by
murder, every soldier in the army has a vote in choosing the succeeding dey;
and though the election is often attended with bloodshed, yet it is no sooner
fixed than he is cheerfully recognized and obeyed. It is true, he must be
confirmed by the Port; but that is seldom refused, as the divan is no stranger
to the dispositions of the people. The power of the dey is despotic; and the
income of the dey of Algiers amounts to about 150,000l. a year, without greatly
oppressing the subjects, who are very tenacious of their property. A detachment
of the army of their states is annually sent into each province to collect the
tribute from the Moors and Arabs; and the prizes they take at sea, sometimes
equal the taxes laid upon the natives. These deys pay slight annual tributes to
the Port. When the Grand Signior is at war with a Christian power, he requires
their assistance, as he does that of the king of Morrocco; but he is obeyed
only as they think proper. Subordinate to the deys are officers, both military
and civil; and in all matters of importance, the dey is expected to take the
advice of a common council, which consists of thirty bashaws. These bashaws
seldom fail of forming parties, among the soldiers, against the reigning dey,
whom they make no scruple of assassinating, even in council; and the strongest
candidate then fills his place. Sometimes he is deposed; sometimes, though but
very seldom he resigns his authority to save his life; and it is seldom he dies
a natural death upon the throne. The authority of the dey is unlimited; but an
unsuccessful expedition, or too pacific a conduct, seldom fails to put an end
to his life and government.

REVENUES.] We have already mentioned those of Algiers, but they are now said
to be exceeded by Tunis. They consist of a certain proportion of the prizes
taken from christians, a small capitation tax, and the customs paid by the
English, French, and other nations, who are suffered to trade with those
states. As to the king of Morocco, we can form no idea of his revenues, because
none of his subjects can be said to possess any property. From the manner of
his living, his attendance, and appearance, we may conclude he does not abound
in riches. The ransoms of Christian slaves are his perquisites. He sometimes
shares in the vessels of the other states, which entitles him to a part of
their prizes. He claims a tenth of the goods of his Mohometan subjects, and six
crowns a year from every Jew merchant. He has likewise considerable profits in
the Negroland and other caravans, especially the slave trade toward the south.
It is thought that the whole of his ordinary revenue, in money, does not exceed
165,000 a year.

MILITARY STRENGTH AT SEA AND LAND.] By the best accounts we have received, the
king of Morocco can bring to the field 100,000 men; but the strength of this
army consists of cavalry mounted by his negro slaves. Those wretches are
brought young to Morocco, know no other state but servitude, and no other
master but that king, and prove the firmest support of his tyranny. About the
year 1727, all the naval force of Morocco consisted only of three small ships,
which lay at Sallee, and being full of men, sometimes brought in prizes. The
Algerines maintain about 6500 foot, consisting of Turks, and cologlies, or the
sons of soldiers. Part of them serve as marines on board their vessels. About
1000 of them do garrison duty, and part are employed to fomenting differences
among the neighboring Arab princes. Besides these, the dey can bring 2000
Moorish horse into the field; but as they are enemies to the Turks, they are
little trusted. Those troops are under excellent discipline, and the deys of
all the other Barbary states keep up a force in proportion to their abilities;
so that a few years ago they refused to send any Tribute to the Turkish
emperor, who seems to be satisfied with the shadow of obedience which they pay
him.

It is very remarkable, that thought the Carthaginians, who inhabited this very
country of Barbary, had greater fleets and a more extensive commerce than any
other nation, or than all the people upon the face of the earth, when that
state flourished; the present inhabitants have scarcely any merchant ships
belonging to them, or indeed any other than what Sallee, Algiers, Tunis, and
Tripoli fit out for piracy; which, though increased since the last attack of
the Spaniards, are now but few and small, and some years ago did not exceed six
ships from thirty-six to fifty guns. The admiral's ship belongs to the
government; the other captains are appointed by private owners, but subject to
military law. With such a contemptible fleet, these people not only harrass the
nations of Europe, but oblige them to pay a kind of tribute by way of presents.

HISTORY.] There perhaps is no problem in history so unaccountable as the decay
or fall of the splendour, power, and glory of the states of Barbary; which, when
Rome was mistress of the world, formed the fairest jewels in the imperial
diadem. It was not till the seventh century, that, after these states had been
by turns in possession of the Vandals and the Greek emperors, the califs or
Saracens of Bagdad conquered them, and from thence became masters of almost all
Spain, form whence their posterity was totally driven about the year 1492, when
the exiles settled among their friends and countrymen on the Barbary coast.
This naturally begot a perpetual war between them and the Spaniards, who
pressed them so hard, that they called to their assistance the two famous
brothers Barbarossa, who were admirals of the Turkish fleet, and who, after
breaking the Spanish yoke, imposed upon the inhabitants of all those states
(excepting Morocco) their own. Some attempts were made by the emperor Charles
V. to reduce Algiers and Tunis, but they were unsuccessful; and, as already
observed, the inhabitants have in fact shaken off the Turkish yoke likewise.

The emperors or kings of Morocco are the successors of those sovereigns of
that country who were all called xeriffs, and whose powers resembled that of
the califate of the Saracens. They have been in general a set of bloody
tyrants; though they have had among them some able princes, particularly Muley
Moluc, who defeated and killed Don Sebastian, king of Portugal. They have lived
in almost a continued state of warfare with the kings of Spain and other
Christian princes ever since; nor does the crown of Great Britain sometimes
disdain, as in the year 1769, to purchase their friendship with presents.

Of AFRICA, from the Tropic of Cancer to the Cape of Good-Hope. See the Table
and Map.
THIS immense territory is, comparitively speaking, very little known; there is
no modern traveller that has penerated into the interior parts; so that we are
ignorant not only of the bounds, but even of the names of several inland
countries. In many material circumstances, the inhabitants of this extensive
continent agree with each other. If we except the people of Abyssinia, they are
all of a black complexion: In their religion, except on the seacoasts, which
have been visited and settled by strangers, they are pagans; and the form of
government is every where monarchical, or despotic. Few princes, however,
possess a very extensive jurisdiction; for as the natives of this part of
Africa are said to be grossly ignorant in all the arts of utility or
refinement, they must be little acquainted with one another; and generally
united in small societies, each governed by its own prince. In Congo, Loango,
and Angola, we are told of powerful monarchs; but on examination, it is found
that the authority of these princes stands on a precarious footing, each tribe
or separate body of their subjects being under the influence or a petty
chieftain of their own, styled Negus, to whose commands, however contrary to
those of the Negascha Negascht, or king of kings, they are always ready to
submit. This indeed must always be the case among rude nations, where the art
of governing, like all others, is in a very simple and imperfect state. In the
succession to the throne, force generally prevails over right; and an uncle, a
brother, or other collateral relation, is on this account commonly preferred to
the descendants, whether male or female.

We are but imperfectly acquainted with the manners and customs of the people
of this extensive country. The accounts given us by Mr. Bruce, of the
Abyssinians, represent them as in a state of very great barbarism. Their manner
of feeding is beyond a parrallel, if we may believe the report of our author.
He informs us, that having fallen in with some soldiers driving a cow before
them, he was surprised to see them throw down the animal, cut off pieces of her
flesh, and then flapping the skin over the wound, make her get up and walk on
as before. This he at first supposed to be a military man^^vure, and an
expeditious method of carrying provisions along with them; but he soon found
that it was the common practice of the country, and that the fate of the
unfortunate animals used by Abyssinians for food, was much worse than if they
were devoured by the most cruel wild beasts. The latter would kill them at
once, or at least not keep them long in torment; but these wild beasts in human
shape protract their agonies as much as possible; flesh being in no estimation
among them, unless it be warm and quivering with life. In their manners, they
are debauched in the most incredible degree; the country is a seat of continual
war and bloodshed; ignorance, and the most abominable superstitions universally
prevail; and, when to all this we join the nominal profession of Christianity,
the idea is too shocking to be born.

Although we read from the Jesuits, says Mr. Bruce, a great deal about marriage
and polygamy, yet there is nothing which may be averred more truly, than that
there is no such thing as marriage in Abyssinia, unless that which is
contracted by mutual consent, without other forms, subsisting only till
dissolved of one or other, and to be renewed or repealed as often as it is
agreeable to both parties, who when they please, cohabit together as man and
wife, after having been divorced, had children by others, or whether they have
been married, or had children with others or not. Upon separation they divide
the children. If the numbers are unequal they are divided by lot. There is no
such distinction as legitimate or illegitimate children from the king to the
beggar.

The religion of the Abyssinians is a mixture of Christianity, Judaism and
Paganism, the two latter of which are by far the most predominant. There are
here more Churches than in any other country, and though it is very
mountainous, and consequently the view much obstructed, it is very seldom you
see less than five or six churches. Every great man that dies thinks he has
atoned for all his wickedness, if he leaves a fund to build a Church, or has
built one in his life time. Wherever a victory is obtained, a church is
erected, the situation for them is always chosen near running water, for the
convenience of their purifications and ablutions, in which they observe
strictly the levitical law. The churches are all round, with thatched roofs:
Their s^^^mits are perfect cones: The outside is surrounded by a number of
wooden pillars, which are nothing else than the trunks of the cedar tree, and
are placed to support the edifice, about eight feet of the roof projecting
beyond the wall of the church, which forms an agreeable walk or c^lonade,
around it in hot weather, or in rain. The inside of the church is in several
divisions, according as is prescribed by the law of Moses. The first is a
circle somewhat wider than the inner one; here the congregation fit and pray.
Within this is a square, and that square is divided by a veil or curtain, in
which is another very small division answering to the holy of holies.

This is so narrow, that none but the priests can go in to it. You must be
barefooted whenever you enter the church, and then you may go through every
part of it, provided you are pure, that is, have not been concerned with women
for 24 hours before, nor touched dead bodies or carrion: (a curious assemblage
of ideas,) in which case you must stand at an awful distance and say your
prayers.

The churches are full of pictures slovenly painted on parchment, and nailed
upon the walls. Sometimes for a particular church they get a number of pictures
of saints, on skins of parchment ready finished from Cairo, in a style very
little superior to their own performances. There is no choice in their saints,
they are both of the old and new Testament, and those that might be dispensed
with from both. There is St. Pontius Pilate and his wife; there is St. ^alaam
and his as^; Samson and his Jaw Bone; and so of the rest.

The Abyssinians receive the holy sacrament in both kinds, in unleavened bread,
and in the grape bruised with the hush together as it grows, so that it is a
kind of marmalade, and is given in a flat spoon. Large pieces of bread are
given to the co^^untments in proportion to their quality, and it sometimes is
the case, with great men, who though they open their mouths as wide as they
conveniently can yet from the respect the priest pays them, such a portion of
the loaf is put into their mouths, that water runs from their eyes, from the
incapacity of chewing it, which however they do as indecently, and with full as
much noise as they eat at table.

The Abyssinians are not all agreed about the state of souls before the
resurrection of the body. The opinion which generally prevails, is that there
is no third state, but that, after the example of the thief, the souls of good
men enjoy beatific vision immediately upon the separation from the body. But
their practice and books both contradict this; for when any person dies, alms
are given, and prayers are offered for the souls of those departed, which would
be vain did they believe they were in the presence of God.

The fertility of a country so prodigiously extensive, might be supposed more
various than we find it is; in fact, there is no medium in this part of Africa
with regard to the advantages of soil; it is either perfectly barren, or
extremely fertile; this arises from the intense heat of the sun, which, where
it meets with sufficient moisture, produces with the utmost luxuriancy; and in
those countries where there are few rivers, reduces the surface of the earth to
a barren sand. Of this sort are the countries of Anian and Zaara, which, for
want of water, and consequently of all other necessaries, are reduced to
perfect deserts, as the name of the latter denotes. In those countries, on the
other hand, where there is plenty of water, and particularly where the rivers
overflow the land, part of the year, as in Abyssinia, the productions of
nature, both of the animal and vegetable kinds, are found in the highest
perfection and greatest abundance. The countries of Mandingo, Ethiopia, Congo,
Angola, Batua, Truticui, Monomotapa, Casati, and Mehenemugi, are extremely rich
in gold and silver. The baser metals likewise are found in these and many other
parts of Africa. But the persons of the natives, detestable as is the traffic,
make the most considerable article in the produce and trade of this miserable
quarter of the globe.

The principal towns in this part of Africa, which are known, are the following.

Gondar, the metropolis of Abyssinia, is situated upon a hill of considerable
height, the top of it nearly plain, on which the town is placed. It consists of
about ten thousand families in times of peace: The houses are chiefly of clay,
the roofs thached in the form of cones, which is always the construction within
the tropical rains. On the west end of the town is the king's house, formerly a
structure of considerable consequence; it was a square building, flanked with
square towers, was formerly four stories high, and from the top of it had a
magnificent view of all the country southward to the lake Izana. Great part of
this house is now in ruins, having been burnt at different times; but there is
still ample lodging in the two lowest floors of it; the audience chamber being
above one hundred and twenty feet long.

Adowa, the capital of Tigre, is situated on the west side of a small plain,
surrounded every way by mountains; it contains about 300 houses; it was not
formerly the capital, but has accidentally become so upon the accession of the
governor, whose property lies in and about it. His mansion house resembles a
prison rather than a palace, for there are in and about it, more than 300
persons in irons, some of whom have been there for 20 years mostly with a view
to extort money from them. Adowa is the seat of a considerable manufacture of
coarse cotton cloth, which circulates instead of money all over Abyssinia.

Sire the capital of the province of the same name, is situated on the brink of
a very steep, narrow valley. In the midst of this valley runs a brook bordered
with palm tress, which bear no fruit: Its houses are all of clay. This town is
also famous for the manufacture of coarse cotton cloths, which pass for current
money through all the Province of Tigre beside these, beads, needles, cohol and
incense, at times only, are considered as money. Sire is situated lat. 14, 4,
35, north, and long. 38 0 16 E. from Greenwich, and although in one of the
finest countries in the world, says Mr. Bruce, putrid fevers of the very worst
kind, are almost constant here.

The nations bounding on Abyssinia, are but little or not at all known. They
are, the chief of them, on the north, south and West, Pagan blacks. Sennaar,
the chief town of the kingdom of Sennaar, is in lat. 13 34 36 north, 33 30 30
east from Greenwich: It is on the west side of the Nile, and close upon the
banks of it. The ground whereon it stands, rises just enough to prevent the
river from entering the town. The country around Sennaar is exceedingly
pleasant in the months of August and September. The corn at this season is now
sprung up, and makes the whole of this immense plain appear a level green land,
interspersed with great lakes of water, and ornamented at certain intervals
with groups of villages, the conical tops of the houses appearing at a
distance, like small encampments. Throughthis extensive plain, winds the Nile,
a delightful river there, more than a mile broad, full to the brim, but never
overflowing. Every where on these banks are seen, numerous herds of the most
beautiful cattle of various kinds, the tribute recently extorted from all the
Arabs; who, freed from their vexations, return home with the remainder of their
flocks in peace, at as great a distance from the town, country, and their
oppressers as they possibly can.

War and treason seem to be the only employment of this horrid people, whom
Heaven has separated by almost impassable deserts from the rest of mankind. The
dress of the Sennaar's is very simple: It consists of a long shirt of blue of
surat cloth, called marotuy, which covers them from the lower part of their
neck down to their feet, but does not conceal the neck itself; and this is the
only difference between the men's and women's dress; that of the women covering
theirs altogether, being buttoned like ours. Both men and women go barefooted
in the house. Their floors are covered with Persian carpets, especially the
women's apartments. In fair weather, they wear sandals; and without doors they
use a kind of wooden patten, neatly ornamented with shells. In the greatest
heat at noon, they order buckets of water to be thrown upon them instead of
bathing. Both men and women anoint themselves, at least once a day, with
camel's grease, mixed with civet, which they imagine softens their skin, and
preserves them from ^utaneous eruptions, of which they are so fearful, that the
smallest pimple in any visible part of their body, keeps them in their house
till it disappears. They lie all night, in a shirt dipped in grease, upon a
bull's hide tanned, and very much softened by this constant greasing, and very
cool at the same time, though it occasions a smell that no washing can free
them from. Their horned cattle are the largest and fattest in the world, and
are exceedingly fine; but the common m^^t sold in the market, is camel's flesh:
The liver of the animal, and the sparerib are always eaten raw, through the
whole country.

All the nations of Africa, within the tropics, are wonderfully affected at the
smallest eruption or roughness of the skin; nor is there any remedy, however
violent, that they will not fly to, for immediate relief. A very singular
complaint mentioned by travelers as common to these countries, is the
Farent^^t, a corruption of an Arabiac word which signifies the worm of Pharaoh.
This animal afflicts those who are in a habit of drinking stagnant water. It
appears indiscriminately in every part of the body: It comes on with an itching
in the spot, and on observing, the small black head of this worm is very
visible. Its body is seemingly of a white silky texture, very small like a
tendon. After its appearance, the natives of these countries, who are used to
it, seize it gently by the head, and wrap it round a thin piece of silk, or
small bird's feather. Every day, or several times a day, they try to wind it up
upon the quill as far as it comes readily; and upon the smallest resistance,
they give over least it should break. They are often as much as five feet in
length.

On the Guinea or western coast, the English trade to James Fort, and other
settlements near and up the river Gambia, where they exchange their woollen and
linen manufactures, their hard ware and spirituous liquors, for the persons of
the natives. By the treaty of peace in 1783, the river of Senegal, with its
dependencies were given up to France. Among the Negroes, a man's wealth
consists in the number of his family, whom he sells like so many cattle, and
often at an inferior price. Gold and ivory, next to the slave trade, form the
principal branches of African commerce. These are carried on from the same
coast, where the Dutch and French, as well as English, have their settlements
for this purpose.

According to a late sensible writer, Mr. Ramsay, the annual British exports to
Africa are estimated at 500,000l. including a considerable quantity that is
annually exchanged with American and other foreign traders on the coast; about
50,000l. of this is returned in ivory, gold dust, gum, etc. The greatest part
of the profits of the slave trade is raised on the sugar plantations. If by
establishing factories, and encouraging civilization on the coast of Africa,
and returning some of the West India and other slaves, to their original
country, some amends could be made for past treachery, to the natives, and the
inhabitants could be instructed in the culture of tobacco, indigo, cotton,
rice, etc. to barter with us for our manufactures, great might be the profits
and much would it serve the cause of humanity. An undertaking of this kind has
lately been set on foot by the Sierra Leona company which bids fair to be
successful, and does very great honor to the humane gentlemen, who are agents
in this business.

The Portuguese are in possession of the east and west coast of Africa, from
the Tropic of Capricorn to the Equator; which immense tract they became masters
of by their successive attempts, and happy discovery and navigation of the Cape
of Good Hope. From the coast of Zangu^bar, on the eastern side, they trade not
only for the articles above mentioned, but likewise for several others, as
sena, aloes, civet, ambergrease, and frankincense. The Dutch have settlements
toward the southern part of the continent, in the country called Caffraria, or
the land of the Hottentots, particularly Cape Town, which is well settled, and
fortified; where their ships, bound for India, usually put in, and trade with
the natives for their cattle, in exchange for which they give them spirituous
liquors.

The establishment which the Dutch East India company have made on either side
of the Cape of Good Hope, the extreme southern point of that great Continent,
which comprehends Europe, Asia and Africa, extends according to computation,
450 miles Eastward and Westward, and 250 toward the North. In this extensive
domain, the population amounts to 17,000 inhabitants of European descent, and
about 30,000 slaves, Africans and Asiatics.

This country is capable of being made, by the simplest means, a populous
commercial Colony. Its pure and temperate climate is favorable to health,
longevity and population. Its soil, though not apparently rich, is, from the
genial temperature of the air, and alternate dews and sunshine, so kindly
vegetative, that it nourishes with little culture, and almost spontaneously,
whatever the husbandman, the botanist, the florist chooses to commit to its
bosom. Thus it is calculated to produce whatever is requisite to the increase
of flocks, horses, and cattle; and at the same time to yield whatever is
necessary to the comfortable subsistence of the human species.

The greatest want of this country, is that of timber for building, and even
for fuel. The navigable rivers are separated from each other by great
distances: But canals are more practicable here than in the low countries of
Europe. The east side of the promontory, and the inland parts, are the richest,
and capable of the highest cultivation. The two principal parts with regard to
actual commerce, are Table Bay and False Bay, which are always safe; so formed
and sheltered, as alternately to yield security against the two prevailing
winds, which are peculiar to that meridian. There are other bays very fit for
navigation; but the policy of the chartered sovereigns, the East India Company,
has drawn a veil over the true knowledge of them. The same jealousy which hides
the knowledge of the ports to which we allude, prohibits the inhabitants from
transporting, on any pretext, their produce and effects to the principal towns,
coastwise by water. The excellent vines of the Cape, if encouraged and
improved, would yield to none in taste, flavor or delicacy. Its grains are not
inferior to those of Sicily. Aloes, myrtle wax, salt and paints, it is capable
of furnishing in profusion; as also indigo, cotton and tobacco. It contains
virgin copper, and copper ore, and the appearance of the soil in many places
indicates the possession of the precious metals.

Families in this place generally consist of from 7 to 17 children, and some
from 18 to 27. From the want of intercourse with strangers, they are all allied
together with intermarriages; without feeling, however, for each other any
kindred affection, and even without that sympathy and fellowship which prevail
in other countries among neighbors. The females appear to be more numerous
than the other sex. It is computed, that at the least five-sixth parts of the
whole number of European descent (17,000) are females and male children under
manhood. About one fourth part of those who are descended from Europeans,
reside at Cape-Town, and about two-fifths of all the slaves.

The people of this place are less the descendants of the Dutch than of
emigrants from France (after the revocation of the Edict of Nantz) from all the
protestant estates in Germany, and from the Austrian Netherlands.

As there is no exportation but from Table and False Bays, wines, grain, and
some other articles pay duties upon entering the towns. -- There is a
considerable quantity of wheat shipped annually by the company to Batavia,
Ceylon and Holland. Cattle and sheep for the use of shipping, are provided by
contracting farmers, who pay a duty for this exclusive privilege.

The chief justice, or fiscal, unites in his own person the three distinct
branches of government; the legislative, the judicial and the executive. This
legislator, judge and executioner, with high powers, possesses great privileges
and emoluments: He can impose and levy taxes for his own use; dispense with
laws; create new crimes; compound for crimes of all denominations and
complexions, and in general, dispose as he pleases, of the lives and fortunes
of the whole people. It is true there is a kind of controlling power, paramount
to this highly privileged person; but woe to him who dares appeal to that
tribunal.

Most families manufacture their own articles of wearing apparel and household
furniture: So that they are only obliged to import from Europe and Asia the
gross materials, and a few of the simplest articles of convenience, and still
fewer of luxury. Their streets are spacious, airy and regularly laid out at
right angles; and they seem to have inherited and preserved the cleanliness of
Haerlem and Delst. But there is one inconveniency which they cannot remedy with
all their industry. The strong squalls of wind which often force themselves
through narrow passes between the surrounding mountains, raise dust in the
streets, in troublesome quantities, in spite of the frequent application of
water from canals and occasional gutters.

Every house keeper has good accomodations for boarders: but strangers are
discouraged from settling there by political finesse. As the Cape of Good-Hope
has, for many years, been a half way house for refreshment, out and home,
travelers of quick conceptions and some genius, have had frequent
opportunities of drawing the strangest medleys of characters, and of remarking
the various effects of wealth, and climate on the manners and passions of men.
The various degrees of rank, and the different stations and circumstances of
persons traveling to and from India, have furnished ample scope for
observations of this kind.

The Aborigines of the country, who are called Hottentots, and who are of a
mild and tractable disposition, have been easily reduced to the condition of
obedient subjects. They are a quiet, inoffensive people, useful to the Dutch in
many respects, particularly in the management of flocks and herds of cattle.
They have been very much misrepresented in Europe: And itis surprising that the
falsehoods which have been propagated concerning them, should so long have
gained credit in the world. It is not true, that they are in the practice of
eating raw flesh, or that they entwine their bodies with the entrails of
cattle. They prepare their food with fire; and their clothing consists of a
dressed hide, which is tied like a collar round the neck, hangs down over the
shoulders near to the ground, and is broad, and it may be wrapped round the fore
part of the body: besides this, they wear another covering of skin round the
loins, which reaches half way down the thighs. Sometimes they have a cap for
the head, and shoes for the feet of the same materials. Their shoes are formed
of a piece of hide, drawn closely about the feet with thongs of the same. The
Hottentots having few conveniences for bathing, and living in a climate where
they are very frequently involved in clouds of dust, have acquired habits of
dirtiness; but their skins, when washed, are clear, though sallow. There is a
straggling nation of Hottentots, in very inland parts of the country, who are
mere savages, having neither flocks nor herds, houses, huts nor settled
residence. These savages live by prey, and their abodes are caves, rocks and
trees. They use very little clothing: It has been said, that they are
cannibals; but this has not been ascertained. They are untameable and
unmanageable by any means that have been yet tried. They refuse to converse as
other uncivilized nations readily do, by natural signs; and scarce deserve to
be ranked among the human species. They are happily, very few in number, and
are seldom to be seen in daylight. They make their depredations in the night,
like so many wolves and tigers.

We are informed by a late learned traveller, that the Hottentots live much in
the same manner as the ancient Gauls, mentioned in Caesar's Commentaries;
residing in different herds or tribes, on the banks of rivers, and near the
forests; where they form so many distinct villages and independent republics.
By means of the rivers, the country about them is fertile in the production of
those roots and wild fruits on which the Hottentots in a great measure subsist;
and the forests yield them the like advantages. The Hottentot villages are all
circular; the cabbins of which they are composed being covered with skins, and
so very low, that a man must either stoop very much, or crawl on his knees, to
got into them. They serve, indeed, chiefly to contain provisions, and their
implements of husbandry; the owner himself never occupying them unless when it
rains: At other times, he passes his leisure hours in sleeping at the door of
his hut; where he lies on his belly, and exposes his back to the sun and the
weather; waking now and then to amuse himself with smoking a certain
strongscented herb, which has much the same effect as our tobacco.

The employment of the Hottentots is purely pastoral: their principal and
almost only occupation being the care of their herds of sheep and ki^e. Of
these each village has one common herd; every inhabitant taking it in his turn
to be herdsman. This charge requires many precautions, very different from
those which are taken by our herdsmen, beasts of prey being numerous and fierce
in the southern parts of Africa. Lions, indeed, are not very common there: but
there are elephants, the rhinoceros, leopards, tigers, and several kinds of
wolves, more destructive than ours, together with many other furious animals
that abound in the forests, and occasionally make excursions toward the Cape,
and destroy the tame cattle. To prevent these misfortunes, it is the business
of the herdsmen to go, or send, every day round his district, in order to
discover if any be ^t of prey be lurking in that quarter. In which case, he
assembles the whole village together, and makes his report; when a party of the
stout^st among them arm themselves with javelins and poisoned arrows, and
follow the person who may have discovered the beast, to the cave or covert
where he is lodged. Here they arrange themselves in two lines; the herdsman
entering the cave, and endeavoring to provoke the beast to follow him out,
where he is inevitably destroyed. United among themselves by the bonds of
fraternal concord, the inhabitants of the same village live in constant peace.
But they take cruel vengeance on the neighboring tribes, on the first insult
that is offered them. The subject of their mutual complaints is generally the
stealing of a sheep or cow, and sometimes only a suspicion of it; the
consequences, however, are usually very terrible, when they determine on
revenge; as they take all possible means, after having made this determination,
to make the aggressors suppose the injury forgotten; but no sooner do they find
their dissimulation has taken effect, in the security of the enemy, than they
fall suddenly upon them with poisoned weapons, sparing neither age nor sex, but
rooting out at once the whole community: such is the method of going to war in
this country.

The care of household affairs among the Hottentots belongs to the department
of the females. The men, indeed, are the butchers, and prepare the meat for
dressing; but the care of providing the vegetables concerns only the women.
Thus the mother of a family sets out in a morning, attended by such of her
children as are able to follow her, and carrying the rest in her arms or on her
back. In this manner she searches the woods and river sides, for roots, pulse,
or fruit; of which having gotten a sufficient quantity, she returns, lights a
fire on a large stone before the cabin, and when the food is dressed, wakes
her husband, who fits down to his meal with the rest of the family. The women
are clothed with sheepskins, as well as the men; wearing the wool outward in
summer, and inwards during the winter.

HISTORY.] The Abyssinians, from a very ancient tradition, according to Mr.
Bruce, attribute the foundation of their monarchy to Menilek, son of Solomon,
by the Queen of Saba, (Sheba) or Arab, rendered in the Vulgate, the Queen of
the South. The annals of the Abyssinians say, she was a Pagan, when she left
Arab, but being full of admiration at the fight of Solomon's works, she was
converted to Judaism in Jerusalem, and bore him a son whom she called Menilek,
and he became their first King. She returned with her son to Saba, or Arab,
whom, after keeping him some years, she sent back to his father to be
instructed. Solomon did not neglect his charge, and he was anointed and crowned
King of Ethiopia, in the temple of Jerusalem, and at his inauguration, took the
name of David: After this he returned to Arab, and brought with him a colony of
Jews, among whom were many doctors of the Law of Moses, particularly one of
each Tribe, to make Judges in his kingdom, from whom the present Umbra (or
Supreme Judges, three of whom always attend the king) are said and believed to
be descended. With these came also Azarias, the son of Zadok the priest, and
brought with him a Hebrew transcript of the law, which was delivered into his
custody, as he bore the title of Nebrit, or High Priest; and this charge though
the book itself was burnt with the church at Axum in the Moorish war of Adel,
is still continued, as it said, in the lineage of Azarias, who are keepers of
the church of Axum at this day. All Abyssinia was thereupon converted, and the
Government of the church and state modelled according to what was then in use
at Jerusalem.

Mr. Bruce has collected a chronological lift of the Princes who have reigned
in that country, from the restoration of the line of Solomon, to the time he
was there, in the year 1769. The kings of Abyssinia, are above all laws. They
are supreme is all causes, eclesiastical and civil. The land and persons of
their subjects are equally their property, and every inhabitant of their
kingdom is born their slave: If he hears a higher rank, it is by the king's
gift; for his nearest relations are accounted nothing better. Punishments
inflicted on criminals are the cross or crucifixion, flaying alive, lapidation,
plucking out the eyes: This last is inflicted usually on rebels. It is
considered as a fundamental law of the land, that none of the royal family, who
have any bodily defect or deformity shall be allowed to succeed to the crown;
and for this purpose any of the princes who may have escaped from the mountain
of Wechne, and who are afterward taken, are mutilated in some of their
members, that thus they may be disqualified from succeeding. The crown being
hereditary in one family, but elective in the person, and polygamy being
permitted, must have multiplied these heirs very much, and produced constant
disputes, so that it was found necessary to provide a remedy for the anarchy
and effusion of royal blood, which was otherwise inevitably to follow. The
remedy was a bur^^ne and gentle one; they were confined in a good climate, upon
a high mountain, and maintained there at the public expense: They are taught to
read and write, but nothing else. 750 Cloths for wrapping round them, 3000
ounces of Gold, which is 30,000 dollars are allowed by the state for their
maintenance. These princes are hardly used, and in troublesome times, often
put to death upon the smallest pretensions. It is said, that their revenue is
sometimes so grossly misapplied, that some of them die with hunger and cold.
The situation however is not so distressing as that of the princes of the
neighboring kingdom of Sennaar or Nubia. There, no mountain is trusted with
the confinement of their princes; but as soon as the father dies, the throats
of all the collaterals, and all their descendants that can be laid hold of, are
cut; and this is the case with all the states in the desert, west of Sennaar.

The Portuguese are sovereigns of the greatest part of the coast, and have a
number of black princes their tributa^ies. There are some independent princes
who have extensive dominions, particularly the kings of Dahome and Widah, the
most noted of any for the infamous slave trade. Upwards of 200 years have the
European nations traded with Africa in human flesh, and encouraged in the
Negroe countries, wars, rapine, desolation, and murder, that the West India
islands might be supplied with that commodity. The annual exportation of those
poor unhappy creatures from Africa for slaves has exceeded 100,000, numbers of
whom are driven down like sheep, perhaps 1000 miles from the sea coast, who are
generally inhabitants of Villages, that have been surrounded in the night by
armed force, and carried off for sale.

A sea officer lately visited all the chiefs of the Negroes in the English
settlements, from Santa Apollonia to Athera, which is upwards of 250 miles, and
found the police and punishment of all crimes supported by the slave trade.
Those who commit crimes on trespasses against their laws, are, at the decision
of twelve elders, sold for slaves for the use of their government, and the
support of their chiefs. These, adultery, and murder, are the highest crimes,
and, whenever they are detected, subject the whole family to slavery. But any
individual condemned to slavery for the crime of his relation, may redeem his
own person, by furnishing two slaves in his room. Or when a man commits one of
the above cardinal crimes, all the male part of his family are forfeited to
slavery: If a woman, the female part is sold. "While on the coast" says me. "I
saw instances of this sort so truly cruel, as made my very bosom bleed. This
traffic in crimes makes the chiefs vigilant. Nor do our planters, who purchase
them, use any pains to instruct them in religion, to make them amends for the
oppression thus exercised on them. I am sorry to say they are unnaturally
averse to every thing that tends to it; yet the Portuguese, French, and
Spaniards, in their settlements, succeed in their attempts to instruct them, as
much to the advantage of the commerce, as of religion. It is for the sake of
Christianity, and the advantages accompanying it, that English slaves embrace
every occasion of deserting to the settlements of these nations."

It is high time for the legislature to enforce and put an end to this most
infamous of all trades, and so disgraceful to the Christian name, and so
repugnant to the principles of a free government.

AFRICAN ISLANDS.
OF the African islands, some lie in the Eastern o^ Indian Ocean, and some in
the Western or Atlantic. We shall begin with those in the Indian Ocean; the
chief of which are Zocotra, Babelmandeb, Madagasear, the Comora Islands,
Bourbon, and Mauritius.

ZOCOTRA. This island is situated in east lon. 53, north lat. 12. thirty
leagues east of Cape Gardefoi, on the continent of Africa: It is eighty miles
long, and fifty-four broad, and has two good harbors, where the European ships
used formerly to put in when they lost their passage to India. It is a
populous, plentiful country, yielding most of the fruits and plants that are
usually found within the tropics, together with frankincense, gum-tragacanth,
and aloe. The inhabitants are Mahometans, of Arab extraction, and are under the
government of a prince or Sheik who is probably tributary to the Port.

BABELMANDEB. The island of Bebelmandeb gives name to the straight at the
entrance of the Red Sea, where it is situated in east lon. 44 30, north lat.
12, about four miles both from the Arabian and Abyssinian shores. The
Abyssinians or Ethiopians, and the Arabians, formerly contended with great fury
for the possession of this island, as it commands the entrance into the Red
Sea, and preserves a communication with the ocean. This strait was formerly the
only passage through which the commodities of India found their way to Europe;
but since the discovery of the Cape of Good Hope, the trade by the Red Sea is
of little importance. The island is of little value, being a barren, sandy spot
of earth, not five miles round.

COMORA. These Islands are, Joanna, Mayotta, Mo^^^lla, Angezeia, and Comora:
situated between 41 and 46 east lon. and between 10 and 14 south lat. at an
equal distance from Madagascar and the continent of Africa. Joanna, the chief,
and which claims sovereignty over, and exacts tribute from the others; is about
30 miles long and 15 broad, and affords plenty of provisions, and such fruits
as are produced between the tropics. East India ships, bound to Bombay, usually
touch here for refreshments. The inhabitants are negroes of the Mohammedan
persuasion, and entertain our seamen with great humanity.

MADAGASCAR. This is the largest of the African islands, and is situated
between 43 and 51 degrees* east lon. and between 10 and 26 south lat. 300 miles
south-east of the continent of Africa; it being near 1000 miles in length from
north to south; and generally between 2 and 300 miles broad. The sea rolls with
great rapidity, and is exceeding rough between this island and the continent of
the Cape of Good Hope, forming a channel, or passage, through which all
European ships, in their voyage to and from India, generally fall, unless
prevented by storms.

Madagascar is a pleasant, desirable, and fertile country, abounding in sugar,
honey, (...) fruit trees, vegetables, valuable gums, corn, cattle, fowls, (...)
(...), iron, some silver, copper, steel, and tin. It affords an agreeable
variety of hills, valleys, woods, and champaign; watered with numerous rivers,
and well stored with fish. The air is generally temperate, and said to be very
healthy, though in a hot climate. The inhabitants are of different complexions
and religions: some white, some (...) some (...), some pagans. The whites, and
those of a tawny complexion who inhabit the coast, are descended from the
Arabs, as is evident from their language, and their religions (...) but here
are no mosques, temples, nor any stated worship, except that they offer
sacrifices of beasts on particular occasions: as when sick, when they plant
yams, or rice, when they hold their Assemblies, circumcise their children,
declare war, enter into new-built houses, or bury their dead. Many of them
observe the Jewish sabbath, and give some account of the sacred history, the
creation and fall of man, as also of Noah. Abraham, Moses, and David; from
whence it is conjectured that they are descended of Jews who formerly settled
here; though none knows how or when. This island was discovered by the
Portuguese, and the French took possession of it in 1642; but the people
disliking their government, were driven out in 16^1: since which the natives
have had the sole possession of the island, under a number of petty princes,
who make war upon one another for slaves and plunder.

MA^^RITIUS, or Maurice, was so called by the Dutch, who first touched here in
1598, in honor of prince Maurice their s^adtholder; but the French have given
it the name of THE ISLE OF FRANCE. It is situated in east lon. 56, south lat.
20, south about 400 miles east of Madagalcar. It is of an oval form, about 150
miles in circumference, with a fine harbor, capable of holding fifty large
ships, secure against any wind that blows, and 100 fathoms deep at the
entrance. The climate is extremely healthy and pleasant. The mountains, of
which there are many, and some so high that their tops are covered with snow,
produce the best ebony in the world, besides various other kinds of valuable
wood, two of which greatly resemble ebony in quality; one red, the other yellow
as wax. The island is watered with several pleasant rivers well stocked with
fish; and though the soil is none of the most fruitful, yields plenty of
tobacco, rice, fruit, and seeds a great number of cattle, deer goats, and
sheep. It was formerly subject to the Dutch, but is now in possession of the
French.

BOURBON. The Isle of Bourbon is situated in east lon. 54, south lat. 21, about
300 miles east of Madagascar, and is about 90 miles round. There are many good
roads for shipping round Bourbon, particularly on the north and south sides;
but hardly a single harbor where ships can ride secure against those
hurricanes which blow during the monsoons. Indeed the coast is so surrounded
with blind rocks, sunk a few feet below the water, that coasting along shore is
at all times dangerous. On the southern extremity is a volcano, which
continually throws out flames, smoke, and sulphur, with a hideous roaring
noise, terrible in the night to mariners. The climate here, though extremely
hot, is healthy, being refreshed with cooling gales, that blow morning and
evening from the sea and land: Sometimes, however, terrible hurricanes shake
the whole island almost to its foundation; but generally without any other bad
consequence than frightening the inhabitants. The island abounds in brooks and
springs, and in fruits, grass, and cattle, with excellent tobacco (which the
French have planted there,) aloes, white pepper, ebony, palm, and other kinds
of wood, and fruit trees. Many of the trees yield odoriferous gums and resins,
particularly benzoin of an excellent sort in great plenty. The rivers are well
stocked with fish, the coast with land and sea tortoises, and every part of the
country with horned cattle, as well as hogs and goats. Ambergris, coral, and
the most beautiful shells, are found upon the shore. The woods are full of
turtle doves, paroquets, pigeons, and a great variety of other birds, beautiful
to the eye and pleasant to the palate. The French first settled here in the
year 1672, after they were driven from the island of Madagascar. They have now
some considerable towns in the island, with a governor; and here their
East India ships touch and take in refreshments.

There are a great many more small islands about Madagascar, and on the eastern
coast of Africa, laid down in maps, but no where described.

Leaving therefore the eastern world and the Indies, we now turn round the Cape
of Good Hope, which opens to our view the Atlantic, an immense ocean, lying
between the two grand divisions of the globe, having Europe, Asia, and Africa,
or the Old World, on the east; and America, or the New World, on the west. In
this Ocean on the African coast are the following islands that have not yet
been described, viz. St. Helena, Ascension, St. Matthew, St. Thomas, etc.
Gorec, Cape-Verd, the Canary and Madeira islands.

ST. HELENA. The first island on this side the Cape is St. Helena, situated in
west lon. 6*4, south lat. 16, being 1200 miles west of the continent of Africa,
and 1800 east of south America. The island is a rock about 21 miles in
circumference, very high, and very steep, and only accessible at the
landing-place, in a small valley at the east side of it, which is defended by
batteries of gums planted level with the water; and as the waves are
perpetually dashing on the shore, it is generally difficult landing even here.
There is no other anchorage about the island but at Chapel Valley Bay; and as
the wind always blows from the south-east, if a ship over-shoots the island
ever so little, she cannot recover it again. The English plantations here
afford potatoes and yams, with figs, plantains, bananas, grapes, kidney-beans,
and Indian corn: of the last, however, most part is destroyed by the rats,
which harbor in the rocks, and cannot be destroyed: so that the flour they use
is almost wholly imported from England; and in times of scarcity they generally
eat yams and potatoes instead of bread. Though the island appears on every side
a hard barren rock, yet it is agreeably diversified with hills and plains,
adorned with plantations of fruit trees and garden-stuff. They have great
plenty of hogs, bullocks, poultry, ducks, geese, and turkeys* with which they
supply the sailors, taking in exchange shirts, drawers, or any light cloths,
pieces of callico, silks, muslins, arrack, sugar, etc.

St. Helena is said to have been first discovered by the Portuguese on the
festival of the Empress Helena, mother of the Emperor Constantine the Great,
whose name it still bears. It does not appear that the Portuguese ever planted
a colony here: And the English East India company took possession of it in
1600, and held it without interruption till the year 1673, when the Dutch took
it by surprise. However, the English, under the command of Capt. Munden,
recovered it again within the space of a year, and at the same time took three
Dutch East India ships that lay in the road. There are about 200 families in
the island, most of them descended from English parents. The East India ships
take in water and fresh provisions here, in their way home; but the island is
so small, and the wind so much against them outward bound, that they then very
seldom see it.

The company's affairs are here managed by a governor, deputy governor, and
store-keeper, who have standing salaries allowed by the company, besides a
public table well furnished, to which all commanders, masters of ships, and
principal passengers are welcome.

ASCENSION. This island is situated in 7 degrees. 40 min. south lat. 600 miles
north west of St. Helena: It received its name from its being discovered by the
Portuguese on Ascension-day; and is a mountainous, barren island, about 20
miles round, and uninhabited; but has a safe, convenient harbor, where the
East India ships generally touch to furnish themselves with turtles or
tortoises, which are very plentiful here, and vastly large, some of them
weighing above an hundred pounds each. The sailors going ashore in the
nightime, frequently turn two or three hundred of them on their backs before
morning; and are sometimes so cruel, as to turn many more than they use leaving
them to die on the shore.

ST. MATTHEW. This is a small island lying in 6-1 west lon. and 1-30 south lat.
300 miles to the north-east of Ascension, and was also discovered by the
Portuguese, who planted and kept possession of it for some time; but afterward
deserted it, this island now remains uninhabited, having little to invite other
nations to settle there, except a small lake of fresh water.

The four following islands, viz. St. THOMAS, PRINCES ISLAND, ANNABOA and
FERNANDOPO, are situated in the gulf of Cuinea, between Congo and Benin; all
of them were first discovered by the Portuguese, and belong still to them; they
furnish shipping with fresh water and provisions as they pats by. And to the
honor of the Portuguese government, and disgrace of the West India
legislatures, there are 15,000 Negro Christians in St. Thomas', instructed to
read and write, who daily attend divine worship, clean and well clothed.

CAPE VERD ISLANDS. These islands are so called from a cape of that name on the
African coast, near the river Gambia, over against which they lie, at the
distance of 300 miles, between 23 and 26 degrees. west long. and 14 and 18 degrees.
north lat. They were discovered in the year 1460, by the Portuguese, and are
about 20 in number; but some of them being only barren, uninhabited rocks, are
not worth notice. St. Jago, Bravo, Fogo, Mavo, Bona^ista, Sal, St. Nicholas,
St. Vincent, Santa Cru^, and St. Amonio, are the most considerable, and are
subject to the Portuguese. The all, generally speaking, is very hot, and in
some of them very unwholesome. They are inhabited by Europeans, or the
descendants of Europeans and negroes.

St. Jago, where the Portuguese viceroy resides, is the most fruitful, best
inhabited, and largest of them all, being 150 miles in circumference, yet it is
mountainous, and has much barren land in it. Its produce is sugar, cotton, some
wine, Indian corn, cocoa-nuts, oranges and other tropical fruits, but the plant
of most consequence is madder, which grows in abundance among the cliffs. Here
is plenty of roots, garden-stuffs, hogs, and poultry, and some of the prettiest
green monkies, with black faces, that are to be met with any where. Baya, or
Praya (famous for an action between an English and French squadron the last
war) situated on the east side, has a good port, and is seldom without ships,
those outward bound to Guinea or the East Indies, from England, Holland and
France, often touching here for water and refreshments.

In the Island of Mayo, or May, immense quantities of salt are mado by the head
of the fun from the lea water, which at spring sides, is received into a fort
of pan, formed by a sand bank, which runs along the coast for two or three
miles. Here the English drive a considerable trade for salt, and have commonly
a man of war to guard the vessels that come to load with it, which in some
years amount to a hundred or more. The salt costs nothing, except for raking it
together, wheeling it out of the pond, and carrying it on asses to the boats,
which is done at a very cheap rate. Several English ships come higher for a
freight of asses, which they carry to Barbados and other British plantations.
The inhabitants of this Island, even the governor and priests, are all negroes,
and speak the Portuguese language. The negro governor expects a small present
from every commander that loads salt, and is pleased to be invited aboard then
ships. The sea water is so clear on this coast, that an English sailor, who
dropped his watch, perceived it at the bottom, though many fathoms deep, and
had it brought up by one of the natives, who are in general expert at diving.

The island of Fogo is remarkable for being a volcano, continually sending up
sulphurous exhalations; and sometimes the flame breaks forth like AEtna, in a
terrible manner, throwing out pumice stones that annoy all the adjacent parts.

GORER is situated within cannon shot of Cape Verd, N. lat. 14^43, W. lon.
17-20, and was so called by the Dutch, from an island and town of the same name
in Holland. It is a small spot not expending two miles in circumference, but
its importance arises from its situation for trade so near Cape Verd, and it
has been therefore a bone of contention between European nations. It was first
possessed by the Dutch, from whom, in 1663, it was taken by the English; but in
1665 it was retaken by the Dutch, and in 1677 subdued by the French, in whose
possession it remained till the year 1759, when it was reduced by commodore
Keppel, but restored to the French at the treaty of peace in 1763. It was
retaken by the English in the last war, but again restored at the peace of 1763.

CANARIES.] The Canaries, anciently called the Fortunate Islands, are seven in
number, and situated between 12 and 19 degrees west lon. and between 27 and 29
degrees north lat. about 150 miles southwest of Morocco. Their particular names
are, Palma, Hiero, Gomora, Teneriffe, Grand Canaria, Fuertuventura, and
Langarote. These islands enjoy a pure, temperate air, and abound in the most
delicious fruits, especially grapes, which produce those rich wines that obtain
the name of the Canary, whereof the greatest part is exported to England,
which, in time of peace, is computed at ten thousand hogsheads annually. The
Canaries abound with those beautiful little birds that bear their name, and are
now so common and to much admired in Europe; but their wild notes in their
native land far excel those in a cage or foreign clime.

Grand Canary, which communicates its name to the whole, is about 150 miles in
circumference, and so extremely fertile as to produce two harvests in the year.
Teneriffe, the largest of these, islands next to that of Grand Canary, is about
120 miles round; a fertile country, abounding in corn, wine, and oil; though it
is pretty much encumbered with mountains, particularly the Peak. Captain Glass
observes, that in coming in with this island, in clear weather, the Peak may be
easily discerned at 120 miles distance, and in sailing from it at 150 miles.
The Peak is an ascent in the form of a sugar loaf, about fifteen miles in
circumference, and according to the account of Sprat, bishop of Rochester,
published in the Philosophical Transoctions, near three miles perpendicular;
but lately ascertained to be only 13,265 feet. This mountain is a volcano, and
sometimes thrown out such quantities of sulphur and melted ore, as to convert
the richest lands into barren deserts. These islands were first discovered and
planted by the Carthaginians; but the Romans destroying that state, put a stop
to the navigation on the west coast of Africa, and the Canaries lay concealed
from the rest of the world, until they were again discovered by the Spaniards
in the year 1405, to whom they still belong. It is remarkable, that though the
natives resembled the Africans in their nature and complexion, when the
Spaniards first came among them, their language was different from that spoken
on the continent; they retained none of their customs, were masters of no
science, and did not know there was any country in the world besides their own.

MADEIRAS.] The three islands called the Madeiras, are situated, according to
the author of Anson's voyage, in a fine climate in 32-27 north lat. and from
^8-30 to 19-30 west lon. about 100 miles north of the Canaries, and as many
west of Sallee Morocco. The largest, from which the rest derive the general
name of Maderias, or rather Mattera, on account of its being formerly almost
covered with wood, i^ about 75 miles long, 60 broad, and 1^0 in circumference.
It is composed of one continued hill, of a considerable height, extending from
east to west; the declivity of which, on the south side, is cultivated and
interspersed with vineyards; and in the midst of this slope the merchants have
fixed their country seats, which form a very agreeable prospect. There is but
one considerable town in the whole island, which is named Fonchial, seated on
the south part of the island, at the bottom of a large bay; toward the sea, it
is defended by a high wall, with a battery of cannon, and is the only place
where it is possible for a boat to land; and even here the beach is covered
with large stones, and a violent surf continually beats upon it.

Though this island seems to have been known to the ancients, yet it lay
concealed for many generations, and was at length discovered by the Portuguese
in 1519; but others after that it was first discovered by an Englishman, in the
year 1344. Be that as it may, the Portuguese took possession of it, and are
still almost the only people who inhabit it. The Portuguese, at their first
landing, finding it little better than a thick forest, rendered the ground
capable of cultivation by setting fire to this wood; and it is now very
fertile, producing in great abundance the richest wine, sugar, the most
delicate fruits, especially oranges, lemons, and pomgranates; together with
corn, honey, and wax; it abounds also with boars and other wild beasts, and
with all sorts of sowls, besides numerous groves of cedar trees, and those that
yield dragon's blood, mastic, and other guns. The inhabitants of this isle make
the best sweetmeats in the world, and succeed wonderfully in preserving citrons
and oranges, and in making marmalade and perfumed pastes, which exceed those of
Genoa. The sugar they make is extremely beautiful, and smells naturally of
violets. This indeed is said to be the first place in the West where that
manufacture was set on foot, and from thence it was carried to the Brasils in
America. The Portuguese not finding it so profitable as at first, have pulled
up the greatest part of their sugar canes, and planted vineyards in their
stead, which produce several sorts of excellent wine, particularly that which
bears the name of the island, malmsey, and tent; of all which the inhabitants
make and sell prodigious quantities. No less than 20,000 hogsheads of Madeira,
it is said, are yearly exported, the greatest part of the West Indies,
especially to Barbados, the Madeira wine not only enduring a hot climate
better than any other, but even being improved when exposed to the sun in
barrels after the bung is taken out. It is said no venomous animal can live
here. Of the two other islands, one is called Port Santo, which lies as a small
distance from Madeira, is about eight miles in compass, and extremely fertile.
It has very good harbors, where ships may ride with safety against all winds,
except the southwest; and is frequented by Indiamen outward and homeward bound.
The other island is an inconsiderable barren rock.

AZORES.] Leaving the Madeiras, with which we close the account of Africa, we
continue our course westward through this immense ocean, which brings us to the
Azores, or as they are called, the Western Islands, that are situated between
25 and 32 degrees west lon. and between 37 and 40 degrees north lat. 900 miles
west of Portugal, and as many east of Newfoundland, lying almost in the midway
between Europe and America. They are nine in number, and are named Santa Maria,
St. Miguel or St. Michael, Tercera, St. George* Graciosa, Fayal, Pico, Flores,
and Corvo. They were discovered in the middle of the 15th century, by Joshua
Vander Berg, a merchant of Bruges in Flanders, who in a voyage to Lisbon, was
by stress of weather driven to these islands, which he found destitute of
inhabitants, and called them the Flemish Islands. On his arrival at Lisbon, he
boasted of this discovery, on which the Portuguese set sail immediately, and
took possession of them, to whom they still belong, and were called in general
the Azores, from the great number of hawks and falcons found among them. All
these islands enjoy a very clear and serene sky, with a salubrious air; but are
exposed to violent earthquakes, from which they have frequently suffered; and
also the inundations of surrounding waves. They are, however, extremely fertile
in corn, wine, and a variety of fruits; also in cattle, fowl, and fish. It is
said that no poisonous or noxious animals breed on the Azores, and that if
carried thither they will expire in a few hours.

St. Michael, which is the largest, being near 100 miles in circumference, and
containing 50,000 inhabitants, was twice invaded and plundered by the English
in the reign of queen Elizabeth. Tercera is the most important of these
islands, on account of its harbor, which is spacious, and has good anchorage,
but is exposed to the southeast winds. It is generally visited by their
homeward bound fleets from Brazil, Africa, and the East Indies. Its capital
town, Angra, contains a cathedral and five churches, and is the residence of
the governor of these islands, as well as the bishop.

NEW DISCOVERIES.
IN this place, I shall mention those only which have been made in the eastern
hemisphere, having given an account of the others at the close of our
description of America. The parts discovered in th^^ hemisphere that j^erit
particular notice, are New Holland, New Guinea, New Britain, and New Ireland.
We shall also here and a more particular account of the Sandwich Islands.

CONTINENT OF NEW HOLLAND.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Length 2400 Miles. between 110 and 153 E. Lon. Breadth 2300 Miles. 11 and 43
S. Lat.

IT lies S. E. of the island of Java, and South of New Guinea, in the Great
South Sea. Fore more than a century after its first discovery by the Dutch, in
1616, it was thought to be a part of a vast southern continent, the existence
of which had been a favorite idea with many experienced navigators. The great
extent of New Holland, gives it an unquestionable claim to the name of
CONTINENT.

The principal Capes are Cape York, and South Cape, which form the extreme N.
and S. points of the Continent. Between these Capes, along the Eastern shore,
are Cape Flattery, Cape Gloucester, Cape Townsend, Sandy Cape, Smokely Cape,
and Cape How. The most noted Bays are Botany Bay on the East side of the
Continent, Bateman Bay, south of it, and Glass house Bay, Harvey's, Keppel,
Halifax, and Trinity Bays, all between Botany Bay, and York Cape, on the
Eastern shore. Shark Bay lies on the west side of the Continent, about south
lat. 25. The capacious gulf of Carpentaria, discovered in 1618, lies on the
North; York Cape, and Arneim's land, make the two points of it.

The whole Eastern coast of this Continent, except the very Southern point, was
discovered and explored by Capt. Cook, in 1770, and is called NEW SOUTH WALES.
It is claimed by England on the old principle of Prior discovery.

From want of opportunity to examine, no considerable rivers have yet been
discovered; but from the appearance of the country, it is conjectured that it
is well watered. Two kinds of Gum are produced here, called red and yellow
Gums; the former resembles Sang^^s Droconis but is perfectly soluble in water.
It is drawn from the tree by tapping, or taken out of the veins of the wood,
when dry, in which it is copiously distributed. It is a very powerful remedy in
the dissentary.

The yellow Gum, as it is called, is strictly resin, not being at all soluble
in water: It has the resemblance of Gamboge, but has not the property of
staining. The plant that produces it is low and small, with long grassy leaves;
but the fructification of it shoots out in a singular manner from the center of
the leaves, on a single straight stem, to the height of twelve or fourteen
feet. Of this stem, which is like some of the Reed Class, the natives usually
make their spears. The resin is generally dug up out of the soil, under the
tree, not collected from it, and may perhaps be that which Talisman called "Gum
Lac of the Ground.'

There are a great variety of birds and animals found here, several of which,
before the discovery of this place, were non descripts. The reader will find
cuts, and a description of a number of these animals and birds, in "The voyage
of Governor Philip to Botany Bay," published by John Stock dale, London, in
1790.


There Natives go always uncovered, although it is observed they suffer
sometimes from the cold. Those on the borders of the sea coast subsist
principally on fish. On that part of the coast which the English have invaded,
the natives have retired, and from, accounts, are much distressed for
provision. A kind of twine is manufactured among them, which, with their
fishing nets, is very neatly made from the flax plant. This plant promises to
be very valuable for the purpose of making cordage, and the finest
manufactures. It grows in Norfolk island (a small island N. W. of New Holland,
on which the English are likewise making a settlement) in great plenty and with
such luxuriance as to reach the height of eight feet.

Their cutting implements are made of stone. Several figures of animals, of
shields and weapons, and even of men, have been seen curved upon the rocks
roughly, indeed, but sufficiently well executed to indicate the object intended
by them. On the top of the hills, is the figure of a man in the attitude
assumed by them, when they begin to dance, executed in a still superior style.
That the arts of im^^tion should thus procode in any degree those of ^^^^ssity,
(...) to be an exception to the rules laid down in the theory for the progress
of invention. Though they have made no attempts toward clothing themselves,
they are by no means insensible of the cold, and appear very much to dislike
the rain. During a shower, they have been observed to cover their heads with
pieces of bark, and to shiver exceedingly. Their method of kindling fire is
probably very laborious, as they are rarely seen without a fire actually, made,
or a piece of burning wood which they carry with them from place to place, and
even in their canoes. The perpetual fires which in some countries formed a part
of the national religion, had perhaps no other origin than a similar inability
to produce it at pleasure, and if we suppose the original flame to have been
made from lightning, the fiction of its coming down from heaven, will be found
to deviate very little from the truth.

In May, 1787, the British government fitted out a squadron of eleven vessels,
with 8^0 convicts, under the the command of Arthur Phillip, Esquire. in order to
form a settlement on this Continent. The situation determined upon has been
named Port Jackson; south lat. 32 52, east lon. from Grenwich, 159 19 30. This
place is about 9 miles from Botany Bay, and has a harbor capable of containing
1000 fail of the line in perfect security. A plan of a town has been regularly
laid out, and from the latest accounts, the prospect was flattering to the new
settlers.

On the first arrival of the English, the natives were found amicable,
hospitable, unaccustomed to act with treachery, or to take the least advantage,
and every precaution was taken to prevent this harmony from being interrupted;
but from some disagreement with individuals, or what is more probable, a
dislike of the encroachments on their territories, they appear to avoid any
intercourse with their new neighbors.

The natives, like all other barbarous nations, have some customs peculiar to
themselves. Governor Phillip, in the interviews he had with the natives,
observed that the women in general had lost two joints from the little finger
of their left hands. He was not able to find out the occasion of this
mutilation, but noticed that it was confined to the females. Patterson. in his
Travels in Africa, tells us that he met with a tribe of Hottentots near Orange
River, all of whom had lost the first joint of their little finger: The reason
they gave for cutting it off was, that it was a cure for a particular sickness
to which they were subject when young. It would be a curious coincidence should
it be discovered that the natives of New Holland do it for any similar reason.


The men are distinguished in a different manner: Their fingers are not
mutilated. but most of them want the right front tooth in the upper jaw. They
also have a custom of perforating the cartilage that divides the nostrils, and
thrusting through it a long bone or stick.

The women are not treated with much tenderness; and are kept in great
subordination by their husbands. They appear to be employed chiefly in the
canoes, in which women have frequently been seen with young children at the
breast.

The inhabitants are not numerous, and are of a chocolate color, middle
stature, and very active and courageous. Their food is chiefly fish, birds of
various kinds, yams, fruit, and the flesh of the Kangaroo, an animal resembling
the Opossum, and peculiar to this Continent. Their weapons are spears and
lances of different kinds, which they throw with great dexterity. They also use
shields of an oblong form, made of bark.

THE NEW HEBRIDES.
THIS name was given by Captain Cook, to a cluster of islands, the most
northerly of which was seen by Quiros, the Spanish navigator, in 1606, and by
him named Tierra del Espiritu Santo. From that time, till Baugainville's voyage
in 1768, and Capt. Cook's voyage in the Endeavor, in 1769, this land was
supposed to be part of a great southern Continent, called Terra Ausralis
incognita. But when Capt. Cock had sailed round New Zealand, and along the
eastern coast of New Holland, this opinion was fully confuted. On his next
voyage, in the Resolution, he resolved to explore those parts accurately; and
accordingly, in 1774, besides ascertaining the extent and situation of these
islands, he discovered several in the group, which were before unknown. The New
Hebrides are situated between the latitudes of 14 29. and 20 4 south; and
between 169 41 and 170 21 east longitude. They consist of the following
islands, some of which have received names from the different European
navigators, and others retain the names which they bear among the natives, viz.
Tierra del Espiritu Santo, Mallicolla, St. Bartholomew, Isle of Lepers, Aurcra,
Whitsuntide, Ambrym, Immer, Apeee. Three Hills, Sandwich, Montagu,
Hinchinbrook, Shepherd, Eorromanga, Irronan, Annatom, and Tanna.

Not far distant from the New Hebrides, and southwestward of them, lies NEW
CATEDONIA, a very large island, first discovered by Capt. Cook, in 1774. It is
about 87 leagues long, but its breadth is not considerable, nor any where
exceeds ten leagues. It is inhabited by a race of stout, tall, well
proportioned Indians, of a swarthy or dark chestnut brown. A few leagues distant
are two small islands, called the Islands of Pines, and Botany Island.

NEW GUINEA,
Till the late discoveries, was thought to be the north coast of an extensive
continent, and to be joined to New Holland; but Capt. Cook discovered a strait
between them which runs northeast, through which he sailed. Thus it was found
to be a long narrow island, extending north east, from the second degree of
south latitude to the twelfth, and from one hundred and thirty one, to one
hundred and fifty degrees east longitude; but in one part it does not appear to
be above fifty miles broad. The country consists of a mixture of very high
hills and valleys, interspersed with groves of cocoa nut trees, plantains,
bread fruit, and most of the trees, shrubs, and plants, that are found in the
other South Sea islands. It affords from the sea a variety of delightful
prospects. The inhabitants make nearly the same appearance as the New
Hollanders on the other side the straits.

North of New Guinea, is NEW BRITAIN, which is situated in the 4th degree of
south latitude, and 152 19, east longitude from Greenwich. It was supposed to
be part of an imaginary Continent, till Capt. Dampier found it to be an island,
and sailed through a strait which divides it from New Guinea. Capt. Carteret,
in his voyage round the world, 1767, found that it was of much less extent that
it was till then imagined to be, by failing through another strait to the
north, which separates it from a long island, to which he gave the name of New
Ireland. There are many high hills in New Britain, and it abounds with large
and stately trees. To the eastward of New Britain, and in both the above
straits, are many islands, most of which are said to be extremely fertile, and
to abound with plantains and cocoa nut trees.

NEW IRELAND
Extends in length, from the north east to the south east, about two hundred
and seventy miles, but is in general very narrow. It abounds with a variety of
trees and plants, and with many pigeons, parrots, rooks, and other birds* The
inhabitants are black, and woolly headed, like the negroes of Guinea, but have
not like them, flat noses and thick lips. Northwestward of New Ireland, a
cluster of islands was seen by Capt. Carteret, lying very near each other, and
supposed to consist of twenty or thirty in number. One of these, which is of a
very considerable extent, was named NEW HANOVER; but the rest of the cluster
received the name of the ADMIRALTY ISLANDS.

SANDWICH ISLANDS.
BESIDES the voyages already mentioned, another voyage was performed by Capt.
Cook and Capt. Clerk, in the Resolution and Discovery, during the years 1776,
1777, 1778, and 1779, in search of a north west passage between the continents
of Asia and America. After they had arrived at the Cape of Good Hope, they
proceeded from thence in New Holland: In this course they discovered two
islands, which Capt. Cook called Prince Edward's isles. The largest about 15
leagues in circuit, is in lat. 46 53 south, lon. 37 46: The other about 9
leagues in circuit, lat. 46 40 and long. 33 8, E. both barren and almost
covered with snow. From thence they proceeded to New Zealand, and afterward
they visited the Friendly and the Society Isles. In January 1777, they arrived
at the Sandwich isles, which are twelve in number, and are situated between 22
15 and 18 53 N. lat. The air of these islands is in general salubrious, and
many of the vegetable productions are the same with those of the Society and
Friendly Isles. The inhabitants are of the middle size, stout and well made,
and their complexion in general a brown olive. Owhyhee is in circumference
about 300 English miles, and the number of inhabitants is computed at 150,000.
The others are large and well peopled. The natives are described as of a mild
and friendly temper and carriage, and in hospitality to strangers not exceeded
by the inhabitants of the Friendly Isles. On the 7th of February, being nearly
in lat. 44 33 north, and lon. 235 36 east, they saw part of the American
continent bearing north east.

Capt. Cook afterward discovered King George's Sound, which is situated on the
north west coast of America, and is extensive; that part of it where the ships
under his command anchored, is in lat. 49 36 no^^, and lon. 233 28 east. The
whole sound it surrounded by high land, which in some places appears very
broken and rugged, and is in general covered with wood to the very top. They
found the inhabitants here rather below the middle size, and their complexions
approaching to a copper color. On the 12th of May, they discovered Sandwich
Sound, in lat. 59 54 north. The harbor in which the ships anchored, appeared
to be almost surrounded with high land, which was covered with snow; and here
they were visited by some of the Americans in their canoes. They afterward
proceeded to the island of Unalaschka, and after their departure from thence
still continued to trace the coast. They arrived on the 20th of August 1778, in
lat. 70 degrees. 54 min. lon. 194 degrees. 55 min. where they found themselves almost
surrounded with ice, and the farther they proceeded to the eastward, the closer
the ice became compacted. They continued laboring among the ice till the 25th,
when a storm came on, which made it dangerous for them to proceed; and a
consultation was therefore held on board the Resolution, as soon as the
violence of the gale abated, when it was resolved, that as this passage was
impracticable for any useful purpose of navigation, which was the great object
of the voyage, it should be prosecuted no farther; and especially on account of
the condition the ships were in, the approach of winter, and their great
distance from any known place of refreshment. The voyage, indeed, afforded
sufficient evidence, that no practicable passage exists between the Atlantic
and Pacific Oceans toward the North; and this voyage also ascertained the
western boundaries of the great continent of America. On their return it
unfortunately happened, that the celebrated and able navigator, Capt. Cook, was
killed in an affray with the natives, by an act of sudden resentment and fear,
rather than from a bad disposition, on the island of Owhyhee, the largest of
the Sandwich isles, on the 14th of February 1779; and his death was universally
regretted, not only in Great Britain, but also in other parts of Europe, by
those to whom his merits and public services were known. In his last voyage he
had explored the coast of America, from 42 degrees. 27 min. to 70 degrees. 40 min. 57
sec. north. After the death of Capt. Cook, the command devolved on Capt.
Clerk, who died at sea on his return to the southward on the 22d day of August
1779. The two ships returned home by the Cape of Good Hope, and on the 5th of
October 1780, anchored at the Note.

A NEW GEOGRAPHICAL TABLE.
Containing the Names and Situations of the chief Cities, Towns, Seas, Gulfs,
Says, Straits, Capes, and other remarkable Places, in the known World.
Collected from the most authentic Charts, Maps, and Observations.

Names of Places. Provinces. Countries. Quarter. Lat. Long. D. M. D. M.
ABheville Picardy France Europe 50 7 N. 1 54 E. Aberdeen Aberdeenshire Scotland
Europe 57-22 N. 1-40 W. Abo Finland Sweden Europe 60-27 N. 22-18 E. Acapulco
Mexico North America 17-10 N. 101-20 W. Aahem Sumatra East Indies Asia 5-22 N.
95-29 E. Adrianople Romania Turkey Europe 42-00 N. 26-30 E. Adriatic sea, or
Gulf of Venice Between Italy and Turkey Europe Mediterranean Sea. Adventure
(Isle) Pacific Ocean Asia 17-05 S. 144-12 W. Agde Languedoc France Europe 43-18
N. 3-33 E. Again Guienne France Europe 44-12 N. 0-40 E. St. Agnes (lights)
Scillies Atlantic ocean Europe 49-56 N. 6-41 W. Agra Agra East India Asia 26-43
N. 76-49 E. Air Airshire Scotland Europe 65-30 N. 4-35 W. Aix Provence France
Europe 43-31 N. 5-31 E. Albany New York United States America 42-48 N. 73-30 W.
Alby Languedoc France Europe 43-55 N. 2-13 E. Aleppo Syria Turkey Asia 35-45 N.
37-25 E. Alexandretta Syria Turkey Asia 36-35 N. 36-25 E. Alexandria Lower
Egypt Turkey Africa 31-11 N. 30-21 E. ALEXANDRIA Virginia United States America
38-45 N. 77-10 W. Algiers Algiers Barbary Africa 36-49 N. 2-17 E. Amboyna
Amboyna Isle East India Asia 4-25 S. 127-25 E. Ambrym Isle South Pacific ocean
Asia 16-09 S. 168-17 E. Amiens Picardy France Europe 49-53 N. 2-22 E. AMSTERDAM
Holland Netherlands Europe 52-22 N. 4-49 E. Amsterdam Isle Pacific ocean Asia
21-09 S. 174-51 W. Ancona March of Ancona Italy Europe 48-37 N. 13-35 E. Angra
Tercera Isle Atlantic ocean Europe 38-39 N. 27-07 W. ANNAPOLIS Maryland U.
States America 39-02 N. 76-40 W. Antigua (Saint John's town) Antigua Isle
Carib* sea N. American 17-04 N. 62-04 W. Antioch Svria Turkey Asia 36-30 N.
36-40 E. Antwerp Brabant Netherlands Europe 51-13N. 04-27 E. Ape (Isle) Pacific
Ocean Asia 16-46 S. 168-32 E. Archangel Dwina Russia Europe 64-34 N. 38-59 E.
Archipelago Islands of Greece Europe Mediterranean Sea. Ascension Isle South
Atlantic Ocean 7-56 N. 14-27 W. Astracan Astracan Russia Asia 46-00 N. 51-00 E.
Athens Achaia Turkey Europe 38-05 N. 23-57 E. Augusta Georgia United States
America ^3-39 N. 82 9 W. St. Augustine Madagascar South Indian sea Africa 23-35
S. 43 13 E. Augustine E. Florida North America 29-51 N. 81-40 W. Ava Ava East
India Asia 20-20 N. 9^-30 E. Asignon Provence France Europe 43-57 N. 04-53 E.
A^ora Isle South Pacific ocean Asia 1^-08 S. 168-^2 E. BAgdad Eyraca Arabia
Turkey Asia 33-20 N. 43-51 E. Balasore Orixa East India Asia 21-20 N. 86-05 E.
B^lbee Syria Turkey Asia 33-30 N. 37-00 E. Baldivia Chili South America 39-35
S. 82-20 W. Baltie sea between Germ. and Swed. Europe Atlantic Ocean. BALTIMORE
Maryland United States America 39-21 N. 77-48 W. Barbuda isle Atlantic ocean N.
America 17-49 N. 61-55 W. Barcelona Catalonia Spain Europe 41-26 N. 02-18 E.
Basil Basil Switzerland Europe 47-35 N. 07-34 E. Basseterre Guadaloupe Canb.
sea N. America 15-59 N. 61-54 W. Bassera Eyraca Arabia Turkey Asia 30-45 N.
47-00 E. Bastia Corsica Italy Europe 42-20 N. 09-40 E. Batavia Java East India
Asia 06-10 S. 106-56 E. Bath Somersetshire England Europe 51-22 N. 02-16 W. Bay
of Biscay Coast of France Europe Atlantic Ocean. Bay of Bengal Coast of India
Asia Indian Ocean. Bayeux Normandy France Europe 49-16 N. 00-47 E. Bayonne
Gascony France Europe 43-29 N. 01-25 W. Belfast Ulster Ireland Europe 54-30 N.
06-30 W. Belgrade Servia Turkey Europe 45-00 N. 21-20 E. Bencoole^ Sumatra East
India Asia 03-49 S. 102-05 E. Bender Basiarabia Turkey Europe 46-40 N. 29-00 E.
Bennigton Vermont United States N. America 42-42 N. 74-10 W. BERLIN Brandenburg
Germany Europe 52-32 N. 13-31 E. Bermudas Bermuda Isles Atlantic ocean N.
America 32-25 N. 63-23 W. Bern Bern Switzerland Europe 47-00 N. 07-20 E.
Berwick Berwickshire Scotland Europe 55-48 N. 01-45 W. Bethlehem Pennlylvania
United States America 40-37 N. 75-14 W. B^lboa Biscay Spain Europe 43-26 N.
03-18 W. Birmigham Warwickshire England Europe 52-30 N. 01-50 W. Black, kuxin^,
sea Turkey in Europe and Asia Bokharia Usbeck Tartary Asia 39-15 N. 67-00 E.
Bolabola Isle Pacific ocean Asia 16-32 S. 151-47 W. Bologna Bolognese Italy
Europe 44-29 N. 21-26 E. Bologne Picardy France Europe 50-43 N. 1-31 E.
Bolschenskoi Siberia Russia Asia 52-54 N. 156-42 E. Bombay Bombay Isle East
India Asia 18-56 N. 72-43 E. Borroughstonness Linhthgowshire Scotland Europe
55-48 N. 03-44 W. Boston L^^^nshire England Europe 53-10 N. 00-25 E. BOSTON
Massachusetts United States America 42-23 N. 71-^4 W. Bourbon Isle South Indian
ocean Africa 20-51 S. 5^-25 E. Bourdeaux Guienne France Europe 44-50 N. 00-29
W. Breda Brabant Netherlands Europe 51-40 N. 04-40 E. Bremen Lower Saxony
Germany Europe 53-25 N. 08-20 E. BRESLAU Silesia Bohemia Europe 51-03 N. 17-13
E. B^est Bretany France Europe 48-22 N. 04-25 E. Bridgetown Barbados Atlantic
ocean N. America 13-05 N. 58-03 W. Bristol Sometletshire England Europe 51-33
N. 02-40 W. British sea Between (...) and Germ. Europe Atlantic Ocean Bru^^s
Flanders Netherlands Europe 51-16 N. 03-05 E. Bru^^wick Low Saxony Germany
Europe 52-30 N. 10-30 E. (...) Brabant Netherland. Europe 50-51 N. 04-26 E.
(...) Lower Hungary Europe 47-40 N. 19-20 E. B^^nes Airs La Plata Brasil S.
America 34-35 S. 58-26 E. B^ka^as^ Walachia Turkey Europe 44-26 N. 26-13 E.
Burlington Jersey North America 40-08 N. 79-00 W. CAbelloport Terra Firma South
America 10-03 N. 67-27 W. CACHAO Tonquin East India Asia 21-30 N. 105-00 E.
Cadiz Andalusia Spain Europe 36-31 N. 6-06 W. Ca^n Normandy France Europe 49-11
N. 0-16 W. Cagliari Sardinia Italy Europe 39-25 N. 9-38 E. Cahors Guienne
France Europe 44-26 N. 1-32 E. Cairo Lower Egypt Africa 30-02 N. 31-23 E.
Calais Picardy France Europe 50-57 N. 1-55 E. Calcutta Bengal East India Asia
22-34 N. 88-34 E. Calao Peru South America 12-01 N. 76-53 W. Calmar Smaland
Sweden Europe 56-40 N. 16-26 E. Cambray Cambresis Netherlands Europe 50-10 N.
3-18 E. Cambeltown Argyleshire Scotland Europe 55-30 N. 5-40 W. Cambodia
Cambodia East India Asia 13-30 N. 105-00 E. Cambridge Cambridgeshire England
Europe 52-12 N. 0-09 E. Cambridge Massachusetts United States America 42-23 N.
71-07 W. Canary, N. E. [Point Canary Isles Atlantic ocean Africa 28-23 N. 15-33
W. Candia Candia Islands Mediterr. Sea Europe 35-18 N. 25-23 E. Candy Ceylon
Indian ocean Asia 7-54 N. 79-00 E. Canso Port Nova Scotia North America 45-20
N. 60-50 W. Canterbury Kent England Europe 51-16 N. 1-15 E. Canton Canton China
Asia 23-07 N. 113-07 E. Cape Clear Irish Sea Ireland Europe 51-18 N. 11-10 W.
-- Comorin On this side the Ganges East India Asia 7-56 N. 78-10 E. --
Finisherre Galicia Spain Europe 42-51 N. 9-12 W. -- Florida East Florida North
America 24-57 N. 80-30 W. -- of Good Hope Hottentots Cassraria Africa 34-29 S.
18-28 E. -- Horn Terra del Fuego Island South America 55-58 S. 67-21 W. -- St.
Vincent Algarve Portugal Europe 37-02 N. 8-57 W. -- Verd Negroland Africa 14-45
N. 17-28 W. Cardigan Cardiganshire Wales Europe 52-10 N. 4-38 W. Carlescroon
Schonen Sweden Europe 56-20 N. 15-31 E. Cartisle Cumberland England Europe
54-47 N. 2-33 W. Carthage Ruins Tunis Barbary Africa 36-30 N. 9-00 E.
Carthagena Terra Firma South America 10-26 N. 75-21 W. Carthagena Murcia Spain
Europe 37-37 N. 1-03 W. Casan Casan Siberia Asia 55-43 N. 49-13 E. Caspian Sea
Russia Tartary Asia Cassel Hesse Cassel Germany Europe 51-19 N. 9-34 E. Castres
Languedoc France Europe 43-37 N. 2-19 E. St. Catherine Isle Atlantic Ocean S.
America 27-35 S. 49-12 W. Cattegate Between Swed. and Den. Europe Atlantic
Ocean. Cavan Ulster Ireland Europe 54-51 N. 7-18 W. Cayenne Cayenne Isle South
America 4-56 N. 52-10 W. Cet^e Languedoc France Europe 43-23 N. 3-47 E. Ceuta
Fez Morocco Africa 35-04 N. 6-30 W. Chalons Burgundy France Europe 46-46 N.
4-56 E. Chandernagore Bengal East India Asia 22-51 N. 88-34 E. CHARLESION South
Carolina United States America 32-35 N. 79-22 W. Charlestown Massachusetts
United States America 42-24 N. 70-32 W. Charlton Isle Hundson's Bay N. America
52-03 N. 79-00 W. Chartres Orleannois France Europe 48-26 N. 1-33 E. Cherbourg
Normandy France Europe 49-38 N. 1-33 W. Chester Cheshire England Europe 53-15
N. 3-00 W. Christmas Sound Terra del Fuego South America 55-21 N. 69-57 W. St.
Christopher's Isle Caribbean Sea N. America 17-15 N. 62-38 W. Civita Vecchia
Patro Di S. Petro Italy Europe 42-05 N. 11-51 E. Cleske's Isles Atlantic Ocean
S. America 55-05 S. 34-37 W. Clermont Auvergne France Europe 45-46 N. 3-10 E.
Colmar Alface France Europe 48-04 N. 7-27 E. Cologne Elec. of Cologne Germany
Europe 50-55 N. 7-10 E. Constance Suabia Germany Europe 47-37 N. 9-12 E.
CONSTANTINOPLE Romania Turkey Europe 41-01 N. 28-58 E. COPENHACEN Zealand Isle
Denmark Europe 55-40 N. 12-40 E. Corinth Morea Turkey Europe 37-30 N. 23-00 E.
CORK Munster Ireland Europe 51-53 N. 8-23 W. Coventry Warwickshire England
Europe 52-25 N. 1-25 W. Cow^s Isle of Wight England Europe 50-46 N. 1-24 W.
Cracow Little Poland Poland Europe 50-10 N. 19-55 E. Cre^^smanster Archduchy of
Austria Germany Europe 48-03 N. ^4-22 E. Common Isle N. Pacific Ocean Asia
31-40 N. 121-0^ E. Curassou Curassou Isle West India America 11-56 N. 68-20 W.
Cusco Peru South America 12-25 S. 70-00 W. DAcca Bengal East India Asia 23-30
N. ^9-20 ^. Damascus Syria Turkey Asia 33-15 N. 37-20 ^. D^^tric Polish Prussia
Poland Europe 54-22 N. 18-^^ E. Dax Gascony France Europe 43-42 N. 0-58 W.
Delft Holland Netherlands Europe 52-06 N. 4-05 E. Delhi Delhi East India Asia
29-00 N. 76-30 E. Derbe^t D^ghistan Persia Asia 42-41 N. 50-^0 E. Derby
Derbyshire England Europe 52-58 N. 1-30 W. Derry Ulster Ireland Europe 54-52 N.
7-40 W. Dieppe Norraandy France Europe 49-55 N. 0-59 E. Dsen G^^erat East India
Asia 21-37 N. 69-^0 E. Dijon Burgundy France Europe 47-19 N. 4-57 E. Dilbengen
S^^bia Germany Europe 48-30 N. 10-^^ E. Dol Bretagne France Europe 48-33 N.
1-4^ W. Dominique Windward Isle. West India America 15-18 N. 61-22 W. DOVER
Kent England Europe 51-07 N. 1-13 E. Dover Delaware United States America 39-10
N. 7^-^4 W. DRESDEN Saxony Germany Europe 51-00 N. 1^-^6 E. Drcux Orleannois
France Europe 48-44 N. 1-36 E. DUBLIN Leinster Ireland Europe ^^-21 N. 6-^1 W.
Dumbarton Dumbartonshire Scotland Europe 55-44 N. 4-^0 W. Dumfries Dumfrieshire
Scotland Europe 55-08 N. ^-2^ W. Dumber Haddington Scotland Europe 55-58 N.
2-2^ W. Dundee Forsar Scotland Europe 56-26 N. 2-48 W. Dungeness Kent England
Europe 50-52 N. 1-^4 E. Duakirk Flanders Netherlands Europe 51-02 N. 2-27 E.
Durham Durham England Europe 54-48 N. 1-25 W. EAoowe Isle Pacific Ocean Asia
21-24 S. 174-25 W. Easter Isle Pacific Ocean America 27-06 S. 109-41 W. Eastern
Ocean betw. the N. W. of N. America and N. E. of Asia N. Pacific ocean. Edenton
N. Carolina United States America ^6-04 N. 77-00 W. Edinburgh Edinburghshire
Scotland Europe 35-57 N. 3-07 W. Edysto^e Eng. Channel England Europe 50-08 N.
4-29 W. Elbing Prussia Poland Europe 54-15 N. 20-00 E. Embden Westphalia
Germany Europe ^^-25 N. 7-20 E. Enat^m Isle Pacific Ocean Asia 20-10 S. 169-99
E. Enebrun Douphine France Europe 44-34 N. 6-34 E. English Channel between Eng.
and France Europe Atlantic Ocean. Ephesun Natolia Turkey Asia 36-01 N. 27-30 E.
Erramanga Isle Pacific Ocean Asia 18-46 S. 169-23 E. Eraerum Turcomania Turkey
Asia 39-56 N. 42-05 E. Ethiopian Sea Coast of Guinea Africa Atlantic Ocean.
Evreux Normandy France Europe 49-01 N. 1-23 E. Eustatia Town Carib. sea West
India N. America 17-29 N. 63-05 W. Exeter Devonshire England Europe 50-44 N.
3-29 W. FAlkirk Sterling Scotland Europe 65-58 N. 3-48 W. Falmouth Cornwall
England Europe 50-08 N. 4-57 W. Fayal Town Aaores Atlantic Ocean Europe ^8-32
N. 2^-36 W. Ferdiand Naronka Brasil S. America 3-55 S. 32-4^ W. Ferrara
Ferrarese Italy Europe 44-54 N. 11-41 ^. Ferro (Town) Canaries Atlantic Ocean
Africa 27-47 N. 17-40 W. Ferrol Galicia Spain Europe 43-30 N. 8-40 W. Fez Fez
Morocco Africa 33-30 N. 6-00 W. Florence Tuscany Italy Europe 43-46 N. 11-07 E.
Flores Azores Atlantic Ocean Europe 39-34 N. 30-5^ W. St. Flour A^vergne France
Europe 45-01 N. 3-10 E. Fort St. David Coromandel East India Asia 12-05 N.
80-55 E. France (Isle of) Indian Ocean Africa 20-09 S. 57-33 E. Francfort on
the Main Franconia Germany Europe 49-55 N. 8-40 E. F^^wenburg Polish Prussia
Europe 54-22 N. 20-12 E. Fuego Isle Cape Verd Atlantic Ocean Africa 14-56 N.
24-23 W. Funchal Madeira Atlantic Ocean Africa ^2-37 N. 17-01 W. Furneaux Isle
Pacific Ocean Asia 17-11 S. 143-01 W. GAp Dauphine France Europe 44-33 N. 6-09
E. Geneva Geneva Switzerland Europe 46-12 N. 6-05 E. GENOA Genoa Italy Europe
44-25 N. 8-^0 E. Genes Savoy Italy Europe 44-25 N. 8-40 E. St. George's Isle
Azores Atlantic Ocean Europe 38-39 N. 27-^5 W. St. George's Fort Coromandel
East India Asia 23-04 N. 80-^^ E. St. Georgestown Bermudas Atlantic Ocean N.
America 32-45 N. 63-^0 W. Ghent Flanders Netherlands Europe 51-03 N. 5-48 E.
Gibraltar Andalusia Spain Europe 36-05 N. 5-17 W. Glasgow Lanerkshire Scotland
Europe 55-51 N. 4-10 W. Gloucester Gloucestershire England Europe ^^-05 N. 2-16
W. Goa Malabar East India Asia 15-31 N. 7^-50 E. Goat Isle Indian Ocean Asia
13-55 N. 120-07 E. Gombroon Farsistan P^rs^n Asia 27-30 N. 74-20 E. Gomera Isle
Canaries Atlantic Ocean Africa 28-05 N. 17-03 W. Good Hope Town Hottentots
Caffres Africa 33-55 S. 28-28 E. Gorce Atlantic Ocean Africa ^4-40 N. 27-20 W.
Gottenburg Gothland Sweden Europe 57-42 N. 1^-43 E. Gottengen Hanover Germany
Europe 51-^1 N. 9-^8 E. Granville Normandy France Europe 48-50 N. 2-32 W.
Gratiosa Azores Atlantic Ocean Europe 39-02 N. 27-5^ W. Grata Stiria Germany
Europe 47-04 N. 15-29 E. Gravelines Fr. Flanders Netherlands Europe 50-59 N.
2-13 E. Greenock Renfrewshire Scotland Europe 55-52 N. 4-22 W. Gryphiswald
Pomerania Germany Europe 54-04 N. 13-43 E. G^^daloupe Oaribbean Sea N. America
15-59 N. 61-54 W. Guarn Ladrone Isles East India Asia 24-00 N. 140-30 E. Gulf
of Bothnia Coast of Sweden Europe Baltic Sea -- of California between
California and Mexico N. America Pacisic Ocean. -- of rinland between Sweden
and Russia Europe Baltic Sea. -- of St. Laurence Coast of New Scotland N.
America Atlantic Ocean. -- of Mexico Coast of Mexico N. America Atlantic Ocean.
-- of Ormus between Persia and Arabia Asia Indian Ocean. -- of Persia between
Persia and Arabia Asia Indian Ocean. -- of Venice between Italy and Turkey
Europe Mediterranean Sea. HAerlem Holland Netherlands Europe 52-20 N. 4-10 E.
Hague Holland Netherlands Europe 52-04 N. 4-22 E. Hamburg Holstein Germany
Europe 53-34 N. 9-55 E. Halifax Yorkshire England Europe 53-45 N. 1-52 W.
HALIFAX Nova Scotia North America 44-40 N. 63-15 W. Hanover Saxony Germany
Europe 52-32 N. 9-35 E. Hartford Connecticut United States America 41-50 N.
72-^0 W. Hastings Sussex England Europe 50-52 N. 04-^6 E. Havannah Cuba Island
N. America 23-12 N. 82-13 W. Haute de Grace Normandy France Europe 49-29 N.
0-10 E. La Heese Dutch Flanders Netherlands Europe 51-25 N. 4-^0 E. St. Helena
(Ja. Town) South Atlantic Ocean Africa 15-55 S. 5-44 W. Hellespont
Mediterrancan and Black Sea Europe and Asia Hernosand W. Bothnia Sweden Europe
6^-38 N. 17-58 E. Hereford Herefordshire England Europe 52-06 N. 2-38 W.
Hervey's Isle South Pacific Ocean Asia 19-17 S. 158-43 W. Hoai Nagham Kian Nan
China Asia 33-34 N. 118-54 E. La Hogue Cape Normandy France Europe 49-44 N.
1-51 W. Hood's Isle South Pacific Ocean Asia 9-26 S. 138-47 W. Hoogstraten
Brabant Netherlands Europe 51-24 N. 4-52 E. Howe's Isle South Pacific Ocean
Asia 16-46 S. 154-01 W. Huabine Isle South Pacific Ocean Asia 16-44 S. 151-02
W. Hodson's Bay Coast of Labrador N. America N. Atlantic Ocean. Hall Yorkshire
England Europe 53-45 N. 0-12 W. JAkutskoi Siberia Russia Asia 62-01 N. 129-52
E. Janeiro (Rio) Brasil S. America 22-54 S. 42-38 W. Jassay Moldavia Turkey
Europe 47-08 N. 27-34 E. Java Head Java Isle East India Asia 6-49 S. 106-55 E.
Jeddo Japan Isle East India Asia 36-20 N. 139-00 E. Jerusalem Palestine Turkey
Asia 31-55 N. 35-25 E. Immer Isle South Pacific Ocean Asia 19-16 S. 169-51 E.
Indian Ocean Coast of India Asia Ingoldstadt Bavaria Germany Europe 48-45 N.
22-27 E. Inverness Invernesshire Scotland Europe 57-33 N. 4-02 W. St. John's
Town Antigua Leeward Isles N. America 17-04 N. 62-04 E. St. John's Town
Newfoundland North America 47-32 N. 52-21 W. St. Joseph's California Mexico N.
America 23-03 N. 109-37 W. Irish Sea between Great Britain and Ireland, Europe,
Atlantic Ocean Irra^^^me Isle South Pacific Ocean Asia 19-31 S. 170-26 E.
Is^^abad Bengal East India Asia 22-20 N. 91-50 E. Isle of Pines South Pacific
Ocean Asia 22-38 S. 167-43 E. ISPA^AN Irac Agem Persia Asia 32-25 N. 52-55 E.
Isthmus of Suet joins Africa to Asia. -- of Corinth, joins the Mores to Greece,
Europe -- of Panama, joins North and South America. -- of Malacca, joins
Malacca to Farther India, Asia. Ivica Isle Mediterr. Sea Italy Europe 38-50 N.
1-40 E. Judda Arabia Felix Arabia Asia 21-29 N. 49-27 E. Juthia Siam East India
Asia 14-18 N. 100-55 E. Kamtsch^tka Siberia Russia Asia 57-10 N. 163-00 E.
Kedgere Bangal East India Asia 21-48 N. 8^-55 E. Kelso Roxboro^shire Scotland
Europe 55-38 N. 02-12 W. Kilmarnock Airshire Scotland Europe 55-38 N. 04-30 W.
Kingsale Munster Ireland Europe 51-32 N. 08-20 W. KINGSTON Jamaica West India
America 18-15 N. 76-38 W. Kiow Ukraine Russia Europe 50-30 N. 31-12 E. Kola
Lapland Russia Europe 68-52 N. 33-13 E. Koningsberg Prussia Poland Europe 54-43
N. 21-35 E. LAguna Teneriffe Cana^^es Atlantic Ocean 28-^8 N. 16-13 W. Lahor
Lahor East India Asia 32-40 N. 75-30 E. Lancaster Lancashire England Europe
54-05 N. 02-55 E. Lancaster Pennsylvania United States America 40-02 N. 76-20
W. Landau Alface France Europe 49-11 N. 08-02 E. Landscroon Schonen Sweden
Europe 55-5^ N. 1^-51 E. Lausa^^e Canton of Vaud Switzerland Europe 46-31 N.
06-50 E. Leeds Yorkshire England Europe 53-48 N. 01-29 W. Leicester
Lercestershire England Europe 52-38 N. 01-03 W. Leipsic Saxony Germany Europe
51-19 N. 12-25 E. Leith Edinburghshire Scotland Europe 55-58 N. 03-00 W.
Leper's Island S. Pacific Ocean Asia 15-23 S. 168-03 E. Leskard Cornwall
England Europe 50-26 N. 04-36 W. Lesparre Guienne France Europe 45-18 N. 00-52
W. Levant Sea Coast of Syria Asia Mediterranean Sea. LEXINGTON Kentucky United
States America 38-25 N. 85-^9 W. Leyden Holland Netherlands Europe 52-10 N.
04-32 E. Liege Bishop, of Liege Netherlands Europe 50-37 N. 05-40 E. Lima Peru
South America 12-01 S. 76-44 W. Limerick Munster Ireland Europe 52-35 N. 08-48
W. Limoges Limoges France Europe 45-49 N. 01-20 E. Lincoln Lincolnshire England
Europe 53-15 N. 00-27 W. Linlithgow Linlithgowshire Scotland Europe 55-56 E.
03-30 W. Lints Austria Germany Europe 48-16 N. 13-57 E. Lisbon Estremadura
Portugal Europe 38-42 N. 09-04 W. Lisle French Flanders Netherlands Europe
50-37 N. 03-09 E. L^chfield Staffordshire England Europe 52-43 N. 01-04 W.
Lizard Point Cornwall England Europe 49-57 N. 05-10 W. LONDON Middlesex England
Europe 51-31 N. 1st Meridian Londonderty Ulster Ireland Europe 50-00 N. 07-40
W. Loretto Pope's Territory Italy Europe 43-15 N. ^4-15 E. Lou^sbourgh Cape
Breton Isle North America 45-53 N. 59-48 W. Louvain Austrian Brabant
Netherlands Europe 50-53 N. 04-49 E. Louveau Siam East India Asia 12-42 N.
100-56 E. Lubec Holstein Germany Europe 54-00 N. 11-40 E. St. Lucia Isle Wind
ward Isles West India N. America 13-24 N. 60-46 W. Lunden Gothland Swaden
Europe 55-41 N. 13-26 E. Luneville Lorrain France Europe 48-35 N. 06-35 E.
Luxemburg Luxemburg Netherlands Europe 49-37 N. 06-16 E. Lyous Lyous France
Europe 45-45 N. 04-54 E. MAcao Canton China Asia 22-12 N. 113-51 E. Macassar
Celebes Isle East India Asia 05-09 S. 119-53 E. Madeira Funchal Atlantic Ocean
Africa 32-37 N. 17-01 W. Madras Coromandel East India Asia 13-04 N. 80-33 E.
MADRID New Castile Spain Europe 40-25 N. 03-20 E. Magdalena Isle South Pacific
Ocean Asia 10-25 S. 138-44 W. Mahon Port Minorca Mediterr. Sea Europe 39-50 N.
03-53 E. Majorca Isle Mediterr. Sea Europe 39-35 N. 0^-34 E. Malacca Malacca
East India Asia 0^-12 N. 102-10 E. Malines Brabant Netherlands Europe 51-01 N.
04-33 E. Malico^a (Isle) South Pacific Ocean Asia 16-15 N. 167-44 E. St. Maloes
Bretagne France Europe 48-38 N. 01-53 W. Malta Isle Mediterranean Sea Africa
35-54 N. 14-33 E. Manilla Lucon^a Philip. Isles East India Asia 14-36 N. 120-58
E. MANTUA Mantua Italy Europe 45-20 N. 10-47 E. Margealante Atlantic Ocean S.
America 15-55 N. 61-06 W. MARIETTA N. W. Territory United States America 39-34
N. 81-40 W. Marseilles Provence France Europe 43-17 N. 05-27 E. St. Martha St.
Martha Terra Firma America 11-26 N. 73-39 W. St. Martin's Isle Carribbean Isles
West India America 18-04 N. 62-57 W. Martinico Isle Carribbean Isles West India
America 14-44 N. 61-16 W. St. Mary's Isle Scilly Isles Atlantic Ocean Europe
49-57 N. 06-38 W. St. Mary's Town Azores Atlantic Ocean Europe 36-^6 N. 25-04
W. Maskelyne Isles South Pacific Ocean Asia 16-32 S. 168-04 E. Mauritius Indian
Ocean Africa 20-09 S. 57-34 E. Maurua Isle South Pacific Ocean Asia ^6-25 S.
152-37 E. Mayence Lower Rhine Germany Europe 49-54 N. 08-25 E. Mayo Isle Cape
Verd Atlantic Ocean Africa 15-10 N. 23-00 W. Meaux Champagne France Europe
48-57 N. 02-57 E. Mecca Arabia Felix Arabia Asia 21-45 N. 41-00 E. Medina
Arabia Felix Arabia Asia 25-00 N. 39-53 E. Mediterr. Sea Between Europe and
Africa Atlantic Ocean. Mequinez Fez Barbary Africa 34-30 N. 06-00 E. MESSIMA
Scilly Island Italy Europe 38-30 N. 15-40 E. Mergus Siam East India Asia 12-12
N. 98-13 E. Mexico Mexico North America 19-54 N. 100-00 W. Miatea Isle South
Pacific Ocean Asia 17-52 S. 148-01 W. St. Michael's Azores Atlantic Ocean
Europe 37-47 N. 25-37 W. Middleburg Isle South Pacific Ocean Asia 21-^0 S.
174-29 W. MILAM Milanese Italy Europe 45-25 N. 09-30 E. Milford Haven
Pembrokeshire Wales Europe 51-45 N. 05-15 W. Mocha Arabia Felix Arabia Asia
13-40 N. 43-50 E. MODENA Modena Italy Europe 44-34 N. 11-17 E. Montreal Canada
North America 45-35 N. 73-11 W. Montpelier Languedoc France Europe 43-36 N.
03-37 E. Montague Isle South Pacific Ocean Asia 17-26 S. 168-36 E. Montrose
Forfar Scotland Europe 56-34 N. 02-20 W. Monferrnt Isle Caribbean Isle West
India America 16-47 N. 62-12 W. MOROCCO Morocco Barbary Africa 30-32 N. 06-10
W. Moscow Moscow Russia Europe 55-45 N. 37-50 E. Munich Bavaria Germany Europe
48-09 N. 11-35 E. Munster Westphalia Germany Europe 52-00 N. 07-10 E. NAmur
Namur Netherlands Europe 50-28 N. 04-49 E. Nancy Lorrain France Europe 48-41 N.
06-16 E. Nangasachi Japan N. Pacific Ocean Asia 32-32 N. 128-51 E. Nanking
Kiangan China Asia 32-00 N. 118-30 E. Nantes Bretagne France Europe 47-13 N.
01-28 W. Naples Naples Italy Europe 40-50 N. 14-18 E. Narva Livonia Russia
Europe 59-00 N. 27-35 E. NEW HAVEN Connecticut United States America 41-19 N.
73-00 W. NEW YORK New York United States America 40-40 N. 74-00 Newcastle
Northumberland England Europe 55-03 N. 01-24 W. Newport Rhode Island United
States America 41-35 N. 71-06 W. Nice Piedmont Italy Europe 43-41 N. 07-22 E.
St. Nicholas Mole Hispaniola West India America 19-49 N. 73-24 W. Nieuport
Flanders Netherlands Europe 51-07 N. 02-50 E. Nineveh Curdistan Turkey Asia
36-00 N. 46-00 E. Ningpo Chekiang China Asia 29-57 N. 120-23 E. Norfolk Isle
South Pacific Ocean Asia 29-01 S. 168-25 ^. Norfolk Vinginia United States
America 36-55 N. 0^-^0 W. Noriton Pennsylvania North America 40-09 N. 79-^^ W.
North Cape Wardhus Lapland Europe 71-10 N. 26-^^ E. Northampaon Northamptonsh.
England Europe 52-15 N. 00-55 W. Norwich Norfolk England Europe 52-40 N. 01-25
E. Nuremberg Franconia Germany Europe 49-27 N. 11-12 E. Nottingham
Nottinghamsh. England Europe 53-00 N. 01-06 W. OChotskoi Siberia Russia Asia
59-20 N. 143-17 E. Ohevah^n South Pacific Ocean Asia 09-04 S. 138-56 W. Isle
Ohita^oo Isle South Pacific Ocean Asia 09-55 S. 139-01 W. Oleron Saintonge
France Europe 46-02 N. 01-20 W. Olinde Brasil South America 08-13 S. 35-00 W.
Ol^nutz Moravia Bohemiz Europe 49-30 N. 16-45 E. Olymapia Greece Turkey Europe
37-30 N. 22-00 E. St. Omner's Flanders Netherlands Europe 50-44 N. 02-19 E.
O^^teayo Isle South Pacific Ocean Asia 09-58 S. 138-46 W. Oporto Duoro Portugal
Europe 41-10 N. 08-22 W. Oran Algiers Barbary Africa 36-30 N. 00-05 E. Orenburg
Tartary Russia Asia 51-^6 N. 55-14 E. L'Orient (Port) Bretagne France Europe
47-45 N. 03-20 W. Orleans Orleannois France Europe 47-54 N. 01-59 E. Orleans
(New) Louisiana North America 29-57 N. 89-53 W. Orm^s Ormicos Isle Persia Asia
26-50 N. 57-00 E. Orotava Teneriffe Atlantic Ocean Africa 28-23 N. 16-19 W.
Orsk Tartary Russia Asia 51-12 N. 58-37 E. Osnaburg Isle South Pacific Ocean
Asia 17-52 S. 148-01 E. Ostend Flanders Netherlands Europe 51-13 N. 03-00 E.
Otaheite South Pacific Ocean Asia 17-29 S. 149-35 W. Owhyoe South Pacific Ocean
Asia 22-10 S. 199-00 E. Oxford Observatory Ocfordshire England Europe 51-45 N.
01-10 W. PAcific or Oriental Ocean Between Asia and America Padua Paduano Italy
Europe 45-22 N. 12-00 E. Paisley Renfrewshire Scotland Europe 55-48 N. 04-08 W.
PALERMO Sicily Isle Italy Europe 38-30 N. 13-43 E. Palliser's Isles South
Pacific Ocean Asia 15-38 S. 146-25 W. Palma Isle Canaries Atlantic Ocean Africa
28-36 N. 17-45 W. Palmerston's Isle South Pacific Ocean Asia 18-00 S. 162-52 W.
Palmyra Syria Turkey Asia 33-00 N. 39-00 E. Panama Darien Terra Firma S.
America 08-47 N. 80-16 W. Paoom Isle South Pacific Ocean Asia 16-30 S. 168-33
E. PARIS (Observ^) Isle of France France Europe 48-50 N. 2-25 E. Parma Parmasan
Italy Europe 44-45 N. 10-51 E. Patna Bengal East India Asia 25-45 N. 83-00 E.
Patrixf^o^d Iceland N. Atlan. Ocean Europe 65-35 N. 14-05 W. Pau Bearn France
Europe 43-15 N. 0-04 W. St. Paul's Isle South Indian Ocean Africa 37-51 S.
77-53 E. Pegu Pegu East India Asia 17-00 N. 97-00 E. Peking Petchili China Asia
39-54 N. 116-29 E. Pelew Islands North Pacific Ocean Asia 7-00 N. 135-00 E.
Pembroke Pembrokeshire Wales Europe 51-45 N. 4-50 W. PANSACOLA West Florida
North America 30-22 N. 87-20 W. Penzance Cornwall England Europe 50-08 N. 6-00
W. Perigueux Guienne France Europe 45-11 N. 0-48 E. Perinaldi Genoa Italy
Europe 43-53 N. 7-45 E. Perth Perthshire Scotland Europe 56-22 N. 3-12 W. Perth
Amboy New Jersey United States America 40-30 N. 74-20 W. Persepolis Irac Agem
Persia Asia 30-30 N. 54-00 E. St. Peter's Fort Martinico W. India N. America
14-44 N. 61-16 W. St. Peter's Isle North Atlantic Ocean America 46-46 N. 56-12
W. PETERSBURG Ingria Russia Europe 59-56 N. 30-24 E. Petropawloskoi Kamtschatka
Russia Asia 53-01 N. 158-40 E. PHILADELPHIA Pennsylvania United States America
39-56 N. 75-09 W. St. Philip's Fort Minorca Mediterr, Sea Europe 39-50 N. 3-53
E. Pickersgill Isle South Atlantic Ocean America 54-42 S. 36-53 W. Pico Azores
Atlantic Ocean Europe 38-28 N. 28-21 W. Pines, Isle of N. Caledonia Pacific
Ocean Asia 22-38 S. 167-43 E. Pisa Tuscany Italy Europe 43-43 N. 10-17 E.
Placentia Newfoundl. Isle North America 47-26 N. 55-00 W. Plymouth
Massachusetts United States America 41-48 N. 70-25 W. Pollingen Swabia Germany
Europe 47-48 N. 10-48 E. Poundicherry Coromandel East India Asia 11-41 N. 79-57
E. Ponoi Lapland Russia Europe 67-06 N. 36-28 E. Porto Bello Terra Firma South
America 09-33 N. 79-45 W. Port Sancto Isle Madeira Atlantic Ocean Africa 32-58
N. 16-20 W. Port Royal Jamaica West India America 18-00 N. 76-40 W. Port Royal
Martinico West India America 14-35 N. 61-04 W. Portland Isle South Pacific
Ocean Asia 39-25 S. 178-17 E. Portland Isle North Atlantic Ocean Europe 63-22
N. 18-49 W. Portsmo. Town Hampshire England Europe 50-47 N. 0^-01 W. -- Academy
Hampshire England Europe 50-48 N. 1-01 W. Portsmouth New Hampshire United
States America 43-05 N. 70-43 W. Poto^i Peru South America 21-00 S. 77-00 W.
Prague Bohemia Europe 50-04 N. 14-50 E. Preshurg Upper Hungary Europe 48-20 N.
17-30 W. Preston Lancashire England Europe 53-45 N. 2-50 W. Prince of Wales New
N. Wales North America 58-47 N. 94 -- 02 W. Fort Providence Rhode Island United
States America 41-50 N. 71-21 W. Pulo Candor Isle Indian Ocean East India Asia
8-40 N. 107-25 E. Pulo Timor Isle Gulf of Siam East India Asia 3-00 N. 104-30
E. Pyles^aa^t Isle South Pacific Ocean Asia 22-23 S. 175-36 W. QUebec Lower
Canada North America 46-55 N. 69-48 W. Queen South Pacific Ocean Asia 10-11 S.
164-3^ E. Charlotte's Isles St. Quintin Picardy France Europe 49-60 N. 3-22 E.
Quito Peru South America 0-13 S. 77-50 W. RAgusa Dalmatia Venice Europe 42-45
N. 18-25 E. Ramhead Cornwall England Europe 50-18 N. 4-15 W. Ratisbon Bavaria
Germany Europe 48-56 N. 12-05 E. Re Isle Aunis France Europe 46-14 N. 1-29 W.
Recif Brasil South America 8-10 S. 35-30 W. Resolution Isle South Pacific Ocean
Asia 17-23 S. 141-40 W. Rheims Champagne France Europe 49-14 N. 4-07 E. Rhodes
Rhode Island Levant sea Asia 36-20 N. 28-00 E. RICHMOND Virginia United States
America 37-40 N. 77-50 W. Riga Livionia Russia Europe 56-55 N. 24-00 E. Rimini
Romagna Italy Europe 44-03 N. 12-39 E. Rennes Bretagne France Europe 48-06 N.
1-36 W. Rochelle Aunis France Europe 46-09 N. 1-04 W. Rochfort Saintonge France
Europe 46-02 N. 0-53 W. Rock of Lisbon Mouth of Tagus River Portugal Europe
38-45 N. 9-30 W. Rodex Guienne France Europe 44-21 N. 2-39 E. Rodrigues Isle
South Indian Ocean Africa 10-40 N. 63-15 E. Rome, St. Peter's Pope's Territory
Italy Europe 41-53 N. 12-34 E. Rotterdam Holland Netherlands Europe 51-56 N.
4-33 E. Rotterdam Isle South Pacific Ocean Asia 20-16 N. 174-25 W. Rouen
Normandy France Europe 49-26 N. 1-00 W. SAba Isle Carib. sea West India America
17-39 N. 63-12 W. Sagan Silesia Germany Europe 51-42 N. 15-27 E. St. Augustine
East Florida North America 29-45 N. 81-12 W. St. Domingo Carib. sea West India
America 18-20 N. 70-00 W. St. Georga's Channel Between England and Ireland
Europe Atlantic Ocean. St. Jago Chilf South 34-00 S. 77-00 W. St. Juan
California North America 26-25 N. 114-09 W. St. Salvador Brasil South America
11-58 S. 38-00 W. Salem Massachusetts United States America 42-35 N. 70-52 W.
Salisbury Wiltshire England Europe 51-00 N. 1-45 W. Sall Isle North Atlantic
Ocean Africa 16-38 N. 22-51 W. Salonichi Macedonia Turkey Europe 40-41 N. 23-13
E. Salvage Isles North Atlantic Ocean Africa 30-00 N. 15-49 W. Samana
Hispaniola West India America 19-15 N. 69-11 W. Samarcand Usbec Tartary Asia
40-40 N. 69-00 E. Samaria Ruins Holy Land Turkey Asia 32-40 N. 38-00 E.
Sandwich Isle South Pacific Ocean Asia 17-41 S. 168-38 E. Santa Cruz Teneriffe
Althntice Ocean Africa 28-27 N. 16-11 W. Santa Fee New Mexico North America
36-00 N. 104-00 W. Savage Isle South Pacific Ocean Asia 19-02 S. 169-25 W.
SAVANNAH Geotgia Unitd States America 31-55 N. 80-20 W. Saunder's Isle South
Georgia S. Atlantic Ocean S. America 58-00 S. 26-53 W. Said, or Thebes Upper
Egypt Africa 27-00 N. 32-20 E. Scarborough Yorkshire England Europe 54-18 N.
0-10 W. Schwexingen Lower Rhine Germany Europe 49-23 N. 8-45 E. Scone
Perthshire Scotland Europe 56-24 N. 3-10 W. Sea of Asoph Little Tartary Curope
and Asia -- Marmora Turkey in Europe and Asia Black sea. -- Ochotsk Between
Siberia, and Kamtschatka, Asia N. Pacific Ocean. -- Yellow Between Eastern
Tartary, China and Corea N. Pacific Ocean. Sedan Champagne France Europe 49-42
N. 5-02 E. Senegal Negroland Africa 15-53 N. 16-26 W. Seville Andalusia Spain
Europe 37-15 N. 6-05 W. Sheerness Kent England Europe 51-25 N. 0-50 E.
Shepherd's Isles South Pacific Ocean Asia 16-58 S. 168-47 E. Shields (South)
Durham England Europe 55-02 N. 1-15 E. Shrewsbury Shropshire England Europe
52-43 N. 2-46 W. Siam Siam East India Asia ^4-18 N. 100-55 E. Sidon Holy Land
Turkey Asia 33-33 N. 36-15 E. Sighamfu Chensi China Asia 34-16 N. 108-48 E.
Sisteron Dauphine France Europe 44-11 N. 6-01 E. S^nyrna Natolia Turkey Asia
38-28 N. 27-24 E. Sombavera Isles Carib. sea West India N. America 18-38 N.
63-32 W. Soolo Isle Philip. Isles East India Asia 5-57 N. 121-20 E. Southampton
Hampshire England Europe 50-55 N. 1-25 W. Spaw Liege Germany Europe 50-30 N.
5-40 E. Stafford Staffordshire England Europe 52-50 N. 2-00 W. Stockholm Upland
Sweden Europe 59-20 N. 18-08 E. Sterling Sterlingshire Scotland Europe 56-10 N.
3-50 W.

Straits of Babelmandel, between Africa and Asia, Red Sea.

-- of Dover, between England and France, English Channel.

-- of Gibraltar, between Europe and Africa, Mediterranean Sea.

-- of Malacca, between Malacca and Sumatra, Asia, Indian Ocean.

-- of Magellan, between Terra del Fuego, and Patagonia, South America.

-- of La Maire, in Patagonia, South America, Atlantic and Pacific Ocean.

-- of Ormus, between Persia and Arabia, Persian Gulf.

-- of Sunda, between Sumatra and Java, Indian Ocean, Asia.

-- of Waigats, between Nova Zembla and Russia, Asia,

Stralsund Pomerania Germany Europe 54-23 N. 13-22 E. Strasburgh Alface France
Europe 48-34 N. 7-46 E. Straumness Iceland N. Atlant. Ocean Europe 65-39 N.
24-24 W. Suez Suez Egypt Africa 29-50 N. 33-27 E. Sultz Lorrain France Europe
47-53 N. 7-09 W. S^^nderland Durham England Europe 54-55 N. 1-10 W. Surat
Guzurat East India Asia 21-10 N. 72-27 E. Surinam Surinam South America 6-00 N.
55-30 W. Syracuse Sicily Isle Italy Europe 36-58 N. 25-05 E. TAble Island New
Hebrides South Pacific Asia 15-38 S. 167-12 E. Tanjour Tanjour East India Asia
11-27 N. 79-07 E. Tanna South Pacific Ocean Asia 19-32 S. 169-46 E. Taoukaa
Isle South Pacific Ocean Asia 14-30 S. 145-04 W. Tauris Aderbeitzan Persia Asia
38-20 N. 46-30 E. Teslis Georgia Persia Asia 43-30 N. 47-00 E. Temontengis
Soloo East India Asia 5-57 N. 120-58 E. Teneriffe Peak Canaries Atlantic Ocean
Africa 28-12 N. 16-24 W. Tercera Azores Atlantic Ocean Europe 38-45 N. 27-01 W.
Teruan Fez Barbary Africa 35-40 N. 5-18 W. St. Thomas's Isle Virgin Isles West
India America 18-21 N. 64-46 W. Thorn Regal Prussia Poland Europe 52-56 N.
19-00 W. Timor, S. W. Poi. East India Asia 10-23 S. 124-04 E. Timorland S. Po.
East India Asia 8-15 S. 131-59 E. Tobolski Siberia Russia Asia 58-12 N. 68-17
E. Toledo New Castile Spain Europe 39-50 N. 3-25 E. Tomik Siberia Russia Asia
56-29 N. 85-04 E. Tonga Tabu Isle South Pacific Ocean Asia 21-09 S. 174-41 W.
Tornea Bothnia Sweden Europe 65-50 N. 24-17 E. Toulon Provence France Europe
43-07 N. 6-01 E. Trapesond Natolia Turkey Asia 41-50 N. 40-30 E. Trent Trent
Germany Europe 46-05 N. 11-02 E. Trenton New Jersey United States America 4^-15
N. 74-15 W. Tripoli Tripoli Barbary Africa 32-53 N. 13-12 E. Tripoli Syria
Turkey Asia 34-30 N. 36-15 E. Troy Ruins Natolia Turkey Asia 39-30 N. 26-30 E.
Tunis Tunis Barbary Africa 36-47 N. 10-00 E. Turin Piedmont Italy Europe 45-05
N. 7-45 E. Turtle Isle South Pacific Ocean Asia 19-48 S. 178-02 W. Tire
Palestine Turkey Asia 32-32 N. 36-00 E. Tyrnaw Trentschin Hungary Europe 48-23
N. 17-38 E. ULiatea South Pacific Ocean Asia 16-45 S. 151-26 W. Upsal Upland
Sweden Europe 59-51 N. 17-47 E. Uranlberg Huen Isle Denmark Europe 55-54 N.
12-57 E. Ushant Isle Butagne France Europe 48-28 N. 4-59 W. U^echt Holland
Netherlands Europe 52-07 N. 5-00 E. Venice Venice Italy Europe 45-26 N. 11-59
E. Vera Croz Mexico North America 19-12 N. 97-25 W. V^RNON, Mount Virginia
United States America 38-40 N. 77-20 W. Verona Veronese Italy Europe 45-26 N.
11-23 E. Vertailles Isle of France France Europe 48-48 N. 2-12 E. VIENNA,
Obser. Austria Germany Europe 48-12 N. 16-22 E. Vigo Galicia Spain Europe 42-14
N. 8-23 W. V^ntamiglia Genoa Italy Europe 43-53 N. 7-42 E. Virgin Gords Virgin
Isles West India America 18-18 N. 63-59 W. WAkesield Yorkshire England Europe
53-41 N. 1-28 W. Prince of Wales's Fort New N. Wales North America 58-47 N.
94-01 W. Wardhus Norwegian Lapland Lapland Europe 70-22 N. 31-11 E. Warsaw
Massovia Poland Europe 52-14 N. 21-05 E. Warwick Warwickshire England Europe
52-18 N. 1-32 W. WASHINGTON Columb, District United States America 38-54 N.
77-09 W. Waterford Munfter Ireland Europe 52-12 N. 7-16 W. Wells Somersetshire
England Europe 51-12 N. 2-40 W. Westman Isles North Atlantic Ocean Europe 63-20
N. 20-22 W. Whitchawen Cumberland England Europe 54-38 N. 3-36 W. Whitf^^ide
Isle South Pacific Ocean Asia 15-44 S. 168-25 E. Wilhansburg Virginia United
States America 37-12 N. 76-48 W. Wilis's Isles South Georgia Atlantic Ocean
America 54-00 S. 38-24 W. Wanchster Hampshire England Europe 51-06 N. 1-15 W.
Wil^a Lithuania Poland Europe 54-41 N. 25-32 E. Wittesburg Upper Saxony Germany
Europe 51-49 N. 12-46 E. Wologda Wologda Russia Europe 59-19 N. 41-20 E.
Worcester Worcestershire England Europe 52-09 N. 1-55 W. Worcester
Massachusetts United States America 42-23 N. 71-44 W. Wor^^^ Lower Rhine
Germany Europe 49-38 N. 8-05 E. Woslak Russia Europe 61-15 N. Wortzburg
Francon'a Germany Europe 49-46 N. 10-18 E. YArthoath Norsolk England Europe
52-45 N. 1-48 E. York Yorkshire England Europe 53-59 N. 1-01 W. Yorkminister
Terra del Fuego South America 55-16 N. 70-03 W.

Greenwich Observe. Kent, England, Europe, 51 28 40 N. ^ 5 37 E. of St. Paul's,
Lon.

AN IMPROVED CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE, OF REMARKABLE EVENTS, DISCOVERIES, AND
INVENTIONS;
Comprehending, in one view, the ANALYSTS or OUTLINES of GENERAL HISTORY, from
the CREATION to the present TIME.
^ef. Christ. 4004 THE creation of the world, and of Adam and Eve. 4003 The
birth of Cain, the first who was born of a woman. 3017 Enoch translated into
heaven. 2348 The old world destroyed by a deluge which continued 377 days. 2247
The tower of Babel is built about this time by Noah's posterity; upon which Cod
miraculously confounds, their language, and thus disperses them into different
nations. 2234 Celestial observations are begun at Babylon, the city which first
gave birth to learning and the sciences. 2188 Misraim, the son of Ham, founds
the kingdom of Egypt, which lasted 1663 years, to the conquest of Cambyses.
2059 Ninus, the son of Belus, founds the kingdom of Assyria, which lasted above
1000 years. 1921 The convenant of God made with Abraham, when he leaves Haran
to go into Canaan, which begins the 430 years of sojourning. 1897 The cities of
Sodom and Gomorrah are destroyed for their wickedness by fire from heaven. 1856
The kingdom of Argos in Greece begins under Inachus. 1822 Memnon the Egyptian
invents the letters. 1715 Prometheus first struck fire from flints. 1635 Joseph
dies in Egypt, which concludes the book of Genesis, containing a period of 2369
years. 1574 Aaron born in Egypt; 1490, appointed by God first high priest of
the Israelites. 1571 Moses, brother to Aaron, born in Egypt, and adopted by
Pharaoh's daughter. 1556 Cecrops brings a colony of Sanes from Egypt, into
Attica, and begins the kingdom of Athens in Greece. 1546 Scamander comes from
Crete into Phrygia, and begins the kingdom of Troy. 1503 Deluge of Deucalion in
Thessaly. 1493 Cadmus carried the Phoenician letters into Greece, and built the
citadel of Thebes. 1491 Moses performs a number of miracles in Egypt, and
departs from that kingdom, together with 600,000 Israelites, besides children,
which completed the 432 years of sojourning. 1485 The first ship that appeared
in Greece brought from Egypt by Danaus, who arrived at Rhodes, and brought with
him his fifty daughters. 1453 The first Olympic games celebrated at Olympic, to
Greece. 1452 The Pentateuch, or five first books of Moses, are written in the
land of Moab, where he died the year following, aged 110 years. 1451 The
Israelites, after sojourning in the wilderness forty years, are led under John's
into the land of Canaan, where they six themselves, after having subdued the
natives; and the period of the sabbatical year commences. 1263 Argonautic
expedition. 1198 The rape of Helen by Paris, which, in 1193, gave rise to the
Trojan war, and siege or Troy by the Greeks, which contained ten years, when
that city was taken and burned. 1048 David is sole king of Israel. 1004 The
Temple is solemnly dedicated by Solomon. 896 Elijah, the prophet, is translated
to heaven. 894 Money first made of gold and silver at Argos. 869 The city of
Carthage, in Africa, founded by Queen Dido. 814 The kingdom of Macedon begins.
776 The first Olympiad begins. 753 Era of the building of Rome in Italy by
Romulus, first king of the Romans. 720 Samaria taken, after three years siege,
and the kingdom of Israel overthrown by Salmanaser king of Assyria, who carried
the ten tribes into captivity. The first eclipse of the moon on record. 658
Byzantium (now Constantinople) built by a colony of Athenians. 604 By order of
Necho, king of Egypt, some Phoenicians sailed from the Red Sea round Africa,
and returned by the Mediterranean. 600 Thales of Miletus travels into Egypt,
acquires the knowledge of geometry, astronomy, and philosophy; returns to
Greece, calculates eclipses, and gives general notions of the universe, and
maintains that one Supreme Intelligence regulates all its motions. Maps,
globes, and signs of the Zodiac, invented by Anaximander, the scholar of
Thales. 597 Jehoiakin, king of Judah, is carried away captive by Nebuchadnezzar
to Babylon. 587 The city of Jerusalem taken, after a siege of 18 months. 562
The first comedy at Athens acted upon a moveable scaffold. 559 Cyrus the first
king of Persia. 538 The kingdom of Babylon destroyed; that city being taken by
Cyrus, who, in 536, issued an edict for the return of the Jews. 534 The first
tragedy acted at Athens, on a wagon, by Thespis. 526 Learning is greatly
encouraged at Athens, and a public library first founded. 515 The second
temple at Jerusalem is finished under Darius. 509 Tarquin the seventh, and last
King of the Romans, is expelled, and Rome is governed by two consuls, and other
republican magistrates, until the bottle of Pharsalia, 461 years. 504 Sardis
taken and burned by the Athenians, which gave occasion to the Persian invasion
of Greece. 4^6 AEsohylus, the Greek Poet, first gains the prize of tragedy. 4^1
Xerxes, King of Persian, begins his expedition against Greece. 458 Ezra is sent
from Babylon to Jerusalem, with the captive Jews, and the vessels of gold and
silver, etc. being seventy weeks of years, or 490 years before the crucasixion
of our Savior. 454 The Romans send to Athens for Solon's laws. 451 The
decemvirs created at Rome, and the laws of the twelve tables compiled and
ratified. 443 Censors created at Rome. 432 Nincteen years cycle invented by
Meton. 430 The history of the Old Testament finishes about this time. Malachi,
the last of the prophets. 401 Retreat of 10,020 Greeks under Xenophon. 400
Socrates, the founder of moral philosophy among the Greeks, put to death by the
Athenians, who soon after repent, and erect to his memory a statue of brass.
379 Boeotian war commences in Greece, finished in 366, after the death of
Epaminondas, the last of the Grecian heroes. After his death, Philip, brother
to the King of Macedon, who had been educated under him, privately set out for
that country, seized the kingdom, and after a continual course of war,
treachery, and dissimulation, put an end to the liberty of the Greeks by the
battle of Cheronea. 336 Philip King of Macedon murdered, and succeeded by his
son Alexander the Great. 332 Alexandr^a in Egypt built. 331 Alexander, King of
Macedon, conquers During King of Persia, and other nations of Asia. 323 Dies at
Babylon, and his empire is divided by his generals into four kingdoms, after
destroying his wives, children, brother, mother, and sisters. 291 Darkness at
Rome at noon day. 290 Solar quadrants introduced at Rome. 285 Dronysius, of
Alexandria, began his astronomical era on Monday June 26, being the first who
found the solar year to consist exactly of 365 days five hours and 49 minutes.
264 Ptolemy Philadelphus, King of Egypt, employs seventy two interpreters to
translata the Old Testament into the Greek language, which is called the
Septuagint. 269 The first coinage of silver at Rome. 264 The first Punic was
begins, and continus 24 years. The chronology of the Arundelian marbles
composed. 250 Eratofthenes first attempted to measure the earth. 242 Conic
sections invented by Apollonius. 218 The second Punic was begins, and continues
17 years. Hannibal passes the Alps, and defeats the Romans in several battles;
but being abandoned and refused support buy his countrymen, fails in the
accomplishment of his purpose. 190 The first Roman army enters Asia, and from
the spoils of Antiochus brings the Asiatic luxury to Rome. 170 Eighty thousand
Jews massacred by Antiochus Epipha^^es. 168 Perseus defeated by the Romans,
which ends the Macedonian kingdom. 167 The first library erected at Rome, of
books brought from Macedonia. 163 The government of Judea under the Maccabees
begins, and continues 126 years. 146 Carthage and Corinth rased to the ground
by the Romans. 145 An hundred thousand inhabitants of Antioch massacred in one
day by the Jews. 135 The history of the Apocrypha ends. 63 Catiline's
conspiracy against the liberties of his country defected. 52 Julius Caesar
makes his first expedition into Britain. 47 The battle of Pharsalia between
Caesar and Pompey, in which the letter is defeated. The Alexandrian library,
consisting of 400,000 valuable books, burnt by accident. 45 The war of Africa,
in which Cato kills himself. The solar year introduced by Caesar. 44 Caesar
killed in the senate house, after having sought ^0 pitched battled, and
overturned the liberties of his country. 43 Brutus, one of the conspirators
against Caesar, and chief of the republicans, being vanquished in the battle of
Philippi, kills himself. 35 The battle of Actium fought, in which Mark Antony
and Cleopatra are totally defeated by Octavius, nephew to Julius Caesar. 30
Alexandara taken by Octavius, and Egypt reduced to a Roman province. 27
Octavius, by a decree of the senate, obtains the title of Augustus Caesar, and
an absolute exemption from the laws, and is properly the first Roman Emperor. 8
The temple of Janus is shut by Augustus, as an emblem of universal peace; and
JESUS CHRIST is supposed to have been born in September, or on Monday, December
25. After Christ. 12 CHRIST disputes with the Doctors in the temple. 29 -- is
baptized in the wilderness by John. 33 -- is crucified on Friday, April 3, at
three o'clock, P. M. His Resurrection on Lord's day, April 5: His Ascension,
Thursday, May 14. 36 St. Paul converted. 39 St. Matthew writes his Gospel.
Pontius Pilate kills himself. 40 The name of Christians first given at Antioch
to the followers of Christ. 43 Claudius Caesar's expedition into Britain. 44
St. Mark writes his Gospel. 46 Christianity carried into Spain. 49 London is
founded by the Romans; and in 363 surrounded with a wall, some parts of which
are still observable. 51 Caractacus, the British King, is carried in chains to
Rome. 52 The council of the Apostles at Jerusalem. 55 St. Luke write his
Gospel. 60 Christianity preached in Britain. 61 Boadicea, the British Queen,
defeats the Romans; but is conquered soon after by Suetonius, governor (...)
Britain. 62 St. Paul is sent in bonds to Rome -- write his epistles between 51
and 66. 63 The acts of the Apostles written. Christianity is supposed to be
introduced into Britain by St. Paul, or some of his disciples, about this time.
64 Rome set fire, and burned for six days; upon which began, under Nero, the
first persecution against the Christians. 67 St. Peter and St. Paul put to
death. 70 Tites takes Jerusalem, which is rased to the ground, and the plough
made to p^^ over it. 79 Herculancum overwhelmed by an eruption of Mount
Vesuvius. ^^ Julius Agricola, governor of South Britain, to protect the
civilized Britons from the incursions of the Caledonians, builds a line of
forts between the rivers Forth and Clyde; defents the Caledonians under
Galgacus on the Grampian hills; and first fails round Britain. 96 St. John the
Evangelist wrote his revelation -- his Gospel in 97. 124 The Caledonians
reconquer from the Romans all the southern parts of Scotland; upon which the
Emperor Adrian builds a wall between Newcastle and Carlisle; but this also
proving ineffectual, Pollian Urbicus, the Roman general, about the year 144,
repairs Agricola's forts, which be joins by a wall four yards thick, since
called Anto^inus's wall. 136 The second Jewish war ends, when they were all
banished Judea. 139 Justin writes his first apology for the Christians. 140
Dublin built. 152 The Emperor Antoni^^s Plus shops the persecution against the
Christians. 211 The Emperor soverus, after having conquered the Scots, and pent
them up by a new wall between the Forth and Clyde (since called Graham's Dyhe)
having also conquered the Parthians in the East, and extended the Roman empire
to its utmost bounds, dies at York. 217 The Sept^^gint said to be found in a
cast. Church yards begin to be consecrated. 274 Silk first brought from India,
and the manufactory of it introduced into Europe 551. 3^3 The tenth general
persecution begins under Dioclesian and Galerius. ^^6 Constantine the Great
begins his reign. 308 C^^dinals first instituted. 313 The tenth persecution
ends by an edict of Constantine, who favors the Christians, and gives full
liberty to their religion. 325 The first general council at Nice, when 318
fathers attended against Arius, where was composed the famous Nicene Creed. 328
Constantine removes the sent of empire from Rome to Byzantium, which in thence
forward called Const^^tinople. 331 Constantine orders all the heathen temples
to be destroyed. 363 The Emperor Julius, forwarded the Apostate, endeavors in
rain to rebuild the temple of Jerusalem. 364 The Roman empire is divided into
the eastern (Constantinoble the capital) and western (of which Rome continued
to be the capital;) each being now under the government of different Emperors.
The Scots utterly defeated and driven out of their country by the Pists and
Romans. Marriage in Lent forbidden. 400 Rolls invented by bishop Panlinus of
Nola in Campagna. 404 The kingdom of Scotland revives under Fergus II. 410 Rome
taken and plundered by Ala^ic, King of the Goths. 412 The Vandals begin their
kingdom in Spain. 420 The kingdom of France begins upon the lower Rhine, under
Phara^^ond. Salique law confirmed by this monarch. 426 The Romans withdraw
their troops from Britain, and never return, advising the Britons to arm in
their own defense, and trust to their own valor. 432 St. Patrick began to
preach in Ireland: he died 17th March, 493, aged 100 years. 446 The Britons,
now left to themselves, are greatly harassed by the Scots and Picts; upon which
they once more make their complaint to the Romans, but receive no assistance
from that quarter. 447 Attila (surnamed the Scourge of God) with his Huns,
ravages the Roman empire. 449 Vortigern, King of the Britons, invites the
Saxoms into Britain against the Scots and Picts. 455 The Saxons having repulsed
the Scots and Picts, invite (...) more of their countrymen, and begin to
establish themselves in kent under (...) 476 The western empire entirely
destroyed; upon the ruins of which several new states arise in Italy and other
parts, consisting of Goths, Vandals, Huns, and other Barbartans; under whom
literature is extinguished, and the works of the learned are destroyed. 496
Clovis King of France baptined, and Christianity begins in that kingdom. 508
Prince Arthur begins his reign over the Britain. 510 Paris becomes the capital
of France. 516 The computing of time by the Christian era is introduced by
Dionysins the monk 529 The code of Justinian, the eastern Emperor, is
published. 557 A terrible plague all over Europe, Asia, and Africa, which
continues near 50 years. 581 Latin ceased to be spoken about this time in
Italy. 600 Bells first used in churches. 606 The power of the Popes begins by
the concessions of Phocas, Emperor of the East. 622 Mahomet flied from Mecca to
Medina in Arabia. His followers compute their time from this era, which in
Arabic is called Hegira, i. e. the Flight. 637 Jerusalem taken by the Saracens,
or followers of Maho^et. 640 Alexandria in Egypt is taken by the Saracens, and
the grand libeary there burned by order of Omar their caliph, or prince. 664
Glass invented in England by Benalt a monk. 670 Building with stone introduced
into England by Ben^et a monk. 685 The Britons totally expelled by the Saxons,
and driven into Wales and Cornwall. 696 Churches first begun to be bulk in
England. 723 The Saracens conquer Spain. Their progress slopped in France by
Charles Martel, in 732. 726 The controversy about images begins, and occasions
many insurrections in the Eastern empire. 748 The computing of years from the
birth of Christ begun to be used in history. 749 The race of Abbas become
caliphs of the Saracens, and encourage learning. 761 Thirty thousand books
burnt by order of the Emperor Lee 76^ The city of Bagdad upon the Tigris is
made the capital of the Saracen Empire. 786 The surplice, a vestment of the
Pagan priests, introduced into churches. 800 Charlemagne, King of France,
begins the empire of Germany, afterward called the western empire, and
endeavors in vain to restore learning in Europe. 828 Egbert King of Wessex
unites the Heptarchy by the name of England. 838 The Scots and Picts have a
decisive bottle, in which the former prevail, and both kingdoms are united by
Kennet, which begins the second period of the Scottish history. The Danes with
60 ships arrived at, and book Dublin. 867 The Danes begin their ravages in
England. 871 Bath Springs first discovered. 886 Juries first instituted. 896
Alfred the Great, after subduing the Danish invaders, composes his body of
laws: divides England into counties, boundrods, and tythings; erects country
courts, and founds the University of Oxford about this time. 915 The University
of Cambridge founded. 936 The Saracen Empire divided into seven kingdoms, by
usurpotion. 940 Christianity established in Denmark. 969 Christianity
established in Russia. 991 The figures in arithmetic are brought into Europe by
the Saracens, from Arabia. Letters of the Alphabet were hitherto used. 996 Otho
III, makes the Empire of Germany elective. 999 Boleslaus the first King of
Poland. 1000 Paper made of cotton rags comes into use, that of limen do. 1170.
1005 All the old churches are rebuilt about this time in a new style. 1014 On
Good Friday, April 23d, the famous bottle of Clontarf was sought, wherein the
Danes were completely defeated with a loss of 11,000 men, and driven out of
Ireland -- but the Irish King, Brian Boromy, was killed, aged 88. 1015 Children
forbidden by law to be sold by their parents in England. Priests forbidden to
marry. 1017 Canute, King of Denmark, gets possession of England. 1025 Musical
gamut invented. 1040 The Danes driven one of Scotland. 1041 The Saxon line
restored under Edward the confessor. 1043 The Turks become formidable, and take
possession of Persia. 1065 The Turks take Jerusalem from the seracens. 1066 The
bottle of Hastings fought, between Harold and William duke of No^^^andy, in
which Harold is conquered and stain: After which William becomes King of
England. 1070 William introduces the feudal law. 1075 Henry IV, Emperor of
Germany, and the Pope, quarrel about the nomination of the German bishops,
Henry, in (...), walks (...) to Roma, toward the end of January. 1076 Justices
of the peace first appointed in England. 1080 Doomsday book began to be
compiled by order of William, from a survey of all the estates in England, and
finished in 1086. The Tower of London built by the same prince, to curb his
English subjects; numbers of whom fly to Scotland, where they introduce the
Saxon or English language; are protected by Malcolm, and have lands given them.
1086 Kingdom of Bohemia begun. 1091 The Saracens in Spain, being hard pressed
by the Spaniards, call to their assistance Joseph King of Morocco; by which the
Moors get possession of all the Saracen dominions in Spain. 1096 The first
crusade to the Holy Land begun, to drive the inside^s from Jerusalem. 1107
King's speech first delivered by Henry 1. 1110 Edgar Atheling, the last of the
Saxon princes, dies in England, where he had been permitted to reside as a
subject. Learning revived in Cambridge 1118 The order of the Knights Templars
instituted to defend the Scpulchre at Jerusalem, and to protect Christian
strangers. 1140 King Stephen grants liberty to his nobles to build castles; in
consequence of which 1100 are erected in 14 years. 1151 The canon law collected
by Gratian, a monk of Bologna. 1163 London bridge, consisting of 19 small
arches, first built of stone. 1164 The Teutonic order of religious knights
begins in Germany. 1171 Dermot Mac Murrogh, prince of Leinster, being beaten
and put to slight by other princes, induces some English adventurers to land in
Ireland, and assist him in recovering his dominions: Dublin is besieged and
taken by Raymond le Gross. 1172 Henry II, lands at Waterford, and soon after
obtains from Richard E. Strongbow (who had married the daughter of Mac Murrogh,
and according to compact, succeeded to his dominions) a surrender of Dublin;
where he erects a pavilion of wicker work, and entertains several Irish
princes, who, voluntarily, submit to him, on condition of being governed by the
same laws, civil and ecclesiastical, and enjoying the same liberties and
immunities, as the people of England. Henry II, landed in Ireland, with 400
knights and 5000 men. 1173 The same king grants its first charter to Dublin;
and, by diverse privileges, encourages a colony from Bristol to settle in it.
1174 Henry II, creates his younger son, 12 years old, King or lord of Ireland,
who grants charters to the city of Dublin, and other corporations. 1180 Glass
windows began to be used in private houses in England. 1182 Pope Alexander III,
compelled the Kings of England and France to hold the stirrups of his saddle
when he mounted his horse. 1186 The great conjunction of the sun and moon and
all the planets in Libra, happened in September. 1192 The battle of Ascalon, in
Judea, in which Richard, King of England, defeats Saladine's army, consisting
of 300,000 combatants. Richard treacherously imprisoned in his way home by the
Emperor of germony 1194 Dieu et mon Droit, first used as a motto by Richard, on
a victory over the French. 1200 Chimnies were not known in England. Surnames
now began to be used; first among the nobility. 1208 London incorporated, and
obtained its first charter from King John. 1210 King John met in Dublin upwards
of 20 Irish princes, who swore allegiance to him, and there caused them to
establish the English laws and customs. 1215 Magna Charta is signed by King
John and the barons of England; and the following year it is granted to the
Irish by Henry III. 1217 The same prince grants the city of Dublin to the
citizens, in fee farm, at 200 marks per^annum. 1227 The Tartars, a new race of
barbarians, under Gingis Khan, emerge from the northern parts of Asia, conquer
the greatest part of that continent, and in 22 years destroy upwards of 14
millions of people. 1233 The inquisition, begun in 1204, is now trusted to the
Dominicans. The houses of London, and other cities in England, France, and
Germany, still thatched with straw. 1252 Magnifying glasses invented by Roger
Bacon. 1253 The famous astronomical tables are composed by Alonzo King of
Castile. 1258 The Tartars take Bagdad, which puts an end to the empire of the
Saracens. 1263 Acho, King of Norway, invades Scotland with 160 fail, and lands
20,000 men at the mouth of the Clyde, but most of them are cut to pieces by
Alexander III, who recovers the western isles. 1264 The commons of England have
a place in parliament. 1269 The Hamburgh company incorporated in England. 1273
The empire of the present Austrian family begins in Germany. 1280 Pulvis
fulminans and gun powder invented by Roger Bacon. 1282 Lewellyn, prince of
Wales, defeated and killed by Edward I, who unites that principality to
England. 1284 Edward 11, born at Carnarvon, is the first prince of Wales. 1285
Alexander III, King of Scotland dies, and that kingdom is disputed by twelve
candidates, who submit their claims to the arbitration of Edward King of
England: Which lays the foundation of a long and desolating war between the two
nations. Spectacles invented by Alexander Spina, a Spanish monk. 1293 There is
a regular succession of English parliaments from this year, being the and of
Edward I. 1298 The present Turkish empire begins in Bithynia under Ottoman.
Silver hasted knives, spoons, and cups, a great luxury. Splinters of wood
generally used for lights. Wine sold by apothecaries as a cordial. 1299
Windmills invented. 1300 About this time the mariner's compass was invented, or
improved, by John Gioia, or Goya, a Neapolitan. The flower de luce, the arms of
the duke of Anjou, then King of Naples, was placed by him at the point of the
needle, in compliment to that prince. 1307 The beginning of the Swise cantons.
Interest of money in England at 45 per cent. 1308 The Popes remove to Avignon
in France for 70 years. 1314 The battle of Bannockburn between Edward II, and
Robert Bruce, in which the English are overthrown with prodigious slaughter,
and all their boasted pretensions of sovereignty are utterly dissipated. 1320
Gold first coined in Christendom. 1335 Two Brabant weavers settle at York,
which, says Edward III, may prove of great benefit to us and our subjects. 1337
The first comet whose course is described with astronomical exactness. 1340
Gunpowder first suggested as useful for warlike purposes by Swartz, a monk of
Cologne; 1346, Edward III, had four pieces of cannon, which contributed to gain
him the battle of Cressy. Oil painting first made use of by John Vaneck. 1344
The first creation to titles by patent used by Edward III. 1349 The order of
the Garter instituted in England by Edward III. 1352 The Turks first enter
Europe. 1356 The battle of Porctiers, in which King John of France, and his
sons, are taken prisoners by Edward the Black Prince. 1357 Coals first brought
to London. 1358 Arms of England and France first quartered by Edward III. 1362
The law pleadings in England changed from French to English, as a favor of
Edward III, to his people. 1386 A company of linen weavers from the Netherlands
established in London. 1388 The battle of Otterburn between Hot^pur and the
earl of Douglas; on this is founded the ballad of Chevy Chase. Title of Baron
first given by Richard II. 1390 Coarse cloth first made in England at Kendal.
1391 Cards invented in France for the King's amusement. 1399 Westminster Abbey
rebuilt and enlarged. Order of the Bath instituted at the coronation of Henry
IV. 1402 Bajazet defeated by Tamerlane, and the power of the Turks almost
entirely destroyed. 1404 Hats for men invented at Paris by a Swiss. 1412
Denmark united with the crown of Norway. 1415 The battle of Agincourt, gained
over the French by Henry V, of England. 1416 The art of curing herrings
invented by William Boekel, a Dutchman: By which he rendered an essential
service to his country. 1428 The siege of Orleans. The celebrated Maid of
Orleans appears, and gives the first blow to the English power in France. She
is afterward taken prisoner, and basely put to death. 1430 Laurentius of
Haerlem invents the Art of Printing, which he practiced with separate wooden
types. Guttenburgh afterward invented cut metal types. Peter Schoeffer
invented the mode of casting types in matrices. But the most authentic accounts
ascribe the invention of Printing to Dr. Faust, or Faustus, in 1444. 1446 The
Vatican library founded at Rome. The sea broke in at Dort, and drowned 100,000
people. 1453 Constantinople taken by the Turks, which utterly overthrown the
Roman empire. 1454 Otto Guerick, a German, invents the air pump. Cape Verd
Isles first seen. Duelling appointed in certain cases in France, in order to
have the judgment of God. 1460 Engravings and etchings in copper invented. 1461
Decimal arithmetic invented, and the use of tangents in trigonometry
introduced, by Reg^omontanus. 147^ Greek language brought into France. 148^
Richard III, King of England, and last of the Plantagenets, is defeated and
killed at the battle of Bosworth, by Henry (Tudor) VII, which puts on end to
the civil wars between the houses of York and Lancaster. 1485 Great numbers
carried off by the sweating sickness. 1486 Henry establishes fifty yeomen of
the guards, the first standing army. 1489 Maps and sea charts first brought to
England by Earth. Columbus. 1491 William Grocyn publicly teaches the Greek
language at Oxford. The Moors, hitherto a formidable enemy to the native
Spaniards, are entirely subdued by Ferdinand, and become subjects of that
prince on certain conditions; but are cruelly persecuted by the inquisitors.
1492 AMERICA discovered by Columbus. 1494 Algebra first known in Europe. 1497
The Portuguese first sail to the East Indies by the Cape of Good Hope. South
America discovered by Americus Vespusins, from whom the continent unjustly
takes its name. North America discovered by Cabot. 1500 Maximilian divides the
empire of Germany into six circles. Brasil discovered by Cabral. 150^ Mines
used in the attack and defense of places, invented. 1509 Gardening introduced
into England from the Netherlands, from whence vegetables were imported
hitherto. 1512 Florida discovered. 1513 The battle of Flowden, in which James
IV, of Scotland, is killed, with the flower of his nobility. 1517 Martin Luther
began the Reformation. Egypt conquered by the Turks. 1518 Magellan, in the
service of Spain, discovers the straits which bear his name, makes the first
voyage round the world, but is killed by savages in the Marianne islands.
Republic of Geneva founded. 1520 Henry VIII, for his writings in favor of
Popery, receives the title of "Defender of the Faith" from the Pope. Chocolate
first brought from Mexico by the Spaniards. 1529 The name of Protestant takes
its rise from the Reformed protesting against the church of Rome, at the diet
of Spires in Germany. 1530 Copernicus revives the Pythagorean system of
astronomy. 1533 Current trees brought into England from Zante. 1537 Religious
houses dissolved by Henry VIII. 1539 The first English edition of the Bible
authorized, the present translation finished 1611. About this time cannon began
to be used in ships. 1543 Silk stockings first worn by the French king. Pins
first used in England; before which time the ladies used skewers. 1544 Good
lands let in England at one shilling per acre. 1545 The famous council of Trent
begins, and continues 18 years. 1546 Interest of money first established in
England by law at ten per cent. Ann Ascue, a Protestant, cruelly tortured by
order of Henry VIII, who, to the utter disgrace of royalty, put his own hands
to the rack, as not thinking the executioner sufficiently expert. She endured
every thing with patience, and was afterward burnt. 1549 Lords lieutenants of
counties instituted in England. 1550 Cherries, pears, etc. introduced into
England. 1553 Circulation of the blood through the lungs first published by
Michael Servetus. 1557 Groats and half groats the greatest silver coin in
England. 1560 Siberia was about this time discovered, under the reign of the
Czar Ivan Basilides. 1563 Knives first made in England. The 39 articles of the
English faith established. 1565 Botany revived at Thuringe in Germany. Potatoes
first brought to Ireland from New Spain. Henry Lord Darnly, husband to Queen
Mary of Scotland, blown up with gunpowder in the Provost's house at Edinburgh,
about two in the morning of Feb. 11. 1569 Royal Exchange, of London, first
built. Circulation of the blood published by Cisalpinus. Mary Queen of
Scotland, driven from her kingdom by the rebellion of her subjects, flies to
Queen Elizabeth for protection, by whom she is treacherously imprisoned. 1571
Printing in Irish characters first instituted. 1572 The great massacre of
Protestants at Paris. 1573 Marby hill in Hereford removed of itself. 1578
Apricots and artichokes introduced into England. 1579 The Dutch shake off the
Spanish yoke, and the republic of Holland begins. English East India company
incorporated -- established 1600. English Turkey company incorporated. 1580 Sir
Francis Drake returns from his voyage round the world, being the first English
circumnavigator. 1581 J. Usher, Archbishop of Armagh, born in Dublin, drew up
104 articles of religion for Ireland, 1615: which were established, 1635. --
Died. 1636. 1582 Pope Gregory introduces the New Style in Italy; the 5th
October being counted 15. 1583 Tobacco first brought from Virginia into
England. 1587 Mary Queen of Scots is beheaded by order of Elizabeth, after 18
years imprisonment. Duelling introduced into England. 1588 The Spanish Armada
destroyed by Drake and other English Admirals. Henry IV, passes the edict of
Nantz, tolerating the Protestants. The manufactory of paper introduced into
England at Dartford. 1589 Coaches first introduced into England. Bombs invented
at Venlo. 1591 Trinity college, Dublin, founded. 1597 Watches first brought
into England from Germany. 1600 Building with brick introduced into England by
the earl of Arundel, most of the houses in London being hitherto built with
wood. 1602 Decimal arithmetic invented at Bruges. 1603 Queen Elizabeth (the
last of the Tudors) dies, and nominates James VI. of Scotland (and first of the
Stuarts) as her successor: which unites both kingdoms under the name of Great
Britain. 1605 The Gunpowder Plot discovered at Westminster. Kepler lays the
foundation of the Newtonian system of attraction. 1606 Oaths of allegiance
first administered in England. 1608 Galileo, of Florence, first discovers the
satellites about the planet Jupiter by the telescope, then just invented in
Holland. -- Quebec settled by the French. 1610 Henry IV, is murdered at Paris
by Ravilliac, a priest. Virginia and Newfoundland settled by the English.
Hudson's Bay discovered by a Captain of that name, who is left by his men to
perish on that desolate coast. 1611 Baronets first created in England by James
I. 1614 Napier, of Marcheston, in Scotland, invents the logarithms. Sir Hugh
Middleton brings the New River to London from Ware. The custom of powdering the
hair took its rise from some ballad singers at St. German's fair, who powdered
themselves to look the more ridiculous. New York and New Jersey settled by the
Dutch. 1618 New Holland discovered by the Dutch. 1619 Dr. W. Harvey, an
Englishman, fully confirms the doctrine of the circulation of the blood. 1620
The broad silk manufactory from raw silk introduced into England. 1623 New
Hampshire settled by an English colony. Plymouth in New England planted by a
part of Mr. Robinson's congregation. 1625 The island of Barbados, the first
English settlement in the West Indies, is planted. 1626 The barometer invented
by Torricelli. 1627 The thermometer invented by Drebellius. A colony of Swedes
settled on Delaware river, Pennsylvania. 1630 Peruvian bark first brought to
France. 1631 Newspapers first published at Paris. 1632 The battle of Lutzen, in
which Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, and head of the Protestants in
Germany, is killed. 1633 Maryland settled by Lord Baltimore, with a colony of
Roman Catholics. 1635 Connecticut and Rhode Island settled. 1638 Harvard
College in Cambridge, Massachusetts, established. 1640 King Charles disobliges
his Scottish subjects; on which their army under General L^sley, enters
England, and takes Newcastle, being encouraged by the mal^contents in England.
The massacre in Ireland, when 40,000 English Protestants were killed. 1642
Civil war begins in England. 1646 Episcopacy abolished in England. Sympathetick
powder made known by Sir K^nelm Digby. 1647 The first Sck^ographick maps made
by Hevelius. 1649 Charles I, beheaded at Whitehall, January 30, aged 49. 1652
The first coffee house in London. The speaking trumpet invented by Kircher, a
Jesuit. 1654 Crom well assumes the Protectorship. 1655 The English, under
Admiral Penn, take Jamaica from the Spaniards. 1658 Crom well dies, and is
succeeded in the Protectorship by his son Richard. 1659 Transfusion of the
blood first suggested at Oxford. 1660 King Charles II, is restored by Monk,
commander of the army, after an exile of twelve years in France and Holland.
Episcopacy restored in England and Scotland. The people of Denmark being
oppressed by the Nobles, surrender their privileges to Fred. III, who becomes
absolute. 1662 The Royal Society established in London by Charles II. Pendulum
Clocks invented by John Fromentel, a Dutchman. Fire engines invented. 1665 The
plague rages in London. 1666 The great fire of London began, Sept. 2, and
continued three days, in which were destroyed 13,000 houses and 400 streets.
Tea first used in England. Academy of sciences established in France. 1667 The
peace of Breda, which confirms to the English the New Netherlands, now known by
the names of Pennsylvania, New York, and New Jersey. 1669 South Carolina
planted by an English colony under Governor Sail. 1670 The English Hudson's
Bay Company incorporated. 1671 Academy of Architecture established in France.
1672 Lewis XIV, overruns g^^^t part of Holland, when the Dutch open their
sluices, being determined to drown their country, and retire to their
settlements in the East Indies. African company established. 1673 St. Helena
taken by the English. 1675 Coffee houses shut up by proclamation, as
encouragers of sedition. 1676 Repeating clocks and watches invented by Barlow.
1678 The peace of N^meguen. The habeas corpus act passed. 1679 Darkness at
London, that one could not read at noon day, January 12. 1680 A great comet
appeared, and continued visible from Nov. 3, to March 9. 1681 William Penn, a
Quaker, receives a charter for planting Pennsylvania. Pennsylvania settled.
1682 College of physicians, at Edinburgh, incorporated. Royal academy
established at Nismes. 1683 India stock sold from 360 to 500 per cent. 1685 The
duke of Monmouth, natural son to Charles II, raises a rebellion, but is
defeated at the battle of Sedgemoor, and beheaded. The edict of Nantz
infamously revoked by Lewis XIV, and the Protestants cruelly persecuted. 1687
The palace of Versailles, near Paris, finished by Lewis XIV. 1688 The
Revolution in Great Britain begins, Nov. 5, King James retires to France,
December 3. 1689 King William and Queen Mary, daughter and son in law to James
II, are proclaimed February 16. Viscount Dundee stands out for James in
Scotland, but is killed after gaining the battle of Killycrankie, upon which
the Highlanders disperse. The land tax passes in England. The toleration act
passes in ditto. 1690 The battle of the Boyne, gained by William against James,
in Ireland. 1691 The war in Ireland finished, by the surrender of Limerick to
William. 1692 The English and Dutch fleets, commanded by Admiral Russel,
defeated the French sleet off La Hogue. 1693 Bayonets at the end of loaded
muskets first used by the French. The duchy of Hanover made the ninth
electorate. Bank of England established by King William. The first public
lottery was drawn this year. Stamp duties instituted in England. 1695 Bank of
Scotland established. 1696 The peace of Ryswick. 1697 Malt tax established.
1699 The Scots settled a colony at the isthmus of Darien, in America, and
called it Caledonia. 1700 Charles XII, of Sweden, begins his reign. Yale
College established at Saybrook, Connecticut -- removed to New Haven 1716. 1701
Prussia elected into a kingdom. Cottonian library settled for public benefit.
Society for the propagation of the Gospel in foreign parts established. 1702
King William dies, aged 50, and is succeeded by Queen Ann, daughter to James
II, who, with the Emperor and States General, renews the war against France and
Spain. 1704 Gibraltar taken from the Spaniards by Admiral Rooke. The battle of
Blenheim, won by the Duke of Marlborough and allies against the French. The
Court of Exchequer instituted in England. Prussian blue discovered at Berlin.
1706 The Treaty of Union betwixt England and Scotland, signed June 22. 1707 The
first British parliament. 1708 Mino^^a taken from the Spaniards by General
Stanhope. The battle of Oudenarde won by Marlborough and the allies. Sardinia
erected into a kingdom, and given to the Duke of Savoy. 1709 Peter the Great,
Czar of Muscovy, defeats Charles XII, at Pultowa, who slies to Turkey. 1710
Queen Anne changes the Whig Ministry for others more favorable to the interest
of her brother, the late Pretender. The cathedral church of St. Paul, London,
rebuilt by Sir Christopher Wren, in 37 years, at one million expense, by a duty
on coals. The English South Sea Company ^egan. 1713 The peace of U^^cht,
whereby Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, New Britain, and Hudson's Bay, in North
America, were yielded to Great Britain; Gibraltar and Mino^ca, in Europe, were
also confirmed to the said crown by this treaty. 1714 Queen Anne dies* at the
age of 50, and is succeeded by George I. Interest reduced to five per cent* in
England. 1715 Lewis XIV* dies, and is succeeded by his great grandson Lewis XV.
The rebellion in Scotland begins in September, under the Earl of Mar, in favor
of the Pretender. The action of Sheriffmuir, and the surrender of Preston, both
in November, when the rebels disperse. 1716 Au^ora Borealis first taken notice
of in England -- 1719 in New England. The Pretender married to the Princess
Sobieski, grand daughter to John Sobieski, late King of Poland. An act passed
for septennial parliaments. 1719 The Mississippi scheme at its height in
France. Lombe's silk throwing machine, containing 26,586 wheels, erected at
Derby; takes up one eighth of a mile; one water wheel moves the rest; and in 24
hours it works 318,504,960 yards of organzine silk thread. The South Sea scheme
in England begun April 7, was at its height at the end of June, and quite sunk
about September 29. 1727 King George dies, in the 68th year of his age; and is
succeeded by his only son, George II. Inoculation first tried on criminals with
success. Russia, formerly a dukedom, is now established as an empire. 1728
North Carolina settled about this time. 1729 Parliament sat at the Blue coat
hospital, Dublin, where an attempt was made to obtain the supplies for 21
years; but rejected by a majority of One. 1731 The first person executed in
Britain for forgery. 1732 Kouh Khan usurps the Persian throne, conquers the
Mogul empire, and returns with two hundred and thirty one millions sterling.
Several public spirited gentlemen begin the settlement of Georgia, one of the
United States of America. 1736 Captain Port^^^^, having ordered his soldiers to
fire upon the populace, at the execution of a smuggler, is himself hanged by
the mob at Edinburgh. 1737 The earth proved to be flatted toward the poles.
1738 Westminster bridge, consisting of fifteen arches, begun; finished in 1750,
at the expense of 389,000l. defrayed by parliament. 1739 Letters of marque
issued out in Britain against Spain, July 21, and war declared October. 23.
1742 The first ship with Irish coals arrived at Dublin from Newry. 1743 The
battle of Dettingen won by the English and allies, in favor of the Queen of
Hungary. 1744 War declared against France. Commodore Anson returns from his
voyage round the world. 1745 The rebellion breaks out in Scotland, and the
Pretender's army defeated by the Duke of Cumberland. -- Culloden, April 16,
1746. 1746 British Linen Company erected. Electric shock discovered. Li^^^ and
Callao swallowed up by (...). 1748 The peace of Aix la Chapel^e, by which a
restitution of all places taken during the war was to be made on all sides.
Halifax, in Nova Scotia, built. 1749 The interest of the British funds reduced
to three per cent. British herring fishery incorporated. Dublin Society
incorporated by charter. 1751 Antiquarian Society at London incorporated. 1752
The new style introduced into Great Britain; the third of September being
counted the fourteenth. Identify of electric fire and lightning discovered by
Dr. Franklin, who thereupon invented a method of securing buildings from
thunder storms. 1753 The British Museum erected at Montague house. Society of
Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce, instituted in London. 1755 Lisbon destroyed
by an earthquake. 1756 One hundred and forty six Englishmen are confined in the
black hole at Calcutta, in the East Indies, by order of the Nabob, and 123
found dead next morning. Marine Society established at London. 1759 General
Wolse is killed in the battle of Quebec, which is gained by the English. 1760
Black Friars bridge, consisting of nine arches, begun; finished 1770, at the
expense of 152,840l. to be discharged by a toll. George II dies, and is
succeeded by George III. 1762 War declared against Spain. Peter III, Emperor of
Russia, is deposed, imprisoned, and murdered. American philosophical society
established in Philadelphia. 1763 The definitive treaty of peace between Great
Britain, France, Spain, and Portugal, concluded at Paris, February 10, which
confirmed to Great Britain the extensive provinces of Canada, East and West
Florida, and part of Louisiana, in North America; also the Islands of Grenada,
St. Vincent, Dominica, and Tobago, in the West Indies. 1764 The parliament
granted 10,000l. to Mr. Harrison, for his discovery of the longitude by has
time piece. 1769 George III's royal charter passed for incorporating the
society of artists. The famous stamp act passed in the British Parliament March
23. Repealed March 1^, 1766. Grand canal adjoining the city basin, Dublin,
begun; completed to mo^astereven in 1786. 1766 A great spot passed the s^n's
center. Gibraltar almost destroyed by a storm. 1768 Academy of painting
established in London. The Turks imprison the Russian Ambassador, and declare
war against that empire. Duration of Irish parliaments limited to eight years.
1769 Electricity of the aurora borealis discovered by Wideburg at Je^^. 1770
Massacre at Boston, March 5. 1771 Dr. Solander and Mr. Banks, in his Majesty's
ship the Endeavor, Lieutenant Cook, return from a voyage round the world,
having made several important discoveries. 1772 The King of Sweden changes the
constitution of that kingdom. A dreadful fire at Antigua. Twelve hundred and
forty people killed in the island of Java by an electrified cloud. A revolution
in Denmark. The Emperor of Germany, Empress of Russia, and the King of Prussia,
strip the King of Poland of great part of his dominions, which they divide
among themselves, in violation of the most solemn treaties. 1773 Capt. Phipps
is sent to explore the North Pole; but having made eighty one degrees* is in
danger of being locked up by the ice, returns. The Jesuits expelled from the
Pope's dominions, and suppressed by his bull. The English East India Company
having, by conquest or treaty, acquired the extensive provinces of Bengal,
Orixa, and ^^har, containing fifteen millions of inhabitants, great
irregularities are committed by their servants abroad, upon which the British
government interferes, and sends out judges, etc. The war between the Russians
and Turks proves disgraceful to the latter, who lose the islands in the
Archipelago, and by sea are every where unsuccessful. Tea, 340 chests,
destroyed at Boston. 1774 Peace proclaimed between the Russians and Turks. The
British parliament having passed an act, laying a duty of three pence per pound
upon all teas imported into America; the colonies, considering this as a
grievance, deny the right of the British parliament to tax them. Boston Port
Bill passed March 25. Deputies from the several American colonies (...) at
Philadelphia, a^ the first general congress, October 16. First petition of
Congress to the King, November. 1775 April 19. The first action happens in
America between the British troops and the Americans at Lexington. Ticonderoga
and Crown Point taken by Colonels Allen and (...). A dreadful fire in Grenada;
loss computed at 500,000l. Paper money issued by Congress. June 17, A bloody
action at B^^ker's Hill between the British troops and the Americans, in which
the brave General Warren was ^^in. Charlestown burnt. Battle of Quebec, where
fell the brave Montgomery, December 31st. 1776 March 17, The town of Boston
(...) by the King's troops. An unsuccessful attempt in July, made by Commodore
Sir Peter Parker and Lieutenant General Clinton, upon Charleston in South
Carolina. Order for calling in all the light gold, and ordering it for the
future to pass only by weight. Congress declare the American colonies free and
independent States, July 4. The Americans retreat from Long Island, in August,
after a bloody (...), and the city of New York is afterward taken Possession
of by the King's troops. December 25, General Washington taken 900 of the (...)
prisoners at (...). Torture abolished in Poland. Battle of Brandy wine. 1777
General H^ we takes possession of Philadelphia, September. Lieutenant General
Burgoyne is obliged to surrender his army, consisting of 5752 men to the
American Generals Gates and Arnold, October 17. 1778 A treaty of alliance
concluded at Paris between the French King and the thirteen United American
States, in which their independence i^ acknowledged by the Court of France,
February 6. The remains of the Earl of (...) (...) at the public expense in
Westminster Abbey, June 9* in consequence of a (...) of parliament. The Earl of
Carlisle, William Eden, Esquire and George Johnstone, Esquire arrived at Philadelphia
the beginning of June, (...) (...) for (...) (...) between Great Britain and
America. 1778 Philadelphia evacuated by the King's troops, June 18. Battle at
Monmouth. The Congress refuse to treat with the British commissioners. Dominica
taken by the French, September 7. Pondicherry surrenders to the arms of Great
Britain, October 17. St. Lucia taken by the French, December 28. 1779 St.
Vincent taken by the French. Grenada taken by the French, July 3. Battle at
Stony Point, July 15. October 12. Both Houses of the Irish Parliament address
the King for a free trade. 1780 Torture in courts of justice abolished in
France. The inquisition abolished in the Duke of Modena's dominions. Admiral
Rodney takes twenty two sail of Spanish ships. Jan. 8. The Admiral also engages
a Spanish fleet under the command of Don Juan de La^gara, near Cape St.
Vincent, and takes fire ships of the line, one more driven on shore, and
another blown up, Jan. 16. Three actions between Admiral Rodney and the Count
de Guichen, in the West Indies, in the months of April and May; but none of
them decisive. Charleston, South Carolina, surrenders to Sir Henry Clinton, May
4. Pensacola, and the whole province of West Florida, surrender to the arms of
the King of Spain, May 9. The Protestant Association, to the number of 50,000,
go up to the House of Commons with their petition for the repeal of an act
passed in favor of the Catholics. That event followed by the most daring riots
in the cities of London and Southwark, for several successive days, in which
some Popish chapels are destroyed, together with the prisons of Newgate, the
King's Bench, the Fleet, several private houses, etc. These alarming riots are
at length suppressed by the interposition of the military, and many of the
rioters tried and executed for felony. Five English Fast Indiamen, and fifty
English merchant ships bound for the West Indies, taken by the combined fleets
of France and Spain, August 8* Earl Cornwalli, obtains a victory over General
Gates, near Camden, in South Carolina, August 16. Arnold, the infamous traitor,
deserts the service of his country, escapes to New York, and is made a
Brigadier General in the British Service, September 24. -- Burns New London.
Major Andre, Adjutant General to the British army, hanged as a spy at Tappan,
in the State of New York, October ^. The Hon. Henry Laurens is committed
prisoner to the Tower on a charge of high treason, October 4. Dreadful
hurricanes in the West Indies, by which great devastation is made in Jamaica,
Barbados, St. Lucia, Dominica, and other islands, October 3, and 10. A
declaration of hostilities published against Holland, December 20. First Irish
State Lottery drawn. American an Academy of Arts and Sciences instituted in
Massachusetts. 1781 The Dutch island of St. Eustatia taken by Admiral Rodney
and General Vaughan, February 3. Retaken by the French, November 27. The ^sland
of sobago taken by the French, June 2. A bloody engagement fought between an
English Squadron under the command of Admiral Parker, and a Dutch Squadron
under the command of Admiral Zo^tman, off the Dogger Bank, August 5. The
Marqu^s La Fayette, at the head of 1000 light infantry, performs important
services in Virginia. Earl Cornwa^^s, with the British army under his command,
surrendered prisoners of war to the American and French troops, under the
command of General Washington and Count Rochanibeau, at Yorktown, in Virginia,
Oct. 19 which decaded the contest in favor of America. Continental paper money
ceased to circulate. 1782 Tri^co^ale, on the island of Ceylon, taken by Admiral
Hughes, Jan.11. Mi^^^ca surrendered to the arms of the King of Spain, Feb. ^.
The Island of St. Christopher taken by the French, Feb. 12. The Island of
Nevis, in the West Indies, taken by the French, Feb. 14. Montserrat taken by
the French, Feb. ^^. The British House^ of Commons address the King against any
farther prosecution o^ offensive war on the continent of North America, March
4; and resolve, that the House would consider all those as enemies to his
Majesty and this country, who should advise, or by any means attempt, the
further prosecution of offensive war on the continent of North America, for the
purpose of reducing the revolted colonies to obedience by force. Admiral Rodney
obtains a victory over the French fleet under the command of Count de Grass,
whom he takes prisoner, near Dominica, in the West Indies. April 6. The
Parliament of Ireland asserted its independence and constitutional rights. The
bill to repeal the declaratory act of George I, relative to the legislation of
Ireland, received the royal assent, June 20. The first great Dungan^on meeting
of Delegates from the Irish Ulster Volunteers, held February 15. The French
took and destroyed the forts and settlements in Hudson's Bay, August 24. The
Spaniards defeated in their grand attack on Gibraltar, September 13. Treaty
concluded between the republic of Holland and the United States of America,
October 8. Provisional articles of peace singed at Paris between the British
and American commissioners, by which the United American colonies are
acknowledged by his Britannic Majesty to be free, sovereign and independent
states, November 30. 1783 Preliminary articles of peace between his Britannic
Majesty and the Kings of France and Spain, singed at Versailles, Jan. 20. Three
earthquakes at Calabria Ulterior and Sicily, destroying a great number of towns
and inhabitants, Feb. 5, 7, and 28th. Armistice between Great Britain and
Holland, Feb. 10. Ratification of the definitive treaty of peace between Great
Britain, France, Spain, and the United States of America, Sept. 3. The fire
balloon invented by M. Montgol^^er of Lions; from which discovery Messrs.
Charles and Robert of Paris taking the hint, construct inflammable gas, or the
air balloon. Courts of justice in England and Ireland separated by a British
act of Parliament. The bank of Ireland, established by act of Parliament,
opened 25th June. A convention of representatives from all the Volunteer Corpse
of Ireland held in the Rotunda, Dublin, for promoting a Parliamentary Reform,
10th Nov. 1784 The city of London wait on the King with an address of thanks
for dismissing the coalition ministry, Jan. 16. The Great Seal stolen from the
Lord Chancellor's house in Great Ormond street, March 24. The definitive treaty
of peace between Great Britain and Holland, May 24. Mr. Lunardi ascended in an
air balloon from the Artillery ground, Moorfields; the first attempt of the
kind in England, September 15. 1785 A Congress of Representatives from the
Counties of Ireland held in Dublin, for promoting a Parliamentary Reform,
January 20. 1786 Commissioners from several of the United States assembled at
Annapolis, Maryland, to consult what measures should be taken to unite the
States in some general and efficient system. Insurrection in Massachusetts.
Charles River Bridge completed, connecting Boston and Charlestown, at the
expense of 15,000l. The King of Sweden prohibited the use of torture in his
kingdom. 1787 The articles of Confederation, originally entered into by the
United States, being found essentially defective, a general Convention of
Delegates from all the States, except Rhode Island, was held at Philadelphia,
this summer, with General Washington at their head, for the purpose of framing
a general plan of government for the United States. And after four months
deliberation, fixed on our present excellent constitution, which has since been
ratified by all the States. 1788 George Washington was unanimously elected
President of the United States, and John Adams, Vice President. 1789 Congress
met at New York for the first time under the new Constitution, March. 4. April
30. George Washington was, in due form, publicly invested with the office of
President of the United States of America. July 14. Revolution in France --
capture of the ^^stile. 1790 Grand French Confederation in the Champ de Mars.
1791 Seven islands discovered in the South Pacific Ocean, between the Marquesas
and the Equator, by Capt. Joseph Ingraham, of Boston. First Folio and royal
Quarto Bibles printed in America, at Worcester, Massachusetts -- Small Quarto,
at Trenton, Newjersey. 1792 A bridge was built over Mernma^k River between
Newbury and Salisbury. 1792 August. The Marquis la Fayette, General of the
armies of France, who was the friend, and had served in the army of the United
States; was a promoter of the French revolution, and firmly attached to the new
Constitution of Iris country, accused of treason, and a price being set on his
head, he quitted the army, and kingdom of France, with 12 officers of rank; who
were all taken prisoners by the Prussians, and the Marquis is now in close
confinement in the castle of Magdeburg, once the residence of the celebrated
Trenck. 1793 January. Trial of Louis 16th, King of France, commenced; the
National Assembly, consisting of 745 members, of whom, 25 being absent, and the
opinions of those present, taken, it was decreed by 480 (forming a majority)
that the execution should take place, without an appeal nominal to the people
-- the remaining number voted for punishment under various restrictions --
Agreeably to the voice of the majority, be was beheaded the 21st January.
February 5. Declaration of War, against the Combined Powers of Great Britain,
Holland, etc. issued by the National Assembly of France. April. The President
of the United States, issued his Proclamation, for the purposes of enjoining an
impartial conduct on the part of the United States toward the belligerent
powers, and of observing a strict neutrality.

MEN OF LEARNING AND GENIUS.
N. B. By the Dates is implied the Time when the Writers died; but taken that
Period happens not to be known, the Age in which they flourished is signified
by fl.
Bef. Christ. 907 HOMER, the first profane writer and Greek poet, flourished.
He^^od, the Greek poet, supposed to have lived near the time of Homer. 884
Ly^urgus, the Spartan lawgiver. 600 Sappho, the Greek Lyric poetess, fl. 558
Solon, lawgiver of Athens. 556 AEsop, the first Greek fabulist. 548 Thales, the
first Greek astronomer and geographer. 497 Pythagoras, founder of the
Pythagorean philosophy in Greece. 478 Confucius, the Chinese Philosopher. 474
Anacreon, the Greek lyric poet. 456 AEschylus, the first Greek tragic poet. 435
Pindar, the Greek lyric poet. 413 Herodotus, of Greece, the first writer of
profane history. 407 Aristophanes, the Greek comic poet, fl. Euripides, the
Greek tragic poet. 406 Sophocles, ditto. 400 Socrates, the founder of moral
Philosophy in Greece. 391 Thucydides, the Greek historian. 361 Hippocrates, the
Greek physician. Democritus, the Greek philosopher. 350 Xenophon, ditto, and
historian. 348 Plato, the Greek philosopher, and disciple of Socrates. 336
Isocrates, the Greek orator. 332 Aristotle, the Greek philosopher, and disciple
of Plato. 313 Demosthenes, the Athenian orator poisoned himself. 288
Theophrastus, the Greek philosopher, and scholar of Aristotle. 285 Theocritus,
first Greek pastoral poet, fl. 277 Euclid. of Alexandria, in Egypt, the
mathematician, fl. 270 Epicurus, founder of the Epicurean philosophy in Greece.
268 Berosus, the Chaldea^ historian. 264 Zeno, founder of the stoic philosophy
in Greece. 244 Callimachus, the Greek elegiac poet. 208 Archimedes, the Greek
geometrician. 184 Plautus, the Roman comic poet. 179 Ennius, the Roman poet.
159 Terence, of Carthage, Latin comic poet. 155 Diogenes, of Babylon, stoic
philo^o. 124 Polybius, of Greece, the Greek and Roman historian. 54 Lucretius,
the Roman poet. 44 Julius Caesar, the Roman historian and commentator, killed.
Diodorus Siculus, of Greece, the universal historian, fl. Vitruvius, the Roman
architect, fl. 43 Cicero, the Roman orator and philosopher, put to death.
Cornelius Nepos, Roman biographer, fl. 34 Sallust, the Roman historian. 30
Dionysius of Halicarnassus, the Roman historian, fl. 19 Virgil, the Roman epic
poet. 11 Catullus, Tibullus, and Propertius, Roman poets. 8 Horace, Roman lyric
and satiric poet. Aft. Christ. 17 Livy, the Roman historian. 19 Ovid, the Roman
elegiac poet. 20 Celsus, the Romans philoso. and physi. fl. 23 St^abo, the Greek
geographer. 33 Phaedrus, the Roman fabulist. 45 Pa^erculus, the Roman
historian, fl. 62 Persius, the Roman satiric poet. 64 Quintus Curtius, a Roman,
historian of Alexander the Great, fl. 64 Seneca, of Spain, the philosopher and
tragic poet, put to death. 65 Lucan, the Roman epic poet, ditto. 79 Pliny the
elder, the Roman natural historian. 93 Josephus, the Jewish historian. 94
E^ictetus, the Greek ^^oic philosopher. fl. 95 Quintilian, Roman orator and
advocate. 96 Statius, the Roman epic poet. 98 Lucius Florus, of Spain, the
Roman historian, fl. 99 Tacitus, the Roman historian. 104 Martial of Spain,
epigrammatic poet. Valerius Flaccus, the Roman epic poet. 116 Pliny the
younger, historical letters. 117 Suetonius, the Roman historian. 11^ Plutarch
of Greece, the biographer. 128 Juvenal, the Roman satiric poet. 140 Ptolemy,
the Egyptian geographer, mathematician, and astronomer, fl. 150 Justin, the
Roman historian, fl. 161 Arrian, the Roman historian and philosopher, fl. ^67
Justin, of Samaria, the oldest Christian author after the Apostles. 180 Lucian,
the Roman philologer. Marcus Aur. Antoninus, Roman Emperor and philosopher. 193
Galen, the Greek philosopher and physician. 200 Diogenes Laertius, Greek
biograph. fl. 229 Dion Cassius, of Greece, the Roman historian, fl. 254 Origin,
Christian father of Alexandria. Herodian, of Alexandria, the Roman historian,
fl. 258 Cyprian, of Carthage, suffered ^^rtyrd. 273 Longinus the Greek orator,
put to death by Aurelian. 320 Lactantius, a father of the church, fl. 336
Arius, a priest of Alexandria, founder of the sect of Aria^s. 342 Eusebius, the
ecclesiastical historian and chronologer. 379 Basil, bishop of Caesarea. 389
Gregory Nazienzen, bish. of Constan. 395 Claudian, the Roman poet. fl.
Heliodorus, Phaenicia, AEthiopicks, etc. 397 Ambrose, bishop of Milan. 415
Macrobius, the Roman grammarian. 428 Eutropius, the Roman historian. 524
Boethius, the Roman poet and platonic philosopher. 529 Procopius, of Caesarea,
the Roman historian.

MODERN AUTHORS.
73^ Bid, a priest of Northumberland; history of the Saxons, Scots, etc. 901
King Alfred; history, philosophy. 980 Avicenna, the Mohammedan philosopher and
physician. 1118 Anna Comnena; Alexiad, or life of her father Emperor Ale^^us
Comnen^^^. 1206 Averroes, Corduba, the Arabian philosopher. 1259 Matthew Paris,
monk of St. Alban's; history of England. 1292 Roger Bacon, Somersetshire;
natural philosophy. 1321 Dante, Florence; poetry. 1374 Petratch, Arezzo in
Italy; poetry. 1376 Boccace, Tuscany; the Decameron, poems, etc. 1400 Chaucer,
London; the father of English poetry. 1481 Platina, Italy; Lives of the Popes,
etc. 1502 Montaigne, Perigord in France; essays. 1509 Philip de Comines,
Flanders; historical memoirs. 1517 Martin Luther, the Great Reformer, fl. John
Calvin, do. do. fl. 1530 Machiavel, Florence; politics, comedies, etc. 1534
Ariosto, Lombardy; Orlando Furicso, and five comedies. 1535 Sir Thomas Moore,
London; history, politics, etc. 1536 Eras^^^, Rotterdam; Colloquies, Praise of
Folly, etc. 1540 Gui^ciardini, Florence; history of Italy. 1543 Coper^^cus,
Thor^ in Prussia; astronomy. 1549 Michael de Cer^antes S^^vedra, Alcala in
Spain; Don Qui^^^, etc. 1552 John Leland, London; lives and antiquities. 1566
H^^bal Caro, Civita N^ova; poems and tran^^^tions. Vid^, Cremona; art of
poetry, and other didactic poems. 156^ Roger Ascha^, Yorkshire; philology. 1578
Rev. John Knox, the Scots reformer; history of the church of Scotland. 1579
Camo^ns, Lisbon; the Lusi^d, an epic poem. 1582 George Buchanan,
D^^b^rtonshire; history of Scotland, psalms of David, politics, etc. 1590
Davila, ^sle of Cyprus; history of the civil wars of France. 1595 Torquato
Tasso, Italy: Jerusalem delivered, an epic poem, A^inta, etc. 1598 Edmund
Spencer, London; ^a^^y Queen. and other poems. 1600 Rev. Richard Hooker,
Exeter; Ecclesiastical Polity. 1605 U^ysses Aldro^and^s, B^logna; natural
history. 16^8 Mendez, Casule; history of China, fl. 1610 Richard Knolle^,
Northamptonshire; history of the Turks. 1612 Battista Guarini, Ferrara; the
Faithful Shepherd, a pastoral poem. 16^5-25 Beaumont and Fletcher; 35 dramatic
pieces. 1616 Wm. Shakespeare, Stratford; 42 tragedies and comedies. 1622 Johu
Napier, Marcheston, Scotland; Inventor of logarithms. 1623 William Camden,
London; history and antiquities. Father Paul Sarpi. Venice; history of the
Council of Trent, Rights of Sovereigns and Subjects, letters, etc. 1624 John
Mariana, Castile; history of Spain. 1625 John Baptist Marino, Naples; poetry.
1626 Lord Chancellor Bacon, London; philosophy and literature in general. 1627
Lewis de Congora, Cordom; poetry and plays. 1628 Francis de Malherbe, Normandy;
poetry. 1630 John Kepler, Wittemberg; astronomy. 1634 Lord Chief Justice Coke,
Norfolk; laws of England. 1635 Trajan Boccalini, Rome; fatyrical pieces, fl.
1638 Ben. Johnson, Lo^d. dramatic pieces. 1639 Philip Massinger, Salisbury; 14
dramatic pieces. 1641 Sir Henry Spe^^an, Norfolk; laws and antiquities.
Jeremiah ^or^ox, Lancashire; astronomer, died at the age of 22. 1646 Lewis
Veli^ de Gue^ara, Andalusi^; comedies. 1650 Des Carts, Toura^me; philosophy
and mathematics. 1654 John Selde^, Sussex; antiquities and laws. John Lewis de
Balzac, Ang^^leme; letters, etc. 1655 Peter Gassendi, Provence; astronomy. 1656
Archbishop Usher, Dublin; divinity and chronology. 1657 Dr. William Harvey,
Kent; discovered the circulation of the blood. 166^ Pascal, Auverg^e; Thoughts
upon Religion, etc. 1667 Abraham Co^ley, London; miscellaneous poetry. 1669 Sir
John Denham, Dublin; Cooper's Hill and other poems. 1673 Moliete, Paris;
comedies. 1674 John Milton, London; Paradise Lost, Regained, and various other
pieces in verse and prose. Hyde, Earl of Clarendon, Wiltshire; history of the
civil wars in England. 1675 James Gregory, Aberdeen; mathematics, geometry and
optics. James Rohault, Amiens; physics. 1677 Rev. Dr. Isaac Barrow, London;
natural philosophy, mathematics. Rev. Richard ^axter, Divinity. fl. 1680 Samuel
Butler, Worcestershire; Hudibras, a burlesque poem. Francis, Duke of
Rochefoucault, France; maxims. Dr. Lewis Moreri, Provence; Historical
Dictionary. 1683 Meze^ay, Lower Normandy; Abridgment of the history of France.
1684 Wentworth Dillon, Earl of Roscommon, Ireland; essay on translated verse,
Horace's art of poetry. Peter Corncille, Rouen; 30 dramatic pieces. 1685 Thomas
Otway, London; 10 tragedies and comedies, etc. 1687 Edmund Waller, Bucks;
poems. 1688 Dr. Ralph Cudworth, Somersetshire; Intellectual System. 1689 Dr.
Thomas Sydenh^^, Dorsetshire; history of physic. Dr. Bonet, Geneva; medicine.
1690 Nathaniei Lee, London; ^1 tragedies Barclay, Edinburgh; Apology for the
Quakers. 1691 Honorable Robert Boil, natural and experimental philosophy,
etc. Sir. George M'Kentie, Dundee; Antiquities and laws of Scotland. 1692 Giles
Menage Angers; philology, miscellanies (...) verse and prose. St. Real, Savoy;
conspiracy of the Spaniards against the Republic of Venice. 1694 John
Tillotson, Archbishop of Canterbury, Halifax; 254 sermons. Antonietta de la
Guard Des Houlieres, Paris; poetry. Marcellus Malpighi, Bologna; discovered the
circulation of the s^p in plants. Puffendorf, Upper Saxony; jurisprudence and
history. 1695 D'^erbelot, Paris; Bibliotheque orientale. Huygens, Hague;
mathematics and astronomy. 1696 John de La Bruyere, France; characters.
March^^ness De Sevigne, France; letters. 1697 Sir. W. Temple, London; politics
and polite literature. School W. Molyneux, Dublin; the case of Ireland stated.
1699 John Racine, France; tragedies. Rev. Dr. William Bates; Divinity. 1701
John Dryden, Northamptonshire; 27 tragedies and comedies, satiric poems,
Virgil, ode on Saint Cecilla's day, etc. Thomas Creech, Dorsetshire;
translations. 1703 Mascaron, Marseilles; funeral orations. 1704 John Lock,
Somersetshire; philosophy, government and theology. Bacconi, Palermo; natural
history. Bossuet, Dijon; discourse upon Universal History, Funeral Orations,
etc. Bourdaloue, France; sermons. 1705 John Ray, Essex; botany, natural
philosophy, and divinity. 1706 Bailet, Picardy: Judgments of the learned,
biography, etc. 1707 George Farquhar, Londonderry, 8 comedies. Rev. James
Saurin, Sermons, tracts. fl. 1708 John Philips, Oxfordshire; Splendid Shilling,
and other poems. 1709 Thomas Corneille, brother to Peter; tragedies. 1710 David
Gregory, Aberdeen; geometry, optics. ^lechier, Avignon; sermons, funeral
orations, etc. Edmund Smith, Worcestershire; Phedra, tragedy, translation of
Longinus. 1712 Bo^leau, Paris; satires, epistles, art of poetry, the Lutrin,
etc. Ca^lim, Italy; astronomy. 1713 Ant. Ash. Cooper, E. of Shaftsbury;
characteristics. Dr. Ar^^bald Pitcairn, Edinburgh, medicine. 1714 Gilbert
Burnet, Edinburgh, Bishop of Salisbury; history, biography, etc. 1715
Malebranche, Paris; philosophy. 1716 Francis De Salignac De la Mothe Fenelon,
Archbishop of Cambray, ^erigord, Telemachus, Dialogues of the Dead,
Demonstration of the Being of God, etc. Leib^^^, ^cipsi^; philosophy, etc. 1718
Nicholas Row, Devonshire; 7 tragedies, translat. of Lucan's Pharsalia. 1719
Rev. John Flamstead, Derbyshire; mathematics and astronomy. Joseph Addison,
Wiltshire; Spectator, Guardian, tragedy of Cato, etc. Dr. John Keill,
Edinburgh, mathematics and astronomy. 1719 Sir Samuel Garth, Yorkshire; poetry.
1720 Anne Dacier, France; translation of Homer, Ter^^^^, etc. 1721 Matthew
Prior, London; poems and politics. 17^3 Fi^^^y, Paris; history. Bail, Foix;
historical and critical dictionary. 1725 Rapin de Thoyras, Languedoc; history
of England. 1727 Sir Isaac Newton, Lincolnshire; mathematics, geometry,
astronomy, etc. 1728 Father Daniel, Rouen; history of France. 1729 Rev. Dr.
Samuel Clarke, Norwich; mathematics, divinity, etc. Sir Richard Steel, Dublin;
four comedies, papers in Tatler, etc. William Congreve, Staffordshire; seven
dramatic pieces. 1732 John Gay, Exeter; poems, fables, and eleven dramatic
pieces. 1734 Dr. John Arbuthnot, Mearnshire; medicine, coins, politics. 1735
Vertot, France; Revolutions of Rome, Portugal, Sweden, etc. 1738 Dr. Boerhaave,
Leyden; botany, etc. 1740 Ephraim Chambers, England; Cyclopaedia. 1741 Rollin,
Paris; history, Belles Lettres. John Baptist Rousseau, Paris; odes, epistles,
epigrams, comedies, letters. Le Sage, Breta^y; Gil Blas, etc. 1742 Dr. Edmund
Halley, London; natural philosophy, astronomy, navigation. 1743 Masillon,
France; sermons. Richard Savage, London; tragedy, etc. 1744 Alexander Pope,
London; poems, letters, translation of Homer. 1745 Reverend Dr. Jonathan Swift,
Dublin; poems, politics, and letters. 1746 Colin M'Laurin, Argyleshire;
algebra, view of Newton's philosophy. 1747 Rev. Jonathan Dickinson, President,
Princeton College; Divinity. 1748 James Thomson, Roxburghshire; Seasons, and
other pieces, five tragedies. Reverend Dr. Isaac Watts, Southampton; logic,
philosophy, psalms, etc. Dr. Francis Hutcheson, Ireland; system of moral
philosophy. 1750 Rev. Dr. Conyers Middleton, Yorkshire; life of Cicero, etc.
Andrew Baxter, Old Aberdeen; metaphysics and natural philosophy. 1751 Lord
Bolingbroke, Surry; philosophy, metaphysics, and politics. 1752 Reverend Dr.
Doddridge; Family Expositor, Lectures, Sermons, etc. 1754 Dr. Richard Mead,
London; on poisons, plague, small pox, medicine. Henry Fielding, Somersetshire;
Tom Jones, Joseph Andrews, etc. 1755 Montesquieu, Bordeaux; spirit of laws,
grandeur and declension of the Romans, Persian letters, etc. 1756 W. Collins,
Chichester; poetry. West, England; translation of Pindar, poems. 1757 Reaumur,
Rochelle; natural history of insects. Reverend Aaron Burr, President of
Princeton College; Answer to Emlyn's Humble Inquiry, Sermons. Colley Cibber,
London; plays. 1758 Reverend Jonathan Edwards, President of Princeton College;
Divinity, Metaphysics. 1760 Reverend Samuel Davies, President of Princeton
College; Sermons. 1761 Sherlock, Bishop London; sermons. Hoadley, Bishop
Winchester; sermons. Richardson, London; Grandison, Clarissa, Pamela. Rev. Dr.
John Leland, Lancashire; answer to Deis^^cal Writers. 1763 W. Shenstone;
Shropshire; poems. 1764 Reverend Charles Churchill, England; Ros^^ad, satires.
1765 Reverend Dr. Edward Young; Night Thoughts, and other poems, and. c Robert
Simson, Glasgow; Conic Sections, Euclid, Apollonius. 1766 Reverend Dr. Samuel
^inley, President Princeton College; Sermons, Tracts. Reverend Thomas Clap,
President of Yale College; Sermons, Tracts. 1767 Dr. Alexander Monro,
Edinburgh; Anatomy of the bones, anatomical and medical essays. Muratori,
Italy; history, antiquities, Metastasio, Italy; dramatick pieces, fl. 1768
Reverend Lawrence Stern, Dublin; 45 sermons, Sentimental Journey, Tristram
Shandy. William Cunningham, Ireland; Pastorals, etc. 1769 Robert Smith,
Lincolnshire; harmonies and optics. 1770 Dr. Mark Akenside, N^^castle upon
Tyne; poems. Dr. Tobias Smollet, Dumbartonshire; History of England, novels,
etc. 1771 Thomas Gray, London; poems. 1773 Earl of Chesterfield; letter. George
Lord Lyttleton, Worcestershire; History of England. 1774 Oliver Goldsmith,
Roscommon, in Ireland; History of the Earth and animated Nature, Citizen of the
World, essays, etc. Hon. Peyton Randolph, first President of the American
Congress. 1775 Dr. John Hawkesworth; essays. 1776 David Hume, Merse; History of
England, essays. James Ferguson, Aberdeenshire; astronomy. 1777 Samuel Foot,
Cornwall; plays. 1778 Voltaire, Paris; the Henriad, an epic poem, dramatic
pieces, poetry, history, literature in general. Rev. Dr. Eliot, Boston;
Sermons. 1779 David Garrick, Hereford; plays. William Warburton, Bishop of
Gloucester; Divine Legation of Moses, and various other works. 1780 Sir.
William Blackstone, Judge of the Court of Common Pi^^s, London; Commentaries on
the Laws of England. Dr. John Fothergill, Yorkshire; philosophy and medicine.
James Harris; Her^^^, Philological Inquiries, Philoso. Arrangements. Gov.
Hatchinson, Boston, Massachusetts; History. 1782 Thomas Newton, Bishop of
Bristol, Litchfield; discourses on the prophecies, and other works. Sir John
Pri^gle, ^art. Roxboroughshire; Diseases of the Army. Henry Home, Lord Kaimes,
Scotland; Elements of Criticism, Sketches of the History of Man, Principles of
Equity, of Morality, Art of ^hinking, Hints on Education, Gentleman Farmer,
etc. 1783 Dr. William Hunter, La^erkshire; anatomy. John James Rousseau,
Geneva; Emilins, a treatise of Education, Dictionary of Music, New Heloi^^,
etc. 1784 Dr. Samuel Johnson, Litchfield; English Dictionary, biography, etc.
1785 William Whitchead, Poet Laureat; poems and plays. Dr. Thomas Le^^d,
Ireland; History of Ireland, etc. etc. 1786 Dr. Gilbert Stuart, Edinburgh;
History of Mary, Queen of Scots, History of the Reformation, etc. 1787 Rev. Dr.
Cha^^cey, Boston; comple^t view of Episcopacy from the Fathers, Salvation for
all men, Setmons, Tracts, etc. 1788 The Count De Bo^^on, Paris; Natural
History. 1790 James Bowdoin, Gov. Massachusetts, Philosophy, politics. William
Livingston, Gov. New Jersey; essays, poetry, politics. Dr. Benjamin Franklin,
Boston; electricity, natural philosophy, etc. 1791 Rev. John Wesley, Divinity,
miscellanies. 1792 Henry Laurens, South Carolina, President of Congress.

THE END.

