

SELF KNOWLEDGE: A TREATISE, SHOWING THE NATURE and (...) OF THAT IMPORTANT
SCIENCE, AND The WAY to attain it, INTERMIXED With various Reflections and
Observations On HUMAN NATURE.

By JOHN MASON, A. M.

-- E Coelo descendit (...). Juv. The proper Knowledge of Mankind is MAN. POPE.
PRINTED at BOSTON, BY I. THOMAS AND E. T. ANDREWS, FAUST'S STATUE, No. 45,
NEWBURY STREET. 1793.

TO SAMUEL LESINGHAM, Esquire. TREASURER of ST. THOMAS'S HOSPITAL.
SIR,
MODESTY and self diffidence are the allowed characteristicks of self
knowledge. If then my presuming to address this piece to you may seem to
discover more assurance and self confidence than becomes a true acquaintance
with the subject I write upon, I have only this to say -- your known
condescension and candor have encouraged that presumption: Nor can any thing
animate an address of this nature more, than an assurance that the person to
whom it is made, has so good an understanding in the practical part of this
subject as will incline (...) to excuse the defects that may appear in the
management of it.

BUT after all SIR, my own proficiency in this science is so poor, that I dare
not be confident I am not wrong in my views, with which I desire this small
tract may appear under your patronage. That it may have refuge from the
petulance of censure, an encouragement in the publication, and I at the same
time, an opportunity of testifying my grateful sense of many past favors, are
my open and avowed ends herein. But still, whether an ambition to be known to
the world under the advantage of your friendship be not the secret and true
motive, I cannot be certain.

HOWEVER, if in this point I may be mistaken, there is another in which I think
I cannot; and that is, that it is at least a pardonable ambition; in which I
shall certainly stand acquitted by every one who knows your character, the
delicacy of your taste in the choice of your friends, and the real honor it
does to those you are pleased to admit into that number.

BUT even this SIR, your penetration will soon discover to proceed from the
same vanity I before suspected myself to be guilty of. And the world will
judge, that I speak it rather to do myself honor than you. However, I am
beforehand with them in the observation. And that I may not be tempted, in this
address, to enhance your character (according to the usual style of
dedications) in order to do honor to my own, and at once oppress your modesty
and expose my vanity, I shall put an end to it, without so much as attempting
to describe a character, which I shall, however, always aim to imitate.

BUT that you may continue to adorn that public and useful station you are in,
and long live a patron and pattern of solid and disinterested virtue; and that
your many charitable offices, and good works on earth, may meet with a large
and late reward in heaven, is the hearty prayer of,

SIR, Your much obliged, and very humble servant. J. MASON.
Dorking, Jan. 32, 1744-5.
PREFACE.
THE subject of the ensuing treatise is of great importance; and yet I do not
remember to have seen it cultivated with that precision, perspicuity and force,
with which many other moral and theological themes have been managed. And
indeed it is but rarely that we find it professedly and fully recommended to us
in a set and regular discourse, either from the pulpit or the press. This
consideration, together with a full persuasion of its great and extensive
usefulness, has excited the present attempt to render it more familiar to the
minds of christians.

Mr. Baxter indeed, has a treatise upon this subject; entitled, The mischief of
self ignorance, and the benefit of self acquaintance. And I freely acknowledge
some helps I have received from him. But he has handled it (according to his
manner) in so lax and diffuse a way, introducing so many things into it that
are foreign from it, omitting others that properly belong to it, and skimming
over some with a too superficial notice, that I own I found myself much
disappointed in what I expected from him. And was convinced that something more
correct, nervous, and methodical was wanting on this subject.

I am far from having the vanity to think that this which I now offer to the
public, is entirely free from those faults which I have remarked in that pious
and excellent author; and am sensible, that if I do not fall under a much
heavier censure myself, it must be owing to the great candor of my reader,
which he will be convinced I have some title to, if he but duly consider the
nature and extent of the subject. For it is almost impossible to let the
thoughts run freely upon so copious and comprehensive a theme, in order to do
justice to it, without taking too large a scope in some particulars that have a
close connection with it; as I fear I have done (Part I. Chap. XIV.) concerning
the knowledge, guard and government of the thoughts.

But there is a great difference between a short occasional and useful
digression, and a wide rambling from the subject, by following the impulse of a
luxuriant fancy. A judicious taste can hardly excuse the latter; though it may
be content the author should gather a few flowers out of the common road,
provided he soon returns into it again.

This brings to my mind another thing, for which, I am sure, I have great
reason to crave the reader's indulgence; and that is, the free use I have made
of some of the ancient heathen writers in my marginal quotations, which I own
looks like an ostentation of reading, which I always abhorred. But it was
conversing with those authors that first turned my thoughts to this subject.
And the good sense I met with in most of their aphorisms and sentiments, gave
me an esteem for them; and made it difficult for me to resist the temptation of
transcribing several of them, which I thought pertinent to the matter in hand.
But after all, I am ashamed to see what an old fashioned figure they make in
the margin. However, if the reader thinks they will too much interrupt the
course of the subject, he may entirely omit them; though by that means he will
perhaps lose the benefit of some of the finest sentiments in the book.

I remember a modern writer, I have very lately read, is grievously offended
with Mr. Addison for so much as mentioning the name of Plato, and presuming in
one of his Spectators to deliver his notions of humor in a kind of allegory,
after the manner of that Greek author; which he calls a formal method of
trifling, introduced under a deep oftentation of learning, which deserves the
severest rebuke See introduction to an essay toward fixing the true standard
of wit, etc. page 20, 21.
. And perhaps a more severe one was never given upon so small a provocation.
From gentlemen of so refined and delicate a taste I can expect no mercy. But
the public is to judge, whether this be not as culpable an affectation as the
contrary one, which prevailed so much in the last century.

One great view I had in mine eye when I put these thoughts together, was the
benefit of youth, and especially those of them that are students and candidates
for the sacred ministry; for which they will find no science more immediately
necessary (next to a good acquaintance with the word of GOD) than that which is
recommended to them in the following treatise; to which every branch of human
literature is subordinate, and ought to be subservient. For certain it is, the
great end of philosophy, both natural and moral, is to know ourselves, and to
know GOD. The highest learning is to be wise, and the greatest wisdom is to be
good; as Marcus Antoninus somewhere observes.

It has often occured to my mind in digesting my thoughts upon this subject,
what a pity it is that this most useful science should be so generally
neglected in the modern methods of education; and that preceptors and tutors
both in public and private seminaries of learning, should forget that the
forming the manners is more necessary to a finished education than furnishing
the minds of youth. Socrates, who made all his philosophy subservient to
morality Totam philosophiam revocavit ad mores. Sen. Epist. p. (...).
, was of this sentiment; and took more pains to rectify the tempers, than
replenish the understandings of his pupils; and looked upon all knowledge as
useless speculation, that was not brought to this end, to make us wiser and
better men. And without doubt, if in the academy the youth has once happily
learned the great art of managing his temper, governing his passions, and
guarding his foibles, he will find a more solid advantage from it in after
life, than he could expect from the best acquaintance with all the systems of
ancient and modern philosophy.

It was a very just and sensible answer, which Agesilaus, the Spartan King,
returned to one who asked him What it was in which youth ought principally to
be instructed? He replied, that which they have most need to practice when they
are men See Plutarch's Laconick Apothegms, under the word Agesilaus.
. Were this single rule but carefully attended to in the method of education,
it might probably be conducted in a manner much more to the advantage of our
youth than it ordinarily is. For as Dr. Fuller observes, that pains we take in
books or arts, which treat of things remote from the use of life, is but a busy
idleness Rule of life, page 82.
. And what is there in life which youth will have more frequent occasion to
practice than this? What is there which they afterward more regret the want
of? What is there in which they want more direction and assistance than the
right government of their passions and prejudices? And what more proper season
to receive those assistances, and to lay a foundation for this difficult but
very important science, than the early part of youth?

It may be said, "it is properly the office and care of parents to watch over
and correct the tempers of their children in the first years of their infancy,
when it may easiest be done." But if it be not done effectually then (as it
very seldom is) there is the more necessity for it afterward. But the truth
is, it is the proper office and care of all who have the charge of youth, and
ought to be looked upon as the most important and necessary part of education.

It was the observation of a great divine and reformer, that he who acquires
his learning at the expense of his, morals is the worse for his education Qui
proficit in literis et deficit in moribus, non proficit sed deficit.
Oecolampadius. See Hist. of Pop. Vol. ii. p. 337.
. And we may add, that he who does not improve his temper, together with his
understanding, is not much the better for it. For he ought to measure his
progress in science by the improvement of his morals; and remember that he is
no further a learned man than he is a wise and good man; and that he cannot be
a finished philosopher till he is a christian Te in scientia profecisse creda^
quantum in moribus fueria emendatior; eo usque doctum, in quantum bonum: It a
philosophum, ^t christianum. Praes. ad Nem.
. But whence is it that moral philosophy, which was so carefully cultivated in
the ancient academy, should be forced in the modern to give place to natural,
that was originally designed to be subservient to it? Which is to exalt the
handmaid into the place of the mistress Things were coming to this pass so
early as Seneca's time; who laments that plain and open truth was turned into a
dark and intricate science. "Philosophy (says he) is turned into philology; and
that through the fault of both masters and scholars; the one teach to dispute,
not to live; and the other come to them to mend their wits, not their manners.
Whereas philosophy is nothing else but a rule of life. Quid autom philosophi^,
nisi vitae (...)."
This appears not only a preposterous, but a pernicious method of institution.
For as the mind takes a turn of thought in future life, suitable to the
tincture it has received in youth, it will naturally conclude, that there is
no necessity to regard, or at least to lay any stress upon what was never
inculcated upon it as a matter of importance then. And so will grow up in a
neglect or disesteem of those things which are more necessary to make a person
a wise and truly understanding man, than all those rudiments of science he
brought with him from the school or college.

It is really a melancholy thing to see a young gentleman of shining parts, and
a sweet disposition, who has gone through the common course of academical
studies, come out into the world under an absolute government of his passions
and prejudices: Which have increased with his learning, and which, when he
comes to be better acquainted with human life and human nature, he is soon
sensible and ashamed of; but perhaps is never able to conquer as long as he
lives, for what of that assistance which he ought to have received in his
education. For a wrong education is one of those three things to which it is
owing (as an ancient christian and philosopher justly observes) that so few
have the right government of their passions (...) -- Bad passions spring up in
the mind three ways; viz. through a bad education, great ignorance, or a
disorder in the animal frame. (...) From a bad education. For if we have not
been taught from out childhood to govern our passions, with all possible care,
they will soon come to have the government of us. Nemes. de Not. Hom. page 182.


I would not be thought to depreciate any part of human literature, but should
be glad to see this most useful branch of science, the knowledge of the heart,
the detecting and correcting hurtful prejudices, and the right government of
the temper and passions, in more general esteem; as necessary at once to form
the gentleman, the scholar and the christian.

And if there be any thing in this short treatise which may be helpful to
students, who have a regard to the right government of their minds, whilst they
are furnishing them with useful knowledge, I would particularly recommend it to
their perusal.

I have nothing further to add, but to desire the reader's excuse for the
freedom with which I have delivered my sentiments in this matter, and for
detaining him so long from his subject; which I now leave to his candid and
serious thoughts, and the blessing of Almighty GOD to make it useful to him.

CONTENTS.
PART I.
CHAP. I. THE Nature and Importance of the Subject. p. 19 CHAP. II. The several
Branches of Self Knowledge. We must know what Sort of Creatures we are, and
what we shall be. p. 29 CHAP. III. The several Relations in which we stand to
GOD, to CHRIST, and our Fellow Creatures. p. 37 CHAP. IV. We must duly consider
the Rank and Station of Life in which Providence has placed us, and what it is
that becomes and adorns it. p. 51 CHAP. V. Every Man should be well acquainted
with his own Talents and Capacities, and in what Manner they are to be
exercised and improved to the greatest Advantage. p. 54 CHAP. VI. We must be
well acquainted with our Inabilities, and those Things in which we are
naturally deficient, as well as those in which we excel. p. 57 CHAP. VII.
Concerning the Knowledge of our Constitutional Sins. p. 60 CHAP. VIII. The
Knowledge of our most dangerous Temptations necessary to Self Knowledge. p. 66
CHAP. IX. Self Knowledge discovers the secret Prejudices of the Heart. p. 70
CHAP. X. The Necessity and Means of knowing our Natural Temper. p. 83 CHAP. XI.
Concerning the secret Springs of our Actions. p. 88 CHAP. XII. Every one that
knows himself, is in a particular Manner sensible how far he is governed by a
Thirst for Applause. p. 90 CHAP. XIII. What kind of Knowledge we are already
furnished with, and what Degree of Esteem we set upon it. p. 95 CHAP. XIV.
Concerning the Knowledge, Guard, and Government of our Thoughts. p. 100 CHAP.
XV. Concerning the Memory. p. 114 CHAP. XVI. Concerning the Mental Taste. p.
118 CHAP. XVII. Of our great and governing Views in Life. p. 122 CHAP. XVIII.
How to know the true State of our Souls; and whether we are fit to die. p. 125
PART II.
SHOWING the great Excellence and Advantage of this kind of Science. p. 129
CHAP. I. Self Knowledge the Spring of Self Possession. p. 130 CHAP. II. Self
Knowledge leads to a wise and steady Conduct. p. 134 CHAP. III. Humility the
Effect of Self Knowledge. p. 135 CHAP. IV. Charity, another Effect of Self
Knowledge. p. 138 CHAP. V. Moderation the Effect of Self Knowledge. p. 140
CHAP. VI. Self Knowledge improves the Judgment. p. 143 CHAP. VII. Self
Knowledge directs to the proper Exercises of Self Denial. p. 145 CHAP. VIII.
Self Knowledge promotes our Usefulness in the World. p. 149 CHAP. IX. Self
Knowledge leads to a Decorum and Consistency of Character. p. 151 CHAP. X.
Piety the Effect of Self Knowledge. p. 154 CHAP. XI. Self Knowledge teaches us
rightly to perform the Duties of Religion. p. 155 CHAP. XII. Self Knowledge the
best Preparation for Death. p. 158
PART III.
SHOWING how Self Knowledge is to be attained. p. 160 CHAP. I. Self Examination
necessary to Self Knowledge. p. 164 CHAP. II. Constant Watchfulness necessary
to Self Knowledge. p. 179 CHAP. III. We should have some Regard to the Opinions
of Other Us concernings, particularly of our Enemies. p. 180 CHAP. IV. Frequent
Converse with Superiors a Help to Self Knowledge. p. 185 CHAP. V. Of
cultivating such a Temper as will be the best Disposition to Self Knowledge. p.
186 CHAP. VI. To be sensible of our False Knowledge a good Step to Self
Knowledge. p. 189 CHAP. VII. Self Inspection peculiarly necessary upon some
particular Occasions. p. 191 CHAP. VIII. To know ourselves we must wholly
abstract from external Appearances. p. 196 CHAP. IX. The Practice of Self
Knowledge a great Means to promote it. p. 199 CHAP. X. Fervent and frequent
Prayer the most effectual Means for attaining true Self Knowledge. p. 206
A TREATISE OF SELF KNOWLEDGE.
PART I.
CHAP. I.
The Nature and Importance of the Subject.
A DESIRE of knowledge is natural to the mind of man. And nothing discovers the
true quality and disposition of the mind more, than the particular kind of
knowledge it is most fond of.

Thus we see that low and little minds are most delighted with the knowledge of
trifles; as in children. An indolent mind, with that which serves only for
amusements or the entertainment of the fancy. A curious mind is best pleased
with facts. A judicious penetrating mind, with demonstration and mathematical
science. A worldly mind esteems no knowledge like that of the world. But a wise
and and pious man before all other kinds of knowledge perfers that of GOD and
his own soul.

But some kind of knowledge (...) other the mind is continually craving after.
And by considering what that is, its prevailing turn and temper may easily be
known.

This desire of knowledge, like other affections planted in our nature, will be
very apt to lead us wrong, if it be not well regulated. When it is directed to
improper objects, or pursued in a wrong manner, it degenerates into a vain and
criminal curiosity. A fatal instance of this in our first parents we have upon
sacred record; the unhappy effects of which are but too visible in all.

Self knowledge is the subject of the ensuing treatise. A subject which the
more I think of, the more important and extensive it appears. So important that
every branch of it seems absolutely necessary to the right government of the
life and temper. And so extensive, that the nearer view we take of its several
branches, the more are still opening to view, as nearly connected with it as
the other. Like what we find in microscopical observations on natural objects.
The better the glasses, and the nearer the scrutiny, the more wonders we
explore; and the more surprising discoveries we make of certain properties,
parts or affections belonging to them, which were never before thought of. For
in order to a true self knowledge, the human mind, with its various powers and
operations, must be narrowly inspected; all its secret bendings and doublings
displayed. Otherwise our self acquaintance will be but very partial and
defective; and the heart after all will deceive us. So that in treating this
subject there is no small danger, either of doing injury to it, by slight and
superficial inquest on the one hand, or of running into a research too minute
and philosophical for common use on the other. The two extremes I shall keep in
my eye, and endeavor to steer a middle course between them.

Know thyself, is one of the most useful and comprehensive precepts in the
whole moral system. And it is well known in how great a veneration this maxim
was held by the ancients; and in how high esteem the duty of self examination
as necessary to it.

Thales the Milesian is said to be the first author of it He was the prince of
the philosophers, and flourished about A. M. 3330, and was cotemporary with
Josiah king of Judah.
. Who used to say, that for a man to know himself is the hardest thing in the
world See Stanley's Life of Thales.
. It was afterward adopted by Chylon the Lacedemonian; and is one of those
three precepts which P^ny affirms to have been consecrated at Delphos in golden
letters. It was afterward greatly admired and frequently used by others Respue
quod non es: tollat sua munera cerdo. Tecum habita: et noris quam fit tibi
corta supellex. Pers. Sat. 4.

-- Nec te q^aesiverit extra. Id. Sat. ^.

-- Te consule, die tibi quis fit. Juv. Sat. 12.

Teipsum concute. Hor. lib. 1. Sat. 3.

Bellum est chim sua vitia nosse. Cic. Epist. ad Atticum. lib. 2.

Illud ((...)) noli petare ad arrogantiam minuendam solum esse (...), (...)
etiam ut bona nostra norimus. Id. Epist. ad Mar. Q Fratrem. lib. 3. Epist. 6.

Id enim maxim quemque decet quod est cujusq^e suum maxim. Quisque igitus
noscat ingenium, acremque se et bonorum et vitiorum suurum Juditem praebeat.
Id. de offic. lib. 2.

Intrandum est igitur in rerum naturam, et penitus, quid ea postulat
pervidendum; aliter enim nosmet ipsos nosse non possumus. Id. de finibus. lib.
5.


. Till at length, it acquired the authority of a divine oracle; and was
supposed to have been given originally by Apollo himself. Of which general
opinion Cicero gives us this reason; "Because it has such a weight of sense
and wisdom in it as appears too great to be attributed to any man Haecenim (i.
e. philosophia) nos cum caeteras res omnes tum quod est difficilimum, docuit;
ut [NOSMET IPSOS] nosceremus. Cujus praecepti tanta vis, tanta sapientia est,
ut ea non humini cuipiam, sed Delphico Deo tribueretur. Cicero de legib. lib. ^.

Quod praeceptum quia majus erat quam ut ab homine vider^tus idcirco assignatum
est Deo: Jubet igitur nos Pythius Apollo, noscere [NOSMET IPSOS] Idem de
Finibus, lib. 5. cap. 16.

Etnimirum hanc hab^t vim praeceptum apollinis, quo monet ut se quisque noscat
-- hunc igitur nosse, (i. e. animum) nisi divinum esset, non esset hoc acrioris
cujusdam animi praeceptum, sic ut tributum Deo fit: hoc est seipsum posse
congnoscere. Idem Tuscus. Quae i. lib. 5.


." And this opinion of its coming originally from Apollo himself, perhaps was
the reason that it was written in golden capitals over the door of his temple
at Delphos.

And why this excellent precept should not be held in as high esteem in the
christian world as it was in the heathen, is hard to conceive. Human nature is
the same now as it was then. The heart is as deceitful; and the necessity of
watching, knowing, and keeping it, the same. Nor are we less assured that this
precept is divine. Nay, we have a much greater assurance of this than heathens
had; they supposed it came down from heaven, we know it did; what they
conjectured, we are sure of. For this sacred oracle is dictated to us in a
manifold light, and explained to us in various views by the holy spirit, in
that revelation which GOD has been pleased to give us as our guide to duty and
happiness; by which as in a glass we may survey ourselves, and know what manner
of persons we are. James i. 23.


This discovers ourselves to us; pierces into the inmost recesses of the mind:
Strips off every disguise; lays open the inward part; makes a strict scrutiny
into the very soul and spirit; and critically judges of the thoughts and
intents of the heart (...) Heb. iv. 12.
. It shows us with what exactness and care we are to search and try our
spirits, examine ourselves, and watch our ways, and keep our hearts, in order
to acquire this important self science; which it often calls us to do. Examine
yourselves. -- Prove your own selves; know you not yourselves (...)2 Cor. xiii.
5. -- Though (...) signifies to approve as well as to prove, yet that our
translators have hit upon the true sense of the word here, in rendering it
prove yourselves, is apparent, not only from the word immediately preceding
((...)) which is of the same import, but because self probation is always
necessary to a right self approbation.

"Every christian ought to try himself, and may know himself if he be faithful
in examining. The frequent exhortations of scripture hereunto imply both these,
viz. that the knowledge of ourselves is attainable, and that we should
endeavor after it. Why should the apostle put them upon examining and proving
themselves, unless it was possible to know themselves upon such trying and
proving?" Bennet's Christ. Oratory, p. 568.


? Let a man examine himself 1 Cor. xi. 28.
. Our savior upbraids his disciples with their self ignorance, in not knowing
what manner of spirits they were of Luke ix. 5^.
. And says the apostle, If a man (through self ignorance) thinks himself to
be something, when he is nothing, he deceives himself. But let every man prove
his work, and then shall he have rejoicing in himself, and not in another Gal.
vi. 3. 4.
. Here we are commanded, instead of judging others, to judge ourselves; and to
avoid the inexcusable ras^ness of condemning others for the very crimes we
ourselves are guilty of, Romans ii. 1, 21, 22. which a self ignorant man is very
apt to do; nay to be more offended at a small blemish in another's character,
than at a greater in his own; which folly, self ignorance, and hypocrisy, our
savior with just severity animadverts upon, Matt. vii. 3 -- 5.

And what stress was laid upon this under the Old Testament dispensation
appears sufficiently from those expressions. -- Keep thy heart with all
diligence. Prove. iv. 23.
Commune with your own heart. Psalm. iv. 4.
Search me, O GOD, and know my heart; try me, and know my thoughts. Psalm.
cxxxix. 23.
Examine me, O LORD, and prove me; try my reins and my heart. Psalm. xxvi. 2.
Let us search and try our ways. Lam. iii. 4.
Recollect yourselves, O nation not desired Zeph. ii. 1. (...)
(...) -- the verb ((...)) properly signifies to glean, or gather together
scattered sticks or straws; as appears from all the places where the word is
used in the Old Testament. (Exodus v. 7, 12. Numb. xv. 32. 1 Kings, xvii. 10.)
Hence by an easy metaphor it signifies to recollect, or gather the scattered
thoughts together; and ought to be so rendered, when used in the reflective
form, as here it is. So says R. Kimchi, ((...)) est (...) stipulas colligere.
Id fit accurata scrutatione, hinc dicitur de qualibet Inquisitione. Whence I
think it is evident that the word should be rendered as above.
. -- And all this is as necessary to that self acquaintance which is the only
proper basis of solid peace Clement Alexandrinus says, that Moses by (...)
phrase, so common in his writings, Take heed to thyself (Exodus x. 28. xxxiv.
12. Deuteronomy. iv. 9.) means the same thing as the ancients old by their (...).
Strom. lib. 2. car. 5.
.

Were mankind but more generally convinced of the importance and necessity of
this self knowledge, and possessed with a due esteem for it; did they but know
the true way to attain it; and under a proper sense of its excellence and the
fatal effects of self ignorance, did they but make it their business and study
every day to cultivate it; how soon should we find a happy alteration in the
manners and spirits of men! -- But the misery of it is, men will not think;
will not employ their thoughts in good earnest, about the things which most of
all deserve and demand them. By which unaccountable indolence and aversion to
self reflection, they are led blindfold and insensibly into the most dangerous
paths of infidelity and wickedness, as the Jews were heretofore; of whose
amazing ingratitude and apostasy GOD himself assigns this single cause -- Isa.
i. 3.
My people do not consider "There is nothing men are more deficient in, than
knowing their own characters. I know not how this science comes to be so much
neglected. We spend a great deal of time in learning useless things, but take
no pains in the study of ourselves; and in opening the folds and ^oubles of the
heart." Reflections on Ridicule, page 61.


Self knowledge is that acquaintance with ourselves, which shows us what we
are, and do, and ought to be, and do, in order to our living comfortably and
usefully here, and happily hereafter. The means of it is, self examination; the
end of it self government, and self fruition. -- It principally consists in the
knowledge of our souls; which is attained by a particular attention to their
various powers, capacities, passions, inclinations, operations, state,
happiness and temper. For a man's soul is properly himself, Matt. xvi. 26.
compared with Luke ix. 25. Praeceptum Apollinis quo monet, ut se quisque
noscat, non enim, credo, id praecipit; ut membra nostra aut staturam figuramque
noscamus: neque no^ corpors fumus; neque ego, tibi dicens hoe, corpori tuo
dico: cum igitur NOSCE TE dicit, hoe dicti, nosee aminum tuum. Nam corpus
quidem quasi vas est, aut aliquod animi receptaculum; ab animo tuio quicquid
agitur id agicur a te. Cic. Tuscul. Quaest. lib. 1.
. The body is but the house, the soul is the tenant that inhabits it; the body
is the instrument, the soul the artist that directs it 2 Cor. v. 1. Romans vi.
13. -- (...) Nemes. de Not. Hom. cap. 6.

(...) Mar. Anton. lib. x. 37. When you talk of a man, I would not have you
tack flesh and blood to the notion, nor those limbs neither which are made out
of it; these are but tools for the soul to work with: And no more a part of a
man, than an axe or a plane is a piece of a carpenter. It is true, nature has
glued them together, and they grow as it were to the soul, and there is all the
difference. Collier.


.

This science, which is to be the subject of the ensuing treatise, has these
three peculiar properties in it, which distinguish it from, and render it
preferable to all other. -- 1. It is equally attainable by all. It requires no
strength of memory, no force of genius, no depth of penetration, as many (...)
do, to come at a tolerable degree of (...) with them; which therefore renders
them inaccessible by the greatest part of mankind. Nor is it placed out of
their reach through a want of opportunity, and proper assistance and direction
how to acquire it; as many other parts of learning are. Every one of a common
capacity has the opportunity and ability to attain it, if he will but
recollect his rambling thoughts, turn them in upon himself, watch the motions
of his heart, and compare them with his rule. -- 2. It is of equal importance
to all -- and of the highest importance to every one It Is virtue only makes our
bliss below, And all our knowledge is OURSELVES TO KNOW. Pope's Essay on Mac.
. Other sciences are suited to the various conditions of life. Some, more
necessary to some; other, to others. But this equally concerns every one that
has an immortal soul, whose final happiness he desires and seeks. -- 3. Other
knowledge is very apt to make a man vain; this always keeps him humble. Nay, it
is for want of this knowledge that men are vain of that they have. Knowledge
puffs up 1 Cor. viii. 1.
. A small degree of knowledge often has this effect on weak minds. And the
reason why great ^attainments in it have not so generally the same effect is,
because they open and enlarge the views of the mind so far, as to let into it
at the same time a good degree of self knowledge. For the more true knowledge a
man has, the more sensible he is of the want of it; which keeps him humble.

And now, reader, whoever thou art, whatever be thy character, station, or
distinction in life, if thou art afraid to look into thine heart, and have no
inclination to self acquaintance, read no farther; lay aside this book; for
thou will find nothing here that will flatter thy self esteem; but perhaps
something that may abate it. But if thou art desirous to cultivate this
important kind of knowledge, and to live no longer a stranger to thyself,
proceed; and keep thy eye open to thine own image, with whatever unexpected
detormity it may present itself to thee; and patiently attend, whilst, by
divine assistance, I endeavor to lay open thine own heart to thee, and to lead
thee to the true knowledge of thyself in the following chapters.

CHAP. II.
The several Branches of Self Knowledge. We must know what Sort of Creatures we
are, and what we shall be.
THAT we may have a more distinct and orderly view of this subject, I shall
here consider the several branches of self knowledge; or some of the chief
particulars wherein it consists. Whereby perhaps it will appear to be a more
copious and comprehensive science than we imagine. And,

1. To know ourselves, is to know and seriously consider what sort of creatures
we are, and what we shall be.

1. What we are.

Man is a complex being, (...) a tripartite person; or a compound creature made
up of three distinct parts, viz. the body, which is the earthly or mortal part
of him; the soul, which is the animal or sensitive part; and the spirit or
mind, which is the rational and immortal part. This doctrine, I think, is
established beyond all dispute, not only by experience, but by authority. It
was received by almost all the ancient philosophers. The Pythagoreans; as we
learn from Jamblicus, vid. Protrept. p. 34, 35. The Platonists; as appears from
Nemesius, Salust, and Laertius, vid. Di. Laertius, lib. 3. p. 219. The Stoics;
as appears from Antoninus, who says expressly, "There are three things which
belong to a man; the body, soul, and the mind. And as to the properties of the
division, sensation belongs to the body, appetite to the soul, and reason to
the mind: (...)" lib. 3. 16 lib. 2. 2. lib. 12. 3. -- Itappears also to have
been the opinion of most of the Fathers. vid. Irenaeus, lib. 5. cap. 9. lib. 2.
cap. 33. Ed. Par. Clem. Alex. Strom. 3. p. 542. Ed. Oxon. Crigen. Philocal. p.
8. Ignat. Ep. ad. Philadelph. ad calcem. See also Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. cap.
2. p. 5. Constitut. Apostol. lib. 7. cap. 34. -- But above all these, is the
authority of scripture, which, speaking of the original formation of man,
mentions the three distinct parts of his nature. Genesis ii. 7. viz. (...) the
dust of the earth, or the body: (...) the living soul, or the animal and
sensitive part: And (...) the breath of life, i. e. the spirit or rational
mind. In like manner the Apostle Paul divides the whole man into (...) the
spirit, the soul, and the body, 1 Thessalonians. v. 23. and what he calls (...) here he
calls (...) Romans vii. 24. the word which Antoninus uses to denote the same
thing. -- They who would see more of this, may consult Namesiuade Natura
Hominis, cap. 1. and Whiston's prim. Christ. vol. 4. page 262.

All the observation I shall make hereupon is, that this consideration may
serve to soften the prejudices of some against the account which scripture
gives us of the mysterious manner of the existence of the divine nature: Of
which every man ( as created in the images of GOD) carries about him a kind of
emblem, in the threefold distinction of the own; which, if he did not every
minute find it by experience to be fact, would doubtless appear to him
altogether s mysterious and incomprehensible as the scripture doctrine of the
trinity.

"Homo habet tres parts, spiritum, animam, et corpus; itaque Homo est Imago S.
S. Trinitatis." August. Tractat, de Symbolo.


-- Each of these three parts have their respective offices assigned them. And
a man then acts becoming himself, when he keeps them employed in their proper
functions, and preserves their natural subordination. -- But it is not enough
to know this merely as a point of speculation; we must pursue and revolve the
thought, and urge the consideration to all the purposes of a practical self
acquaintance.

We are not all body, nor mere animal creatures. We find we have a more noble
nature than the inanimate or brutal part of the creation. We can not only move
and act freely, but we observe in ourselves a capacity of reflection, study,
and forecast; and various mental operations, which irrational animals discover
no symptoms of. Our souls therefore must be of a more excellent nature than
theirs; and from the power of thought with which they are endowed, they are
proved to be immaterial substances. And consequently in their own nature
capable of immortality. And that they are actually immortal, or will never die,
the sacred scriptures do abundantly testify As nature delights in the most easy
transitions from one class of beings to another, and as the nexus utriusque
generis is observable in several creatures of ambiguous nature, which seem to
connect the lifeless and vegetable, the vegetable and animal, the animal and
rational worlds together; (See Nemesius de Not. Hom. cap. 1. p. 6.) why may not
the souls of brutes be considered as the nexus between material and immaterial
substances, or matter and spirit, or something between both? The great
diffimilitude of nature in these two substances, I apprehend, can be no solid
objection to this hypothesis, if we consider (beside our own ignorance of the
nature of spirits) but now nearly they approach in other instances, and how
closely they are united in man.
. -- Let us then hereupon seriously recollect ourselves in the following
soliloquy.

"O my soul, look back but a few years; and thou wast nothing! -- And how did
thou spring out of that nothing? -- Thou could not make thyself. That is
quite impossible. -- Most certain it is, that that Almighty, self existent and
eternal power, which made the world, made thee also out of nothing. Called thee
into being when thou wast not; gave thee these reasoning and reflecting
faculties, which thou art now employing in searching out the end and happiness
of thy nature. It was He, O my soul, that made thee intelligent and immortal.
It was he that placed thee in this body, as in a prison; where thy capacities
are cramped, thy desires debased, and thy liberty lost. -- It was he that sent
thee into this world, which by all circumstances appears to be a state of short
discipline and trial. And wherefore did he place thee here, when he might have
made thee a more free, unconfined, and happy spirit? -- But check that thought;
it looks like a too presumptuous curiosity. A more needful and important
inquiry is -- What did he place thee here for? -- And what does he expect from
thee whilst thou art here? -- What part has he allotted me to act on the stage
of human life; where He, angels, and men, are spectators of my behavior? The
part he has given me to act here is, doubtless, a very important one; because
it is for eternity It is said when the prince of the Latin poets was asked by
his friend, why he studied so much accuracy in the plan of his poem, the
propriety of his characters, and the purity of his diction; he replied, in
aeternum pingo, I am writing for eternity. What more weighty consideration to
justify and enforce the utmost vigilance and circumspection of life, than this;
in aeternum vivo, I am living for eternity?
. And what is it, but to live up to the dignity of my rational and intellectual
nature; and as becomes a creature born for immortality?

"And tell me, O my soul, (for as I am now about to cultivate a better
acquaintance with thee, to whom I have been too long a stranger, I must try
thee, and put many a close question to thee,) tell me I say, whilst thou
confinest thy desires to sensual gratifications, wherein do thou differ from
the beasts that perish? Captivated by bodily appetites, do thou not act
beneath thyself? Do thou not put thyself upon a level with the lower class of
beings, which were made to serve thee, offer an indignity to thyself, and
despise the work of thy Maker's hands? O remember thy heavenly extract;
remember thou art a spirit, Check then the solicitations of the flesh; and dare
to do nothing that may diminish thy native excellence, dishonor thy high
original, or degrade thy noble nature. Major sum, et ad majors natus, quam quod
sim corporis manciplum. Quod equidem non aliter uspicio quam rinculum libertati
meae circumdatum. Sen. Ep. 66.

"I am too noble, and of too high a birth" (says that excellent moralist) "to
be a slave to my body; which I look upon only as a chain thrown upon the
liberty of my soul."


. -- But let me still urge it. Consider, I say, O my soul, that thou art an
immortal spirit. Thy body dies; but thou, thou must live forever, and thine
eternity will take its tincture from the manner of thy behavior, and the
habits thou contractest, during this thy short copartnership with flesh and
blood. O! do nothing now, but what thou may with pleasure look back upon a
million of ages hence. For know, O my soul, that thy self consciousness, and
reflecting faculties, will not leave thee with thy body; but will follow thee
after death, and be the instrument of unspeakable pleasure or torment to thee
in that separate state of existence As it is not the design of this treatise to
enter into a nice and philosophical disquisition concerning the nature of the
human soul, but to awaken men's attention to the inward operations and
affections of it, (which is by far the most necessary part of self knowledge)
so they who would be more particularly informed concerning its nature and
original, and the various opinions of the ancients about it, may consult Nemes.
de Not. Hom. cap. 1. and a treattise called The Government of the Thoughts,
chap. 1. and Chamber's Cyclopaedia, under the word SOUL.
."

2. In order to a full acquaintance with ourselves, we must endeavor to know
not only what we are, but what we shall be.

And O! what different creatures shall we soon be, from what we now are! Let us
look forwards then, and frequently glance our thoughts toward death; though
they cannot penetrate the darkness of that passage, or reach the state behind
it. That lies veiled from the eyes of our mind; and the great GOD has not
thought fit to throw so much light upon it, as to satisfy the anxious and
inquisitive desires the soul has to know it. However, let us make the best use
we can of that little light which scripture and reason have let in upon this
dark and important subject.

"Compose thy thoughts, O my soul, and imagine how it will fare with thee, when
thou go a naked, unimbodied spirit into a world, an unknown world of
spirits, with all thy self consciousness about thee, where no material object
shall strike thine eye; and where thy dear partner and companion the body
cannot come nigh thee. But where without it thou will be sensible of the most
noble satisfactions, or the most exquisite pains. Embarked in death, thy
passage will be dark; and the shore on which it will land thee, altogether
strange and unknown. -- It does not yet appear what we shall be "Thou must
expire, my soul ordained to range
Through unexperienced scenes, and myst'ries strange:
Dark the event, and dismal the exchange.
But when compelled to leave this house of clay,
And to an unknown somewhere wing thy way;
When time shall be eternity, and thou
Shall be thou know not what, nor where, nor how,
Trembling and pale. what will thou see or do?
Amazing state! -- No wonder that we dread
The thoughts of death or faces of the dead.
His black retinue sorely strikes our mind;
Sickness and pain before, and darkness all behind.
Some courteous ghost, the secret then reveal;
Tell us what you have felt, and we must feel.
You warm us of approaching death, and why
Will you not teach us what it is to die?
But having shot the gulf, you love to view
Succeeding spirits plunged along like you;
Nor lend a friendly hand to guide them through.
When dire disease shall cut, or age unite
The knot of life and suffer us to die:
When after some delay, some trembling strife,
The soul stands quivering on the ridge of life;
With fear and ^ope she throbs, then curious tries
Some strange hereafter, and some hidden skies."
Norris.
"

That revelation, which GOD has been pleased to make of his will to mankind,
was designed rather to fit us for the future happiness, and direct our way to
it, than open to us the particular glories of it; or distinctly show us what it
is. This it has left still very much a mystery; to check our too curious
inquiries into the nature of it, and to bend our thoughts more intently to that
which more concerns us, viz. an habitual preparation for it. And what that is,
we cannot be ignorant, if we believe either our bible or our reason. For both
these assure us, that that which makes us like to GOD, is the only thing that
can fit us for the enjoyment of him. Here then let us hold. Let our great
concern be to be holy as he is holy. And then, then only, are we sure to enjoy
him, in whose light we shall see light. And be the future state of existence
what it will, we shall some way be happy there. And much more happy than we can
now conceive; though in what particular manner we know not, because GOD has
not revealed it.

CHAP. III.
The several Relations wherein we stand to GOD, to CHRIST, and our fellow
creatures.
II. SELF knowledge requires us to be well acquainted with the various
relations in which we stand to other beings, and the several duties that result
from those relations. And,

1. Our first and principal concern is to consider the relation wherein we
stand to him who gave us being.

We are the creatures of his hand, and the objects of his care. His power
upholds the being his goodness gave us. His bounty accommodates us with the
blessings of this life, and his grace provides for us the happiness of a
better. -- Nor are we merely his creatures, but his rational and intelligent
creatures. It is the dignity of our natur^l, that we are capable of knowing and
enjoying him that made us. And as the rational creatures of GOD, there are two
relations especially that we bear to him; the frequent consideration of which
is absolutely necessary to a right self knowledge. For as our Creator, he is
our king and father. And as his creatures we are the subjects of his kingdom,
and the children of his family.

1. We are the subjects of his kingdom. And as such we are bound,

1. To yield a faithful obedience to the laws of his kingdom. -- And the
advantages by which these come recommended to us above all human laws are many.
-- They are calculated for the private interest of every one, as well as that
of the public; and are designed to promote our present, as well as our future
happiness. -- They are plainly and explicitly published; easily understood; and
in fair and legible characters writ in every man's heart; and the wisdom,
reason, and necessity of them are readily discerned. -- They are urged with the
most mighty motives that can possible affect the human heart. And if any of
them are difficult, the most effectual grace is freely offered to encourage and
assist our obedience: Advantages which no human laws have to enforce the
observance of them. -- 2. As his subjects we must readily pay him the homage
due to his sovereignty. And this is no less than the homage of the heart;
humbly acknowledging that we hold every thing of him, and have every thing from
him. Earthly princes are forced to be content with verbal acknowledgments, or
mere formal homage. For they can command nothing but what is external. But GOD,
who knows and looks at the hearts of all his creatures, will accept of nothing
but what comes from thence. He demands the adoration of our whole souls, which
is most justly due to him who formed them, and gave them the very capacities to
know and adore him. -- 3. As faithful subjects, we must cheerfully pay him the
tribute he requires of us. This is not like the tribute which earthly kings
exact; who as much depend upon their subjects for the support of their power,
as their subjects do upon them for the protection of their property. But the
tribute GOD requires of us, is a tribute of praise and honor, which he stands
in no need of from us: For his power is independent, and his glory immutable;
and he is infinitely able of himself to support the dignity of his universal
government. But it is the most natural duty we owe to him as creatures. For to
praise him, is only to show forth his praise; to glorify him, to celebrate his
glory; and to honor him, is to render him and his ways honorable in the eyes
and esteem of others. And as this is the most natural duty that creatures owe
to their creator, so it is a tribute he requires of every one of them in
proportion to their respective talents and abilities to pay it. -- 4. As
dutiful subjects, we must contentedly and quietly submit to the methods and
administrations of his government, however dark, involved or intricate. All
governments have their arcana imperii, or secrets of state; which common
subjects cannot penetrate. And therefore they cannot competently judge of the
wisdom or rectitude of certain public measures; because they are ignorant
either of the springs of them, or the ends (...) them, or the expediency of the
means arising from the particular situation of things in the present juncture.
And how much truer is this with relation to GOD's government of the world;
whose wisdom is far above our reach, and whose ways are not as ours. Whatever
then may be the present aspect and appearance of things, as dutiful subjects we
are bound to acquiesce; to ascribe wisdom and righteousness to our maker, in
confidence that the king and judge of all the earth will do right. -- Again, 5.
As good subjects of GOD's kingdom, we are bound to pay a due regard and
reverence to his ministers; especially if they discover an uncorrupted fidelity
to his cause, and a pure unaffected goal for his honor; if they do not seek
their own interest more than that of their divine master. The ministers of
earthly princes too often do this, and it would be happy if all the ministers
and ambassadors of the heavenly king were entirely clear of the imputation. It
is no uncommon thing for the honor of an earthly monarch to be wounded through
the sides of his ministers. The defamation and slander that is directly thrown
at them is obliquely intended against him; and as such it is taken. So to
attempt to make the ministers of the gospel, in general, the objects of
derision, as some do, plainly shows a mind very dissolute and disaffected to
GOD and religion itself; and is to act a part very unbecoming the dutiful
subjects of his kingdom. Lastly. As good subjects, we are to do all we can to
promote the interest of his kingdom; by defending the wisdom of his
administrations, and endeavoring to reconcile others thereunto, under all the
darkness and difficulties that may appear therein, in opposition to the profane
censures of the prosperous wicked, and the doubts and dismays of the afflicted
righteous. This is to act in character as loyal subjects of the king of heaven.
And whoever forgets this part of his character, or acts contrary to it, shows a
great degree of self ignorance.

But, 2. As the creatures of GOD, we are not only the subjects of his kingdom,
but the children of his family. And to this relation, and the obligations of
it, must we carefully attend, if we would attain the true knowledge of
ourselves. We are his children by creation; in which respect he is truly our
father. (...). lxiv. 8.
But now, O LORD, thou art our father, we are the clay, and thou our potter;
and we all are the work of thine hands. And in a more special sense we are his
children by adoption. Call. iii. 26.
For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. And therefore, 1.
We are under the highest obligations to love him as our father. The love of
children to parents is founded on gratitude for benefits received, which can
never be requited; and ought in reason to be proportioned to those benefits.
And what duty more natural than to love our benefactors? What love and
gratitude then is due to him, from whom we have received the greatest benefit,
even that of our being, and every thing that contributes to the comfort of it?
-- 2. As his children we must honor him; that is, must speak honorably of
him, and for him; and carefully avoid every thing that may tend to dishonor
his holy name and ways. Mal. i. 6.
A son honors his father: -- If then I be a father, where is mine honor? --
3. As our father we are to apply to him for what we want. Whether should
children go, but to their father, for protection, help and relief in every
danger, difficulty and distress? -- And 4. We must trust his power and wisdom,
and paternal goodness, to provide for us, take care of us, and do for us, that
which is best; and what that is he knows best. To be anxiously fearful what
will become of us, and discontented and perplexed under the apprehensions of
future evils, whilst we are in the hands and under the care of our father which
is in heaven, is not to act like children. Earthly parents cannot avert from
their children all the calamities they fear, because their wisdom and power are
limited; but our all wise and almighty father in heaven can. They may possibly
want love and tenderness, but our heavenly father cannot. Isa. xlix. 15. -- 5.
As children, we must quietly acquiesce in his disposals, and not expect to see
into the wisdom of all his will. It would be indecent and undutiful in a child
to dispute the authority, or question the wisdom, or neglect the orders of his
parents every time he could not discern the reason and design thereof. Much
more unreasonable and unbecoming is such a behavior toward GOD, who gives
not account of any of his matters; whose judgments are unsearchable, and whose
ways are past finding out. Job xxxiii. 13. Romans xi. 33.
-- Lastly, As children, we must patiently submit to his discipline and
correction. Earthly parents may sometimes punish their children through
passion, or for their pleasure; but our heavenly father always corrects his for
their profit, Heb. xii. 10.
and only if need be, 1 Pet. i. 6.
and never so much as their iniquities deserve. Ezra ix. 13.
-- Under his fatherly rebukes then let us be ever humble and submissive. --
Such now is the true filial disposition. Such a temper, and such a behavior
should we show toward GOD, if we would act in character as his children.

These then are the two special relations, which as creatures, we stand in to
GOD. And not to act toward him the manner beforementioned, is to show that we
are ignorant of, or have not yet duly considered our obligations to him as his
subjects and his children; or that we are as yet ignorant both of GOD and
ourselves. -- Thus we see how directly the knowledge of ourselves leads us to
the knowledge of GOD. So true is the observation of a late pious and very
worthy divine, that "He that is a stranger to himself, is a stranger to GOD,
and to every thing that may denominate him wise and happy See Mr Baxter's
dedicatory epistle, prefixed to his treatise on the benefits of self
acqucintance.
."

But, 2. In order to know ourselves there is another important relation we
should often think of, and that is, That in which we stand to JESUS CHRIST our
Redeemer.

The former was common to us as men; this is peculiar to us as christians, and
opens to us a new scene of duties and obligations, which a man can never
forget, that does not grossly forget himself. For as christians, we are the
disciples, the followers, and the servants of Christ, redeemed by him.

And 1. As the disciples of Christ, we are to learn of Him. To take our
religious sentiments only from his gospel, in opposition to all the
authoritative dictates of men, who are weak and fallible as ourselves. Call no
man master on earth. While some affect to distinguish themselves by party
names, as the Corinthians formerly did, (for which the Apostle blames them) one
saying, I am of Paul; another, I am of Apollos; another, I am of Cephas, 1 Cor.
i. 12.
let us remember that we are the disciples of Christ; and in this sense make
mention of his name only. It is really injurious to it, to seek to distinguish
ourselves by any other. There is more carnality in such party distinctions,
denominations and attachments, than many good souls are aware of; though not
more than the Apostle Paul (who was unwillingly placed at the head of one
himself) has (...) them of. 1 Cor. iii. 4.
-- We are of Christ; our concern is, to honor that super^our denomination, by
living up to it. And to adhere inflexibly to his gospel (...) the only rule of
our faith, the guide of our life, and the foundation of our hope; whatever
contempt or abuse we may suffer either from the profane or bigoted part of
mankind for so doing. -- 2. As christians we are followers of CHRIST; and
therefore bound to imitate him and copy after that most excellent pattern he
has set us, who has left us an example that we should follow his steps. 1
Pet. ii. 21.
To see that the same holy temper be in us which was in him; and to discover it
in the same manner that he did, and upon like occasions. To this he calls us,
Matt. xi. 29.
and no man is any further a christian than as he is a follower of Christ;
aiming at a more perfect conformity to that most perfect example which he has
set us of universal goodness. -- 3. As christians, we are the servants of
CHRIST; and the various duties which servants owe to their masters in any
degree, those we owe to him in the highest degree; who expects we should behave
ourselves in his service with that fidelity and zeal, and steady regard to his
honor and interest, at all times, which we are bound to by virtue of this
relation, and to which his unmerited and unlimited goodness and love lays us
under infinite obligations. -- Lastly, We are moreover his redeemed servants;
and as such are under the strongest motives to love and trust him.

This deserves to be more particularly considered, because it opens to us
another view of the human nature, in which we should often survey ourselves, if
we desire to know ourselves; and that is, as depraved or degenerate beings. The
inward contest we so sensibly feel, at some seasons especially, between a good
and a bad principle, (called in scripture language the flesh and the spirit,)
of which some of the wisest heathens seemed not to be ignorant: (...) Pythag.
Aur. Carm.

A fatal inbred strife does lurk within, The cause of all this misery and sin.


This, I say, is demonstration that some way or other the human nature has
contracted an ill bias, (and how that came about the sacred scriptures have
sufficiently informed us) and that it is not what it was when it came
originally out of the hands of its maker; so that the words which St. Paul
spoke with reference to the Jews in particular, are justly applicable, to the
present state of mankind in general, there is none righteous, no not one; --
they are all gone out of the way, they are together become unprofitable, there
is none that does good, no not one. Romans iii. 10, 12.


This is a very mortifying thought; but an undeniable truth, and one of the
first principles of that science we are treating of, and very necessary to be
attended to, if we would be sensible of the duty and obligations we owe to
Christ as the great REDEEMER; in which character he appears for the relief and
recovery of mankind under this their universal depravity.

The two miserable effects of the human apostasy are, 2. That perverse
dispositions grow up in our minds from early infancy, soon settle into vicious
habits, and render us weak, and unwilling to obey the dictates of conscience
and reason: This is commonly called the dominion of sin. Now in both these
respects did Christ the Lamb of GOD come to take away the sin of the world;
that is, to take away the reigning power of it by the operation of his grace
and its condemning power by the atonement of his blood; to sanctify us by his
spirit and justify us by his death; by the former he reconciles us to GOD, and
by the latter he reconciles GOD to us By this phrase I do not mean that GOD was
implacable or absolutely irreconcilable to us till he was pacified by the
vicarious sufferings of his son; for how then could he have appointed him to
die as our propitiatory sacrifice? But that the death of Christ is the clearest
demonstration of GOD's willingness to be actually reconciled to us.
, and is at once our righteousness and strength. He died to purchase for us the
happiness we had forfeited, and sends his grace and spirit to fit us for that
happiness he has thus purchased. So complete is his redemption! so precisely
adapted is the remedy he has provided, to the malady we had contracted! -- "O
blessed Redeemer of wretched ruined creatures, how unspeakable are the
obligations I owe thee! But ah! How insensible am I to those obligations! the
saddest symptom of degeneracy I find in my nature, is that base ingratitude of
heart which renders me so unaffected with thine astonishing compassions. Till I
know thee, I cannot know myself: And when I survey myself may I ever think of
thee! May the daily consciousness of my weakness and guilt lead my thoughts to
thee; and may every thought of thee kindle in my heart the most ardent glow of
gratitude to thee, O thou divine, compassionate friend, lover, and REDEEMER of
mankind!"

Whoever then he be that calls himself a christian, that is, who professes to
take the gospel of Christ for a divine revelation, and the only rule of his
faith and practice; but at the same time, pays a greater regard to the dictates
of men, than to the doctrines of CHRIST; who loses sight of that great example
of Christ, which should animate his christian walk, is unconcerned about his
service, honor, and interest, and excludes the consideration of his merits and
atonement, from his hope of happiness; he forgets that he is a christian; he
does not consider in what relation he stands to CHRIST, (which is one great
part of his character) and consequently discovers a great degree of self
ignorance.

3. Self knowledge moreover implies a due attention to the several relations in
which we stand to our fellow creatures: And the obligations that result from
thence.

If we know ourselves, we shall remember the condescension, benignity, and love
that is due to inferiors: The affability, friendship and kindness we ought to
show to equals: The regard, deference and honor which belong to superiors:
And the candor, integrity, and benevolence we owe to all.

The particular duties requisite in these relations are too numerous to be here
mentioned. Let it suffice to say, that if a man does not well consider the
several relations of life in which he stands to others, and does not take care
to preserve the decorum and propriety of those relations, he may justly be
charged with self ignorance.

And this is so evident in itself, and so generally allowed, that nothing is
more common than to say, when a person does not behave with due decency toward
his superiors, such an one does not understand himself. But why may not this
with equal justice be said of those who act in an ill manner toward their
inferiors? The expression, I know, is not so often thus applied; but I see no
reason why it should not, since one is as common, and as plain an instance of
self ignorance as the other. Nay, of the two, perhaps men in general are more
apt to be defective in their duty and behavior toward those beneath them,
than they are toward those that are above them. And the reason seems to be,
because an apprehension of the displeasure of their superiors, and the
detrimental consequences which may accrue from thence, may be a check upon
them, and engage them to pay the just regards which they expect. But there
being no such check to restrain them from violating the duties they owe to
inferiors, (from whose displeasure they have little to fear) they are more
ready under certain temptations to treat them in an unbecoming manner. And as
wisdom and self knowledge will direct a man to be particularly careful, lest he
neglect those duties he is most apt to forget; so as to the duties he owes to
inferiors, in which he is most in danger of transgressing, he ought more
strongly to urge upon himself the indispensable obligations of religion and
conscience. And if he does not, but suffers himself through the violence of
ungoverned passion, to be transported into the excesses of rigor, tyranny, and
oppression, toward those whom God and nature have put into his power, it is
certain that he does not know himself; is not acquainted with his own
particular weakness; is ignorant of the duty of his relation; and whatever he
may think of himself, has not the true spirit of government; because he wants
the art of self government. For he that is unable to govern himself, can never
be fit to govern others.

Would we know ourselves then, we must consider ourselves as creatures, as
christians, and as men; and remember the obligations which, as such, we are
under to GOD, to CHRIST, and our fellow men; in the several relations we bear
to them, in order to maintain the propriety, and fulfill the duties of those
relations.

CHAP. IV.
We must duly consider the Rank and Station of Life in which Providence has
placed us, and what it is that becomes and adorns it.
III. A MAN that knows himself, will deliberately consider and attend to the
particular rank and station in life in which providence has placed him; and
what is the duty and decorum of that station; what part is given him to act;
what character to maintain; and with what dece^^y and propriety he acts that
part, or maintains that character.

For a man to assume a character, or aim at a part that does not belong to him,
is affectation. And whence is it that affectation of any kind appears so
ridiculous, and exposes men to universal and just contempt, but because it is a
certain indication of self ignorance? Whence is it that many seem so willing to
be thought something when they are nothing; and seek to excel in those things
in which they cannot; whilst they neglect those things in which they may excel?
Whence is it that they counteract the intention of nature and providence; that
when these intended them one thing, they would fain be another? Whence, I say,
but from an ignorance of themselves, the rank of life they are in, and of the
part and character which properly belong to them?

It is a just observation, and an excellent document of a moral heathen, that
human life is a "Drama, and mankind the actors, who have their several parts
assigned them by the master of the theater, who stands behind the scenes, and
observes in what manner every one acts. Some have a short part allotted them,
and some a long one; some a low and some a high one. It is not he that acts the
highest or most shining part on the stage, that comes off with the greatest
applause; but he that acts his part best, whatever it be. To take care then to
act our respective parts in life well, is ours; but to choose what part in life
we shall act, is not ours, but GOD's Epictet, Enchir. cap. 23. -- Quomodo
fabula, sic vita; non quam diu, sed quam been acta sit, resert. Sen. Ep. 69,
ad. sin. Life is a stage play; it matters not how long we act, so we act well.
-- Non est bonum, vivere, sed been vivere. Id. de. benef. lib. 3. cap. 31. It
is not life but living well, that is the blessing.
." -- But a man can never act his part well, if he does not attend to it; does
not know what becomes it; much less, if he affect to act another, which nature
never designed him. It is always self ignorance that leads a man to act out of
character.

Is it a mean and low station of life thou art in? Know then, that providence
calls thee to the exercise of industry, contentment, submission, patience,
hope, and humble dependence on him, and a respectful deference to thy
superiors. In this way thou may shine through shine obscurity; and render
thyself amiable in the sight of GOD and man. And not only so, but find more
satisfaction; safety and self enjoyment, than they who move in a higher sphere,
from whence they are in danger of falling.

But has providence called thee to act in a more public character, and for a
more extensive benefit to the world? -- Thy first care then ought to be, that
thy example, as far as its influence reaches, may be an encouragement to the
practice of universal virtue. And next to shine in those virtues especially
which best adorn thy station; as benevolence, charity, wisdom, moderation,
firmness, and inviolable integrity; with an undismayed fortitude to press
through all opposition in accomplishing those ends which thou have a prospect
and probability of attaining for the apparent good of mankind.

And as self acquaintance will teach us what part in life we ought to act, so
the knowledge of that will show us whom we ought to imitate and wherein. We are
not to take example of conduct from those who have a very different part
assigned them from ours; unless in those things that are universally ornamental
and exemplary. If we do, we shall but expose our affectation and weakness, and
ourselves to contempt for acting out of character. For what is decent in one
may be ridiculous in another. Nor must we blindly follow those who move in the
same sphere, and sustain the same character with ourselves; but only in those
things that are befitting that character. For it is not the person, but the
character, we are to regard; and to imitate him no farther than he keeps to
that.

This caution particularly concerns youth, who are apt to imitate their
superiors very implicitly, and especially such as shine in the profession,
they themselves are intended for; but for want of judgment to distinguish what
is fit and decent, are apt to imitate their very foibles; which a partiality
for their persons makes them deem as excellencies: And thereby they become
doubly ridiculous, both by acting out of character themselves, and by a weak
and servile imitation of others in the very things in which they do so too. To
maintain a character then with decency, we must keep our eye only upon that
which is proper to it.

In fine, as no man can excel in every thing, we must consider what part is
allotted us to act, in the station in which providence has placed us, and to
keep to that, be it what it will, and seek to excel in that only.

CHAP. V.
Every Man should be well acquainted with his own Talents and Capacities; and
in what Manner they are to be exercised and improved to the greatest Advantage.
IV. A MAN cannot be said to know himself, till he is well acquainted with his
proper talents and capacities; knows for what ends he received them, and how
they may be most fitly, applied and improved for those ends.

A wise and self understanding man, instead of aiming at talents he has not,
will set about cultivating those he has; as the way in which providence points
out his proper usefulness.

As, in order to the edification of the church, the spirit of God at first
conferred upon the ministers of it a great variety of spiritual gifts, 1 Cor.
xii. 8 -- 10.
so, for the good of the community, GOD is pleased now to confer upon men a
great variety of natural talents; and every one has his proper gift of GOD;
one after this manner, another after that. 1 Cor. vii. 7.
And every one is to take care not to neglect, but to stir up the gift of GOD
which is in him. 1 Timothy iv. 14, 2 Timothy i. 6.
Because it was given him to be improved. And not only the abuse, but the
neglect of it must hereafter be accounted for. Witness the doom of that
unprofitable servant, who laid up his single pound in a napkin; Luke, xix. 20,
24.
and of him who went and hid his talent in the earth. Matt. xxv. 25, 30.


It is certainly a sign of great self ignorance, for a man to venture out of
his depth, or attempt any thing he wants opportunity or capacity to accomplish.
And therefore a wise man will consider with himself, before he undertakes any
thing of consequence, whether he has abilities to carry him through it, and
whether the issue of it is like to be for his credit; lest he sink under the
weight he lays upon himself, and incur the just censure of rashness,
presumption and folly, See Luke xiv. 28 -- 32. -- Buccae Noscenda est mensura
tuoe, spectandaque rebus In summis, minimis, -- Juv. Sat. 11.

-- versate diu, quid far recusent Quid valiant humeri. -- Hor. de. Art. Poet.

He that takes up a burden that is too heavy for him, is in a fair way to break
his back.

(...) Epict. Enchir. cap. 36.

In every business consider, first, what it is you are about; and then your own
ability, whether it be sufficient to carry you through it.




It is no uncommon thing for some who excel in one thing, to imagine they may
excel in every thing. And not content with that share of merit which every one
allows them, are still catching at that which does not belong to them. Why
should a good orator wish to be thought a poet? Why must a celebrated divine
set up for a politician? Or a statesman affect the philosopher? Or a mechanic^
(...) scholar? Or a wise man labor to to be thought a wit? This is a weakness
that flows from self ignorance, and is incident to the greatest men. Nature
seldom forms a universal genius; but deals out her favors in the present state
with a parsimonious hand. -- Many a man by this foible has weakened a well
established reputation. -- non omnia possumus omnes. Virg.

Caecilius, a famous Rhetorician of Sicily who lived in the time of Augustus,
and writ a treatise on the sublime (which is censured by Longinus in the
beginning of his) was a man of a hasty and enterprising spirit, and very apt to
overshoot himself on all occasions; and particularly ventured out of his depth
in his Comparison of Demosibenos and Cicero. Whereupon Plutarch makes this sage
and candid remark. "If (says he) it was a thing obvious and easy for every man
to know himself, possibly that saying, (...) had not passed for a divine
oracle." Plut. Live. Vol. vii. page 347.




CHAP. VI.
We must be well acquainted with our Inabilities, and those Things in which we
are naturally deficient, as well as those in which we excel.
V. WE must, in order to a thorough self acquaintance, not only consider our
talents and proper abilities, but have an eye to our frailties and deficiencies
that we may know where our weakness, as well as our strength lies. Otherwise,
like Samson, we may run ourselves into infinite temptations and troubles.

Every man has a weak side. Every wise man knows where it is, and will be sure
to keep a doubble guard there.

There is some wisdom in concealing a weakness. This cannot be done, till it be
first known, nor can it be known without a good degree of self acquaintance.

It is strange to observe what pains some men are at to expose themselves; to
signalize their own folly; and to set out to the most public view those things
which they ought to be ashamed to think should ever enter into their character.
But so it is; some men seem to be ashamed of those things which would be their
glory, whilst others glory in their shame. Phil. iii. 10.


The greatest weakness in man is to publish his weakness and to appear fond to
have them known. But vanity will often prompt a man to this; who, unacquainted
with the measure of his capacities, attempts things out of his power, and
beyond his reach; whereby he makes the world acquainted with two things to his
disadvantage, which they were ignorant of before; viz. his deficiency, and his
self ignorance in appearing so blind to it.

It is ill judged (though very common) to be less ashamed of a want of temper
than understanding. For it is no real dishonor or fault in a man to have but a
small ability of mind, provided he have not the vanity to set up for a genius
(which would be as ridiculous, as for a man of small strength and stature of
body, to set up for a champion) because this is what he cannot help. But a man
may in a good measure correct the fault of his natural temper, if he be well
acquainted with it, and duly watchful over it. And therefore to betray a
prevailing weakness of temper, or an ungoverned passion, diminishes a man's
reputation much more than to discover a weakness of judgment or understanding.
-- But what is most dishonorable of all is, for a man at once to discover a
great genius and an ungoverned mind. Because that strength of reason and
understanding he is master of, gives him a great disadvantage for the
government of his passions. And therefore his suffering himself notwithstanding
to be governed by them, shows, that he has too much neglected or misapplied
his natural talent; and willingly submitted to the tyranny of those lusts and
passions, over which nature has furnished him with abilities to have secured
an easy conquest.

A wise man has his foibles as well as a fool. But the difference between them
is, that the foibles of the one are known to himself, and concealed from the
world; the foibles of the other are known to the world, and concealed from
himself. The wise man sees those frailties in himself, which others cannot; but
the fool is blind to those blemishes in his character, which are conspicuous to
every body else. Whence it appears, that self knowledge is that which makes the
main difference between a wise man and a fool, in the moral sense of that word.

CHAP. VII.
Concerning the Knowledge of our Constitutional Sins.
VI. SELF acquaintance shows a man the particular sins he is most exposed and
addicted to; and discovers not only what is ridiculous, but what is criminal,
in his conduct and temper.

A man's outward actions are generally the plainest index of his inward
dispositions. And by the allowed sins of his life, you may know the reigning
vices of his mind. Is he addicted to luxury or debauch? Sensuality then appears
to be his prevailing taste. Is he given to revenge and cruelty? Choler and
malice then reign in his heart. Is he confident, bold and enterprising?
Ambition appears to be the secret spring. Is he fly and designing, given to
intrigue and artifice? You may conclude, there is a natural subtilty of temper
that prompts him to this; and this secret disposition is criminal, in
proportion to the degree in which these outward actions, which spring from it,
transgress the bounds of reason and virtue.

Every man has something peculiar in the turn or cast of his mind, which
distinguishes him as much as the particular constitution of his body. And both
these, viz. his particular turn of mind, and constitution of body, not only
incline and dispose him to some kind of sins, more than to others, but render
the practice of certain virtues much more easy. Men, with regard to their
bodies, and bodily appetites, are pretty much alike; but with regard to their
souls, and their mental tastes and dispositions, they are often as different as
if they were quite of another species; governed by different views,
entertertained with different pleasures, animated with different hopes, and
affected by different motives, and distinguished by as different tempers and
inclinations, as if they were not of the same kind. So that I am very ready to
believe, that there is not a greater difference between an angel, and some of
the best and wisest of men; or between a devil, and some of the worst and
wickedest of men, with regard to their tempers and dispositions, than there is
between some sort of men, and some others. And what inclines me to this
sentiment is, considering the easy transition which nature always observes in
passing from one order or kind of beings to another (which I have before taken
notice of) together with the prodigious difference there appears to be between
some and others of the human species, almost in every thing belonging to their
souls. For some there are "in whom" (as one expresses it) "one would think
nature had placed every thing the wrong way;" depraved in their opinions,
unintelligible in their reasoning, irregular in their actions, and vicious in
every disposition. Whilst in some others we see almost every thing amiable and
excellent that can adorn and exalt the human mind, under the disadvantages of
mortality.


Now these sins to which men are commonly most inclined, and the temptations
which they have the least power to resist, are, and not improperly, called
their constitutional sins; their peculiar frailties; and, in scripture, their
Psalm. xviii. 32.
own iniquities, and the sins which Heb. xii. 1.
do most easily beset them (...) the well circumstanced sin.
.

"As in the humors of the body, so in the vices of the mind, there is one
predominant; which has an ascendant over us, and leads and governs us. It is in
the body of sin, what the heart is in the body of our nature; it begins to live
first, and dies last. And whilst it lives, it communicates life and spirit to
the whole body of sin; and when it dies, the body of sin expires with it. It is
the sin to which our constitution leads, our circumstances betray, and custom
inslaves us; the sin to which not our virtues only, but vices too, lower their
topsail, and submit; the sin, which when we would impose upon GOD and our
consciences, we excuse and disguise with all imaginable artifice and sophistry;
but, when we are sincere with both, we oppose first, and conquer last. It is,
in a word, the sin which reigns and rules in the unregenerate, and too often
alarms and disturbs (ah! that I could say no more) the regenerate See Dr.
Lucas's Sermons, Vol. 1. page 151.
.

Some are more inclined to the sins of the flesh; sensuality, intemperance,
uncleanness, sloth, self indulgence, and excess in animal gratifications.
Others to the sins of the spirit; pride, malice, covetousness, ambition, wrath,
revenge, envy, etc. And I am persuaded there are few, but, upon a thorough
search into themselves, may find that some one of these sins has ordinarily a
greater power over them than the rest. Others often observe it in them if they
themselves do not. And for a man not to know his predominant iniquity is great
self ignorance indeed; and a sign that he has all his life lived far from home;
because he is not acquainted with that relating to himself, which every one who
is but half an hour in his company, perhaps may be able to inform him of. Hence
proceeds that extreme weakness which some discover in censuring others, for the
very same faults they are guilty of themselves, and perhaps in a much higher
degree; on which the Apostle Paul animadverts, Romans ii. 1. Quis tulerit
Gracehos de seditione querentes? Clodius accuset moechus? Catilina Cat^egum?
Juv. Sat. 2.
.

It must be owned, it is an irksome and disagreeable business for a man to turn
his own accuser; to search after his own faults, and keep his eye upon that
which gives him shame and pain to see. It is like tearing open an old wound.
But it is better to do this, than to let it mortify. The wounds of the
conscience, like those of the body, cannot be well cured till they are searched
to the bottom; and they cannot be searched without pain. A man that is engaged
in the study of himself, must be content to know the worst of himself O nimis
gravis angustia! Si me inspicio, non tolero, meipsum: Si non inspicio, nescio
meipsum. Si me (...), terret me facies mea: Si me non considero, falsit me
damnatio me. Si me video, horror est intolerabilis: Si non vide^ ^mors est
inevitabilis. O grievous straight! If I look into myself, I cannot endure
myself, If I look not into myself, I cannot know myself. If I consider myself,
my own face affrights me: If I consider not myself, my damnation deceive me. If
I see myself, my horror is intolerable: If I see (...) myself death is
unavoidable. Ans^lme.
.

Do not therefore shut your eyes against your darling sin, or be averse to find
it out. Why should you study to conceal or excuse it; and fondly cherish that
viper in your bosom? -- (...) men deal by their sins, as some ladies do by
their persons. When their beauty is decayed, they seek to hide it from
themselves by false glasses, and from others by paint. So, many seek to hide
their sins from themselves by false glosses, and from others by excuses, or
false colors Baxter.
." But the greatest cheat they put upon themselves. Prove. xxviii. 13.
They that cover their sins shall not prosper. It is dangerous self flattery to
give soft and smoothing names to sins, in order to disguise their nature.
Rather lay your hand upon your heart, and Exodus iv. 6.
thrust it into your bosom, though it come out (as Moses's did) leprous as snow
Initium est (...), not^^a peccati: Nam qui peccare se neseit, corrigi non rult.
Deprehendance oportet, antequam emendes. Quidam vitiis glorimour. To existimas
aliquid de remedio cogitare, qui mala sun virtut^^^ loco Dumerant? Ideo quantum
potes teipsum coargos: Inquire in to: Accusatoris primum partibus fungere,
deinde judicis, sevissime deprecatorit. Aliquando te offend. Sen. Epist. 28.
-- The knowledge of sin is the first step toward amendment; for he that does
not know he has offended, is not willing to be reproved. You must therefore
find out yourself, before you can amend yourself. Some glory in their vices.
And do you imagine they have any thought about reforming who place their very
vices in the room of virtues? Therefore reprove thyself; search thyself very
narrowly. First turn accuser to thyself, then a judge, and then a suppliant.
And dare for once to displease thyself.
.

And to find out our most beloved sin, let us consider what are those worldly
objects or amusements which give us the highest delight; this, it is probable,
will lead us directly to some one of our darling iniquities, if it be a sin of
commission: And what are those duties which we read, or hear of from the word
of GOD, to which we find ourselves most disinclined? And this, in all
likelihood, will help us to detect some of our peculiar sins of omission;
which, without such previous examination we may not be sensible of. And thus we
may make a proficiency in one considerable branch of self knowledge Ethocipsum
argumentum est in melius translati animi quod vitia sua, quae adhuc ignorabat,
videt. Sen. Epist. 6. -- -- It is a good argument of a reformed mind, that it
sees those vices in itself, which it was before ignorant of.

A man's predominant sin usually arises out of his predominant passion; which
therefore he should diligently observe. The nature and force of which is
beautifully described by a late great master of English verse.

On different senses different objects strike,
Hence different passions more or less inflame,
As strong or weak, the organs of the frame:
And hence one master passion in the breast,
Like Aaron's serpe^^ swallows up the rest.
Nature its mother, habit is its nurse;
Wit, spirit, (...), but make it worse;
Reason itself but gives it edge and power,
As heaven's blessed beam turns vinegar more sours.
Ah I if she lead not arms as well as (...),
What can she more than tell us we are fools?
Teach us to mourn our nature, not to mend;
A sharp accuser, but a helpless friend!
Pope's Essay on Man.
.

CHAP. VIII.
The Knowledge of our most dangerous Temptations, necessary to Self Knowledge.
VII. A MAN that rightly knows himself, is acquainted with his peculiar
temptations; and knows when, and in what circumstances, he is in the greatest
danger of transgressing.

Reader, if ever you would know yourself, you must examine this point
thoroughly. And if you have never yet done it, make a pause when you have read
this chapter, and do it now. Consider in what company you are most apt to lose
the possession and government of yourself; on what occasions you are apt to be
most vain and unguarded, most warm and precipitant. Flee that company, avoid
those occasions, if you would keep your conscience clear. What is it that robs
you most of your time and your temper? If you have a due regard to the
improvement of the one, and the preservation of the other, you will regret such
a loss; and shun the occasions of it, as carefully as you would a road beset
with robbers.

But especially must you attend to the occasions which most usually betray you
into your favorite vices; and consider the spring from whence they arise, and
the circumstances which most favor them. They arise doubtless from your
natural temper, which strongly disposes and inclines you to them. That temper
then, or particular turn of desire, must be carefully watched over as a most
dangerous quarter. And the opportunities and circumstances which favor those
inclinations must be resolutely avoided, as the strongest temptations. For the
way to subdue a criminal inclination is, first, to avoid the known occasions
that excite it; and then to curb the first motions of it Principiis obsta: sero
medicina paratur, Cum mala per longas invaluere moras. Ovid.
. And thus having no opportunity of being indulged, it will of itself in time
lose its force, and fail of its wonted victory.

The surest way to conquer, is sometimes to decline a battle; to weary out the
enemy, by keeping him at bay. Fabius Maximus did not use this stratagem more
successfully against Hannibal than a christian may against his peculiar vice,
if he be but watchful of his advantages. It is dangerous to provoke an unequal
enemy to the fight, or run into such a situation, where we cannot expect to
escape without a disadvantageous encounter.

It is of unspeakable importance, in order to self knowledge and self
government, to be acquainted with all the accesses and avenues to sin, and to
observe which way it is that we ourselves too often approach it; and to set
reason and conscience to guard those passes, those usual inlets to vice, which
if a man once enters, he will find a retreat extremely difficult -- me vestigia
terrent Omnia te adversam spectantia, nulla retrorsum. Hor. -- Facilis
descensus averni. Sed revocare gradum, etc. Virg,
.

"Watchfulness, which is always necessary, is chiefly so when the first
assaults are made. For then the enemy is most easily repulsed; if we never
suffer him to get within us, but upon the very first approach draw up our
forces, and fight him without the gate. And this will be more manifest, if we
observe by what methods and degrees temptations grow upon us. -- The first
thing that presents itself to the mind is a plain single thought; this straight
is improved into a strong imagination; that again enforced by a sensible
delight; then follow evil motions; and when these are once stirred there wants
nothing but the assent of the will, and then the work is finished. Now the
first steps to this are seldom thought worth our care; sometimes not taken
notice of; so that the enemy is frequently got close up to us, and even within
our trenches, before we observe him." Stanhope's Thomas a Kempis, page 22.


As men have their particular sins, which do most easily beset them; so they
have their particular temptations, which do most easily overcome them. That may
be a very great temptation to one, which is none at all to another. And if a
man does not know what are his greatest temptations, he must have been a great
stranger indeed to the business of self employment.

As the subtle enemy of mankind takes care to draw men gradually into sin, so
he usually draws them by degrees into temptation. As he disguises the sin, so
he conceals the temptation to it; well knowing, that were they but once
sensible of their danger of sin, they would be ready to be on their guard
against it. Would we know ourselves thoroughly then, we must get acquainted not
only with our most usual temptations, that we be not unawares drawn into sin,
but with the previous steps and preparatory circumstances, which make way for
those temptations, that we be not drawn unawares into the occasions of sin; for
those things which lead us into temptations are to be considered as
temptations, as well as those which immediately lead us into sin. And a man
that knows himself will be aware of his remote temptations, as well as the more
immediate ones; e. g. If he find the company of a passionate man is a
temptation (as Solomon tells us it is, Prove. xxii. 24, 25.) he will not only
avoid it, but those occasions that may lead him into it. And the petition in
the Lord's Prayer makes it as much a man's duty to be upon his guard against
temptation, as under it. Nor can a man pray from his heart that GOD would not
lead him into temptation, if he take no care himself to avoid it.

CHAP. IX.
Self Knowledge discovers the secret Prejudices of the Heart.
VIII. ANOTHER important branch of self knowledge is, for a man to be
acquainted with his own prejudices; or those secret prepossessions of his
heart, which, though so deep and latent, that he may not be sensible of them,
are often so strong and prevalent as to give a mighty, but imperceptible bias
to the mind.

There is no one particular that I know of wherein self knowledge more
eminently consists than it does in this. It being therefore so essential a
branch of my subject, and a point to which men seldom pay an attention equal to
its importance, I beg leave to treat it with a little more precision.

These prejudices of the human mind may be considered with regard to opinions,
persons, and things.

1. With regard to opinions.

It is a common observation, but well expressed by a late celebrated writer,
"that we set out in life with such poor beginnings of knowledge, and grow up
under such remains of superstition and ignorance, such influences of company
and fashion, such insinuations of pleasure, etc. that it is no wonder, if men
get habits of thinking only in one way; that these habits in time grow rigid
and confirmed; and so their minds come to be overcast with thick prejudices,
scarce penetrable by any ray of truth, or light of reason See religion of
nature delin. Page 129.
."

There is no man but is more attached to one particular set or scheme of
opinions in philosophy, politics, and religion, than he is to another; I mean
if he has employed his thoughts at all about them. The question we should
examine then is, how came we by these attachments? Whence are we so fond of
these particular notions? Did we come fairly by them? Or were they imposed upon
us, and dictated to our easy belief, before we were able to judge of them? This
is most likely. For the impressions we early receive generally grow up with us,
and are those we least care to part with. However, which way soever we came by
them, they must be reexamined, and brought to the touchstone of sound sense,
solid reason, and plain scripture. If they will not bear this after hard
rubbing, they must be dismissed, as no genuine principles of truth, but as
counterfeits imposed upon us under the guise and semblance of it.

And as reason and scripture must discover our prejudices to us, so they only
can help us to get rid of them. By these are we to rectify, and to these are we
to conform, all our opinions and sentiments in religion, as our own standard,
exclusive of all other rules, light or authority, whatsoever.

And care must further be taken that we do not make scripture and reason bend
and buckle to our notions; which will rather confirm our prejudices than cure
them. For whatever cannot evidently be proved, without the help of overstrained
metaphors, and the arts of sophistry, is much to be suspected; which used to
make archbishop Tillotson say -- Non amo argutias in Thelogia I do not love
subtilties in divinity. But,

2. The human mind is very apt to be prejudiced either for or against certain
persons, as well as certain sentiments. And as prejudice will lead a man to
talk very unreasonably with regard to the latter, so it will lead him to act as
unreasonably with regard to the former.

What is the reason, for instance, that we cannot help having a more hearty
affection for some persons than others? Is it from a similarity of taste and
temper? Or something in their address, that slatters our vanity? Or something
in their humor, that hits our fancy? Or something in their conversation, that
improves our understanding? Or a certain sweetness of disposition, and
agreeableness of manner, that is naturally engaging? Or from benefits received
or expected from them? Or from some eminent and distinguished excellency in
them? Or from none of these; but something else, we cannot tell what? -- Such
sort of inquiries will show us whether our esteem and affections be rightly
placed; or flow from mere instinct, blind prejudice or something worse.

And so on the other hand, with regard to our disaffection toward any one, or
the disgust we have taken against him; if we would know ourselves, we must
examine into the bottom of this; and see not only what is the pretended, but
true cause of it: Whether it be justifiable, and our resentments sentments duly
proportioned to it. -- Is his manner in thinking, talking, and acting, quite
different from mine, and therefore what I cannot approve? Or have I received
some real affront, or injury from him? Be it so, my continued resentment
against him, on either of these accounts, may be owing notwithstanding, more to
some unreasonable prejudice in me, than to any real fault in him.

For as to the former, his way of thinking, talking and acting, may possibly be
juster than my own; which the mere force of custom and habit only makes me
prefer to his. However, be it ever so wrong, he may not have had the same
advantage of improving his understanding, address, and conduct, as I have had;
and therefore his defects herein are more excusable. And he may have many other
kind of excellencies which I have not. -- "But he is not only ignorant and
unmannered, but unsufferably vain, conceited and overbearing at the same time."
Why, that perhaps he cannot help. It is the fault of his nature. He is the
object of pity rather than resentment. And had I such a disposition by nature,
I should, perhaps, with all my self improvement, find it a difficult thing to
manage. And therefore, though I can never choose such a one for an agreeable
companion, yet I ought not to harbor a dislike to him, but love, and pity, and
pray for him, as a person under a great misfortune; and be thankful that I am
not under the same. -- "But he is quite blind to this fault of his temper, and
does not appear to be in the least sensible of it." -- Why, that is a great
misfortune still; and he ought to be the more pitied. And as to the other
pretended ground of disgust, "he has often offended and injured me." Let me
consider, 1. Whether any offense was really intended; whether I do not impute
that to ill nature, which was only owing to ill manners; or that to design,
which proceeded only from ignorance. Do I not take offense before it is given?
If so, the fault is mine, and not his. And the resentment I have conceived
against him, I ought to turn upon myself For every trifle scorn to take offense;
That always shows great pride, or little sense.
Good nature and good sense must always join;
To err is human, to forgive divine.
Pope.


. -- Again, 2. Did I not provoke him to it, when I knew his temper? The fault
is still my own. I did, or might know the pride, passion or perverseness of his
nature; why then did I exasperate him? A man that would needlessly rouse a
lion, must not expect always to come off so favorably as the hero of La
Mancha. -- But, 3. Suppose I were not the aggressor; yet, how came I into his
company? Who led me into the temptation? He has acted according to his nature
in what he has done; but I have not acted according to my reason, in laying
myself so open to him. I knew him; why did I not shun him, as I would any other
dangerous animal that does mischief by instinct? If I must needs put my finger
into a wasp's nest, why should I blame them for stinging me? -- Or, 4. If I
could not avoid his company, why did I not arm myself? Why did I venture
defenseless into so much danger? Or, 5. Suppose he has done me a real and
undeserved injury, without my fault or provocation; yet does not my discontent
aggravate it? Does it not appear greater to me, than it does to any body else?
Or than it will to me, after the present ferment is over? -- And lastly, after
all, must I never forgive? How shall I be able to repeat the Lord's Prayer, or
read our savior's comment upon it, Mat. vi. 14, 15. with an unforgiving
temper? Do I not hope to be forgiven ten thousand talents; and cannot I forgive
my fellow servant thirty pence? When I know not but he has repented, and GOD
has forgiven him, whose forgiveness I want infinitely more than my greatest
enemy does mine. A man despises me: What then? Did he know me more, he would
perhaps despise me more. But I know myself better than he can know me; and
therefore despise myself more. And though his contempt in this instance may be
groundless, yet is others it would be but too well founded. I will therefore
not only bear with, but forgive it. -- Contemnendus est ipse contemptus, faith
Seneca. But such retorted scorn is more becoming the character of a strick than
a christian.

It has been reckoned a wise and witty answer which one of the philosophers
returned to his friend, who advised him to revenge an injury that had been done
him: "What (says he) if an ass kicks me, must I needs kick him again?" And
perhaps there is more wit than wisdom in that reply. It seems indeed to carry
in it something of a true greatness of mind; but does it not at the same time
discover, a kind of haughty and contemptus us spirit? The truth is, (as a
judicious writer observes upon is) "it is at best but a lame and mis^^pen
charity; it has more of pride than goodness. We should learn of the holy Jesus,
who was not only meek but lowly. We should contemn the injury, and pity the
weakness; but should not disdain or despise the persons of our enemies. Charity
vaunteth not himself, is not puffed up, does not behave itself unseemly." See
Scougal's duty of loving our enemies.




Such considerations are of great use to soften our prejudices against persons;
and at once to discover the true spring, and prevent the bad effects of them.
And happy would it be for a christian, could he but call to mind and apply to
his relief, half the good things which that excellent heathen emperor and
philosopher Marcus Antoninus could say upon this subject. Some of which I have,
for the benefit of the English reader, extracted, and thrown into the margin.
In the morning remember to say to thyself; this day perhaps I may meet with
some impertinent, ungrateful, peevish, tricking, envious, chur^sh fellow. Now
all these ill qualities in them proceed from their ignorance of good and evil.
And since I am so happy as to understand the natural beauty of a good action,
and the deformity of an ill one, and since the person that obliges me is of
near kin to me; and though not just of the same blood and family, yet of the
same divine extract as to his mind; and finally, since I am convinced that no
one can do me a real injury, because he cannot force me to do a dishonest
thing; for these reasons I cannot find in my heart to hate him, or so much as
to be angry with him. Marx. Anton. Medit. Book 2. 1.

You are just taking leave of the world; and have you not yet learned to be
friends with every body? And that to be an honest man, is the only way to be a
wise one? Id. book 4. 37.

To expect an impossibility is madness; now it is impossible for ill men not to
do ill things. Id. Book 5. 1^.

It is the privilege of human nature above (...) love those that offend us; in
order to this consider, 1. (...) offending party is of kin to you; 2. That he
acts thus, because he knows no better; 3. He may have no design to offend you;
4. You will both of you quickly be in your graves; but above all, 5. You have
received no harm from him: For your mind or reason is the same as it was
before. Id. Book 7. 22.

Think upon your last hour, and do not trouble yourself about other people's
faults, but leave them there where they must be answered for. Id. Book 7. 20.

Do not return the temper of ill natured people upon themselves, nor treat them
as they do the rest of mankind. Id. Book 7. 55.

Though the gods are immortal, yet they not only patiently bear with a wicked
world through so many ages; but what is more, liberally provide for it: And are
you, who are just (...) off the stage, weary with bearing, though you are one
of those unhappy mortals yourself? Id. Book 7. 70.

Never disturb yourself; for men will do the same untoward (...) over again,
though you burst with (...)

Reform an injurious person if you can; if not remember our patience was given
you bear with him. That the gods patiently bear with such men, and sometimes
bestow upon them health, and fame, and fortune. Id. Book 9. 11.

When people treat you ill, and show their spite, and slander you, enter into
their little souls, go to the bottom of them, search their understandings and
you will soon see, that nothing they may think or say of you need give you one
troublesome thought. Id. Book 9. 27.

That is the best thing for a man which GOD sends him; and that is the best
time when he sends it. Id. Book 10. 2.

It is sometimes a hard matter to be certain, when you have received ill usage
or not; for men's actions oftentimes look worse than they are: And one must be
thoroughly informed of a great many things, before he can rightly judge. Id.
Book 11. 18.

Consider how much more you often suffer from your anger and grief, than from
those very things for which you are angry and grieved. Id. Book 11. 18.

When you fancy any one has transgressed, say thus to yourself; "How do I know
it is a fault? But admit it is, it may be his conscience has corrected him;
and then he has received his punishment from himself." Id. Book 12. 16.

To these I shall add two more quotations out of the sacred writings, of
incomparably greater weight and dignity than any of the forementioned. Prove.
xix. 11. The discretion of a man defe^eth his anger; and it is his glory to
pass over a transgression. Romans xii. 20, 21. If thine enemy hunger, feed him;
if he thirst, give him drink: For in so doing thou shall heap ^oals of fire on
his head. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good,




3. The mind is apt to be prejudiced against or in favor of certain things and
actions, as well as certain sentiments and persons.

Do you not sometimes find dull disagreeable ideas annexed to certain places,
seasons, or employments, which give you a secret aversion to them? These arise
from the remembrance of some unpleasing incidents you have heretofore met with,
and which you apprehend may again (...) you on such occasions. But they are
nothing more than the mere misrepresentations of fancy; and ought to be
repelled, because they will be apt to lead you to neglect the duties of your
character.

If therefore you find in yourself a secret disinclination to any particular
action or duty, and the mind begins to cast about for excuses and reasons to
justify the neglect of it, consider the maker well: Go to the bottom of that
reluctance; and search out what it is that gives the mind this aversion to it.
Whether it be the thing, or action itself, or some discouraging circumstances
that may attend it; or some disagreeable consequences that may possibly flow
from it; or your supposed unfitness for it at present. Why, all these things
may be only imaginary. And to neglect a plain and positive duty upon such
considerations, shows that you are governed by appearances more than realities,
by fancy more than reason, and by inclination more than conscience.

But let fancy muster up all the discouraging circumstances, and set them in
the most formidable light, to bar your way to a supposed duty; for instance,
"It is very difficult, I want capacity, at least am so indisposed to it at
present, that I shall make nothing of (...); and then it will be attended with
danger to my person, reputation or peace; and the opposition I am like to meet
with is great, etc." But after all, in the call of providence clear? Is the
thing a plain duty? Such a reason, conscience, and scripture; your office,
character, or personal engagements call upon you to discharge? If so, all the
aforesaid objections are vain and delusive; and you have nothing to do, but to
summon your courage, and in dependence on divine help, to set about the
business immediately and in good earnest, and in the best and wisest manner you
can; and you may depend upon it, you will find the greatest difficulty to lie
only in the first attempt; these frightful appearances to be all visionary, the
mere figments of fancy turning lambs into lions, and mole hills into mountains;
and that nothing but sloth, folly, and self indulgence, thus set your
imagination on work to deter you from a plain duty. Your heart would deceive
you, but you have found out the cheat, and do not be imposed upon. "The wise
and prudent conquer difficulties,
"By daring to attempt them. Sloth and folly
"Shiver and shrink at sight of toil and danger,
"And make the impossibility they fear.
(...).




Again, suppose the thing done; consider how it will look then. Take a view of
it as past; and whatever pains it may cost you, think whether it will not be
abundantly recompensed by the inward peace and pleasure, which arise from a
consciousness of having acted right. It certainly will. And the difficulties
you now dread will enhance your future satisfaction -- (...).
. But think again how you will bear the reflections of your own mind if you
wilfully neglect a plain and necessary duty; whether this will not occasion you
much more trouble than all the pains you might be at in performing it. And a
wise man will always determine himself by the end; or by such a retrospective
view of things, considered as past.

Again, on the other hand, if you find a strong propension to any particular
action, examine that with the like impartiality. Perhaps it is what neither
your reason nor conscience can fully approve. And yet every motive to it is
strongly urged, and every objection to it slighted. Sense and appetite grow
importunate and clamorous, and want to lead, while reason remonstrates in vain.
But turn not aside from that faithful and friendly monitor, whilst with a low,
still voice, she addresses you in this soft but earnest language. -- "Hear me,
I beseech you, but this one word more. The action is indeed out of character;
what I shall never approve. The pleasure of it is a great deal over rated; you
will certainly be disappointed. It is a false appearance that now deceives you.
And what will you think of yourself when it is past, and you come to reflect
seriously on the matter? Believe it, you will then wish you had taken me for
your counselor, instead of those enemies of mine, your lusts and passions,
which have so often misled you, though you know I never did."

Such short recollections as these, and a little leisure to take a view of the
nature and consequences of things or actions, before we reject or approve them,
will prevent much false judgment and bad conduct; and by degrees wear off the
prejudices which fancy has fixed in the mind, either for, or against any
particular action; teach us to distinguish between things and their
appearances; strip them of those false colors that so often deceive us;
correct the sallies of the imagination, and leave the reins in the hand of
reason.

Before I dismiss this head, I must observe, that some of our strongest
prejudices arise from an excessive self esteem, or too great a complacency in
our own good sense and understanding. Philautus in every thing shows himself
well satisfied with his own wisdom; which makes him very impatient of
contradiction, and gives him a distaste to all who shall presume to oppose
their judgment to his, in any thing. He had rather persevere in a mistake than
retract it, lest his judgment should suffer; not considering that his ingenuity
and good sense suffer much more by such obstinacy. The fullness of his self
sufficiency makes him blind to those imperfections which every one can see in
him but himself. So that however wise, sincere and friendly, however gentle and
seasonable your remonstrance may be, he takes it immediately to proceed from
ill nature or ignorance in you, but from no fault in him.

Seneca, I remember, tells us a remarkable story, which very well illustrates
this matter. -- Writing to his friend Lucilius, "My wife (says he) keeps
Harpastes in her house still, who, you know, is a sort of family food, and no
small encumbrance upon us. For my part I am far from taking any pleasure in
such prodigies. If I have a mind to divert myself with a fool, I have not far
to go for one; I can laugh at myself. This silly girl, all on a sudden, lost
her eye sight: And (which perhaps may seem incredible, but it is very true) she
does not know she is blind; but is every now and then desiring her governess to
lead her abroad, saying the house is dark. -- Now what we laugh at in this poor
creature, you may observe happens to us all. No man knows that he is covetous
or insatiable. Yet with this difference; the blind seek somebody to lead them,
but we are content to wander without a guide. -- But why do we thus deceive
ourselves? The disease is not without us, but fixed deep within. And therefore
is the cure so difficult, because we do not know that we are sick Sen. Epist.
52.
."

CHAP. X.
The Necessity and Means of knowing our Natural Temper.
IX. ANOTHER very important branch of self knowledge is, the knowledge of those
governing passions or dispositions of the mind, which generally form what we
call a man's natural temper.

The difference of natural tempers seems to be chiefly owing to the different
degrees of influence, the several passions have upon the mind. e. g. If the
passions are eager and soon raised, we say the man is of a warm temper; if more
sluggish and slowly raised, he is of a cool temper; according as anger malice
or ambition prevail, he is of a fierce, churlish, or haughty temper; the
influence of the softer passions of love, pity and benevolence, forms a sweet,
sympathising and courteous temper; and when all the passions are duly poised,
and the milder and pleasing ones prevail, they make what is commonly called a
quite good natured man.

So that it is the prevalence or predominance of any particular passion which
gives the turn or tincture to a man's temper, by which he is distinguished, and
for which he is loved or esteemed, or shunned and despised by others.

Now what this is, those we converse with are soon sensible of. They presently
see the fault of our temper, and order their behavior accordingly. If they are
wise and well mannered, they will avoid striking the string which they know
will jar and raise a discord within us. If they are our enemies they will do it
on purpose to set us on tormenting ourselves. And our friends we must suffer
sometimes with a gentle hand to touch it, either by way of pleasant raillery or
faithful advice.

But a man must be greatly unacquainted with himself, if he is ignorant of his
predominant passion, or distinguishing temper, when every one else observes it.
And yet how common is this piece of self ignorance? The two apostles, James and
John, discovered it in that very action wherein they meant to express nothing
but a hearty zeal for their master's honor; which made him tell them, that
they knew not what manner of spirit they were of, Luke ix. 55. i. e. that,
instead of a principle of love and genuine zeal for him, they were at that time
governed by a spirit of pride, revenge and cruelty: and yet knew it not. And
that the apostle John should be liable to this censure, whose temper seemed to
be all love and sweetness, is a memorable instance how difficult a thing it is
for a man at all times to know his own spirit; and that that passion, which
seems to have the least power over his mind, may on some occasions insensibly
gain a criminal ascendant there.

The necessity of a perfect knowledge of our reigning passions appears further
from hence; that they not only give a tincture to the temper, but to the
understanding also; and throw a strong bias on the judgment. They have much the
same effect upon the eye of the mind, as some distempers have upon that of the
body. If they do not put it out, they weaken it; or throw false colors before
it, and make it form a wrong judgment of things. And, in short, are the source
of those forementioned prejudices, which so often abuse the human understanding.

Whatever the different passions themselves that reign in the mind may be owing
to, whether to the different texture of the bodily organs, or the different
quantity or motion of the animal spirits, or to the native turn and cast of the
soul itself; yet certain it is, that men's different ways of thinking are much
according to the predominance of their different passions; and especially with
regard to religion. Thus, e. g. we see melancholy people are apt to throw too
much gloom upon their religion, and represent it in a very uninviting and
unlovely view, as all austerity and mortification; whilst they who are governed
by the more gay and cheerful passions, are apt to run into the other extreme,
and too much to mingle the pleasures of sense with those of religion; and are
as much too lax, as the other are too severe. And thus, by the prejudice or
bias of their respective passions, or the force of their natural temper they
are led into different mistakes.

"So that would a man know himself, he must study his natural temper; his
constitutional inclinations, and favorite passions; for by these a man's
judgment is easily perverted, and a wrong bias hung upon his mind: These are
the inlets of prejudice; the unguarded avenues of the mind, by which a thousand
errors and secret faults find admission, without being observed or taken notice
of Specta^. Vol. vi. No. 899.
."

And that we may more easily come at the knowledge of our predominant
affections, let us consider what outward events do most impress and move us;
and in what manner. What is it that usually creates the greatest pain or
pleasure in the mind? -- And as for pain, a stoic indeed may tell us, "that we
must keep things at a distance; let nothing that is outward come within us; let
externals be externals still." But the human make will scarce bear the rigo^ of
that philosophy. Outward things, after all, will impress and affect us. And
there is no harm in this, provided they do not get the possession of us,
overset our reason, or lead us to act unbecoming a man or a christian. And one
advantage we may reap from hence is, the manner or degree in which outward
things impress us, may lead us into a better acquaintance with ourselves,
discover to us our weak side, and the passions which most predominate in us.

Our pleasures will likewise discover our reigning passions, and the true
temper and disposition of the soul. If it be captivated by the pleasures of
sin, it is a sign its prevailing taste is very vicious and corrupt; if with the
pleasures of sense, very low and sordid; if imaginary pleasures, and the
painted scenes of fancy and romance do most entertain it, the soul has then a
trifling turn; if the pleasures of science or intellectual improvements are
these it is most fond of, it has then a noble and refined taste; but if its
chief satisfactions derive from religion and divine contemplation, it has then
its true and proper taste; its temper is as it should be, pure, divine, and
heavenly; provided these satisfactions spring from a true religious principle,
free from that superstition, bigotry and enthusiasm, under which it is often
disguised.

And thus, by carefully observing what it is that gives the mind the greatest
pain and torment, or the greatest pleasure and entertainment, we come at the
knowledge of its reigning passions, and prevailing temper and disposition.

"Include thyself then, O my soul, within the compass of thine own heart; if it
be not large, it is deep, and thou will there find exercise enough. Thou will
never be able to sound it; it cannot be known, but by Him, who tries the
thoughts and reins. But dive into this subject as deep as thou can. Examine
thyself; and this knowledge of that which passes within thee, will be of more
use to thee, than the knowledge of all that passes in the world. Concern not
thyself with the wars and quarrels of public or private persons. Take
cognizance of those contests which are between thy flesh and thy spirit;
betwixt the law of thy members, and that of thy understanding. Appease those
differences. Teach thy flesh to be in subjection. Replace reason on its throne;
and give it piety for its counselor. Tame thy passions, and bring them under
bondage. Put thy little state in good order; govern wisely and holily those
numerous people which are contained in so little a kingdom; that is to say,
that multitude of affections, thoughts, opinions and passions which are in
thine heart Jurieu's Method of Christian Devotion, Part iii. Chap. iii.
."

CHAP. XI.
Concerning the secret Springs of our Actions.
X. ANOTHER considerable branch of self acquaintance is, to know the true
motives and secret springs of our actions.

This will sometimes cost us much pains to acquire. But for want of it, we
should be in danger of passing a false judgment upon our actions, and of
entertaining a wrong opinion of our conduct.

It is not only very possible, but very common, for men to be ignorant of the
chief inducements of their behavior; and to imagine they act from one motive,
whilst they are apparently governed by another. If we examine our views, and
look into our hearts narrowly, we shall find that they more frequently deceive
us in this respect than we are aware of; by persuading us that we are governed
by much better motives than we really are. The honor of GOD, and the interest
of religion, may be the open and avowed motives; whilst secular interest and
secret vanity may be the hidden and true one. While we think we are serving
GOD, we may be only sacrificing to Mammon. We may like Jehu, boast our real for
the Lord, when we are only animated by the heat of our natural passions 2
Kings, x. 16.
; may cover a censorious spirit under a cloak of piety; and giving admonition
to others, may be only giving vent to our spleen.

Many come to the place of public worship, out of custom or curiosity, who
would be thought to come thither only out of conscience. And whilst their
external and professed view is to serve GOD, and gain good to their souls,
their secret and inward motive is only to show themselves to advantage, or to
avoid singularity, and prevent others making observations on their absence.
Munificence and almsgiving may often proceed from a principle of pride and
party spirit, and seeming acts of friendship from a mercenary motive.

By thus disguising our motives we may impose upon men, but at the same time we
are imposing upon ourselves; and whilst we are deceiving others, our own hearts
deceive us. And of all impostures self deception is the most dangerous, because
least suspected.

Now, unless we examine this point narrowly, we shall never come to the bottom
of it; and unless we come at the true spring and real motive of our actions, we
shall never be able to form a right judgment of them; and they may appear very
different in our own eye, and in the eye of the world, from what they do in the
eye of GOD. For the Lord sees not as man sees: For man looks on the outward
appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart. 1 Samuel xvi. 7.
And hence it is, that that which is highly esteemed among men, is oftentimes
abomination in the sight of GOD. Luke xvi. 15.
Every way of man is right in his own eyes; but the LORD pondereth the hearts.
Prove. xxi. 2.


CHAP. XII.
Every one that knows himself is in a particular Manner sensible how far he is
governed by a Thirst for Applause.
XI. ANOTHER thing necessary to unfold a man's heart to himself is, to consider
what is his appetite for same; and by what means he seeks to gratify.

This passion in particular having always so main a stroke, and often times so
unsuspected an influence on the most important parts of our conduct, a perfect
acquaintance with it is a very material branch of self knowledge, and therefore
requires a distinct consideration.

Emulation, like the other passions of the human mind, shows itself much more
plainly, and works much more strongly in some than it does in others. It is in
itself innocent; and was planted in our natures for very wise ends, and, if
kept under proper regulations, is capable of serving very excellent purposes;
otherwise it degenerates into a mean and criminal ambition.

When a man finds something within him that pushes him on to excel in worthy
deeds, or in actions truly good and virtuous, and pursues that design with a
steady unaffected ardour, without reserve or falsehood, it is a true sign of a
noble spirit. For that love of praise can never be criminal that excites and
enables a, man to do a great deal more good than he could do without it. And
perhaps there never was a fine genius or a noble spirit, that rose above the
common level, and distinguished itself by high seize in what is truly
excellent, but was secretly, and perhaps insensibly prompted, by the impulse of
this passion.

But, on the contrary, if a man's views center only in the applause of others,
whether it he deserved or not; if he pants after popularity and fame, not
regarding how he comes by it; if his passion for praise urge him to stretch
himself beyond the line of his capacity, and to attempt things to which he is
unequal; to condescend to mean arts and low dissimulation for the sake of a
name; and in a sinister, indirect way, sue hard for a little incense, not
caring from whom he receives it; his ambition then becomes vanity. And if it
excite a man to wicked attempts, make him willing to sacrifice the esteem of
all wise and good men to the acclamations of a mob; to overleap the bounds of
decency and truth, and break through the obligations of honor and virtue, it
is then not only vanity, but vice: And vice the most destructive to the peace
and happiness of human society, and which of all others has made the greatest
havoc and devastation among men.

What an instance have we here of the wide difference between common opinion
and truth? That a vice so big with mischief and misery should be mistaken for a
virtue! And that they who have been most infamous for it should be crowned with
laurels, even by those who have been ruined by it; and have those laurels
perpetuated by the common consent of men through after ages! Seneca's judgment
of Alexander is certainly more agreeable to truth than the common opinion; who
called him "a public cut throat rather than a hero; and who, in seeking only
to be a terror to mankind, arose to no greater an excellence, than what
belonged to the most hurtful and hateful animals on earth Quid enim simile
habebat vesanus adolescens, cui provirtuse erat felix temeritas? -- Hic a
pueritia latro, gentiumque vastator, tam hostium pernicies quam amicorum. Qui
summum bonum duceret terrori esse cunctis mortalibus: Oblitus non ferocissima
tantum, sed ignavissima quoque animalia, timeri obvirus malum. Sen de Cenef.
cap. 13.

How different from this is the judgment of Plutarch in this matter? who, in
his Oration concerning the fortune and virtue of Alexander, exalts him into a
true berc, and justifies all the waste he made of mankind under (the same
color with which the Spaniards excused their inhuman barbarities toward the
poor Indians, viz.) a pretense of civilizing them. And in attributing all his
success to his virtue, he talks more like a soldier serving under him in his
wars, than an historian who lived many years afterward, whose business it was
to transmit his character impartially to future ages. And in whatever other
respects, Mr. Dryden may give the preference to Plutarch before Seneca, (which
he does with much zeal in his Preface to Plutrach's Lives) yet it must be
allowed that in this instance at least, the latter shows more of the
Philosopher. See Plut. Mor. Vol. I. ad sin.


."

Certain it is, that these false heroes, who seek their glory from the
destruction of their own species, are of all men most ignorant of themselves;
and by this wicked ambition entail infamy and curses upon their name, instead
of that immortal glory they pursued. According to the prophet's words. -- Woe to
him also coveteth an evil covetousness to his house, that he may set his nest
on high; that he may be delivered from the power of evil. Thou have consulted
shame to thine house, by cutting off many people; and have sinned against thy
soul. Hab. ii 9, 10. (...) that gains a wicked gain,

Oh sons of earth I Attempt ye still to rise,
By mountains (...) on mountains, to the skies?
Heaven still with laughter the vain toil surveys,
And buries madmen in the heaps they raise,
Who wickedly is wise or madly brave,
Is but the more a fool, or more a knave.
Pope's Essay on Man.


Now no man can truly know himself till he be acquainted with this, which is so
often the secret and unperceived spring of his actions, and observes how far it
governs him in his conversation and conduct; virtue and real excellence will
raise to view, though they be not mounted on the wings of ambition, which, by
soaring too high, procures but a more fatal fall.

And to correct the irregularity and extravagance of this passion, let us but
reflect how airy and unsubstantial a pleasure the highest gratifications of it
afford; how many cruel mortifications he exposes us to, by awakening the envy
of others; to what meanness it often makes us submit; how frequently it loses
its end by pursuing it with too much ardour; and how much more solid pleasure
the approbation of conscience will yield, than the acclamations of ignorant and
mistaken men, who, judging by externals only, cannot know our true character;
and whose commendations a wise man would rather despise than court. "Examine
but the size of people's sense, and the condition of their understandings, and
you will never be fond of popularity, nor afraid of censure; nor solicitous
what judgment they may form of you, who know not how to judge rightly of
themselves." (...) Mark Anton. lib. ix. 18.


CHAP. XIII.
What Kind of Knowledge we are already furnished with, and what Degree of
Esteem we set upon it.
XII. A MAN can never rightly know himself, unless he examines into his
knowledge of other things.

We must consider then the knowledge we have; and whether we do not set too
high a price upon it, and too great a value upon ourselves on the account of
it; of what real use it is to us, and what effect it has upon us; whether it
does not make us too stiff, unsociable, and assuming; testy and supercilious,
and ready to despise others for their supposed ignorance. If so, our knowledge,
be it what it will, does us more harm than good. We were better without it;
ignorance itself would not render us so ridiculous. Such a temper with all our
knowledge, shows that we know not ourselves.

"A man is certainly proud of that knowledge he despises others for the want
of."

How common is it for some men to be fond of appearing to know more than they
do, and of seeming to be thought men of knowledge? To which end they exhaust
their fund almost in all companies, to outshine the rest. So that in two or
three conversations they are drawn dry, and you see to the bottom of them much
sooner than you could at first imagine. And even that torrent of learning,
which they pour out upon you at first so unmercifully, rather confounds than
satisfies you; their visible aim is not to inform your judgment, but display
their own; you have many things to query and except against, but their
loquacity gives you no room; and their good sense, set off to so much
advantage, strikes a modest man dumb: If you insist upon your right to examine,
they retreat either in confusion or equivocation; and, like the scuttle fish,
throw a large quantity of ink behind them, that you may not see where to
pursue. Whence this foible flows is obvious enough. Self knowledge would soon
correct it.

But, as some ignorantly affect to be more knowing, so others vainly affect to
be more ignorant than than they are; who, to show they have greater insight and
penetration than other men, insist upon the absolute uncertainty of science;
will dispute even first principles; grant nothing as certain, and so run into
downright Pyrrhonism; the too common effect of abstracted debates excessively
refined. Socrates's saying, Nihilse scire, (...) ipsum, savoured of an affected
humility. But they that followed went further; and particularly Areesilas,
Negalat esse quicquam, quod ciei potcit, neillud quioem ipsum quod Sacrates
fool reliquiss^t. And thus thea absuraity grew to a size that was manstrous.
For to know that one knows nothing, is a contradiction. And not to know that he
knows even that, is not to know out that he may know something. Relig. of Not.
delin. Page 40.


Every one is apt to set the greatest value upon that kind of knowledge, in
which he imagines he himself most excels; and to undervalue all other in
comparison of it. There wants some certain rule then, by which some men's
knowledge is to be tried, and the value of it estimated. And let it be this. --
"That is the best and most valuable kind of knowledge, that is most subservient
to the best ends; i. e. which tends to make a man wiser and better, or more
agreeable, and useful both to himself and others." -- For knowledge is but a
means that relates to some end. And as all means are to be judged of by the
excellency of the end, and their expediency to produce it; so that must be the
best knowledge that has the directest tendency to promote the best ends; viz.
a man's own true happiness, and that of others; in which the glory of GOD, the
ultimate end, is ever necessarily comprised.

Now, if we were to judge of the several kinds of science by this rule, we
should find, 1. Some of them to be very hurtful and pernicious; as tending to
pervert the true end of knowledge; to ruin a man's own happiness, and make him
more injurious to society. Such is the knowledge of vice, the various
temptations to it, and the secret ways of practicing it; especially the arts of
dissimulation, fraud, and dishonesty. 2. Others will be found unprofitable and
useless. As those parts of knowledge, which though they may take up much time
and pains to acquire, yet answer no valuable purpose; and serve only for
amusement, and the entertainment of the imagination. For instance, an
acquaintance with plays, novels, games, and modes, in which a man may be very
critical and expert, and yet not a wit the wiser or more useful man. 3. Other
kinds of knowledge are good only relatively, or conditionally, and may be more
useful to one than to another; viz. a skill in a man's particular occupation or
calling, on which his credit, livelihood, or usefulness in the world depends.
And as this kind of knowledge is valuable in proportion to its end, so it ought
to be cultivated with a diligence and esteem answerable to that. Lastly, other
kinds of knowledge are good absolutely and universally; viz. the knowledge of
GOD and ourselves. The nature of our final happiness and the way to it. This is
equally necessary to all. And how thankful should we be, that we, who live
under the light of the gospel, and enjoy that light in its perfection and
purity, have so many happy means and opportunities of attaining this most
useful and necessary kind of knowledge!

A man can never understand himself then, till he makes a right estimate of his
knowledge; till he examines what kind of knowledge he values himself most upon,
and most diligently cultivates; how high a value he sets upon it; what good it
does him; what effect it has upon him; what he is the better for it; what end
it answers now; or what it is like to answer hereafter.

There is nothing in which a man's self ignorance discovers itself more, than
in the esteem he has for his understanding, or for himself on the account of
it. It is a trite and true observation, that empty things make the most sound.
Men of the least knowledge are most apt to make a show of it, and to value
themselves upon it; which is very visible in forward confident youth, raw
conceited academicks, and those who, uneducated in their childhood, betake
themselves in later life to reading, without taste or judgment, only as an
accomplishment, and to make a show of scholarship; who have just learning
enough to spoil company, and render themselves ridiculous, but not enough to
make either themselves or others at all the wiser.

But beside the formentioned kinds of knowledge, there is another which is
commonly called false knowledge; which, though it often imposes upon men under
the show and semblance of true knowledge, is really worse than ignorance. Some
men have learned a great many things, and have taken a great deal of pains to
learn them, and stand very high in their own opinion on account of them, which
yet they must unlearn before they are truly wise. They have been at a vast
expense of time, and pains, and patience, to heap together, and to confirm
themselves in a set of wrong notions, which they lay up in their minds as a
fund of valuable knowledge; which if they try by the forementioned rules, viz.
"the tendency they have to make them wiser and better, or more useful and
beneficial to others," will be found to be worth just nothing at all.

Beware of this false knowledge. For as there is nothing of which men are more
obstinately tenacious, so there is nothing that renders them more vain, or more
averse to self knowledge. Of all things, men are most fond of their wrong
notions.

The Apostle Paul often speaks of these men, and their self sufficiency, in
very poignant terms; who, though they seem wise, yet (says he) must become
fools before they are wise. 1 Cor. iii. 18.
Though they think they know a great deal, know nothing yet as they ought to
know. 1 Cor. viii. 2.
But deceive themselves, by thinking themselves something when they are
nothing. Gal. vi. 3.
And whilst they desire to be teachers of others, understand not what they say,
nor where of they affirm. 1 Timothy i. 7.
And want themselves to be taught what are the first rudiments and principles
of wisdom. Heb. v. 11.


CHAP. XIV.
Concerning the Knowledge, Guard, and Government of our Thoughts.
XIII. ANOTHER part of self knowledge consists in a due acquaintance with our
own thoughts, and the inward workings of the imagination.

The right government of the thoughts requires no small art, vigilance, and
resolution. But it is a matter of such vast importance to the peace and
improvement of the mind, that it is worth while to be at some pains about it. A
man that has so numerous and turbulent a family to govern as his own thoughts,
which are too apt to be at the command of his passions and appetites, ought not
to be long from home. If he be, they will soon grow mutinous and disorderly
under the conduct of those two headstrong guides, and raise great clamours and
disturbances, and sometimes on the slightest occasions. And a more dreadful
scene of misery can hardly be imagined, than that which is occasioned by such a
tumult and uproar whithin, when a raging conscience or inflamed passions are
let loose without check or control. A city in flames, or the mutiny of a
drunken crew aboard, who have murdered the Captain, and are butchering one
another, are but faint emblems of it. The torment of the mind, under such an
insurrection and ravage of the passions, is not easy to be conceived. The most
revengeful man cannot wish his enemy a greater.

Of what vast importance then is it for a man to watch over his thoughts, in
order to a right government of them! To consider what kind of thoughts find the
easiest admission, in what manner they insinuate themselves, and upon what
occasions!

It was an excellent rule which a wise heathen prescribed to himself, in his
private meditations; manage (says he) all your actions and thoughts in such a
manner, as if you were just going out of the world. Mare. Anton. Medit. lib. 2.
11.
Again, (says he) a man is seldom, if ever, unhappy for not knowing the
thoughts of others; but he that does not attend to the motions of his own, is
certainly miserable. Mare. Anton. lib. 2. 8.

"Nothing can be more unhappy than that man who ranges every where, ransacks
every thing, digs into the bowels of the earth, dives into other men's bosoms,
but does not consider all the while that his own mind will afford him
sufficient scope for inquiry and entertainment, and that the care and
improvement of himself will give him business enough." Id. lib. 2. 15.

"Your disposition will be suitable to that which you most frequently think on;
for the soul is, as it were, tinged with the color and complexion of its own
thoughts." Id. lib. 5. 16.




It may be worth our while then to discuss this matter a little more precisely;
and consider, 1. What kind of thoughts are to be excluded or rejected. And 2.
What ought to be indulged and entertained.

I. Some thoughts ought to be immediately banished as soon as they have found
entrance. -- And if we are often troubled with them, the safest way will be to
keep a good guard on the avenues of the mind by which they enter, and avoid
those occasions which commonly excite them. For sometimes it is much easier to
prevent a bad thought entering the mind, than to get rid of it when it is
entered. -- More particularly,

1. Watch against all fretful and discontented thoughts which do but chase and
corrode the mind to no purpose. To harbor these is to do yourself more injury
than it is in the power of your greatest enemy to do you. It is equally a
christian's interest and duty to learn, in whatever state he is, there with to
be content. Phil. iv. 11.


2. Harbor not too anxious and apprehensive thoughts. By giving way to
tormenting fears, suspicions of some approaching danger or troublesome event,
we not only anticipate, but double the evil we fear; and undergo much more from
the apprehension of it before it comes, than from the whole weight of it when
present. This is a great, but common weakness; which a man should endeavor to
arm himself against by such kind of reflections as these; -- "Are not all these
events under the certain direction of a wise providence? If they befall me, they
are then that share of suffering which GOD has appointed me; and which he
expects I should bear as a christian. How often has my timorous heart
magnified former trials? which I found to be less in reality than they appeared
upon their approach. And perhaps the formidable aspect they put on, is only a
stratagem of the great enemy of my best interest, designed on purpose to divert
me from some point of duty, or to draw me into some sin to avoid them. However,
why should I torment myself to no purpose? The pain and affliction the dreaded
evil will give me when it comes, is of GOD's sending; the pain I feel in the
apprehension of it before it comes, is of my own procuring. Whereby I often
make my sufferings more than double; for this overplus of them, which I bring
upon myself, is often greater than that measure of them which the hand of
providence immediately brings upon me."

3. Dismiss as soon as may be, all angry and wrathful thoughts. These will but
canker and corrode the mind, and dispose it to the worst temper in the world,
viz. that of fixed malice and revenge. Anger may steal into the heart of a wise
man, but it rests only in the bosom of fools. Eccles. vii. 9.
Make all the most candid allowances for the offender. Consider his natural
temper. Turn your anger into pity. Repeat 1 Cor. xiii. Think of the patience
and meekness of Christ, and the petition in the Lord's prayer; and how much you
stand in need of forgiveness yourself, both from GOD and man; how fruitless,
how foolish is indulged resentment; how tormenting to yourself? You have too
much good nature willingly to give others so much torment; and why should you
give it yourself? You are commanded to love your neighbor as yourself, but not
forbidden to love yourself as much. And why should you do yourself that injury,
which your enemy would be glad to do you? The christian precept in this case
is, Let not the sun go down upon your wrath, Ephesians. iv. 26. And this precept
Plutarcb tells us the Pythagorcans practiced in a literal sense: "Who, if at
any time in a passion they broke out into opprobious language, before sunset
gave one another their hands, and with them a discharge from all injuries; and
so with a mutual reconciliation parted friends." Plut. Mor. Vol. iii. page 89.


But, above all, be sure to set a guard on the tongue whilst the fretful mood
is upon you. The least spark may break out into a conflagration, when cherished
by a resentive heart, and fanned by the wind of an angry breath. Aggravating
expressions, at such a time, are like oil thrown upon flames, which always make
them rage the more (...) Plutarch. de Ita Cohiben. It is good in a fever, much
better in anger, to have the tongue kept clean and smooth.
. Especially,

4. Banish all malignant and revengeful thoughts. A spirit of revenge is the
very spirit of the devil, than which nothing makes a man more like him; and
nothing can be more opposite to the temper which christianity was designed to
promote. If your revenge be not satisfied, it will give you torment now; if it
be, it will give you greater hereafter. None is a greater self tormentor than a
malicious and revengeful man, who turns the poison of his own temper in upon
himself Malitia ipsa maximam partem veneni sui bibit. -- Illud venenum quod
serpents in alienam perniciem proferunt, sine sua continent. Non est huic
simile; hoc habentibus pess^^um est. Sen. Epist. 82.
.

Drive from the mind all silly, trifling, and unreasonable thoughts; which
sometimes get into it we know not how, and seize and possess it before we are
aware; and hold it in empty, idle amusements, that yield neither pleasure nor
profit, and turn to no manner of account in the world; only consume time, and
prevent a better employment of the mind. And indeed there is little difference
whether we spend the time in sleep, or in these waking dreams. Nay, if the
thoughts which thus insensibly steal upon you be not altogether absurd and
whimsical, yet if they be impertinent and unseasonable, they ought to be
dismissed, because they keep out better company.

6. Cast out all wild and extravagant thoughts, all vain and fantastical
imaginations. Suffer not your thoughts to roam upon things that never were, and
perhaps never will be; to give you a visionary pleasure in the prospect of what
you have not the least reason to hope, or a needless pain in the apprehension
of what you have not the least reason to fear. The truth is, next to a clear
conscience and a sound judgment, there is not a greater blessing than a regular
and well governed imagination; to be able to view things as they are, in their
true light and proper colors; and to distinguish the false images that are
painted on the fancy, from the representations of truth and reason. For how
common a thing is it for men, before they are aware, to confound reason and
fancy, truth and imagination together? To take the flashes of the animal
spirits for the light of evidence? and think they believe things to be true or
false, when they only fancy them to be so? and fancy them to be so, because
they would have them so? Not considering that mere fancy is only the ignis
satuus of the mind; which often appears brightest, when the mind is most
covered with darkness; and will be sure to lead them astray, who follow it as
their guide. Near akin to these are,

7. Romantic and chimerical thoughts. By which I mean that kind of wildfire,
which the briskness of the animal spirits sometimes suddenly flashes on the
mind, and excites images that are so extremely ridiculous and absurd, that one
can scarce forbear wondering how they could get admittance. These random
flights of the fancy are soon gone; and herein differ from that castle building
of the imagination before mentioned, which is a more settled amusement. But
these are too incoherent and senseless to be of long continuance; and are the
maddest fallies, and the most ramping reveries of the fancy that can be. I know
not whether my reader understands now what I mean; but if he attentively
regards all that passes through his mind, perhaps he may hereafter by
experience.

8. Repel all impure and lascivious thoughts; which taint and pollute the mind;
and though hid from men, are known to GOD, in whose eye they are abominable.
Our savior warns us against these as a kind of spiritual fornication Matthew. v.
28
, and inconsistent with that purity of heart which his gospel requires.

9. Take care how you too much indulge gloomy and melancholy thoughts. Some are
disposed to see every thing in the worst light. A black cloud hangs hovering
over their minds; which, when it falls in showers through their eyes, is
dispersed; and all within is serene again. This is often purely mechanical; and
owing either to some fault in the bodily constitution, or some accidental
disorder in the animal frame. However, one that consults the peace of his own
mind will be upon his guard against this, which so often robs him of it.

10. On the other hand, let not the imagination be too sprightly and
triumphant. Some are as unreasonably exalted, as others are depressed; and the
same person at different times often runs into both extremes; according to the
different temper and flow of the animal spirits. And therefore the thoughts,
which so eagerly crowd into the mind at such times, ought to be suspected and
well guarded; otherwise they will impose upon our judgments and lead us to form
such a notion of ourselves and of things, as we shall soon see sit to alter,
when the mind is in a more settled and sedate frame.

Before we let our thoughts judge of things, we must set reason to judge our
thoughts; for they are not always in a proper condition to execute that office.
We do not believe the character which a man gives us of another, unless we have
a good opinion of his own; so neither should we believe the verdict which the
mind pronounces, till we first examine whether it be impartial and unbiassed;
whether it be in a proper temper to judge, and have proper lights to judge by.
The want of this previous act of self judgment, is the cause of much self
deception and false judgment.

Lastly. With abhorrence reject immediately all profane and blasphemous
thoughts; which are sometimes suddenly injected into the mind, we know not how,
though we may give a pretty good guess from whence. And all those thoughts
which are apparently temptations and inducements to sin, our Lord has, by his
example, taught us to treat in this manner Matt. iv. 10.
.

These then are the thoughts we should carefully guard against. -- And as they
will (especially some of them) be frequently insinuating themselves into the
heart, remember to set reason at the door of it to guard the passage, and bar
their entrance, or drive them out forthwith when entered; not only as
impertinent, but mischievous intruders.

But, II. There are other kinds of thoughts which we ought to indulge and with
great care and diligence retain and improve.

Whatever thoughts give the mind a rational or religious pleasure, and tend to
improve the heart and understanding, are to be favored, often recalled, and
carefully cultivated. Nor should we dismiss them, till they have made some
impressions on the mind, which are like to abide there.

And to bring the mind into a habit of recovering, retaining, and improving
such thoughts, two things are necessary.

1. To habituate ourselves to a close and rational way of thinking. And 2. To
moral reflections and religious contemplations.

1. To prepare and dispose the mind for the entertainment of good and useful
thoughts, we must take care to accustom it to a close and rational way of
thinking.

When you have started a good thought, pursue it; do not presently lose sight
of it, or suffer any trifling suggestion that may intervene to divert you from
it. Dismiss it not till you have sifted and exhausted it; and well considered
the several consequences and inferences that result from it. However, retain
not the subject any longer than you find your thoughts run freely upon it; for
to confine them to it when it is quite worn out, is to give them an unnatural
bent, without sufficient employment; which will make them flag, or be more apt
to run off to something else.

And to keep the mind intent on the subject you think of, you must be at some
pains to recall and refix your desultory and rambling thoughts. Lay open the
subject in as many lights and views as it is capable of being represented in.
Clothe your best ideas in pertinent and well chosen words, deliberately
pronounced; or commit them to writing.

Whatever be the subject, admit of no inferences from it, but what you see
plain and natural. This is the way to furnish the mind with true and solid
knowledge. A^, on the contrary, false knowledge proceeds from not understanding
the subject, or drawing inferences from it which are forced and unnatural; and
allowing to those precarious inferences, or consequences drawn from them, the
same degree of credibility as to the most rational and best established
principles.

Beware of a superficial, flight, or confused view of things. Go to the bottom
of them, and examine the foundation; and be satisfied with none but clear and
distinct ideas (when they can be had) in every thing you read, hear, or think
of. For resting in imperfect and obscure ideas, is the source of much confusion
and mistake.

Accustom yourself to speak naturally, pertinently, and rationally, on all
subjects, and you will soon learn to think so on the best; especially if you
often converse with those persons that speak, and those authors that write in
that manner.

Such a regulation and right management of your thoughts and rational powers,
will be of great and general advantage to you, in the pursuit of youthful
knowledge, and a good guard against the levities and frantic fallies of the
imagination. Nor will you be sensible of any disadvantage attending it,
excepting one, viz. its making you more sensible of the weakness and ignorance
of others who are often talking in a random, inconsequential manner; and whom
it may oftentimes be more prudent to bear with, than contradict. But the vast
benefit this method will be of in tracing out truth, and detecting error, and
the satisfaction it will give you in the cool and regular exercises of self
employment, and in the retaining, pursuing, and improving good and useful
thoughts, will more than compensate that petty disadvantage.

2. If we would have the mind furnished and entertained with good thoughts, we
must inure it to religious and moral subjects.

It is certain the mind cannot be more nobly and usefully employed than in such
kind of contemplations. Because the knowledge it thereby acquires, is of all
others the most excellent knowledge; and that both in regard of its object and
its end; the object of it being GOD, and the end of it eternal happiness.

The great end of religion is to make us like GOD, and to conduct us to the
enjoyment of him. And whatever has not this plain tendency, and especially of
it have the contrary, men may call religion (if they please) but they cannot
call it more out of its name. And whatever is called religious knowledge, if it
does not direct us in the way to this end, is not religious knowledge; but
something else falsely so called. And some are unhappily accustomed to such an
abuse of words and understanding, as not only to call, but to think those
things religion, which are quite the reverse of it, and those notions religious
knowledge, which lead them the farthest from it.

The sincerity of a true religious principle, cannot be better known, than by
the readiness with which the thoughts advert to GOD, and the pleasure with
which they are employed in devout exercises. And though a person may not always
be so well pleased with hearing religious things talked of by others, whose
different taste, sentiments, or manner of expression may have something
disagreeable; yet if he have no inclination to think of them himself, or to
converse with himself about them, he has great reason to suspect that his
heart is not right with GOD. But if he frequently and delightfully exercise his
mind in divine contemplations, it will not only be a good mark of his
sincerity, but will habitually dispose it for the reception of the best and
most useful thoughts, and fit it for the noblest entertainments.

Upon the whole then, it is of as great importance for a man to take heed what
thoughts he entertains as what company he keeps; for they have the same effect
upon the mind. Bad thoughts are as infectious as bad company; and good thoughts
solace, instruct, and entertain the mind, like good company. And this is one
great advantage of retirement: that a man may choose what company he pleases
from within himself.

As in the world we oftener light into bad company than good, so in solitude we
are oftener troubled with impertinent and unprofitable thoughts, than
entertained with agreeable and useful ones. And a man that has so far lost the
command of himself, as to lie at the mercy of every foolish or vexing thought,
is much in the same situation as a host, whose house is open to all comers;
whom, though ever so noisy, rude and troublesome, he cannot get rid of; but
with this difference, that the latter has some recompense for his trouble, the
former none at all; but is robbed of his peace and quiet for nothing.

Of such vast importance to the peace, as well as the improvement of the mind,
is the right regulation of the thoughts. Which will be my apology for dwelling
so long on this branch of the subject; which I shall conclude with this one
observation more; that it is a very dangerous thing to think, as too many are
apt to do, that it is a matter of indifference what thoughts they entertain in
their hearts; since the reason of things concurs with the testimony of the holy
scriptures to assure us, that the allowed thought of folishness is sin Prove.
xxiv. 9.
Nam scelus inter setacitum qui cogitat ullom Facti crimen habet. Juv. Sat. 14.

Guard well thy thoughts; our thoughts are heard in heaven, Young.


.

CHAP. XV.
Concerning the Memory.
XIV. A MAN that knows himself will have a regard not only to the management of
his thoughts, but the improvement of his memory.

The memory is that faculty of the soul, which was designed for the storehouse
or repository of its most useful notions; where they may be laid up in safety,
to be produced upon proper occasions.

Now a thorough self acquaintance cannot be had without a proper regard to this
in two respects. 1. Its furniture. 2. Its improvement.

1. A man that knows himself will have a regard to the furniture of his memory;
not to load it with trash and lumber, a set of useless notions or low conceits,
which he will be ashamed to produce before persons of taste and judgment.

If the retention be bad, do not crowd it. It is of as ill consequence to
overload a weak memory, as a weak stomach. And that it may not be cumbered with
trash, take heed what company you keep, what books you read, and what thoughts
you favor; otherwise a great deal of useless rubbish may fix there before you
are aware, and take up the room which ought to be possessed by better notions.
But let not a valuable thought slip from you, though you pursue it with much
time and pains before you overtake it. The regaining and refixing it may be of
more avail to you than many hours reading.

What pity it is that men should take such immense pains, as some do, to learn
those things which, as soon as they become wise, they must take as much pain^
to unlearn! -- A thought that should make us very curious and cautious about
the proper furniture of our minds.

2. Self knowledge will acquaint a man with the extent and capacity of his
memory, and the right way to improve it Tribus rebus potissimum constat optima
memoria, intellectu, ordine, cura, siquidem bona memoriae pars est rem penitus
intellexisse; tum, ordo facit, ut qum semel exciderent, quasi postliminio in
animum revocamus; porro cura omnibus it rebus, non hic tantum plurimum valet.
Erasm. de rat, stud, ad calc. Ringelbergii, p. 168.
.

There is no small art in improving a weak memory, so as to turn it to as great
an advantage as many do theirs which are much stronger. A few short rules to
this purpose may be no unprofitable digression.

1. Beware of every sort of intemperance in the indulgence of the appetites and
passions. Excesses. of all kinds do a great injury to the memory.

2. If it be weak, do not overlade it. Charge it only with the most useful and
solid notions. A small vessel should not be stuffed with lumber. But if its
freight be precious, and judiciously stowed, it may be more valuable than a
ship of twice its burden.

3. Recur to the help of a common place book, according to Mr. Locke's method;
and review it once a year. But take care that by confiding to your minutes or
memorial aids, you do not excuse the labor of the memory; which is one
disadvantage attending this method.

4. Take every opportunity of uttering your best thoughts in conversation, when
the subject will admit it; that will deeply imprint them. Hence the tales which
common story tellers relate, they never forget, though ever so silly. Quicquid
didiceris id coafestim doceas; sic et tua firmare, et prodesse aliis potes.
Ringelbergius de ratione studii, p. 28.

Postremo illud non ad unum aliquid, sed ad omnia simul plurimum conducet, si
frequenter alio^ quoque doceas. Nusquam enimmelius deprehenderis quid
intelliges, quid non. Atque interim nova quaeque occurent, commentanti
differentique, nihil non altius infigitur animo. Erasoe. Rot, de rat. stud. p.
170.




5. Join to the idea you would remember, some other that is more familiar to
you, which bears some similitude to it, either in its nature, or in the sound
of the word by which it is expressed; or that has some relation to it either
in time or place. And then by recalling this, which is easily remembered, you
will, (by that concatenation or connection of ideas which Mr. Lock takes
notice of) draw in that which is thus linked or joined with it; which otherwise
you might hunt after in vain. -- This rule is of excellent use to help you to
remember names.

6. What you are determined to remember, think of before you go to sleep at
night, and the first thing in the morning when the faculties are fresh. And
recollect at evening every thing worth remembering the day past.

7. Think it not enough to furnish this storehouse of the mind with good
thoughts, but lay them up there in order, digested or ranged under proper
subjects or classes; that whatever subject you have occasion to think or talk
upon, you may have recourse immediately to a good thought which you heretofore
laid up there under that subject. So that the very mention of the subject may
bring the thought to hand; by which means you will carry a regular common place
book in your memory. And it may not be amiss sometimes to take an inventory of
this mental furniture, and recollect how many good thoughts you have treasured
up under such particular subjects, and whence you had them.

Lastly. Nothing helps the memory more than often thinking, writing or talking
on those subjects you would remember. -- But enough of this.

CHAP. XVI.
Concerning the Mental Taste.
XV. A MAN that knows himself, is sensible of, and attentive to the particular
taste of his mind, especially in matters of religion.

As the late Mr. How judiciously observes, "there is beside bare understanding
and judgment, and diverse from that heavenly gift, which in the scripture is
called grace, such a thing as gust and relish belonging to the mind of man,
(and, I doubt not, with all men, if they observe themselves) and which are as
unaccountable, and as various as the relishes and disgusts of sense. This they
only wonder at who understand not themselves, or will consider nobody but
themselves. -- So that it cannot be said universally, that it is a better
judgment, or more grace that determines men the one way or the other; but
somewhat in the temper of their minds distinct from both, which I know not how
better to express than by MENTAL TASTE. -- And this has no more of mystery in
it, than that there is such a thing belonging to our natures as complacency and
displacency in reference to the objects of the mind. And this, in the kind of
it, is as common to men as human nature; but as much diversified in individuals
as men's other inclinations are." See his humble request both to conformists
and dissente^^.


Now this different taste in matters relating to religion, (though it may be
sometimes natural or what is born with a man, yet) generally arises from the
difference of education and custom. And the true reason why some persons have
an inveterate disrelish to certain circumstantials of religion, though ever so
justifiable, and at the same time a fixed esteem for others that are more
exceptionable, may be no better than what I have heard some very honestly
profess, viz. that the one they have been used to, and the other not. As a
person by long use and habit acquires a greater relish for coarse and
unwholesome food than the most delicate diet; so a person long habituated to a
set of phrases, notions, and modes, may, by degrees, come to have such a
veneration and esteem for them as to despise and condemn others which he has
not been accustomed to, though perhaps more edifying and more agreeable to
scripture and reason.

This particular taste in matters of religion differs very much (as Mr. How
well observes) both from judgment and grace.

However, it is often mistaken for both: When it is mistaken for the former, it
leads to error; when mistaken for the latter, to censoriousness.

This different taste of mental objects is much the same with that, which, with
regard to the objects of sense we call fancy; for as one man cannot be said to
have a better judgment in food than another, purely because he likes some kind
of meats better than he; so neither can he be said to have a better judgment in
matters of religion purely because he has a greater fondness for some
particular doctrines and forms.

But though this mental taste be not the same as the judgment, yet it often
draws the judgment to it; and sometimes very much perverts it.

This appears in nothing more evidently than in the judgment people pass upon
the sermons they hear. Some are best pleased with those discourses which are
pathetick and warming, others with what is more solid and rational, and others
with the sublime and mystical; nothing can be too plain for the taste of some,
or too refined for that of others. Some are for having the address only to
their reason and understanding, others only to their affections and passions,
and others to their experience and consciences. And every hearer or reader is
apt to judge according to his particular taste, and to esteem him the best
preacher or writer who pleases him most; without examining first his own
particular taste, by which he judges.

It is natural indeed for every one to desire to have his own taste pleased,
but it is unreasonable in him to set it up as the best, and make it a test and
standard to others. But much more unreasonable to expect that he who speaks in
public should always speak to his taste; which might as reasonably be expected
by another of a different one. It is equally impossible that what is delivered
to a multitude of hearers should alike suit all their tastes, as that a single
dish, though prepared with ever so much art and exactness, should equally
please a great variety of appetites; among which there may be some, perhaps,
very nice and sickly.

It is the preacher's duty to adapt his subjects to the taste of his hearers,
as far as fidelity and conscience will admit; because it is well known from
reason and experience, as well as from the advice and practice of the apostle
Paul, Romans xv. 2. Let every one of us please his neighbor for his good to
edification. 1 Cor. ix. 22. To the weak, became I as weak, that I might gain
the weak: I am made all things to all men, that I might by all means save some.
that this is the best way to promote their edification. But if their taste be
totally vitiated, and incline them to take in that which will do them more harm
than good, and to relish poison more than food, the most charitable thing the
preacher can do in that case is, to endeavor to correct so vicious an
appetite, which loathes that which is most wholesome, and craves pernicious
food; this, I say, it is his duty to attempt in the most gentle and prudent
manner he can, though he run the risk of having his judgment or orthodoxy
called into question by them, as it very possibly may; for commonly they are
the most arbitrary and unmerciful judges in this case, who are least of all
qualified for that office.

There is not perhaps a more unaccountable weakness in human nature than this,
that with regard to religious matters our animosities are generally greatest
where our differences are least; they who come pretty near to our standard, but
stop short there, are more the objects of our disgust and censure, than they
who continue at the greatest distance from it. And in some cases it requires
much candor and self command to get over this weakness. To whatever secret
spring in the human mind it may be owing, I shall not stay to inquire; but the
thing itself is too obvious not to be taken notice of.

Now we should all of us be careful to find out and examine our proper taste of
religious things; that if it be a false one, we may rectify it; if a bad one,
mend it; if a right and good one, strengthen and improve it. For the mind is
capable of a false gust, as well as the palate; and comes by it the same way;
viz. by being long used to unnatural relishes, which by custom become grateful.
And having found out what it is, and examined it by the test of scripture,
reason and conscience, if it be not very wrong, let us indulge it, and read
those books that are most suited to it, which for that reason will be most
edifying. But at the same time let us take care of two things, 1. That it do
not bias our judgment, and draw us into error, 2. That it do not cramp our
charity, and lead us to censoriousness.

CHAP. XVII.
Of our great and governing Views in Life.
XVI. ANOTHER part of self knowledge is, to know what are the great ends for
which we live.

We must consider what is the ultimate scope we drive at; the general maxims
and principles we live by; or whether we have not yet determined our end, and
are governed by no fixed principles; or by such as we are ashamed to own.

The first and leading dictate of prudence is, "that a man propose to himself
his true and best interest for his end; and the next is that he make use of all
those means and opportunities whereby that end is to be obtained. This is the
most effectual way that I know of to secure to one's self the character of a
wise man here, and the reward of one hereafter. And between these two there is
such a close connection, that he who does not do the latter, cannot be supposed
to intend the former. He that is not careful of his actions shall never
persuade me that he seriously proposes to himself his best interest, as his
end; for if he did, he would as seriously apply himself to the other, as the
means." Nortis's Misc. p. 18.


There are few that live so much at random as not to have some main end in eye;
something that influences their conduct, and is the great object of their
pursuit and hope. A man cannot live without some leading views; a wise man will
always know what they are, whether it is fit he should be led by them or no;
whether they be such as his understanding and reason approve, or only such as
fancy and inclination suggest. He will be as much concerned to act with reason,
as to talk with reason; as much ashamed of a solecism and contradiction in his
character, as in his conversation.

Where do our views center? In this world we are in; or that we are going to?
If our hopes and joys center here, it is a mortifying thought, that we are
every day departing from our happiness; but if they are fixed above, it is a
joy to think that we are every day drawing nearer to the object of our highest
wishes.

Is our main care to appear great in the eye of man; or good in the eye of GOD?
If the former, we expose ourselves to the pain of a perpetual disappointment.
For it is much if the envy of men do not rob us of a good deal of our just
praise, or if our vanity will be content with that portion of it they allow us.
But if the latter be our main care, if our chief view is to be approved of GOD,
we are laying up a fund of the most lasting and solid satisfactions. Not to say
that this is the truest way to appear great in the eye of men; and to
conciliate the esteem of all those whose praise is worth our wish.

"Be this then, O my soul, thy wise and steady pursuit; let this circumscribe
and direct thy views; be this a law to thee, from which account it a sin to
depart, whatever disrespect or contempt it may expose thee to from others (...)
Epict. Each. cap. 74. -- What you have once wisely proved stick to, as a law
not to be violated without guilt. And mind not what others say of you.
; be this the character thou resolvest to live up to, and at all times to
maintain both in public and private (...) (...). cap. 40. -- Fix your
character, and keep to it; whether alone or in company.
, viz. a friend and lover of God; in whose favor thou centerest all thy
present and future hopes. Carry this view with thee through life, and dare not
in any instance to act inconsistently with it."

CHAP. XVIII.
How to know the true State of our Souls; and whether we are fit to die.
LASTLY, The most important point of self knowledge, after all, is to know the
true state of our souls toward GOD; and in what condition we are to die.

These two things are inseparably connected in their nature, and therefore I
put them together. The knowledge of the former will determine the latter, and
is the only thing that can determine it; for no man can tell whether he is fit
for death, till he is acquainted with the true state of his own soul.

This now is a matter of such vast moment, that it is amazing any considerate
man, or any one who thinks what it is to die, can be satisfied, so long as it
remains an uncertainty. -- Let us trace out this important point then with all
possible plainness; and see if we cannot come to some satisfaction in it upon
the most solid principles.

In order to know then whether we are fit to die, we must first know what it is
that fits us for death. -- And the answer to this is very natural and easy;
viz. that only fits us for death, that fits us for happiness after death.

This is certain. -- But the question returns. What is it that fits us for
happiness after death?

Now in answer to this, there is a previous question necessary to be
determined; viz. What that happiness is?

It is not a fool's paradise, or a Turkish dream of sensitive gratifications.
It must be a happiness suited to the nature of the soul, and what it is capable
of enjoying in a state of separation from the body. And what can that be, but
the enjoyment of GOD, the best of beings and the author of ours?

The question then comes to this; What is that which fits us for the enjoyment
of GOD, in the future state of separate spirits?

And methinks we may bring this matter to a very sure and short issue; by
saying it is that which makes us like to him now. -- This only is our proper
qualification for the enjoyment of him after death, and therefore our only
proper preparation for death. For how can they, who are unlike to GOD here,
expect to enjoy him hereafter? And if they have not just ground to hope that
they shall enjoy GOD in the other world, how are they fit to die?

So that the great question, Am I fit to die? Resolves itself into this, Am I
like to GOD? For it is this only that fits me for heaven, and that which fits
me for heaven, is the only thing that fits me for death.

Let this point then be well searched into, and examined very deliberately and
impartially.

Most certain it is, that GOD can take no real complacency in any but those
that are like him; and it is as certain, that none but those that are like him
can take pleasure in him. -- But GOD is a most pure and holy being; a being of
infinite love, mercy and patience; whose righteousness is invariable, whose
veracity inviolable, and whose wisdom unerring. These are the moral attributes
of the divine being, in which he requires us to imitate him; the express
lineaments of the divine nature, in which all good men bear a resemblance to
him; and for the sake of which only they are the objects of his delight: For
GOD can love none but those that bear this impress of his own image on their
souls. -- Do we find then these visible traces of the divine image there? Can
we make out our likeness to him in his holiness, goodness, mercy,
righteousness, truth and wisdom? If so, it is certain, we are capable of
enjoying Him, and are the proper objects of his love. -- By this we know we are
fit to die; because by this we know we are fit for happiness after death.

Thus then, if we are faithful to our consciences, and impartial in the
examination of our lives and tempers, we may soon come to a right determination
of this important question, What is the true state of our souls toward GOD?
and in what condition we are to die? "Nor do I apprehend the knowledge of our
state (call it assurance if you please) so uncommon and extraordinary a thing
as some are apt to imagine. Understand by assurance and satisfactory evidence
of the thing, such as excludes all reasonable doubts and disquieing fears of
the contrary, though, it may be, not all transient suspicions and jealousies.
And such an assurance and certainty multitudes have attained, and enjoy the
comfort of; and indeed it is of so high importance, that it is a wonder any
thoughtful christian that believes in eternity can be easy one week or day
without it. Bennet's Christ. Orat. page 569."
Which as it is the most important, so it is the last instance of self
knowledge I shall mention: And with it close the first part of this subject.

A TREATISE OF SELF KNOWLEDGE.
PART II.
Showing the great Excellency and Advantages of this Kind of Science.
HAVING in the former part of the subject laid open some of the main branches
of self knowledge, or pointed out the principal things which a man ought to be
acquainted with, relating to himself; I am now, reader, to lay before you the
excellency and usefulness of this kind of knowledge, as an inducement to labor
after it, by a detail of the several great advantages attending it, which shall
be recounted in the following chapters.

CHAP. I.
Self Knowledge the Spring of Self Possession.
1. ONE great advantage of self knowledge is, that it gives a man the truest
and most constant self possession.

A man that is endowed with this excellent knowledge is calm and easy.

1. Under affronts and defamation. For he thinks thus: "I am sure I know myself
better than any man can pretend to know me. This calumniator has, indeed, at
this time missed his mark and shot his arrows at random; and it is my comfort,
that my conscience acquits me of his angry imputation. However, there are worse
crimes which he might more justly accuse me of; which, though hid from him, are
known to myself. Let me set about reforming them; lest, if they come to his
notice, he should attack me in a more defenseless part, find something to
fasten his obloquy, and fix a lasting reproach upon my character (...) Epict.
Ench. cap. 48. -- If you are told that another reviles you, do not go about to
vindicate yourself, but reply thus: My other faults I find are hid from him,
else I should have beard of them too.
.

There is a great deal of truth and good sense in that common saying and
doctrine of the Stoics, though they might carry it too far, that it is not
things but thoughts that disturb and hurt us (...)Id. cap. 10. It is not
things, but men's opinions of things that disturb them.

(...)Id. cap. 27. Remember, It is not be that reviles or assaults you, that
injures you, but your thinking that they have injured you. -- (...)Id. p. 37.
No man can hurt you unless you please to let him; then only are you hurt when
you think yourself so.

(...)Marc, Anton. Me^. lib. 4. 3. Things do not touch the mind, but stand
quietly without; the vexation comes from within, from our suspicions only. --
Again, (...)Id. lib. 5. 19. Things themselves cannot affect the mind; for they
have no entrance into it, to turn and move it. It is the mind alone that turns
and moves itself.


. Now as self acquaintance teaches a man the right government of the thoughts
(as is shown above, Part I. Chap. XIV.) it will help him to expel all anxious,
tormenting and fruitless thoughts, and retain the most quieting and useful
ones; and so keep all easy within. Let a man but try the experiment, and he
will find, that a little resolution will make the greatest part of the
difficulty vanish.

2. Self knowledge will be a good ballast to the mind under any accidental
hurry or disorder of the passions. It curbs their impetuosity; puts the reins
into the hands of reason, quells the rising storm, ere it makes shipwreck of
the conscience; and teaches a more to leave off contention before it be (...)
with, Prove. xvii. 14.
it being much safer to keep the lien chained than to encounter it in its full
strength and furry. And thus will a wise man, for his own peace, deal with the
passions of others, as well as his own.

Self knowledge, as it acquaints a man with his weaknesses and worst qualities,
will be his guard against them; and a happy counterballance to the faules and
excesses of his natural temper.

3. It will keep the mind sedate and calm under the surprise of bad news. or
afflicting providence.

"For am I not a creature of GOD? And my life and comforts, are they not wholly
at his disposal, from whom I have received them; and by whose favor I have so
long enjoyed them; and by whose mercy and goodness I have still so many left?"

A heathen can teach me, under such losses of friends, or estate, or any
comfort, to direct my eyes to the hand of GOD, by whom it was lent me, and is
now recalled; that I ought not to say, it is lost but restored. And though I be
injuriously deprived of it, still the hand of GOD is to be acknowledged; for
what is it to me, by what means, he that gave me that blessing, takes it from
me again Epictst. Enchirid. cap. 15.
.

He that rightly knows himself will live every day dependent on the divine
author of his mercies, for the continuance and enjoyment of them. And will
learn from a higher authority than that of a heathen moralist, that he has
nothing he can properly call his own, or ought to depend upon as such. That he
is but a steward employed to dispense the good things he possesses, according
to the direction of his Lord, at whose pleasure he holds them; and to whom he
should be ready at any time cheerfully to resign them, Luke xvi. 1.

4. Self knowledge will help a man to preserve an equanimity and self
possession under all the various scenes of adversity and prosperity.

Both have their temptations: To some the temptations of prosperity are the
greatest; to others, those of adversity. Self knowledge shows a man which of
these are the greatest to him: And, at the apprehension of them, teaches him to
arm himself accordingly that nothing may deprive him of his constancy and self
possession, or lead him to act unbecoming the man, or the christian.

We commonly say, no one knows what he can hear till he is tried. And many
persons verify the observation, by bearing evils much better than they feared.
Nay, the apprehension of an approaching evil often gives a man a greater pain
than the evil itself. This is owing to inexperience and self ignorance.

A man that knows himself, his own strength and weakness, is not so subject as
others, to the melancholy presages of the imagination; and whenever they
intrude, he makes no other use of them than to take the warning, collect
himself, and prepare for the coming evil; leaving the degree, duration, and the
issue of it with him, who is the sovereign disposer of all events, in a quiet
dependence on his power, wisdom and goodness.

Such self possession is one great effect and advantage of self knowledge.

CHAP. II.
Self Knowledge leads to a wise and steady Conduct.
II. AS self knowledge will keep a man calm and equal in his temper, so it will
make him wise and cautious in his conduct.

A precipitant and rash conduct is ever the effect of a confused and irregular
hurry of thought. So that when by the influence of self knowledge, the thoughts
become cool, sedate and rational, the conduct will be so too. It will give a
man that even, steady and uniform behavior in the management of his affairs,
that is so necessary for the dispatch of business; and prevent many
disappointments and troubles which arise from the unsuccessful execution of
immature or ill judged projects.

In short, most of the troubles which men meet with in the world may be traced
up to this source, and resolved into self ignorance. We may complain of
providence, and complain of men; but the fault, if we examine it, will commonly
be found to be our own. Our imprudence, which arises from self ignorance,
either brings our troubles upon us, or increases them. Want of temper and
conduct will make any affliction double.

What a long train of difficulties do sometimes proceed from one wrong step in
our conduct, into which self ignorance or inconsideration betrayed us? And
every evil that befalls us in consequence of that, we are to charge upon
ourselves.

CHAP. III.
Humility the Effect of Self Knowledge.
III. TRUE self knowledge always produces humility.

Pride is ever the off spring of self ignorance. The reason men are vain and
self sufficient is, because they do not know their own failings; and the reason
they are not better acquainted with them is, because they hate self inspection.
Let a man but turn his eyes within, scrutinize himself, and study his own
heart, and he will soon see enough to make him humble. Behold I am vile, Job
xi. 4.
is the language only of self knowledge Qui been seipsum cognoscit sibi^ipsi
vilescit, nec laudibus disectatur humanis. Tho. a Kemp. de Imit. Chr. lib. 1.
cap. 2.
.

Whence is it that young people are generally so vain, self sufficient and
assured, but because they have taken no time or pains to cultivate a self
acquaintance? And why does pride and stiffness appear so often in advanced age,
but because men grow old in self ignorance? A moderate degree of self knowledge
would cure an inordinate degree of self complacency Quanto quis minus se videt,
tanto minus sibi displicet. Greg.
.

Humility is not more necessary to salvation, than self knowledge is to
humility Scio neminem absque sui cognitione salvari, de qua nimirum matter
salutis, humilitas oritar, et timor domini. Bernard. -- Utraque cognitio Dei,
scilicet et tui, tibi recessaria est ad salutem; quia sicut ex notitia tui
venit in te timor Dei, atque ex Dei notitia itidem amor; sic e contra, ex
ignorantia tui superbia, ac de Dei ignorantia venit desperatio. Idem. in Cannc.
.

It would effectually prevent that bad disposition which is too apt to steal
upon, and infect some of the best human minds (especially those who aim at
singular and exalted degrees of piety) viz. a religious vanity or spiritual
pride; which without a good deal of self knowledge and self attention will
gradually insinuate into the heart, taint the mind, and sophisticate our
virtues before we are aware; and in proportion to its prevalence make the
christian temper degenerate into the Pharisaical.

"Might I be allowed to choose my own lot, I should think it much more eligible
to want my spiritual comforts, than to abound in these at the expense of my
humility. No; let a penitent and contrite spirit be always my portion; and may
I ever so be the favorite of heaven, as never to forget that I am the chief of
sinners. Knowledge in the sublime and glorious mysteries of the christian
faith, and ravishing contemplations of GOD and a future state, are most
desirable advantages; but still I prefer charity which edifieth before the
highest intellectual perfections of that knowledge which puffs up; 1 Cor.
viii. 11.
-- Those spiritual advantages are certainly best for us, which increase our
modesty and awaken our caution, and dispose us to suspect and deny ourselves.
-- The highest in GOD's esteem, are meanest in their own. And their excellency
consists in the meekness and truth, not in the pomp and oftentation of piety
which affects to be seen and admired of men Stanhope's Tho. a Kemp. B. 2. chapter
11.

[CHRIST.] "My son, when thou feel thy soul warmed with devotion and holy
zeal for my service, it will be advisable to decline all those methods of
publishing it to the world, which vain men are so industrious to take, and
content thyself with its being known to GOD and thine own conscience. Rather
endeavor to moderate and suppress those pompous expressions of it, in which
some place the very perfection of zeal. Think meanly of thy own virtues. --
Some men, of a bold, ungoverned zeal, aspire at things beyond their strength,
and express more vehemence than conduct in their actions. They are perfectly
carried out of themselves with eagerness; forget that they are still poor
insects upon earth, and think of nothing less than building their nest in
heaven. Now these are often left to themselves, and taught by sad experience,
that the saint flutterings of men are weak and ineffectual; and that none soars
to heaven except I assist his flight, and mount him on my own wings. -- Virtue
does not consist in abundance of illumination and knowledge; but in lowliness
of mind, in meekness and charity; in a mind entirely resigned to GOD, and
sincerely disposed to serve and please him; in a just sense of every man's
vileness; and not only thinking very meanly of one's self, but being well
content to be so thought of by others. Id. book. 3. chap. 8."

"It is a dangerous drunkenness, I confess, that of wine; but there is another
more dangerous. How many souls do I see in the world drunk with vanity, and a
high opinion of themselves? This drunkenness causes them to make a thousand
false steps, and a thousand stumbles. Their ways are all oblique and crooked.
Like men in drink, they have always a great opinion of their own wisdom, their
power, and their prudence; all which often fail them. -- Examine well thyself,
my soul; see if thou art not tainted with this evil. Alas! if thou deniest it,
thou provest it. It is great pride to think one has no pride; for it is so
think you are as good i deed. as you esteem yourself. But there is no man in
the world but esteems himself better than he truly is."

"Thou will say, it may be, thou have a very ill opinion of thyself. But be
assured, my soul, thou do not despise thyself so much as thou art truly
despicable. If you do despise thyself indeed, thou make a merit of that
very thing; so that pride is attached to this very contempt of thyself."
Jurieu's Method of Devotion, p. 1. chapter 10.


."

CHAP. IV.
Charity another Effect of Self Knowledge.
IV. SELF Knowledge greatly promotes a spirit of meekness and charity.

The more a man is acquainted with his own failings, the more he is disposed to
make allowances for those of others. The knowledge he has of himself, will
incline him to be as severe in his animadversions on his own conduct, as he is
on that of others; and as candid to their faults as he is to his own. "The
great GOD seems to have given that commandment (KNOW THYSELF) to those men more
especially, who are apt to make remarks on other men's actions, and forget
themselves." (...) Mor. Vol. I. p. 273.


There is an uncommon beauty, force, and propriety in that caution which our
savior gives us, And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye,
but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Or how will thou say to
thy brother, let me pull out the mole out of thine eye, and behold the beam is
in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, first cast the beam out of thine own eye, and
then shall thou see clearly to cast out the mole out of thy brother's eye,
Matt. vii. 3 -- 5.
In which words these four things are plainly intimated; 1. That some are much
more quick sighted to discern the faults and blemishes of others, than their
own: Can spy a mote in another's eye, sooner than a beam in their own. 2. That
they are often the most forward to correct and cure the foibles of others, who
are most unqualified for that office. The beam in their own eye makes them
altogether unfit to pull out the mole from their brother's. A man half blind
himself should never set up for an Oculist. 3. That they who are inclinek to
deal in censure should always begin at home. 4. Great censoriousness is great
hypocrisy. Thou hypocrite, etc. all this is nothing but the effect of woeful
self ignorance.

This common failing of the human nature, the heathens were very sensible of --
Egomet mi ignosco, maenius in quit;
Stultus et improbus hic amor est, dig^usque notari.
Com us praevdeas ocu^ls mal^ lippus inunctis,
Cursn (...) vitlis tam cernis acutum,
(...), aut Serpens Epidaurius?
Hor. Sat. 3. lib. 1.

Fit enim, nefcio quomodo, ut magis in aliis cernamus quam in nobismet psit,
siquid delinquitur. Cicero.


; and imaged it in the following manner: Every man, say they, carries a wallet,
or two bags with him; the one hanging before him, and the other behind him;
into that before, he puts the faults of others; into that behind, his own; by
which means he never sees his own failings, whilst he has those of others
always before his eyes. Sed praecedenti spectatur mantica tergo. Per. Sat. 4.

Non videmus id manticae quod in tergo est. Carul. Carm. 22.

Nostram peram non videntes, aliocum (juxta Persium) manticam consideramus. D.
Hieron. Epist. 91.




But self knowledge now helps us to turn this wallet; and place that which has
our own faults before our eyes, and that which has in it those of others,
behind our back. A very necessary regulation this if we would behold our own
faults in the same light in which they do. For we must not expect that others
will be as blind to our foibles as we ourselves are. They will carry them
before their eyes, whether we do, or no. And to imagine that the world takes no
notice of them, because we do not, is just as wise as to fancy that others do
not see us, because we shut our eyes.

CHAP. V.
Moderation the Effect of Self Knowledge.
V. ANOTHER genuine offspring of self knowledge is moderation.

This indeed can hardly be conceived to be separate from that of meekness and
charity beforementioned; but I choose to give it a distinct mention, because I
consider it under a different view and operation, viz. as that which guards and
influences our spirits in all matters of debate and controversy.

Moderation is a great and important christian virtue, very different from that
bad quality of the mind under which it is often misrepresented and disguised,
viz. lukewarmness and indifference about the truth. The former is very
consistent with a regular and well corrected zeal, the latter consists in the
total want of it; the former is sensible of, and endeavors with peace and
prudence to maintain the dignity and importance of divine doctrines, the latter
has no manner of concern about them; the one feels the secret influences of
them, the other is quite a stranger to their power and efficacy; the one
laments in secret the sad decay of vital religion the other is an instance of
it. In short, the one proceeds from true knowledge, the other from great
ignorance; the one is a good mark of sincerity, and the other a certain sign of
hypocrisy. And to confound two things together, which are so essentially
different, can be the effect of nothing but great ignorance, inconsideration,
or an overheated, injudicious zeal.

A self knowing man can easily distinguish between these two. And the knowledge
which he has of human nature in general, from a thorough contemplation of his
own in particular, shows him the necessity of preserving a medium (as in every
thing else, so especially) between the two extremes of a bigoted zeal on the
one hand, and indolent lukewarmness on the other. As he will not look upon
every thing to be worth contending for, so he will look upon nothing worth
losing his temper for in the contention; because, though the truth be of ever
so great importance, nothing can do a greater disservice to it, or make a man
more incapable of defending it, than intemperate heat and passion; whereby he
injures and betrays the cause he is over anxious to maintain. The wrath of man
works not the righteousness of GOD. James i. 20.


Self knowledge heals our animosities, and greatly cools our debates about
matters of dark and doubtful speculation. One who knows himself sets too great
a value upon his time and temper, to plunge rashly into those vain and
fruitless controversies, in which one of them is sure to be lost, and the other
in great danger of being so; especially when a man of bad temper and bad
principles is the opponent; who aims rather to silence his adversary with over
bearing confidence, dark unmeaning language, authoritative airs, and hard
words, than convince him with solid argument; and who plainly contends not for
truth but victory. Little good can be done to the best cause in such a
circumstance. And a wise and moderate man who knows human nature, and knows
himself, will rather give his antagonist the pleasure of an imaginary triumph,
than engage in so unequal a combat.

An eagerness and zeal for dispute, on every subject, and with every one, shows
great self sufficiency; that never failing sign of great self ignorance. And
true moderation, which creates an indifference to little things, and a wise and
well proportioned zeal for things of importance, can proceed from nothing but
true knowledge, which has its foundation in self acquaintance.

CHAP. VI.
Self Knowledge improves the Judgment.
VI. ANOTHER great advantage of being well acquainted with ourselves is, that
it helps us to form a better judgment of other things.

Self knowledge indeed does not enlarge or increase our natural capacities, but
it guides and regulates them; leads us to the right use and application of
them; and removes a great many things which obstruct their due exercise, as
pride, prejudice, and passion, etc. which oftentimes miserably pervert the
rational powers.

He that has taken a just measure of himself, is thereby better able to judge
of other things.

1. He knows how to judge of men and human nature better. -- -- For human
nature, setting aside the difference of natural genius, and the improvements of
education and religion, is pretty much the same in all. There are the same
passions and appetites, the same natural infirmities and inclinations in all
mankind; though some are more predominant and distinguishable in some, than
they are in others. So that if a man be but well acquainted with his own, this,
together with a very little observation on human life, will soon discover to
him those of other men; and show him very impartially their particular failings
and excellencies, and help him to form a much truer sentiment of them, than if
he were to judge only by their exterior, the appearance they make in the eye of
the world, or the character given of them by others; both which are often very
fallacious.

2. Self knowledge will teach us to judge rightly of facts as well as men. It
will exhibit things to the mind in a proper light, and true colors, without
those false glosses and appearances which fancy throws upon them, or in which
the imagination often paints them. It will teach us to judge not with the
imagination, but with the understanding; and will set a guard upon the former,
which so often represents things in wrong views, and gives the mind false
impressions. See Part I. Chap. IV.

3. It helps us to estimate the true value of all worldly good things. It
rectifies our notions of them, and lessens that enormous esteem we are apt to
have for them. For when a man knows himself, and his true interest, he will see
how far, and in what degree, these things are suitable to him, and subservient
to his good; and how far they are unsuitable, insnaring, and pernicious. This,
and not the common opinion of the world, will be his rule of judgment
concerning them. By this he will see quite through them; see what they really
are at bottom: and how far a wise man ought to desire them. The reason why men
value them so extravagantly is, because they take but a superficial view of
them, and only look upon their outside, where they are most showy and inviting.
Were they to look within them, consider their intrinsic worth, their ordinary
effects, their tendency and their end, they would not be so apt to over value
them. And a man that has learned to see through himself can easily see through
these. Abstrahunt a recto divitiae, honores, potentia, et caetera quae opinione
nostra chara sunt, precio suo vilia. Nescimus ae^^ibmare res: de quibus, non
cum sama led cum rerum natura, deli^erandum est. Nihil habent ista magnificum,
quo mentes in se nostras trahant, praeter hoc quod mirari illa contuevimus. Non
enim, quia concupiscenda sunt, laudantur, sed concupiscuntur quia laudata sunt.
Sen. Epist. 82. -- Riches, honors, power, and the like, which owe all their
worth to our false opinion of them, are too apt to draw the heart from virtue.
We know not how to prize them; they are not to be judged of by the common
vogue, but by their own nature. They have nothing to attract our esteem, but
that we are used to admire them; they are not cried up because they are things
that ought to be desired, but they are desired because they are generally (...)
up.


CHAP. VII.
Self Knowledge directs to the proper Exercise of Self Denial.
VII. A MAN that knows himself best, knows how, and wherein, he ought to deny
himself.

The great duty of self denial, which our Savior so expressly requires of all
his followers, plain and necessary as it is, has been much mistaken and abused;
and that not only by the church of Rome, in their doctrines of penance, fasts
and pilgrimages, but by some protestant christians in the instances of
voluntary abstinence and unnecessary austerities. Whence they are sometimes apt
to be too censorious against those who indulge themselves in the use of those
indifferent things, which they make it a point of conscience to abstain from.
Whereas, would they confine their exercise of self denial to the plain and
important points of christian practice, devoutly performing the necessary
duties they are most averse to, and resolutely avoiding the known sins they are
most inclined to, under the direction of scripture, they would soon become more
solid, judicious, and exemplary christians; and did they know themselves, they
would easily see that herein there is occasion and scope enough for self
denial; and that to a degree of greater severity and difficulty than there is
in those little corporal abstinences and mortifications they enjoin themselves.

1. Self knowledge will direct us to the necessary exercises of self denial,
with regard to the duties our tempers are most averse to.

There is no one, but, at some times, find a great backwardness and
indisposition to some duties which he knows to be seasonable and necessary.
This then is a proper occasion for self discipline. For to indulge this
indisposition is very dangerous, and leads to an habitual neglect of known
duty; and to resist and oppose it, and to prepare for a diligent and faithful
discharge of the duty, notwithstanding the many pleas and excuses that carnal
disposition may urge for the neglect of it, this requires no small pains and
self denial; and yet it is very necessary to the peace of conscience.

As for our encouragement to this piece of self denial, we need only remember
that the difficulty of the duty, and our unfitness for it, will, upon the
trial, be found to be much less than we apprehended. And the pleasure of
reflecting, that we have discharged our consciences, and given a fresh
testimony of our uprightness, will more than compensate the pains and
difficulty we found therein. And the oftener the criminal propensions to the
wilful neglect of duty are opposed and conquered, the seldomer will they
return, or the weaker will they grow. Till at last, by divine grace, they will
be wholly overcome; and in the room of them will succeed an habitual readiness
to every good work, Tit. iii. 1.
and a very sensible delight therein: A much happier effect than can be
expected from the severest exercises of self denial, in the instances before
mentioned.

2. A man that knows himself will see an equal necessity for self denial, in
order to check and control his inclinations to sinful actions: To subdue the
rebel within; to rest the solicitations of sense and appetite; to summon all
his wisdom to avoid the occasions and temptations to sin, and all his strength
to oppose it.

All this (especially if it be a favorite constitutional iniquity) will cost a
man pains and mortification enough. For instance, the subduing a violent
passion, or taming a sensual inclination, or forgiving an apparent injury and
affront. It is evident, such a self conquest can never be attained without,
much self knowledge and self denial.

And that self denial that is exercised this way, as it will be a better
evidence of our sincerity, so it will be more helpful and ornamental to the
interests of religion, than the greatest zeal in those particular duties which
are most suitable to our natural tempers, or than the greatest austerities in
some particular instances of mortification, which are not yet so necessary, and
perhaps not so difficult or disagreeable to us as this.

To what amazing heights of piety may some be thought to mount, (raised on the
wings of flaming zeal and distinguished by uncommon precisoness and severity
about little things) who all the while, perhaps, cannot govern one passion, and
appear yet ignorant of, and slaves to, their darling iniquity: through an
ignorance of themselves, they misapply their zeal, and misplace their self
denial; and by that means blemish their characters with a visible
inconsistency. A pious zeal may be active and yet not pernicious, and shine
without burning. Intemperate zeal is like Sirius in Homer.(...)

(...) quidem clara, sed saeva luce coruseat, Et morboe aetus que adfert
mortalibus aegris. II. x. 30.

Picus zeal is like the gentle flame in Virgil.
Ecce levis subito de virtice visus (...)
Fundere lumen apex, tractuque innoxia mollis
Lambere s^amma comas, er circum tempora pasci.
Jortin^ disc. p. ^1. AEn. 1^.




CHAP. VIII.
Self Knowledge pronotes our Usefulness in the World.
VIII. THE more we know of ourselves, the more useful we are like to be, in
those stations of life in which providence has fixed us.

When we know our proper talents and capacities, we know in what manner we are
capable of being useful; and the consideration of our characters and relations
in life, will direct us to the proper application of those talents; show us to
what ends they are given us, and to what purposes they ought to be improved.

"Many of those who set up for wits, and pretend to a more than ordinary
sagacity and delicacy of sense, do notwithstanding spend their time
unaccountably; and live away whole days, weeks, and sometimes months together,
to as little purpose, though it may not be so innocently, as if they had been
asleep all the while. -- But if their parts be so good as they would have
others believe, sure they are worth improving; if not, they have the more need
of it. -- Greatness of parts is so far from being a discharge from industry,
that I find men of the most exquisite sense in all ages were always most
curious of their time. And therefore I very much suspect the excellency of
those mens' parts, who are dissolute and careless mispenders of it." Norris's
Misc. p. 120.


It is a sad thing to observe, how miserably some men debase and prostitute
their capacities. Those gifts and indulgences of nature, by which they outshine
many others, and by which they are capable of doing real service to the cause
of virtue and religion, and of being eminently useful to mankind, they either
entirely neglect, or shamefully abuse, to the dishonor of GOD, and the
prejudice of their fellow creatures, by encouraging and emboldening them in the
ways of vice and vanity. For the false glare of a profane wit will sometimes
make such strong impressions on a weak, unsettled mind, as to overbear the
principles of reason and wisdom and give it too favorable sentiments of, what
it before abhorred. Whereas the same force and sprightliness of genius would
have been very happily and usefully employed in putting sin out of countenance,
and in rallying the follies and exposing the inconsistencies of a vicious and
profligate character.

The more talents and abilities men are blessed with, the more pains they ought
to take. -- This is Chrysostom's observation. And the reason is obvious;
because they have no more to answer for than other men, which I take to be a
better reason than what is assigned by this father, viz. because they have more
more to lose. (...)De Sacerd. I. v. c. ^.


When a man once knows where his strength lies, wherein he excels, or is
capable of excelling, how far his influence extends, and in what station of
life providence has fixed him, and the duties of that station; he then knows
what talents he ought to cultivate, in what manner and to what objects they are
to be chiefly directed and applied, in order to shine in that station, and be
useful in it. This will keep him even and steady in his pursuits and views;
consistent with himself, uniform in his conduct and (...) to mankind, and will
permit his shooting at a wrong mark, or missing the right one he aims at; as
thousands do, for want of this necessary branch of self knowledge. See Part I.
Chap. V.

CHAP. IX.
Self Knowledge leads to a Decorum and Consistency of Character.
IX. A MAN that knows himself, knows how to act with diseretion and dignity in
every station and character.

Almost all the ridicule we see in the world takes its rise from self
ignorance, and to this mankind by common assent ascribe it, when they say of a
person that acts out of character, he does not know himself. Affectation is the
spring of all ridicule, and self ignorance the true source of affectation. A
man that does not know his proper character, nor what becomes it, cannot act
suitably to it. He will often affect a character that does not belong to him;
and will either act above or beneath himself, which will make him equally
contemptible in the eyes of them that know him Omnique in re posse quod deceat
acere, fartis et naturae est; scire, quid, quandoque deceat, prudentiae. Cic.
de Orat. I. 3. 55.
.

A man of superior rank and character, that knows himself, knows that he is
but a man; subject to the same sicknesses, frailties, disappointments, pains,
passions and sorrows, as other men; that true honor lies in those things, in
which it is possible for the meanest peasant to excel him; and therefore he
will not be vainly arrogant. He knows that they are only transitory and
accidental things, that set him above the rest of mankind; that he will soon be
upon a level with them; and therefore learns to condescend: And there is a
dignity in this condescension; it does not sink, but exalts his reputation and
character.

A man of inferior rank, that knows himself, knows how to be content, quiet,
and thankful, in his lower sphere. As he has not an extravagant veneration and
esteem for those external things which raise one man's circumstances so much
above another's, so he does not look upon himself as the worse or less valuable
man, purely because he has them not; much less does he envy them that have
them. As he has not their advantages, so neither has he their temptations: He
is in that state of life, which the great arbiter and disposer of all things
has allotted him; and he is satisfied: But as a defference is owing to
external superiority, he knows how to pay a proper respect to those that are
above him, without that abject and servile cringing which discovers an
inordinate esteem for their condition. As he does not over esteem them for
those little accidental advantages in which they excel him, so neither does he
overvalue himself for those things in which he excels others.

Were hearers to know themselves, they would not take upon them to dictate to
their preachers; or teach their ministers how to teach them; (which, as St.
Austin observes Norit medicus quid salutiferum, quidve contrarium petat
aegrotos. AEgroti estis, nolete ergo dictari quae vobis medicamina velit
opponere.
, is the same thing as if a patient, when he sends for a physician, should
prescribe to him what he would have him prescribe;) but, if they happen to hear
something not quite agreeable to their former sentiments, would betake
themselves more diligently to they study of their bibles, to know whether those
things were so. Acts xvii. 11.


And were ministers to know themselves, they would know the nature and duty of
their office, and the wants and infirmities of their hearers better, than to
domineer over their faith, or shoot over their heads, and seek their own
popularity, rather than their benefit. They would be more solicitous for their
edification, than their approbation; (the most palatable food is not always the
most wholesome;) and like a faithful physician, would earnestly intend and
endeavor their good, though it be in a way they may not like; and rather risk
their own characters with weak and captious men, than withhold any thing that
is needful for them, or be unfaithful to GOD and their own consciences.
Patients must not expect to be always pleased, nor physicians to be always
applauded.

CHAP. X.
Piety the Effect of Self Knowledge.
X. SELF knowledge tends greatly to cultivate a spirit of true piety.

Ignorance is so far from being the mother of devotion, that nothing is more
destructive of it. And of all ignorance, none is a greater bane to it than self
ignorance. This indeed is very consistent with superstition, bigotry and
enthusiasm, those common counterfeits of piety, which by weak and credulous
minds are often mistaken for it. But true piety and real devotion can only
spring from a just knowledge of GOD and ourselves; and the relation we stand in
to him, and the dependence we have upon him. For when we consider ourselves as
the creatures of GOD, whom he made for his honor, and as creatures incapable
of any happiness, but what results from his favor; and as entirely and
continually dependent upon him for every thing we have and hope for; and whilst
we bear this thought in our minds, what can induce or prompt us more to love
and fear and trust Him, as our GOD, our father, and all sufficient friend and
helper?

CHAP. XI.
Self Knowledge teaches us rightly to perform the Duties of Religion.
XI. SELF knowledge will be a good help and direction to us in many of our
devout and christian exercises. Particularly,

1. In the duty of prayer; both as to the matter and mode Ille De^ veram
orationem exhibet qui semetipsum cog nos. cit. Greg.
. -- He that rightly knows himself, will be very sensible of his spiritual
wants, and he that is well acquainted with his spiritual wants, will not be at
a loss what to pray for. "Our hearts would be the best prayer books, if we were
well skilled in reading them. Why do men pray, and call for prayers when they
come to die, but that they begin a little better to know themselves? And were
they now but to hear the voice of GOD and conscience, they would not remain
speechless. But they that are born deaf are always dumb Baxter.
."

Again, self knowledge will teach us to pray, not only with fluency, but
fervency; will help us to keep the heart, as well as order our speech before
GOD; and so promote the grace as well as gift of prayer. Did we but seriously
consider what we are, and what we are about; whom we pray to, and what we pray
for, it is impossible we should be so dead, spiritless, and formal in this
duty, as we too often are. The very thought would inspire us with life, and
faith, and fervor.

2. Self knowledge will be very helpful to us in the duty of thanksgiving: As
it shows us both how suitable and how seasonable the mercies are which we
receive. A christian that keeps up an intelligence with himself, considers what
he has, as well as what he wants; and is no less sensible of the value of his
mercies, than his unworthiness of them: And this is what makes him thankful.
For this reason it is, that one christian's heart even melts with gratitude for
those very mercies, which others disesteem and depreciate; and perhaps despise,
because they have not what they think greater. But a man that knows himself,
knows that he deserves nothing, and therefore is thankful for every thing. For
thankfulness as necessarily flows from humility, as humility does from self
acquaintance.

3. In the duties of reading and hearing the word of GOD, self knowledge is of
excellent use to enable us to understand and apply that which we read, or hear.
Did we understand our hearts better, we should understand the word of GOD
better; for that speaks to the heart. A man that is acquainted with his own
heart, presently sees how the divine word penetrates and explores, searches and
lays open its most inward parts, feels what he reads; and finds that a
quickening spirit, which to a self ignorant man is but a dead letter.

Moreover, this self acquaintance teaches a man to apply what he reads and
hearts of the word of GOD. He sees the pertinence, congruity, and suitableness
of it to his own case; and lays it up faithfully in the store room of his mind,
to be digested and improved by his after thoughts. (...) it is by this art of
applying scripture, and urging the most suitable instructions and admonitions
of it home upon our consciences, that we receive the greatest benefit by it.

4. Nothing is of more eminent service in the great duty of meditation;
especially in that part of it which consists in heart converse. A man who is
unacquainted with himself, is as unfit to converse with his heart, as he is
with a stranger he never saw, and whose taste and temper he is altogether
unacquainted with. He knows not how to get his thoughts about him. And when he
has, he knows not how to range and fix them; and has no more the command of
them, than a general has of a wild, undisciplined army, that has never been
exercised, or accustomed to obedience and order. But one, who has made it the
study of his life to be acquainted with himself, is soon disposed to enter into
a free and familiar converse with his own heart; and in such a self conference
improves more in true wisdom, and acquires more useful and substantial
knowledge, than he could do from the most polite and refined conversation in
the world. -- Of such excellent use is self knowledge in all the duties of
devotion and piety.

CHAP. XII.
Self Knowledge the best Preparation for Death.
XII. SELF knowledge will be an habitual preparation for death, and a constant
guard against the surprise of it. Because it fixes and settles our hopes of
future happiness. That which makes the thoughts of death so terrifying to the
soul, is its utter uncertainty what will become of it after death. Were this
uncertainty to be removed, a thousand things would reconcile us to the thoughts
of dying Illa quoque res morti nos alienat, quod haec jam novimus illa ad quae
transituri sumus, noscimus qualia sins. Et horremus ignota. Naturalis praeterea
tenebrarum metus est, in quas adductura mors creditur. S^n. Epist. 83. It is
this makes us averse to death, that it translates us to object: we are
unacquainted with, and we tremble at the thoughts of those things that cre
unknown to us. We are naturally afraid of being in the dark, and death is a
leap in the dark.
.

"Distrust and darkness of a future state,
"Is that which makes mankind to dread their fate:
"Dying is nothing; but it is this we fear,
"To be we know not what, we know not where.
Now self knowledge, in a good degree, dissipates this gloom, and removes this
dreadful doubt. For as the word of GOD has revealed the certainty of a future
state of happiness which the good man shall enter upon after death, and plainly
described the requisite qualifications for it; when by a long and laborious
self acquaintance, he comes distinctly to discern those qualifications in
himself, his hopes of heaven soon raise him above the fears of death. And
though he may not be able to form any clear or distinct conception of the
nature of that happiness, yet in general he is assured that it will be a most
extensive one, and will contain in it every thing necessary to make it
complete; because it will come immediately from GOD himself "When we say that
the state of the other world is unknown, the only meaning of it is, that it is
a state of such happiness, so far beyond any thing we ever yet experienced,
that we cannot form any notion or idea of it. We know that there is such a
happiness; we know in some measure wherein this happiness consists; viz. in
seeing GOD and the blessed JESUS, who loved us, and gave himself for us; in
praising our Creator and Redeemer; in conversing with Saints and Angels. But
how great, how ravishing and transporting a pleasure this is, we cannot tell,
because we never yet felt it. -- Now methinks, this should not make the
thoughts of death uneasy to us, should not make us unwilling to go to heaven;
that the happiness of heaven is too great for us to know or conceive in this
world. For men are naturally fond of unknown and untried pleasures, which is so
far from being a disparagement to them, that it raises our expectations of
them, that they are unknown. In the things of this world, enjoyment usually
lessens our esteem and value for them, and we always value that most which we
have never tried; and methinks the happiness of the other world should not be
the only thing we despise before we try it. -- It is some encouragement to us
that the happiness of heaven is too big to be known in this world; for did we
perfectly know it now, it could not be very great." Sherlock on death, p. 71,
72.
. Whereas they who know not what they are, must necessarily be ignorant what
they shall be. A man that is all darkness within, can have but a dark prospect
forward Illi mors gravis incubat,
Qui, notus nimis omnibus,
Ignotus moritur sibi.
Sen. Tra. Thyes.

Who, exposed to others eyes,
Into his own heart never pries,
Death's to him a strange surprise.

.

Oh, what would we not give for solid hope (...) death! Reader, would thou
have it, know GOD, and know thyself.

A TREATISE OF SELF KNOWLEDGE.
PART III.
Showing how Self Knowledge is to be attained.
FROM what has been said under the two former parts of the subject, self
knowledge appears to be in itself so excellent, and in its effects so
extensively useful and conducive to the happiness of human kind, that nothing
need further be added by way of motive or inducement to excite us to make it
the great object of our study and pursuit. If we regard our present peace,
satisfaction, and usefulness, or our future and everlasting interests, we shall
certainly value and prosecute this knowledge above all others; as what will be
most ornamental to our characters, and beneficial to our interest in every
state of life, and abundantly recompense all our labor.

Were there need of any further motives to excite us to this, I might lay open
the many dreadful effects of self ignorance, and show how plainly it appears to
be the original spring of all the follies and incongruities we see in the
characters of men, and of most of the mortifications and miseries they meet
with here. This would soon appear by only mentioning the reverse of those
advantages before specified, which result from self knowledge. For what is it,
but a want of self knowledge that makes us so unsettled and volatile in our
dispositions? So subject to transport and excess of passions in the varying
scenes of life? So rash and unguarded in our conduct? So vain and self
sufficient? So censorious and malignant? So eager and confident? So little
useful in the world, in comparison of what we might be? So inconsistent with
ourselves? So mistaken in our notions of true religion? So generally indisposed
to, or unengaged in the holy duties of it? And finally, so unfit for death, and
so afraid of dying? -- I say, to what is all this owing, but self ignorance?
The first and fruitful source of all this long train of evils. -- And indeed,
there is scarce any, but what may be traced up to it. In short, it brutifies
man to be ignorant of himself. Man that is in honor, and understands not
(himself especially) is as the beasts that perish. Psalm. xlix. 20.


"Come home then, O my wandering, self neglecting soul; lose not thyself in a
wilderness, or tumult of impertinent, vain, distracting things. Thy work is
nearer thee; the country thou should first survey and travel is within thee;
from which thou must pass to that above thee; when by losing thyself in this
without thee, thou will find thyself before thou art aware in that below thee.
-- Let the eyes of fools be in the corners of the earth; leave it to men beside
themselves to live as without themselves; do thou keep at home and mind thine
own business. Survey thyself, thine own make and nature, and thou will find
full employ for all thy most active thoughts. Mirantur aliqui altitudines
montium, ingentes fluctus maris, altiffimos lapsus stuminam, et oceani ambitum,
et gyros syderum, et relinquunt seipsos, nec mirantur; faith St. Augustine. Some
men admire the heights of mountains, the huge waves of the sea, the sleep falls
of rivers, the compass of the ocean; and the circuit of the stars, and pass by
themselves without admiration.
But do thou delight in the mysteries of nature? Consider well the mystery of
thy own. The compendium of all thou studiest is near thee, even within thee;
thyself being the epitome of the world (...) Nem. de. Not. Hom. cap. 1. page
34. Who can sufficiently admire the noble nature of that creature man, who has
in him the mortal and the immortal, the rational and irrational nature-united,
and so carries about with him the image of the whole creation; whence be is
called microcosm, or the little world; for whose sake (so highly is he honored
by GOD) all things are made, both present and future; nay, for whose sake GOD
himself became man? -- So that it was not unjustly said by Gregory Nys^^ne,
that man was the macrocosm, and the world without the microcosm.
. -- If neither necessity, or duty, nature or grace, reason or faith, internal
inducements, external impulses, or eternal motives, might determine the subject
of thy study and contemplation, thou would call home thy distracted thoughts,
and employ them more on thyself and thy GOD Baxter's Mischief of Self Ignorance.
."

Now then let us resolve that henceforth the study of ourselves shall be the
business of our lives. That by the blessing of GOD, we may arrive at such a
degree of self knowledge as may secure to us the excellent benefits before
mentioned. To which end, we should do well to attend diligently to the rules
laid down in the following chapters.

CHAP. I.
Self Examination necessary to Self Knowledge.
1. THE first thing necessary to self knowledge is self inspection.

We must often look into our hearts if we would know them. They are very
deceitful; more (...) than we can imagine till we have searched and tried and
watched them well. We may meet with frauds and faithless dealings from men; but
after all, our own hearts are the greatest cheats; and there are none we are in
greater danger from than ourselves. We must first suspect ourselves, then
examine ourselves, then watch ourselves, if we expect ever to know ourselves.
How is it possible there should be any self acquaintance without self converse?

Were a man to accustom himself to such self employment, he need not live till
thirty before he suspects himself a fool, or till forty before he knows it, See
the Complaint, or Night Thoughts, Part 1. page 28.


Men could never be so bad as they are, if they did but take a proper care and
scope in this business of self examination Hoc nos pessimos faeit, quod nemo
vitam suam respicit. Quid facturi simus, cogitamus, et id raro; quid secerimus,
non cogitamus. Sen. Epist. 84.
. If they did but look backwards to what they were, inwards to what they are,
and forwards to what they shall be.

And as this is the first and most necessary step to self acquaintance, it may
not be amiss to be a little more particular in it. Therefore,

1. This business of self scrutiny must be performed with great care and
diligence, otherwise our hearts will deceive us, even whilst we are examining
of them. "When we set ourselves to think, some trifle or other, presently
interrupts and draws us off from any profitable recollection. Nay, we ourselves
fly out, and are glad to be diverted from a severe examination into our own
state; which is sure, if diligently pursued, to present us with objects of
shame and sorrow, which will wound our sight, and soon make us weary of this
necessary work Stanhope's Tho. a Kempes, page 166.
."

Do not let us flatter ourselves then that this is a mighty easy business. Much
pains and care are necessary sometimes to keep the mind intent; and more to
keep it impartial. And the difficulty of it is the reason that so many are
averse to it; and care not to descend into themselves Ut nemo id sese tentat
descendcre! Pers. sat. 4.
.

Reader try the experiment; retire now into thyself; and see if thou can not
strike out some light within, by closely urging such questions as these --
"What am I? For what was I made? And to what ends have I been preserved so
long, by the favor of my maker? Do I remember, or forget those ends? Have I
answered or perverted them? -- What have I been doing since I came into the
world? What is the world, or myself, the better for my living so many years in
it? -- What is my allowed course of actions? Am I sure it will bear the future
test? Am I now in that state I shall wish to die in? And, O my soul, think, and
think again what it is to die. -- Do not put that most awful event far from
thee; nor pass it by with a superficial thought. Can thou be too well
fortified against the terrors of that day! and art thou sure that the props
which support thee now, will not fail thee then? -- What hopes have thou for
eternity? Have thou indeed that godly temper, which alone can fit thee for the
enjoyment of GOD? -- Which world art thou most concerned for? What things do
most deeply affect thee? -- O my soul, remember thy dignity; think how soon the
scene will shift. Why should thou forget that thou art immortal?"

2. This self excitation and scrutiny must be frequently made. -- They who have
a great deal of important business on their hands should often look over their
accounts, and frequently adjust them; lest they should be going backwards, and
not know it. And custom will soon take off the difficulty of this duty, and
make it delightful.

In our morning retreat it will be proper to remember, that we cannot preserve
throughout the day that calm and even temper we may then be in. That we shall
very probably meet with some things to ruffle us; some attack on our weak side.
Place a guard there now. Or however, if no incidents happen to discompose us,
our tempers will vary; our thoughts will flow pretty much with our blood; and
the dispositions of the mind be a good deal governed by the motions of the
animal spirit; our souls will be serene or cloudy, our (...) volatile or
phlegmatic, and our inclinations sober or irregular, according to the
briskness or sluggishness of the circulation of the animal fluids, whatever may
be the natural and immediate cause of that; and therefore we must resolve to
avoid all occasions that may raise any dangerous ferments there; which, when
once raised, will excite in us very different thoughts and dispositions from
those we now have; which, together with the force of a fair opportunity and
urgent temptation, may overset our reason and resolution, and betray us into
those sinful indulgencies which will wound the conscience, stain the soul, and
create bitter remorse in our cooler reflections. Pious thoughts and purposes in
the morning will set a guard upon the soul and fortify it under all the
temptations of the day.

But such self inspection, however, should not fail to make part of our evening
devotions. When we should review and examine the several actions of the day,
the various tempers and dispositions we have been in, and the occasions that
excited them. It is an advice worthy of a christian, though it first dropped
from a heathen pen; that before we betake ourselves to rest, we review and
examine all the passages of the day, that we may have the comfort of what we
have done aright, and may redress what we find to have been amiss; and make the
shipwrecks of one day, be as marks to direct our course on another. A practice
that has been recommended by many of the heathen moralists of the greatest
name, as Plutarch, Epictetus, Marcus Antoninus; and particularly Pythagoras, in
the verses that go under his name, and are called his golden verses: Wherein he
advises his scholars every night to recollect the passages of the day, and ask
themselves these questions; "Wherein have I transgressed this day? What have I
done? What duty have I omitted, etc. (...)

Vid. Pythag. Aur. Carm apud Poet Minor. page 420.

Let not your eyes the sweets of slumber taste
'Till you have thrice severe reflections past,
On the actions of the day from first to last.
Wherein have I transgressed? What done have I?
What actions unperform'd have I past by?
And if your actions ill, on search you find,
Let grief; if good, let joy possess your mind.
This do, this think, to this your heart incline;
This way will lead you to the life divine.

?" Seneca recommends the same practice. " Sectius (says he) did this; at the
close of the day, before he betook himself to rest, he addressed his soul in
the following manner." "What evil of thine have thou cured this day? What vice
withstood? In what respect art thou better?" Passion will cease or become more
cool, when it knows every day it is to be thus called to account. What can be
more advantageous than this constant custom of searching through the day? --
And the same course (says Seneca) I take myself; and every day sit in judgment
on myself; and at even, when all is hush and still, I make a scrutiny into the
day; look over my words and actions, and hide nothing from myself; conceal none
of my mistakes through fear for why should I? When I have it in my power to say
thus: "This once I forgive thee; but see thou do so no more. -- In such a
dispute I was too keen; do not for the future contend with ignorant men; they
will not be convinced, because they are unwilling to show their ignorance. Such
a one I reproved with too much freedom; whereby I have not reformed, but
exasperated him; remember hereafter to be more mild in your censures; and
consider not only whether what you say be true, but whether the person you say
it to, can bear to hear the truth Vid. Seneca de Ira, lib. 3. cap. 36.
." -- Thus far that excellent moralist.

Let us take a few other specimens of a more pious and christian turn, from a
judicious and devout writer M. Bennet. See his Christ. Orator, page 584.
.

"This morning, when I arose, instead of applying myself to GOD in prayer,
which I generally find it best to do, immediately after a few serious
reflections, I gave way to idle musing, to the great disorder of my heart and
frame. How often have I suffered for want of more watchfulness on this
occasion? When shall I be wise? -- I have this day shamefully trifled, almost
through the, whole of it: Was in my bed when I should have been upon my knees;
prayed but coolly in the morning; was strangely off my guard in the business
and conversation I was concerned with in the day, particularly at -- I indulged
to very foolish, sinful, vile thoughts, etc. I fell in with a strain of
conversation too common amongst all sorts, viz. speaking evil of others; taking
up a reproach against my neighbor. I have often resolved against this sin, and
yet run into it again. How treacherous this wicked heart of mine! I have lost
several hours this day in mere sauntering and idleness. -- This day I had an
instance of mine own infirmity, that I was a little surprised at, and I am sure
I ought to be humbled for. The behavior of --, from whom I can expect nothing
but humor, indiscretion and folly, strangely ruffled me; and that after I have
had warning over and over again. What a poor, impotent, contemptible creature
am I! -- This day I have been kept in a great measure from my too frequent
failings. -- I had this day very comfortable assistances from GOD, upon an
occasion not a little trying -- what shall I render?"

3. See that the mind be in the most composed and disengaged frame it can, when
we enter upon this business of self judgment. Choose a time when it is most
free from passion, and most at leisure from the cares and affairs of life. A
judge is not like to bring a cause to a good issue, that is either intoxicated
with liquor on the bench, or has his mind distracted with other cares when he
should be intent on the trial. Remember you sit in judgment upon yourself, and
have nothing to do at present but to sift the evidence which conscience may
bring in either for or against you, in order to pronounce a just sentence;
which is of much greater concernment to you at present than any thing else can
be: And therefore it should be transacted with the utmost care, composure, and
attention.

4. Beware of partiality, and the influence of self love in this weighty
business; which if you do not guard against, it will soon lead you into self
delusion; the consequences of which may be fatal to you. Labor to see yourself
as you are; and view things in a just light, and not in that in which you would
have them appear. Remember that the mind is always apt to believe those things
which it would have to be true, and backward to credit what it wishes to be
false; and this is an influence you will certainly lie under in this affair of
self judgment.

You need not be much afraid of being too severe upon yourself. Your great
danger will be of passing a too favorable judgment. A judge ought not indeed
to be a party concerned; and should have no interest in the person he sits in
judgment upon. But this cannot be the case here; as you yourself are both judge
and criminal, which shows the danger of pronouncing a too favorable sentence.
But remember, your business is only with the evidence and the rule of judgment;
and that however you come off now, there will be a rehearing in another court,
where judgment will be according to truth.

"However, look not unequally either at the good or evil that is in you; but
view them as they are. If you observe only the good that is in you, and
overlook the bad, or search only after your faults, and overlook your graces,
neither of these will bring you to a true acquaintance with yourself Baxter's
director, page 876.
."

And to induce you to this impartiality, remember that this business (though it
may be hid from the world) is not done in secret; GOD sees how you manage it,
before whose tribunal you must expect a righteous judgment. "We should order
our thoughts so (faith Seneca) as if we had a window in our breasts, through
which any one might see what passes there. And indeed there is one that does;
for what does it signify that our thoughts are hid from men? From God nothing
is hid Sic cogitandum tanquam aliquis in pectus intimum inspicere possit; et
potest. Quid enim prodest ab homine aliquid esse secretum? Nihil deo clausum c.
t. Sen. Epist. 84.
."

5. Beware of false rules of judgment. This is a sure and common way to self
deception. e. g. Some judge of themselves by what they have been. But it does
not follow, if men are not so bad as they have been, that therefore they are
good as they should be. It is wrong to make our past conduct implicitly the
measure of our present; or the present rule of our future; when our past,
present, and future conduct must be all brought to another rule. And they who
thus measure themselves by themselves, and compare themselves with themselves,
are not wise. 2 Cor x 12.
-- Again, others are apt to judge of themselves by the opinions of men; which
is the most uncertain rule that can be; for in that very opinion of theirs you
may be deceived. How do you know they have really formed so good an idea of you
as they profess? But if they have, may not others have formed as bad? And why
should not the judgment of these be your rule, as well as the opinion of those?
Appeal to self flattery for an answer. -- However, neither one nor the other of
them perhaps appear even to know themselves; and how should they know you? How
is it possible they should have opportunities of knowing you better than you
know yourself? A man can never gain a right knowledge of himself from the
opinion of others, which is so various, and generally so ill founded. For men
commonly judge by outward appearances, or inward prejudice, and therefore for
the most part think and speak of us very much at random. -- Again, others are
for judging of themselves by the conduct of their superiors; who have
opportunities and advantages of knowing, acting and being better; "and yet
without vanity be it spoken (say they) we are not behind hand with them." But
what then? Neither they nor you perhaps are what the obligations of your
character indispensably require you to be, and what you must be ere you can be
happy. But consider how easily this argument may be retorted. You are
better-than some, you say, who have greater opportunities and advantages of
being good than you have; and therefore your state is safe. But you yourself
have greater opportunities and advantages of being good than some others have,
who are nevertheless better than you; and the refore, by the same rule, your
state cannot be safe. -- ^gain, others judge of themselves by the common maxims
of the vulgar world concerning honor and honesty, virtue and interests; which
maxims, though generally very corrupt and very contrary to those of reason,
conscience, and scripture, men will follow as, a rule, for the sake of the
latitude it allows them: And fondly think, that if they stand right in the
opinion of the lowest kind of men, they have no reason to be severe upon
themselves. Others, whose sentiments are more delicate and refined, they
imagine, may be mistaken, or may overstrain the matter. In which persuasion,
they are confirmed, by observing how seldom the consciences of the generality
of men smite them for those things which these nice judges condemn as heinous
crimes. I need not say how false and pernicious a rule this is. Again, others
may judge of themselves and their state by sudden impressions they have had, or
strong-impulses upon their spirits, which they attribute to the singer of GOD,
and by which they have been so exceedingly affected as to make no doubt but
that it was the instant of their conversion. But whether it was or no, can
never be known but by the conduct of their after lives. -- In like manner,
others judge of their good state by their good frames; though very rare, it may
be, and very transient; soon passing off like a morning cloud, or as the early
dew. "But we should not judge of ourselves by that which is unusual or
extraordinary with us; but by the ordinary tenor and drift of our lives. A bad
man may seem good in some good mood; and a good man may seem bad in some
extraordinary falls; to judge of a bad man by his best hours, and a good man by
his worst, is the way to be deceived in them both Baxter's direct. p. 876
." And the same way may you be deceived in yourself. -- Pharaoh, Ahab, Herod
and Felix, had all of them their softenings, their transitory fits of goodness;
but yet they remain upon record under the blackest characters.

These then are all wrong rules of judgment; and to trust to them; or to try
ourselves by them, leads to fatal self deception. Again,

6. In the business of self examination you must not only take care you do not
judge by wrong rules, but that you do not judge wrong by right rules. You must
endeavor then to be well acquainted with them. The office of a judge is not
only to collect the evidence and the circumstances of facts, but to he well
skilled in the laws, by which those facts are to be examined.

Now the only right rules by which we are to examine, in order to know
ourselves, are reason and scripture. Some are for setting aside these rules, as
too severe for them; too stiff to bend to their perverseness; too straight to
measure their crooked ways; are against reason, when reason is against them;
decrying it is carnal reason: And against scripture, when scripture is against
them, despising it as a dead letter. And thus, rather than be convinced they
are wrong, they reject the only means that can set them right.

And as some are for setting aside these rules, so others are for setting them
one against the other. Reason against scripture, and scripture against reason.
When they are both given us by the GOD of our natures, not only as perfectly
consistent, but as proper to explain and illustrate each other, and prevent our
mistaking either; and to be, when taken together, (as they always should) the
most complete and only rule by which to judge both of ourselves, and every
thing belonging to our salvation, as reasonable and fallen creatures.

1. Then one part of that rule which GOD has given us, to judge of ourselves
by, is right reason. By which I do not mean the reasoning of any particular
man, which may be very different from the reasoning of another particular man;
and both, it may be, very different from right reason; because both may be
influenced not so much by the reason and nature of things, as by partial
prepossessions and the power of passions. But by right reason I mean those
common principles, which are readily allowed by all who are capable of
understanding them, and not notoriously perverted by the force of prejudice;
and which are confirmed by the common consent of all the sober and thinking
part of mankind; and may be easily learned by the light of nature. Therefore if
any doctrine or practice, though supposed to be founded in, or countenanced by
revelation, be nevertheless apparently repugnant to these doctrines of right
reason, or evidently contradict our natural notions of the divine attributes,
or weaken our obligations to universal virtue, that we may be sure is no part
of revelation; because then one part of our rule would clash with and be
opposite to the other. And thus reason was designed to be our guard against a
wild and extravagant construction of scripture.

2. The other part of our rule is the sacred scriptures, which we are to use as
our guard against the licentious excursions of fancy, which is often imposing
itself upon us for right reason. Let any religious scheme or notion then appear
ever so pleasing or plausible, if it be not established on the plain principles
of scripture, it is forthwith to be (...): And that sense of scripture that is
violently forced to bend toward it, is very much to be suspected.

It must be very surprising to one who reads and studies the sacred scriptures
with a free, unbiassed mind, to see what elaborate, fine spun, flimsy glosses
men will invent to put upon some texts as the true and genuine sense of them;
for no other reason, but because it is most agreeable to the opinion of their
party, from which, as the standard of their orthodoxy, they durst never depart;
who, if they were to write a critique in the same manner on any Greek or Latin
author, would make themselves extremely ridiculous in the eyes of the learned
world. But if we would not pervert our rule, we must learn to think as
scripture speaks, and not compel that to speak as we think.

Would we know ourselves then, we must often view ourselves in the glass of
GOD's word. And when we have taken a full survey of ourselves from thence, let
us not soon forget what manner of persons we are. Jam. i. 23, 24.
If our own image do not please us, let as not quarrel with our mirror, but set
about mending ourselves.

The eye of the mind indeed, is not like that of the body, which can see every
thing else but itself; for the eye of the mind can turn itself inward, and
survey itself. However, it must be owned, it can see itself much better when
its own image is reflected upon it from this mirror. And it is by this only
that we can come at the bottom of our hearts, and discover those secret
prejudices and carnal prepossessions, which self love would hide from us.

This then is the first thing we must do in order to self knowledge, we must
examine, scrutinize, and judge ourselves, diligently, leisurely, frequently and
impartially; and that not by the false maxims of the world, but by the rules
which GOD has given us, reason and scripture; and take care to understand
those rules and not set them at variance.

CHAP. II.
Constant Watchfulness necessary to Self Knowledge.
II. WOULD we know ourselves, we must be very watchful over our hearts and
lives.

1. We must keep a vigilant eye upon our hearts, i. e. our tempers,
inclinations and passions. A more necessary piece of advice, in order to self
acquaintance, there cannot be than that which Solomon gives us, Prove. iv. 23.
Keep your heart with all diligence, or as it is in the original, above all
keeping (...)
q. d. Whatever you neglect or overlook, be sure you mind your heart Parallel
to this advice of the royal preacher, is that of the imperial philosopher,
(...) Look within, for within is the fountain of good. M. Aurel. lib. 7. 59.
. Narrowly observe all its inclinations and aversions, all its motions and
affections, together with the several objects and occasions which excite them.
And this precept we find in scripture enforced with two very urgent reasons.
The first is because out of it are the issues of life. i. e. As our heart is,
so will the tenor of our life and conduct be. As is the fountain, so are the
streams; as is the root, so is the fruit. Matt. vii. 18.
And the other is, because it is deceitful above all things. Jer. xvii. 9.
And therefore, without a constant guard upon it, we shall insensibly run into
many hurtful self deceptions. To which I may add, that without this careful
keeping of the heart we shall never be able to acquire any considerable degree
of self acquaintance or of self government.

2. To know ourselves, we must watch our life and conduct as well as our
hearts. And by this the heart will be better known; as the root is best known
by the fruit. We must attend to the nature and consequences of every action we
are disposed or solicited to, before we comply; and consider how it will appear
in a future review. We are apt enough to observe and watch the conduct of
others. A wise man will be as critical and severe upon his own. For indeed we
have a great deal more to do with our own conduct than that of other men; as we
are to answer for our own, but not for theirs. By observing the conduct of
other men we know them; by carefully observing our own we must know ourselves.

CHAP. III.
We should have some Regard to the Opinions of Others concerning Us,
particularly of our Enemies.
III. WOULD we know ourselves, we should not altogether neglect the opinion
which others may entertain concerning us.

Not that we need be very solicitous about the censure or applause of the
world; which are generally very rash and wrong, and proceed from the particular
humors and prepossessions of men; and he that knows himself, will soon know
how to despise them both. "The judgment which the world makes of us is
generally of no manner of use to us it adds nothing to our souls or bodies, nor
lessens any of our miseries. Let us constantly follow reason, (says Montaigne)
and let the public approbation follow us the same way, if it pleases."

But still, I say, a total indifference in this matter is unwise (...)Chrysostom
(...) Sacerd. l. 5. c. 4. As to the groundless reports that may be raised to
our disadvantage, it is not good either too much to fear them, or entirely to
despise them. We should endeavor to stifle them, be they ever so false, or the
authors of them ever so contemptible.
. We ought not to be entirely insensible of the reports of others; no, not to
the railings of an enemy; for an enemy may say something out of ill will to us,
which it may concern us to think of coolly when we are by ourselves; to examine
whether the accusation be just, and what there is in our conduct and temper
which may make it appear so. And by this means our enemy may do us more good
than he intended; and discover to us something in our hearts which we did not
before advert to. A man that has no enemies ought to have very faithful
friends; and one who has no such friends, ought to think it no calamity that
he has enemies to be his effectual monitors. -- "Our friends (says Mr.
Addison) very often flatter us as much as our own hearts. They either do not
see our faults, or conceal them from us; or soften them by their
representations, after such a manner that we think them too trivial to be taken
notice of. An adversary, on the contrary, makes a strict, or search into us,
discovers every flaw and imperfection in our tempers, and though his malice may
set them in too strong a light, it has generally some ground for what it
advances. A friend exaggerates a man's virtues, an enemy inflames his crimes. A
wise man should give a just attention to both of them so far as it may tend to
the improvement of the one, and the diminution of the other. Plutarch has
written an essay on the benefits which a man may receive from his enemies; and
among the good fruits of enmity mentions this in particular, that by the
reproaches it casts upon us we see the worst side of ourselves, and open our
eyes to several blemishes and defects in our lives and conversations, which we
should not have observed without the help of such ill natured monitors.

"In order likewise to come at a true knowledge of ourselves, we should
consider, on the other hand, how far we may deserve the praises and
approbations which the world bestow upon us; whether the actions they celebrate
proceed from laudable and worthy motives, and how far we are really possessed
of the virtues which gain us applause amongst those with whom we converse Such
a reflection is absolutely necessary, if we consider how apt we are either to
value or condemn ourselves by the opinions of other, and sacrifice the report
of our own hearts to the judgment of the world Spectat. Vol. VI. No. 399.
."

In that treatise of Plutarch here referred to, there are a great many
excellent things pertinent to this subject; and therefore I thought it not
improper to throw a few extracts out of it into the margin The foolish and
inconsiderate spoil the very friendships they are engaged in; but the wise and
prudent make good use of the hatred and enmity of men against them.

Why should we not take an enemy for our tutor, who will instruct us gratis in
those things we knew not before? For an enemy sees and understands more in
matters relating to us than our friends do. Because love is blind, but spite,
malice, ill will, wrath, and contempt, talk much, are very inquisitive and
quick sighted.

Our enemy, to gratify his ill will toward us, acquaints himself with the
infirmities both of our bodies and minds; sticks to our faults, and makes his
invidious remarks upon them, and spreads them abroad by his uncharitable and
ill natured reports. Hence we are taught this useful lesson for the direction
and management of our conversation in the world, viz. that we be circumspect
and wary in every thing we speak or do, as if our enemy always stood at our
elbow, and overlooked our actions.

Those persons whom that wisdom has brought to live soberly, which the fear
and awe of enemies has infused, are by degrees drawn into a habit of living
so, and are composed and fixed in their obedience to virtue by custom and use.

When one asked Diogenes how he might be avenged of his enemies, he replied, To
be yourself a good and honest man.

Antisthenes spoke incomparably well; "that if a man would live a safe and
unblamable life, it was necessary that he should have very ingenuous and
faithful friends, or very bad enemies; because the first, by their kind
admonitions, would keep him from sinning, the latter by their invectives."

He that has no friend to give him advice, or reprove him when he does amiss,
must bear patiently the rebukes of his enemies, and thereby learn to end the
(...) of his ways; considering seriously the object which these severe ceasures
aim at, and not what he is who makes them. For he who designed the death of
Prometheus the Thessalian, instead of giving him a fatal blow, only opened a
swelling which he had, which did really save his life. Just so may the harsh
reprehensions of enemies cure some distempers of the mind, which were be fore
either not known, or neglected; though their angry speeches do originally
proceed from malice or ill will.

If any man with opprobrious language objects to you crimes you know nothing
of, you ought to inquire into the causes or reasons of such false accusations;
whereby you may learn to take heed for the future, lest you should unwarily
commit those offenses which are unjustly imputed to you.

Whenever any thing is spoken against you that is not true, do not pass by, or
depise it because it is false; but forthwith examine yourself, and consider
what you have said or done that may administer a just occasion of reproof.

Nothing can be a greater instance of wisdom and humanity, than for a man to
bear silently and quietly the follies and revilings of an enemy; taking as much
care not to provoke him, as he would to sail safely by a dangerous rock.

It is an eminent piece of humanity, and a manifest token of a nature truly
generous, to put up the affronts of an enemy, at a time when you have a fair
opportunity to revenge them.

Let us carefully observe those good qualities wherein our enemies excel us,
and endeavor to excel them, by avoiding what is faulty, and imitating what is
excellent in them. Plut. Mor. Vol. 1. page 265. et seq.


.

It is the character of a dissolute mind, to be entirely insensible to all that
the world says of us; and shows such a confidence of self knowledge as is
usually a sure sign of self ignorance. The most knowing minds are ever least
presumptuous. And true self knowledge is a science of so much depth and
difficulty, that a wise man would not choose to be overconfident that all his
notions of himself are right, in opposition to the judgment of all mankind;
some of whom perhaps have better opportunities and advantages of knowing him
(at some seasons especially) than he has of knowing himself. Because herein
they never look through the same false medium of self flattery.

CHAP. IV.
Frequent Converse with Superiors a Help to Self Knowledge.
IV. ANOTHER proper means of self knowledge, is to converse as much as you can
with those who are your superiors in real excellence.

He that walks with wise men shall be wise. Prove. xlii. 20.
Their example will not only be your motive to laudable pursuits, but a mirror
to your mind; by which you may possibly discern some failings or deficiencies
or neglects in yourself, which before escaped you. You will see the
unreasonableness of your vanity and self sufficiency, when you observe how much
you are surpassed by others in knowledge and goodness. Their proficiency will
make your defects the more obvious to yourself. And by the luster of their
virtues you will better see the deformity of your vices; your negligence by
their diligence; your pride by their humility; your passion by their meekness;
and your folly by their wisdom.

Examples not only move, but teach and direct, much more effectually than
precepts; and shows us not only that such virtues may be practiced, but how;
and how lovely they appear when they are. And therefore if we cannot have them
always before our eyes, we should endeavor to have them always in our mind;
and especially that of our great head and pattern, who has set us a perfect
example of the most innocent conduct under the worst and most disadvantageous
circumstances of human life Qui plenissime intelligere appatit qualis sit,
tales debet aspiscre qualis non est; ut in bonorum forma, metiatur quantum
det^rmis est. Greg.
.

CHAP. V.
Of cultivating such a Temper as will be the best Disposition to Self Knowledge.
V. IF man would know himself, he must with great care cultivate that temper
which will best dispose him to receive this knowledge.

Now as there are no greater hindrances to self knowledge than pride and
obstinacy; so there is nothing more helpful to it than humility and as openness
to conviction.

1. One who is in quest of self, knowledge, must above all things seek
humility. And how near an affinity there is between these two, appears from
hence, that they are both acquired the same way. The very means of attaining
humility are the properest means for attaining self acquaintance. By keeping an
eye every day upon our faults and wants we become more humble; and by the same
means we become more self intelligent. By considering how far we fall short of
our rule and our duty, and how vastly others exceed us, and especially by a
daily and diligent study of the word of GOD, we come to have meaner thoughts of
ourselves; and by the very same means we come to have a better acquaintance
with ourselves.

A proud man cannot know himself. Pride is that beam in the eye of his mind,
which renders him quite blind to any blemishes there. Hence nothing is a surer
sign of self ignorance than vanity and ostentation.

Indeed true self knowledge and humility are so necessarily connected, that
they depend upon, and mutually beget each other. A man that knows himself,
knows the worst of himself, and therefore cannot but be humble; and a humble
mind is frequently contemplating its own faults and weaknesses, which greatly
improves it in self knowledge: So that self acquaintance makes a man humble,
and humility gives him still a better acquaintance with himself.

2. An openness to conviction is no less necessary to self knowledge than
humility.

As nothing is a greater bar to true knowledge than an obstinate stiffness in
opinion, and a fear to depart from old notions, which (before we were capable
of judging perhaps) we had long taken up for the truth; so nothing is a greater
bar to self knowledge, than a strong aversion to part with those sentiments of
ourselves which we have been blindly accustomed to, and to think worse of
ourselves than we are wont to do.

And such an unwillingness to retract our sentiments in both cases proceeds
from the same cause, viz. a reluctance to self condemnation. For he that takes
up a new way of thinking, contrary to that which he has long received, therein
condemns himself of having lived in an error; and he that begins to see faults
in himself he never saw before, condemns himself of having lived in ignorance
and sin. Now this is a most ungrateful business, and what self flattery can by
no means endure.

But such an inflexibillity of judgment, and hatred of conviction, is a very
unhappy and hurtful turn of mind. And a man that is resolved never to be in the
wrong, is in a fair way never to be in the right.

As infallibility is no privilege of the human nature, it is no diminution to a
man's good sense of judgment to be found in an error, provided he is willing
to retract it. He acts with the same freedom and liberty as before, whoever be
his monitor; and it is his own good sense and judgment that still guides him;
which shines to great advantage in thus directing him against the bias of
vanity and self opinion. And in thus changing his sentiments, he only
acknowledges that he is not (what no man ever was) incapable of being mistaken.
In short, it is more merit, and an argument of a more excellent mind, for a man
freely to retract when he is in the wrong, than to be overbearing and positive
when he is in the right (...)M. Aur. lib. 6 21. If any one can convince me that
I am wrong in any point of sentiment or practice, I will alter it with all my
heart. For it is truth I seek, and that can-hurt nobody. It is only persisting
in error, or ignorance, that can hurt us.
.

A man then must be willing to know himself, before he can know himself. He
must open his eyes, if he desires to see; yield to evidence and conviction,
though it be at the expense of his judgment, and to the mortification of his
vanity.

CHAP. VI.
To be sensible of our false Knowledge, a good Step to Self Knowledge.
VI. WOULD you know yourself, take heed and guard against false knowledge.

See that the light that is within you be not darkness; that your favorite and
leading principles be right. Search your furniture, and consider what you have
to unlearn. For oftentimes there is as much wisdom in casting off some
knowledge which we have, as in acquiring that which we have not. Which perhaps
was what made Themistocles reply, when one offered to teach him the art of
memory, that he had much rather he would teach him the art of forgetfulness.

A scholar that has been all his life collecting books, will find in his
library at last a great deal of rubbish. And as his taste alters, and his
judgment improves, he will throw out a great many as trash and lumber, which it
may be, he once valued and paid dear for; and replace them with such as are
more solid and useful. Just so should we deal with our understandings; look
over the furniture of the mind; separate the chuff from the wheat, which are
generally received into it together; and take as much pains to forget what we
ought not to have learned, as to retain what we ought not to forget. To read
froth and trifles all our life, is the way always to retain a flashy and
juvenile turn; and only to contemplate our first (which is generally our worst)
knowledge, cramps the progress of the understanding, and makes ourself survey
extremely deficient. In short, would we improve the understanding to the
valuable purposes of self knowledge, we must take as much care what books we
read, as what company we keep.

"The pains we take in books or arts, which treat of things remote from the use
of life, is a busy idleness. If I study (says Montaigne) it is for no other
science than what treats of the knowledge of myself and instructs me how to
live and die well Rule of life, page 82, 90,
."

It is a comfortless speculation, and a plain proof of the imperfection of the
human understanding, that upon a narrow scrutiny into our furniture, we observe
a great many things which we think we know, but do not; and many which we do
know, but ought not; that a good deal of the knowledge we have been all our
lives collecting, is no better than mere ignorance, and some of it worse; to be
sensible of which is a very necessary step to self acquaintance See Part i.
Chap. xiii. sin.


CHAP. VII.
Self Inspection peculiarly necessary upon some particular Occasions.
VII. WOULD you know yourself, you must very carefully attend to the frame and
emotions of your mind under some extraordinary incidents.

Some sudden accidents which befall you when the mind is most off its guard,
will better discover its secret turn and prevailing disposition than much
greater events you are prepared to meet, e. g.

1. Consider how you behave under any sudden affronts or provocations from men.
A fool's wrath is presently known, Prove. xii. 16.
i. e. a fool is presently known by his wrath.

If your anger be soon kindled, it is a sign that secret pride lies lurking in
the heart; which, like gun powder, takes fire at every spark of provocation
that lights upon it. For whatever may be owing to a natural temper, it is
certain that pride is the chief cause of frequent and wrathful resentments. For
pride and anger are as nearly allied as humility and meekness. Only by pride
comes contration. Prove. xiii. 20.
And a man would not know what mud lay at the bottom of his heart, if
provocation did not stir it up.

Athenodorus the philosopher, by reason of his old age, begged leave to retire
from the court of Augustus, which the emperor granted him; and in his
compliments of leave, "remember (said he) Coesar, whenever you are angry; you
say or do nothing, before you have distinctly repeated to yourself the four and
twenty letters of the alphabet." Whereupon Coesar catching him by the hand, I
have need (says he) of your presence still; and kept him a year longer See
Plut. Mor. Vol. 1. page 238
. This is celebrated by the ancients as a rule of excellent wisdom, but a
christian may prescribe to himself a much wiser, viz. "When you are angry,
answer not till you have repeated the fifth petition of the Lord's Prayer --
Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And our
Savior's comment upon it -- For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your
heavenly father will also forgive you: But if ye forgive not men their
trespasses neither will your father forgive your trespasses." Matt. vi. 14, 15.


It is a just and seasonable thought, that of Marcus Antoninus upon such
occasions; "A man misbehaves himself toward me -- what is that to me? The
action is his; and the will that sets him upon it is his; and therefore let him
look to it. The fault and injury belong to him, not to me. As for me, I am in
the condition providence would have me, and am doing what becomes me Meditat.
Book v. 25.
."

But after all, this amounts only to a philosophical contempt of injuries; and
falls much beneath the dignity of a christian forgiveness, to which self
knowledge will happily dispose us. And therefore, in order to judge of our
improvements therein, we must always take care to examine and observe, in what
manner we are affected in such circumstances.

2. How do you behave under a severe and unexpected affliction from the hand of
providence? Which is another circumstance, wherein we have a fair opportunity
of coming to a right knowledge of ourselves.

If there be an habitual discontent or impatience lurking within us, this will
draw it forth, especially if the affliction be attended with any of those
aggravating circumstances which accumulated that of Job.

Afflictions are often sent with this intent, to teach us to know ourselves;
and therefore ought to be carefully improved to this purpose.

And much of the wisdom and goodness of our heavenly father is seen by a
serious and attentive mind, not only in proportioning the degrees of his
corrections to his children's strength, but in adapting the kinds of them to
their tempers; afflicting one in one way, another in another, according as he
knows they are most easily wrought upon, and as will be most for their
advantage. By which means a small affliction of one kind may as deeply affect
us, and be of more advantage to us, than a much greater of another.

It is a trite but true observation, that a wise man receives more benefit from
his enemies, than from his friends; from his afflictions than from his mercies;
by which means his enemies become in effect his best friends, and his
afflictions his greatest mercies. Certain it is, that a man never has an
opportunity of taking a more fair and undisguised view of himself, than in
these circumstances. And therefore by diligently observing in what manner he is
affected at such times, he may make an improvement in the true knowledge of
himself, very much to his future advantage, though perhaps not a little to his
present mortification. For a sudden provocation from man, or a severe
affliction from GOD, may detect something which lay latent and undiscovered so
long at the bottom of his heart, that he never once suspected it to have had
any place there. Thus the one excited wrath in the meekest man, Psalm. cvi. 33.
and the other passion in the most patient. Job. iii. 3.


By considering then in what manner we bear the particular afflictions GOD is
pleased to allot us, and what benefit we receive from them, we may come to a
very considerable acquaintance with ourselves.

3. What is our usual temper and disposition in a time of peace, prosperity and
pleasure, when the soul is generally most unguarded?

This is the warm season that nourishes and impregnates the seeds of vanity,
self confidence, and a supercilious contempt of others. If there be such a root
of bitterness in the heart, it will be very apt to shoot forth in the sunshine
of uninterrupted prosperity; even after the frost of adversity had nipped it,
and, as we thought, killed it.

Prosperity is a trial as well as adversity; and is commonly attended with more
dangerous temptations. And were the mind but as seriously disposed to self
reflection, it would have a greater advantage of attaining a true knowledge of
itself under the former than under the latter. But the unhappiness of it is,
the mind is seldom rightly turned for such an employment under those
circumstances. It has something else to do, has the concerns of the world to
mind; and is too much engaged by the things without it, to advert to those
within; and is more disposed to enjoy than examine itself. However, it is a
very necessary season for self examination, and a very proper time to acquire a
good degree of self acquaintance, if rightly improved.

Lastly. How do we behave in bad company?

And that is to be reckoned bad company in which there is no probability of our
doing or getting any good but apparent danger of our doing or getting much
harm: I mean, our giving offense to others, by an indiscreet zeal, or incurring
guilt to ourselves by a criminal compliance.

Are we carried down by the torrent of vanity and vice? Will a flash of wit or
a brilliant fancy make us excuse a profane expression? If so, we shall soon
come to relish it, when thus seasoned, and use it ourselves.

This is a time when our zeal and wisdom, our fortitude and firmness are
generally put to the most delicate proof; and when we may too often take notice
of the unsuspected escapes of folly, fickleness, and indiscretion.

At such seasons as these then, we may often discern what lies at the bottom of
our hearts, better than we can in the more even and customary scenes of life,
when the passions are all calm and still. And therefore would we know
ourselves, we should be very attentive to our frame, temper, disposition and
conduct upon such occasions.

CHAP. VIII.
To know ourselves we must wholly abstract from external Appearances.
VIII. WOULD you know yourself, you must, as far as possible, get above the
influence of exteriors, or a mere outward show.

A man is, what his heart is. The knowledge of himself is the knowledge of his
heart, which is entirely an inward thing; to the knowledge of which then,
outward things (such as a man's condition and state in the world) can
contribute nothing: But, on the other hand, is too often a great bar and
hindrance to him in his pursuit of self knowledge.

1. Are your circumstances in the world easy and prosperous, take care you do
not judge of yourself too favorably on that account.

These things are without you, and therefore can never be the measure of what
is within; and however the world may respect you for them, they do not in the
least make you either a wiser or more valuable man.

In forming a true judgment of yourself then, you must entirely set aside the
consideration of your estate, and family; your wit, beauty, genius, health,
etc. which are all but the appendages or trappings of a man; a smooth and
shining varnish, which may lacker over the basest metal Si perpendere to voles,
sepone pecuniam, domum, dignitatem, intus te ipse consule. Sen.

Nam genus, et proavos, et quaeon feoimus ipsi,

Vix ea nostra voco. Ovid. Met. lib. xiii. ^^ 140.


.

A man may be a good and happy man without these things, and a bad and wretched
one with them. Nay he may have all these, and be the worse for them. They are
so far from being good and excellent in themselves, that we often see
providence bestows them upon the vilest of men, and in kindness denies them to
some of the best. They are oftentimes the greatest temptations, and put a man's
faith and wisdom to the most dangerous trial.

2. Is your condition in life mean and afflicted? Do not judge the worse of
yourself for not having those external advantages which others have.

None will think the worse of you for the want of them, but those who think the
better of themselves for having them: In both which they show a very depraved
and perverted judgment. These are (...) things entirely without us and out of
our power; for which a man is neither the better nor the worse, but according
as he uses them: And therefore you ought to be as indifferent to them as they
are to you. A good man shines amiably through all the obscurity of his low
fortune; and a wicked man is a poor little wretch in the midst of all his
grandeur Parvur pumilio, licet in monte constite^it; colossus magnitudinem suam
servabit, etiamsi steterit in puteo. Sen. Epist. 77.

"Pygmies are Pygmies still, though placed on Alps;
"And Pyraxies are Pyramids in vales.
Night Thoughts.


.

Were we to follow the judgment of the world, we should indeed think otherwise
of these things; and by that mistake be led into a wrong notion of ourselves.
But we have a better rule to follow, to which if we adhere, the consideration
of our external condition in life, whatever it be, will have no undue influence
on the mind in its search after self knowledge.

CHAP. IX.
The Practice of Self Knowledge, a great Means to promote it.
IX. LET all your self knowledge be reduced into practice.

The right improvement of that knowledge we have, is the best way to attain
more.

The great end of self knowledge is self government; without which (like all
other) it is but a useless speculation. And as all knowledge is valuable in
proportion to its end, so this is the most excellent, only because the practice
of it is of the most extensive use.

"Above all other subjects (says an ancient pious writer) study thine own self.
-- For no knowledge that terminates in curiosity or speculation is comparable
to that which is of use; and of all useful knowledge, that is most so which
consists in the due care and just notions of ourselves. This study is a debt
which every one owes himself. Let us not then be so lavish, so unjust as not to
pay this debt; by spending some part, at least, if we cannot all or most of our
time and care upon that which has the most indefeasible claim to it. Govern
your passions; manage your actions with prudence; and where false steps have
been made, correct them for the future. Let nothing be allowed to grow
headstrong and disorderly; but bring all under discipline. Set all your faults
before your eyes; and pass sentence upon yourself with the same severity as you
would do upon another, for whom no partiality has biassed your judgment St.
Bernard's Medit. chap. 5.
.

What will our most exact and diligent self researches avail us, if after all,
we sink into indolence and sloth? Or what will it signify to be convinced that
there is a great deal amiss in our deportments and dispositions, if we sit
still contentedly under that conviction, without taking one step toward a
reformation? It will indeed render us but the more guilty in the sight of GOD.
And how sad a thing will it be to have our self knowledge hereafter rise up in
judgment against us?

"Examination is in order to correction and amendment. We abuse it and
ourselves, if we rest in the duty without looking farther. We are to review our
daily walk, that we may reform it; and consequently a daily review will point
out to us the subject and matter of our suture daily care." -- "This day"
(says the christian upon his review of things at night) "I lost so much time;
particularly at -- I took too great a liberty; particularly in -- I omitted
such an opportunity that might have been improved to better purpose. I
mismanaged such a duty -- I find such a corruption often working; my old
infirmity -- still cleaves to me: How easily does this sin beset me! -- Oh! may
I be more attentive for the time to come, more watchful over my heart! take
mine heed to my ways! May I do so the next day!" -- "The knowledge of a
distemper is a good step to accure: at least it directs to proper methods and
applications in order to it. Self acquaintance leads to self reformation. He
that at the close of each day calls over what is past, inspects himself, his
behavior and manners, will not fall into that security, and those uncensured
follies that are so common and so dangerous Bennet's Christ. Orat. page 578.
."

And it may not be improper, in order to make us sensible of and attentive to
some of the more secret faults and foibles of our tempers, to pen them down at
night, according as they appeared during the transactions of the day. By which
means, we shall not only have a more distinct view of that part of our
character to which we are generally most blind; but shall be able to discover
some defects and blemishes in it, which perhaps we never apprehended before.
For the wiles and doublings of the heart are sometimes so hidden and intricate,
that it requires the nicest care and most steady attention to detect and unfold
them.

For instance: "This day I read an author, whose sentiments were very different
from mine, and who expressed himself with much warmth and confidence. It
excited my spleen, I own, and I immediately passed a severe censure upon him.
So that had he been present, and talked in the same strain, my ruffled temper
would have prompted me to use harsh and ungrateful language, which might have
occasioned a very unchristian contention. But I now recollect, that though the
author might be mistaken in those sentiments, (as I still believe he was) yet
by his particular circumstances in life, and the method of his education, he
has been strongly led into that way of thinking. So that his prejudice is
pardonable; but my uncharitableness is not; especially considering that in many
respects he has the ascendant of me. -- This proceeded then from
uncharitableness, which is one fault of my temper I have to watch against; and
which I never was before so sensible of, as I am now upon this recollection.
Learn more moderation, and make more allowances for the mistaken opinions of
others for the future. Be as charitable to others who differ from you, as you
desire they should be to you who differ as much from them. For it may be you
cannot be more assured of being in the right than they are."

"Again; this day I found myself strongly inclined to put in something by way
of abatement to an excellent character given of an absent person, by one of his
great admirers. It is true I had the command of myself to hold my tongue, and
it is well I had, for the ardour of his zeal would not have admitted the
exception, (though I still think that in some degree it was just) which might
have raised a wrangling debate about his character, perhaps at the expense of
my own; or however occasioned much animosity and contention. -- But I have
since examined the secret spring of that impulse, and find it to be envy; which
I was not then sensible of; but my antagonist had certainly imputed it to this:
And had he taken the liberty to have told me so, I much question whether I
should have had the temper of the philosopher; who, when he was really injured,
being asked whether he was angry or no, replied, No; but I am considering with
myself whether I ought not to be so. I doubt I should not have had so much
composure, but should have immediately resented it as a false and malicious
aspersion; but it was certainly envy, and nothing else; for the person who was
the object of the encomium was much my superior in many respects. And the
exception that arose to my mind was the only flaw in his character; which
nothing but a quick sighted envy could descry. Take heed then of that vice for
the future."

"Again; this day I was much surprised to observe in myself the symptoms of a
vice, whcih of all others, I ever thought myself most clear of; and have always
expressed the greatest detestation of in others, and that is covetousness. For
what else could it be that prompted me to withhold my charity from my fellow
creature in distress, on pretense that he was not in every respect a proper
object; or to dispense it so sparingly to another, who I knew was so, on
pretense of having lately been at a considerable expense upon another occasion?
This could proceed from nothing else but a latent principle of covetousness;
which, though I never before observed in myself, yet it is likely others have.
O how inscrutable are the depths and deceits of the human heart! -- Had my
enemy brought against me a charge of indolence, self indulgence, or pride and
impatience, or a too quick resentment of affronts and injuries, my own heart
must have confirmed the accusation, and forced me to plead guilty. Had he
charged me with bigotry, self opinion, and censoriousness, I should have
thought it proceeded from the same temper in himself, having rarely observed
any thing like it in my own. But had he charged me with covetousness, I should
have taken it for downright calumny, and despised the censure with indignation
and triumph. And yet after all, I find it had been but too true a charge. --
Oh! how hard a thing is it to know myself! -- This, like all other knowledge,
the more I have of it, the more sensible I am of my want of it." Cicero was
without doubt the vainest man in life; or he never could (...) the face to
beseech Lucceius, in writing the Roman history, to set the administrations of
his consulship in the most distinguished point of glory, even at the expense of
historical truth; and yet when he is begging a favor of the like kind even of
Cato himself, he has these astonishing words: -- Si quisquam fuit unquam
remotus et natura et magis etiam (ut mihi quidem sentire videor) ratione atque
doctrina ab INANI LAUD ET SERMONIRUS VULGI, ego profecto is sum, lib. 15. Ep.
4. If ever any man was a STRANGER TO VAIN GLORY, and the desire of popular
applause it is myself; and this disposition which I have by nature, is
(methinks) (...) yet stronger by reason and philosophy. -- Ah! how secretly
does self ignorance (not only insinuate into, but) conceal itself within the
most improved and best cultivated minds. -- Reader, (...).


The difficulty of self government and self possession arises from the
difficulty of a thorough self acquaintance, which is necessary to it. I say a
thorough self acquaintance, such as has been already set forth in its several
branches, (Part I.) For as self government is simply impossible (I mean
considered as a virtue) where self ignorance prevails so the difficulty of it
will decrease in proportion to the degree in which self acquaintance improves.

Many, perhaps may be ready to think this a paradox; and imagine that they know
their predominant passions and foibles very well, but still find it extremely
difficult to correct them. But let them examine this point again, and perhaps
they may find, that that difficulty arises either from their defect of self
knowledge (for it is in this as in other kinds of knowledge, wherein some are
very ready to think themselves much greater proficients than they are) or else
from their neglect to put in practice that degree of self knowledge they have.
They know their particular failings, yet will not guard against the immediate
temptations to them. And they are often betrayed into the immediate temptations
which overcome them, because they are ignorant of, or do not guard against, the
more remote temptations, which lead them into those which are more immediate
and dangerous, which may not improperly be called the temptations to
temptations; in observing and guarding against which, consists a very necessary
part of self knowledge, and the great art of keeping clear of danger, which, in
our present state of frailty, is the best means of keeping clear of sin.

To correct what is amiss, and to improve what is good in us, is supposed to be
our hearty desire, and the great end of all our self research. But if we do not
endeavor after this, all our labor after self knowledge will be in vain. Nay,
if we do not endeavor it, we cannot be said heartily to desire it. "For there
is most of the heart where there is most of the will; and there is most of the
will, where there is most endeavor; and where there is most endeavor, there
is generally most success: So that endeavor must prove the truth of our
desire, and success will generally prove the sincerity of our endeavor Baxter.
." This, I think, we may safely say, without attributing too much to the power
of the human will, considering that we are rational and free agents, and
considering what effectual assistance is offered to them, who seek it, to
render their endeavors successful, if they are sincere; which introduces the
subject of the following chapter.

CHAP. X.
Fervent and frequent Prayer the most effectual Means for attaining true Self
Knowledge.
LASTLY, the last means to self knowledge which I shall mention is frequent and
devout applications to the Fountain of Light, and the Father of our spirits, to
assist us in this important study, and give us the true knowledge of ourselves.

This I mention last, not as the least, but, on the contrary, as the greatest
and best means of all, to attain a right and thorough knowledge of ourselves,
and the way to render all the rest effectual, and therefore though it be the
last means mentioned, it is the first that should be used.

Would we know ourselves, we must often converse not only with ourselves in
meditation, but with GOD in prayer; in the lowest prostration of soul,
beseeching the father of our spirits to discover them to us; in whose light we
may see light, where before there was nothing but darkness; to make known to us
the depth and devices of our heart. For without the grace and influence of his
divine illuminations and instructions, our hearts will, after all our care and
pains to know them, most certainly deceive us. And self love will so prejudice
the understanding, as to keep us still in self ignorance.

The first thing we are to do in order to self knowledge is, to assure
ourselves that our hearts are deceitful above all things. And the next is, to
remember that the Lord searches the hearts, and tries the reins, Jer. xvii.
^0.
i. e. that He, the ((...)) Searcher of all hearts, 1 Chronicles. xxviii. 9.
has a perfect knowledge of them, deceitful as they are; which consideration,
as it suggesteth to us the strongest motive to induce us to labor after a true
knowledge of them ourselves; so it directs us at the same time how we may
attain this knowledge; viz. by an humble and importunate application to Him, to
whom alone they are known, to make them known to us. And this, by the free and
near access which his holy spirit has to our spirits, he can effectually do
various ways; viz. by fixing our attentions; by quickening our apprehensions;
removing our prejudices, (which, like a false medium before the eye of the
mind, prevents its seeing things in a just and proper light;) by mortifying our
pride; strengthening the intellective and reflecting faculties; and enforcing
upon the mind, a lively sense and knowledge of its greatest happiness and duty;
and so awakening the soul from that carnal security and indifference about its
best interests, into which a too serious attention to the world is apt to
betray it.

Besides, prayer is a very proper expedient for attaining self knowledge, as
the actual engagement of the mind in this devotional exercise is in itself a
great help to it. For the mind is never in a better frame, than when it is
intently and devoutly engaged in this duty; it has then the best apprehensions
of GOD, the truest notions of itself, and the justest sentiments of earthly
things; the clearest conceptions of its own weakness, and the deepest sense of
its own vileness; and consequently is in the best disposition that can be, to
receive a true and right knowledge of itself.

And Oh! could we but always think of ourselves in such a manner, or could we
but always be in a disposition to think of ourselves in such a manner, as we
sometimes do in the servour of our humiliations before the throne of grace, how
great a progress should we soon make in this important science? Which evidently
shows the necessity of such devout and humble engagements of the soul, and how
happy a means they are to attain a just self acquaintance.

AND NOW, reader, whoever thou art that have taken the pains to peruse these
sheets, whatever be thy circumstances or condition in the world, whatever thy
capacity or understanding, whatever thy occupations and engagements, whatever
thy favorite sentiments and principles, or whatever religious sect or party
thou espousest, know for certain, that thou have been deeply interested in what
thou have been reading; whether thou have attended to it or no. For it is of no
less concern to thee than the security of thy peace, and usefulness in (...)
world, and thy happiness in another; and relates to all thy interests, both as
a man and a christian. -- Perhaps thou have seen something of thine own image
in the glass that has now been held up to thee. And will thou go away, and soon
forget what manner of person thou art? -- Perhaps thou have met with some
things thou do not well understand or approve. But shall that take off thine
attention from those things thou do understand or approve, and art convinced
of the necessity of? -- If thou have received no improvement, no benefit from
this plain practical treatise thou have now perused; read it over again. The
same thought, you know, often impresses one more at one time than another. And
we sometimes receive more knowledge and profit by the second perusal of a book
than by the first. And I would fain hope that thou will find something in this
that may set thy thoughts on work, and which by the blessing of GOD, may make
thee more observant of thy heart and conduct; and in consequence of that a more
solid, serious, wise, established christian,

But will you, after all, deal by this book you have now read, as you have
dealt by many sermons you have heard? Pass your judgment upon it according to
your received and established set of notions; and condemn or applaud it, only
as it is agreeable or disagreeable to them; and commend or censure it, only as
it suits or does not suit your particular taste; without attending to the real
weight, importance, and necessity of the subject abstracted from those views;
or will you be barely content with the entertainment and satisfaction, which
some parts of it may possibly have given you; to assent to the importance of
the subject, the justness of the sentiment, or the propriety of some of the
observations you have been reading; and so dismiss all without any further
concern about the matter? -- Believe it. O christian reader, if this be all the
advantage you gain by it, it were scarce worth while to have confined yourself
so long to the perusal of it. It has aimed, it has sincerely aimed, to do you a
much greater benefit; to bring you to a better acquaintance with one you
express a particular regard for, and who is capable of being the best friend,
or the worst enemy, you have in the world; and that is yourself; -- It was
designed to convince you, that would you live and act consistently, either as a
man, or a christian, you must know yourself; and to persuade you under the
influence of the foregoing motives, and by the help of the forementioned
directions, to make self knowledge the great study, and self government the
great business of your life. In which resolution may Almighty GOD confirm you;
and in which great business may his grace assist you, against all future
discouragements and distractions. With him I leave the success of the whole; to
whom be glory and praise for ever.

FINIS.

