The King of the Vultures. The Ourang Outang; or, Wild-Woman of the woods. The
East India Porcupine.
MUSEUM and WAX-WORK,
At the EXCHANGE, NEW YORK, The Public are informed that this AMERICAN MUSEUM
contains an extensive Collection of the Productions of Nature and Art: Among
which are the following
NATURAL CURIOSITIES.
1 A PERFECT Horn that grew out of a woman's head in this city, it is about
five Inches in length, and grew from behind the right ear.

LIVING ANIMALS.
2 A Porcupine from the East Indies, the only one ever seen in America: His
quills are very long and formidable, and considered as a great curiosity. 3.
The Ant Bear, from the coast of Patigonia, a beautiful animal, and the only one
ever brought to this country. 4. The American Gray Squirrel, in a machine, in
which he grinds pepper for his living. With a number of other animals.
LIVING BIRDS.
5. A King of the Vultures, from South-America: This remarkable bird is about
as large as a turkey, the head and neck is beautiful, and resembles the head of
an Indian when painted and decorated in an elegant style. 6. The American
Eagle, very large and gay.
PRESERVED ANIMALS.
7. The male and female Ourang Outang; or, the man and woman of the woods, with
a Foetus of the same, perfect in spirits, in a fine state of preservation, from
Africa, the greatest natural curiosities in America. 8. The American Buffalo,
in his natural standing position, while alive. 9. The Brazil Porcupine. 10. The
Armidillo, from Terra Del Fugo. 11. Several American Alligators. 12. Several
Monkeys, of different species. 13. The Sloth, from South-America, said to be
the most slothful of all animals. 14. A Lamb, with two perfect heads and necks
complete, and with but one body, from Brunswick, (New Jersey.) 15. A Tooth of
the American non-described animal, called the Mammoth, supposed to be four or
five times as large as the modern Elephant: This tooth is upwards of seven
inches through and four thick, and weighs upwards of four pounds; was found in
April, 17^2, at the great Salt Licks, near the River Ohio, in Kentucky. 16. A
head of a Sea Lion, from Faulkland Islands: With a great variety of other
animals.
PRESERVED BIRDS. A large and beautiful collection, among which are the
following, viz.
17. The celebrated English Pheasant, Partridge, Ruff, and two beautiful Owls.
18. The Gold Cock, from South-America. Towcan, or Bill Bird, from Africa, this
is a remarkable Bird, its bill being nearly as large as its body. 19. The Sea
Gannet, a welcome sight to the Mariner, after a long voyage. 20. The Pinguin,
from Faulkland Islands.
SNAKES.
21. A large number of remarkable Snakes, among which are, the Yellow Snake,
from South-America, 18 feet in length. 22. The American Rattle and Hoop Snakes.
23. The Glass Snake, from South Carolina.
FISH.
24. A large number of Fish, and parts of Fish, among which are, the Sword,
Saw, and Thrasher, which are formidable enemies to the Whale. 25. The Dolphin,
Flying Fish, Porcupine Fish, and Sea Horse. 26. An uncommon large Jaws and
Teeth of a Shark, with a knife, that was found in him when taken. 27. Corals of
various kinds, and a number of Fossils and Minerals. 28. A beautiful collection
of Shells, and other Marine productions. 29. A large collection of beautiful
Butterflies, and other Insects, from St. Croix, together with a large number of
other curiosities, from the Universal Garden of Nature.
ARTIFICIAL CURIOSITIES.
30. A large collection of Mr. BOWEN's celebrated Wax-Figures. (in full
stature) among which are, the American Divine, the Philosopher, the Statesman,
the Hero, the Venerable, the Artist, the Beautiful, and the Ugly. 31. The
celebrated Aeronaut M. Blanchard. 32. Two beautiful Mandarins, from the East-
Indies, dressed in the modern style of that country. 33. A Transparent Monument
(placed in the center of the room) sacred to the Memory of Christopher
Columbus, who discovered to Mankind this Western World, on the 12th of October,
1492. 34. The Model of a Monument (in clay) designed and executed by the
celebrated Italian Artist in Statuary, Mr. Ceracchi: This Monument is intended
to perpetuate the Memory of American Liberty, by alluding to events which have
been completed, to our present situation, and to most probably future
incidents. It is the universal opinion, that should it be completed it will be
the most emblematical of the kind, and a work of the greatest magnitude, either
ancient or modern, and highly evinces the capacity, taste and genius of the
Artist. 35. A number of Indian Bows and Arrows, from different countries, and
other implements of War. 36. A number of Indian Ornaments, and dresses, from
different countries. 37. Sundry African Warlike Instruments and Ornaments. 38.
Several Chinese Instruments of War, and other curiosities. 39. An excellent
Electrical Machine and Apparatus. 40. An Air-Gun, made in this city by an
American Artist. This Gun, when properly charged, will discharge about twenty
bullets successively, without renewing the charge; for several times it will
discharge a bullet to do execution at the distance of sixty yards. 41. A
collection of Coins and Medals.
DESCRIPTION OF THE ROOM.
THE Room in which the MUSEUM is contained, is 60 by 30 feet, with an arch of
20 feet high, on which is elegantly painted a sky blue, and intermixed with
various kinds of clouds, in some of which are naturally represented a
Thunder-Storm with flashes of Lightning. On the walls are elegantly painted, a
large number of Trees, from various parts of the world; some of which are as
large as their natural full growth; among which are the celebrated Bread Fruit
Tree from the Pacific Ocean, and the delicious Mangoston from the same country,
etc. etc. These trees or plants are surrounded by smaller ones of the same
kind, forming beautiful groves, which have a fine effect. Also, on the walls of
the room are painted a number of beautiful Birds, from various parts of the
world; among wdich are the Spoon-bill, the Bird of Paradise, Flamingo and
Ostritch; together with a great variety of foreign Animals, among which are the
Rhinocerous, Zebra, Hyaenia, Leopard, Hippopotomos, or River Horse, Camel
Camelopard, Elephant, Lion, etc. etc.

The above Paintings were copied from the best Historical Prints, and are
universally allowed to be excellent imitations, with respect to color and Form;
the whole forming a most superb and magnificent appearance.

A particular description of the contents of the MUSEUM, will be published with
all convenient speed.

The MUSEUM and WAX-WORK is open every day (Sundays excepted) from ten o'Clock
A. M. till one P. M. and from three till five in the afternoon -- and three
evenings in a week, viz. on Tuesdays, and Fridays.

The Room will be lighted at candle light, and the Exhibition closed at nine
o'CLock.

Tickets at Two Shillings, for grown persons, and One Shilling for children,
may be had in the front room up stairs, opposite the door of the Museum --
Also, for the convenience of those who may wish to attend this place of
pleasing resort (frequently) Annual Tickets (not transferable) may be obtained
at the Museum, at One Dollar.

New York, November 25, 1793. G. BAKER, Keeper of the Museum.


