THE ORIGINAL AND PRESENT STATE OF MAN, BRIEFLY CONSIDERED: WHEREIN IS SHOWN,
The Nature of his FALL, and the Necessity, Means and Manner of his RESTORATION,
through the Sacrifice of CHRIST, and the sensible Operation of that DIVINE
PRINCIPLE of GRACE and TRUTH, held forth to the World, BY THE PEOPLE CALLED
QUAKERS. TO WHICH ARE ADDED, Some REMARKS on the ARGUMENTS of SAMUEL NEWTON, of
NORWICH.

BY JOSEPH PHIPPS.

We both labor, and suffer Reproach, because we trust in the living GOD, who
is the Savior of all Men, 'specially of those that believe. 1 Timothy iv. 10.
TRENTON: PRINTED BY ISAAC COLLINS. M.DCC.XCIII.

THE PREFACE.
MY chief Inducement to publish a few Observations upon S. Newton's Letter to
the Author of a Letter to Dr. Formey, etc. signed, No Matter who.
Letter in the Year 1767, was the Defense of that divine Principle vouchsafed
by a gracious Creator, through a beneficent Redeemer to all Mankind, in order
to their Instruction, Help and Salvation. Its Operation and Extent appeared to
me to be misunderstood, and mistakenly represented in that Discourse; and
finding it equally so in a late The leading Sentiments of the People called
Quakers examined, etc. by S. Newton, of Norwich.
Reply of the same Author, I think myself in some Degree obliged to appear a
second Time, still further to show, according to my Understanding, the
Necessity, Universality and real Sensibility of the Work of God's Holy Spirit
upon the immortal Soul of Man, as the vital Source, and Support of true
Religion in him; and therefore the primary Guide of his Life and Conduct.

My Intention is not mere Controversy, but Explanation and Doctrine. I have
therefore taken the Liberty to use diverse Expressions from the Apocrypha, and
other writings, where their Pertinence and Clearness entitled them to a Place.

I take little Notice of the numerous declamatory Parts of my Opposer's
Performance. It concerns not the ingenuous Reader, who can be most keen or most
petulent, but on which Side of the Question the Truth lies, and by which
Doctrine his Mind is most likely to be best and most profitably informed. This
be may better judge for himself, than others for him; for be they ever so
ingenious, or otherwise learned, they cannot be competent Judges in Things they
have not experienced, and which are not to be known but by Experience.

I have no Animosity toward my Antagonist; but his Work appears to me sounded
in Mistakes, both concerning the Sense of Scripture, and the Intention of our
Writings. To proceed minutely to unravel and clear, what he has been at so much
Pains to perplex and confuse, would be more tedious than difficult, and could
by no Means compensate either for the Reader's Time or my own. My first
Endeavor therefore shall be, to show the Verity of our true leading
Principles, from the original, and present State of Mankind, with the
Assistances requisite thereunto, and afterward to add some Remarks upon diverse
Parts of the Treatise before me.

THE ORIGINAL AND PRESENT STATE OF MAN, etc.
CHAP. 1.
1. Man was originally created in Purity, and in a State of due Order and
Rectitude. 2. He was insp^^^ with a Sense of his Duty; and 3 and 4, empowered
to perform it. 5. Being tempted, he lapsed from his proper Guard, the
preserving Power of God, into Sin. 6. He fell from the Image of the Heavenly,
into the Image of the Earthly. How unlawful Self rose in him. 7. That he really
suffered Death in Spirit, in the Day of his Transgression. What the Life and
Death of the Soul are.

1. IN the Beginning God created all Things good. Inherently and immutably good
himself, every Production of his must necessarily be so, according to the
several Kinds wherein he created them. As Man was wholly made by him, he must
have been made wholly good; his Nature clear of all Impurity, and free from all
Defect and Disorder. His Faculties were not imperfect, but limited to their
proper Sphere, and every Part of his Composition constituted in its due
Rectitude; the Body placed in Subservience to his rational Spirit, or Soul, as
to the more noble and excellent, and therefore the superior Part, made for
Immortality, and in Subjection only to the Guidance of its Creator.

2. The human Faculties, or Powers of Capacity, must then be clear,
unprejudiced, and fit to receive Impressions, yet void of any but those of
immediate Sense. Man, merely as Man, could not originally bring any real
Knowledge into the World with him. That must either be immediately communicated
to him by his Maker, or afterward acquired by himself, through Observation and
Experience. The latter required Time to ef^^^; and as it was requisite to his
Situation, th^^ he should be immediately endued with ^^^h an Understanding of
himself, and his Grea^^r, as related to his present Duty, and affected his
Felicity, he certainly was, by Divine Wisdom and Goodness, timely furnished
with it.

3. Man must not only then be supplied with a due Degree of Light and
Understanding, but he must also be empowered to act up to it, else his
Knowledge would have been afforded him in vain. Yet, though he certainly was
thus empowered, the Sequel manifested he was placed in a State of Probation,
otherwise, he could never have been guilty of the least Failure; for his Maker
being essentially and unchangeably good, must have fixed him in a State of
immutable Virtue and Goodness had he determined to fix him at all.

4. As the omniscient Creator most certainly foresaw what a subtle Adversary
Man would have to encounter, he as surely furnished him with Means sufficient
to discover his Snares, and resist his Assaults. If Satan was suffered to use
his Subtilty and Influence to deceive him, doubtless he was not only warned,
but also endued with a Sufficiency of Divine Light and Influence to withstand
his Attempts, as he kept duly upon his Watch.

Nothing but the Divine Nature can enable any intelligent Creature to resist
Temptation, and act up to the Divine Will. If therefore any created Being is
required to keep up thereunto, it must be assisted by Divine Power so to do.
God created Man for a Purpose of his own Glory. To glorify God, and to partake
of his Glory, Man must walk in Obedience to his Will. Man could neither
infallibly know his Will, nor constantly perform it, merely by the Strength of
his own Faculties; he must therefore, necessarily have been assisted by the
Spirit of God, to enable him to perform his Will, and so to obey him as to
glorify him, and enjoy a blessed Inheritance in him; otherwise, the End of
Man's Creation could not be answered. Hence it is concluded, the first Man Adam
was made a living Soul by the Inspiration of the second Adam Christ, who is a
quickening Spirit; Cor. xv. 45, 46.
for that was not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural; and
afterward that which is spiritual. That is, Adam was first created a natural
Man, and then rendered a spiritual One by the qui^^^ning Power of the Spirit of
Christ, which is the true Life, and proper Element for immortal Spirits to live
and move in.

Thus the Parents of Mankind, in their original uncorrupted State, being fit
Temples for the Holy Ghost to dwell in, were, as well as the Sanctified in
Christ afterward, Partakers of the Divine Nature, Pet. i. 4.
by the internal quickening of Divine Life. The Author of the Book of Wisdom
observes, Wisd. vii.
that Wisdom in all Ages, and certainly in the first and purest, enters Holy
Souls: Which Wisdom he describes to be the Breath of the Power of God, a pure
Influence flowing from the Glory of the Almighty, the Brightness of the
everlasting Light, the unspotted Mirror of the Power of God, and the Image of
his Goodness. This clearly denotes the Spirit of the eternal Son of God
himself, and evidently concurs with those Parts of the New Testament which
declare him to be, Cor. i. 24.
the Power of God, Col. i. 15.
and the Wisdom of God, the true Light, and Life of Men, John i. 4, 9.
the Brightness of the Father's Glory, Cor. iv. 4.
and the Image of the invisible God.

It was undoubtedly in the Light of this pure Influence that Adam had such an
intuitive Discerning of the Creation, as enabled him to give Names to them
according to their several Natures. Genesis ii. 19.
For we read, The Lord God formed every Beast of the Field, and every Fowl of
the Air, and brought them unto Adam, to see what he would call them; and
whatsoever Adam called every living Creature that was the Name thereof.

Under this celestial Enduement, the sacred Impression of the Divine Image
conspicuously appeared in the first of Mankind. Genesis i. 27.
In the' Image of God created he them.

5. Had Man kept in faithful Obedience to his Heavenly Guide, and rejected the
Efforts of the Tempter, he might undoubtedly, in due Time, have been advanced
to a Degree of Establishment beyond all Possibility of falling; but not
continuing strictly upon his Watch, and, contrary to the Warning before given
him, turning his Attention toward the Temptation, when alluringly presented,
he slipped from his proper Guard; leaving hold of that Spirit wherein his Life
and Strength lay, he fell from it, and all its Advantages, out of the Liberty
of the Sons of God, into the Bondage of Corruption: A sure Introduction to
Misery. For as Holiness and Happiness are inseparably united, so Sin and Misery
are indivisibly connected.

To suppose, that the Almighty Author of all Good, originally subjected Man
under a moral Necessity to transgress upon the Appearance of Temptation, is an
Imagination too injurious to the Divine Character to be admitted. Our first
Parents were unquestionably enabled by their Maker to abide in due
Watchfulness, which would have entitled them to Preservation; their Defection
from which, was certainly not of him, but of themselves. Had their Lapse been
through his Will, or intentional Disposition of Circumstances, so that it must
inevitably follow, he could not consistently have sentenced them to Punishment
for it; because in so doing, they performed his Will, which could not be a Sin
against him.

A dangerous Fondness to become knowing in Things hurtful, and no Way
necessary, seems to have an early Entrance into the human Mind. Genesis in. 5.
In the Day ye eat, your Eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods, knowing
Good and Evil. By the Suggestion of this flattering Falsehood, Eve was
deceived. Knowing nothing but Good, she might have remained happy: but
experiencing Evil, she became otherwise. This Knowledge is as opposite to that
of the Divine Wisdom, as Darkness is to Light. It is certain the Omniscient
knows both Good and Evil, but he knows the first by immutable Possession, and
perfect Enjoyment, and the last he beholds with Abhorrence, in eternal
Opposition to, and infinite Distance from the Purity of his Nature. With sinful
Man the Case is reverse, Evil having immediate Possession of him, and Good
being out of his Reach, without divine Mercy, he must be completely wretched.
This is the necessary Consequence of that boasted Knowledge of the World, which
Men acquire by tasting the pernicious and poisonous Sweets of Temptation.

6. The Consequences of this primary Lapse were immediately affecting to the
actual Transgressors, and remotely to all their Posterity. 1. They lost the
bright Impression of the Divine Image, and the Felicity attending it.
Forfeiting the immediate indwelling and pure Influence of GOD'S Holy Spirit,
they lost that Divine Similitude, wherein they had enjoyed internal Light,
Life, Love, Goodness, Righteousness, Holiness, and Happiness. That omnipresent
Spirit of Power, Truth and Virtue, which in their original State had been their
Comforter, disunited from them through Transgression, now became their Accuser
and Convictor. 2. Lapsing from under due and constant Subjection to the Mind
and Spirit of his Creator, the Will of Man separated from the Will of God, and
became Self-will. Self-love in Man was originally and properly placed in
Subservience to the Love of his Maker, who being in all Respects justly
Supreme, had, whilst Man stood in cheerful Obedience, the Supremacy in his
Affection; but by his undutiful Self-gratification, and letting in the
Suggestion of the Tempter, his chief Love turned from his Maker to himself.
Thus probably inordinate Self-love and Self-will originated in Man, and they
always stand in a Will separate from the Will of God, and a Spirit contrary to
his Holy Spirit. This mental Separation opened an easy Road of Access for the
Evil Spirit to influence the human Mind toward exterior Objects, and rendered
them the Subjects of Temptation. By giving way to carnal Inclinations, Man
became carnally-minded, and "to be carnally-minded is Death." Romans viii. 6.


7. When the Sovereign Legislator first added a positive Law to Adam, he
pre-denounced immediate Death upon him, in Case of his Transgression. Genesis ii.
17.
In the Day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die. This seems to
imply a much deeper and more important Meaning than what relates to the Body; a
Meaning more immediately affecting to the rational Soul; the Privation of a
Life which before Transgression it happily enjoyed, and which, by Disobedience,
it must certainly lose. What then is the proper Life of the Soul, and what is
the Death of that which must for ever exist? Merely to be, cannot be the Life
intended. It must be, to live in that Life which immutably exists only in the
Divine Nature, and which is not to be enjoyed but by partaking of the Divine
Nature, 2 Pet. i. 4.
the Spirit of him, John xiv. 6.
who is the Life, Col. iii. 4.
and our Life; John i. 4.
that Life the Evangelist declares to be the true Light of Men.

This Supernatural, Spiritual, Heavenly Power and Virtue of the great
Illuminator, and Quickener, is the true Life of the immortal Spirit of Man; and
the total Want, or Deprivation thereof, is its Death. Turning from this to
embrace Temptation, our first Parents did surely, in the Day of Transgression,
deviate from, and die in Spirit to that Divine Life by which they had been
quickened. For, it is the Spirit that quickens, John vi. 6.3.
or gives Life; and when Life departs, 2 Cor. iii. 6.
Death ensues of Course. As the Body dies when deprived of its animal Life; so
the Soul is left in a State of spiritual Death, when that which is its proper
Life departs from it; saving this Difference, that the deceased Body remains
wholly insensible; but the Soul, in the full State of its Death, still exists
under the unavoidable Sense of its Guilt and Misery. Wisdom i. 12.13.
according to Wisdom Man found Death in the Error of his Life. -- For God made
not Death, neither has h^ Pleasure in the Destruction of the Living. Ibid. ii.
24.
" -- But through Envy of the Devil came Death into the World.

CHAP. II.
1. The Fall of Adam and Eve affected all their Progeny, not with Guilt, but
with Infirmity. 2. How this accrues. 3. The State of Infants. 4. The common
Ascendence of the sensitive Powers over the rational. 5. How the Creature is
said, Romans viii. to be subjected to Vanity by its Creator. 6. When arrived to
Years of Understanding, we add Sin to Infirmity.

1. IT appears from holy Writ, that previous to our own actual Offenses, we are
all naturally affected by the Transgression of our Primo-genitors. By one Man,
Romans v. 12.
Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin, so Death passed upon all Men,
for that all have sinned. This is not to be understood of the Death of the Body
only; for all come into the World in the Image of the earthly, or, void of the
quickening and sensible Influence of Divine Life. But this Disadvantage,
through the Supreme Goodness, is amply provided for, and there appears no
necessity to conclude, that we all come into the World justly obnoxious to
Divine Vengeance, for an Offense committed by our Primo-genitors, before we
came into the World. With what Propriety can an Infant, incapable of committing
any Crime, be treated as an Offender? The Scripture positively assures us, Eze.
xviii.
God's Ways are equal -- that the Soul that sins IT shall die, Romans v. 15 to
20.
and not the Son for the Fault of the Father -- that whatever Adam's Posterity
lost through him, that and more they gain in Christ; and undoubtedly, his Mercy
and Goodness, and the Extent of his Propitiation, are as applicable to Infants,
who have not personally offended, as to Adults who have.

2. The immortal reasonable Soul of Man, in every Individual, appears to be the
immediate Production of its Creator; for the Prophet Zechariah, speaking of the
great Acts of God in Creation, Zech. xii. i.
asserts, that he forms the Spirit of Man within him. And in Eccles. xii. 7.
we read upon the Death of the Body, Then shall the Dust return to the Earth as
it was, and the Spirit shall return unto God who gave it. The Soul therefore,
receiving its Existence immediately from the Perfection of unchangeable Purity,
can have no original Impurity or Intemperature in its Nature; but being
immediately and intimately connected with a sensitive Body, and of itself,
unable constantly to withstand the Eagerness of the animal Passions after
Gratifications of a carnal Nature, is liable to be so influenced by them, as to
partake with them in their sensual Indulgencies. In this State the Descendants
of Adam come into the World, unendued with that divine Life which Adam fell
from. And who can say, this might not be admitted in Mercy to all the future
Generations of Mankind? 1st. That each succeeding Individual might be prevented
from incurring the Guilt of repeating the Sin of our prime Ancestors, and
falling from the same Degree of Innocence, Purity and Divine Enjoyment. 2d.
That, by feeling the Infirmity of our own Nature, and the Want of Divine
Assistance, we might become the more sensible of our Danger, and necessary
Dependence on our Creator, and thence be continually excited to seek after, and
cleave to him, in Watchfulness, Circumspection and Prayer, in order to obtain a
State of Restoration. 3d. That having in Part attained such a State, our
Prudence might be useful toward our Preservation and Growth therein; since we
should certainly be more assiduously concerned, to secure to ourselves a good
Condition, obtained through Pains and Difficulty, than one we might have been
originally placed in without any Care or Trouble to ourselves.

3. Whatever were the Peculiarities attending the Fall of the first Man and
Woman, or those consequent upon it, this is certain, that their Progeny do not
come into the World in that same State of Brightness themselves were
constituted in after their Creation. It cannot escape the Notice of those who
have had the Care of Infants, that the earliest Exertions observable in them,
evidently arise from the Powers of animal Desire, and animal Passion; how prone
these are to increase in them, and to predominate as they grow up, and the
Solicitude it requires to keep Children out of Unruliness and Intemperature, as
they advance to Youth's Estate; how much too potent their inordinate
Propensities are for the Government of the rational Faculty; what Pains are
necessary to regulate, and often but to paliate them, by a virtuous Education,
and improving Converse; and the Impossibility they should ever be radically
subdued and ruled, without the Application of a superior Principle.

4. In the present State of our Nature, the sensitive Powers take the Lead of
the rational in the first Stage of Life, as the Soul brings only a Capacity,
without any real Knowledge, or Potency, into the World with it. It acquires its
Knowledge by Degrees, enlarging also in Capacity to receive it gradually. Every
one knows, it is not capable at five or ten Years of Age, to comprehend the
same Ideas in the same Extent, as in riper and more advanced Years. It first
becomes impressed with the Images of external Things, presented through the
corporeal Organs, and afterward with those mental Ideas inculcated by its
primary Instructors, whether true or false. Hence the Bias of Education becomes
strong, either to Right or Wrong, according as the Instructions received are
agreeable to either, and the Passions being inlisted in their Service,
occasionally exercise their Warmth in Favor of the prevalent Idea, or
Impression, however wrong it may be; unless the Mind, through Divine
Illumination, discover its Error, and submit to its Rectification.

5. Previous to the Reception of Knowledge, the Soul is joined to the Body, by
the Power of its Creator, who, in Consequence of the Fall, Romans viii. 20, 21.
saw fit it should be so. "For," says the Apostle, the Creature was made
subject to Vanity, not willingly, but by Reason of him who has subjected the
same in Hope; because the Creature itself also shall be delivered from the
Bondage of Corruption, into the glorious Liberty of the Children of God.

The rational Soul is here intended by the Creature, and properly denominates
the Man. Herein the true Distinction lies, betwixt the human Species and
Creatures of inferior Kinds. This descends not with the Body, from Parents to
Children; the Soul being an indivisible immaterial Substance, cannot be
generated. The Soul of the Child never was in the Parent, and therefore could
never sin in him, nor derive Guilt from his Transgression. Neither can Guilt
accrue to it, merely from its being joined to a Body descended from him,
because that Junction is the Act of the Creator.

To account a Child guilty, or obnoxious to Punishment, merely for an Offense
committed by its Parents, before it could have any Consciousness of Being, is
inconsistent both with Justice and Mercy; therefore no Infant can be born with
Guilt upon its Head.

6. Besides our natural Alienation from, and Ignorance of the internal Life of
God, Ephesians. iv. 18.
in our fallen State, it must be acknowledged, that all who have arrieved to
such a Degree of Maturity as to be capable of receiving a right Understanding,
and of distinguishing the inward Monitions of Truth in their Conscience, have
also increased and strengthened the Bonds of Corruption upon themselves, in
different Degrees, by a repeated, and too frequently an habitual Indulgence of
the carnal Part, against the Sense of Duty received, and are more deeply
entered into the dark Region of the Shadow of Death, Ibid. ii. 1.
through their own Trespasses and Sins. Thus all have sinned, Romans iii. 23.
and come short of the Glory of God.

CHAP. III.
1. The State of Man in the fallen Nature, and the Necessity of his Renovation.
2. His Inability to accomplish it for himself, and the Necessity of Divine
Assistance thereunto. 3. What moral Evil is -- that it both may, and must be
removed from Man in order to his Felicity. 4. Without this, Man is not fully
acquitted by the one Offering of our Savior at Jerusalem. 5. The Spirit of God
is absolutely necessary to effect this great Work. 6. What perfect Redemption
from Sin consists in -- The Term World, John iii. 16. is not to be confined to
the Elect -- Christ tasted Death for all Men without Exception.

1. WHATEVER we may have derived from our Parents, we certainly accumulate to
ourselves additional Corruption. All Flesh has corrupted his Way upon the
Earth. Genesis vi. 12.
Every adult Person, in his common natural State, must, upon serious
Introversion, find in himself a Proneness to the Gratification of Self, and the
sensual Part, an eager Inclination at Times to forbidden Pleasure, an Aversion
to Piety and Holy Walking, a Consciousness of Guilt, and a fearful Apprehension
of the Approach of Death. Men generally confess they have erred and strayed,
like lost Sheep, from the salutary Faths of Virtue and Duty, and that, such is
their Frailty, it is an easy Thing for them to fall in with Temptation; but
hard, if not impossible, effecually to resist it. Nay, even the high Rewards
promised to Virtue and a good Life, and the sore Punishments annexed to Vice
and Folly, are altogether insufficient to retain them in the Practice of the
former, or to enable them to conquer the Force of their Inclination to the
latter. This demonstrates the Corruption of their Nature; and, as out of the
Abundance of the Heart, the Mouth speaks; Mat. xii. 34.
so from what lodges or presides within, the exterior Practice arises. The
Corruption in the Heart corrupts the Actions, Manners, and Language. Hence all
the Irregularities in Conduct, all the profane and untrue Speeches, all the
common complimental Falsehoods, to gratify the Pride and Folly of vain Minds.

As the Origin of Evil in Man, came by transferring his Attention and Desire
from his Creator to the Creature, dividing his Will from the Will of God, and
his Spirit from the Spirit of God; so the Continuation of Evil in Man is by the
Continuance of this Separation, and must abide so long as that remains. In this
Situation, commonly called the State of Nature, we are both unsit for, Ephesians. v.
5.
which admits of nothing sinful or unclean. It is therefore absolutely
requisite that Man should be made Holy, in order to be happy. Holiness cannot
unite with Unholiness; nor can Ability arise from Infirmity. If Pollution can
cleanse itself, if Evil can produce Good, if Death can bring forth Life; Man
thus corrupted, debilitated and deadened, may disengage, reform, quicken, and
restore himself. But it is not in the Power of Man, as such, to extricate
himself from the Bonds of Sin and Death. Yet, as Impurity is the Bar, it must
be removed. Isa. lix. 2.
As Sin separates Man from his Maker, Man must be separated from Sin, or he
cannot be reconciled, and united to him. Without Restoration to a State of
Holiness, he cannot enjoy the Felicity pertaining to that State; Heb. xii. 14.
for, without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord.

How then shall corrupt Man become Holy? How shall he, in a State of utter
Incapacity, enter into and maintain a Warfare against his many and mighty
Adversaries, which beset him within and without? What Ability has he to fight
his Enemy who is already enchained by him? A Power too strong for Man has got
Possession; it must be a superior Power to dispossess him, to rescue and
restore Man; and who is sufficient for these Things? None but his Omnipotent
Creator was able to unbind and extricate him. But his Will Adam had separated
from, his Law he had transgressed, his Command he had disobeyed, and against
him alone he had committed this high Offense. Yet, behold the astonishing
Compassion and Kindness of infinite Goodness! An all-sufficient Means was
straightway provided, for the Redemption both of the actual Offenders and all
their Progeny. The eternal Word, the Son, the Lamb of God Almighty, gave
instant Demonstration of the Greatness of Divine Love and Mercy, in then
concurring with the Father, to yield himself up in due Time to take the Nature
of Man upon him, Ibid ii. 16.
and, by resigning it to Suffering and Death, to make it a Propitiation for the
whole Species; and also, in immediately, Cor. xii.
and all along, assording a Manifestation of his Holy Spirit to every Man to
profit withal, in order to their present Deliverance from the Power of Sin, and
their everlasting Salvation from the certain Effect of abiding therein to the
last, namely, the second Death.

That Man should, of himself, empower himself to live in the constant Practice
of crossing his natural Inclinations and Propensities, is a wild Presumption;
but that a Spirit infinitely good, and more powerful than all his Enemies,
should so influence, incline, and enable him, is highly reasonable to believe,
because absolutely necessary. By the Help of God's Spirit, Man may, 1 Cor. ix.
27.
like the Apostle, be assisted to keep his Body under, and bring it into
Subjection, before the Strength of its Passions and Affections lessen by Decay
of Nature; which the rational Faculty can never effectually accomplish, even
under that Decay, without superior Assistance.

3. Neither the Possibility, nor Probability, of Man's Purification and
Sanctification by the Holy Spirit, can reasonably be doubted; for, First, as
physical Evil, or bodily Pain, has no substantial Existence of its own, but is
purely incidental to corporeal Nature; so moral Evil is to the Soul, a Disorder
which it has improperly lapsed into. It is no Part of God's Creation, nor has
any real Existence by itself; but is the sallen, defective, distempered
Condition of Beings, once created without Intemperature, or Defect. Evil
therefore, though it be in Man, is no constituent Part of Man, but an
Imperfection adventitious to his Nature, be recovered from, and his Nature
restored to a State of Fitness for Union with his Maker. Secondly, uncreated
Omnipotence is certainly more able to cleanse, than the creaturely, corrupt,
and fallen Powers of Darkness are to defile; and Infinite Goodness must be as
willing and ready to effect the first, as limited Envy the last. Did not the
Sovereign Lord intend Man should be made Holy, he would not require it; nor
would he require it without affording him the Assistance requisite to
accomplish it, for he enjoins no Impossibilities. That he does require it, the
sacred Writings sufficiently witness. "God," 1 These. iv. 7.
says an apostolic Writer, has not called us unto Uncleanness, Ephesians. v. 25,
etc.
but unto Holiness. And, Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself for it,
that he might sanctify and cleanse it, with the washing of Water by the Word,
(or the purifying Efficacy of the Holy Word, or Spirit, which cleanses the
Soul, as Water does the Body) that he might present it to himself a glorious
Church, not having Spot or Wrinkle, or any such Thing, but that it should be
Holy and without blemish. In another Place, he gives this Exhortation, 1 These.
v. 22, 24.
Abstain from all Appearance of Evil -- then proceeds -- And the very God of
Peace sanctify you wholly, and I pray God, that your whole Spirit, and Soul,
and Body, be preserved blameless unto the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. And
to encourage them to seek it and hope for it, he immediately assures them,
Faithful is he that calls you, who also will do it.

4. Vain is that imaginary Pretense, that Christ has paid the whole Price for
us, by which we stand fully acquitted in the Sight of God; that we have
complete Redemption in him without Sanctification in ourselves; and that by the
external Offering up of his Body, he has perfected the Work for us, and we are
already reconciled thereby. For, was this the real Truth, Christ only paid the
Price of Man's Redemption, that he might continue in a State of Pollution, and
practice Evil with Security; or be justified in breaking the known Commands of
God, and serving Satan during the whole Term of this Life. Contrary to this,
the apostolic Doctrine is, 1 Pet. i^. 24.
His own Self bore our Sins in his own Body on the Tree, that we being dead to
Sin, should live unto Righteousness." -- He died for all, 2 Cor. v. 15.
that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him
who died for them." -- How shall we that are dead to Sin live any longer
therein? Romans vi. 2.12.21.22.
-- "Let not Sin therefore reign in your mortal Body, that ye should obey it in
the Lusts thereof." -- "What Fruit had ye then in those Things whereof ye are
now ashamed? For the End of those Things is Death. But now being made free from
Sin, and become Servants to God, ye have your Fruit unto Holiness, and the End
everlasting Life.

It is true, the Apostle says, Heb. x. 14.
By one Offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified. But this
does not imply, that his Sacrifice perfected those who never came to be
sanctified. Applying it to this Case, it can mean no more than, that such who
have so experienced the effectual Operation of Divine Grace, as to become
sanctified, have Remission by that one Offering for Sins committed before their
Sanctification, which perfects their Redemption; and also for Transgressions
after, upon Repentance. For Sin once committed cannot be undone; present, and
future Obedience is no more than Duty; and past Offenses must still remain
against us without Forgiveness. Our Savior therefore, by his Sacrifice,
manifested the Mercy, Love, and Kindness of God, Romans iii. 25.
"by whom," says the Apostle, he was set forth to be a Propitiation through
Faith in his Blood, to declare his Righteousness, for the Remission of Sins
that are past, through the Forbearance of God. Herein he showed, that a Door of
Reconciliation is opened to all Men; but those who through Unbelief of, and
Disobedience to Divine Grace, never experience the Work of Sanctification,
deprive themselves of that unspeakable Advantage; for it is through
Sanctification that any come effectually to enjoy the Benefit of the Sacrifice
of Christ. That outward Offering for all, showed the Love of God toward all;
and that he stands ready to pardon past Transgression, in all who sincerely
accept his Terms of true Repentance and Reformation; but our Salvation is not
completed by that single Act only, and the Work of Redemption, finished for us
without us. Though Christ died for us, that we might be brought unto Glory, yet
we are not actually purified, fitted for, and introduced into the Kingdom
merely by that one Offering. The Way to Reconciliation was opened by the Death
of Christ, but we are not saved by his Life till we livingly experience the
Work of Salvation in our own Particulars.

5. It is always requisite that the Means be adequate to the End, the Cause
sufficient to the Effect; therefore, as all Men throughout all Nations, and
every Generation, originally stand in equal Relation to their Creator, have
been, and must naturally be, in absolute Need of his Help, in order to
Purification and Salvation, the Means afforded for this Purpose must be
universal to reach all. It must be a Principle of real and powerful Holiness
and Goodness, to change the Condition of Man, from Evil to Good. It must be
Omnipotent, to enable him to overcome his Adversaries, the World, the Flesh,
and the Devil. Nothing but a Spirit superior to all these can effectually
cleanse the Soul, and operate to the Expulsion, and Exclusion of those subtle
and powerful Enemies which continually seek to hold Men in the Bondage of
Corruption; therefore nothing but God's Holy, Universal, Almighty Spirit can
effect this necessary Alteration in Man, rectify the Disorder Sin has
introduced into his Nature, and raise him up from a State of spiritual Death,
by producing a new and Heavenly Birth of Divine Life in him, by which he may be
created anew in Christ Jesus unto good Works, and restored to the Image of God
in Righteousness and true Holiness.

6. Perfect Redemption consists, first, in paying the Price of Ransom; and
second, in bringing out of Bondage, and setting the Prisoner at Liberty. Our
Savior paid the first by his Suffering and Sacrifice; and he performs the last
by the effectual Operation of his Spirit, in the Hearts of those who receive
him, and resign wholly to him.

None have Cause to murmur at, or complain against the Dispensations of their
benevolent Creator, for in Christ he has rendered to every Child of Adam a
full Equivalent for the Loss sustained through his unhappy Fall. John iii. 16.
God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting Life. I know some
allege, that the World here intends not all Men, but the Elect only. But we
find the Term World, when confined to Men, in the New Testament, is used either
for all Mankind in general, for the Majority of Mankind, or for the unbelieving
Part of it; and where it intends a Part of the Species, it is often used to
signify Unbelievers, and to distinguish them from Believers, but is never
spoken of Believers only. Besides, such an Acceptance would turn the Text into
Nonsense, for then it must be thus understood, God so loved the Elect that he
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever of the Elect believes in him,
should not perish, but have everlasting Life. This would imply, that some of
the Elect would not believe in him, and all the consequent Absurdities of that
Position. But read the Text as it stands, and the Particle whosoever, properly
distinguishes the World into Believers, and Unbelievers, or Faithful, and
Unfaithful, and shows that God so loved the whole of his rational Creation,
that he gave all an Opportunity of being saved through believing; and if any
did not so embrace it, their Refusal was the Cause of their Condemnation, and
not the Want of God's Love, nor of an Opportunity of closing in with, and
receiving the Benefit of it. This the four succeeding Verses plainly declare.
John iii. 17, etc.
For God sent not his Son into the World to condemn the World, but that the
World through him might be saved. He that believes on him is not condemned;
but he that believes not is condemned already, because he has not believed in
the Name of the only begotten Son of God. And this is the Condemnation, that
Light is come into the World, and Men loved Darkness rather than Light, because
their Deeds were evil. For every one that does Evil, hates the Light, neither
comes to the Light, lest his Deeds should be reproved. It is not reasonable to
conclude, the whole World can mean less than the whole human Species.

2 Pet. i. 21 and ii. 1.
The Apostle Peter says, The Prophecy came not in old Time, or rather at any
Time, by the Will of Man, but Holy Men of God spoke as they were moved by the
Holy Ghost. But there were false Prophets also among the People, even as there
shall be false Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves
swift Destruction. This indicates that Christ died not only for those who come
to be saved, but also for those who bring Destruction upon themselves;
otherwise it cannot be understood "that, by his Sacrifice, he bought or paid
the Price of Redemption, conditionally for them as well as others. But if he
thus bought those who denied him, who yet occasioned their own Destruction, it
is truly asserted in the full Extent of the Words, Heb. ii. 9.
that He by the Grace of God should taste Death for every Man;" and that He is
the Propitiation for our Sins, 1 John ii. 2.
, and not for ours only, but also for the Sins of the whole World.

CHAP. IV.
1. The Progeny of Adam not condemnable for his Transgression, but their own.
2. The vital Part of Religion is internal, and may be experienced by People
under every religious Denomination, and in every Part of the World -- Pagans
not necessarily excluded from all Share in Christ, and Christianity; which, 3.
consists not essentially in Exteriors, or an imagery of Religion, but in being
endued with a new Nature. 4 and 5, This is certainly and sensibly to be known,
through the Operation of Divine Grace. 6. Christ waits to be gracious at the
Door of every Man's Heart, causes the Dead to hear his Voice, quickens the
Observant, and renders them Partakers of his Heavenly Communion.

1. HOWEVER public a Person Adam may be accounted, and however his Posterity
might, without a Redeemer, have been by any thought chargeable with his Sin
(though I am unable to conceive how any Man should deserve Condemnation for
what he could not help) yet our Savior having paid the Price of our
Redemption, eb. ii. 9.
by tasting Death for every Man, there cannot be any Thing chargeable to Adam's
Descendants merely on Account of his Transgression, exclusive of their own.
Original Sin therefore, in that Sense which implies Guilt in them for his
Offense, I apprehend, has no Foundation in Truth. Nor, was it really so, could
any ceremonious Performance of Men, or even all the Water of Jordan wash it
away. All exterior Forms, however mistakenly exalted, or celebrated amongst
Mankind, are but outward and visible Signs, and altogether ineffectual toward
any real Change or Reformation of the Subject. And respecting little Children
who are taken away before they have personally offended, they cannot in Equity
be chargeable, but may with just Confidence be resigned, as perfectly safe in
the Arms of their Savior, who declared, Mat. xix. 14.
Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven; and also told his Followers, Ibid xviii. 3.
except ye be converted, and become as little Children, ye shall not enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven.

2. The vital Part of Man's Religion and Duty stands, principally, in a right
Attention to, and a faithful Obedience of the Manifestation of the Spirit of
Christ in the Heart and Conscience. He who pays due and constant Regard to
this, is in his Measure a Follower of Christ, and has, in some Degree, the
Reality of Christianity in him, live under what Mode of Profession, or in what
Part of the World soever he may. For who is a Servant of Christ but he that
willingly obeys him? Is he who willingly acts according to his verbal Precepts,
a Follower of Christ; and is not he who, without the Knowledge of these, with
equal Willingness follows the Leadings of his Spirit, also his Servant? Of this
Spirit the truly Virtuous and Religious amongst the Gentiles were, Romans ii. 14,
15.
in Degree, Partakers; "For," says Holy Writ, when the Gentiles which have not
the Law, do by Nature the Things contained in the Law, these, having not the
Law, are a Law unto themselves; which show the Work of the Law written in their
Hearts, their Conscience also bearing Witness, and their Thoughts the mean
While accusing or else excusing one another.

The Words by Nature here, I apprehend, are not to be understood as if the
Apostle intended the Gentiles became Virtuous by any Goodness in their fallen
Nature, which must be the same as all other Men's. The Context shows, he was
here distinguishing between those who enjoyed the Ministration of the Mosaic
Law, and those who had it not; and he uses the Expression, by Nature, in the
same Sense as if he had said, without an Education under the Law, and proceeds
to show, that though they had it not, yet they practiced the Substance intended
by the Law. This showed not, that their own Hearts were their Law, but as the
Apostle explains it, that the Work of the Law was written in their Hearts, and
that they had a Part in the New Covenant, in Reference to which it is said,
Jer. xxxi. 33.
I will put my Law in their inward Parts, and write it in their Hearts. Though
they were without the Law of Moses, they were not without Law to God. For, by
receiving and retaining the Divine Impressions in their Consciences, they were
under the Law to Christ, or subject to the Manifestation of his Spirit in their
Hearts, and in Proportion to their Obedience, Partakers of the Nature of the
Divine Principle within them. By the internal Operation of this Nature it was
that they became reformed in Heart, and rectified in Life and Practice, so far
as they were so; or as the Text has it, enabled to do the Things contained in
the Law. Originally disordered, and actually depraved, their own Nature as Men
could never have led and empowered them to this; for, since the primary Lapse,
it is prone to Evil, Romans vii. 18.
and true Reformation and Religion arise not from that disordered and corrupt
Ground. They come not by Nature, but by Grace. They are the Fruit of that good
Seed universally sown in every Heart, by the great and good Husbandman for that
End. Were it not for the Notices and Powers communicated by this internal
Principle, Man must have continued to proceed in the Increase of Corruption,
Irreligion and Misery; as appears too evidently by the Conduct of such as
disregard it. Not by following their own Nature therefore, but by Obedience to
the inward Law of the Divine Nature written in the Heart, the conscientiously
Virtuous amongst the Gentiles, as well as others, were enabled to perform the
Things, or just Morals contained in the Mosaic Law, and thereby to evidence in
their Measures, the effectual Operation and Authority of the Divine Lawgiver
within them.

The Gentiles therefore partaking of the Law written in the Heart, cannot
properly be said to be excluded from all Share in the New Covenant, or
Dispensation of the Gospel. The Gospel, taken in its full Extent, is the
Revelation of the Love and Mercy, and the Offer and Operation of the Grace of
God, through Christ, to fallen Man in his natural and corruptible State, in
order to his Restoration and Salvation. It is not wholly contracted into the
mere Tidings; but, including these, goes deeper, and essentially consists in
the Thing declared by them; Ibid. i. 16.
the Power of God administered to the Salvation of the Soul. By this the
outward Coming of Christ is rendered truly and fully effectual to each
Individual. Those who believe in, and obey him in his inward and spiritual
Manifestations, by which the Gospel is preached in every rational Creature
under Heaven, may come to be Partakers of his Life, and be saved by him from
the second Death of eternal Misery, though providentially incapacitated to know
the exterior History of his Incarnation, etc.

That virtuous and devout Gentiles were approved of God, appears in the Case of
Cornelius, Acts x. 2, 3, 4.
for we find that before his Reception of historical and verbal Christianity,
his sincere Devotion, and Reverence toward his Creator, and charitable Acts to
the Needy, came up for a Memorial before God, who also now taught Peter, Verse
15, the Gentiles he had thus cleansed were no more to be esteemed common or
unclean than the believing Jews, and gave him, Ibid. 34, 35.
of a Truth, to perceive, that God is no Respecter of Persons; but in every
Nation, he that fears him, and works Righteousness, is accepted with him.

Hence it appears, those who conscientiously obey the spiritual Manifestations
of Christ in them, are internally, though not by outward Profession, his
Disciples and Followers, and truly believe in him so far as he is revealed to
them; for Obedience is the certain Proof of a right Faith. And I make no
Question, but those in any Part of the Globe, who, from invincible Obstacles,
have not the Opportunity of historical Christianity, in their Obedience to the
spiritual Appearance of Christ in their Hearts, are accepted, and partake of
the Benefits of his Death. Why should they not be as capable of receiving
Advantage by the Sacrifice of Christ, as Disadvantage by the Fall of Adam,
whilst they are equally Strangers to the History of both? But certainly, those
to whom the sacred Writings are providentially communicated, are under double
Obligation, since they are favored with that additional instrumental
Advantage; and it will tend to their greater Condemnation, if they believe not
unto Obedience. For, however high the Profession of such may be, they are but
imperfect, superficial, ineffectual Believers, who hold with the external Part,
and experience not the internal: Christians in Name, but not in Deed and in
Truth. It is essential to us who have the Scriptures, to believe both in the
outward Coming, and inward Ministration of our Savior, resigning to him, and
trusting in him, with that Faith of the Operation of God, which works by Love
to the Purification of the Heart, and is the saving Faith of the Gospel.

Complete Christianity has both an Inside and an Outside; a Profession or
bodily Appearance, and a Life and Virtue, which is as a Soul to that Body.
Those who are in Possession of both, are complete Christians. Those who have
the inward Part without the outward, though incomplete in that Respect, will,
in the Sight of perfect Equity, certainly be preferred to such as have the
latter without the former; and it would be well for all who have the History,
and profess the Christian Religion, yet walk contrary to its Requirings, could
they change Conditions at last with such conscientious Gentiles. Let those who
are so deeply affected with Absurdity, as to believe or imagine, that infinite
Wisdom, Goodness and Equity, has confined Salvation to such of his Creatures as
happen, without any Choice of their own, to inhabit particular Spots of the
Globe, are formalized after a peculiar Manner, or entertain one particular Set
of Articles and Opinions, let such duly consider the following Texts. Mat.
viii. 10, 11, 12.
Verily I say unto you, I have not found so great Faith, no not in Israel; and
I say unto you, That many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit down
with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven; but the Children
of the Kingdom" (by Education merely) "shall be cast out into utter Darkness;
there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth." Rev. vii. 9, 10.
"After this I beheld, and lo, a great Multitude, which no Man could number, of
all Nations, and Kindreds, and People, and Tongues, stood before the Throne,
and before the Lamb clothed with white Robes, and Palms in their Hands; and
cried with a loud Voice, saying, Salvation to our God, who sits upon the
Throne, and unto the Lamb!

3. Real Christianity consists not in the Profession of any framed Articles of
Belief, nor in the Practice of Signs and Ceremonies, however displaved with
exterior Pomp, or whatever Significance may be fancifully attributed to them by
their Supporters. Form and Profession make not a real Christian; but the
putting on of a new Nature. Gal. v. 24.
They that are Christ's have crucified the Flesh with the Affections and
Lusts." "If any Man be in Christ, 2 Cor. v. 17, 18.
he is a new Creature; old Things are past away; behold all Things are become
new, and all Things are of God. The Necessity of Regeneration, the Power by
which it is effected, and the Cooperation of God and Man therein, are all
included in that Text, Romans viii. 13, 14.
If ye live after the Flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through the Spirit do
mortify the Deeds of the Body, ye shall live. For as many as are led by the
Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God.

4. The New Birth is not brought forth in Particulars imperceptibly. The New
Man is renewed in Knowledge; Col. iii. 10.
in a certain and sensible Experience. The Soul in whom it is going forward,
has an internal Sense of it through its whole Progress, and must keep a steady
Eye thereunto, that it may go forward. 2 Cor. iii. 18.
"We all," says the Apostle, with open Face beholding as in a Glass, the Glory
of the Lord, are changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, even as by
the Spirit of the Lord. By looking at the deceitful Beauty of Temptation, Men
fall into Sin, and by keeping a steadfast Eye inwardly unto Christ in Spirit,
with humble Resignation to him, and earnest Desire after him, Man finds
Preservation, and gradually advances from one Degree of Grace to another, till
he really experienceth a Renewal of the Divine Likeness upon his Soul, and an
inward Translation out of Sin, Darkness and Death, into Divine Light, Life and
Holiness; and thereby, in Conclusion, from Anxiety and Misery, to Peace and
Felicity.

5. The natural Man may polish and adorn himself with Variety of Literature,
Arts and Breeding, but in his best Accomplishments, he is but the natural Man
still, which the Apostle declares, 1 Cor. ii. 14.
receives not the Things of the Spirit of God, neither can he know them. This
is the natural Condition of all Men, before the Work of Renovation is begun in
them, and seeing all stand in Need of Divine Grace to effect it, and that God
will have, 1 Timothy ii. 4.
or wills, all Men to be saved, and to come unto the Knowledge of the Truth;"
Tit. ii. 11, 12.
so, "the Grace of God that brings Salvation, has appeared to all Men,
teaching us," (by its Convictions) "that denying Ungodliness, and worldly
Lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World."
Psalm. 1. x.
Thus, "the mighty God, even the Lord has spoken, and called the Earth, from
the Rising of the Sun unt^ the going down thereof. All the persons
Instructions, and Writings of the Prophets, Apostles, and their Contemporaries
taken in their full Extent, have never been any Thing near so universal amo^^st
Mankind, as thi^ Grace and Power of God; for it always had been, and is present
to every Individual, in a Nations, and throughout every Generation.

6. Isa. xlix. 6.
He who is given for a Light to the Gentiles, and God's Salvation to the Ends
of the Earth, not only dispenses of his Grace universally and individually,
but even waits to (...) gracious. Rev. iii. 20.
"Behold," says he, I stand (...) the Door and knock: If any Man hear my
Voice, and open the Door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he
with me. This is Christ in Spirit, who proclaims, He that has an Ear, let
him hear.

Query. But if Man in his fallen Estate be dead, how can the Dead hear?

Ans. When the Savior called, John xi. 43.
Lazarus come forth! The Dead was quickened, and immediately obeyed. The Voice
of him who is a quickening Spirit, is a quickening Power. The Hour is coming, 1
Cor. xv. 45.
and now is, when the Dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of God, John v. 25.
and they that hear shall live.

Query. What is meant by his standing at the Door?

Answ. His wonderful Condescension, Patience and Long-forbearance, in waiting
upon the Soul of Man, as for an Entrance; that as he is a rational Creature, he
may be prevailed with willingly to open his Heart to his Redeemer, and receive
him.

Query. How does Christ in Spirit knock, or call?

Answ. By influencing the Soul in its Seasons of Quietude, so as to excite
Inclinations and Desires toward Good; and (...) Times, by distressing it with
the (...) ^^sations of Guilt, and Remorse, for its (...) ^^rsuits and Practices.

Query. How shall Man (...) and receive him?

Answ. By resigning hi^^^ (...) to Self, and the Propensities of (...) humbly
adhering to the Voice, or present Manifestations of the Spirit.

Query. How does the Lord come in and sup with Man, and make him a Partaker of
his Supper?

Answ. When the Spirit of Christ is received by the Soul in Faith, Love and due
Submission, he proceeds by Degrees to set it at Liberty from the Bondage and
Influence of Corruption; for, 2 Cor. iii. 17.
"where the Spirit of the Lord is," (in Possession) "there is Liberty;" and
when he has brought the Soul into a proper Degree of Purification, he shods
the Comfort of his Love into it, and makes it a Partaker of the Communion of
Saints, which is inward and spiritual. This is the true Sup^^r of the Lord. He
who participates of this, discerns and tastes the Lord's spiritual Body, and
experienceth it to be Meat indeed, John vi. 55.
and his Blood to be Drink indeed.

CHAP. V.
1. God's true and faithful Witness in the Conscience a Divine Monitor, and
daily Preacher to Man. 2. It produces the New Birth in the Obedient; and, 3.
promoteth its Growth in them. 4. This no Indignity to Man, but the contrary,
and of absolute Necessity to his Ascendence above sublunary Considerations. 5.
It is not beneath the Dignity of the Creator to make Man so far the Subject of
his especial Regard, as to enable him to answer the End he created him for. The
same Power that created, requisite to the Support of his Creation, and his
continual Superintendance necessary to Mankind.

1. MANKIND are not left to Satan, nor to their own Lusts, nor to live without
God in the World. A Way is cast up. A Means is provided. Besides the natural,
and traditional Consciousness of mere moral Good and Evil in every Breast, God
has a Divine Witness in the Heart of each Individual, which will truly
manifest Right and Wrong in the Consciences of those who faithfully attend
thereunto, afford Light and Power to set them free from the Mists of
Prepossession and Prejudice, and become to them a safe Conductor, and an able
Supporter in the Paths of Religion and Virtue.

What Instructor can we have equal to this most intimate Witness? A Monitor so
near, so constant, so faithful, so infallible! This is the great
Gospel-privilege of every Man: The Advantage of having it preached Day by Day
in his own Heart, without Money, and without Price, yet with Certainty. Is it
reasonable to conclude, this nice, true, and awful Discerner, should be less
than Divine? Can any Person, upon serious Consideration, imagine it to be the
Nature of the fallen Man himself? Is there the least Probability that any Thing
so corrupted and clouded, should so clearly and instantly distinguish, and
would the Heart of Man, which is declared by Inspiration to be deceitful above
all Things, Jer. xvii. 9.
and desperately wicked, so faithfully reprove itself? Would that which
delights in its own Indulgence, and is impatient of Restraint, act in daily
Control to its own Inclinations? Is it the Property of Evil to do Good? Here is
a just Criterion. That which is natural, leads according to Nature; that which
is spiritual according to the Spirit. These are distinguished in Scripture by
the Terms Fles^ and Spirit, Romans vii. 23.
and are truly said to war against each other in Man. Gal. v. 17.
As Sin wars against the Spirit to destroy the Soul, the Spirit wars against
Sin to save the Soul.

Let me query with you, who, instead of embracing in Hum^lity, Love, and
Thankfulness, this upright Principle as Divine, are exerting your Abilities to
depreciate and revile it. Whilst you confess it distinguishes Right from Wrong
in your own Breasts, by its Approbation of the first, and Rebuke of the last;
can you thus acknowledge it to be infallibly Good, and at the same Time
attribute it to yourselves? "I know, Romans vii. 18.
" says Paul, that in me, that is in my Flesh," (or belonging to my Nature)
dwells no good Thing. Is your Nature in a better Condition than his was? Is
there any good Thing in yours, yet was there none in his? He confessed he had
none as Man. I presume you have no more than he had. Whence then this quick and
righteous Discriminator appearing in your Consciences? You will not say, it is
of Satan; it must therefore either be of Man, or of God. For the Reasons above
hinted, it cannot be of Man; it must therefore be of God. Wonderful is the
Mercy, and great the Advantage to every Man, that God himself, according to the
Scriptures, thus condescends to be the Teacher of his People, Isa. ii. 3. and
live. 13.
by the Manifestation of his Spirit in every Heart; Jer. xxxi. 34.
and certainly it ought to be accepted and observed with the greatest Reverence
and Thankfulness. John vi. 45. and xvi. 13.


2. 1 These. iv. 9.
The Increase and Operation of this living Principle becomes a new Life in and
to the obedient Soul, 1 John ii. 27.
quickening and refreshing it with a Sense of Divine Love, Strength, and
Comfort. This Life being begot and brought forth by the Holy Spirit in the
willing Mind, is called a Birth of the Spirit, and being its new Production
there, it is styled the New Birth; and seeing our first Parents, immediately
upon their Creation, were favored with this spiritual Birth in them, and lost
it by Disobedience, the Renewal of it, both in themselves and in their
Posterity, has taken the Terms of Regeneration and Renovation, or the Birth of
Divine Life renewed in Man. Being Inheritors of spiritual Death in Adam, or in
the fallen State and Nature, we can only be born again to Life in Christ, by
the Power and Virtue of his Holy Spirit, John xi. 25.
who is the Resurrection and the Life.

3. Every productive Power brings forth its own Likeness; the evil Spirit an
evil Birth, and the good Spirit a Birth answerable to its Goodness; and (...)
every natural Birth admits of a Growth, Luke xiii. 18, 22.
(...) does this spiritual Birth in the Soul. John iv. 14.
Out Savior represents its gradual Progression, in those Similies of the
Increase of the Mustard-(...) the Process of Leaven, and the springing (...) of
living Water into everlasting Life. The A^^^^^les Peter and John also show the
several Gradations experienced among^^ the Believers, under the Similies of
newborn Babes, 1 Pet. ii. 2.
Children, young Men, and Father. There is like wise not only a Progression
from the lowest of these States to the highest, but eve^ that of Fathers ^dmits
of continual Advances, as Paul witnesses, who, though he truly asserted, that
the Law of the Spirit of Life in Chri^s^ Jesus had set him five from the Law of
Sin and Death; Romans viii. 2.
yet he was sensible of higher Degre^^ of A^^i^^ment still before him, and
therefore, after he had b^^^ near thirty Years in the Apostleship, he ^^^tes
this Acknowledgment; Not as though I had already attained, Phil. iii. 12, 13,
14.
either were already perfect, but I follow after, if that I may apprehend that
for which also (...) am apprehended of Christ Jesus. Brethrea, I count
no^myself to have apprehended; b^^ this one Thing I do, for getting those
Thin^^ which are behind, and reaching forth u^^^ those. Things which are
before, I pre^^ toward the Mark, for the Prize of the hig^^ Calling of God in
Christ Jesus.

4. (...) who treat this Doctrine, of the Necessity of Man's being renewed,
led, an^ guided by the Spirit of his Maker, as a Disp^ragement to human Reason,
put the highest Indignity upon the supreme Wisdom, Goodness, and Power. The
Dignity of human Nature consists not in Self-sufficiency. The most exalted of
created Beings neither exist, nor act independent of their Creator; much less
Man, Heb. ii. 7.
who in his primitive Purity was made lower than the Angels. He stands in
continual Need of Divine Help; and his true Dignity consists in being, by his
Reason, above all inferior Creatures capable of consciously receiving that
Assistance, and of being thereby preferred to, and preserved in a blessed Union
and Communion with his Maker. It cannot be any lessening to an Inferior to
bedirected and guided by a superior Being; especially by the Supreme Lord, and
sole Author of all Existence, Infinite in Excellency, Power and Wisdom, and
Immutable in Glory. Endued with his Spirit, in any Degree, the Creature is
raised above the highest Elevation of its own Nature; and the more it is
clothed with it, the more it is dignified and exalted.

No created Being, by its natural Powers, can rise above its natural Sphere. To
reach a sublimer Station, it must be assisted by Strength superior to its own;
a Power equal to the Height of its Ascent. It is only when the Sun of
Righteousness sheds forth its quickening Beams upon the Spirit of Man, that the
poor Worm is capacitated in Reality, to take Wing and mount above its sublunary
Limits, toward the Regions celestial.

5. Some Writ^^s of the Epicurean Cast, have imagined it beneath (...) Divine
Greatness, (...) the Sove^^ig a (...) of all, to stoop so low as to make Man a
peculiar Object of his Notice and Regard. To such as mistake those sure Marks
of Degeneracy, Pride and Haughtiness, for Greatness of Soul, this may seem
reasonable; but in him to whom Pride is Abomination, Pro. xvi. 5.
and as distant from his Similitude as Darkness is to Light, it cannot have any
Place. What it is not below him to create, it cannot be beneath him to regard,
proportionably to the End he made it for; and seeing Man was created for a
Purpose of his Glory, Isa. xliii. 7.
and to partake of his Felicity, it would derogate from his Wisdom and
Goodness, to suppose he should look upon it as below him to enable Man to
answer the great End of his Creation; which he could not by any Means do,
without a competent Assistance from his Maker. Pride was the Cause of the
Degeneracy of Angels, and its natural Consequence is the Destruction of Peace
and Felicity to all that entertain it. By being Something in our own Conceit,
attributing any Good to ourselves, or aspiring above our Place and due Order,
we center in Pride and Arrogance. Created Beings may be guilty of this; but it
is impossible to that all-perfect Existence, who is Infinite, Omnipotent, and
Immutable.

This visible World demonstrates, it was made by an Omnipotent Power, and is
preserved by the same Power. Without Power it could not be made, and (...) Tho.
Sherlock justly observer That which ow^^ its very Being to Power must depend
upon the Power that made it, Discourse on Providence.
for it can have (...) Principle of Self-subsistence independent on (...)
Cause. What does not necessarily (...) must both be originally created, and
con^^^^dy upheld by the Power, that made it. It had no Being before its
Creation. It cannot retain its Being against the Will of its Creator. Its
Existence and Support stand equally in the Power of its Maker, without whom it
was Nothing, could never have existed, nor can continue in Existence. It was
made by his Power, is preserved by his Power, and upon the Withdrawment of his
Power would dissolve and evanish into its original Nothing. There is no Medium
between Self-existence and Dependence on its Cause; therefore a Cessation from
it of the Power that made it, is Annihilation to it. Thus, as all created
Things were made, and still subsist solely by the Energy of the Creator's Will
and Power, he must necessarily, whilst they exist, be omni-present with them,
in them, and through them; therefore cannot be ignorant of any Thing relating to
them, nor unconcerned about them, or any Part of them.

The continual Interposition and Superintendence of the Spirit of God, was
always requisite to Man, both to preserve him whilst in Innocence, and to
recover him from under his fallen Estate, by governing the Effects of natural
Causes; and to counteract the Wiles, and oppose the Influences of the evil
Spirit. Therefore the great Mediator for, and Redeemer of Men, was from the
Beginning, not only incarnately and corporeally given for a Propitiation for
the Sins of the whole World, to be testified, or verified, in due Time; but he
was also as universally given, in a spiritual Manner, to be a Witness, a
Leader, and Commander. Isa. lv. 4
1. He is spiritually given for a Witness, to testify against Sin in every
Breast, by his Smitings there for Evil conceived or committed. 2. For a Leader
and Commander, to such as pay due Regard to his Convictions, by turning from
Iniquity to him that smites them, and cleaving to him in that Faith and Love he
produces in them. These he leads in a Cross to all the corrupt Nature, and
empowers them to follow him in the Regeneration. This is the true doctrinal
Cross of Christ.

CHAP. VI.
1. Regeneration not only necessary, but really experienced by the Primitive
Christians. 2. Paul's comprehensive Description of this great work. It answers
to the original Work of Creation, and is effected only by the Holy Spirit. 3.
As Objection against the Sensibility of this Work answered. 4. The same
continued. 5. Who it is that disbelieves it. The Renunciation of human Reason
not required, but the yielding it to an infallible Instructor, in order to its
Rectification and Improvement.

1. NOW, O Man! What is the great Business of thy Life in this World, but to
regain thy Place in the Paradise of God; to secure an everlasting Establishment
in that Inheritance which is incorruptible, Pet. i. 4.
undefiled, and fades not away! To accomplish this, thou must be stripped of
all that which unfits thee for an Entrance. Whatever has been the Cause of
Exclusion must be removed. Whatever can have no Place nor Habitation there,
must be separated from thee, or thou can not be admitted. That which lets
will let till it be taken out of the Way. Whatever thou have in thee or about
thee, that thou art attached to in Consequence of the Fall, all separate Self,
and the carnal Mind thou must resign, or thou can never know a Restoration.
The Gospel-axe, the Power of the Spirit of God, must be laid to the Root of the
Tree of Corruption in thee, that it may be extirpated, and the Vine of Life
implanted in its Room, that in the Heart, where the sinful Nature has spread
its poisonous Produce, James i. 21.
the engrafted Word which is able to regenerate and save the Soul, may
flourish, and bring forth its Heavenly Fruits; from whence arises Happiness to
the Creature, and Praise to the eternal Author of all Virtue and Felicity.

The Necessity of Regeneration was not only preached to the People in the
primitive Times, but was actually experienced by the Believers.

A clear and pregnant Instance we have in 1 Cor. vi. 9, 10, 11. Know ye not
that the Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived,
neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers
of themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor
Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God; and such were
some of you; but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in
the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Here the Apostle
plainly testifies, that some of the Corinthian Brethren, who had been of
polluted Hearts and vicious Lives, were become regenerated, made clean and
holy, and shows this great Change in them, was wrought in the Name, or Power,
of the Lord Jesus, which he explains to be, by the Spirit of our God. The
Apostle Peter concurs with Paul in bearing the like Testimony. 1 Pet. i. 22, 23.
Seeing ye have purified your Souls in obeying the Truth, through the Spirit,
unto unfeigned Love of the Brethren; see that ye love one another with a pure
Heart fervently; being born again, not of corruptible Seed, but incorruptible,
by the Word of God, which lives and abides for Ever. To the like Purpose
might be added, Ephesians. ii. 5, 6. Col. i. 13, -- ii. 10, 11, 12, 13. -- iii. 9,
10. with the 6th Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, and many other Texts.

2. The Apostle particularly shows the Nature and Manner of this Work in Romans
the viith and viiith; which, for Want of a real Experience of, many have been
led to imagine, were intended by him, as only descriptive of his own Condition
at the Time he wrote them; yet it is manifest, they comprehend diverse, and
eve^ contrary Conditions, which himself and other^ had experienced in their
Christian Progress, and which it was impossible he should be is at one and the
same Time; viz. a State (...) Darkness, and a State of Light; a State of
Uncleanness, and a State of Purity; a State of Bondage, and a State of Liberty;
a State of Life, and a State of Death.

Chap. vii. 5. he says, When we were in the Flesh," (under the Dominion of the
carnal Nature) "the Motions of Sins which were" (manifested) "by the Law, did
work in our Members to bring forth Fruit un^^ Death. Here he refers back to
that Sta^^ of Sin and Death, they had formerly been enthralled in, but were now
past, as fully appears by the succeeding Verse, which says, But now we are
delivered from the Law, that being dead wherein we were held, that we should
serve in Newness of Spirit, and not in the Oldness of the Letter. Verse 7, he
returns to the former State again, and becomes more particular. "I had not
known Sin," says he, "but by the Law." Before he became sensibly convicted in
his own Conscience, where the Sense of the Law was opened to him; he remained
in his first State of natural Blindness, yet knew it not to be such,
notwithstanding his learned Education, and legal Strictness. Though dead as to
any Sense of Divine Life, yet he was alive in the Spirit of the World; Romans vii.
"For," says he, I was alive without the Law once; but when the Commandment
came, Sin revived, and I died. Opposed by the internal Administration of the
spiritual Law, which brought Conviction, the sinful Nature was afresh excited
by the Powers of Evil, and sprung up as with new Life and Vigor, to obstruct
his Escape from it; For, Verse 8.
without the Law Sin was dead. That is, its Nature remained quiet and
undisturbed, enjoying its Indulgence without Interruption, till the Law of Life
was administered against it. Then the Commandment, Verse 10, 11.
which was ordained to Life, I found" (by the Resistance of that Nature) "to be
unto Death. For Sin taking Occasion by the Commandment, deceived me, and by it
slew me. Or, darkened me, and brought (...) Sense of Death over me. It seems to
ha^^ deceived him at first into a Belief that the Law brought forth Death,
because he found a Sense of Death ensue upon the Convictions of this Law; but
Death is the Fruit of Sin, which is condemned by the Law: For says he, Verse
12, 13.
the Law is Holy, and the Commandment Holy, Just, and Good. Was then that which
is Good made Death unto me? God forbid. He found it was that which so violently
opposed it that produced Death, and occasioned the Condemnation of the Law to
come upon him, which discovered this Death in him. This was permitted that Sin
might appear Sin, and that by the convicting Force of the Commandment it might
become exceeding sinful in his View, or be held by him in Abhorrence. He then
feelingly expresses the enthralled Situation of this convicted, but unconverted
State. Romans vii. 14.
The Law is spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under Sin. That is, he found
himself as really in Captivity under Sin, as those are to their Purchasers who
are sold into Slavery. Verse 15.
For that which I do, I allow not. I am convinced it is Evil, and would gladly
be delivered from it, but notwithstanding my Convictions, am under its Power,
and unable to extricate myself. Verse 19.
For the Good that I would, I do not; but the Evil which I would not, that I
do. Yet, in patient Submission, and fervent cleaving to God, some Consolation
attends this awakened Condition; Verse 20, 21, 22, 23.
for, If I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but Sin that
dwells in me. For I delight in the Law of God after the inward Man; but I see
another Law" (or Power) "in my Members, warring against the Law of my Mind, and
bringing me into Captivity to the Law" (or Power) of Sin, which is in my
Members. Thus prevented of what I love, and enthralled by what I hate, what a
miserable Slavery am I in! O, wretched Man that I am! Verse 24.
Who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death?

He then, Verse 25.
still personating One in this struggling Situation, thanks God, through Jesus
Christ, for having brought him thus far on his Christian Course and Warfare,
that he could will to do Good, though yet unable actually to perform it. Hence
he had a Ground of Thankfulness, in Hope that he who had wrought the Will in
him, would also in due Time perfect the Deed by him. In Conclusion, he proceeds
to show, though this had once been his Condition, he now experienced perfect
Deliverance, from all the perplexing and afflicting Circumstances of this, and
the several exercising States he had formerly passed through, and had just been
giving so lively a Description of. Romans viii. 1, 2.
There is therefore," says he, "now no Condemnation to them which are in
Christ Jesus," (as he then certainly was) "who walk not after the Flesh, but
after the Spirit: For the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, has set
me free from the Law of Sin and Death. This again testifies his Deliverance,
and answers to that first cited, Chap. vii. 6.
Now we are delivered from the Law, (which condemns for Sin) "that," (sinful
Nature) being dead wherein we were held, that we should serve in Newness of
Spirit, and not in the Oldness of the Letter. With these accords that of Colos.
i. 12, 13. Giving Thanks unto the Father, who has made us meet to be Partakers
of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light: Who has delivered us from the Power
of Darkness, and has translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son.

In the Passages above cited from Romans vii. and viii. the experienced Apostle
evidently includes a Representation of three very different Conditions, in
their Course of Progression, and State of Disparity from each other. First, a
natural blind unconvicted State; which is that of Darkness and Death, Genesis i. 2.
answering to the original Chaos before Light was brought forth. Second, a
State of Illumination and Discovery, of Conviction and internal Warfare, in
order to a complete Conversion; which partakes of a Mixture, and shows Light
and Darkness in the Act of Separation, like that in Genesis i. 3, 4, 5. Third, a
State of Redemption from the Power of Sin, through Purification, and a
Translation into the spiritual Kingdom of Christ; which is the State of the
perfect Christian, and completes the new Creation, wherein every Thing takes
its due Place, and moves in its proper Order. I now refer it to the intelligent
Reader, whether it is not an Absurdity to imagine, that these three diverse,
and in some Respects contrary States should all subsist together, at the same
Time, in the same Subject.

By this Representation, which contains a brief and comprehensive Delineation
of the Work of the New Birth, the Apostle shows to such as are young in the
Faith, what different States they have to pass through in that preparatory
Travel, and also reminds the Regenerate of what they have witnessed, in the
Lines of his own Experience. He describes the various Steps, and principal
Leadings of the Holy Spirit, till by its effectual Operation, the Soul is
rendered a new Creature, and introduced into the Kingdom of God; which being
inward and spiritual, is entered by an inward and spiritual Way. Hence it is
clear, a Man may acquire all the Learning, and receive all the Degrees that
Schools and Colleges can bestow, with all the Authority Men can afford him, and
may be strict in the Practice of all the Forms and Exteriors of Religion; and
yet remain the natural Man still. These can bring him no nearer to true
Regeneration, than he was the Moment of his Birth; for the Newbirth is the Work
of the Holy Spirit only. Nothing but the Spirit of Holiness can make a Man
Holy; for nothing can communicate what it has not. Nothing can set Men free
from the Power of Sin, and its Wages, Death, but the Law, or Power, of the
Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus individually administered. This, which turns
Sinners into Saints, by a real Purgation, and renders them, as to their inward
State, new Creatures, remains to be their Light and Leader, and the primary
Guide of their Life and Conduct, by its immediate Manifestations in the Heart;
whereby it frequently brings Scripture-Truths to their Remembrance, and opens
the Sense of them profitably to their Understandings, at the same Time
influencing the Mind to a Practice answerable.

3. Evident as it is, that the Apostle in the foregoing Scriptures, describes
diverse Changes of Condition, which through the Operation and Effect of the Holy
Spirit, he had certainly known and sensibly felt; yet some have appeared even
amongst the Leaders of the People, who acknowledge, See a Quotation from
Sermons published under the ludicrous Title of Yorick's, in the Gentleman's
Magazine for April, 1766.
The Influence of God's Spirit enables us to render him an acceptable Service,
but assert, that it is in a Way imperceptible to us; that the Sacred Writings
are utterly silent concerning any sensible Demonstrations of its Workings
within us, that they cannot be distinguished from the Efforts of our own
Reason; that all Pretenses to it are suggested by an enthusiastic or
distempered Fancy; and that there never was a Christian with a cool Head, and a
sound Judgment, that in any Instance of a Change of Life, would presume to say,
which Part of his Reformation was owing to Divine Help.

The truly sound reformed Christian known and acknowledges, every Part of his
Reformation is owing to Divine Help; and whoever propagate the above cited
anti-scriptural Doctrine, demonstrate their Ignorance of true Regeneration, and
that their Wisdom is but the superficial Wisdom of Words, which can only enable
them to make a Show of Knowledge, by talking about the Things of God, without
any right Understanding of them. The Pomp of Science, and the Flourish of
Eloquence, have no more Alliance to Truth than the Pride of Life. They belong
to the Wisdom of this World, by which God is not to be known; 1 Cor. i. 21.
For the World by Wisdom knew not God, nor the Things of God. All the Knowledge
of the natural Man, Ibid. ii. 11.
the Man whose Nature remains unchanged, whether called Pagan, Jew, or
Christian, and whether it be styled Philosophy or Divinity, is but the
ineffectual ideal Wisdom of this World: The vaunting Head-knowledge. It is not
the Wisdom from above, by which alone God, and the Things of God are to be
known; that is, experienced. These are out of the Reach of Arts, Languages, and
Sciences, and are discovered only by the Manifestation of the Spirit of Christ
in the Heart. Col. ii. 3.
In whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge. Yet though the
World by all its admired and celebrated Wisdom, knows not God, there is a
Wisdom communicated by which he is known. "For God," 2 Cor. iv. 6, 7.
says Holy Writ, who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined
in our Hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the
Face (or inward Appearance) of Jesus Christ. The Apostle adds, We have this
Treasure in earthen Vessels, (we enjoy it now whilst in these Bodies of Clay)
that the Excellency of the Power may be of God, and not of us.

This luminous and excellent Power operates upon the humble thankful Acceptor,
so as to open an Understanding of what he reads, both in Scripture and other
experimental Writings, often giving him to feel that concerning which he reads,
and rendering it of improving Effect to him. But he who rejects the Means, can
never attain the End. He who refuses or flies from the Light of Life, when it
offers itself to him by Reproof and Conviction, not believing it to be of God,
nor receiving it as such, stops its Operation, prevents it from opening itself
to him, and enlarging in him. For the unbelieving Heart shuts up its own Way,
Mat. xiii. 58.
and therefore remains insensible of the internal Power of the Savior. Mark
vi. 5, 6.


4. What Man upon Earth can say, he has not had Convictions? Or, that he has
had them without any Sense of them? Who could have a Sense of them, and not
distinguish it from the Efforts of his own Reason; not distinguish the Reprover
from the Reproved? Unfelt Convictions are Impossibilities. In what Manner is
the Work of Renovation known, without any Perception of it in its Progress? Did
the Apostle Paul so pathetically describe the painful States he had traveled
through, and the opposite Powers engaged within him, without ever having a
certain Sense of them? Or is the Coolness of his Head, and the Soundness of his
Judgment now to be arraigned, and are his Christian Experiences to be treated,
only as the Issues of an enthusiastic or distempered Fancy?

How could any witness Repentance unto Life, Remission of Sins, and the Times
of Refreshing from the Presence of the Lord, without an inward Sense of them?
Were all the Cries, the Pantings and Thirstings after the Divine Presence,
uttered by the sacred Writers without a Sense of that Want; and were all their
triumphant Rejoicings in the Consolation of his Presence, expressed under a
total Insensibility of it? Were the kindly Fruits of the Spirit, and the
Comforts of the Holy Ghost unfelt by those who enjoyed them? Who can affirm
these Absurdities? Where can such blind Leaders bring their blind Followers to?
Those who turn their Backs on the Light, must walk in Darkness. It is the sole
Property of the Spirit of Chirst, the Light of Men, to make true Discoveries to
the Mind, both respecting itself, and every Thing else that concerns it. Hence
he is rightly styled the Sun of Righteousness; the same Thing to the Soul of
Man, that the Sun in the Firmament is to his Body. The one is the Light
without, the other the Light within; and therefore is properly so denominated.

5. It is the unbelieving unrenewed Man, unacquainted with the effectual
Operation of this Heavenly Principle, that unwittingly rejects and disparages
it, and thereby contributes to keep both himself and others in Blindness
concerning it, and Prejudice against it. 1 Cor. ii. 14.
The natural Man, says the Apostle, receives not the Things of the Spirit of
God, for they are Foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they
are spiritually discerned.

What! says the mighty Man of Reason, must I put out my Eyes in order to see?
Must I lay aside and renounce my Reason, to obtain a better Understanding? It
is impossible, absurd and preposterous. Very true; and it is equally true, that
no such Absurdity is required. It is neither right Reason, nor the proper Use
of Man's Reason, that is objected to and advised against. For right Reason is
Truth, and is ever correspondent with the inward Motions of the Spirit of
Truth; and Man's rational Faculty is what renders him capable of receiving
divine Influence and Instruction, without which it is impossible to conceive he
could be a fit Subject for it; and was his Reason in such a perfect State, as
to merit the Name of right Reason, he would not stand in such absolute Need of
it. But it evidently appears, from the various Biasses and Prepossessions Men
are generally under, the Weakness and Mutability of their Understandings, and
the innumerable and irreconcilable Differences amongst them, especially the
learned and leading Part of Mankind, that human Reason is far from being always
agreeable to right Reason, which is unchangeably true. What is cautioned
against therefore, is the setting up human Reason above its due Place in
Religion, making it the Leader instead of the Follower of Revelation, the
Teacher, instead of the Learner; and esteeming it vested with a Kind of
Self-sufficiency, independent of the Direction and Help of God's Holy Spirit.

We are not required to lay aside our Understandings, either in order to, or
under the Influences of the Spirit; but, as prudent and docile Scholars, to
submit them to the necessary Instruction and Improvement of that infallible
Master of Infinite Wisdom and Knowledge, who is the Isa. live. 13. Jer. xxxi.
34. John vi. 45. Heb. viii. 10, 11. and x. 16.
universal Teacher of his People; that we may be enabled rightly to obey and
worship him with the Spirit, 1 Cor. xiv. 15.
and with the Understanding also. The Spirit of God, and a right Understanding
must infallibly concur.

As the Light of the Sun is so agreeably dispensed by the Sovereign Wisdom,
that it does not put out or blind Men's Eyes, but assists to the proper Use of
them; so the Divine Illumination and Influence is administered by the same
Wisdom in such due Degrees, that it neither banishes Man's Reason, nor deprives
it of its Utility, but restores it to its full and proper Use in Religion, by
dispelling the Fogs of Prejudice and Passion, giving it a clear Sense of Duty,
and furnishing Ability to perform it. The Holy Men of God were not deprived of
their Understandings, 1 Pet. i. 21.
when they spoke and wrote as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, but found them
illuminated and highly improved by it. They were not used by the Spirit as
senseless Machines, nor remained as Vegetables, imperceptive of the Virtue
arising in, and enlarging them. Their Faculties were brightened, and raised to
an higher Pitch of Usefulness, than could ever have been reached by them,
whilst unassisted by the Power of Divine Grace. With good Reason therefore,
has one of the inspired Writers given this necessary Exhortation, Trust in the
Lord with all thine Heart, Prove. iii. 5.
and lean not unto thine own Understanding. And he further says, Ibi. xxviii.
26.
He that trusts in his own Heart, is a Fool.

CHAP. VII.
1. Whence true Religion arises. 2. How God is to be know according to the New
Covenant. Of whom the Body or Church of Christ is composed, and the Life it
enjoys. 3. Whence this Life is received. 4. That which brings forth the
New Birth must maintain it. 5. True Religion always essentially the same.
Exterior Institutions only Super-additions to lead the. Darkened and Degenerate
toward it. 6. Man has no Pretension to Merit, but through Faithfulness, is
graciously allowed a filial Claim. 7. The Nature of God's Govenants with Man.

1. NOTWITHSTANDING too many are taught to imagine Importance and Efficacy, in
Mode, Ceremony, Sign and Shadow, the Mint, Anise and Cummin of the legal
Dispensation; Gal. v. 6.
yet it is certain, that in Jesus Christ, neither Circumcision avails any
Thing, nor Uncircumcision, but Faith which works by Love. Neither the
Practice, nor Disuse of Forms and Rituals, are of any Availance with God. But
the first may more than unprofitably busy their Practisers, if they are so
dangerously deceived, as to place Confidence either in their own Performances,
or those of their Leaders. The Religion of the true Christian consists not in
Form, but Substance, and arises not from the Activity of human Reason,
Imagination, or Opinion, but from an Heartfelt Sensation of Divine Love in the
Light of Life. Its Foundation is no less than the immediate Administration of
God's Holy Spirit to the Spirit of Man. This shows unto Man what his Thoughts
are, Amos iv. 13.
what himself, and what the Lord is, so far as properly concerns him. It opens
the Understanding, and directs the Duty of the obedient; Jer. x. 23.
for the Way of Man is not in himself; it is not in Man that walks to direct
his Steps. It is the Light of the Lamb which shows the Way of Salvation: the
one great Light appointed to rule the Day, or spiritual Dispensation of
Christianity; Rev. xxi. 14.
wherein the Nations of them which are saved must walk.

2. Men in their natural State may, by Reading and Study, collect Abundance of
Notions concerning the Supreme Being; but as Light discovers all Things, yet
cannot be really known but by its own Appearance; so God, who, in the most
perfect, and superlative Sense, is Light, 1 John i. 5.
can only be truly known by his own immediate Manifestation. What is ordinarily
called the Knowledge of God, John xvii. 3.
is but a Series of Apprehensions concerning his Essence, his Attributes, and
his Providence; but what our Savior called so, is the real experimental Sense
of his Life. This is Life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God,
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. Truly to know him, is to participate of
the quickening Sense of his Life, through the communicated Influence of his
eternal Spirit. Thus to know him, is to partake of the New Covenant, or true
Gospel Dispensation; for therein it is declared, Jer. xxxi. 34.
They shall all know me from the least of them to the greatest of them.
Accordingly the living Christian has a certain Sense of Divine Life in his own
Breast, which affords him Instruction. Strength and Comfort, in such a Manner,
as b^^ waits in Faithfulness upon it, that he is under no absolute Necessity to
lean upon the Teachings of other Men; yet when they come in a Degree of the
same Life, he accepts them as instrumentally from God.

This Life of God in Christ, is the very Soul of Christianity; without which
the best Forms and highest Professions are but as Members of a dead Body,
unavailable and unacceptable. He that has the Son has Life, 1 John v. 12.
and he that has not the Son of God has not Life. Because I live, John xiv.
19, 20.
says he, ye shall live also. At that Day ye shall know, that I am in my
Father, and you in me, and I in you. It is because he lives in, and
communicates of his Life to his spiritual Followers, that they live also. Of
these the true Church, the adopted Body of Christ, under all Denominations, is
composed. These alone are his peculiar Heritage, or Clergy. This Ecclesiastical
Body of Christ, is a living Body, rendered such by the Inspiration of his Life.
Col. iii. 4.
He is the Life common to all his true Members. By his vital Influence he
communicates a living Sense of Truth to them, inclines them to himself, and
inspires them both with the Desire and Power of Obedience, and as the advance
in Faithfulness, he favors them with increasing Tastes of Divine Grace and
Love, the Savor of the Holy Unction, and the indwelling Virtue and Glory of
his Heavenly Presence. Ephesians. iv. 4.
There is one Body, and one Spirit. Was there not one and the same Spirit
throughout the whole Church, it could not be one Body, nor a living Body. In
Joh. Tract. 26.
Non potest vivere Corpus Christi niside spiritu Christi, says Augustine: The
Body of Christ cannot live but by the Spirit of Christ. He who partakes not of
the same Spirit with the Head, is no true Member of the Body. His spiritual
Influence is the precious Blood, or Spring of Life which renders all his
Members living, and what gives Life gives a Sense of that Life; Col. iii. 3.
but though their Life is most surely known to themselves, it is bid with
Christ in God, from the Knowledge of those who remain unquickened by it; and
hence arises all their Opposition to it.

3. We are all by Nature Strangers to this Divine Life, and we cannot, by any
Means, obtain it for ourselves. It is not of Man's Acquirement, but God's
Communication; and as far out of the Reach of the most Learned, as of the most
Illiterate. It is hid from the Wise and Prudent (in their own Eyes) and
revealed to those who are as Babes (to the World's Wisdom.) It is not the high
Learned, but the Humble that God teaches, and the Meek that he guides in the
Paths of Truth and Judgment. Every one's Eye therefore ought to be humbly to
God alone, and not to be fixed upon the Wise, the Scribe, the Disputer of this
World; for God has, by the powerful Simplicity and Purity of his Gospel
Dispensation, 1 Cor. i. 20.
made foolish the Wisdom of this World. Yet so fond is the World of its own
Wisdom, that it has in great Measure detruded the Cross of Christ, and true
spiritual Religion, and erected and supported this Idol in its Room. After this
Image the World has wondered, and indeed it has been a Means wonderfully to
blind, ensnare and deceive its Worshippers, whose Faith stands in the Wisdom of
Men, 1 Cor. ii. 5.
and not in the Power of God; and is therefore the Reverse of the Faith of the
Gospel.

4. From a due Consideration of the debased and corrupt State of Mankind, since
the Fall, and of the great and good End of their Creation, it must evidently
appear, that Regeneration has ever been the one Thing needful; a Work
essential for all to experience. And as the Birth of the Spirit cannot be
brought forth by any Thing but the Spirit, so it must also be preserved in its
Growth and Accomplishment by the Spirit. Hence the abiding, or indwelling of
the Spirit remains to be of absolute Necessity to the Regenerate, that as their
Souls are quickened into the Divine Life by it, they may continue to live,
move, and have their Being as Christians therein, and be sustained in a
spiritual Union, and blessed Communion with their Maker.

5. The Essentiality of true Religion has ever been the same, primarily
consisting in the Life of God being raised up, and the Love of God shed abroad
in the Heart, operating therein to its Renovation, and to every virtuous and
be^evolent End. Whatever of Externals or Ceremonials have, at sundry Times,
been super-added by Divine Direction or Command, we^ not intended to alter, or
unsettle Men from due and constant Attention to vital spiritual Religion; but
when they were become greatly degenerated from it, and darkened concerning it,
the merciful Creator was pleased, by Means suited to their estranged and carnal
Condition, to point it out to them, and lead them by Signs and Symbols toward
it. Thus the Mosaic Law was not meant to be the Whole of Religion to the
Israelities, Gal. iii. 24.
or to supercede the internal Religion of Grace; but only to be as a
Schoolmaster to bring them to Christ in Spirit, in whom all is included and
fulfilled, and whose Presence was then with the Faithful amongst them, who had
spiritual Communion with him; for, according to Scripture. 1 cor. x. 3. 4.
They did all eat the same spiritual Meat, and did all drink the same spiritual
Drink; for they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them; and that Rock
was Christ.

It is a vain Thing to imagine, that Religion ever wholly consisted in Mode or
Form; or that the All-perfect Lord at any Time dispensed with the Substance for
the Sake of the Shadow; or ever made any Alteration therein, by Diversity of
Institutions, from arbitrary Will and Pleasure, merely to exercise his
Sovereignty, as though Power was a darling Attribute, and more regarded by him
than Wisdom, Righteousness, and Goodness; or as though his Attributes could be
divided in him. No; he is God, and changes not. His Law is his own Spirit of
eternal Rectitude, and his Retribution according to every Man's State and
Works. The different Modifications that have appeared amongst Men in Point of
Religion, have been occasioned by the different Alterations in the Conditions
of Mankind. The All-wise God has directed some for a Time, in Condescension,
for the good End abovementioned; and diverse Combinations of Men have invented
and enjoined Abundance more, according to their own carnal Misapprehensions of
spiritual Things, or to advance their own sinister Purposes.

Exterior Forms are but temporary Matte^. They are no Essentials of true
Christianity. The great Author of it represents it as a Well of Water in Man
springing up into everlasting Life. John iv. 14.
It radically arises from a living, abiding, increasing Principle in Man, of a
pure, spiritual and heavenly Nature. As this is cordially embraced, it enlarges
in the Soul, expels the Works and Power of Darkness, and produces its own
genuine Fruits of Humility, Selfdenial, Patience, Resignation to God, and Trust
in him alone; Righteousness, Holiness, Meekness, Gentleness, Temperance,
Goodness, Brotherly-kindness, Charity. It derives its Origin from Heaven, and
leads to Heaven. It carries the Soul out of all Formalities and false Rests, up
to the Supreme Good himself. It breaks down all our own Self-will, and brings
into perfect Resignation to the Divine Will. In this humble contrited Frame,
and no other, can we sincerely and truly say, Thy Kingdom come! The Will be
done! For whilst our Wills stand in Separation from the Will of God, we cannot
address him in these Terms with Propriety; or in Spirit and Truth.

6. The Pride of Man is naturally averse to this abased and broken Situation.
It knows not how to submit to be, or to think itself, nothing though it is
worse than nothing. It would fain erect and plume itself upon some Importance,
some Estimation, or Deserving of its own; yet all its Pretenses to Merit are
false and vain. Man being nothing as such, but what he affords him, is wholly
God's, and not his own, and is therefore in Duty bound to walk in Obedience to
him, every Moment of his Life, which is given him for that End. And seeing Man
has fallen short of his Duty, and has sinned against his Sovereign by
Disobedience, it is neither in his Power, by any Thing he can perform, to merit
Heaven, nor to purchase Remission for himself. He can neither undo what he has
misdone, nor render to his Maker an Equivalent for the Trespasses he has
committed against him. But such is the merciful Goodness, and Free Grace of God
toward his helpless Creatures, that he offers both Forgiveness and Felicity
upon the most reasonable Terms of Repentance and Amendment. To the Willing and
Obedient, to him who is faithful unto Death, to him that over-cometh, through
Divine Assistance, are the Promises of eternal Life. Upon the Foundation of
these free and voluntary offers of the Divine Goodness, and Man's Compliance
with the Conditions, stands his Title. Rev. xxii. 14.
Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have Right to the
Tree of Life, and may enter in through the Gates into the City.

7. The Laws and Requisitions of God to Man, are in Scripture often styled
Covenants. Not meaning that Man has personally bound himself, on his Part to
perform the Conditions, but that he is really in Duty as deeply obliged, and as
firmly bound to do the Will of his Creator, as if he had voluntarily bound
himself in the strongest Obligations possible. The Reason is, Man owes his very
Being, and all the Good he receives, spiritual and temporal, to his Maker, to
whom he stands indebted for all, and who therefore has an unquestionable Right
to claim all Affection, Gratitude, and Obedience from him; and more especially
as it is all for his own everlasting Advantage. There is also an internal
spiritual Covenant, a Divine Connection, which the Heart of Man feels in his
Faithfulness, to his Creator: The Spirit of Life, in Christ Jesus, which sets
free from the Bonds of Sin and Death, and unites the Soul to its Savior in the
powerful Covenant of Divine Love. By this, through Faith, it becomes engrafted
into Christ; and by Obedience, it remains in him as a Branch in the Vine; or is
incorporated with him as its Head; for he that is joined unto the Lord is one
Spirit. 1 Cor. vi. 17.
Of this vital Union regenerate Souls have a certain Sense, in Proportion to
their Progress. 1 John iv. 13.
Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of
his Spirit. Ibid. iii. 14.
" -- "Hereby we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given
us. Hence it is clear, that the Gift of the Spirit communicates this
Intelligence.

CHAP. VIII.
1. Religion the same both to the Learned and Unlearned -- The Holy Spirit
requisite to every Man, as the universal Reformer. 2. It was such to the
Israelites, and 3. The best Part of their Divine Legation. 4. Why Statutes of
an outward and temporary Nature were added. 5. They are taught to look through
them to Christ, of whose Spirit they partook. 6. But it was not dispensed to
them in that Degree of Purity and Splendour with which it broke forth at the
Christian Era. 7. How this was witnessed to by the Law. 8. How by the
Prophets. 9. The Spirit was in all Ages administered, and the truly Humble
favored with its indwelling.

I. RELIGION here, and Salvation hereafter, are as much the Concern and Duty of
the Illiterate and Ignorant, as of the Wise and Learned. And as those are by
much the greater Number, religious Duty must undoubtedly consist in something
equally attainable and practicable by all; for God is no Respecter of Persons.
It cannot be essentially in literal Knowledge, nor in any p^c^h^^ Mode of
Education; for these are the Lot of few, in Comparison of the whole of Mankind.
Happiness being the End of Man's Creation, and the universal indispensable
Concern of every Man, the effective Means of Regeneration and Salvation must be
attainable by every Man. Nothing but the Omnipresent, and All-effective Spirit
of God can be this Means; for nothing else is universal, nor any Way adequate
to the Work. The Spirit of God therefore, being necessary to every Man, is
afforded to every Man, by him who withholds nothing necessary.

This Holy operative Spirit, Solomon, under its Influence, with great
Propriety, styles Wisdom, and represents it, in familiar Language, as calling
upon Mankind, Prove. i.
to turn at its Reproofs, with a Promise, to pour out its Spirit unto them. He
also impleads those as Fools who reject or slight its Reproofs, or Convictions
in their Consciences; Verse 20, 21.
by which he shows, it accompanies them even in the Streets and Places of
Concourse. Recounting the great Works of this Spirit of Wisdom, he elsewhere
testifies, She preserved the first formed Father of the World, Wisd. x. 1.
that was created alone, and brought him out of his Fall. She was not only his
Preserver before his Fall, but his Requickener and Restorer out of that Death,
he through Transgression fell into; and seeing the whole rational Progeny of
Adam are naturally under the like Necessity of being born of the Spirit, its
Administration is offered to all, in due Degrees, and every Individual in all
Ages, who have experienced the New Birth, by which right Reformation is
wrought, have known it to be effected by the Operation of the Spirit. This the
wise Author above cited witnesses, i^ his Acknowledgment to Almighty Goodness,
Wisd. ix. 17, 18.
when he says, Thy Council who has known, except thou give Wisdom, and send
thy Holy Spirit from above? For so the Ways of them who lived on the Earth were
reformed, and Men were taught the Things that are pleasing unto thee, and were
saved through Wisdom.

2. Evident Tokens of internal Religion, and the immediate Manifestations of
the Spirit for that End, appear throughout both the Old Testament and the New.
Before the Flood, the old World was favored with the Manifestation of the Holy
Spirit, as it is implied Genesis vi. 3. "My Spirit shall not always strive with,"
or rather, in, "Man." For so Hebreans say it ought to be rendered. And indeed,
where could the Spirit so properly strive as in the Soul of Man, where the Seat
of Corruption is, and to which the Suggestions of Evil are applied? And to what
End should it strive with them, but to bring them to Repentance and
Reformation, and to become, through their Obedience, the Kingdom, or ruling
Power of God in them.

Renovation of Heart by the Holy Spirit, and its genuine Fruits of Repentance
toward God, Faith in him, and Obedience to him, was the principal and
essential Part of Religion also among the Israelites. Deuteronomy. xxx. 10. Moses
represents the Conditions on the Performance of which they should be entitled
to the Promises. If thou shall hearken unto the Voice of the Lord thy God, to
keep his Commandments and his Statutes, which are written in this Book of the
Law, and if thou turn unto the Lord thy God, with all thine Heart, and with all
thy Soul. These are the Terms; first, that they should keep the Law; this was
the external and legal Part of their Duty. Second, that they should turn their
whole Hearts and Souls to God; this was the internal and evangelical Part. He
leaves them not here in a State of Uncertainty, but proceeds to show them to
what their inward Attention should be turned. Verse 11, etc.
"For," says he, this Commandment which I command thee this Day," (or this
which I command thee to turn thine Heart unto) "is not hidden from thee,
neither is it far off. It is not in Heaven that thou should say, who shall go
up for us to Heaven, and bring it unto us, that w^ may hear i^ and do it?
Neither is it beyond the Sea, that thou should say, who shall go over the Sea
for us, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it and do it? But the Word is
very nigh unto thee, in thy Mouth, and in thy Heart, that thou may do it.
The Apostle assumes and explains this Passage, Romans x. 6, 7, 8. The
Righteousness which is of Faith, speaks on this wise, "Say not in thine
Heart, who shall ascend into Heaven? (that is to bring Christ down from above.)
"Or, who shall descend into the Deep?" (that is to bring up Christ again from
the Dead.) "But what says it? The Word is nigh thee, even in thy Mouth, and in
thy Heart. That is the Word of Faith which we preach.

By this Explanation of the Apostle, it appears, is it, That besides the Law,
Moses then preached to Israel the same Words of Faith, which himself, and his
evangelical Brethren did. 2d, That this Word is Christ in Spirit, calling for
Attention and Obedience in the Heart, or Conscience, of Man, in order to effect
his Restoration and Salvation. 3d, This is not a local, or temporary, but an
inward Visitation of the Savior of Mankind, by his Spirit in the Heart.

The Word of Faith is the Word of Truth, the Word of the everlasting Gospel;
and not a Composition of Letters. The Term Word, like many other Words, is used
in various Senses; as a Speech or Saying, an Engagement, a Report, a Command,
an Exhortation, an Instruction, etc. because these are composed of Words. And
as Men use to convey their Sense to one another by Words, so God conveys his to
Men by Christ, who is peculiarly and emphatically styled in Scripture, the Word
of God; John i.^ Rev. xix. 13.
and as the Way Men receive Words from the Mouths of one another is by Hearing,
so the Manner by which the Soul receives internal Instruction, Reproof, etc.
from the Holy Spirit, is metaphorically called Hearing. Thus Faith, which is
the Gift of God, is said to come by Hearing, and Hearing by the Word of God.
Romans x. 17.
That is, I apprehend, the internal Sense itself is opened in the Soul, as well
as Subjects communicated, by the Spirit of Christ.

3. Hence we see, the Divine Legation to the Jews, consisted not in the outward
written Law only. Nor were they kept in Ignorance of inward spiritual Religion,
or of a future State of Rewards and Punishments. For, if so, to what Purpose
did Moses press the Consideration of their latter End upon them, with so much
Fervency? O that they were wise, Deu. xxxii. 29.
that they understood this, that they would consider their latter End. What
material Consideration should their latter End, or Time of Death, be of, to
such as know no better but that it would be the Period of their Existence? Or
why should he command their Attention to the living Word of Faith, Christ in
the Heart, as well as to the written Code? He was an eminently inspired
Prophet, and well knew that Salvation is by Christ alone; and that his inward
spiritual Law, is as preferable to the exterior one, as the Substance is to the
Shadow. Obedience to the outward temporal Law, had outward and temporal
Promises; but Obedience to the inward spiritual Law, has Promises of an
internal and eternal Nature. By the Works of the first, no Man could be
justified; but by the Operation of the last, sanctification is wrought, and
Salvation experienced. Moses was a Type of Christ, and the temporal Law, with
its temporal Rewards, a Type of the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus,
and its eternal Recompense.

4. But it may be queried; if the spiritual Law was always afforded, what
Occasion was there for the Addition of temporal Statutes? Answer, The
Israelites, by living under Servitude to a most superstitious and idolatrous
People, were become prone to Superstition and Idolatry themselves. Psalm. cvi.
35, 36.
"They were mingled among the Heathens," says the Psalmist, and learned their
Works; and they served their Idols, which were a Snare unto them. Out of this
Idolatry they were to be brought, and by their Obedience to the only true God,
were to become an Example to the Nations round them, to influence their Return
likewise. Though all had the Word nigh in the Heart, yet having lost the right
Sense of what it is, the Law was added, Gal. iii. 19.
because of their Transgression and Corruption till the coming of Christ in the
Flesh.

Seeing their habitual Attachment to the Forms and Superstitions of Paganism,
was too strong to admit of their being willingly and clearly brought out of
them at once, Divine Wisdom condescended to meet them in the State they were
in, and to proceed gradually with them, by allowing them some Forms and
Ceremonies like to those they had been inured to; but more regular and
significant. The Supreme Lord of the Universe first observes to them, Exodus xx.
I am the Lord thy God which have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of
the House of Bondage;" and then commands, "Thou shall have no other Gods before
me. Thus he draws their Attention off from the Idols of the Heathen, and places
it wholly upon himself, as the sole Object of their Adoration and Obedience.
And to give one Instance for all, as the Heathens, whose Manners they had
imbibed, were accustomed to swear by their false Gods, he did not see fit to
prohibit all solemn Oaths at once, but confined them to swear by himself alone,
exclusive of the Pagan Idols; not requiring the perfect Practice of the
Christian Precept, Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, nor by the Earth, nor
by any other Oath, of them, whilst not in a Christian State, nor under its
clear Dispensation; but only entering them into the Path appointed for them
toward it, and to prepare the Way for its Establishment. Thus he made the Law
a temporary Expedient, to bring them gradually toward the Practice of that
perfect Religion, he intended in due Season to introduce, and to set up in its
Purity, for all Men to come into, and to walk in.

5. In the mean Time, the Sovereign Wisdom was pleased to sound an Alarm, and
set up an Ensign to the rest of Mankind, amongst the Descendants of Israel. He
wrought Wonders for their Deliverance and Support; and, besides many excellent
moral Precepts, dispensed to them a Form of Knowledge and of the Truth in the
Law; Romans ii. 20.
symbolically denoting the Nature and Manner of Redemption and Salvation
through his Son, by many significant Types, Allego^ries, and Similitudes,
accommodated to the religious Modes, and Apprehensions they had espoused;
which, though Semblances of a distant, because of an exterior Kind, yet were
intended, and wisely adapted to be to the superstitiously disposed, Gal. iii.
24.
as a Schoolmaster to lead them gradually to Christ: That is, to the Knowledge
of Christ, then to come outwardly as a propitiatory Sacrifice for the Sins of
Mankind, and also to the Knowledge of Christ within, the Hope of Glory, as the
actual Sanctifier and Savior of Men. Cor. x. 2.
For though they were all baptized unto Moses in the Cloud, or dipped into his
exterior Dispensation as under a Vail; yet the Spiritually-minded amongst them,
were enabled to penetrate through the Vail to the internal Reality, Cor. x. 2,
3, 4.
and "did" as before observed, all eat the same spiritual Meat, and did all
drink the same spiritual Drink; for they drank of that spiritual Rock that
followed them, and that Rock was Christ.

Still further to assist them, Divine Goodness, at Times, inspired diverse of
the most regenerate, and most devoted of both Sexes, with the Spirit of
Prophecy, and engaged them to preach the Necessity of Righteousness and
Holiness to them, and to direct their View, through the Figures and outward
Similitudes of the ceremonial Law, to the Truth signified by them, and plainly
to instruct them in, and exhort them to inward and spiritual Religion; which
was the ultimate Intent of the Mosaic, and every other Dispensation of God to
Mankind. For the Rituals of the Law were not instituted to supersede, but to
serve, as an Index to the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus.

I do not apprehend, that the Mystery of Godliness, and its internal Life and
Virtue, was ever intended by Divine Wisdom to be concealed from Mankind; but
was always held forth, though sometimes obscurely under typical Forms, on
Account of the Numbers of degenerate Minds, who were too much prepossessed and
darkened, to behold the Splendour of the Gospel in its clear Manifestation. For,
throughout all Generations, to as many as rightly received Christ, John i. 12.
he gave Power to become the Sons of God; yet the spiritual powerful Gospel of
our Lord, was not so publicly promulgated, without some Kind of ceremonial
Shadows, till the full Display of the Christian Dispensation, at the Time of
the Jewish Feast of Pentecost, when the Disciples, waiting together in
Obedience to the Command of Christ, were according to his Promise, baptized
with his one true permanent Baptism; that of the Holy Ghost, which fulfils and
supersedes all other Baptisms, and remains the standing Ordinance of God to his
Church for ever. Then by Revelation was the Mystery conspicuously and
powerfully disclosed, Ep^. iii. 5, 6.
"which", says the Apostle, in other Ages was not made known unto the Sons of
Men, as" (or in the same Degree) "it is now revealed unto his Holy Apostles and
Prophets, by the Spirit; that the Gentiles should be Fellow-heirs, and of the
same Body, and Partakers of his Promise in Christ by the Gospel." Romans iii. 21.
-- "For now the Righteousness of God without the Law, is manifested, being
witnessed by the Law and the Prophets.

7. The Law witnessed to the Gospel, 1st, by its various Offerings and
Sacrifices, pointing out, and keeping in Remembrance, that the Messiah should
come in the Flesh, in order "to put away Sin by the Sacrifice of himself." Heb.
ix. 26.
This was the real Use of the Sin and Trespass offerings; Ibid. x. 4.
for, It is not possible, that the Blood of Bulls and Goats should take away
Sins. No; they had Reference to the precious Blood of Christ, both corporeal
and spiritual, who by one Offering, Heb. x. 14.
has perfected for ever them that are sanctified, thereby putting a final
Period to the legal Sacrific^^ 2d, The Law witnessed to the Gospel, by i^^
diverse Sprinklings, Washings, and Purifications, which had no more Efficacy
toward the Removal of Sin and Guilt, than the Blood of Bulls and Goats; but
must be understood to denote the Necessity of real Holiness, and to signify the
spiritual A^ministration of Christ, who gave himself for us, Tit. i. 14.
that he might redeem us (not only from Guilt and Condemnation) but also from
all Iniquity, the Cause of them, and purify unto himself a peculiar (or
sanctified) People, zealous of good Works. Ibid. iii. 5.
This he does by the washing of Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy
Ghost.

8. The Prophets witnessed to the Gospel, 1st, by their predictive Declarations
concerning the Coming, Sufferings, and Offices of the Messiah. 2d, By
instructing the People in the Necessity of internal, essential, effectual
Religion, in Preference to the written law, even during the Time that stood in
Force, as that weightier Part and superior Duty, which ever necessarily remains
throughout all Generations.

Samuel says, 1 Samuel xv. 22.
"To obey is better than Sacrifice." Hosea, I desired Mercy, Hos. vi. 6.
and not Sacrifice," (or not in Comparison with it) and the Knowledge of God
more than Burnt-offerings. David acknowledges to the Lord, Thou desire not
Sacrifice, Psalm. li. 16, 17.
else would I give it: Thou delightest not in Burnt-offering. The Sacrifices of
God are a broken Spirit: A broken and a contrite Heart, O God, thou will not
despise. In his pathetic address to the Almighty. Verse 6, he says, "Thou
desire Truth in the inward Parts;" and Verse 10, he prays, Create in me a
clean Heart, and renew a right Spirit within me. Micah queries, Micah vi. 7, 8.
Will the Lord be pleased with Thousands of Rams, or with ten Thousands of
Rivers of Oil? Shall I give my Firstborn for my Transgression, the Fruit of my
Body for the Sin of my Soul? And then answers; He has showed thee, O Man, what
is Good; and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, to love
Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? Moses exhorts the Children of Israel,
Deuteronomy. x. 16.
to circumcise the Foreskin of their Heart, and told them, Ibid. xxx. 6.
The Lord thy God will circumcise thine Heart, and the Heart of thy Seed, to
love the Lord thy God with all thine Heart and with all thy Soul. Here he
shew^^ them, Romans iv. 11.
Though they had received the Sign of Circumcision, the Reality most required
was that of the Heart in the Spirit; which is the Work of Regeneration, the
Christian Circumcision of the Apostle, Ibid. ii. 28, 29.
who asserts, He is not a Jew who is one outwardly, neither is that
Circumcision which is of the Flesh, but he is a Jew who is one inwardly, and
Circumcision is that of the Heart, in the Spirit, and not in the Letter. He
also obser^es to the Colossians, Col. ii. xx.
that in Christ they were circumcised with the Circumcision made without Hands,
in putting off the Body of the Sins of the Flesh, by the Circumcision of Christ.

That the Necessity of the Knowledge and Love of God, and of a Change from Sin
to Holiness, by the internal Circumcision of the Spirit, was both taught and
pressed upon the Jews, as that without which the Observance of the Law would
little avail them; Isa. i. 11. to 19, and Chap. lxvi 3, 4.
nay, the Prophet Isaiah plainly shows, that the latter without the former,
rendered the Practice of it, though divinely instituted, abominable even to its
Institutor.

9. Regeneration, or the Circumcision of the Heart in the Spirit, being always
required, the Spirit by which alone it is wrought, must have been always
dispensed to Mankind for that End. This is the gracious Gift of the Father
Almighty, through the Redeemer, to whom the Psalmist says, Psalm. lxviii 18.
Thou have ascended on high; thou have led Captivity captive; thou have
received Gifts for Men; yea, for the Rebellious also; that the Lord God might
dwell among them. This was the blessed Experience of those that humbled
themselves under his mighty Hand. Isa. lvii. 15
For thus says the high and lofty One that inhabiteth Eternity, whose Name is
Holy, I dwell in the high and Holy Place, with him also that is of a contrite
and humble Spirit, to revive the Spirit of the Humble, and to revive the Heart
of the contrite Ones.

CHAP. IX.
1. The Mosaic Law a new Form of Theocracy, therefore introduced by miraculous
Appearances. The Abolition of the Law, and the setting up of the Gospel in its
genuine Purity, was necessarily attended with equal Demonstration of the like
wonderful Powers. 2. All the primitive Ministers had the Spirit, but their
Gifts were different. All were not Workers of Miracles, therefore these were
extra Powers, not essentia^ to an inspired Ministry. Inspiration always
requisite to true Ministry; but Miracles not. 3 and 4. Miracles were temporary
Sanctions requisite to the Abolition of the Law, and Institution of the Gospel,
but not essential to be continued for its Support, yet under all Dispensations,
at Times were occasionally wrought. The Want of them no Proof a Minister is not
inspired. 5. The Institution of Christianity once confirmed by them, the future
Promulgation of its Doctrine stands not in Need of their continued Repetition.
The Excellency of the Gospel consists in its being a Ministration of the
Spirit, clear of all exterior Signs and Shadows. 6. True Christians are
baptized by one Spirit into one Body. 7. The Primitives not opened at once into
the perfect Clearness of the Gospel, but gradually enlightened. 8. Hence many
Professors to this Day, mistake the first initiatory Mixture for the complete
State of Christianity. 9. This consists in the total Removal of outward Signs
and Shadows, and the clear shining of the Sun of Righteousness itself. The
Vanity of superseding this by human Learning.

1. AFTER the Wonders of Creation and Providence were displayed, in producing
and establishing the stupendous System of external Nature, its great Author was
pleased, at distant Periods, to show forth the visible Effects of his
miraculous Power amongst the Sons of Men; but when the Time came wherein he saw
fit to recall the degenerate World from the Corruptions it was immersed in, by a
public Assumption and Manifestation of his own just Dominion amongst a People
chosen for that Purpose, he raised up the Children of Israel as an Exemplar to
the rest of Mankind. He brought them Got of their Egyptian Bondage by an high
Hand, and through many admirable Strokes of his Power; and upon his Institution
of the Mosaic Law, which being the Introduction of a new Form of Theocracy,
unknown to the World, it was requisite it should be attended by such
extraordinary Marks of Divine Authority, as might be sufficient to authenticate
and enforce it, as coming from himself. He therefore, on that great Occasion,
appeared to the Israelites in a Manner answerable to his Almighty Sovereignty;
and also to the Nature and Solemnity of that Law; which being a Ministration of
Condemnation, was ushered in by the most dreadful and astonishing Tokens of
Terror; with Thunderings and Lightnings, Blackness, Darkness, and Tempest, the
Mountain flaming with Fire, the alarming Sound of the Trumpet, waxing louder
and louder, and the Voice of Words so terrible, that not only the People, but
the whole Mountain quaked exceedingly. This being an obvious, and most solemn
Act of the supreme Legislator of the Universe, no less Authority than his own,
could either abolish, or alter it, and when the Period arrived, wherein he saw
fit to set aside, and supersede this Law of outward and carnal Ordinances, by
bringing forward into full View, and sole Obligation, the Substance pointed to
by it, his spiritual and more excellent Covenant; it was necessary that it
should appear to be done, by clear Demonstrations of the same sovereign
Authority, in as public a Manner, and at the most proper Season for it.
Accordingly the gracious Dispensation of the Gospel was introduced by Evidences
of Divine Authority equally extraordinary, and equally suited to its placid and
salutary Nature.

Besides the numerous Predictions of the Prophets concerning the Messiah, the
Advent of his Forerunner the Baptist, and the miraculous Conception of our
Savior by the blessed Virgin, witness the many wonderful Works he performed,
the unaccountable Darkness, and the rending of the Vail of the Temple
throughtout from Top to Bottom, upon his giving up the Ghost, denoting the
Separation, Conclusion, and passing away of all Sign and Ceremony, and the
Disclosure of the Substance in Spirit and Truth; his astonishing Resurrection,
and that of the Bodies of buried Saints which arose and went into the City; and
his visible Ascension, attended with the glorious Ministration of Angels. After
all this, at the Time of the Jewish Feast of Pentecost, annually observed in
Memorial of the giving forth of the Law on Mount Sinai, the Apostles and
Disciples, Male and Female, being assembled together, according to the Lord's
Command, the Holy Spirit gave a twofold Demonstration of its Advent, as the
administrative Power of the Christian Dispensation, then to commence without
any Mixture of a legal or shadowy Nature; first, by the Appearance of cloven
Tongues, as of Fire, which sat upon each of them. Second, by filling their
Hearts with the Holy Ghost, Acts ii.
to such a Degree, that they began to speak with other Tongues, or in other
Languages besides their own, as the Spirit gave them Utterance. Endued with
Heavenly Wisdom and Power, and inflamed with Divine Love and Fervor, they were
now qualified to put in Practice the Commission before given, in a verbal
Manner, by the great Lord and Lawgiver. To diverse of them were likewise added,
the miraculous Powers of healing all Manner of Diseases; the Dumb were made to
speak, the Deaf to hear, the Lame to walk, the Blind to see; Demoniacs were
dispossessed, and the Dead were raised and restored to Life.

But these extraordinary Powers were neither conferred upon all, nor confined
to the Apostles only; yet a Measure of the same Spirit was communicated to
every one of them, Women as well as Men; otherwise Peter's Application of the
Prophecy of Joel had not been true. They were all filled with the Holy Ghost,
but differently gifted, and qualified by it, for different Services, according
to the Will and Wisdom of the great Dispenser. 1 Cor. xii. 8, etc.
To one is given by the Spirit the Word of Wisdom; to another the Word of
Knowledge by the same Spirit; to another Faith by the same Spirit; to another
the Gift of Healing by the same Spirit; to another the working of Miracles; to
another Prophecy; to another discerning of Spirits; to another diverse Kinds of
Tongues; to another the Interpretation of Tongues. But all these works that
one and the self same Spirit, dividing to every Man severally as he will.

Hence it appears, that what are commonly called Miracles, are not necessary or
essential to Divine inspiration, but only adjunctive Operations of the Spirit
thereto, which have been occasionally super-added, and therefore may either
totally cease, when the Occasions for which they were added are over, or
continue to be used as it shall appear requisite to Divine Wisdom. When
therefore the Gospel was so far spread and established, in the Parts then
intended, that the End for which those extraordinary Powers were afforded was
answered they were gradually withdrawn from the Church; which was left, in the
general, upon its proper and permanent Bottom, the immediate Inspiration of the
Holy Spirit. No Necessity therefore can be pleaded for the constant Continuance
of miraculous Powers, or such a Spirit of Prophecy, as signifies a peculiar
Gift of foretelling future Events; but only of those supernatural Influences,
which are requisite to enlighten, quicken, regenerate, sanctify, bring forth
the Fruits of the Spirit in Man, enable him to fill up his Duty, and finally
prepare him for a Celestial Mansion. These are indispensably necessary to be
continued. They are of moral Consideration, and immediately influential to the
Preparation and Salvation of every Man, which Miracle and Prediction are not.

3. Notwithstanding manifest Appearances of extraordinary Power were added,
both to the Introduction of the Law, and that of the Gospel, they are not to be
considered as Parts of either, but as Sanctions requisite to their Institution;
so I believe, some divine Exertions of a miraculous Nature have been evidenced,
at Times, under both Administrations, as well as before them; either for the
Convincement of doubtful Persons, or to give additional Weight and Authority to
the Ministry of some inspired Servants of God, amongst those present with them,
or to encourage and confirm them in their Service. Though I doubt not but this
has sometimes been the Case since the first Century, and may remain to be so
to the End of Time, for neither the Power nor Goodness of the Almighty is
shortened; yet I am also of Opinion, that miraculous Appearances have been less
public, and more sparingly afforded since the first Century than before it;
which may be in Part owing to the Declension of the professing Churches. I also
believe, according to the prophetic Declarations of the Apostles, that under
the declined and darkened State of both Teachers and Hearers, many strange
Signs, and lying Wonders have been, and still may be suffered to be imposed
upon the Credulity of a disobedient People, by false Pretenders, for the
Support of a corrupt Interest, and the Aggrandisement of the Conductors.
Undoubtedly, those mysterious Delusions have been abundantly more numerous for
many Centuries past, than the Exertions of Divine Power in an extraordinary Way.

4. The Continuation of exterior Miracles is not essential to the Ministration
of the Gospel; for was it so, Christianity could not subsist without them. Yet,
though they are not of absolute Necessity thereunto, they may be occasionally
used, or not, as the Sovereign Wisdom sees meet. But that they are still
constantly, or periodically continued in any particular Church, as a peculiar
Mark of its being the only true Church of Christ, above all others, I find no
Warrant to believe. Pretensions of this Kind, naturally put thinking Minds upon
looking for a superior Excellency in the Doctrines, and Practices of such a
Church; and when they find it abound in Superstition and Pomp, coercive
Imposition, proud Hierarchy, Craft, Lucre, and Idolatry, even bordering upon
Politheism; for what else is the Adoration of Saints, and Sinners under that
Title, by attributing a Kind of Omnipresence, and Influence in the Court of
Heaven to them? When they find these, and other monstrous Absurdities in the
established Doctrines of such a Church, instead of the Simplicity, Purity,
Humility, Love and Life of the Gospel; what can they conclude of those
Pretensions, but that they are the deceitful Juggles of Imposture, and the
Legends of Folly? The very Ends most of them are calculated to answer,
sufficiently evidence their Falsehood, and show, whatever they are, that they
are not Divine.

It does not appear, that in the primitive Age of Christianity, those who were
sometimes attended with miraculous Powers, were always so accompanied in their
Ministry; nor that all inspired Ministers were ever enabled to work Miracles in
the Sight of the People. Seeing therefore it is evident, that these
extraordinary Powers are not essential to an inspired Ministry, they are not
the necessary Proofs of it; nor the Want of them an Argument, that a Minister
is not inspired. But though these are not essential to Christianity, immediate
Inspiration is constitutionally so. The Excellency of the Gospel Dispensation
is, that it is not a Mixture of Sign and Substance, as that of the Jews was,
nor a temporary, but a standing Ministration of the Spirit.

5. Seeing no further Change of Dispensations is ever to be made, nor any other
Doctrine to be preached, but that of our Savior and his Apostles, which upon
its Commencement, received a miraculous Confirmation, sufficient for its
lasting Establishment, People are not now to expect, or call for Miracles from
those who preach the Christian Doctrine; but to turn to, and attend upon that
Divine Principle pointed out in the Scriptures, as manifested in the Breast of
each Individual, the Ministration of Christ in Spirit. This will give the
sincere and humble Receiver more clear and particular Demonstration than
outward Signs and Tokens could do; for the Powers whence these proceed, may be
disputed, but the internal Evidence of the Light of Christ, the Life of Men, as
rightly waited for, and adhered to, leaves no Doubt in the Mind concerning its
Divine Nature and Authority. Hence Robert Barclay asserts, in the Words of the
primitive Protestants, there is no Need now of outward Miracles to avouch the
Doctrines of the Gospel; yet acknowledges, that some did appear upon its
Revival in the last Century. But to return.

The Apostle, 2 Cor. iii. shows that the Ministration of the Gospel far excels
that of the Law, and that its Excellency stands in its Spirituality. Having
spoken of the Law, 2 Cor iii. 8, 9, 10, 11.
Verse 7, he subjoins, How shall not the Ministration of the Spirit be rather
glorious? For if the Ministration of Condemnation be Glory, much more does the
Ministration of Righteousness exceed in Glory. For even that which was made
glorious, had no Glory in this Respect, by Reason of the Glory which excels.
For if that which was done away was glorious, much more that which remains is
glorious. Why is the Gospel thus super-eminent above the Law, seeing that was a
Divine Institution? Principally, because it is not an outward Code as the Law
was, 2 Cor. iii. 3.
but an inward Law of Life written, not with Ink, but with the Spirit of the
living God, not in Tables of Stone, but in fleshly Tables of the Heart; Verse 6.
and because it makes able Ministers, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; for
the Letter kills, but the Spirit gives Life.

No Man can be a true Christian without the Spirit of Christ; Romans viii. 9.
for, If any Man has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.

1 Cor. vi. 19.
Every Christian ought to experience the indwelling of the Spirit. Know ye not
that your Body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you, which ye have
of God, and ye are not your own.

It is requisite to every Christian, that he should know the Spirit to be his
Guide and Leader; Romans viii. 14.
for, only as many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God.

No man can be a Sheep of Christ without a distinguishing Sense of the Spirit
of Christ I am the good Shepherd, John x. 14, 27, 4 and 5.
and know my Sheep, and am known of mine." -- "My Sheep hear my Voice, and I
know them, and they follow me." -- "The Sheep follow him, for they know his
Voice, and a Stranger they will not follow. The Voice of Christ is the
Manifestation of his Spirit to the Soul.

Without being born again of the Spirit, John iii.
no Man can enter the Kingdom of God, and without the Spirit, no Man can be
born of it; consequently the Spirit is altogether as requisite to us as it
could be to the Primitives. It is no more in our Ability to regenerate and
prepare ourselves for the Kingdom, than it was in theirs. No Powers, natural or
acquired, in our unregenerate State, are sufficient for so great a Purpose, and
to enable us truly to say, with the People of God in former Times, Lord, thou will ordain Peace for us; Isa. xxvi. 12.
for thou have wrought all our Works in us.

Without the Spirit, no Man can be a Minister of the Spirit. The apostolic
Direction is, As every Man has received the Gift, 1 Peter iv. 10, 11.
even so minister the same one to another, as good Stewards of the manifold
Grace of God. If any Man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God; if any Man
minister, let him do it as of the Ability which God gives; that God in all
Things may be glorified through Jesus Christ.

6. Every true Believer and faithful Follower of Christ, in the apostolic Age,
received a Portion of the same Holy Spirit which the Prophets and Apostles did,
though in less Degrees; "for," says Paul, 1 Cor. xii. 13.
by one Spirit are we all baptized into one Body, whether we be Jews or
Gentiles, whether we be bond or free; and have been all made to drink into one
Spirit. This one Spirit rendered them one Body, and joined them to the one
living Head. There is one Body and one Spirit, Ephesians. iv. 4, 5, 6.
even as ye are called in one Hope of your Calling; one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all; and in
you all. Thus, according to the several Measures allotted them, they were all
Partakers of the same Holy Spirit, and as it was then, so it is now, and ever
must be in the true spiritual universal Church of Christ.

7. The Gospel Sun arose in great Splendour, yet it appeared not in its full
Meridian at once, to any. The Openings of Truth in the Minds of the primitive
Christians, Apostles as well as others, were gradual. As they advanced forward
in the new Nature, they saw further and further. For a Time, they occasionally
circumcised, entered into Vows, anointed with Oil, baptized with John's
Baptism; all which were of an external and legal Nature. Nay, at first, they
perceived not the Holy Ghost was to be given to Gentiles as well as Jews,
though Joel had plainly prophesied, it should be poured out upon all Flesh. But
afterward, as their Concern continued to press forward, they were led beyond
the first initiatory Mixture of Things; they saw clearly and declared, that the
Holy Spirit fell upon the Gentiles, Acts xi. 18
as well as Jews; Gal. v. 6.
that neither Circumcision nor Uncircumcision avails; Heb. ix. 9.
that a good Conscience arises not from the Practice of exterior Rites; 1 John
ii. 20, 27.
that the Unction from the Holy One is altogether sufficient to give
Instruction and true Judgment; that the saving Baptism is not that which can
reach no deeper than the outside of the Flesh, but that of the Spirit, which
baptizes the Heart, 1 Pet. iii. 21.
and produces the Answer of a good Conscience toward God, by the Resurrection
of Christ, or his spiritual arising in or upon the Soul.

8. It is no uncommon Thing to hear the apostolic Age styled the Infancy of
Christianity; and so it was in Point of Time, and also in Respect to the
temporary Continuation of a few Exteriors, not immediately seen through, and
afterward retained for a Season, in Condescension to those new Believers, who
had been so much attached to symbolical Practices, they could not readily be
brought to disuse them. And, in our Day, many of the present Leaders and
Rulers, in diverse of the most numerous Churches professing the Christian Name,
seem to imagine, that though the Assistance of the Holy Ghost was necessary to
the Introduction, and Support of the Christian Religion in primitive Times, it
has no Need of it now. It is become so matured by Man's Wisdom and Learning,
which had no Share in its Origin, that it is fully capable to go alone. So that
now it is, in great Measure, become another Thing, and stands upon another
Foundation, than formerly. Though it still calls Christ its Head, and accounts
itself his Body, it receives no immediate Direction from him, nor feels the
Circulation of his Blood, which is the Life and Virtue of true Religion. Thus
deservedly incurring the Reproof of the Apostle implied in this Query, Having
begun in the Spirit, Gal. iii. 3.
are ye now made perfect by the Flesh? In Truth, it too evidently appears, in a
general View, the professed Christian Churches, instead of being in the
Maturity of Christianity, are greatly in the Decline from that State; or they
could not be so insensible, nor durst appear so opposite to the Life of
Religion, as to reject and decry the vital Part of it, and treat it as extinct,
unnecessary, or at least insensibly, to be now received; as too many of their
Leaders and Members do. Surely a Church in this Condition, is properly entitled
to that Address of the Spirit, to the degenerate Church of Sardis; I know thy
Works, Rev. iii. 1.
that thou have a Name, that thou live, and art dead. Yet, notwithstanding
this seems to be too generally the Case, and that the Religion of many high
Professors is little else but real Deism, covered with a superficial Kind of
Christianity, I hope, and verily believe, there are many living and sensible
Members of the Body of Christ in those Churches.

9. The Vitality and Glory of Christianity lies ^^^che clear Administration of
the Holy Spirit, without any Vail of legal or ritual Adumbrations.
School-learning is but an human Accomplishment, and though very useful as a
Servant, is no Part of Christianity. Neither the Acquirements of the College,
nor the Formalities of human Authority, can furnish that Humility which fitteth
for God's Teaching. Possessed of Arts and Languages, weak People are puffed up
with a Conceit of Superiority, which leads from Self-denial and the daily
Cross, into Pride and Self-sufficiency; and instead of waiting for, and
depending upon the Wisdom and Power of God, into a Confidence in the Wisdom of
this World, and a devotional Satisfaction in the Rote of external Forms and
Ordinances. Whereas those that worship God in the Spirit, Phil. iii. 3.
rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no Confidence in the Flesh. And why? Because
it is t^^^ Spirit that quickens; John vi. 63
the Flesh profits nothing.

Whosoever deny that the Holy Spirit, and its internal Operations, are now to
be sensibly experienced, only demonstrate their own Insensibility thereof. The
true People of God in all Ages, have declared their own undoubted Sense of
Divine Illumination and Help, and the Apostle, in Romans vii. and viii. before
cited, testifies he had a strong, clear, distinguishing Sense of the Holy
Spirit throughout its Operations. As it was then, it now is, and must remain to
be, so long as Men are upon Earth. The same Work, in due Measure, is absolutely
necessary to every one, and the like Sense of it proportionably clear and
certain to all who experience Regeneration. No Man can obtain Felicity out of
God's Kingdom, nor can any enter the Kingdom without being born of the Spirit,
neither is the Work of the New Birth wrought insensibly in any. Whatever Medium
incognitum, or unknown Means Men imagine, insensible Operation is not
Regeneration. It is a mere Deception. The Holy Ghost, whether it operate by
Words and Instruments, or without them, always comes in Power; a Power which
gives an undeniable Sense of it, perfectly distinct from, and above all other
Powers, and with a Perspicuity, at Times, as far exceeding all natural Lights,
as the radiant Sun does the faint Glimmer of the Glowworm.

This Holy Spirit of Divine Light, and Power of Life, is the great fundamental
Principle of the reproached Quakers, and the only true saving Principle for all
Mankind. It is Christ in Spirit, a Light to lighten the Gentiles, Luke ii. 3.
and God's Salvation to the Ends of the Earth; Acts xiii. 47.
who always became, Heb. v. 9.
and stands always ready to become, the Author of eternal Salvation to all them
that obey him.

CHAP. X.
1. S. Newton's Mistake, in asserting the Doctrine of the Quakers centers in
the reprobationary Scheme. 2. God first sets Man at Liberty, often revisits him
by the Spirit of Grace, seeks by all proper Means to prevail with him, without
violating the Liberty he affords him, till his continued Backsliding
demonstrates he will not turn from his evil Ways, and live. Then his Time of
Visitation ceases, and he is given up to his beloved Delusions. 3. God is not
the Author of Evil. Objections from Isaiah and Amos answered. 4. Men justified
in Evil-doing, if God be its Author. What Sin is. It is not the Effect, but the
Cause of his Displeasure, and to be placed to Man's Account. 5. The Cause of
Man's Salvation. The great Efficient of it. He operates toward it, both
immediately, and by the Use of proper Means, all by Grace, through the Faith it
communicates, which necessarily produces good Works, not to be attributed to
Man as meritorious. 6. What Calvinism teaches. 7, etc. The modern Fatalists
somewhat refine upon this, but unavoidably center in the same Absurdity and
Falsehood. This largely shown in Variety of Matter to the End of this Chapter.

1. HAVING endeavored plainly to show what the leading Principles of the
People called Quakers are, and that they are the genuine Doctrines of true
Christianity, I shall now proceed to take more particular Notice of diverse
material Parts of my Opponent's Treatise.

His insisting that the Quakers Doctrine centers in the reprobationary Scheme,
and that Barclay was as much a Predestinarian as John Calvin, is merely his own
Mistake. He grounds it not upon their Doctrine, but what he improperly imagines
to be so. Page 14, he says, Barclay and his Friend speak of no Divine
Assistance which enables Persons to be passive, that the Light within may
operate and save. Whereas, in my Observations, P. 82, I quote Barclay, saying,
(...) Man is wholly unable of himself to work with the Grace, neither can be
move one Step out of the natural Condition, until the Grace of God lay hold
upon him, so, it is possible to him to be passive, and not resist it, as it is
possible for him to resist it. That is, by the Power of Divine Grace laying
hold of, or influencing the Spirit of Man, it first becomes possible for him to
be passive, and not resist its Operation; which is the first Step Man takes in
the Way of Salvation. "Without me," John xv. 5
says our Savior, "ye can do nothing." I therefore added, Man cannot set one
single Step toward his Salvation, without the Assistance of the Grace of God,
as the first moving, and continually enabling Cause, both of the Will and the
Deed. So that though Passiveness is the Beginning of the Work, he is previously
disposed to it by Virture of the Holy Spirit. This manifests the Untruth of S.
N.'s Assertion, P. 212, and the Nullity of all his Reasonings from it, that the
Apologist will not suffer the Honor of the first Step of the Soul toward
Salvation to be ascribed to the Light or Grace within. On the contrary we
attribute the Whole of Man's Salvation to it, first and last, without at all
placing Man's Destruction to the Account of his Maker; which John Calvin
directly does.

What our Doctrine teaches is, 1. That Man has no Ability to save himself, is
not naturally in a State of equal Freedom to Good or Evil at his Pleasure, nor
is in Possession of that Faith which is necessary to his Salvation. 2. That the
Redeemer affords a Manifestation of his Spirit to the Soul of every Man, by
which, at Seasons, he checks his corrupt Inclinations, stops them in their
Career, and puts it in his Power to reflect upon his present Condition, and
become ^ssive to the Operation of this inward Principle. If he resist it not,
but stand in Submission, it takes further Hold of him, gives him so to believe
in it, as to suffer it in some Degree to unite with, abide in, and operate upon
him. In this Situation, he (...) Strength and Comfort spring up from it, which
increases his Faith and Trust therein, and gradually enables and engages him
to become active; that is, to join heartily in Concurrence with its Operations,
and to proceed from Faith to Faith, and from one Degree of Grace to another,
till he attain to know the New Birth of the Spirit, and to participate in
Degree of the glorious Light, Life, and Nature of the Heavenly Kingdom.

2. God has made Man a reasonable Creature, and therefore requires a willing
Obedience of him, in order to the high Reward of eternal Felicity; and if he
repeatedly visits all with the Reaches of his Grace, and continues Time after
Time to convict, persuade, and woo, as the Scriptures declare, that he may
prevail upon him to come to Repentance; does he not go as far as reasonable
Creatures can claim, without violating the rational Liberty he affords? Let Man
but yield Obedience to his Convictions, and see if he can charge his Creator
with Partiality, or hard Measure. It is the unprofitable and unprofiting
Servant that does this.

Education and Tradition do certainly prepossess, and give a Bias to the Mind
against every Doctrine different to those it has been taught; but the Divine
Light, at Times, darts in upon the Soul unawares, as quick as Lightning,
penetrates through all its Darkness and every false Color, disturbs it in its
polluted Rests, and carnal Gratifications, shows its Bondage under them, and
inspires the secret Wish and heaving Sigh to be delivered, attended with some
Degree of Resolution against them. This being the opening of Divine Light upon
the Mind, is called the Day of God's Visitation, the Time of Grace unto Man;
wherein Life and Death are distinguished in him, and Liberty is not only given
him to choose Life, which he could not do before, but also a suitable Measure
of Ability to love and cleave to the Grace he is visited with, and thereby to
come to Repentance, Tit. ii. 11.
and be saved. For this Grace is the Spirit of the Savior, and brings the
Power of Salvation in it.

These merciful Visitations of Divine Grace are often repeated, by Night as
well as by Day. "God," Job xxxiii. 14, etc.
says inspired Elihu, speaks once, yea twice, yet Man perc^veth it not, in a
Dream, in a Vision of the Night, when deep Sleep falls upon Man in
Slumberings upon the Bed. Then he opens the Ears of Men, and seals their
Instruction; that he may withdraw Man from his Purpose and hide Pride from Man.
He then proceeds to show, how he operates upon the submissive Soul, in the Work
of Repentance and Mo^tification, and what shall be its Issue. Afterward he
recapitulates the Whole in these comprehensive Terms. Job xxxiii. 27, etc.
He looks upon Men, and if any say, I have finned, and perverted that which
was right, and it profited me not; he will deliver his Soul from going into the
Pit, and his Life shall see the Light. Lo, all these Things works God
oftentimes with Man, to bring back his Soul from the Pit to be enlightened with
the Light of the Living.

The great FATHER OF MERCIES, is pleased to continue his gracious Visitations
from on high to backsliding Men, till they are become so determined in
Wickedness, and so habitually united to its Servitude, that like the Servants
in Exodus xxi. 5, 6. they will not be freed from it. Then Night comes upon
them, the Day of their Visitation ceases for God will not always strive with
those, prove. xxix 1.
who have been long and often reproved, and still harden their Necks, to no
Purpose; but after long Forbearance he withdraws the Reaches of his merciful
L^ving-kindness, and suffers them to incur that dreadful Sentence, Rev. xxii.
11.
He that is unjust, let him be unjust still; and he that is filthy, let him be
filthy, still.

When Persons are thus judicially hardened, and given up to their own Hearts
Lusts, and beloved Delusions, and left in a State of Insensibility of the
Divine Principle, they may blindly mistake it for Peace and Security. To such,
Conscience becomes, for the present, obscured, and as a Book shut up, wherein
they cannot read; but in the Day of the righteous Retribution of the great
Judge of Quick and Dead, this hidden Volume will again be unfolded, by him who
opens, and none can shut, and a just Distribution made to every one according
to what is written therein (for it will prove either a Book of Life or of Death
to every Man) to them who, by patient Continuance in well-doing, have sought
the Glory of God, their own Salvation, and the Good of others, Immortality and
eternal Life; but to those who have continued in Disobedience and Rebellion
against God, Tribulation and Anguish both inexpressible and interminable.

3. Can any reasonable Creature think it possible, that the same Spirit and
Power of Goodness which condescended to take our low Nature upon him, suffer
in, and sacrifice that Nature whilst connected with it, 1 John. ii. 2.
a Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World, could ever intentionally
consign the Majority, or any Part of the same World, to unavoidable or
unconditional Misery? It appears from his Attributes of Truth, Equity, Wisdom,
Mercy, and Goodness, impossible that he should either actually oblige any of
his Creatures to sin, that they might be miserable; or, when he has created
them, to desert them to Sin and Misery, by entirely withholding from them that
which is necessary to their Help and Preservation. We therefore rationally
conclude, that he does not only set Good and Evil before Man in their just
Distinctions, but at the same Time, enables him to choose which he will follow;
and further, that he stirs up and assists Man to desire after true Felicity,
and as he abides in this Desire, he empowers him to strive, press, and wrestle
effectually for Deliverance and Preservation.

The primary Motions of Volition in the Mind being very nice and delicate, are
not easy, if possible, for Men to form a precise Idea of without the Light of
God's Spirit; whence some have taken Occasion to charge the different
Dispositions of Men toward the Visitations of Divine Grace, to God's Account,
by which they render him the primary Author of Evil, who by the special
Peculiarity of his Essence, is too unchangeably perfect in all his Attributes,
ever to warp from perfect Rectitude. But is it not absurd to suppose, that any
intelligent Being can voluntarily produce what is contrary to its Nature;
especially an Omnipotent Existence, whose Power must be irresistible by all
Objects and Occurrences? Is not Sin the Transgression of God's Will, and Vice
contrary to his Nature? How then could these be produced by an Act of his Will,
or be the genuine Fruit of his Power, either mediately or immediately? Can a
right Understanding lead any Man to think, that the Will of God is possible at
any Time to be contrary to his Nature?

From Purity, Goodness, and Virtue, no Impurity, Vice, or Evil could naturally
arise. But that Text has been objected, Luke xvii 1.
It is impossible but that Offenses will come. True; but whence come they? Not
from God, but from that Root of Corruption, which has entered and overspread
the World. Whilst this corrupt Root remains, they will naturally spring from
it; and the same Text pronounces, "Woe unto him through whom they come." But God
says, "I create Evil." Isa. xlv. 7.
And the Prophet says, Shall there be Evil in a City, Amos iii 6.
and the Lord has not done it? Moral Evil is not here intended, but the
natural Evil of Pain and Distress, through Hostility, Sickness, Famine, etc.
which are the Judgments of God upon Men for Disobedience, and the Commission of
moral Evil.

4. To say, that God originally so constituted and ordered Things, that Evil
must necessarily ensue in Consequence of such Constitution, is to treat him
both as the designing and potential Author of all Evil. Wherein then are the
wickedest Creatures, whether angelical or human, to blame? If they cannot be
otherwise than they are, nor act otherwise than they do; in Point of Equity,
all their Wickedness is justified by the Necessity they are originally
subjected to by their Creator; whom this Doctrine renders the real Author of
it, either immediately or remotely. If God himself laid the Groundwork of all
Evil, he must be the Author of all that follows by necessary Consequence upon
it.

According to my Apprehension, Sin consists in the Creatures's preferring the
Indulgence of its depraved Nature, to the Obedience of Divine Grace; which
Indulgence leads it to the Abuse of that Grace, and to think, speak and act
against the manifested Will of its Creator. Neither the Origin, nor Continuance
of Sin in the World, can be the Fruit of God's Will; for it always brings his
Displeasure upon the Creature. It is not the Effect, but the Cause of his
Displeasure. A Being perfectly Holy, Just, and Good, can neither do Evil, nor
Delight in seeing his Creatures do it. It is contrary to his Nature, therefore
against his Will, and what he could not suffer to originate without offering
Means to prevent it, and showing his Displeasure with it; nor can he
consistently be conceived to extend personal Approbation or Aversion to any,
exclusive of the State of the Parties respecting Good and Evil.

That some obey, and others refuse Obedience to the Manifestations of Divine
Grace, is certainly true; and we believe, the Cause of this Difference is not
of God, but entirely owing to the Man. Let him that doubts it, inquire in his
own Conscience. The faithful witness there, by its Condemnations for Evil, will
plainly show him, that the Fault is his own. What Man is there upon Earth
without these compunctive Strokes? Who has not, also, felt at Times,
Inclinations and Dispositions excited in him toward Virtue and a good Life;
and who knows not, that when he followed them, he found Peace in his Obedience;
and when he turned from this salutary Pursuit to one of a contrary Nature, he
incurred Trouble and Condemnation? Can a reasonable Creature need further
Proofs, that both those convicting Reprehensions and Comforts, are the internal
immediate Adjudications of a just, good, powerful, omni-present,
all-intelligent Principle? And what is this but God; and for what End does he
thus attend every Soul and Conscience, but that all may come to Repentance, and
experience Salvation?

5. The first moving, true, and proper Cause of Man's Salvation, is the
Goodness and Love of God to him. The essential Means by which he effects it, is
the Operation of his own Holy Spirit on the Soul of Man, often immediately, and
sometimes instrumentally, by making use of exterior and incidental Things, and
working by them as secondary Means; such as Preaching, reading the Scriptures,
and other good Books, pious Conversation, Worship, Mercies, Distresses, etc.
After this Manner it pleases Divine Wisdom to exercise the Body in the Service
of the Soul, whereby both are bettered diverse Ways. It is God by his Holy
Spirit, who works all Good in Man, both as to the Will and the Deed. It is by
Grace we are saved, through Faith; or in the Way of Faith. That Faith which
works by the Love of God to the Purifying of the Heart, and the Production of
good Works. These are the genuine Fruits of it, and inseparable from it:
Therefore without Works we cannot be saved. Yet it is not by the Works that we
are saved, as the Cause of Salvation to us, but by Grace, through the Root of
them, the Faith, by which we believe in God, open to, and receive him, cleave
to him, trust in him, and so lay hold of eternal Life. This Faith is not our
Faculty, but the Gift of God to us. It comes by Grace, the free Grace of God,
who is not willing that any should perish, 2 Pet. iii 9.
but that all should come to Repentance. He whose Works are Evil, has not this
saving Faith, believe what Propositions he will; for where it is, it
necessarily produces them. This Root is never without its Fruits. Jam. ii. 18
Show me thy Faith without thy Works, and I will show thee my Faith by my
Works, says the Apostle James. Yet these Works do not render us meritorious of
Salvation, for they are not to be attributed to us, but wholly to him who
through his Grace, has brought us into this blessed State of living Faith
wherein they are produced. Ephesians. ii. 8, 9, 10.
For by Grace are ye saved, through Faith, and that not of yourselves. It is
the Gift of God. Not of Works, lest any Man should boast: For we are his
Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, which God has before
ordained, that we should walk in them.

6. The Reprobationary Scheme demonstrates, to what a Pitch of Absurdity, the
Minds even of sensible and pious Men may be carried, when they follow their own
cloudy Reasonings instead of the Illuminations of the Holy Spirit. Chap. 3.
Genesis 1 Inst. C. 18. S. 1. Lib. de Praed. Lib. de Prove. Lib. de Praed. De
Eccaut. Q. 5. Lib. de Provid. C. 3. Resp. ad Verst. Part 1. P. 120.
Calvin asserts that, by the Ordination and Will of God Adam fell. God would
have Man to fall -- and that the highest or remote Cause of hardening is the
Will of God. Beza says, God has predestined not only unto Damnation, but
also unto the Causes of it, whomsoever he saw meet. Zanchius, that God is the
first Cause of Obduration. Zuinglius, that God moves the Robber to kill. He
kills, God forcing him thereunto. But thou will say, he is forced to Sin; I
permit truly that he is forced. Piscator, that reprobate Persons are absolutely
ordained to this twofold End; to undergo everlasting Punishment, and
necessarily to sin, and therefore to sin, that they may be justly punished. It
is a Mystery to me, how the poor Reprobates can be justly punished, for Actions
they are Divinely obliged to commit; or how they can sin by necessarily doing
the Will of God.

7. Our modern Writers of this Class, refine a little from the Barbarism of
their Predecessors in Expression, but their Refinements ultimately center in
the like Accusation of their Creator. S. Newton often edges about it, yet
appears very shy of speaking his Sentiments clearly upon this Point; but I
presume we have them in his favorite Author, Jonathan Edwards, M. A. whom he
so particularly recommends in his Letter, Page 54. This Author, in his careful
and strict Inquiry into the modern prevailing Notions of that Freedom of Will,
etc. has these Expressions. P. 357.8.
If by the Author of Sin be meant the Sinner, the Agent, or Actor of Sin, or
the Doer of a wicked Thing; so it would be a Reproach and Blasphemy to suppose
God to be the Author of Sin. -- But if by the Author of Sin is meant the
Permitter, or not a Hinderer of Sin; and at the same Time, a Disposer of the
State of Events in such a Manner, for wise, holy, and most excellent Ends and
Purposes, that Sin, if it be permitted, or not hindered, will most certainly
and infallibly follow: I say, if this be all that is meant by the Author of
Sin, I don't deny that God is the Author of Sin." -- "It is no Reproach for the
Most High to be thus the Author of Sin. This is not to be the Actor of Sin, but
on the contrary, of Holiness. What God does herein is Holy, and a glorious
Exercise of the Infinite Excellency of his Nature." -- "That it is most
certainly so, that God is in such a Manner the Disposer and Orderer of Sin, is
evident, if any Credit is to be given to Scripture; as well as it is impossible
in the Nature of Things to be otherwise.

I think I have already shown, in the preceding Part of this Discourse, that it
is not only possible, but most probable to be otherwise; and now shall proceed
to show, it is impossible to be according to this Author's Assertion.

8. If God disposes the State of Events in such a Manner, that Sin will most
certainly follow, and that he also permits, or does not hinder it, he must be
the sole Author of Sin himself, and those who are called the Actors, or
Committers of Evil, are only Subjects, by whom he effects it: They are nothing
more, in the Case, than the necessitated Instruments of Evil. If he has so
ordered the Nature and Concerns of his rational Creation, that they must most
certainly and infallibly sin, he must be the Cause of Sin, and not they; and it
cannot be righteous in him to charge the Blame of what must infallibly follow,
from his own Determination and Disposal, upon those to whom he has rendered it
unavoidable.

If the Almighty, from the Beginning, so ordered his Creation, that Evil must
necessarily ensue in it, it must be designed by him, or he would not have so
ordered it, and every supposed Transgressor necessarily acts according to the
Divine Will, in every Sin he commits, and the Divine Being takes Pleasure first
in his Sin, and next in his eternal Misery; for he is certainly pleased when
his Will is done. What worse can be said of the worst of Beings, than this
Doctrine implies of the Best.

If Man be allowed no Choice, he can incur no Guilt. He must at some Time be at
Liberty, or he can never do amiss. If he do only what he is obliged to do, by a
Constitution of Things fixed by his Creator, he cannot sin against him; for
what he obliges him to do, he wills him to do, and it can be no Transgression
against him to do his Will; because to sin, is to offend him, and to offend
him, is to act contrary to his Will. Whatever a Man does from the Necessity of
his Nature, let that Necessity be the Consequence of the Lapse of his first
Parents, or not, if a Remedy be not in his Power, it is the same Thing to him.
It was not himself that subjected himself to such a faulty or defective Nature;
therefore he cannot, in Equity, be condemned for what he could no Way help, or
avoid. To assert, that a Person may be justly punished for being what he is
obliged to be, or doing what he is inevitably forced to do by his Maker, may
pass upon blind inconsiderate People for Mystery; but to others it must appear
a manifest Absurdity, and a most daring one, when attributed to the eternal
Fountain of all Truth and Justice, a Reproach to him, and Blasphemy against him.

9. It is impossible God should commit any Act of Sin, because it is against
his Nature, and consequently impossible he should will it. Sin is the
Transgression of his Will, and if he could neither will nor act it, he cannot
be any Way the Author of it. Barely suffering it to arise, is not causing it to
be. All that can be allowed is, that by forming reasonable Creatures, and
constituting them in a State of rational Freedom, he afforded them the
Opportunity of making their Duty their Choice; but never willed them to abuse
it, by lapsing from the Grace he favored them with for their Preservation,
dividing their Wills from his Will, and counteracting his salutary Laws; to
whom they owed their Being, and on whom they must absolutely depend for all the
Good they ever could enjoy. And notwithstanding he foresaw they might be
prevailed on to make a wrong Use of their Liberty, he certainly intended to
favor them with Means amply sufficient for their Recovery and Restoration.
Though he forbore forcibly to hinder them from falling into Iniquity, he did
all that could be done to prevent it in rational Creatures. He forewarned them
against it, showed them the dreadful Consequence of it, and unquestionably
armed them with Power, by his Spirit, to withstand all Temptation to it, had
they kept under it. He never could so permit, as to license their Departure
from their reasonable Duty, and true Interest. By the Power and Goodness
dispensed to Man, he might have stood without Sin; and now that he has fallen
into it, by a Renewal of the same Power and Goodness still afforded him, he may
be recovered from it, and brought to Felicity. His Redeemer both offers and
assists him; yet he backslides, and refuses to abide under the Guidance of his
great Benefactor. Man's Destruction therefore, Hos. xiii. 9.
is of himself, and in the Lord alone is his Help.

10. We are told, The Will is always determined by the strongest Motive. Has
the Will no Liberty then, at any Time? Is it always so forcibly determined, in
all its Motions, by Circumstances and Motives successively arising upon it,
from the original Constitution of Things, that every Man is necessarily obliged
to think, speak, and act just as he does? No, it is answered, In temporal
Matters the Mind has a Liberty of Choice. Why not in Spirituals as well as
Temporals? How are the Motives and Circumstances which determine the Will in
temporal Concerns, more in its Power than those that determine it in spiritual
ones; and how do we know it to be so? Was this really the Case, our inevitable
Acts would certainly render us no proper Subjects of Reward and Punishment; of
Come, ye Blessed, or Go, ye Cursed. We must be equally unentitled to
Approbation and Censure.

Those who allege, that Motives arise from the Circumstances we are placed in,
and the Occurrences we meet with, which necessarily oblige us to think, speak,
and act as they impress our Minds, do not appear sufficiently to consider, that
there is a Supreme All-powerful Controller of Circumstances and Events, who
can, and unquestionably does, in due Season, by his potential Influence upon
the Mind of Man, counterbalance every other Influence. Can we think that he
places Good and Evil, Life and Death before Men, as the Sacred Records
testify, and calls them repeatedly to choose Life and Good, and yet that he
does not enable them so to do? Every Divine Precept, every Exhortation, every
Command, every Commination, implies a Liberty afforded to the Subject, to
comply or refuse; to obey, or disobey.

11. In the Supposition before us, the Will of Man is effectually deprived of
all Freedom in his main Concern. For it is the same Thing to the Sufferer,
whether the superior Power subject him under this irresistible Fatality, by an
immediate and unalterable Decree, or by the Means of Motives and Inducements,
so powerfully suited to his natural Inclinations and Passions, that he must
necessarily be carried away with them. The Man is equally in Bondage either
Way. To tell him, that his Will is free, because he does as he pleases when he
acts agreeable to those Motives, and the Dispositions they necessarily excite,
or enlarge, whilst at the same Time, they are unavoidable by him, and so
irresstibly influential to his corrupt Inclinations, that they are rendered
eagerly concurrent with them; to argue in this Case, that because the Party
pursues the Gratification of his present Desires, he acts upon a Principle of
Freedom, is to assert an evident Falsehood. For, the Man is first deceived,
overpowered, and so unwittingly captivated, that he cannot avoid willing the
Evil he is ensnared into; and though he wills it, it is because his Will is not
at Liberty, but previously deceived and captivated, though he sees not how, and
instead of being a moral Agent, is merely the Instrument of an unseen superior
Power, who artfully obliges him to an evil Course, and to the Infelicity
consequent upon it.

The Nature of Liberty supposes no absolute Necessity, but such a Freedom as
may admit of Choice, without a pre-determining Power obliging one Way only.
It Is true, the Powers of Men, as well as those of all other Creatures, are
necessarily limited to their proper Sphere. No Creature can exceed the Bounds
of its proper Element, yet it can act with Freedom therein, as a Bird in the
Air, or a Fish in the Water; so Man, though unable to stretch beyond the
Compass of Humanity, is enabled to act at Liberty within it; and I conceive, a
wise and good Being, though Omnipotent, would not put any Restraint or Force
upon him there, but for his Good. It is barbarous to suppose, he would restrain
him from Good in order to his Hurt. Joh xxxiv. 10, 11, 23.
Far be it from God, that he should do Wickedness; and from the Almighty, that
he should commit Iniquity. For the Work of a Man shall he render unto him, and
cause every Man to find according to his Ways. -- For he will not lay upon Man
more than Right; that he should enter into Judgment with God.

12. I cannot perceive any Ground for a destructive Partiality in Almighty
Wisdom, and perfect Equity. Can he who prefers Mercy to Sacrifice, exalt
Cruelty above Mercy? To suppose, that the Supreme Excellence should create all
the Millions of Mankind of one Nature, and for eternal Duration, and that he
should, either immediately or remotely, necessitate a Minority of them to
everlasting Happiness, and at the same Time determine to give the major Part no
other Opportunity, but to be inevitably and ete^^^lly miserable; is to suppos,
that there is more Cruelty than Goodness, more Rigor than Wisdom, and more
Inequality than Mercy in the Divine Nature. I therefore must conclude, that the
Supposition is irrational, unjust, and grossly injurious to the Divine
Character.

It is to be understood, that he who is supposed to act in this contrary
Manner, toward his Creatures in the same State and Nature, does it from one
and the same Nature in himself; or that he is differently determined toward
them, from two different Natures of contrary Dispositions in himself? I am
utterly unable to conceive how opposite Wills can subsist in the same Nature,
and how two contrary Natures can exist in a Being of perfect and immutable
Simplicity and Purity; or that such contrary Procedures concerning his rational
Creatures, can arise from Unity, Equity, and Goodness, in the utmost
Perfection? But no Difficulty attends the Supposition, that the same Nature
should operate to different Effects upon Subjects in different Conditions. It
is evident to every Man's Observation, that the most glorious inanimate Object
of Creation, the Sun, by its Beams will soften Pitch and harden Clay; but these
contrary Effects arise not from different Natures in its own Rays, but are
different Effects of the same Beams, occasioned by the contrary Dispositions of
the Pitch and Clay to receive them. So, I apprehend, the Holy Spirit operates
differently on different Persons, by Reason of their different States and
Dispositions to receive its Influences.

It is not a little affecting, to behold Allegations so injurious to the great
Dispenser of all Good, set forth with Subtilty of Sentiment, and Elegance of
Language, which can hardly fail to operate to the Deception and Hurt of those
who embrace and allow them a Place in their Minds. To assert, that God either
originally, or afterward, disposed the Course of Things, and State of Events
in such a Manner, that Sin must certainly and infallibly follow, is to render
him the intentional and primary Author of all the Evil that ensues. For he that
raises a Building, causes it to be filled with Combustibles, and sets Fire to
it by a Fuze, or a Train of Powder of the greatest Extent, which must
infallibly burn it down, is as certainly the Destroyer of the Edifice, as if he
fired it immediately without such Means.

13. It has been alleged, If God had not given Man Liberty, he could not have
abused it. Very true. If the Artificer had not made, nor the Shopkeeper
furnished the Suicide with the Knife he cut his Throat with, he could not have
misused it; but is he who made or sold it him, for better Purposes, entitled to
any Part of his Guilt? Without Liberty Man could not have sinned, and without
the Knife the Suicide could not have made such a self-injurious Use of it; yet
it is not the Knife, nor those who furnished it; neither is it the Liberty, nor
he who afforded it; but the ill-conceived Disposition of the Perpetrator from
whence the Default arises, and to which it is in Justice, wholly to be imputed.

14. All the Souls that God has made, are equally his; and he whose Mercies are
over all his Works, overlooks none of his Creatures in the Distribution of his
Mercies. He withholds his Talents from none, but dispenses them in different
Portions to different Persons; that social Communication and Connection may be
preserved amongst us in this Life. To One he gives five Talents; to a Second,
two; to a Third; one; but to every one a Degree of Divine Manifestation
sufficient, if believed in and obeyed, to operate to his Salvation. He justly
requires a Profiting answerable to the Measure he affords; and as he perfectly
knows to what Degree of Improvement each might have attained, he will finally
judge all according to their Increase, their Negligence, or their Rejection of
the Talent received.

15. The rational immortal Soul, is principally and essentially the Man. This,
as I have already shown, is the immediate Creation of God, and descended not
from Adam and Eve, nor passes from Parents to Children, like the mortal Body;
and seeing it never was in them, it never sinned in them. The Doctrine of
Preterition therefore, which supposes, that all sinned when Adam transgressed,
and deserve Condemnation for the Sin he committed, and thence concludes, that
God does justly withold his saving Grace from the Majority of Mankind; is a
Conclusion drawn from unirue Premises, and consequently a false Doctrine. First
to create the rational Soul, and then to forsake it, is not Preterition, but
Dereliction. And this Doctrine is not only false, but dangerous. For when some
feel the comfortable Touches of Divine Visitation, instead of humbling
themselves under it, that the Work of Regeneration may go forward, this Opinion
leads them to imagine it to be a Mark of their Election, and perhaps to add
other Marks to themselves from mistaken Scriptures; by which they increase
their natural Pride, Self-conceit, and Presumption, which defeat the good
Intention of God's Grace toward them. Others of a melancholy Turn, when
convicted and distressed in their Minds for Sin, are led by this Opinion, to
think it a Mark of personal Reprobation, and thence into Despondence, with all
its dismal Consequences. Thus, what the merciful Creator intends for Men's
Benefit, they turn to their own great Disadvantage.

16. Whatever Doctrine contradicts the evident Sense of those clear and express
Portions of the Sacred Record, which, by Divine Commission, professedly and
directly treat upon this Point, such Doctrine must be false, and ought to be
rejected. It answers no good Purpose to increase Disputation about Things
hidden, or Texts obscure and ambiguous; but this is certain, and certainly to
be relied upon, that where the Almighty plainly declares his Will, respecting
his Creatures, he who cannot be mistaken, is surely to be credited in
Preference to the Contra-positions of mistaken Men, who presume to interpret
his Words so as to contradict his most clear, and most solemn Asseverations.

Through a Misapprehension of the second Commandment, the People of Israel, in
Ezekiel's Time, had espoused this reprobationary Notion, that the Children were
punished for the Sin of their Parents, so that it was become a Maxim among
them, The Fathers have eaten sour Grapes, and the Childrens Teeth are set on
Edge. The Prophet therefore, was especially commissioned to declare God's
immutable Will and Determination, in Opposition thereto. Ezekiel. xviii Verse 2 to
5.
As I live, says the Lord God, ye shall not have Occasion any more to use this
Proverb in Israel. Behold, all Souls are mine, as the Soul of the Father, so
also the Soul of the Son is mine: The Soul that sins, Verse 20.
it shall die. The Son shall not bear the Iniquity of the Father, neither shall
the Father bear the Iniquity of the Son; the Righteousness of the Righteous
shall be upon him, and the Wickedness of the Wicked shall be upon him. Verse. 25
to 29.
-- Yet ye say, the Way of the Lord is not equal. Hear now, O House of Israel!
Is not my Way equal? Are not your Ways unequal? Where a righteous Man turns
away from his Righteousness, and commits Iniquity, and dies in them, for
his Iniquity that he has done, shall he die. Again, when the wicked Man
turns away from his Wickedness that he has committed, and does that which is
lawful and right, he shall save his Soul alive. Because he considers, and
turns away from his Transgressions that he has committed, he shall surely
live, he shall not die. Verse 30.
-- I will judge you, O House of Israel, every one according to his Ways, says
the Lord God. Repent, and turn yourselves from all your Transgressions so
Iniquity shall not be your Ruin. The Prophet repeats more to the like Purpose,
both in this Chapter, Chap. xxxiii. 11.
and in the 33d. As I live, says the Lord God, I have no Pleasure in the Death
of the Wicked, but that the Wicked turn from his Way and live. Turn ye, turn ye
from your evil Ways; for why will ye die, O House of Israel? Verse 17, 18, 19.
-- Yet the Children of thy People say, the Way of the Lord is not equal; but
as for them, their Way is not equal. When the Righteous turns from his
Righteousness, and commits Iniquity, he shall even die thereby. But if the
Wicked turn from his Wickedness, and do that which is lawful and right; he
shall live thereby.

It is manifest, the Death denounced in these Scriptures, is not the common
Death of the Body; for in that Respect, one Event happens to the Righteous
and the Wicked, but that State of everlasting Infelicity peculiar to those who
go out of Time into Eternity, without Repentance and Regeneration.

From all these express Declarations, it evidently appears, Lam iii 33.
that the Almighty does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of Men;
that he is not willing that any should perish, 2 Pet. iii. 9.
but that all should come to Repentance. These are all plain Manifestations of
the Mind of God professedly on the Point, and to all who intend not to deny his
Uprightness and Veracity they ought to be decisive. The Sins of Men are placed
to the Account of their own Will, and not to the Will of God, in that pathetic
Expostulation, Why will ye die? And indeed, it is impossible he should will
that which is a Transgression of his Will. It is clear, he does all that can be
done by fair Means to prevent it. By that pressing Repetition, Turn ye, turn ye
from your evil Ways, it is manifest, he puts it in the Power of Men to turn
from them. Who then can justify their Perverseness, by any Way charging their
Sin, either immediately or remotely to his Account?

Men are not destroyed through any Malevolence in their Creator toward them;
but are saved by his Grace, which he dispenses to all from that unparalleled
Benevolence, which arises purely from his Infinite Goodness. Sinful man has
nothing to offer, God therefore, will have Mercy, because he will have Mercy;
because he is full of Mercy, he will dispense it to his helpless and unworthy
Creatures. "I," Isa. xliii. 25.
says he to the repenting Sinner, even I am he that blotteth out thy
Transgressions, for mine own Sake, and will not remember thy Sins.

17. Detachments of various Texts and Portions of Scripture, though indirect to
the Subject, and alluding to different Considerations, have been pressed, and
martialled under diverse Colors, to fix a cruel Partiality on our common
Creator and Benefactor. Edwards, P. 358, etc
We are told, that he ordered the Obstinacy of Pharaoh, the Sin and Folly of
Sihon, and the Kings of Canaan, the treacherous Rebellion of Zedekiah against
the King of Babylon, the Rapine and Ravages of Nebuchadnezzar, etc. But
properly considered, this was ordering Punishment for Sin, not Sin for
Punishment. He hardens none till they have hardened themselves past all
Probability of Repentance, and then he leaves them to the Mis-rule of their own
beloved Lusts and Vices; and what are treated as unrighteous Ravages, though
really such in the Committers of them, are, respecting the Almighty, the
righteous Execution of his Justice against those who have filled up their
Measure of Iniquity, and abused his gracious Goodness and long Forbearance
toward them, till he sees fit no longer to continue it to them. Thus he
punishes the settled Wickedness of some, by the Wickedness of their Enemies,
which he permits to be turned upon them; and afterward proceeds in like Manner
with their Chastisers, when they also have filled up their Measure.

I shall omit at present to proceed further with the Scriptures alleged against
the universal Extension of Divine Goodness to the Souls of Men, and acknowledge
my Inability to conceive, what wise, holy, and most excellent Ends and Purposes
could be answered, by the Almighty's disposing the State of Events in such a
Manner, that Sin will most certainly and infallibly follow, and eternal Misery
to innumerable Multitudes of his Creatures in Consequence; and also what Glory
can accrue to a Being infinite in Wisdom, Power and Goodness, from his
continually creating immortal and reasonable Creatures, with no better
Intention toward them but that most barbarous one of irredeemable Infelicity.
I am also at a Loss to discover, what Comfort can arise to an humane, virtuous
and charitable Mind from such a cruel Consideration. Those Hearts must be very
unfeeling for others, and their Conceit in their own Favor very strong, who,
fancying to themselves a personal Election, can pride and console themselves in
their own imagined Security, and the inequitable Destruction of the major Part
of their Species. Misled Men, like the unprofitable Servant, may imagine such
unjust Severity in the unchangeable Perfection of Equity, but those who have
the Love of God shed abroad in their Hearts, by the Holy Ghost, find it to flow
freely toward all Mankind without Exception, and to engage them to wish the
Salvation of all. This is a stronger Proof to them of the Universality of God's
good Will to Men, than all the sophistical Reasonings of those who remain
insensible of it, to the contrary.

18. Before I leave this Subject, let me observe, that my Opponent, P. 198,
after his usual Manner of making Meanings for me, will have it, that according
to some of my Expressions; Mankind are by Nature, in such a State, that if God
does not afford them sufficient Means of Salvation, he is unjust; surely then,
there can be no Grace in his giving them these, for, whatsoever he is bound in
Justice and Equity to bestow, cannot be Grace. This is an Observation which
carries its own Evidence with it.

Every Observation carries its own Evidence with it, but it may not be a true
Evidence. What I assert is, that as it would be an Act of Injustice and
Cruelty, to create rational and sensible Souls, with no better Purpose toward
them, than to render them inexpressibly and eternally miserable, by continually
supporting them in Being, and as continually withholding that from them
without which they never can be relieved; so it is impossible for God, who is
most essentially and immutably Justice and Goodness itself, to act otherwise by
his Creatures than according to Justice and Goodness and therefore, that he
certainly does not withhold, but affords his Creatures the Means necessary to
their Felicity. I believe his Mercies are over all, and to all, with a just and
gracious Intent toward them; and that the universal Redeemer purchased Gifts
for those who prove rebellious, as well as others, and that all are visited
with a Manifestation of his Spirit, that they may profit by it; and though they
do lapse from the visiting Power, and often lose the disposing Assistances
assorded them, he still follows them, Time after Time, in long Forbearance, and
often revisits them, of his freely-abounding Grace and Mercy, that they may be
prevailed upon to come to Repentance and be saved. Hence, according to common
Phraseology, we style his universal primary Assistance an Act of Equity, and
his numerous Repetitions thereof Acts of Goodness; yet neither is the First
without Grace and Mercy, nor are the Latter void of Equity. As to that of God's
being bound in Justice and Equity, I do not see the Propriety of that Language.
I apprehend, he is not bound by any Thing, but that he always acts in the
perfect Freedom of his own Nature; which is that of Equity, Truth and Goodness.
For, strictly speaking, I think it less proper to say, that he has what we mean
by these Terms, than that he is what we intend by them; and as his Essence can
never admit of the least Imperfection, it is impossible he should ever be, or
act otherwise. It is therefore by a strained and unjust Inuendo, that S. N.
would infer from my Words, that irreverent upbraiding Kind of Expression, If
God does not afford them sufficient Means of Salvation, he is unjust. Should I
follow his Manner of Reasoning, I might as properly infer, that he holds Grace
and Justice as incompatible with each other, and cannot possibly concur in the
same Act; which, I think, he will hardly affirm. Does not he, as well as I,
assert that God's Acts are according to Justice? Will he allow me to say, that
he therefore denies there is either Grace or Mercy in them? Should I put such
an Abuse upon his Expressions, he would unquestionably bestow the Severity of
his Justice upon me; which I acknowledge he has often done with great Freedom,
without any just Merit on my Part.

19. We read Isaiah lv. 8, 9. My Thoughts are not your Thoughts, neither are
your Ways my Ways, says the Lord; for as the Heavens are higher than the
Earth, so are my Ways than your Ways, and my Thoughts than your Thoughts. And
Chap. xl. 28, the Prophet says, There is no searching of his Understanding.
Yet our Christian-Fatalists appear to think themselves wise enough to discover,
the very precise Mode and Manner of God's Prescience, and because they can see
but one Way how Omniscience should foreknow, they seem to conclude, there can
be no other in the unlimited Expanse of Infinite Ability. But, Romans xi. 34.
who has known the Mind of the Lord, or who has been his Counselor. To whom
has he revealed those unsearchable, and incomprehensible Secrets of the Divine
Essence which belong to himself only? A due Degree of Modesty would teach us,
there is something in the Mode and Manner of Infinite Comprehension, as much
beyond the Reach of our limited Capacities, as the Extent of Omniscience
itself; and Attempts to unvail inscrutable Mysteries, are more evident
Demonstrations of human Presumption and Folly, than of Wisdom and Piety. Are
those Men sure, there is no Way possible for God to know, but what is open to
the Perception of their imperfect Modicum of Reason? The Arguments they ground
upon this imaginary Foundation, are sufficient to impeach their Basis; for they
carry an evident Face of Falsehood. They ultimately and unavoidably render the
undeniable Source of all Good, and Center of all Perfection, the real and
intentional Author of all Imperfection, Vice and Wickedness, and all the Misery
consequent thereupon; which it is impossible for unchangeable Truth and
Goodness to be. "Will thou," says he, Jeb xl. 8.
disannul my Judgment? Will thou condemn me, that thou may be righteous? --
"God forbid," says the Apostle, yea, Romans iii. 4
let God be true, but every Man a Liar.

From the Certainty of the Premises the Certainty of the Conclusion arises.
From uncertain Premises no certain Conclusion can be drawn. There is something
in the Divine Prescience which always has been, and is ever like to remain an
impenetrable Secret to human Understanding. What no Man knows, no Man can
properly argue from. We know the Divine Being is but one Essence, perfectly
pure and simple. One eternal, immutable, central Power, making and supporting
all other Beings, and operating variously according to the Subjects, and the
State of the Subjects of its Operation; but never contrarily toward Subjects
in the same Condition. As all Souls are equally his immediate Creation, no just
Reason can be advanced why he, who is righteous in all his Ways, Psalm. cxlv. 17.
and holy (or merciful) in all his Works, should deal so unequally with them,
as to predetermine some to eternal Happiness, and others to inevitable Misery.
Mere Will and Pleasure, implies an unaccountable Severity, though under the Guise
of Sovereignty. The Condemnation of Men, according to our Savior, is neither
the Fruit of God's previous Decree, nor his Preterition; for, John iii. 19.
this is the Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, but Men loved
Darkness rather than Light, because their Deeds were evil.

CHAP. XI.
1. The Quakers cleared of the Charge of their holding Anti-scriptural
Principles. 2. S. Newton's reiterated Pretense to try their Doctrine by Right
Reason, and the true Sense of Scripture, a presumptuous Vanity. The Scripture
not clearly and fully understood without the Illumination of the Spirit that
gave them forth. 3. Authors cited to this Purpose. 4. Barclay's Assertion
defended. 5. No Disagreement or Clashing in the different Degrees of Divine
Evidence. 6. The Infallibility of the Scriptures as given forth by the Spirit,
and the Fallibility of human Understanding concerning them. 7. None but the
Divine Author able to ascertain his own Sense in the Scriptures. 8. The
Scriptures rightly understood, a Rule; but not the sole, the primary, and
universal Rule. The Holy Spirit alone is such. 9. The Scriptures allowed to be
the primary written Rule, to which, in all Disputes, we therefore refer, as
well as others; but the immediate Illumination of God's Spirit, is a more
certain Criterion to each Individual in his own Breast.

1. MY Opponent, in his Introduction, P. 3, and in several other Places,
insinuates, that the Quakers System is founded upon a supposed saving Influence
of the Holy Spirit, without the Instrumentality of the Scriptures; and Page 4,
he charges it upon them as an Anti-scriptural Principle. This he positively
asserts, from which I must dissent, because I understand the Religion of the
Quakers stands not in System, nor is a supposed saving Influence of the Spirit
any Part of their Doctrine, but a real experimental one; not always without,
but often with the Instrumentality of the Scriptures. I Will own myself obliged
to him, if he will show me where the Scripture either says, or fairly implies,
that the Spirit is not to be received without their Instrumentality. How was
the Spirit received by the Penmen of the Scriptures, from Beginning to End, 2
Peter i. 20, 21.
when they wrote and spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost? I look upon
this Assertion of S. N. as a fundamental Error; for, it is not only true, that
the Scriptures assert no such Thing, but also that they plentifully inculcate
the contrary, as will appear anon.

Christ is with his true Followers, and will be to the End of the World. To
say, he is always with them in the Scriptures, appears to me, too great a
Strain of Language for Truth to accompany. If the Spirit of Christ be so
connected with the Text, as always to attend it, I apprehend, no sincere and
sensible Reader could mistake the Sense of it, nor any such differ to an
Opposition of each other about it, yet what is more common? We have frequently
experienced, and always allowed, that the Spirit of Truth often uses, and
opens Truth by the Scriptures, as an instrumental Means; and we also assert,
that the same Spirit often has opened Truths, given a Sense of their
Conditions, and administered Help, to sincere and attentive Minds, without the
Instrumentality of the Scriptures. This is the universal Gospel-privilege,
foretold by Jeremiah, through Divine Inspiration. Jer. xxxi. 33, 34.
I will put my Law in their inward Parts, and write it in their Hearts, and
will be their God, and they shall be my People. And they shall teach no more
(of Necessity) every Man his Neighbor, and every Man his Brother, saying, know
ye the Lord; for they shall all know me, (each Man for himself) from the least
of them to the greatest of them, says the Lord.

Is it rationally to be understood, that this Divine Internal Teacher, is so
absolutely bound to the Instrumentality of Scripture, in his immediate Legation
to the Soul of Man, that he never opens or instructs without it? The Text
implies no such Matter. The Apostle John (Anno Dom. 90) treats of this
immediate Teacher under the Title of an Unction from the Holy one. 1 John ii.
20, 27.
Ye have an Unction from the Holy one, and ye know all Things. That is, I take
it, ye have the Spirit, which, as you attend to it, gives you a right
Discerning of all Things that concern you; for, The Anointing which ye have
received of him, abides in you, and ye need not that any Man teach you; but as
the same Anointing teaches you of all Things, and is Truth, (the Spirit of
Truth) and is no Lie; and even, as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him or
it. This shows the complete Sufficiency of this inward, immediate Instructor,
without any Instrumentality of an exterior Kind. The eternal Spirit of Truth
cannot stand in Need of any such Assistance; consequently, is not to be
understood as confined to any, but operates either by the Scriptures, or
without them, at his Pleasure.

God has always afforded Instruction to his People; but his Teachings by the
Law to the Jews, were through instrumental Means. The Prophet declares, Jer.
xxxi. 31, 32.
this New Covenant of the Gospel should not be according to the Old Covenant of
the Law; it should not consist of instrumental Teaching, though that might be
occasionally used; for God himself would put his Law in their inward Parts.
This implies his own immediate Communication to the Soul, of that Law which is
not according to the literal Nature of the Old Covenant, but is really and
truly, the Law of the Spirit of Life Christ Jesus; the illuminating quickening
Law, immediately and mentally given to Man by the Spirit of Life itself; which
therefore is, and ever must be, the constitutional establishment of the
Gospel Dispensation.

Isaiah, in a prophetic Address to the Gospel Church, Isa. live. 13.
says, All thy Children shall be taught of the Lord. In Reference to this, and
other like Prophecies, our Savior says, It is written in the Prophets, John
vi. 45.
and they shall be all taught of God. Every Man therefore that has heard, and
has learned of the Father, comes unto me. And in the preceding Verse he
says, V. 44.
No Man can come to me except the Father who has sent me, draw him. This
drawing, hearing and learning of the Father, and coming to Christ, are all
spiritually to be understood; as I have shown in the former Part of this
Discourse. This Doctrine is witnessed to 1 Thessalonians iv. 8, 9. Beginning with those
who had so little Understanding standing of it, as to treat it with Contempt,
the Apostle declares, He therefore that despises, despises not Man, but God,
who has also given unto us his Holy Spirit. But as touching Brotherly-love, ye
need not that I write unto you; for ye yourselves are taught of God, to love
one another. The Apostle was then writing to them immediately from God; by
Divine Inspiration, and he makes a manifest Difference between this mediate
Manner of Teaching, and what he intended by their being taught of God; the
direct and obvious Sense of which is, God's own immediate Illumination and
Instruction.

By necessary Consequence from these Premises, and Abundance more that might be
added from the Scriptures, it appears to be both an experimental and a
scriptural Truth, that God teaches immediately by his Spirit, as well as
Instrumentally by external Means; and that this is an indispensable Doctrine of
the Gospel.

2. S. N. sets out, in his Letter, P. 4, with a Profession to try the leading
Principles of the Quakers by Right Reason, and Scripture, or as he afterward
expresses it, the true Sense of Scripture. Upon this, I observed, that without
Divine Illumination, Man has not sufficient Ability to ascertain the genuine
Sense of doubtful and disputed Texts, which are very numerous, and mentioned in
Proof, the Diversity of Senses wherein those Texts, are understood, by Persons
apparently of equal Sincerity, and of the best natural and acquired Parts,
under the same, as well as different Denominations, as plain Indications, that
the Assistance of the Divine Author himself is requisite to the right
Understanding of them I also showed, that Man's Reason is too much clouded, and
biassed by his Passions and Prepossessions, to be justly denominated Right
Reason, and instanced its Diversity concerning spiritual Matters, and its
Mutability in the same Persons; also that Right Reason is Truth, unchangeably
the same, and incapable of Error, and therefore exists only in the Divine
Nature, which Men must, in Measure, become Partakers of in order to the
Rectification of their fallen and fallible Reason.

Instead of either acknowledging, on disproving this, S. N. now professes to
bring the leading Sentiments of the Quakers, a second Time, to the Bar of Right
Reason and the true Sense of Scripture; but he forgot that he ought, in the
first Place, to prove, that he has these infallible Criterions in Possession.
"A Man," says Sir William Temple, that tells me my Opinions are absurd or
ridiculous, impertinent or unreasonable, because they differ from his, seems to
intend a Quarrel instead of a Dispute, and calls me Fool or Madman with a
little more Circumstance; though perhaps I pass for One as well in my Senses as
he; as pertinent in Discourse, and as prudent in Life. Yet these are the common
Civilities in religious Argument, of sufficient and conceited Men, who talk
much of Right Reason, and mean always their own, and make their private
Imagination the Measure of general Truth. Observations on the United Provinces,
Page 226.

Respecting the Scriptures, we are so far from lessening them, or opposing the
true Sense of them, that we verily believe, and sincerely assert, that the Holy
Spirit, in what Degree of Illumination soever it appears, never can contradict
them; for Difference in Degree makes no Contrariety. It is the private, or
particular, Interpretation of Man without Divine Illumination, that we object
to, as insufficient to assure the Sense of disputed Scriptures. Besides Man's
natural Inability, the various Prejudices, the prevailing Passions, the
different Interests, and the diverse Leaders of the People, all contribute to
give different, and sometimes opposite Senses of the Sacred Text. Many have the
Words of the Spirit in Scripture, who have not the Mind of the Spirit in their
Hearts.

3. Neither Nature nor Education can give a Man the Sense of the Holy Ghost,
nor, of Consequence, interpret its Expressions with Certainty. It is therefore
truly asserted, not only by the Quakers, but also by Abundance of distinguished
Writers of various Professions, ancient and modern, that the internal
Illumination of God's Holy Spirit is absolutely necessary to every Man, in
order to his right Understanding of the Scriptures. Let me advance a few out of
many more now before me.

The Holy Scriptures opened by the Holy Spirit, show Christ unto us; the Holy
Spirit is therefore the Opener of the Scriptures. Theophylact in Joan. 10.

What Men set forth from human Sense, may be perceived by the Wit of Man; but
what is set forth by the Inspiration of the Divine Spirit, requires an
Interpreter inspired with the like Spirit. Erasmus, Paraph. in 2 Peter i. 20,
21. And Coll. in Ixthuophagia prope Finem, he says, They expound the Sacred
Writings from the Pulpit, which no Man can either rightly understand, or
profitably teach without the Inspiration of the Holy Spirit.

The Scriptures are of no private Interpretation; i. e. not of every private
Man's Interpretation out of his own Brain, because they were dictated by the
Holy Ghost; and by the Holy Ghost, the Meaning of the Holy Ghost in them only
can be expounded. Obad. Watker's Disc. concerning the Spirit of Martin Luther,
P. 97.

The Scriptures are not to be understood, but by the same Spirit by which they
were written. Luther, Oper. Tom. 2. P. 309.

The Spirit of God, from whom the Doctrine of the Gospel proceeds, is the only
true Interpreter to open it to us, Calvin's Com. in 1 Cor. ii. 14.

The Apostle teaches, 1 Cor. 2. that the Scripture cannot be apprehended and
understood but by the Holy Spirit. Zanchius, De Sacra Scriptura, Tom. viii. P.
430.

The Things of the Spirit of God, are understood and perceived by the powerful
Inspiration of the Holy Spirit alone. Beza, Anotat. in 1 Cor. ii. 14.

As the Scriptures were written by the Spirit of God, so must they be expounded
by the same. For, without that Spirit we have neither Ears to hear, nor Eyes to
see. It is that Spirit that opens, and no Man shuts, the same shuts,
and no Man opens. Bishop Jewel's Defense of the Apology, P. 72.

The outward Reading of the Word, without the inward Working of his Spirit, is
nothing. The precise Pharisees, the learned Scribes, read the Scriptures over
and over again; they not only read them in Books, but wore them on their
Garments; they were not only taught, but were able to teach others. But because
this Heavenly Teacher had not instructed them, their Understanding was
darkened; their Knowledge was but Vanity. Archbishop Sandy's Sermons, printed
1616, P. 48.

The Holy Men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost; it follows,
that all the Scripture ought to be expounded by God, because it is inspired of
God -- We do acknowledge, that all Means are vain, unless the Lord give Eyes to
see; to whom, therefore, the Prophet made his Prayer, Psalm. cxix. 18.
Open mine Eyes, that I may see thy Wonders of thy Law. Rainolds's Conferrence
with Heart, P. 81.

The internal Light whereby we come to see the Sense of the Scripture, is the
Holy Spirit. Weemse's Christian Synagogue, Lib. i. P. 31.

The Anointing of the Holy Spirit, teaches the Faithful to understand those
Truths, which they have received from the Apostles. Amesius, Bellarm.
enervatus. Lib. i. C. v. N. 32, P. 60.

It is not possible that supernatural Knowledge should be rightly received,
without supernatural Light. Fra. Rous, Interiora regnia Dei Coelest. Academ.
Chap. ii. P. 12.

God is the Author of all Divine Truth, and of the Discovery of it made to us.
An inward enlightening and irradiating the Mind by the Holy Spirit, is
absolutely necessary for the Apprehending of the Divine Mysteries, which are
contained in the Doctrines of the Gospel. John Edwards's Free Disc. concerning
Truth and Error, P. 481.

In Regeneration, the Understanding is illuminated by the Holy Spirit, that it
may understand both the Mysteries and Will of God. The Helvitian Confession and
Expos. Fidei Christinae, Chap. ix.

The Gift of interpreting Scripture, is not of human Prudence, but of the Holy
Ghost. Wirtembergica Confessio, de Sacra Scriptura, in Corp. Confess.

We acknowledge the inward Illumination of the Spirit of God, to be necessary
for the saving Understanding of such Things as are revealed in the World.
Confession of Faith by the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, since approved
by the Kirk of Scotland, and the same with that of the Independents, and
particular Baptists.

4. Page 5. S. N. says, in his Note, that I charge him with Ignorance and
Design. My Words are, Ignorance or Design. Ignorance; if he really thinks
Barclay means, the internal Illumination of the Spirit in one Man's Breast, is
an Evidence of it to others. Design; if he really understands his Meaning, and
wilfully perverts it. Barclay's Assertion, that neither the Scriptures, nor the
natural Reason of Man, are a more noble, or certain Rule or Touchstone, than
the immediate Revelation of God's Holy Spirit, relates only to such as are
sensible of its immediate Revelations, and to the Evidence of these Revelations
in the Parties themselves to whom they are immediate. To these he asserts, they
are more noble, because Divine, and more certain, because immediate, than their
own private Interpretation, of Scriptures, by Reading and Study, without the
Illumination of the Holy Spirit, can be. The Spirit only can ascertain the
Sense it intends. Sometimes it communicates a literal, sometimes an allegorical
Sense, a direct, or an allusive Sense, a theoretical, or an experimental Sense.
Men are liable to mistake one for another, and without a Sense of the Spirit,
must often miss of the Mind of the Spirit.

In the next Proposition, Barclay demonstrates the Truth of his Assertion, by
showing from 1 Cor. xii. 12, etc. that though the Body or Church of Christ is
one, it is composed of many Members, who have each their several Services
appointed, and directed by the Holy Spirit in that Body; and each must
therefore attend to the Spirit for his own proper Direction. He afterward
instances the special Duties of Particulars in the Church. Barclay therefore
gives frequent Advices, to a Waiting for, and due Attention to, the Holy
Spirit; which S. N. P. 5, seems so out of Temper with, that he treats them as
bold Dictates, terrible Impositions, and enthusiastic Delusions of fatal
Tendency.

5. P. 7. He professes to untie what he calls the Gordian Knot of Quakerisin,
by observing, that the true Sense of the Scriptures, is of equal Authority with
Divine Manifestations, and that, as the Scriptures were given forth by the
Apostles, whom we allow had the Spirit in a greater Degree than any in this
Age, therefore he concludes, upon our Principles, the true Sense of the
Scriptures, is a nobler Rule of Judgment in Religion, than our own pretended
inward Divine Revelations.

We are well apprized of, and have always asserted, greater and lesser Degrees
of Divine Illumination have been communicated to different persons; but we also
believe there cannot be any Contrariety, Clashing, or Dissonance in any of its
Degrees; because it is from one and the same Spirit, and in what Degree soever
it appears, it speaks one and the same Thing, in point of Congruity, and
carries its own Divine Authority with it in every Degree. Hence, to suppose a
Disagreement between one Degree of it and another, whilst it can differ in
nothing but Degree, is untrue and absurd. As to our own, or any Man's own
pretended, or any pretended Divine Revelations, we utterly and equally
disclaim, as being of any Authority, or Advantage whatsoever; for such mere
Pretensions are altogether as unequal to discover and assure the true Sense of
dubious Parts of Scripture, as the unenlightened Reason of the natural Man. It
is a vain Thing in any Person to pretend he has the true Sense of the Holy
Scriptures, whilst his Performances demonstrate his Mistakes concerning it;
which is evidently the Case with our present Opposer, as I shall make more
fully appear by and by.

6. When any press their own particular Opinion of the Sense of any Part of
Scripture, as the true Sense of the Holy Ghost, yet deny all Sense of the Holy
Ghost in their Hearts, who that observes a Diversity of Senses amongst these,
can give Credit to their Assertions? But they allege, the Scripture is
infallible. I allow it; but how is its true Sense to be infallibly conveyed to
every Reader? By human Study and Instruction? That has led into all the
Differences and Disagreements about it. The plain Truth of the Matter is,
nothing but the Spirit of Divine Wisdom, whence the Scripture came, can give
the genuine Sense of it. 1 Cor. ii. 11.
For, The Things of God knows no Man, but the Spirit of God. What is the
Infallibility of Scripture to him, who has not the infallible Sense of it? If
all had this, who have the Scriptures, none could mistake them, nor differ with
each other about them; yet it is too manifest, by the Differences amongst
Christians, they do mistake them. This is not to be imputed to any Defect in
the Sacred Writings, but to the common Unfitness of Men's Understandings to
discover the right Sense of them. What then can open it to Man's Capacity but
the Holy Spirit?

The Question is not, whether the Scriptures, as written by Divine Inspiration,
are infallibly right, for such must be so, but whether every one that reads
them, is able infallibly to understand them? To pretend, if they are not
clearly to be understood without the Assistance of the Spirit, they are given
in vain, is to contradict the Scripture, 1 Cor. xii. 7.
which declares that, The Manifestation of the Spirit is given to every Man to
profit withal. It may as truly be asserted, that the Divine Being, whilst he
knows we are in Darkness, gives us a Chart to direct our Way, and at the same
Time withholds the Light, by which alone we can discover its true Contents;
which is merely to mock and tantalize us, and also to render our Situation
worse than that of the Jews; for all the written Precepts of their Law were
plain and evident; Neh. ix. 7.
yet God gave them of his good Spirit to instruct them; all the written
Doctrines of the Gospel are not so, and is not the Holy Spirit as requisite to
us as it was to them?

7. Scripture Doctrines are of diverse Classes. They exhibit just Morals, and
benevolent Conduct between Man and Man, in a Manner superior to the best Ethic
Writers in all Ages and Nations. These are generally and justly allowed to be
of natural, universal, and unalterable Obligation, and are sufficiently plain
and clear to the common Sense of every Man. But Matters relating to Faith and
Worship, having admitted of many circumstantial Additions and Alterations,
according to the different Dispensations of Divine Wisdom, have not been so
level to Men's Understandings, nor have they been so united in Judgment
concerning them, as in the Case of moral Duties. Ever since the collected
Publication of the New Testament, Differences in Opinion about the true Sense,
especially in Matters of Faith, have subsisted and abounded; and what can
determine these Differences? The learned A. says, such a Text means so and so.
The learned B. asserts, it is to be accepted in a different, perhaps a contrary
Sense. They apply to the Context, and remain still as different in Opinion, and
as positive of being in the Right. They recur from Text to Text, and from
Critic to Commentator, till they have exhausted every one they can find, or
force to their Purpose, and still remain equally, if not more at a Distance
than at the Beginning. What is there left to determine the Matter? Will
Churches or Councils do it? They jangle from Year to Year, or from Age to Age,
and leave the Difference as wide as they found it. The true Sense still remains
only with the Divine Author of the disputed Texts, and he alone is able to
communicate it. Would it not be a wild Presumption in either A. or B. to boast
that he will try his Opponent's Opinion by the true Sense of the Spirit, and at
the same Time deny, that either himself, or Man, can have any real Sense of the
Spirit? I have not here supposed a Nonentity, but a Case that has subsisted for
a great many Centuries, and which must always continue, whilst Men prefer their
own Prejudices, Imaginations, and Reasonings, to the internal Leadings of the
Spirit of Truth.

8. We hold the Scriptures to be a Rule to all that have them, so far as they
have a right Understanding of them, and also that they are adequate to the
Purpose intended by them; but we cannot aver, they are the sole, the primary,
and the universal Director of Mankind in Matters of religious Duty. 1. They are
not the sole Director; because the Spirit of God in the Heart and Conscience of
Man is also an undeniable Director. 2. They are not the primary Director;
because the Illumination of the Holy Spirit that gave them forth is requisite
to open the true Sense of those numerous Parts of them, about which the
Apprehensions of Men so much differ. The Spirit also from which the Scriptures
came, is original, and therefore primary to them; and as the Spirit only can
open its own true Sense included in them, they are secondary to the Spirit, as
an Instrument in its Hand. 3. They are not the universal Director; because it
is not probable that One in Ten, if one in Twenty, of Mankind, have ever had
the Opportunity of possessing them. Seeing therefore this is the Case, they
cannot properly be pronounced, the complete, adequate, universal Rule of
Mankind.

Hence we esteem them the secondary Rule or Guide of Christians, which being
Divinely communicated for the Use of all to whom they may come; and also being
intrinsically superior in Excellence to all other Writings, we prefer them
above all others, and as thankfully accept, and as comfortably use them, as any
People upon Earth; verily believing, with the Holy Apostle, Romans xv. 4
that they were written for our Learning, that we, through Patience, and
Comfort of the Scriptures might have Hope.

This is not to depreciate the Scriptures, but to hold them in their proper
Place, and due Superiority to the Works of Men, and Subordination to their
Supreme Communicator, and only sure Expounder. For the Holy Spirit is requisite
to the right Use of them, as the Agent to the Instrument; and what is an
Instrument without a Hand to guide and enforce it? And which is superior, the
Agent or the Instrument? The Holy Spirit is the original Wisdom whence the
Scriptures came, and the sole Power that can open, and give right Effects to
them. John xvi. 13.
The Spirit of Truth is given to guide into all Truth; is the only Thing that
can do it, and consequently the Supreme Guide afforded to Mankind. It is both
unwarrantable and irrational, to assert any Thing else is the sole, or primary
Director, whilst the Spirit of God is communicated for that Purpose.

The same Scripture-Truths appear as differently to each Person, as their
Understandings differ one from another. Human Intellects therefore must be
rectified, to enable them to see those Truths in the same Sense. The Rectifier
is the Spirit of Truth, which alone can unite them in the true Sense.

We stick not to style the Scriptures collectively, a Divine, or Christian
Rule; but we object to call them, The Rule of Faith and Practice, lest that
should be understood to imply we are to look for nothing further to be our
Guide or Leader. The Scriptures themselves abundantly testify, there is
something superior to them, which all ought to look for, and attend unto; that
is, the Holy Spirit of the Supreme Legislator of Men, and Prime Author of the
sacred Writings; in and by whose Light and Power they are made instrumentally
useful, and adequate to the Purposes intended by them. Like a good Sun-dial,
they are true and perfect in their Kind, that is, as Writings; but, respecting
the Parts differently understood, they may justly bear the same Motto with the
Dial, Useless without Light.
Non sine Lumine. For as the Dial without the Cast of the Sunbeams, has not
its proper Use, to tell the Time of the Day; neither does the ambiguous Text
answer its true End, infallibly to communicate the Mind of the Holy Spirit to
different Understandings, except the luminous Beams of the Sun of Righteousness
discover it to the attentive Mind.

9. Our Opposers call the Scriptures the primary Rule. We allow it is the
primary written Rule, and in all Disputes betwixt them and us, we abide by its
Decision, according to our understanding of the Sense of it, which they profess
to do likewise by theirs. In all public Differences therefore we refer
intentionally to the same Rule with them. But we have both plain Scripture and
Experience to support our Belief, that respecting the particular Duty of
Individuals, every one has in his own Breast, a nearer and more certain Rule
or Guide of Conscience than the Scriptures; the Manifestation of the Spirit
given to every Man to profit withal, which duly observed, gives a right
Interpretation of Scripture, so far as is necessary for them, and also the
truest Sense of each particular Person's Duty to him. When a Person feels the
faithful Witness of God in his Conscience, condemning him for what is wrong,
and approving him for what is right, does he not find it to speak more clearly,
particularly, and convictingly to his Case and State, than he can read it in
the Scriptures? Can he then conclude, that this truly-distinguishing and most
striking Witness, is less than that Spirit of Truth, or Comforter, John xvi. 8.
which convinces the World of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment?

Speaking of Persons unenlightened, I observed that every Man's Sense of
Scripture, is his Scripture, and when he proposes his Opponent shall be
determined by Scripture, he means according to his own Apprehension of the
Sense of it. This S. N. applies equally to Men's Apprehensions of the
Illuminations of the Spirit within them; and I allow, it holds equally against
those Pretenders to the Spirit's Illuminations, who are in Reality void of
them; but it will by no Means conclude against the really Enlightened; nor will
his following Argument prove that no Man is enlightened. "For," says he, P.
10. what John Reeve and Lodowick Mugleton thought to be the Mind of the Spirit
within them, William Penn and his Brethren denied; and what these thought to be
the Mind of the Holy Ghost, the former rejected as spurious. This shows, that
the Pretensions of both Parties could not be right, but not that neither of
them were so, any more than it would prove the Apostle Paul, Acts xiii. 8.
and Elimas the Sorcerer, Jer. xxviii
or Jeremiah and Hananiah, equally wrong in their Pretensions.

When Christ, after his Resurrection, Luke xxiv. 45.
opened the Understandings of his Disciples that they might understand the
Scriptures, was not the Divine Illumination in their Understandings, a more
clear, certain and superior Evidence of the Sense of them, than all their
Reading and Study could have afforded them, without such Illumination? Are
Mankind now become so much more wise and penetrating, than those who for Years
had the Benefit of hearing him who is perfect in Wisdom, that they have no Need
of his Assistance to open their Understandings? Or is their School and College
Learning so perfect, as to render God's Illumination quite needless? Are the
innumerable Clashings and Janglings of the Book-learned about the Sense of
Scripture, a Proof of the Unity of their Sentiments, and the Verity of their
Sense of disputed Texts? If so, Discord may be a Proof of Harmony, and Fighting
of Agreement.

From what is past, I trust, it will appear that our Opposer's more certain
Criterion, P. 3. is only such in his own Imagination. How can that be the
certain Criterion, about the Meaning of which all the Uncertainty arises? It is
certain, without Divine Illumination every Reader of Texts of a dubious Sense,
accepts them in the Sense his Prepossessions make for him; which is the Cause
of the innumerable Differences amongst professing Christians. R. Barclay
therefore justly denies, that Divine inward Revelations are to be subjected to
the Test either of the outward Testimony of the Scriptures, or of the natural
Reason of Man, as to a more noble, or certain Rule or Touchstone.

CHAP. XII.
1. S. N.'s Reasoning not pertinent. 2. His charging me with Mistake, an Error
of his own. 3. His Observation answered. 4. His Mis-construction and
Mis-application of 2 Timothy iii. 15, etc. and its Antinomian Consequences
refuted. 5. What true Gospel-Faith comprehends.

1. PAGE 7. To introduce a week Argument, S. N. queries, Is the real Nature of
the Spirit to be known either by mere Feelings, or metaphysical Speculations?
Answ. The Divine Nature which the Faithful, in Measure, have been made
Partakers of, they have known by a Divine Sensation of its Influence,
communicated only by itself; as nothing but the Sun itself can reveal and
impart its own Light and Warmth.

Ibid. They must tell us what these Feelings are like? Answ. They are not like
any Thing the natural Man is acquainted with. The natural Man receives not the
Things of the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. ii.
for they are Foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned.

Ibid. It is not conceived, however, that they can find out his Essence. Answ.
They do not presume to find out his Essence. They are content with, and
thankful for, the Dispensations he is pleased to make of his Influence; which
this Author, P. 8. injudiciously jumbles together with Views, Sentiments,
Effects, Production, Creature, etc. Whereas the Influence shed by the Essence
is not of its Creation, but an Emanation of its own Nature, Power and Quality,
which produces those Effects in the Creature, as the Potential Influence of
the Sun, is of the Nature and Quality of the Sun, producing its salutary
Effects in external Nature, and sensibly operating upon sensitive Creatures, so
as to enable them to see by its Light, and to feel the comforting Warmth of its
Presence, as well as truly to discover its Productions in and around them.

Having indiscriminately confounded Things that differ, S. N. proceeds thus to
syllogize upon it.

That which is not known, felt or discerned in its real Nature, cannot be a
Rule of Action to any One, superior to its own Influence, Effects or
Productions.

The Holy Spirit is not known, felt or discerned in his real Nature, by any
Quaker or others, but only his Influence, Effects, etc.

Therefore he cannot be in his own real Nature a Rule of action to them,
superior to his own Productions, Effects and Influence.

This demonstrates how void of Truth and Probability Logic may be in a
sophistical Hand. For, How should any Thing be a Rule superior to its
Influence, when its Influence is that by which it rules? And with what
Propriety is its Influence, and the Effects and Productions of that Influence
placed under the same Predicament? This Argument evidently insinuates, 1. That
the Influence of the Holy Spirit is no more of its real Nature, than the Works
and Effects produced by it; which is the same Thing as to say, The Influence of
the Sun in the Firmament, that is, his Beams, which irradiate his
distinguishing Light, and shed his animating Warmth, are no more of his real
Nature, than the Wax he softens, or the Clay he hardens. 2. That the rational
Soul feels and discerns the Influence of the Spirit, without any real Sense of
the Nature of the Spirit. This appears to me just as true, as that we see by
the Light of the Sun, without any Perception of that Light, and are corporeally
animated by its Warmth, without ever feeling it. 3. That if the essential
Fullness of the Divine Being do not come into immediate Contact with the Soul of
Man, he cannot have any sensible Perception of God's Nature by his Divine
Influence; which is like asserting, that the powerful Influence of the Sun
cannot be sensibly perceived by a Man, unless the Body of the Sun immediately
touch his Body.

2. Having noted in my Observation, P. 14, 15, from John v. 39, that the
Pharisees rested upon the Scriptures, and would not apply to Christ, my
Opponent answers, P. 11. Our Savior, however, seems to give a different
Account of the Matter; for he frequently tells them, Mat. xv. 6. Mark vii. 13.
that they made the World of God of none Effect, through their Traditions; how
then could they be said to rest upon it? Answ. The Reason our Savior gives,
why they should, or did search the Scriptures, is, For, in them ye think ye
have eternal Life. If they thought to have eternal Life in the Scriptures, they
certainly, in that Sense, rested upon them for it, and not upon Christ, the
only Savior, to whom they would not come that they might have it. As to their
making the Word, or Command of God, of none Effect through their Traditions,
that was spoken at a different Time, and appears not to relate to the Object of
their Dependence for eternal Life, therefore cannot either with Propriety or
Prudence, be urged in Contradiction to what he here asserted. The Text, I
apprehend, may be thus understood. Search, or rather, ye search the Scriptures,
for in them ye think ye have eternal Life. You think so, but are mistaken, for
they are not the Life, but come from the Life, and they are they which testify
of me, who am the Life; yet ye stick in them as your Life, and ye will not come
to me, the Life, that ye might have Life; therefore, notwithstanding your
Dependence upon the Scriptures, ye remain in a State of Death, resting upon the
Letter only, without the Knowledge of the Spirit.

3. P. 12. S. N. says, It deserves to be particularly noted, that our Lord
never once blames them for not attending to the Light within. I think, it
merits more particular Notice, that if he does not blame them in Terminis, In
Terms.
for not attending to it, he does more, by showing them the Condemnation that
accrues to those who neglect it. John iii. 19 -- 21.
This is the Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and Men loved
Darkness rather than Light; because their Deeds were Evil. For every One, that
does Evil hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest his Deeds should
be reproved. But he that does Truth comes to the Light (or attends to it) that
his Deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God. That is, under
the Influence of his Spirit. For, "God," says the Apostle, 2 Cor. iv. 6.
who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined in our Hearts,
to give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God, in the Face of Jesus
Christ.

The Light of God shining in the Heart, is certainly a Light within, and this
Light comes in the Face, or Appearance, of Jesus Christ, which Appearance
therefore, must be within, and ought in Duty to be attended to.

4. Ibid. I am unjustly charged with a Design to lessen the Importance, and
show the Insufficiency of the Scriptures; because I said, that though they are
sufficient to make the Man of God perfect, through Faith which is in Christ
Jesus, yet they are not able to make the sinful Man, the corrupt Man perfect,
who has not this Divine Faith of the Operation of God, by which the Victory is
obtained. Against this, S. N. cites 2 Timothy iii. 15 -- 17, and says, Paul then
here asserts, that the Scriptures are able to make a Person (who was not so
before, or was not so without them, and must therefore be sinful and corrupt)
wise unto Salvation, or in other Words, a Man of God, through Faith, etc.

If to perfect the Man of God, and to change the corrupt Sinner into a Man of
God, be the same Thing; or, if the Man of God, and the sinful Man; the
Regenerate, and the Unregenerate; the Prophet, and the Profligate; be One and
the same, the Apostle says it; but if they are not so, he asserts no such
Thing. Writing, in this Place, to his beloved Brother in Christ, Timothy, who
in his former Epistle, he styles a Man of God, he addresses him in particular
with this Expression: 1 Timothy vi. 1.
From a Child thou have known the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee
wise unto Salvation, through Faith which is in Christ Jesus. I cite this as it
ought to be translated.
All Scripture given by Inspiration is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof,
for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that the Man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works. This cannot with Propriety
be extended to any but Timothy, and such as Timothy; true Believers in, and
Followers of Christ. To add Wisdom to the Man of God, the regenerate Man, in
order to his Perfection in Divine Knowledge, appears to me a very different
Thing from the making a sinful corrupt Man Holy, or turning a gross and
miserable Sinner into a Saint; for this, according to Scripture, is the
peculiar Work of the Holy Spirit; as I have already made appear.

The Scriptures Timothy had been instructed in from his Childhood, could hardly
be any other than those of the Old Testament; and all they could here be meant
to do for the Man of God, must be to afford him Instruction in the Way of
Righteousness; to add to his own. Experience, the Experiences of those before
him in that Line. For to suppose they were sufficient to regenerate and perfect
the sinful corrupt Man, is more than they are able now to do, even with the New
Testament added to them.

The sinful corrupt Man is certainly he that abides in sinful Practices; and
the Apostle says, 1 John iii. 8.
He that commits Sin is of the Devil. Will S. N. assert, that the Man of
God, and he who is of the Devil, are the same? Then Christ and Belial are
united in the same Person, Light and Darkness may accord with each other, and
that which separates from God may be joined to him.

I do not think so injuriously of my present Antagonist, as to believe he
really intends what the Doctrine I oppose ultimately results in; but I judge
this a proper Opportunity to caution against such corrupt and dangerous
Positions as some have publicly avowed.

1. That Man, at the same Time he is actually unrighteous in himself, is
righteous in Christ. That is, he is not what he is in Reality, but what he
persuades himself to be, by a false Imagination concerning the Sacrifice of
Christ; like that Generation who are pure in their own Eyes, Prove. xxx. 12.
yet are not washed from their Filthiness.

2. That the supreme Essence of immutable Truth, looks upon Man in a false
Light; esteeming him pure, whilst he knows him to be sinful and corrupt.

3. That Christ, the Truth, is a false Medium, showing the States of Men
contrary to what they are in Reality.

4. That Man is the Servant of Christ, whilst he is under the Influence of
Antichrist; that he is imputatively Holy, whilst he is ruled by the Author of
Pollution, the Adversary of all Holiness; and that he is acting in the Will of
God, whilst he is doing the Works of the Devil; Romans vi. 16.
notwithstanding we read, To whom ye yield yourselves Servants to obey, his
Servants ye are to whom ye obey; whether of Sin unto Death, or of Obedience
unto Righteousness.

It is a vain Delusion for any to expect, that Purity in the highest Perfection
should unite with them, whilst they remain in the very Cause of Separation from
him. Sin made the Separation at first, and the Continuance of it continues the
Separation. If it be queried, Did not Christ die to reconcile Sinners to God? I
answer, Yes; but not to reconcile God to Sin, nor to save Sin. He suffered not
to purchase a License for Sinners to continue such; but to open the way for
them to come to Repentance, through the Gift of God procured by him; Luke xiii.
5.
for, says he, Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. He came not to
uphold, but to destroy the Works of the Devil; 1 Cor. vi. 9, 10.
which include all Manner of Sin and Corruption. "Know ye not," says the Man
of God, that the Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not
deceived; neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate,
nor Abusers of themselves with Mankind, nor Thiev^s, nor Covetous, nor
Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God.
The Notion of imputative Righteousness to such as remain in the Commission of
these Evils, therefore, is a vain and pernicious Error.

We must die to Sin, or we cannot live to God; and in Proportion as we die to
Sin, we live in Christ, and no further. We must put on Christ, by true Faith
and Obedience, which are never separate; for that is a false Faith which abides
in, or satisfies any, without Obedience, Jam. ii. 20.
"Faith without Works is dead," says the Servant of Christ, Verse 18.
and show me thy Faith without thy Works, and I will show thee my Faith by my
Works.

The Law says, Do, or avoid this, and live. The Gospel not only forbids the
outward Act, but also restrains the inward Desire and Motion toward it. The
Law says, Thou shall not kill; nor commit Adultery; nor forswear thyself, etc.
The Gospel commands, Give not Place to Anger; thou shall not lust; swear not at
all, etc. In this Manner, the Gospel destroys not the moral Law, but fulfils
it, by taking away the Ground of sinful Acts, and laying the Ax of the Spirit
to the Root of Corruption.

Can the Considerate imagine, that the everlasting Source of Wisdom and Might,
can be at a Loss how to expel Satan's Kingdom in Man whilst upon Earth? Or can
they think him so delighted with Men's Offenses against his Purity and
Goodness, as to will that Satan should reign over his Creatures to the last
Moment of their Lives? Is it not more to his Glory to deliver from the Power of
Evil, and to save both from Sin here, and Misery hereafter, than to save only
from Wretchedness in Futurity? Is a P^rt greater than the Whole? Or, is an
incomplete Deliverance preferable, or more glorious than that which is perfect?

When Doctrines opposite to Purification of Heart, and Holiness of Life, are
industriously propagated, it stands every One in hand to be alarmed, lest, by
giving Place to them in their Minds, they become blinded through the
Deceitfulness of Sin; which will center them at last in a Fool's Paradise,
instead of the City of God, Rev. xxi. 27.
the Heavenly Jerusalem, into which nothing that defiles, that works
Abomination, of makes a Lie, shall in any wise enter.

5. The Ability in the Scriptures, as before cited, to enlarge the Man of God
in saving Wisdom, the Apostle says, is through Faith which is in Christ Jesus.
S. N. resolves this saving Faith into a Belief of those Parts of the Old
Testament, which related particularly to Christ, to which he adds the like
Parts of the New Testament.

What true Gospel-Faith is, let us a little consider. As the Entrance of the
Divine Word quickens the Soul, so it first communicates a Degree of Faith, 1
Cor. xii. 9. and Col. ii. 12.
through which it operates; 2 Cor. iv. 13.
for true Faith is the Gift of God and the Holy Spirit is the Spirit of Faith
which is not a bare Belief of Truths concerning Christ, 2 Timothy iii. 17.
but a Faith in him. The Faith in Christ is not comprised in giving Credit to
Narrations and Doctrines, and a Mode of Practice framed by the Wisdom of Men
upon it; for that centers short of the essential Substance of Faith.
Gospel-Faith in Man believes the Truth of all that is revealed by the Spirit,
both in the Heart, and in the Sacred Writings; because it feels it, savours it,
and is one with it. It not only assents to the scriptural Accounts of the
Incarnation and whole Process of Christ in Judea; but it also receives his
internal Appearance, consents to his Operation, and concurs with it.

That Faith which stands wholly upon Hearsay, Tradition, Reading, or
Imagination, is but a distant Kind of ineffectual Credence, which permits the
Soul to remain in the Bondage of Corruption. The Wicked may go this Length
toward Gospel-Faith; but the true Faith lays hold of, and cleaves to the
Spirit of Truth, in its inward Manifestations, wherein it stands, and whereby
it grows, till the Heart is purified, the World overcome, and Salvation
obtained.

This Faith is as a Flame of pure Love in the Heart to God. It presses toward
him, pants after him, resigns to him, confides and lives in him. 1 Timothy iii.
9.
The Mystery of it is held in a pure Conscience, and in the effective Power of
the Everlasting Gospel; whence the Christian Dispensation in Holy Writ, is
often distinguished from the exterior Dispensation of the Mosaic Law, and the
prior Administration of Angels in visible Appearances, by the Appellation of
FAITH.

Though the Term Faith is occasionally used by the Penmen of Scripture in
diverse, yet not contrary, but consistent Senses, this seems to be the One
standing Faith mentioned, Ephesians. iv. 5. which is in Christ Jesus, as it is the
Fruit of his Grace and good Spirit in the Heart. Through this the Scriptures
become effectually instructive to the Man of God, and helpful to the real
Christian in the Way of Life and Salvation. Romans i. 17
It is the Faith by which the Members of Christ truly live, Gal. ii. 20, and
iii. 11.
and abide as such. Heb. x. 38 Ephesians. vi. 16
It is their invincible Shield; and the Knowledge of Christ in them, is the
Proof of their possessing it. 2 Cor. xiii 5.
Abundance is said of the Nature, Power, Heb. xi.
and Effects of this all-conquering Faith; but I hope, this will be sufficient
to show, though in its complete Sense, it includes a Belief of all that is said
of Christ, and by Christ, in Holy Writ, it goes deeper, and arises not in Man
merely from the Man but takes its Birth, and receives its Increase from the
Operation of the Holy Spirit in him; which works by it to the Sanctification of
the Heart, and the Production of every Christian Virtue.

CHAP. XIII.
1. S. N.'s saving Ability of the Scriptures considered. 2. His wrong Reasoning
from the Plea of the Papists. 3. Spiritual Things how understood. 4. Barclay
defended from the Charge of arguing in a false Circle. 5. George Fox rescued
from S. N.'s illiberal Abuses.

1. S. N. says, P. 14. No more than what we assert of the Ability of Scripture
have the Apologist or his Defenders said of the Light within. It may be so; but
where is the Proof of this, that himself and his Coadjutors assert concerning
the saving Ability of the Scriptures? Why thus it follows. We also say, the
Scriptures will make us wise unto Salvation, if we attend to the Sense of them,
believe it, and so become influenced by it, therefore they are able to save.

I have already shown, that he mistakes the Sense of the Text abovementioned,
which is not the only One by many, how then should he attend to, believe, and
be influenced by the Sense who has it not? And, how should he be saved by the
Sense of that he does not understand? I hope his Salvation will be better
founded than his Argument; for this has no firmer Basis than bare Assertion.
We say, the Scriptures, etc. therefore they are able to save. But I have said
enough before to this Point.

2. P. 15. He reminds me, that the Papists plead, The Scriptures are not the
supreme Guide; for they do not answer the End, that is, the reconciling of
Differences; for those who pretend most to consult the Scriptures, do most of
all disagree in Matters of Faith, and in their Interpretation of the Scripture.

No Protestant of a sound Understanding can deny the Truth of this; for more
religious Differences have arisen, and still subsist, about the Sense of
Scripture, than any Thing else. There is therefore Need of an infallible
Interpreter; which is the Spirit of Truth, whence they came, John xvi. 13.
and who is measurably given to guide into all Truth. The Error of the Papists
stands not in asserting the undeniable Diversities amongst Men, concerning the
Sense of Scripture, but in setting up a visible carnal Head, instead of the
invisible spiritual Head of the Church; a Succession of fallible Men, under the
Pretense of their being infalliby empowered, officially and finally to
determine Doctrines for, and direct the Consciences of all others; and those
who approach the nearest to this Part of Popery, are such as pretend their own
private, or peculiar Interpretations, are the true Sense of the Scriptures, and
who seek to impose them upon others as such.

3. P. 18. S. N. expresses an Imagination, that Barclay meant by Right Reason,
not the Faculty of the Understanding itself, but that Reasoning or Argument
which is conformable to the true Relation of Things. I must suppose him to
intend here, the true Relation of spiritual Things; for those are what we have
here to do with. But what will this avail him? By what Means will he assure us,
that his Understanding is adequate to this Relation, and to what is, or is not
conformable to it? Spiritual Things are the Things of God, and says Holy Writ,
1 Cor. ii. 11.
The Things of God knows no Man, but the Spirit of God, therefore the Apostle
declares, Verse 12.
We have received, not the Spirit of the World, but the Spirit which is of God;
that we might know the Things that are freely given to us of God." Verse 14.
-- "But the natural Man receives not the Things of the Spirit of God, for
they are Foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. Hence it is clear, that he who has not the Knowledge of
spiritual Things, by the Manifestation of the Spirit of God, has not the true
Knowledge of them, imagine what he will of his other Acquirements; and he must
find himself at last upon the sandy Foundation of vain Opinion.

Verse 15.
The Apostle follows this by asserting, The spiritual Man judges all Things.
That is, the Man who is rendered spiritual, by the renewing Influence of the
Holy Spirit, has, through the Shining of Divine Light upon his Mind, a clear
Discerning of all those spiritual Matters it concerns him to know; which it is
impossible for the natural Man rightly to comprehend.

4. P. 21. The Apologist has Recourse to the Scriptures, to prove to us the
Necessity of immediate Inspiration for all Persons, but when he will convince
us of the Truth and Certainty of the Scriptures, he turns back again to his
peculiar Notion of the Revelation of the Spirit in every Man. Strange Logic
indeed!

What Conclusion is more natural, than to determine what a Tree is by its
Fruit; or what the Fruit is by the Tree? Men do not gather Grapes of Thorns,
nor Figs of Thistles; but when they see a Fig Tree, they know its Fruit must be
Figs; and when they see a Grape, they know it to be the Fruit of the Vine. In
this Manner the Holy Spirit and the Scriptures, where both are known, bear
mutual Testimony to each other, by a Demonstration above all Logic, and out of
the Reach of Sophistry. What Barclay, therefore, urges in this Case, is the
reciprocal Testimony of the Spirit with the Scriptures, as the clearest und
best Convincement of both to the Mind of Man, and this not so much by Way of
Argument to the Head, as Appeal to the Conscience.

5. P. 22. Our Opponent falls upon George Fox, whom he represents in no very
candid Manner. He takes upon him to contradict those concerning him, who for
many Years were personally acquainted with him, and his Conduct, and who, both
from the Opportunities they had, and the Abilities they possessed, were much
better Judges both of the Man, and the Reality of the Facts, than he can
possibly be. What he calls his fair and just Examination, is a mere Train of
Invective and Abuse, relating to Matters transacted long before he was born
into the World; and which his notorious Prejudice renders him unfit to
determine upon. Having pursued George Fox with great Warmth, through eight or
nine Pages, and sufficiently heated his Spirits, he fastens upon his singular
concern at Litchfield, in 1651. Upon which I shall drop the following
Observations.

It has pleased the Divine Being at Times to require Things of his devoted
Servants, which must appear very foolish to the Wisdom of the World; 1 Cor. i.
27.
but he has chosen the foolish Things of the World to confound the Wise. Might
not such an Act as this simply related by George Fox, be required of him, in
Part, to try, or to give him an Opportunity of exercising, his Faith and
Obedience, and also to alarm a People too secure in false Rests, and carnal
Indulgences? He represents the Apprehension he had of it, was to revive the
Memorial of their Predecessors, and their deep Sufferings for the Cause of
Christ; which, in Divine Wisdom, might be proper to a Generation immersed in a
State of Degeneracy, and Forgetfulness of God, and to show them the W^ that
would attend a Continuance in a degenerate Life and Practice. With the same
View, Woes, have been pronounced by diverse of God's inspired Messengers, as we
read in Scripture, and what mighty Hurt or Scandal accrued from this, that it
must be interpreted in the worst Sense possible to be put upon it? What but
Ignorance, or an invidious and malevolent Disposition, would see nothing else
in the Case, but arrant Villainy, rank Enthusiasm, gross and melancholy
Fanaticism, loquacious Lunacy, and diabolical Possession?

If G. Fox had from a Divine Impulse, found it his Concern to go naked for
three Years together, as the Prophet Isaiah did; Isai. xx.
or to lay Siege to a Tile, in a cumbent Posture, Ezekiel. iv.
and bake his Bread with Dung, for the Space of fifteen Months, as Ezekiel did;
it would as surely have drawn down the Resentment of S. N. upon him, and would
have been altogether as just a Foundation for his Asperity.

With Respect to miraculous Testimonials; when I consider the many gross
Impositions of that Kind, under Names delivered down to us with great
Veneration, and sainted in the Romish Church, I do not admire that thinking
Persons, not sufficiently experienced in the Divine Life, should be inclined to
disbelieve any modern Narratives of supernatural Tokens. But this Difference is
evidently observable, between the few related by George Fox, and his Friends,
and the many by Popish Writers. These industriously propagated their miraculous
Legends for a Name; for the Support of unscriptural Superstition, and separate
Interests, monastic Institutions, the Adoration of Relics, and of the blessed
Virgin, the Invocation of Saints, real or nominal, Prayers for the Departed,
Image Worship, their deified Sacrament, the formal Sign of the Cross,
consecrated Oil, etc. But G. Fox never once pretended to a Power of working
Miracles to the People where he came, to open a Door amongst them for the
Reception of himself, or the Principles he spread; nor was it necessary he
should, since they had been already miraculously attested, in the first
planting of Christianity. For, the Fundamentals he preached were, Christ once
in the Flesh, and always in Spirit, as the Light and Life of Men, the Mediator,
the Propitiation, the Intercessor, the potential and actual Redeemer, offered
for all, and to all, and the especial Savior of all that believe in him so as
to obey him; with the Necessity of Regeneration in Man, and the Practice of
every Moral and Christian Virtue.

Is it nothing extraordinary, that a Person so obscure and illiterate, so
little conversant amongst Men, so uneducated in Arts, Languages and Sciences,
so unversed in the various Modes of Divinity, by Turns in Fashion,
uninstructed, unprovided, unprotected by Men, should singly and alone, launch
into the troubled Sea of a tempestuous fluctuating World, and in direct
Opposition to all the Pride, Policy and Power of a learned and lucrative
Priesthood, and a prejudiced People with a bigoted Magistracy at their Head;
that such an One, by the simple Doctrine of the Cross of Christ, should be made
instrumental to the turning of Thousands, not from Form to Form, but from
Darkness to Light; from the Power of Satan, to the Power of God; from a Death
in Sin, to the Life of Righteousness; from habitual Vice, to a Course of
Virtue; insomuch that some judicious Magistrates declared, the People raised
through his Ministry, eased their Hands of much Trouble, and had it not been
for the Spreading of this Principle of Divine Light, the Nation would have been
overrun with Ranterisin, and Licentiousness! In this great and good Work, G.
Fox, with the People he had been instrumental to raise, stood with unabated
Courage and Constancy, and were enabled, with undaunted Fortitude, to bear up
against near forty Years cruel Persecution, with small Intervals, both from
royal and republican Parties, as each ascended the Scale of national Power.
This he was favored to see an End of, before his Removal beyond the Noise of
Archers, and out of the Reach of Envy and Malignity.

Notwithstanding the invidious Misrepresentations made concerning him, no Marks
of Insincerity, Artifice or Imposture appeared in his Conduct, nor of Interest
or Ambition in his Views. He sought not to gather People to himself, but to
Christ alone. He made no Pretenses to work Miracles, in Confirmation of his
Mission, whilst he traveled and labored amongst his Fellow Creatures; but, in
his Journal, which he left behind him in Manuscript, he acknowledges the
Goodness and Power of God, in giving extraordinary Proofs at Times, according
to his Pleasure, that he attended some of them, with a Measure of the same
Divine Power, which formerly accompanied diverse of the primitive Ministers in a
much larger Degree.

But notwithstanding the Principles we profess, are evidently scriptural, and
depend not upon, nor as S. N. mistakenly asserts, Page 29.
stand or fall together with any Relations of miraculous Appearances, either in
G. Fox's Journal, or the Writings of his Co-temporaries; which Relations are
purely incidental, and appeared not till many Years after the Settlement of the
Society. Yet, as he was an useful, eminent, and honorable Member of our
religious Body, we are not unconcerned in his Veracity, and therefore require
better Proofs against it than the Surmises, Presumptions, and Disguises of
Prejudice. What he relates of the Facts, he asserts upon his own Knowledge of
them, and diverse are witnessed to by others as well as himself. Can S. Newton
assert the Contrary, upon his certain Knowledge of the Falsehood of those
Relations; or has he demonstrated the Truth of them to be impossible? No such
Matter. They are such as have always been; and what have been may be. George
Fox's Integrity is too well attested, to be destroyed by Imaginations,
Innuendoes, and Invectives. Lucre, Preferment, the Avoidance of Disadvantage,
Distress, or Abuse, have operated upon the Hopes and Fears of many; but never
appeared to have shaken, or weighed with him. Such was the Strength of his
Faith, and the internal Support which attended him. He was no Sect-master. He
sought neither external Benefits, nor the Honor that is from below. He traded
not in Religion. He truckled not to the corrupt Humors or Dispositions of any.
He called the People out of that Apostasy from the Holy Spirit of God they were
too generally sunk into, and out of those carnal Ordinances which could not
truly Heart, and Reformation in Life and Practice. Neither did himself, nor
those who became connected with him, divide from others for Separation-sake,
but to join together in following the One Everlasting Shepherd of the true
Sheep. To him they gathered, and in the Life and Love of the Gospel, became
united to him in Spirit, as their only Head, and one to another as Brethren.
They learnt to call no Man Master in a religious Sense, and to know that the
true Church is not the Church of Peter, of Paul, or of Apollos; that it owns
but one Head, the Lord Jesus Christ; whose Followers they professed to be, and
not the Followers of G. Fox, R. Barclay, W. Penn, or any other, further than
they followed him. These they never looked upon as Heads of, but Brethren in
the Society, never styled themselves by their Names, nor allowed them any other
Estimation, than that double Honor required by the Apostle, 1 Timothy v. 17.
to those who are doubly serviceable.

It is too probable from the Sacred Writings to be denied, that the Almighty,
both before the Institution of the Mosaic Law, and during its Continuance, all
along, at Seasons, occafionally manifested apparent Tokens of his supernatural
Power, through those he particularly concerned to hold up the Mirror of true
Religion in its genuine Purity, and to revive and restore it when lost, or to a
great Degree obscured amongst its Professors; and why should it appear an
Absurdity to suppose, that since the primitive Age of Christianity, he should
see fit sometimes on like Occasions, to add Sanctions of like Nature? When I
find such Instances testified to by Men of Understanding, Integrity, and
disinterested Christian Piety, upon their own Knowledge of the Facts, I see no
just Ground to discredit their Attestations, because Persons manifestly
prejudiced against them, and confessedly insensible of the Influence and
Operation of the Holy Spirit, have settled themselves in an Opinion, that they
are to remain for ever to be discontinued under the Administration of the
Gospel, though continued occasionally throughout all former Dispensations. I
have met with no Reason sufficient to warrant me to conclude, that the great
Minister of the Sanctuary might not see proper, in the last Century, to add
some Instances of this Kind, to the Services of his disinterested and devoted
Servants, for their Encouragement, to stem the Torrent of Opposition against
the Revival of his Truth in its Purity, when Formality and Hypocrisy on one
Hand, Licentiousness and Profaneness on the other, with Jarring and Violence on
all Sides raged against them; as if nothing less was meant than their utter
Extinction.

CHAP. XIV.
1. S. N.'s Insinuation, that I prefer the Apology to the New Testament, with
the Imaginations he grounds it upon, answered. Herein the true Gospel is shown,
and the People professing it defended. 2. Answers to his Queries concerning the
Economy of the Quakers, wherein the Nature and Manner of their Worship is
explained. 3. An Abuse obviated, and the Scriptures placed in their proper
Light. 4. The Futility of S. N.'s Remark concerning the Prophecies I adduced.
5. My Inadvertence in one of my Expressions acknowledged, and my Sense cleared.
6. Concerning Revelation objective and subjective, immediate and instrumental.
7. My Opponent's Instance of Balaam answered. 8. His Artifice remarked, in
perverting our Words to serve his own Purpose.

1. S. N. in his Letter, Page 9, indirectly insinuated, that the Quakers read
more, and form their Sentiments more from the Apology than the New Testament.
Knowing this to be untrue, I denied it of the Generality of that People, and
queried with him, If he intended it of particular Persons, who are they? In
Answer to this Question, P. 47, he now assumes the Charge of Nathan upon David,
and roundly asserts to me, thou art the Man. But how I should be the Man he
meant when he penned that Suggestion, is mysterious to me, seeing then he
certainly was perfectly unacquainted with me. But it seems, for Want of
another, I must be the Man, because he cannot help thinking, P. 46, that I
assert or insinuate, 1. What the Apostles have spoken and written is not the
Gospel." 2. That the real Meaning of their Writings is only a dry Theory." 3.
"That the Gospel in Fact is an inexplicable Substance within all Men, whether
they know any Thing of the Character and Redemption of Christ, as represented
in the New Testament, or not.

4. That the Whole of our Salvation depends solely upon an inward Power and
Virtue, without the Influence of the inspired Sentiments of the Book of God.

If I may be allowed to speak my own Sense, what I have asserted, and do
believe, respecting these Points, is, 1. That the evangelic and apostolic
Writings are descriptive and declarative of the Gospel, Romans i. 16
which therein is defined to be the Power of God unto Salvation; 1 Cor. i. 24.
that Christ is the Power of God, who spiritually and internally administers
Light and Life to the Souls of Men, which spiritual and powerful
Administration, is the essential Gospel: and that, both those Parts of
Scripture, which bear Testimony to the Incarnation and outward Process of
Christ, and those that witness to his inward Ministration in Spirit, whether
narrative or doctrinal, being the best and most eminent written Testifications
of the Gospel, are therefore, by a Metonymy, usually called by its Name.

2. In my Observations, from P. 36 to 43, I fully made appear, that the real
Meaning of the apostolic Writings is not a dry Theory, but a strong
Recommendation of the living and sensible Operation of the Power of God.

3. The Reader may see in my Answers to the first of these Articles, and other
Parts of this Treatise, that I do not hold the Gospel to be in Fact an
inexplicable Substance, etc. But that it is not to be truly and certainly known
without Divine Illumination; for, 1 Cor. ii. 11.
The Things of God knows no Man, but the Spirit of God." We read, 2 Timothy i.
10.
that "Life and Immortality are brought to Light by the Gospel. But what is
this Life and Immortality? Did not Mankind believe in a future State, before
the Incarnation of Christ? Yes, certainly: Both Jews and Gentiles believed and
held the Truth of it. What Life and Immortality then is that which is peculiar
to the Gospel, and which it is its particular Property to unvail? It consists
not wholly in the Relation of the external Procedure and Doctrines of our Lord,
but mainly in that spiritual Gift he procured for us through his Sufferings,
which is the Life and Power that the immortal Spirit of God manifests in the
believing and obedient Soul; that Spirit which quickens those who have been
dead in Trespasses and Sins, Ephesians. iv. 18.
and therein alienated from the Life of God. The very Essence of the Gospel, is
the issuing forth of this Spirit of Life to the Hearts of Men. Prove. iv. 23.
Keep thy Heart with all Diligence, says the wise Man, for out of it are the
Issues of Life. This teaches that these living Issues arise in the Heart of
Man, but not from the Heart itself. Was it so, the Heart or Soul would be its
own Quickener and Savior, and Christ would be excluded as such; John xiv. 6.
but he alone is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, therefore the issuings of
Life to the Heart are from the Spirit, and in and through it by his Spirit. The
Divine Influence of it is the Life of the Soul, that which renders it living,
and void of this, it cannot be in a Gospel Sense, a living Soul. It may endure
to Eternity; but mere Duration is not this Divine Life. To exist without this
Life, is to be scripturally dead; it is therefore requisite for the Soul to
wait for, feel after, and find this immortal Life, and also to keep to it with
all Diligence, that it may experience the daily Issues thereof to its Comfort
and Preservation, John iv. 14.
and to be as a Well of Water springing up into everlasting Life.

4. The Pretense that I assert, the Salvation of those who have the Privilege
of perusing the Scriptures, depends solely upon an inward Power and Virtue,
without those as a Means, is no Assertion of mine; for my Words plainly
indicate the contrary. I say, P. 14, We do not pretend that the internal Motion
of the Spirit is the only Means of Reformation and Religion, to those who are
likewise favored with the Scriptures; but highly prize, thankfully accept, and
use them as the best secondary Means extant. I also understand the propitiatory
Sacrifice of our Savior, by which he opens the Door of Reconciliation for us,
to be the initiatory Part of Man's Salvation, and the internal Work of
Regeneration by his Spirit, to be its actual Completion; for thereby an
Entrance is administered into the Heavenly Kingdom.

Lastly, no Man can have the Influence of the inspired Sentiments of the Book
of God, without receiving those inspired Sentiments, which I have sufficiently
shown, no Man has who reads without the inspiring Power. Every Reader has
only his own Conceptions about the Sentiments inspired of God, and not those
real Sentiments, without a Degree of Inspiration from him; which the manifest
Mistakes and Contradictions of many demonstrate they are Strangers to.

By all this, it must evidently appear, that S. N.'s Premises are so many
Perversions, and his Thou art the Man, a groundless Accusation.

In his two next Paragraphs, S. N. demands an Exposure of some Matters relating
to the internal Management of the Society in its own peculiar Affairs; and
though I am not convinced of his Authority for it, I Will give him a just Answer
to his Queries, without returning his Incivilities.

1. The Quakers neither read the Scriptures, nor any Thing else, during the
Time of their Worship, or as a Part of it, but after that is over, they usually
once in the Year, take the Opportunity, before the Congregation separate, to
read those short Informations and Advices which are transmitted from the
Yearly Meeting in London. These Advices always consist of Scripture-quotations,
and Doctrines agreeable to Scripture, according to the best of their Knowledge;
but the reading of them is no more a Part of their Worship, than the reading
Testimonies of Denial against immoral Members, or the Substance of Briefs
recommended by the Crown, at such Opportunities.

2. They give such Preference to the Scriptures above all other Writings, that
they strictly press the frequent reading of them, and call for Answers at every
Quarterly Meeting throughout the Society, and at the general Yearly Meeting in
London from every particular Quarterly Meeting, whether the Holy Scriptures are
constantly read in their Families, or not; which they neither do, nor ever did,
respecting any of their own Writings, or any others.

3. The Society does occasionally present, or recommend such of their Books as
they think proper to give Information concerning their Principles, to obviate
the Prejudices conceived, and industriously propagated against them; which they
apprehend, they have as much Right to do, as their Adversaries have to
misrepresent and calumniate them; and indeed, the Abuses of those are
sufficient to oblige them to this Practice.

4. They do recommend Silence and Stillness in their religious Assemblies; and
as our Manner of Worship is misunderstood by many, and often treated with
Ridicule, I shall take this Opportunity to offer some Explanation of it.

We look upon Divine Worship to be the most solemn Act the Mind of Man is
capable of being engaged in; and in Consideration of the high and inconceivable
Majesty of Almighty God, think it our Duty to approach him with the greatest
Reverence. Every thinking Person, who is in any Degree sensible of the Love and
Fear of God, must esteem it an awful Thing, to present himself to the especial
Notice of the Infinite Omnipresent Eternal Being. Under a Sense of this, the
wise Man advises, Keep thy Foot when thou go to the House of God," Eccles.
v. 1.
(or enters upon Worship) "and be more ready to hear, than to give the
Sacrifice of Fools; for they consider not that they do Evil. Be not rash with
thy Mouth, and let not thine Heart be hasty to utter any Thing before God; for
God is in Heaven, and thou upon Earth, therefore let thy Words be few. He well
knew, as he expresses it, Prove. xvi. 1.
that both The Preparation of the Heart, and the Answer of the Tongue is from
the Lord. This accords with what our Savior says, John xv. 5
Without me ye can do nothing. We, therefore, cannot perform Divine Worship
acceptably but by his Assistance. This must be received in Spirit; for, says
the Apostle, Romans viii. 26.
The Spirit also helps our Infirmities; for we know not what we should pray
for as we ought. This being as certainly our Case, as it was that of the
Apostles and primitive Believers, it is incumbent on us to wait for that Spirit
which is requisite to help our Infirmities, in order to pray as we ought. No
Forms of Devotion of Men's Invention can supply the Place of the Spirit. The
same Apostle further says, Ephesians. ii. 18
Through him we both have an Access, by one Spirit unto the Father. Seeing
therefore, that both our Help and Access is through the Spirit of Christ, the
Renewal of which is at his Pleasure, and not ours, we must necessarily wait for
it. This Waiting must be in Stillness of Mind from the common Course of our own
Thoughts, from all wandering Imaginations, and also in Silence from the
Expression of Words; for the Utterance of Words is not waiting, but acting.

Words are requisite to convey the Sense of one Person to another, but not to
that Omniscient Being, who is an universal Spirit, and every where Almighty,
who therefore stands not in Need, either of the Use of corporeal Organs,
Instruments, or the Sound of Words, to communicate with the Spirit of Man.

If, in order to worship, the Mind do not settle into Stillness, the Passions
will be at work, and may agitate it into enthusiastic Hears, and vague
Imaginations. But in true Stillness, and Singleness of Soul toward God, they
are silenced and subjected. The still small Voice of the Inspirer of all Good
then comes to be heard, and the Mind being closely engaged in Attention
thereunto, and answering it in Faith and humble Submission, feels Divine Life
and Love spring up, and receives Ability therein, truly to worship the great
Author of its Existence, and Heavenly Supplier of its Wants, with a Devotion no
Forms can reach.

This Worship is not entered upon by totally laying aside our Faculties, and
falling into a senseless Stupor, as superficial Observers have imagined, but by
a real Introversion of Mind, and an Attention fixed singly upon the alone
Object of all Adoration, in patient, yet fervent Desire after him. Thus,
according to the Hebrew, the experienced Psalmist advises, Be silent to the
Lord, Ps. xxxvii. 7.
and wait patiently for him; and respecting his own Practice, he says, Truly
my Soul is silent upon God, Ibid. lxii. 1.
adding this cogent Reason, from him comes my Salvation. Verse 5, he applies
the Exhortation to himself. My Soul, wait thou only upon God, for my
Expectation is from him. Great Encouragement he had thus to wait, as appears
Psalm xl. where he says, I waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto
me, and heard my Cry. He brought me up also out of an horrible Pit, out of the
miry Clay, and set my Feet upon a Rock, and established my Goings, and he has
put a new Song into my Mouth, even Praise unto our God. This was no new Song in
itself, but being sensibly renewed to him in his acceptable Waiting, he, with
sufficient Propriety, styles it so.

To the same practical and profitable Doctrine Jeremiah bears Testimony. Lam.
iii. 26, 27, 28.
It is good that a Man should both hope, and quietly wait for the Salvation"
(or saving Help) of the Lord. It is good for a Man that he bear the Yoke in his
Youth. He sits alone, and keeps Silence, because he has borne it upon him.

Silent Waiting was in Practice among the Prophets, and those that attended
them, as appears in the Prophecy of Ezekiel. We find the Spirit of the Prophet
was engaged in Divine Vision, whilst the Elders of Judah sat before him, as it
is described from the 1st Verse of the viiith Chapter, to the 4th of the xith
Chapter. During the Time of which Vision, it cannot be consistently supposed,
that he was either speaking to them, or they to him, or to each other. This was
not a singular Instance of their meeting together, for it was the Manner of
God's People to congregate with the Prophets, as that close Reprehension
plainly indicates. Eze. xxxiii 31.
They come unto thee as the People comes, and they sit before thee as my
People, and they hear thy Words, but they will not do them.

In this solemn Practice, we have often been enabled thankfully to acknowledge,
the Verity of that gracious Declaration of our Lord, Where Two or Three are
gathered together in my Name, Mat. xviii. 20.
there am I in the midst of them;" the Fulfilling of that Promise, They that
wait upon the Lord shall renew their Strength; Isa. xl. 31.
the Certainty of that Assertion, The Lord is good unto them that wait for him,
Lam. iii. 25.
to the Soul that seeks him; and the Necessity and Authority of that just
Command, "Be still, Psalm. xlvi. 10.
and know that I am God."

As silent Waiting appears to us, in the first Place, requisite to the Worship
of God in Spirit and Truth, it is always our Practice, for we believe he ought
to have the Direction of our Hearts therein; and if he please to influence any
One under due Preparation, vocally to appear, either by Way of Address to
himself in Prayer, or to us in Preaching, we never preclude such Appearances,
but silently assist according to our Measures. If it prove that none are so
concerned to speak, we sit the Time through in Silence, wherein true mental
Worship is often experienced; but never appoint any Meeting with Intent, that
it shall be held throughout in Silence, as some have mistakenly imagined; for
we believe, that all ought to be led and guided by the good Spirit of God, more
especially in the solemn Acts of Divine Worship. It would be an happy Thing,
were all so led, amongst us as well as others, but the Case appears otherwise
with too many, who sit unconcerned, in Expectation of hearing the Ministry,
instead of waiting upon God, and therefore often meet with Disappointment. The
Apostle said in his Age, they are not all Israel, Romans ix. 6.
which are of Israel. So we must acknowledge, all who have descended from
faithful Ancestors, are not themselves faithful; but the Defect is in
themselves, and not in the Principle.

5. We profess, that the Spirit of Truth ought to be ours, and every Man's
Leader, and that this Spirit is an infallible Principle, and that so far as any
faithfully follow it, they are infallibly led, and no further; but we never
did, nor do profess, that all in Society with us are so led, or even
sufficiently seek to be so. Nor was it the Case amongst the primitive
Christians themselves. We well know, and freely own, that we have all sinned,
and come short of the Glory of God, and that without Repentance and
Regeneration, we must for ever fall short of it. We are also sensible, that
upon due Confession, Submission, and sincere Obedience to the Manifestations of
Christ, the Light of Men, 1 John i. 9.
he is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us from all
Unrighteousness;" Verse 7.
and if we "walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, we have Fellowship one
with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all Sin. Could
any Thing but either gross Ignorance, captious Envy, or Malevolence infer from
this, that we profess, we all are, or that any of us always are infallible? Yet
so have our Doctrines been discolored by our Adversaries from the Beginning,
and in the same Track our present Opposer follows his Predecessors, repeatedly
upbraiding us by Allegation, that there is some Difference both in Sentiment
and Practice among us; but is it possible to be otherwise with any Body of
People, whether less or more, whilst different Degrees of Capacity and
Experience remain amongst them, as they ever must, and whilst any are deficient
in paying that due Regard to the Principles they profess, which they ought to
do?

3. S. N.'s subsequent Query, Page 47, has Reference to an Expression of mine,
in Answer to his common, though improper, Manner of Reasoning, that is, drawing
general Conclusions from particular Premises, and charging the Faults of
particular Persons upon the general Body, which never espoused nor countenanced
them. This I showed to be a fallacious Practice, and instanced, that by this
Manner of arguing, the Theft and Treachery of Judas might be charged upon the
whole twelve Apostles, seeing he was one of them. Upon this my Opponent
impertinently asks, Did our Lord, and his Apostles counterance Theft or
Treachery, as the Quakers do publicly and privately a Neglect of a primary and
principal Attention to the Scriptures, as the best Standard of Faith and
Practice?

This appears intended to deceive the unwary Reader into a Notion, that in the
preceding Remark, I have drawn a Reflection injurious to the Character of the
Apostles, and to heighten the Prejudice, he irreverently foists in our Lord
also, who is not once mentioned in the Paragraph. With Regard to the
Scriptures, I have declared our Sense concerning them, and shall only add, that
we hold them to be the best written Standard of Belief and Practice that we
know of in the World. We venerate them for the Sake of the great Author they
came from, and seek to him for the right Understanding and proper Use of them;
believing him who alone can open the true Sense of them, and accompany it with
Power to enable us effectually to put it in Practice, to be the primary Guide,
and therefore ought always to have our principal Attention, ever esteeming
ourselves in Duty bound, in the first Place, Heb. xii. 2.
to look unto Jesus, Luke xii. 23.
the Author and Finisher of our Faith. As the Life is more than Meat, and the
Body than Raiment, so is the immediate Influence of the Spirit of Christ more
than the Scriptures, or than any Man's, or Peoples private or partial
Interpretation of them, from whence have arisen all the Differences that
subsist about them, and which must ever remain to be the Case, till the Holy
Spirit itself is applied and attended to, as the right Interpreter, and supreme
Standard of Faith and Practice. This is the original essential primary Guide,
and that Revelation which comes immediately from the Spirit of God into a Man's
Heart, is certainly the primary One, and that which he receives through
instrumental Means, is as certainly but a secondary One.

4. S. N. pretends, P. 56, It is somewhat remarkable, that Mr. Phipps should
refer us more than one Hundred Years back, to prove to us, there had been a
Spirit of Prophecy among them. Why should this be so remarkable, when he
demanded what Grounds Barclay had to assert such had appeared among them? Would
any Person rationally expect I should bring modern Instances to prove an
Assertion made before they existed? Had I introduced any that arose after the
Date of the Apology, he might properly have said they were impertinently
alleged.

5. Page 64, he cites this Passage from my Observations, Barclay's Doctrine is,
that the Holy Spirit communicates not a natural Faculty, but itself to the
faithful Soul, and becomes to it a new Principle wherein, or as an Organ
whereby, it is capacitated rightly to understand religious Truth. My
Inadvertence in leaving an Expression so short of my real Intention, perhaps
may have led my Opponent to misunderstand my Meaning. I must therefore request
his Leave to explain my own Words; which should have been, The Holy Spirit
communicates not a natural Faculty, but somewhat from itself, to the faithful
Soul, which becomes to it, etc. By this he might have gathered, that I intended
not a Communication of its Essence, but its Influence; like as the Sun in the
Firmament does not shed its Body, but its Radiance upon the Earth; by the
unvailing Light, and animating Warmth of which, the Faculties of M^n receive a
clearer and stronger Perception, both of that glorious Luminary itself, and
also of what it reveals and discovers, than it possible for them to do without
its Assistance, by all other Means whatsoever. As to the Word Organ here, S. N.
knows it is only a Metaphor, a short Simile in one Word, often used in
Discourse, not as Argument, but for Illustration; and as no Simile runs on all
Four, it is not reasonable to expect it in this. I meant to be understood by
the Words, as an Organ, its operating to like Purpose as a corporeal Organ, or
a Means of conveying Intelligence from the Divine Essence to the Soul of Man;
as an Eye does from the Object to the Understanding. I hope this Explanation
will sufficiently obviate all the Inferences and Reflections occasioned by my
Inadvertence.

6. Page 69 and 70, S. N. infers, that the Quakers Notion of Revelation seems
to imply, that it must be a Revelation of something not understood, or a
Communication of something to the Mind, of which the Soul has no Conception;
and that it is a manifest Contradiction, -- no Revelation at all, etc.

Barclay distinguishes Revelation into objective and subjective, and sometimes
he speaks of the one, and sometimes of the other. In order to show the
Propriety of this Distinction, let me observe, that the Soul of Man has not
only a Faculty of Cogitation, by which it ordinarily thinks, unites, divides,
compares, or forms Ideas, but also a latent Power of internal Sensation, or of
perceiving Spiritual Objects by an inward and spiritual Sense, when presented
through a proper Medium; which, till the Beams of Divine Light shine upon it,
it must be as totally unacquainted with, as the Child in its Mother's Womb is
with its Faculties of Sight and Hearing. For, though in that Situation, it may
be completely formed, and possess every Organ proper to corporeal Sensation,
yet it is not empowered to exercise them, or really to know it has them, till
it be brought forth into the Medium necessary to the Use of them, composed of
the Light and Air of this World. Then it first finds the peculiar Sense, and
Exercise of those natural Powers which, before its Birth, it could not have the
least Understanding or proper Use of. In like Manner, the natural Man must be
delivered out of his natural Darkness, into the luminous and quickening
Influence of that Divine Word, or Spirit, which is most emphatically styled the
true Light and Life of Men. Thus born of the Spirit, into this proper Medium of
Divine Knowledge, the Soul is made acquainted with that spiritual Sense it
could neither discover, nor believe pertained to it, whilst in its natural
State. This is no new natural Faculty added, but its own mental Power newly
opened, and brought into its due Place and Use.

Words are inadequate to the Expression of this internal Sense felt in the Soul
under Divine Influence. It cannot be ideally conveyed to the Understanding of
the Unexperienced; for it is not an Image, but a Sensation, impossible to be
conceived but by its own Impression. So true is that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. ii.
9, 10.
Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the Heart of Man,
the Things which God has prepared for them that love him; but God has
revealed them unto us by his Spirit. It was upon this Consideration that I
said, Divine Light is the Subject of inward Sensation, and is not to be
communicated from one to another by Reasoning, over verbal Description. For,
should any Person give the most clear and lively Description possible of the
Light of the Sun, to a Man blind from his Birth, it would only be communicating
an ideal Notion of the Light, but not the Light itself. It might be called a
subjective Revelation concerning the Light to him, but not an objective one of
the Light itself. This no Man can have but by his own immediate Sensation.

Divine Revelation is a Disclosure of something to the rational Mind by the
Holy Ghost, not in the Mind's own Power to discover. This the Holy Spirit does,
either by unvailing of itself by its Influence in some Degree to the Soul, and
giving it an internal Sense of its Presence; or by favoring it with the Vision
of other Objects, real or representative, through the Communication of Divine
Light and Power; or by giving the Soul a clear Sense of its own State and
Condition. All this being a Discovery of Objects, is called objective
Revelation.

Subjective Revelation is a Disclosure of Subjects, or Things relative, through
the Inspiration of the Holy Spirit; by which the Mind is opened into the
Knowledge of the Divine Will concerning Persons or Things, led into the true
Sense of Scriptures, or into a deeper Understanding of Doctrines than it could
ever reach without Divine Illumination. Of this Kind was the original
Revelation of the Scriptures to those who penned them.

All this, both objective and subjective, is truly internal immediate
Revelation. What is now modishly treated as the only Revelation still existing,
and to exist, is rather the Fruit of Revelation than the Thing itself, a
scriptural Record of Things revealed; for they certainly were so to those to
whom they were immediately disclosed; but the different Senses put upon the
many disputed Parts of them, for many Generations past, demonstrate those Parts
are not truly a Revelation to those who mistake them; nor can they ever become
such to them, till they know the Holy Author to be their Interpreter. 1 Pet. i.
20, 21.
For, No Prophecy of Scripture is of any private Interpretation. For the
Prophecy came not in old Time, or rather, at any Time, by the Will of Man, but
Holy Men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

P. 75 and 76, S. N. argues, that the immediate internal Revelation of the Holy
Ghost is not in all sufficient to save, because Barclay allows, that some who
have once had it, may be, and have been damned; to which I answer, if all were
saved, it would be a certain Proof that God is able to save all, but are we
therefore warranted to deny or dispute the Ability of Almighty Power to save
all, because all are not saved? A flowing Spring is certainly sufficient to
quench my Thirst, if I drink sufficiently of it; but if I refuse, the
Insufficiency is not in the Spring, but entirely owing to my Refusal. But
Balaam is adduced as an Instance quite in Point; because he had internal
Revelation, yet taught Balak to seduce the Israelites to sin. That he sometimes
had internal Revelation, is true, and whilst he adhered thereunto, it preserved
him from teaching Seduction. It was when he departed from it, or suffered
himself to be so far overcome with a Love to the Wages of Unrighteousness, 2
Pet. ii. 15, and Jude 11.
that the Holy Spirit departed from him, as an Illuminator and Preserver, that
he joined Balak in his evil Purposes. This has been the Case of all Apostates,
the Grace of God is all-sufficient, but they disobey, divide from, and thereby
prevent it from operating sufficiently to their Salvation.

CHAP. XV.
1. S. N.'s Inconsistency with our Savior's Expression, Mat. xvi. 2. The
Possibility and Necessity of attaining a spiritual Sense of the Spirit of God,
preached by Paul to the Pagans. 3. A false Inference from my Words obviated. 4.
The Pagans not void of God's saving Grace, nor led by it into Polytheism, etc.
The rude Absurdity of charging us with Paganism. 5. Impious Idolaters, etc. not
in Christ; but he appears in them as a swift Witness. To whom he communicates
saving Knowledge. A Piece of manifest Abuse repelled. 6. The Gospel comes not
in Word only, but in Power, and Christ not only came outwardly, but also
appears inwardly, and by the powerful Operation of his Spirit effects all our
Works in us. He is the real Efficient of all Good in Man. 7. The Gospel
sensibly preached in every Man. The Office of the Spirit of Truth. 8. The Light
not unintelligible, though undefinable as to its intimate and peculiar Essence
by the Wit of Man, to which natural Things are equally so. 9. My Belief
respecting S. N.'s Note. 10. His Misinformation and Impertinence concerning
our Terms of Admission. 11. A Day, or Time of Visitation to Man demonstrated.
12. My Intention in styling the Relief be expresses a notional one. 13. What
Deism is. The Quakers not Deists, nor such Enthusiasts as their Opponent would
render them.

1. PAGE 104. We pass over his new Discovery, that the Rock on which Jesus will
build his Church, is the immediate Revelation of Christ by the Father. What he
calls my new Discovery, is our Savior's old Discovery, as ancient as the New
Testament; and what he styles passing over it, is stopping to contradict it.
The Answer of Christ to Peter is, Blessed art thou Simon Barjona, for Flesh and
Blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father, which is in Heaven. In
Opposition to this, S. N. says, It is at least highly probable, the Apostle
learnt the Truth he confessed from our Lord's Conversation and Instruction, or
from the Baptist's Testimony, however the Spirit of the Father influenced him
in receiving it. I take it, the Truth Peter confessed was not the mere Truth of
a Proposition, but a Sense of the Reality of Jesus being the Christ. This, our
Lord says, the Father revealed to Peter; but S. N. says it is at least highly
probable he did not, but that either Christ himself or the Baptist did it, and
intimates that the Father only aided toward the Apostle's better receiving
their Report. I do not see, why this Truth is not as likely to have been
spiritually revealed to Peter by the Father, as it was to Paul, who declares,
Ephesians. iii. 3, 4, 5.
that by Revelation the Mystery of Christ was made known to him, and that it
was likewise revealed to his Holy Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit.

2. Neither shall we dwell upon his Ranking, P. 41. the feeling after God, and
finding him, mentioned by Paul to the Athenians, Acts xvii. 27, as an equal
Proof of his Point, with the Prophets being moved by the Holy Ghost. 2. Pet. i.
21. The Point I brought this Scripture in Proof of is, that a spiritual
internal Sense of God is not impossible to be known. I therefore first
observed, that Paul told the Athenian Pagans, God made of one Blood all Nations
of Men, not only to live upon the Face of the Earth, but that they should seek
the Lord, if happily they might feel after him and find him. "Hence I inferred,
"he then must certainly be to be found and felt by Man; and as he is a Spirit,
it must be after a spiritual Manner. We cannot consistently suppose the Apostle
was bantering the Athenians here, by putting them upon feeling after and
finding what was not to be felt nor found by them. To this Argument my
Antagonist answers not, but recurs to Evasion, and charges me with invidious
Reflections and designing Perversions, for no better End that I can see, but to
cover his Imbecility.

3. P. 106, he cites me as follows, Observations, P. 44, The Confidence of a
true Christian is not in what he hears, or reads, but in what he feels of the
Holy Spirit. Hereupon he says, Now this sets aside the real Use and Importance
of a written Revelation, to all Intents and Purposes, for its Contents cannot
now be known but by either Reading or Hearing.

The real Use of the Scriptures is to afford Instruction and Comfort, and their
chief Importance is to recommend to the Spirit of Christ from whence they came,
that his People may be enabled rightly to put their Trust in him. 2 Cor. v. 5,
6.
The Apostle declares, God had given them the Earnest of the Spirit, therefore
they were always confident. Was not their Confidence then grounded in the
Earnest of the Spirit given them of God? And, is a trust in this Spirit, and a
Belief of the Contents of Scripture, incompatible with each other? Or, is a
Christian to have no Confidence in the Spirit and Power of the Savior himself,
but all in his own Notions of what he reads in Scripture, true or false; and
will his own Efforts according to these Notions save him? Cannot he follow
those scriptural Exhortations and Doctrines which plainly teach us to pray for
the Spirit, to be led by the Spirit, to live and walk in the Spirit, without
setting the Scriptures aside, and treating them with Contempt? Those who have
experienced a living Sense of the Spirit, instead of dividing from the
Scriptures, and depreciating their Service, are by the Divine Influence, more
closely united to them, read them with a better Understanding, and more to
their Comfort and Advantage than ever, are altogether as fervently concerned to
press the frequent Perusal of them, as an^y of those who so unjustly accuse
them, and who are so inexperienced in the Truth as it is in Jesus, as to place
their whole Confidence in the Notions and Opinions they gather from reading the
Scriptures, and remain Strangers to the necessary Knowledge of Christ within,
the Hope of Glory.

4. P. 109. S. N. thus entitles his 7th Article, The religious Opinions and
Practices of Mr. Phipps's Brethren, whom he has selected from among the
Heathens, recapitulated, that he may see what their supposed Divine Inspiration
taught them.

The Instances I adduced from the Pagans, were to show, that it was evident
from some of their own Expressions, they had an internal Sense of that Grace of
God which the Apostle says, Tit. ii. xx.
brings Salvation, and has appeared to all Men. The Citations I made, appear
to me Proofs of it. Our Opponent appearing prepossessed with an Opinion, that
eternal Salvation is confined to the Knowledge of the History and Doctrines of
our Savior, is necessarily led to think, that all who are not providentially
furnished with this, are intentionally left under an Impossibility of entering
the Kingdom of Heaven; and thence concludes, that the Generality of the Pagan
World must be void of any Share of the saving Grace of God; and that we must be
wrong in supposing otherwise concerning them. Possessed of these Notions, he
seems to infer, that the same Principle which taught them, they had at Times a
Manifestation of something of a Divine Nature within them, also led them into
their Polytheism, Idolatry, false Theology, and Immoralities. But I apprehend,
this is as far from being true of the Pagans, as it is of those Patriarchs,
Israelites, and Christians, who have defaulted or degenerated. For I can no
more believe, that Principle which sometimes gave Plato a Sense that the Light
and Spirit of God raises up the Soul into a sensible Communion with him, led
him also to teach a Plurality of Deities, than I believe the Spirit which led
Noah to preach Righteousness, led him also to over-charge and disguise himself
with Wine; or that the Spirit which at Seasons inspired Aaron, led him also to
make a Golden Calf, for the Israelites to worship, or at all concurred with him
in it. Nor do I think it reasonable to conclude, that because Aaron assisted in
an idolatrous Practice, and offended the Spirit of God in other Respects, as
also Miriam, David, Solomon, and many other inspired Persons did, that he never
had a Sense of Divine Influence.

But it seems, both myself, and the People I am religiously connected with, are
Brother-Pagans, because we hold one like Opinion with some of the best and most
intelligent Heathens. Is it either just or charitable, to suppose those
Heathens held no sound or sensible Truths? If they did hold any such, how can
any sound or sensible Mind do otherwise, than to acknowledge the same Truths?
And, if such a One detest their Polytheism, Idolatry, and Immorality, as truly
as S. N. himself can do, is he justly to be stigmatized with the reproachful
Title of Brother-Pagan? What is it that constitutes Paganism? 1 Cor. xii. 7.
Is it a Belief, that the Manifestation of the Spirit is given to every Man to
profit withal? Or, Acts x. 34, 35.
, to perceive of a Truth, that God is no Respecter of Persons, but in every
Nation, he that fears him, and works Righteousness, is accepted with him?
Then both Paul and Peter were Brother-Pagans too. If we hold the same Doctrine
with the Pagans where their Tenets are agreeable to Truth, is it equitably to
be inferred, that we are one with them where they are not? Should I return my
Antagonist his Compliment, by producing Points, wherein he accords with
Papists, Deists, Enthusiasts, Antinomians, and Pagans, and charge their Errors
and Extravagancies upon him, would he not tell me, it is treating him with
haughty Contempt and virulent Invective, as he does without any such Reason?
Let him look to the Beam in his own Eye.

The Sentences I quoted from a few Pagan Writers demonstrate what I adduced
them for; that they were sensible of a Divine Principle in their Consciences,
and knew somewhat of its Operation. Their abiding still in some Part of the
Polytheism, etc. they had been educated in, and the Customs they had been
taught to hold as sacred and inviolable, only indicate, they had not come so
fully under the Guidance of this Principle, as to be led into all Truth by it;
but not that they were void of all Sense of it.

P. 119, 120, S. N. asserts, when Paul was at Athens, he did not direct them to
an immediate Revelation -- nor appeal to a Divine saving Principle, or Spirit
in them. But elsewhere says, Ephesians. ii. 12. they were without God; 1 Cor. i. 21.
and that they knew not God.

The Text does not peremptorily say, they knew not God, but that they knew him
not by their own Wisdom; and the same Apostle says, They are without Excuse;
Romans i. 20, 21, 22.
because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were
thankful, but became vain in their Imaginations, and their foolish Heart was
darkened. Professing themselves Wise, they became Fools. This shows, they had
some Time a Knowledge of him, but through Inattention and Disobedience lost
that Knowledge; as is the Case with too many professing Christians as well as
they. And when the Apostle was among the Athenians, he acquainted them, Acts
xvii. 27.
that God made all Nations of Men, that they might feel after him and find him;
intimating, for their Encouragement so to do, that he was not far from every
one of them. If they might feel after and find him, it must be by the immediate
Revelation of his Spirit to their Spirits; which when found and felt, would, as
adhered to in Obedience, become a Divine and saving Principle in them. As to
that of Ephesians. ii. 12, it does not appear to relate to the Gentile-World of all
Ages and Qualities, but to the carnal State of those Gentile Believers the
Apostle was then writing to, before their Conversion to Christianity, as the
preceding Verfe evidences. Respecting 1 Cor. i. 21, it is particularly levelled
against all who depend upon their carnal Wisdom, their natural or acquired,
Parts, for the Knowledge of God. For, the Words of the Apostle are, The World
by Wisdom knew not God; which is equally true of carnal Jews and Christians, as
of carnal Heathens. Both these Texts therefore are impertinently alleged.

5. In the following Paragraph, S. N. pretends, that I may call Idolators,
Abettors of Suicide, Countenancers of shocking Impieties and Immoralities,
Brethren in Christ, and treat them as savingly influenced by the Spirit of the
true God.

I deny all such to be either Brethren, or any Thing else, in Christ, or
savingly influenced by the Spirit of God. What I believe concerning them is,
that they all have at Times felt the reproving Witness of God in their
Consciences, which gives them a convicting Knowledge of him; Job xxiv. 13.
and if they continue to r^bel against this Light, they become so darkened
toward it, that they know not the Ways thereof, nor abide in the Paths
thereof. -- Not liking to retain God in their Knowledge, Romans i. 28
after long Forbearance, he gives them over to a reprobate Mind. Our Principle
teaches, that the Grace of God that brings Salvation, has appeared to all
Men, first as a Convictor, or Convincer of Sin. Thus it stands at the Door of
Man's Heart, and knocks for Entrance, and if the Heart opens to it, and abides
in the Ability it furnishes, sincerely desiring, and seeking to obey its
Motions, it will, by due Degrees, increase that Ability therein, till it prove
itself the Power of God unto Salvation to it. Then, and not till then, the Mind
is sensible of the saving Knowledge of his Divine Prin^iple; yet, before this,
whilst the Soul knew nothing more of it than merely its Convictions, it could
not be said to be totally ignorant of an internal immediate Sense of that Grace
which is saving, both in its Nature and Intention, though it was not endued
with the saving Knowledge of it.

I appeal to that Sense of the Grace of God, in every conscientious Breast,
whether those uncandid Reflections, and the Insinuation of my Opposer, that I
may exult in the religious Spirit of impure immoral Idolators, be doing Justice
to the scriptural Doctrine I declare, and becoming his Pretensions as a
Minister of the Gospel?

6. As to what follows under his next Head, we have all along uniformly
acknowledged, as fully as he can do, the Gospel came in Word as well as in
Power; 1 These. i. 5.
but not in Word only, but also in Power, even in the Power of the Holy Ghost.
And, we are sensible, that this Divine Power, from whence the Words sprang, is
the very Essence of the Gospel, and the Words but the outward Expression, or
exterior Declaration by which it is preached and recommended. To this essential
internal Grace, Power and Spirit of God, the Apostles called, and pressed their
Hearers, as well as to the Belief of the outward Advent and Process of the
Messiah then past. They taught them, that Christ was once offered to bear the
Sins of many, Heb. ix. 28.
and unto them that look for him, shall he appear the second Time, without Sin
unto Salvation. This second Appearance of Christ, we do not understand to
intend his coming to Judgment at the great Day of general Decision; for then he
will come both to determine the final State ^f the Righteou^ and Unrighteous;
not to Salvation only, but to Condemnation also. But this second Appearance is
in order to the Salvation of those who look for him to that End. Accordingly,
the Apostle thus prays for the Believers, 2 These. iii. 5.
The Lord direct your Hearts into the Love of God, and into the patient Waiting
for Christ; and he describes the Corinthians as waiting for the Coming, 1 Cor.
i. 7.
" or renewed Appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Notwithstanding our Savior empowers and employs his Messengers to declare his
Will, and to call People to the Work of Repentance and Regeneration; yet he
constitutes them not as Deputies to do the Work for him. It is not the Words
they deliver, nor any Application Man, by his own Powers, can make of them,
which can perform this great Business. "Lord," says the Prophet, Isa. xxvi. 12.
thou will ordain Peace for us; for thou also have wrought all our Works in us.
The Spirit of the High and Holy One is the true Efficient of all the real Good
that is done, all the Virtue that is wrought, either in the Church in general,
or any of its Members. It is the Spirit that I said, Days should speak, and
Multitude of Years should teach Wisdom. But there is a Spirit in Man, and the
Inspiration of the Almighty gives them Understanding." Job xxxii. 7, 8. "Eye
has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the Heart of Man, the
Things which God has prepared for them that love him. But God has revealed
them unto us by his Spirit; for the Spirit searches all Things, yea, the deep
Things of God. For what Man knows the Things of a Man, save the Spirit of Man
which is in him? Even so, the Things of God knows no Man, but the Spirit of
God. I Cor. ii. 9, 10, 11.
gives Understanding, and unvails the Knowledge of the Things of God; "It is
the Spirit that quickens, the Flesh profits nothing." Job vi. 63. "The
Letter ^^leth, but the Spirit gives Life." Cor. iii. 6. If the Spirit of him
that raised up Jesus from the Dead, dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from
the Dead, shall also quicken your mortal Bodies, by his Spirit that dwells in
you. Romans viii. 11.
quickens and makes alive, If ye live after the Flesh, ye shall die; but if
ye through the Spirit do mortify the Deeds of the Body, ye shall live. Romans
viii. 13.
mortifies, -- Circumcision is that of the Heart in the Spirit, and not in the
Letter. Romans ii. 29.
circumcises, "By one Spirit we are all baptized into one Body." 1 Cor. xii. 13.
baptizes, But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in
the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. 1 Cor. vi. 11.
sanctifies, Except a Man be born of Water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of God. That which is born of the Flesh is Flesh: and that which is
born of the Spirit, is Spirit, John iii. 5, 6.
regenerates, The Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, has made me free
from the Law of Sin and Death. Romans viii. 2.
sets free, That he would grant you, according to the Riches of his Glory, to
be strengthened with Might, by his Spirit, in the inner Man. Ephesians. iii. 16.
strengthens, and enables to Obedience. In the Spirit is In him was Life, and
the Life was the Light of Men." -- "That was the true Light which lights
every Man that comes into the World." John i. 4.9. "God, who commanded the
Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined in our Hearts, to give the Light of
the Knowledge of the Glory of God, in the Face of Jesus Christ 2 Cor. iv. 6.
the true Light, "The Spirit gives Life." 2 Cor. iii. 6.
the Life, -- "Who also declared unto us your Love in the Spirit." Col. i. 8.
the Love, We through the Spirit wait for the Hope of Righteousness, by Faith.
Gal. v. 5.
the Waiting, "If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit." Gal.
v. 25.
the Walking, -- "If any Fellowship of the Spirit." Phil. ii.1. -- Have been
all made to drink into one Spirit. 1 Cor. xii. 13.
the Fellowship, and Communion of the Gospel. In the Spirit The Spirit also
helps our Infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for as we ought,
but the Spirit itself makes Intercession for us," etc. Romans viii. 26. "Praying
always with all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto
with all Perseverance. Ephesians. vi. 18. -- "Praying in the Holy Ghost." Jude 20.
is true Prayer made, Through him we both have an Access by one Spirit unto the
Father. Ephesians. ii. 18.
Access to the Throne of Grace opened, and acceptable Worship performed. The
Spirit is Woe to the rebellious Children -- that cover with a Covering, but not
of my Spirit. Isa. xxx. 1.
the Covering of God's People, When he the Spirit of Truth i^ come, he will
guide you^^ to all Truth. John xvi. 3.
their Guide, "If ye be led by the Spirit ye are not under the Law." Gal. v.
18. "As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God." Romans
viii. 14.
their Leader, I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter
that he may abide with you for ever; even the Spirit of Truth. John xiv. 16, 17.
their Comforter, -- God, who has also Sealed us, and given the Earnest of the
Spirit in our Hearts." 2 Cor. i. 22. -- "In whom also, after that ye believed,
ye were sealed with that Holy Spirit of Promise." Ephesians. i. 13. -- "Grieve not
the Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed, unto the Day of Redemption.
Ibid. iv. 30.
their Seal, the infelt Earnest of an everlasting Inheritance to them; and in
some, the all-effective Power and Virtue of the Gospel-ministration; all which
the Scriptures here-under cited undeniably evidence.

7. In all these Respects the Holy Spirit operated in common amongst the
primitive Believers. For the Continuation of the same spiritual Operations, it
is that we plead, and not that of miraculous Gifts; which were always
extraordinary, and afforded but to few in Comparison of the whole Number of the
Primitives. Yet our Examiner all along chooses, that we shall mean what he
pleases, and what may best answer the End he so artificially labors to
accomplish. Upon this Ground, P. 122, etc. he proceeds against us, as though we
disputed the Convincement of the Christian Converts through the Preaching of
the Apostles; which we are as far from denying as any People upon Earth. What I
opposed him in was, the Inference he appeared to make, that because it pleased
God to teach them sometimes instrumentally, he never taught them immediately at
any Time; or, that none were ever converted or taught of God but through
external Means; which the very Convictions of God's Grace in every Man's
Conscience disprove.

He allows, all Men have the Spirit, but denies they have any more Sense of it,
than a Vegetable of the Sap that nourishes it. But his own repeated Confession,
that when he does Right Conscience approves, and when he does Wrong it condemns
him, shows the Contrary. This is generally called Conscience, because it is
something of God appearing in the Mind, and giving it a conscious Sense of
Right and Wrong respecting its own Acts. No Man could know it makes these just
Distinctions, without a Sense of them. What is inward Conviction for Evil, but
a Sense of Guilt? And, what is the genuine Effect of Guilt, but Remorse? What
does Remorse lead to, but Repentance? And what is Repentance, but the Doctrine
of the Gospel? Every rational Creature under Heaven, therefore, having this
Sensation, has the Gospel preached in him or her by this righteous Principle,
agreeable to Col. i. 3.

Our Lord showed his Disciples, that the Spirit of Truth, John xv. and xvi.
the Comforter, should not only bring to their Remembrance what he had told
them, show them Things to come, and lead them into all Truth; but it should
likewife, reprove the World of Sin, of Righteousness, and of judgment. Whether
this Divine Visitor appears to the Mind of Man, in Words, or without Words, by
the Sensations of Compunction and Remorse; whether in the Sharpness of Reproof,
or the healing Touches of Consolation; whether it manifests itself as Light, or
sheds its Life and Love into the Heart; whether it darts upon it as Lightning,
or settles it in a Holy Serenity; fills it with Faith, or inflames it with
Zeal; in all these Ways, seeing it proceeds not by Messenger, but by its own
immediate Communication to the rational Soul of Man, it is properly styled
internal immediate Revelation.

This Divine Principle is a living Source of Truth and Virtue in Man, without
which Laws and Precepts would little avail, and when through Faithfulness
thereunto, it is enlarged and advanced over all in the Soul, it is found to be
a sure Foundation, which neither the Wisdom of the Wise, the Reasonings of the
Confident, the Jugglings of the Crasty, the Derision of the Reviler, the Rage
of the Persecutor, nor even the Gates of Hell can prevail against.

8. S. N.'s repeated Allegations that this Principle is inexplicable and
unintelligible, and calling for particular Definitions of its peculiar Essence,
with his insulting Conclusions thereupon, amount to nothing more than this
Argument. If you are really sensible of this Principle, you can clearly define
what it is; but you are not able thus to define it; therefore you have no Sense
of it. To show this Reasoning proves nothing, take the following Parallel. If
you are really sensible there is a magnetic Power in the Loadslone, you can
clearly define what that Power is; but you are not able clearly to define it;
therefore you have no Sense of it. What experienced Navigator would prefer this
Reasoning to the Facts he has had ocular Demonstration of; to the certain
Experience he has daily profited by? That a Man must be able to define to
others, the peculiar Essence of whatever he sensibly knows to be true, is
beyond the Power of Logic to prove. It is enough for us to know, that it is God
that works in us, and to yield Obedience to his Operations; the Truth of
which is not at all affected by a Want of nice and essential Definitions of
that which effects them. We plainly behold the astonishing natural Virtue of
the Magnet, both respecting its Attraction and polar Adhesion. It is an
undeniable effective Power, yet essentially undefinable by the Wit of Man. All
the Attempts that have been, or can be made to discover it, whether just or
erroneous, it cannot in the least affect the Reality and Verity of it; because
a Cloud of Witnesses have found it to be true by a sensible Evidence. So it is
with the Work and Power of the Holy Spirit. All the painful Researches of the
most ingenious and penetrating of Mankind, demonstrate that the intimate
Essences, and intrinfic Differences of natural Things, are out of the Reach of
human Discovery; much more so are those of a spiritual Nature.

9. In his Note, P. 123, he suspects, I cannot conscientiously believe, what I
cannot but conscientiosly believe; which is, that to be servent in Spirit,
relates to the Fervency of a Man's own Spirit; Acts xviii. 25.
and that to be fervent in the Spirit, as expressed of Apollos, intends a
Fervency inspired by the Spirit. It is true, our Translators have rendered the
like Phrase, Romans xii. 11. servent in Spirit; but probably, what led them to
that might be the contrasting Expression preceding it, not slothful in
Business; yet I think unwarrantably.

Ibid. S. N. says, Mr. Phipps also is for making a Syllogism for me, that he
might the more easily refute it. The Syllogism I made for him is founded upon
his own Assertions; that God had many People at Corinth, but he did not choose
to teach them the Gospel by immediate Revelation. No, etc. His new substituted
Syllogism is founded upon a different Position, to which I do not object; that
is, they were not taught the Gospel by internal immediate Revelation alone. By
his Addition of the Word alone, he alters from his former Doctrine to ours.
What the Apologist asserts, is sufficiently proved; for I have shown, Words,
without Divine Influence, are not to be depended on for the true Sense of
ambiguous Expressions, because they are so liable to be differently understood
by different Persons.

10. What S. N. gives out as our Terms of Admission, P. 128, are not our Terms
of Admission. We receive our Members upon a better Foundation than he appears
to be acquainted with. Our Terms of Admission, are, a free and unforced
conscientious Acquiescence upon Principle, with the essential Doctrines of
Truth and real Christianity, and the Rules of the Society founded thereon, and
not upon mere external Appearances. The Divine Principle itself is our Bond of
Union, and the Holy Scriptures are our Articles. Christ once in the Flesh, and
always in Spirit, are Fundamentals with us. We require no Subscription to
Articles of human Invention.

As to Differences in Opinion amongst us; whilst Professors of the same Faith
differ in Years and Experience, in Capacity and Opportunity, in Education and
Associates, in Faithfulness or Unfaithfulness to their Principles, there must
be different Opinions and Practices. When the Believers in the primitive Age of
Christianity grew numerous, it was the Case amongst them, and in all Societies
ever since. What we assert is, that the One Holy Spirit leads all that
faithfully follow it into Sameness of Doctrine, and Unity of Love; and that all
who profess to be Followers of Christ, ought to be led by his Spirit; but that
all, either of our own Society, or any other, are so led, we are far from
asserting or believing.

The Quotation made from Barclay, Page 131, amounts to no more than this; that
the Spirit of God is sufficient of itself, without any Thing else; but nothing
else is sufficient without that. To infer from this undeniable Truth, that we
mean every Thing but the Holy Spirit is useless to Man's Salvation, whether the
Spirit please to use them or not, is a mere Perversion. Whatever the Spirit is
pleased to use, it renders useful; what it uses not in the Work of Salvation,
cannot be useful toward it; for Salvation is of God, Ps. xxxvii. 39.
and there is no Savior besides him. Isa. lxiii. 11.
To parallel this with such an Huddle of Falsehoods, as my Opposer cites from
the deistical Author of Christianity not founded on Argument, is only a
Repetition of one of his customary Abuses.

11. P. 135. He thinks Barclay's Time or Day of Visitation, which does not
always continue through a Man's Life, a dangerous and melancholy Opinion.
"For," says he, were a Man properly affected with his miserable Condition by
Sin, and once imagined his Day of Grace to be over, neither the Light within
him, nor the Gospel without him, can give him any Relief. For this Reason Men
ought carefully to embrace the Day of their Visitation, and follow the Advice
of our Savior, John xii. 36.
who says, While ye have the Light, believe in the Light, that ye may be the
Children of Light. This is the only Way to escape the dreadful Consequences of
continuing in Rebellion against it. And, is it not a Comfort to all Men, that
they are allowed this Opportunity? If he think so unfavourably of this
Doctrine, what does he teach others to think of his favorite Doctrine of
Preterition, which allows of no Condition, or Time of Visitation at all, nor
even one single Chance for Salvation, to the Majority of Mankind?

That there is such a Time and Opportunity as Barclay inculcates, and that it
may be lost to Apostatizers past Redemption, is evident from that awful
Passage, Heb. vi. 4, 5, 6. It is impossible for those who were once
enlightened, and have tasted of the Heavenly Gift, and were made Partakers of
the Holy Ghost, and have tasted of the good Word of God, and the Powers of the
World to come; if they shall fall away, to renew them again unto Repentance;
seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open
Shame.

This Passage evinces, 1st. that Persons may become sensible Partakers of the
Holy Ghost, and taste of that Divine Power which is the eternal Life of the
Blessed in the World to come. 2d. That they may apostatize from this Condition
to such a Degree, that Repentance, and consequently Salvation, shall become
impossible to them. 3d. That they bring this upon themselves, because they
crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open Shame; they
reject and rebel against the Invitations of his Spirit in themselves, till they
occasion it to forsake them, whereby the Divine Witness is spiritually
crucified and slain as to its Life in them, and the Christian-name openly
reproached through their evil Conduct and Example. This is further illustrated
by a Simile in the two succeeding Verses. Heb. vi. 7. and 8.
For the Earth which drinks in the Rain that comes often upon it, and brings
forth Herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, receives Blessing from God.
But that which bears Thorns and Briars, is rejected, and is nigh unto
cursing, whose End is to be burned. The Rain that comes often upon the Earth,
denotes that the Divine Visitation is frequently renewed to the Soul of Man;
and the Earth which drinks it up, and brings forth Herbs, the Soul that
affectionately receives, and faithfully retains it, so as to bring forth the
Fruits of the Spirit; whereby it inherits the Blessing of God's Salvation. By
the Earth which bears Thorns and Briars, is pointed out the Soul that so
repeatedly continues to resist, and backslide from the Divine Visitor, as to
bring forth, and abide in, wicked Works, which occasions him to reject and
forsake it; the Consequence whereof must be its final Condemnation and
Destruction.

This Portion of Scripture thus demonstrates, both the Certainty of a Day of
Divine Visitation to the Souls of Men, and the Possibility of its being
discontinued, whilst they remain in the Body.

12. S. N. in his Letter, P. 29, having said, Whether God would pardon my
Iniquities, my Light could give me no Information; and afterward expressing, I
am relieved by a Notion, a Report, a Testimony, Sentiments delivered by Jesus
of Nazareth, and his Apostles in the New Testament." I queried, P. 58. "What
does he read there that particularly concerns himself more than any other
Person? Where does the New Testament declare, that S. Newton's Signature
instead of his proper Name.
No Matter who, is in a State of Divine Acceptance and Approbation? Herein I
had no Intention to insinuate, that he meant to exclude all others from an
equal Share with him, nor will my Words bear such a Construction. But
apprehending, upon his Predestinarian Principles, that he flattered himself, he
was one of the personally elected, from something he had read in the New
Testament, and willing he should not deceive himself, I inquired where he found
himself particularly pointed out as one of the Elect. Instead of a pertinent
Answer, he cites only the first Part of the Question, and in that leaves out
the Word particularly; which is unfair in both Respects, and renders all the
religious Indignation he vents upon it for several Pages, entirely pointless.
What I intended was to put him upon Consideration, that if what he read in the
New Testament was a true Relief to him, his Comfort must arise either from an
Evidence that all Men universally have, or that himself in particular has
certainly a Share in the glad Tidings of the Gospel; and that, if he did not
believe all Men therein comprehended, this comfortable Evidence to himself must
spring either from the Holy Spirit bearing Witness with his Spirit, that he is
the Lord's, or from an especial Mention of him in the Scripture; and as I found
he denied the internal Evidence of the Spirit, I queried with him, where he
found himself particularly pointed out in the New Testament, as in a State of
Divine Acceptance; and I still think it worth his While to examine the Grounds
of his Belief, that he may not be deceived by a mere Notion.

13. He cites Barclay's Definition of Conscience in the Abstract, and then
improperly treats it as in the Concrete, to make it suit with the deistical
Notions of Tindal, and prove the Quakers Deists: A Point he as arduously as
ineffectually labors. We always understand the natural Conscience, and the
Light of God's Spirit appearing in the Conscience, as different Principles. The
very Essence of Deism consists in a Denial of Revelation. A Denial of all
Divine Revelation is perfect Deism. A Denial of it in Part is partial Deism.
The Quakers deny no Part of Divine Revelation; therefore are in no Respects to
be styled Deists. They believe both in the Inspiration of the Scriptures, and
that of the Holy Spirit. Those who disbelieved either the one or the other, are
so far deistical. He who believes the Sacred Writings were penned by Men
inspired for that Purpose, and yet holds that all immediate Inspiration is now
totally withheld, does, in perusing the Scriptures, rest upon his own private
Interpretations, or that of his Party, as the true Sense intended by the Holy
Ghost, and is at best a Semi-Deist. Such a One has no Right to reproach those
with the Name of Deists, who believe the Penmen of Scripture to have been
Inspired as well as he, and also acknowledge the Continuance of Inspiration,
which he does not. To pretend, that the inspired Records must be needless to,
and therefore set aside by, those who believe the Continuance of internal
Inspiration, is falsely inferred; for, the Scriptures of the Old Testament were
useful to, and used by the inspired Apostles; and those who have at Times
experienced the Renewals of Inspiration, know that the Scriptures are often
thereby brought to their Remembrance, more clearly opened, and rendered more
useful and comfortable to them, than it is possible for them to be without it.
This is not the vain Imagination of a private Spirit, nor that wild Enthusiasm
so indiscriminately and untruly cast as an Opprobrium, upon all who profess the
Necessity of knowing the inspiring Spirit of Truth to lead into all Truth to
the End of the World.

CHAP. XVI.
1. S. N.'s pretended Quotation from G. Fox's Great Mystery a false one. G.
Fox's true Intention. 2. The essential Gospel, and S. N.'s supposed Cases
answered. Barclay cleared of his charge, and himself shown to oppose the Sense
of the Apostle. 3. Christ the Light and Life of Men before his Incarnation.
These Terms not to be confined to his corporeal Appearance upon Earth. 4. Nor
to the Scriptures. What their proper Use is. 5 and 6. The Greek Word
Erchomenon, John i. ix. more properly applicable to Man, than either to Light
or Christ. 7. A material Difference between Light afforded in order to
Salvation, and a real embracing of it so as to be saved by it. Christ as truly
the Light of the Souls of Men, as the Sun is to their Bodies, whether they keep
their Eyes open to it, or shut them against it. 8. Christ as the Divine Word,
the creating, upholding, and saving Power of God to Mankind, the Elect, the
gracious Administrator of Life and Salvation, through his external Sacrifice,
and by the Communication of his Spirit. The true Sense of unlearned Writers,
not to be ascertained by the Rules of Grammar, or Criticism. 9. Romans x. 14, 15,
equally concerns Jews and Gentiles. The Improbability of the Primitives
preaching throughout the habitable World. 10. Not every individual Man, but
every regenerate Person, is the Temple of God. 11. The Kingdom of God is
within, Luke xvii. S. N.'s Falsification of the original Text, to make it
appear otherwise. The true Christian is the Temple of Christ, wherein he
manifests himself by his Spirit. 12. What the Kingdom of God is. The Conclusion.

1. WHAT S. N. pretends to cite, Page 144, from G. Fox's great Mystery, is not
there. It is nothing better than a Perversion of Expressions of a different
Meaning, made formerly by Thomas Hicks, from whom he has taken it at second
Hand, and who was one of the many unjust and violent Adversaries of the Quakers
in the last Century; confuted by George Whitehead, in the second Part of the
Christian Quaker, and by William Penn, in his Reason against Railing, and his
Counterfeit Christian detected.

What G. Fox says in his great Mystery, P. 68, is, Christ is in you except ye
be Reprobates," says the Apostle; and again, God breathed into Man the Breath
of Life, and he became a living Soul; for that which came out from God, was the
Cause that Man became alive, a living Soul, and is not this of God? -- Is not
that of God which came out from God? This he did not intend of the Soul itself,
but of the inbreathing of Divine Life in the Soul. Of this Life it is that he
says, It brings the Soul that is faithful to it, up into God, from whence it
came, whereby they come to be one Soul; meaning in Unity, not Identity. What he
means, P. 29 and 91, by the Soul's being infinite, is only immortal, or of
infinite Duration, not Expansion. These Terms he sometimes used one for
another, as is common amongst unlettered Persons. It is evident from his own
Words, P. 91, that he did not mean the Soul was a Part of the Divine Essence;
for he there speaks of its being in a State of Death whilst in Transgression,
which is not possible to the Divine Essence, and afterward adds, Every Man
that comes into the World, having a Light from Christ Jesus (the Way out of
the Fall, the second Adam) receiving the Light, they receive Redemption and
Sanctification, whereby their Spirits, Bodies, and Souls are sanctified. Here
he plainly distinguishes between the Soul, and that which it receives of the
Divine Nature which Sanctifies it.

G. Fox's Treatise was printed in 1659, and contains cursory Answers to above
an Hundred different Opposers, who in a Manner mobbed him from the Press at
that contentious Period; and as he had full Employment for his Time otherwise,
and had not the Benefit of that Literature which is now common, infamous
Advantages then were, and have often since been taken by designing Antagonists,
of the Inaccuracy of his Expressions. But I should think it beneath any Person
of a liberal Education, and Character, to copy from those Illintenders, or to
follow them in such a disingenous Line. Neither the Witticism of S. N.'s
sensible Writer, nor his own Reflection upon it, has any Foundation in our
Doctrine.

2. In answer to his Efforts concerning the Gospel, P. 147, and c. without
troubling myself with the unnecessary Pedantry of Etymologies, I shall say, we
allow the Word Gospel, in an extended Sense, may include both the Mystery and
the History, the inward and outward Process of our Savior; 1 These. i. 5.
for the Gospel comes not in Word only, but also in Power, and in the Holy
Ghost. We believe, this Power of the Holy Ghost to be the internal essential
Part, and the Words the exterior declarative, and occasional Expression of it.
We admit the History, metonymically to a Share in the Title, but not to engross
it; lest the Power, which is the Life and Reality of it, should be excluded,
and People be deceived into a Belief, that the Gospel essentially consists of
nothing but Words.

The Passages S. N. cites, P. 148 and 150, from 1 Cor. xv. and Acts x. prove
not that the Gospel is totally comprehended in the historical Part only. We are
far from denying, that Paul, Peter, or any other true Minister or Messenger of
Christ, preached the Gospel, when, by Inspiration, they preached concerning the
historical Process of Christ; but we cannot allow, that this comprehends the
Whole of the Gospel they preached. For we read in their Writings, that the
Gospel is the Power of God unto Salvation, 2 Cor. iv. 6.
and that it shines as a Light in the Heart, to give the Knowledge of the Glory
of God. The Doctrines of the Gospel are also called the Gospel, and the
Preaching of them, is termed preaching the Gospel; but it is evident, neither
the History nor the Doctrines, are the essential Gospel intended in Gal. i.
For, we find, after the Apostle had said, Gal. i. 9.
If any Man preach any other Gospel unto you, than that ye have received, let
him be accursed, he shows what he meant by the Gospel they had received, in 11,
12, 15, and 16th Verses. I certify you Brethren, that the Gospel which was
preached of me, is not after Man. For I neither received it of Man, neither was
I taught it, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ." -- But when it pleased
God, who separated me from my Mother's Womb, and called by his Grace, to reveal
his Son in me, that I might preach him among the Heathen, immediately, I
conferred not with Flesh and Blood. The Gospel here intended is plainly, the
immediate Revelation of the Son of God within him, and neither an historical
nor doctrinal Relation of Things without him. It is against the Oppugners of
this internal essential Gospel which is not of Man, nor by Man, but by the
Revelation of Jesus Christ within Man, that the Apostle twice pronounces
Anathema. S. N. untruly charges us with a Disregard of the Context, though here
he manifestly rejects it, and runs to 1 Cor. and Acts for an Explanation,
rather than use the real and true One of the Apostle himself, in its due and
proper Place.

S. N. allows, P. 153, that the Gospel was attended by the Power of the Holy
Ghost, but asserts, it was not that Power. The Apostle says, Romans i. 16.
it is the Power. Thus not we, but himself contradicts the Apostle. 1 Cor. xii.
4, 5.
In Demonstration of this Gospel Spirit and Power Paul preached, that the Faith
of his Hearers might be fixed in this Power of God, and not in the private
Interpretations of Men's Wisdom. His Fellow Laborers preached under the
Influence of the same Divine Power, which pricked their Hearers in their Heart;
Acts ii. 37.
and so must all that ever truly preach the Gospel. The Apostle declares, 1
Cor. iv. 19, 20.
he would know not the Speech of them that are puffed up, but the Power. For
the Kingdom of God is not in Word, but in Power. This everlasting Power is the
Spirit of the Gospel, wherein it mainly and most essentially consists; as the
Essentiality of the Man does of the rational Soul; and the Words and Matters
preached or written, are as the Body, or present Outside. 2 Timothy iii. The
Apostle describes what Kind of Men those would be who, having a Form of
Godliness, would deny the Power;" and directs, "from such turn away.

P. 155, S. N. supposes two Cases, which are briefly these: First, If I and
some of my Brethren were confined for Rebellion, without any Prospect but that
of Death before us, and a royal Messenger brought a Proclamation to the Gate
for our Pardon and Enlargement. Or, Second, if we were actually brought to the
Place of Execution, and the King's Son, in his Father's Name, there declared a
free and full Pardon to us, on practical Conditions. Upon these Suppositions he
queries, whether these Declarations would not be Gospel, or glad Tidings to us?
I answer, Yes, if the real Fulfillment of them certainly ensue; but if not, they
would soon prove sad Tidings, and depress us the more upon a Disappointment.
Will he say, that the Whole is done only by reading the Proclamation? Is not
the material Part to follow? Are we delivered by Hearing? Is it not necessary
that we should fulfill the Terms required, and then be unfettered and unbound,
or the Prison Doors set open to us? And is not this the essential Part? The
Words declare the kind Offer and the good Intent, but the executive Power sets
at Liberty; and which is preferable if considered apart. Which would any Man
choose, to hear of Liberty, or to enjoy it? To resolve the Whole of the Gospel
into mere Tidings, and to reduce it into bare Report, is to exclude the
powerful Reality which gives Deliverance, from any Share in the Title; as
though the Report was the Savior, and the Notion the Salvation. This is what
we cannot admit as an Article in our Creed. We know no Savior but Christ, nor
any Salvation without his Power.

S. N. was too sanguine in asserting in his Letter, P. 34, and repeating it in
his present Publication, P. 149, that Barclay's treating the Gospel in like
Manner, was a Distinction of his own devising. I showed him the Contrary, from
William Thorpe, the Protestant Martyr, John Smith, of Cambridge, and Dr. Smith;
and I Will now show him further, that Tertullian wrote to the same Purpose
fifteen Hundred Years ago. In his Apology, Cap. xvii. he says, surely the Soul
was before the Letter, and the Word was before the Book. And in his Carminum
Advers. Marion. Lib. ii. he says, -- non Verba Libri, sed missus in Orbem Ipse
Christus Evangelium est, si cernere vultis. In English thus: If you are
disposed to understand; not the Words of the Book, but Christ himself, who is
sent into the World, is the Gospel. We likewise read, 2 Cor. iv. 3, etc. If our
Gospel be hid, it is hid (in eos) in them that are lost; in whom the God of
this World has blinded the Minds of them which believe not, lest the Light of
the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto them.
For we preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and ourselves your
Servants for Jesus's Sake. For God who commanded the Light to shine out of
Darkness, has shined in our Hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledge of the
Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ. Here the Apostle teaches, that the
Gospel they preached was Christ, showing his Face, or manifesting himself as
the Image of God in their Hearts; and that it was only hid, or obscured in the
Minds of those, who through Unbelief therein, or Unfaithfulness thereto, were
become blinded toward it by him who is called the God of this World, Ephesians. ii.
2.
because he is obeyed by those who walk according to the Course of this World.

3. P. 162, S. N. acknowledges, that John the Evangelist asserts, the Logos, or
Word, was God, the Creator of all Things, the Life, and Light of Men; to which
he adds, It was the Source of all the true Knowledge of God, and a future
State, that had ever been, or was then revealed to any of his People, for the
Life and Happiness of their Souls.

All this, understood of the Eternal Word, we readily acquiesce in; as it
accords with the Nature of Truth, and the Prophecy of the Gospel Covenant. Jer.
xxxi. 33, 34.
I will put my Law in their inward Parts, and write it in their Hearts. -- For
they shall all know me from the least of them, to the greatest of them. This
could not intend the Knowledge of Christ incarnate; for that Appearance was too
exterior, and of too short Duration. Nor could it mean the Knowledge of the
Scriptures; for a Man may know them from Beginning to End, believe them to be
true, and frame his Practice according to his Apprehensions of the Sense of
them, and yet not know the Lord. The Jews had the Law, the Prophets, and the
Scriptures extant in their Time; yet the Almighty by the Mouth of the same
Prophet declares, Ibid. iv. 22
My People are foolish, they have not known me. Nor was it possible they should
without Divine Assistance; therefore he says, Jer. xxiv. 7.
I will give them a Heart to know me. And in Ezekiel, A new Heart also will I
give you, Ezekiel. xxxvi. 26, 27.
and a new Spirit will I put within you. -- I will put my Spirit within you.
Thus the true Knowledge of God is to be received, by the internal Writing of
the Divine Word in the Heart, which puts the Law of Light and Life within Man,
and thereby lights every Man coming, or that comes into the World.

4. To imagine the universal Light and Life of the immortal Word, is at all
meant of the Scriptures, is absurd. For it appears to have been, at least, two
Thousand four Hundred Years after the Creation, before any Part of the
Scriptures were written, and the several Pieces that compose them, were
occasionally written at diverse Times, and by different Penmen, taking up about
sixteen Hundred and thirty Years more, from the Publication of the first of
them by Moses, to the last by John the Divine; considering also, that the
abundantly greater Part of Mankind in these latter Ages, since they have
appeared in Christendom, have never yet had them, and how many Millions
therein, have been wickedly debarred from the Use of them in their own
Language, by an interested and designing Priesthood; it undeniably appears,
that a vast Majority of Mankind never had the Benefit of them. And, amongst
those who are favored with them, the Variety, and even Contrariety of Opinions
and Practices which have all along subsisted, especially among the high
Pretenders to, and Possessors of Literature, all contribute to demonstrate,
that though the Sacred Records, opened by the spiritual Key of David, are
profitable and excellent above all other Writings, yet a more adequate
universal Guide than themselves, ever has been, and now is, absolutely
necessary to the Salvation of Mankind.

5. P. 164, S. N. understands the Word Erchomenon rendered coming, John i. 9.
or that comes, as referring to the Light, rather than to Man. But, as
Maldonatus observes, Man being the next Noun, may more properly challenge the
Participle coming to itself. Thus it is in the Syriac, Arabic, and Ethiopic
Versions; in the Latin, by Luther, Erasmus, Beza, Drusius, and others; also in
the French, Spanish, Italian, German, Low Dutch, and Anglosaxonic Translations.
In the same Sense it was understood by Nazianzen, Chrysosiom, Lactantius, etc.
Of all which Instances are produced in William Penn's Spirit of Truth
vindicated, published about a Century ago, in Answer to a learned Socinian. But
apart from other Authorities, the Context appears sufficient to clear the Point.

John i. I. The Evangelist shows first, what the Word, Christ, was in himself,
and asserts he was God; and next what he was in and to the World. Verse 3, 4.
First, he was the Creator of all Things; and second, the Light of Men; and
both these he was in the Beginning, or early Part of Time to this Creation,
four Thousand Years before his coming in the Flesh. As he then began to be the
Light of Men, he has all along continued to be so. As he made the Sun to be
the Light of our external World, whether People keep their Eyes open, or shut
them against its shining; so is the true Light of the Spirit of Men, whether
they open to him or not. This he is by the inward Manifestation of his Spirit
in every Man's Conscience. In him was Life, Verse 4.
and the Life was the Light of Men. This was in the Beginning, and has been
from the Beginning. It is the One living Eternal Word, or energetic Spirit,
appearing in both Modes, when truly believed in, and properly received.

6. John i. 5.
The Light shines in Darkness, and the Darkness comprehended it not. "This,"
says S. N. P. 163, may more particularly, as some think, refer to the Jews.
But, why so? Were the Gentiles less dark than the Jews? Or does the Term World
include the Jews only, who were but a Handful compared with the Gentiles? How
does that comport with Verse 10, He was in the World, and the World was made by
him, and the World knew him not. Are not the Gentiles included in the World
that was made by him, as well, and as much as the Jews? Or, Romans iii 29.
is he the God of the Jews only, and not of the Gentiles also? I take the
Darkness to be the corrupt State of Mankind; Gentiles as well as Jews.

He says, P. 164, The Phrase coming into the World, seems plainly to denote a
preexistent State; but neither Scripture, nor Reason, support any such Notion
concerning Mankind in general. I agree with him in the latter Part, but differ
from him in the former, i. e. that coming into the World seems plainly to
denote a pre-existent State, in any other Sense than the Pre-existence of all
Men in their Mothers Womb, before they may properly be said to come forth into,
Jer. xx. 18.
or to make their Appearance in the visible World. I apprehend the Phrase no
more denotes any other Pre-existence of Mankind than the coming of the great
Day, implies the Pre-existence of that Day. Nor do I see, with what Propriety
this Expression can be applied to Christ, more than to any one of the Species.
For he was always in the World, John i. 10.
which was made, and continually subsists by his Power; hence all that can be
meant by his coming thereinto, is that he assumed a different Manner of
Appearance, or Mode of Manifestation in it than he had done before.

7. P. 166. Those who did not receive him, and were not born of him, could not
therefore be described as enlightened unto Salvation. Those who did not receive
him, could never be born of him; for he that is born of him, is both
enlightened and quickened by his Spirit. The Savior as the Light of the World,
dispenses of his Light to every Man that comes into the World, to give him a
Sight of his captive Condition; this Sight producing that godly Sorrow which
works Repentance, 2 Cor. vii. 10.
Salvation ensues. So though the Light of the Savior arises upon all, in
order that all may come to Repentance and be saved, yet those who are so
attached to their evil Courses, that they love Darkness rather than Light, shut
it out from them, and therefore do not come to the saving Knowledge of him, who
is the Author of Eternal Salvation to all that obey him. Heb. v. 9.


If my Opposer intends by the Phrases savingly enlightened, enlightened unto
Salvation; and such like, that we mean the saving Power is nothing in the Work
but a mere Illuminator, and that Illumination is Salvation; I must tell him, we
entertain no such Ideas, for they are void of Truth and Reality. When we speak
of the Light's being of a saving Nature we do not intend, that Salvation is
effected merely by Light abstractively considered, though it is the Light of
Life. The Eternal Word operates both as Light, and as Life. It gives true
Discovery and Discrimination, as Light and empowers to live and act suitably,
as Life. This Light and Life, being the very Nature of the Savior, are
properly said to be of a saving Nature. Men may be so enlightened as to see the
Way of Salvation, and yet refuse to walk in it; yea, they may be led into the
Way, yet not abide in it. Will their Refusal, or Defection alter the Nature of
the Light, or prove it is not saving? Would any shutting out the Light, be a
Proof that it would not shine upon me; or of the Contrary? Food is not such to
him who refuses to eat it; but is it not Food in its Nature, because he refuses
it? And might it not be Food to him, if he would be wise enough to take it?

8. "In the Beginning was the Word." John i. 1.
This Divine Word had no Beginning. It was no Part of the Creation. All created
Things were made by him, and called from Inexistence into Being; but the Word
is without Beginning or End of Days. The Word inexpressible by Words, and
incomprehensible by Thoughts and Imaginations. The Orthos Logos, or Right
Reason, infinite in Wisdom, Goodness and Power; from the Beginning issuing
forth, and acting in the Work of Creation and Providence, and also from the
Time of the Fall, in Mediation and Regeneration.

As Man was the only Part of this lower Creation designed for Immortality, the
Favors he then received were answerable to the high Purpose of his Maker in
creating him. The creating and conserving Word, immediately became his
Illuminator, and Quickener. All Things were made by him, Verse 3, 4.
and without him was not any Thing made that was made. In him was Life, and the
Life was the Light of Men.

After Man's Transgression, and Defection from this Divine Light and Life, this
gracious Word astonishingly condescended to offer himself to repair the Breach,
by determining, in due Time, to take the Nature of Man upon him, and to give it
up to excruciating Pains, and the Death of the Cross, as a Propitiation for the
Sins of the whole World. Hereby he showed the Greatness of Divine Love and
Mercy to poor helpless Man, and also, by then immediately renewing, and
thence-forward continuing, to afford a Manifestation of his Light to Man in his
fallen Estate. For, before his Incarnation, John i. 10.
He was in the World, and the World was made by him, and the World knew him
not. The Generality, though they felt his inward Convictions, the Reproofs of
Instruction, they distinguished them not to be his, but might flatter
themselves, they were only the Effects of Tradition early instilled into their
Minds; and not having their Habitation in the Light, were become as Darkness;
yet the Light shined in their Darkness, Verse 5.
though their Darkness comprehended it not. They thought too meanly of this
Light, had no just Conception of it, knew it not to be the Visitation of the
Son of God, and though they were his own Gentiles as well as Jews, by Creation,
and intentional Redemption, Verse 11, 12.
they received him not. S. N. might tell the Evangelist here, in like Manner as
he does us, that he Attributes not this saving Sonship to the Grace or Gift of
God, but to a certain virtuous Openness in themselves, which renders their
Salvation owing to themselves.
But as many as received him, to them gave he Power to become the Sons of God.

The Evangelist having spoken of him as the universal, illuminating, effective
Word, Verse 14, he comes to speak of his Incarnation, saying, And the Word was
made Flesh, and dwelt among us. We are not here to understand, that the
sovereign Word, or Spirit, was transubstantiated into Flesh, but that for Man's
Redemption, he took the Nature of Man upon him, and appeared amongst Men, as a
Man, and undoubtedly in the Eyes of most seemed not more than Man; but says
this enlightened Follower, and we beheld his Glory, (had a Sense of his
Divinity, as well as a Sight of his Humanity) the Glory as of the only Begotten
of the Father (the only One of his own Essence and Eternity) full of Grace and
Truth -- and of his Fullness have all we received, John i. 16.
and Grace for Grace.

When Persons read, and presume to expound, the Scriptures with School and
College Methods uppermost in their Heads, it is no Wonder they mistake them.
The inspired Writers observed no such Rules, even those of them who might have
a competent Share of Literature; which most of them had not. Learned, or
unlearned, the Light and Motion of the Holy Spirit was their Guide; not the
Rules of Rhetoric, Logic, or Grammar. Is not the Apostle John's Greek as
ordinary as G. Fox's English; yet who had a deeper Understanding given him in
Divine Things than John? Not School-learning, but the Light of the Holy Ghost
gave them a right Understanding, and the same is requisite to the right
Understanding of their Writings. 1 Cor. ii. 6.
They spoke ^ot the Wisdom of this World; therefore are not ^o be understood by
its Wisdom; yet nothing (...) more busy to explain them. They often ^reat of
Things promiscuously; even as our Savior himself spoke, intermixing the
internal spiritual Sense with the external, both respecting himself, and the
Matters he touched upon. This John does in his first Chapter, sometimes
speaking of Christ as the Word, which respects his Divinity, sometimes as Man,
or as in the Flesh, and sometimes comprehending both Senses in the same Words.
For Want of right Understanding properly to distinguish them, Men are apt to
jumble, and mistake one for another. Hence arise Disagreement, Clashing, and
Jangling about the true Sense of Scripture; and trying it by the Notions of
Systems they have espoused, instead of trying them by the Truth, it is no
Wonder there is so much Controversy. The only Way to put an End to it, is for
all to come to the Spirit of Truth in their own Hearts, that they may be led
into all Truth; which till they do, they never can be.

9. P. 171, S. N. by a Perversion, charges Barclay with Perversion. He asserts,
"Paul" (in Romans x. 14, 15,) is only speaking of the Israelites, as the Scope of
the Chapter demonstrates. This appears to me a Mistake. For though the Apostle
had been speaking particularly of them in diverse of the preceding Verses, in
these he manifestly includes both Jews and Gentiles. Romans x. 12, 13, 14.
His Words are, There is no Difference between the Jew and the Greek; for the
same Lord over all, is rich unto all that call upon him. For, whosoever shall
call upon the Name of the Lord, shall be saved. How then shall they call on him
in whom they have not believed? etc. The Pronoun they has evidently an equal
Reference to both Jews and Gentiles; as the preceding Context demonstrates.

Accepting these Words, Verse 18.
their Sound went into all the Earth, and their Words unto the Ends of the
World, as intended only of the Preaching of the Apostles, and their Companions
in Travel, and as being literally true when Paul wrote his Epistle to the
Romans, S. N. P. 172, asserts, It is most likely, it was by them, and their
Adherents, propagated throughout the greatest Part of the then habitable World.
Upon which I ask, What Probability is there, that any of them ever preached the
Gospel in China, Persia, Tartary, India, Russia, America, the numerous oriental
and occidental Islands, or, set legendary Tales aside, in Britain, or in short,
throughout the far greatest Part of the then habitable World? The Assertion
appears grounded upon a vulgar Error, though too current, and what is built
upon it, is improbable Conjecture.

10. P. 175, etc. S. N. having cited 1 Cor. iii. 18, and xii. 7, says, These
and such like Passages are ascribed indiscriminately to Mankind universally,
and every individual Man is declared to be the Temple of God, and to have a
Manifestation of the Spirit, to profit withal. That the Manifestation of the
Spirit is given to every Man to profit withal, we verily believe, and do not
only depend upon this particular Text for it. We also believe, that if every
Man seeks rightly to profit with it, every Man may so grow in Grace as in
Time to become the Temple of God. But that every Man so profits with it, as
really to become God's Temple, we no more believe than our Accuser.

Great Part of what follows, and indeed a large Portion of his Volume, is made
up of Repetitions from his Letter, with additional Suppositions, which are
untruly fathered upon us; and which lay scattered in the confuted Publications
of Hicks, Faldo, Bugg, Lesly, Pickworth, and other party Writers in the last
Century. These have become as Magazines of Sophistry and Abuse, to furnish
their warm Successors in Opposition, who to this Day keep retailing them out
against us.

11. P. 180. Our Examiner presumes entirely to refute every Thing Barclay' s
Defender has advanced upon Luke xvii. 20, 21. The Passage is, The Kingdom of
God comes not with Observation, neither shall they say, lo here, or lo there;
for behold the Kingdom of God is within you. To suit his Purpose, S. N. chose
to read these last Words, is among you. To this I replied, Observations, P. 74,
This reading destroys the Antithesis evidently intended by our Savior, who was
here answering a Question put to him by the Pharisees, concerning the coming of
an outward Kingdom, by informing them, that the Kingdom of God is an inward
Kingdom; and showing the Difference between an outward and visible Form, which
Men are capable to point out by their lo here, and lo there, and his own
internal spiritual Dominion.

To accomplish my entire Refutation, he takes the Word entos, out of the
original Greek, the proper Signification of which is within, as it stands in
our Translation. It is also rendered in Latin intus by Beza, and intra by
Castalio, both which signify within. Instead of this my Opponent substitutes
en, which is usually rendered in or among. By the like Practice the Scripture
may be made to teach any Doctrine whatsoever. But to common Understandings, the
taking away an original Word from the Text, and putting another in its Place
different in Signification, is a direct Falsification of Scripture; which is
the more notorious, as there does not appear to be any various Reading in the
Greek Text to afford a Pretense for it. See the Greek Testament, printed at
Oxford, 1765; to which are added variou^ Reading, collated from above one
Hundred Manuscripts, and from the ancient Versions. See also Mill's Greek
Testament.


The Cause of Truth stands in Need of no such Artifices; nor can that System be
according to Truth, which is obliged to Falsehood for its Support.

When a Writer, who professes so high an Esteem for the Holy Scriptures, takes
such unwarrantable Freedoms with them, as openly to falsify them to serve his
Purpose; his Efforts, instead of accomplishing the Refutation of others, must
terminate in Self-confusion. For this, I refer to P. 239, where he vents
himself in these opprobrious Terms, To adopt a religious Scheme which is
contrary to them, (the Scriptures) though we may borrow the Phraseology and
Terms of Scripture to express it, must be impious daring Insolence, and
attrocious Rebellion against the Divine Government. Were the most dreadful
Curses pronounced, by the Spirit, upon "any who shall add to, or diminish from
the Prophecy of one Book." Rev. xxii. 18, 19. How unspeakably deplorable must
their Doom be, if they die without an Alteration of Mind, who pervert the main
Sense of the whole New Testament, and introduce another Gospel. If this heavy
Charge and Denunciation belong to those who add to, diminish from, or pervert
the Sense of Scripture, it behooves our Opponent to look to himself; for he
appears to be notoriously guilty.

Page 184. He teaches, that the Apostolic Expression, Col. i. 27.
Christ in you the Hope of Glory, only intends, that Christ should be freely
proclaimed among the Gentiles, to give them the Hope of eternal Glory. Which is
very much like asserting, that the Proclamation concerning Christ without them,
is Christ in them, or at least, all that is meant by it. But presently after,
he acknowledges the Truth in Part, where he says, -- Christ no doubt, dwelt and
reigned in their Hearts, by his Spirit, through its purifying Influence. He
afterward expresses an Apprehension that I cannot think Paul meant, Christ so
dwelt in the Hearts of all Mankind universally. Certainly I cannot; but at the
same Time I must think, he appeared by his Spirit in the Minds of all, either
as a Comforter, a Purifier, or a Convictor and Reprover, in order that they
might believe in, and obey him under this Appearance, through which they would
find him to become the Hope of Glory in them.

In Matters of such high Concern as relate to our eternal State, it is
incumbent upon all, to be more cautious than confident about the Exclusion of
their Fellow Creatures from the Grace and Salvation of God; lest by asserting
the Nonexistence of that Experience in others, themselves have not yet known,
they become of those to whom our Savior declares, Mat. xxiii. 13.
Ye shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against Men; for ye neither go in yourselves,
neither suffer ye them that are entering, to go in.

12. If any ask, What is the Kingdom of Heaven, or of God? I answer;
Notwithstanding he is the Almighty Sovereign of the Universe, yet that is more
peculiarly styled his Kingdom, wherein he so completely governs as to be always
cheerfully and perfectly obeyed; where he is the sole Mover of all that is
done, where he is glorified in all that is done, and where he communicates of
his Glory and Felicity without Mixture. This Kingdom can neither be entered,
nor at all seen into by Man, but through the New Birth of the Holy Spirit,
whereby the Soul experienceth a being born into it; John iii. Col. i. 13.
a being delivered from the Power of Darkness, and translated into the Kingdom
of the dear Son of God. Hereby alone the Spirit of Man enters it, and through
Faithfulness, is enabled to make Advances therein whilst in the Body. This
Kingdom stands not in Locality, not in any here, or there; therefore it is in
vain to direct it by lo here, or lo there. It stands in an Infinite and
Heavenly Spirit, Life, and Nature, wherein nothing impure can live or enter. It
is the internal Dominion, or ruling Power of the Holy Ghost in Men and Angels;
that pure Influence so beautifully and sublimely described in Wisdom vii.
flowing from the Glory of the Almighty, which in all Ages entering into Holy
Souls, makes them Friends of God, and Prophets. In fine, this Kingdom of God,
is the Dominion of the Light and Life of the Spirit of God. Whoever lives under
the sensible Influence and Government of it, lives in this Kingdom. This is the
Kingdom of the Saints militant on Earth, and of the Saints triumphant in
Heaven, it being experienced by the Sanctified in Christ Jesus, in Part whilst
in this World, and enjoyed in its Fullness in the World to come.

What follows is chiefly a Repetition of what our Opponent published before in
his Letter, the Tenor of which is already obviated in diverse Parts of this
Work, and therefore I shall now take my Leave of him, passing by Abundance of
his Illiberalities, and sincerely wishing, that himself, and all Men, may come
really to know the only true God, John xvii. 3.
and Jesus Christ, whom he has sent, that they may experience Life eternal.

FINIS.

