THE ACT OF INCORPORATION AND LAWS OF THE Philadelphia Medical Society.

Arranged and Copied by Order of the Society, February 6th, 1793.

EX COLLISIONE SCINTILLA. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOHNSTON and JUSTICE, AT
FRANKLIN'S HEAD, No. 41, CHESTNUT STREET, 1793.

THE Act of Incorporation OF THE Philadelphia Medical Society.
WHEREAS by an Act of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
passed the 6th day of April, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred
and ninety-one, entitled, An act to confer on certain associations of the
citizens of this Commonwealth, the powers and immunities of corporations, or
bodies politic in law, it is enacted, That when any number of persons, citizens
of this Commonwealth are associated, or mean to associate, for any literary,
charitable, or for any religious purpose, and shall be desirous to acquire and
enjoy the immunities of a corporation or body politic in law, it shall, and may
be, lawful for such persons to prepare an instrument in writing, therein
specifying, the objects, articles, conditions, name, style, or title, under
which they have associated, or mean to associate, and the same to exhibit and
present to the Attorney General of the Commonwealth for the time being, for his
perusal and approbation, and afterward to the Supreme Court of the said
Commonwealth, for the perusal and approbation of said Court, which if finally
approved, shall be sent with certificates of such approbation to the Governor
of the Commonwealth, in order to be by him transmitted to the Master of the
Rolls, to be enrolled, and thence the persons so associating, shall become, and
be a corporation or body politic in law and in fact.

NOW, in pursuance and by virtue of the said recited Act of the General
Assembly of Pennsylvania, the subscribers constituting an association under the
title of "The Philadelphia Medical Society," being desirous to acquire, and
enjoy, the powers and immunities of a corporation or body politic in law, for
the literary purposes of their society, do present this instrument in writing,
containing as is hereafter set forth, the objects, articles, condition, style
or title, under which they have associated, to the said Attorney and Supreme
Court respectively, for their perusal and approbation, to the intent that they
may become, and be a corporation or body politic in law and in fact, agreeably
to the provisions in the said recited Act. That is to say,

ARTICLE I.
The Corporation shall be styled, "The Philadelphia Medical Society," and shall
consist of all the Members of the Association under that name, viz.

George Munro, M. D. John Davis, Isaac Catherill, Solomon Bush, Andrew Ross, M.
D. James Straton, James Hutchinson, M. D. Samuel M. Shoot, John Laws, M. B.
William Gardener, M. B. Baynard Wilson, Theophilus Elmer, M. B. Isaac Auld,
Joseph Hirst, James Vanmeter, Edward Rumsey, William Wardlaw, Jonathan Maris,
Thomas R. Harris, M. B. Wm. R. Couzens, M. D. George Pfeiffer, M. D. James
Woodhouse, M. D. Moses Sheftall, Charles Tilden, M. B. William Whiteman, Joseph
P. Minnick, William Weston, William Currie, William Shippen, M. D. Adam Kuhn,
M. D. Casper Wistar, M. D. Thomas T. Tucker, M. D. James G. Brehon, William
Wilson, S. Hosmer, Nathan Dorsey, Tucker Harris, M. D. David Ramsay, M. D.
James Lynak, M. D. Isaac Chanlor, M. D. Alexander Baron, M. D. William Stokes,
A. B. Henry Colesbury, M. D. Richard Dale, James Craig, James Carter, Rob. G.
Davidson, A. M. William Boys, A. M. John Watkins, James M'Farland, Thomas
Fossitt, Edward Cutbush, Adam Seybert, George Thompson, Samuel Brown, William
Leigh, Philip S. Matthews, Matthias E. Sawyer, Richard Bradford, Peter
Horlbeck, Stephen De Heart, William Bache, A. B. Henry Haywood, Christopher
Heydrick, George Teackle, Artemas Seagrave.
And such other members as shall hereafter be duly chosen, agreeably to the Bye
Laws of said Corporation for the purpose of their mutual improvement in the
Science of Medicine, and for the promoting of Medical Knowledge.

ARTICLE II.
The Officers of the Corporation shall consist of a President, two
Vice-Presidents, three Secretaries, one Treasurer, and two Curators, which
Officers shall be chosen at such times, in such manner, and for such periods,
respectively, as the Bye Laws of the Society shall ordain. But all the Officers
now in office, shall so remain until the next stated period of election. The
duties of the Officers respectively, shall be such as the Bye Laws of the
Society, do or shall prescribe, or ordain.

ARTICLE III.
The Corporation shall convene every year at six o'clock P. M. of the first
Saturday of November, and from that time shall continue to meet, at the same
hour, and on the same day in each week, until the last Saturday of the ensuing
February, in every year inclusive. But there shall be moreover two
extraordinary meetings in each session, one on the first Wednesday of December,
and the other on the first Wednesday of February, at six o'clock in the evening
of those days respectively, for the sole and exclusive purposes of making, or
altering, and amending the Bye Laws of the Society, and of electing the
Officers thereof.

ARTICLE IV.
That the said Corporation and their successors, by the name, style, and title
aforesaid, shall forever hereafter be able and capable, in law and in fact, to
sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, in any court or courts, before any
judge or judges, justice or justices, in all manner of suits, complaints,
pleas, causes, matters and demands whatsoever; they shall have power to make,
have, and use one common seal, with such device and inscription as they shall
deem proper, and the same to break, alter, and renew at their pleasure; they
shall have power and authority to make rules, bye laws and ordinances; and to
do every other act and thing needful for the good government and support of the
affairs of the said Corporation: Provided always, That the said bye laws, rules
or ordinances, or any of them, be not repugnant to the Constitution and Laws of
the United States, and Laws of this Commonwealth, or to this Instrument.

ARTICLE V.
The said Corporation and their successors by the name, style and title
aforesaid, shall be able and capable in Law, according to the terms and
conditions of this Instrument, to take, receive, and hold all grants, gifts,
devises, and bequests, of real, personal, or mixed estates, and to dispose
thereof in any lawful manner for the use of the Corporation: Provided always,
That the clear yearly value of the estate, real, personal, or mixed, of the
said Corporation, and the interest of money by them lent, shall not exceed the
sum of Five Hundred Pounds.

I have perused and examined the preceding Instrument, and hereby certify, that
I am of opinion, that the Objects, Articles, and Conditions therein set forth
and contained, are lawful.

JARED INGERSOLL, Attorney General.
April 6th, 1792.
We the Justices of the Supreme Court of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
Hereby Certify, That at a Supreme Court held at Philadelphia, for the said
Commonwealth, on the thirteenth day of April, in the year of our Lord one
thousand seven hundred and ninety-two, an Act or Instrument of Incorporation of
the Philadelphia Medical Society, by the Name and Title of "The Philadelphia
Medical Society," signed by a number of persons, citizens of this Commonwealth,
together with the opinion of Jared Ingersoll, Esquire, Attorney General of the
said Commonwealth, thereon was exhibited to the said Supreme Court, who having
perused and examined the same, concur with him in opinion, that the Objects,
Articles, and Conditions therein set forth and contained are lawful.

THOMAS MKEAN, EDWARD SHIPPEN, JASPER YEATES, WILLIAM BRADFORD.


In the Name, and by the Authority of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. THOMAS
MIFFLIN, Governor of the said Commonwealth, To MATTHEW IRVIN, Esquire, Master
of the Rolls in and for the said Commonwealth, sends greeting:
WHEREAS it has been duly certified to me, by Jared Ingersoll, Esquire,
Attorney General of the said Commonwealth, and by Thomas M'Kean, Esquire,
Chief Justice, and Edward Shippen, Jasper Yeates, and William Bradford,
Esquires, Justices of the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania, that they have,
respectively, perused and examined the foregoing Act, or Instrument, for the
Incorporation of "The Philadelphia Medical Society;" and that they concur in
opinion, that the Objects, Articles, and Conditions therein set forth and
contained, are lawful. NOW KNOW YOU, That, in pursuance of the Act of the
General Assembly in such case made and provided, I have transmitted the said
Act, or Instrument, of Incorporation unto you, the said Matthew Irvin, Master
of the Rolls aforesaid, hereby requiring you to inrol the same, at the expense
of the applicants, to the intent that, according to the Objects, Articles, and
Conditions therein set forth and contained, the parties may become, and be, a
Corporation, or Body Politic, in Law, and in Fact, to have continuance by the
Name, Style, and Title, in the said Instrument provided and declared.

Given under my hand and the great seal of the State, at Philadelphia, this
second day of June, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and
ninety-two, and of the Commonwealth the sixteenth.

By the Governor, A. I. DALLAS, Secretary.
Inroled in the Rolls Office for the State of Pennsylvania, in Law Book No. 4,
Page 465, etc. Witness my hand and seal of office, the second day of June, 1792.

MATTHEW IRVIN.



THE LAWS OF THE Philadelphia Medical Society.
THE Society shall convene every year on the first Saturday of November, at six
o'clock, P. M. and continue to meet on the same day of the week, and at the
same hour, until the last Saturday of February inclusive.

The President shall take the chair, and constitute the Society precisely at
ten minutes after six o'clock, and adjourn at ten, or before, if agreed on.

The Roll shall be called twice each evening by the Secretary, viz. immediately
after the President has taken the chair, and immediately previous to the
adjournment of the Society, any Junior Member residing in the city of
Philadelphia, who fails to answer to his name, shall be fined one eighth of a
dollar for each failure.

Of Officers.
There shall be the following Officers of this Society, viz. a President, two
Vice-Presidents, three Secretaries, one Treasurer, and two Curators.

The above Officers shall be chosen annually by ballot, on the extraordinary
meeting to be held on the first Wednesday of February.

Of the President.
The President is to preside at all meetings, to preserve order, to regulate
the debates, and to state and put questions agreeably to the sense and
intention of the Members. He shall also have power to fine any Member who
refuses to obey him, in a sum not exceeding five shillings for each offense.

Of Vice-Presidents.
In the absence of the President, his duty shall devolve on the
Vice-Presidents, so that they shall preside alternately at meetings; but if
neither the President nor one of the Vice-Presidents be present, the Members
met shall appoint one of their own body to take the chair pro tempore.

Of the Secretaries.
One of the Secretaries (to be chosen from among the Junior Members) shall
attend each meeting of the Society, take down the minutes, which he shall read
at the next meeting and (when corrected) shall copy the same in a book kept for
that purpose: he shall likewise read all letters and papers that may be
communicated to the Society, and transcribe in a proper book such of them as
the Society may think worthy of being preserved. The other two Secretaries
shall give notice to Honorary Members of their election, and write and answer
letters in behalf of the Society, and, in general, manage all matters of
correspondence.

Treasurer.
The Treasurer shall collect all moneys arising from the admission or fines of
the Members, and shall receive all donations of money that may be made to the
Society, and shall pay the same agreeably to their orders, certified to him by
the President, Vice President, or Member who was in the chair when such order
was made. The Treasurer shall keep a regular account of all moneys received and
paid by him as aforesaid, and once every year or oftener, if required by the
Society, he shall render a statement to them of the stock in his hands, and the
disbursements made by their order, and shall deliver up to his successor the
books and all papers belonging to them, together with the balance of cash in
his hands; and for the faithful discharge of his trust, he shall, before he
enters on his office, give bond and security to the President and
Vice-Presidents in double the sum, which they or any two of them shall judge,
he may probably become entrusted with during his said office.

Curators.
The Curators shall take charge of and preserve, for the use of the Society,
all property of whatsoever kind it may be (money excepted) which the Society
shall become possessed of, and keep an exact list of the same, together with
the names of the respective donors, in a book provided for that purpose, which
book shall be laid before the Society as often as called for. The Curators on
entering upon their office shall give such a receipt for every thing committed
to their care or charge, as the Society may direct, and at the end of the term
shall deliver up the same to their successors. For the faithful performance of
the duty and trust reposed in them, they shall give bond to the President and
Vice President in such a sum as they or any two of them shall demand.

Of Members, and their Admission.
The Society shall consist of Honorary and Junior Members, the former to be
exempted from all the duties of the latter, except that of attending on
Committees when appointed. Any Junior Member having attended the Society two
seasons, or taken a Degree in Medicine, shall be considered as an Honorary
Member.

Any person who has obtained a Degree in Medicine, or is eminent in the
practice of Physic, may be proposed as an Honorary Member; at the ensuing
meeting he shall be balloted for, and if elected, he shall be informed of it by
letter, accompanied with a Certificate of the Society.

Any person desirous of becoming a Junior Member of this Society, may be
proposed; and if permitted to read, he shall write a Thesis on some Medical
Subject, or any subject connected with Medicine, and present it at the next
meeting of the Society, who shall examine him not exceeding the space of one
hour and a half, on the merits of his Thesis, and determine by ballot his
admission or rejection -- if admitted, he shall deilver his dissertation to the
Secretary to be deposited in the hands of the Curators; and shall also pay into
the hands of the Treasurer fifteen shillings, for the use of the Society. No
conversation or discussion between Members shall be allowed during the
examination of a Candidate.

It shall not be lawful to admit as a Junior Member of this Society any such
Member of the American Medical Society, nor shall any Junior Member of this
Society under the penalty of twenty dollars, be proposed as a Member to the
said American Medical Society.

Nor shall any Member be admitted after the first Saturday in January.

Of Dissertations.
Each Member according to seniority, shall prepare and read before the Society,
a Dissertation on some Medical Subject, or one connected with Medicine, under
the penalty of seven shillings and sixpence: but this shall not exempt him
from bringing forward his piece on the ensuing meeting.

At each meeting a Dissertation shall be discussed, and another to be discussed
at the ensuing meeting, shall be read by its author.

Every author who may be absent for more than five minutes during the
discussion of his piece, shall be fined two shillings and sixpence, and if
absent the whole night, shall forfeit five shillings, besides the usual fines
for non-attendance.

On the first ordinary meeting in February, each Member under the penalty of
three shillings and nine pence, shall deliver to the President, the subject on
which he proposes to write the ensuing winter, and if two or more should choose
the same subject, the Senior Member shall retain his choice, and the other make
a new one by the ensuing meeting.

Of Extraordinary Meetings.
There shall be two Extraordinary Meetings in each session, one on the first
Wednesday in December, for the sole purpose of altering or amending Laws; and
the other on the first Wednesday of February, at six o'clock P. M. for the
purpose of altering and amending Laws, and choosing Officers.

Of Committees.
The mode of appointing Committees shall be as follows, viz. the President
shall nominate one gentleman, who shall be considered as Chairman, he shall
name the second, and so on until the number agreed on be completed. But if the
business be of a very extraordinary and important nature, any Member may move
that the Committee be chosen by ballot, which shall accordingly be done. The
Chairman of every Committee shall appoint a time for its meeting before he
leaves the Society. Committees shall have the power of imposing a fine of one
shilling on any of their Members who absent themselves from their meetings.

Of Motions.
Any Member may make whatever Motion he thinks will tend to the benefit of the
Society; his proposal or Motion must be given to the President in writing,
seconded by another Member, and it shall be immediately voted or balloted for,
unless five of the Members wish it to lie over for a week's consideration. In
either case it shall be recorded in the Minutes of the Society.

Every Motion shall be carried by a majority of the Members present, except
such as relate to the admission of Members, of candidates to read, to the
expulsion of Members, or such as may affect an established Law of the Society;
in which cases two thirds shall be required.

Of Decorum.
No Member shall interrupt the President, or any other Member while speaking;
every Member shall stand erect when he speaks, and address himself uncovered to
the President, under the penalty of one shilling for each offense; which sum
shall be the fine annexed to all Laws where none is specified.

Of Donations and Communications.
All Communications and Donations made to the Society, are to be directed to
the President, who is to dispose of them into the hands of the proper Officers,
for the use of the Society.

Reasons and Manner of Expulsion.
Any Member who refuses to pay his fine or fines, or to comply in any
particular with the Laws of the Society, shall be expelled; but previous to his
expulsion on this account, information shall be given to the Society of such an
intention, and this shall be inserted and stand in the minutes one week, after
which he shall be expelled, and the person thus expelled loses all his
privileges as a Member, and the word expelled shall be written opposite to his
name in the Law Book.

Of Certificates.
Any Member about to leave the University, may apply for a Certificate, which
petition shall be granted immediately. Each Member on abtaining a Diploma,
shall pay seven shillings and sixpence.

The following form may be granted.

Societas Medica Philadelphiensis

Viro ingenuo and ornatissimo (...) socium (...) quem in numerum nostrum
accepimus, cujus ingenium felicissimum et deligentia indefessa semper nobis
oblectamento fuere, has literas lubentissime donamus, at que eum omnibus
Philosophiae et Medicinae Cultoribus solicit commendamus. In quorum
Testimonium sigillum nostrum cum nomine Presidis subscripto praesentibus apponi
fecimus.

List of Members belonging to the Philadelphia Medical Society.
HONORARY MEMBERS.
James Hutchinson, M. D. Professor of Chemistry. Whilliam Shippen, M. D.
Professor of Anatomy, Surgery and Midwifery. Casper Wister, M. D. Adjunct
Professor of Anatomy, Surgery and Midwifery. Adam Kuhn, M. D. Professor of the
Practice of Medicine. Benjamin Rush, M. D. Professor of Institutes and Clinical
Medicine. Samuel P. Griffitts, Professor of Materia Medicae. George Munro, M.
D. Andrew Ross, M. D. William Currie, Thomas T. Tucker, M. D. Tucker Harris, M.
D. David Ramsay, M. D. James Lynah, M. D. Isaac Chanler, M. D. Alexander Baron,
M. D. John Laws, M. B. William Gardener, M. B. Theophilus Elmer, M. B. Thomas
R. Harris, M. B. Wm. R. Couzens, M. D. George Pfeiffer, M. D. James Woodhouse,
M. D. Henry Colesbury, M. D. Charles Tilden, M. B. Moses Sheftall, William
Whiteman, Joseph P. Minnick, William Weston, Isaac Auld, Baynard Wilson, Samuel
M. Shoot, James Straton, Solomon Bush, Isaac Catherill, John Davis, James G.
Brehon, William Wilson, S. Hosmer, Nathan Dorsey, Jonathan Maris, William
Wardlaw, Edward Rumsey, James Vanmeter, Joseph Hirst, William Stokes, A. B.
Richard Dale, James Craig, James Carter, Rob. G. Davidson, A. M. William Boys,
A. M. John Watkins, James M'Farland, Thomas Fossitt, Edward Cutbush, Adam
Seybert, George Thompson, Samuel Brown, William Leigh, Philip S. Matthews,
Matthias E. Sawyer, Richard Bradford, Peter Horlbeck, Stephen De Heart, William
Bache, A. B. Henry Haywood, Christopher Heydrick, George Teackle, Artemas
Seagrave.
JUNIOR MEMBERS, admitted 1792-3.
W. J. Doble, Henry Rose, John Smith, Edward Fisher, Thomas Drysdale, John J.
Long, Samuel M'Culloh, A. M. Charles Caldwell, Charles S. Waugh, Ashton
Alexander, Louis Marshall, Joseph Gray, James Brisben, Richard G. Harris,
George Williamson, William Wishart, Samuel Chilton, Burgess Ball, Charles
Carter, John Willis,

