Three Choice and Profitable SERMONS Upon Several TEXTS of SCRIPTURE VIZ. JER.
30.17. JOHN 14.3. HEB. 8.5.

By that Reverend Servant of Christ, MR. JOHN NORTON Late (...) of the Church
of Christ at Boston in N.E.

The First of them being the LAST SERMON which he Preached at the Court of
Election at Boston.

The Second was the LAST which he Preached on the Lord's Day.

The Third was the LAST which he Preached on his Weekly-Lecture-Day.

WHEREIN (Beside many other excellent and seasonable Truths) is showed, the
Lords Sovereignty over, and Care for his Church and (...), in order to both
their Militant and Triumphant condition (...) and their Fidelity and good
affection toward himself.

2 Samuel.23.1. Now these be the LAST words of David. David the son of Jesse said,
and the man who was raised up on high, the Anointed of the God of Jacob, and
the sweet Psalmist of Israel. Deuteronomy.31.29. For I know, that after my death (...)
will utterly corrupt your selves, and turn aside from the way which I have
commanded (...): and evil will best you in the latter days, etc. Ezra 3.3. And
they set the Altar upon his Bases; for fear was upon them, because of the
people of those Countries. Zech.1.5,6. Your fathers, where are they? and the
Prophets, do they live for ever? but my words and my statutes which I commanded
my servants the Prophets, did they not take hold of your fathers? and they
returned, and said, Like as the Lord of Hosts thought to do unto us, according
to our ways, and according to our doings, so has he (...) with us. CAMBRIDGE:
Printed by S. G. and M. I. for Hezekiah Usher of Boston. 166^

JOHANNES (...)
ANAGR. NONNE IS HONORATUS
NOnne is Honoratus! Deus ipsacorenat honor
Servum, (cum per^it) non perennie, suum^
Abstulit Enochum translatio mira, sed ^jus
In Coe^s decor^t pulchra Coron^ Caput.
Qut nohis, (subito raptu^) miser effa videtur
( Forsitan, Ignar is) vivit at usque De^,
Vivit, and in Coe^s cumulatus honoribus amplis
Regnat in oeternum (sic a^t ipse Deu)
Mors ^nopina pot^st Jobi cito perdere Natos,
Sors quibus in super is inviolata datur.
Multa prius passi Moses Aaronque fuere,
Tempus and ante suam jussus uterque mori.
Q^id (...) non (...) Canaanem visere? Tanto
Ce^sior in Coelis cessit uerique locus.
Curribus ignit is Elias raptus; at illis
A^ summi veh^tur culmina summa poli.
Esto. Sit in B^ll Josias victus, and ictus,
Mortuus in pace est non pereunte tamen.
Funera non unquam Mage lamentanda Sioni,
Josiae nunquoem Gloria major erat.
Quem ^eflent homines, Deus optimus auget honor
His dolor, ast illi Gloria summa fui^.
Si Caput amisit (gladio resecante) Iobannes,
E^es honor, (Christo judice) quantus erat!
Sit Stephanus l^pidum (hoet) obrutus ictibus, Illum
Christus in amplexus traxerat inde suos.
Christus and ipse fuit quam dira morte peremptus
At sequitur tantam Gloria quanta Crucem!
Sic Deus ut Christum, sic Christus honor Coronat
Eximio, quibus est Gloria chara Det.
Qualis erat noster (syncero cord) Johannes
Cui, nisi qu^ Christi, chara fuere nihil.
Hoc (scio) nemo negat, nisi very Testis and oequi
Non velit esse (Bonos Consule, sive malos.)
Pro Samuele olim contestabantur and omneis
( Hune qui pro meritis vix coluere suis)
Vel siquis forsan magis invidet Ejus honori,
Hinc cumulus crescet major honoris ei.
Anagr. 2.
JESU! ANNON THRONOS?

JOHANNES NORTONIUS. Anagr. 3.
ANNON JESU HONOR SIT?

ANnon dandus honor sit ab omnibus omnis Jesu?
Est quibus in Jesu sanguine parta salus?
ENGLISH.
OH Jesus! have not thou prepared Thrones
For us thy poor and ill deserving ones?
How should we then to Thee all Honor give,
And to thy Name, who in the Heavens do live,
And there preparest Mansions for thine,
Where they may all in endless Glory shine?
To the same purpose. JOHN NORTON. Anagr. INTO HONOR.
FRom Honor into Honor go (the Lord thus calling thee)
To higher Honor, then there could on Earth obtained be.
Heaven is the Seat of Honor for those whom he Crowns with Grace;
For the most honorable Crowns, Heaven is the only place.
By men that are most ignorant of Gods revealed Will,
Thou may be miserable thought; for so they construe still
(Like brutish ones) the mi^de of God if Saints die in a swoo^,
As if their Sun, all bright before, Were now gone down at Noon.
As if their case were now by far the more to be deplored,
As that which does but little hope (or none) of Bliss afford.
Yea, holy Job his Friends to this did too-too much incline,
[ That sudden Changes, such us his, do argue Wrath divine.]
But when the Saints do perish thus (as foolish men conceive)
That is the time, and means whereby more Honor they receive,
As being Crowned with Royal Crowns which are at Gods right hand.
Like Joseph from his Dungeon raised by the Kings Command.
T w^^ a translation mavelous which did En^ch re^ove
From out this sinful world, to be crowned in the Heavens above,
Where now he lives, and reigns, with heaps of highest honor filled,
All his Predictions to be from time to time fulfilled.
An unexpected death did seize on Jobs posterity,
But in the Heavens a glorious Lot for them prep^r'd did lie.
Moses and Aaron when as they had suffered much, were bid
As 't were, before their time to die (as in their Mounts they did)
What if the Land of Canaan they might not visit? yet
A place more glorious in the Heavens they, both of them, did get.
In flaming fiery-Charet wrapped from earth Elijah was,
And by the same conveyed he was unto his bliss-ful place.
Be it that good Josiah were cut off with sudden stroke,
He died in peace, and unto rest eternal was he t^ke.
No funeral to Sion was as his so lamentable,
Yet was his death as well as life to him most honorable.
Theirs was the grief, the joy was his, God highly honored him,
Although his death to carnal eyes might miserable seem.
The cursed executioner cut off John Baptist's head,
But how did Jesus honor him both when alive, and dead.
The Crowned Martyr holy Stephen in cruel wise was stoned,
But by his ble^sed Savior's most sweet i^braces owned.
Yea, Christ himself, Gods own dear Son, whose death more woeful was
Yet from his cross how soon advanced to that most ^lorious place!
So God his Christ with honor crowned; So Christ does honor his,
To whom Gods Honor, and his Christ's, most dear and precious is.
And such an one our Norton was whose death we so lament,
Whose whole desire was upon Christ and on his glory bent
None can deny it good nor bad, like as to Samuel
They all were forced to confess he had done all things well,
If any one should have an heart with envy filled so much
As unto him his honor due malignantly to gru^ch
Yet this will add unto the weight of his most glorious Crown,
And both in sight of God and men increase his high renown.
It Is true: he was a man, and none himself abhorred more;
But none did more the Lords free grace in Jesus Christ adore.
Nothing but this, to know, or preach, or share in did he with
This was on Earth, as it is in Heav^n his blessed Paradise.
To Honor Christ he was content as well (...), as Land,
His Life to venture, yea his ALL, was All at Christ's Command.
The care of all His Churches-dear lay heavy on his heart,
As he did ever, but at last, most fully it impart.
His life was nothing but of death a daily meditation,
And to his happy end, at last, a solemn preparation.
He was a man (if any were) that loved truth, and peace,
Which to promote, in every kind he (...) all did cease.
An Orthodox Divine he was (his writings all do show,)
Both Englands Holland, all the World, or do or may it know.
His Books do Antichrist confute with all his viperous brood,
Especially where they eclipse the merits of Christ blood.
Church-holy-order he maintained against Morellianisme,
Decrying every sect, but most abhorring Quakerisme.
His last both words, and works (like David's) were the best
And as his death more near approached more lively then the rest.
Nothing, but things at Gods right hand, and heavenly Man^ions
Was in his thoughts, a^ home, abroad, bre^t 'd in's expressions.
Ipswich was happy, Boston more, (if it we had but known)
Whom two such John's successively God gave to be their own.
But John and Paul, so much admir'^ (and most deservedly)
Must be content to be aba^'d by some, before they die:
And being dead, it will appear such Prophets once we had,
When God has once abased us with changes very sad.
The Lord, if his good pleasure be, our miseries prevent,
And of our great unthankfulness grant that we may repent.
Then will the Lord this Widow-Church, that widows house relieve,
And make us all rejoice again whom now he ^akes to grieve.
We grieved him first, and just it was that he should grieve our hearts,
Though when at low'st we are, it is fa^ beneath our just deserts.
I speak of all New England, but chiefly of Boston Church,
Oh! let us all impartially our ways and spirits search;
And say as the Disciples did, Lord, is it I? is it I?
And thou, my soul, beyond the rest It to thy self apply.
It Is t^ou have sinned: were there none, but thy unworthiness
Well might the Lord both thee, and all, because of thee, distress.
When such green trees, as were those John's Gods hand thus spares not,
Of such a dry and withered one Lord what will be the lot?
However we must bless thy name (what ere of us become)
That thou takes up such fruitful ones to thine eternal home.
Oh! that their rare Examples we^ to follow had the grace!
That thou may count us worthy once of that most glorious place.
As for his Mary, let her say, [ Rabboni] unto him,
Who calls her [ Mary] by her Name, and did her Soul redeem.
John Wilson Sen.
SION the Outcast healed of her Wounds. BEING THE FIRST SERMON: AND Preached
at the COURT of ELECTION, MAY XXII. 1661.
Jerem. 30. 17. For I will restore health unto thee, and I will heal thee of
thy wounds, says the Lord; because they called thee an Outcast, saying, This
is Sion, whom no man seeks after.
THis Text may be called A Divine Plaster for a Sinsick Outcast: in other
words it is Gods C^re of Sion, when incurably Wounded. You have here the
Patient described from diverse Adjuncts: some Inherent, abiding in the Patient;
some Extrinsecal, relating to the Patient. That which is Abiding, is that she
is an Outcast, Wounded, and Sick: That which is Extrinsecal, relates either
to the Spectators, or to the Physician. To the Beholders: and there you have
their disaffection, viz. They called thee an Outcast, saying, etc. To the
Physician: and there you have his affection, viz. I will restore health to
thee, and will heal thee of thy wounds: which Affection is amplified, 1. From
the Cause, Because they called thee an Outcast, therefore will I heal thee. 2.
From the Infallibility of it, upon the testimony of this Physician; Thus says
the Lord. They say, Thou art an Outcast: the Lord says, He will restore her.

To open the words briefly. The Patient, Here you find, 1. An [ Out-cast] It
does immediately look to the good Figs that were in Babylon, and they were in a
manner voluntary Exiles, they yielded themselves to go: and such an Outcast is
here meant, as is not only cast out of the Country, but out of the hearts and
affections of others. Several Comparisons there are, that set forth this
Outcast; as, that of a menstruous woman, ^am. 1.17. of the person cast out of
the Synagogue, Ezra 10 8. Ioh. 9. 22. and that of the Leper, 2 Chronicles. 26.21. he
dwells in an house apart; and as Iephthah, thrust and expelled out of his
Fathers house; cast out of doors, and out of hearts and esteem. 2. But not
only is Sion an Outcast, but an Outcast [ Wounded] and it is Laesio ad
mortem, a deadly wound; and an incurable wound, ^er. 30.12. i.e. according to
man: And not a green Wound, but an Ulcer, a festered Wound and Sore; and no
wonder then she is also sick. And if we look to the Extrinsecal Adjuncts which
accompany this Patient, there is that which relates unto

1. The Beholders: They say [ This is Sion, whom no man seeks after.] They
did reproach her, and there was no denial of it; Is not this Sion! it is spoken
in way of derision: the sarcasm of an Enemy. Sion was a word of honor, but
they here relate to the Notation of the Hebrew word, from (...) Siccitas, as
being a dry, withered, sapless thing; a barren, and forsaken, and undesirable
place and society. And further [ Whom no man seeks after] Neither this sort
of men, nor that sort of men; none has any care of her welfare.

2. A second kind of Extrinsecal Adjuncts relate unto the Physician; [
Therefore I will restore health unto thee, and I will heal thee.] Now God will
apply a sanative Cataplasm, an healing Plaster: This is Repentance, and
Restitution, ^er. 31.9. Repentance, and their Return, make up the sanative
Plaster. In respect of her self, there was need of Repentance; in respect of
the adversary, there was need of Reduction. And the Cause of it, viz. [ Because
they called thee an Out-cast] as who should say, I am sensible of all thy case,
and the opprobrie thou have suffered, therefore will I restore thee. But shall
not this fail? No, Jehovah's word is engaged for it, Thus says the Lord.

Doct. When Sion for its sin is become an Outcast (a subject of contempt) God
takes occasion from her Calamity to give her Repentance, that so he may bring
upon her the Blessing of his own People. I will not more then intimate to you
the Paradoxes that the Text does abound with. Sion, and acknowledged, and yet
no man cares for her. A People, none neglected like them; a People, none
beloved like them: Neglected, if you look at men; beloved, if you look at God.
A People, whose very adversaries are instrumental to their prosperity. These
are such Riddles, as we may truly say Gods grace only makes. A strange
occasion may that seem to be, which God takes for the healing of his People in
Isa. 57.17,18. I have seen his ways ( i. e his frowardness and covetousness)
and will heal him. Ezekiel. 11. 15, 16, 17. Thy brethren, even thy brethren, etc.
they say, Ge^^ ye far from the Lord, unto us is the land given in possession:
Therefore say, Thus says the Lord, although I have cast them far off, etc.
though I have scattered them, etc. yet will I be a little Sanctuary unto them
-- I will gather you, etc. Zech.3.2. The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan, even the
Lord that has chosen Jerusalem: Is not this a brand plucked out of the fire?
They had been in the Furnace long enough. As the Lord deals thus with his
people, so David makes use of the like in his personal case, 2 Samuel 16. 12. It
may be the Lord will look upon mine affliction, and requite me good, etc. bless
me, because of his cursing.

The Reasons of the point, are:

Reas. 1. From the Sympathy that there is between the Head and the Members.
Christ is sensible of the sufferings of his Outcast. It is true, that the
Outcast does suffer; it is a greater truth, that the God of the Outcast
suffers. Isa. 63. 9. I^ all their affliction, he was afflicted: it relates
to Israel in Egypt. Zech. 2.8. He that touches you, touches the apple of his
Eye: it relates to the good Figs in exile. It is no little ease that our
sorrows touch Christ, according to Hell. 4. 15. We have not an high Priest that
cannot be touched, etc. What though the Outcast suffers for sin, yet he has
a sufferer with him: and in this respect what Paul said to his Corinthians, 2
Cor. 2.2. that does Christ say to his Outcast, If I make you sorry, who is he
that makes me glad, but the same that are made sorry by me?

Reas. 2. Because that Gods Name suffers, while his Outcasts do thus suffer.
Exodus 32.12. if God should destroy Israel, the Egyptians will say, For mischief
has he brought them, etc. Deuteronomy.32.27. Were it not that I feared the wrath of
the enemy, lest their adversaries should behave themselves strangely, and say,
Our hand is high, and the Lord has not done all this. You remember the
argument which Joshua uses, Chap.7,8,9. When Israel falls before the enemy,
what will thou do to thy great Name? The destruction of Israel would raise a
scandal to Religion, and the God of Israel.

Reas. 3. To capacitate the Outcast to receive the benediction of a Father,
the actual blessing of his People. To be Gods people, is one thing; but to be
made meet to receive the blessing of his people, is another thing. Zech. 3. 2.
The Lord, even the Lord that has chosen ^erusalem, etc. God in election has
made them his people, and determined to bless them: it is this that does pluck
the brand out of the fire. Ier. 24. 5,6,7. I will set mine eyes upon them for
good, I will bring them again, I will build them, I will give them an heart to
know me, etc. Ier.30.22. and 31.33. I will be their God, and they shall be my
people: and verse.9. Ye shall come with weeping and supplications, etc. [Ye
shall come] there is their Return; [ with weeping and supplications] there is
their Repentance: and the Lord has undertaken for it; I am a father to Israel,
and Ephraim (as bad as he is) is my firstborn. The cause of their being his
people, a penitent people, a blessed people, is his fatherly relation to them,
Ier.32.38,39. Ier.30.7. Alas, it is the time of ^acobs trouble, but he shall be
saved out of it.

use 1. Instruction 1. Hence learn, that Sion is subject to sad Apostasy, or
defections. Ier. 2.5,13,21. I planted thee a noble vine. We must acknowledge,
God planted us, I may say, a Scripture vine, and, if so, a noble vine: but you
see a generous vine subject to be a degenerate vine. Exodus 32. 7, 8. They
turned aside quickly. But as the Orator solemnizing a sad funeral, desired to
have learned Mortality from another Instance, rather then that of S^aliger; so
I would God would learn us this truth from some other instances, rather then
from these Churches. I may mention notwithstanding, the Politicians observation
concerning the stage of action usually changed in thirty years; because the
persons that make the major vote, are usually changed, and gone by that time.
Something about that time, has our time been in this land, now perhaps the
major vote is changed; you may say in such and such a case many a time, and had
such been alive, these actions, and those, in Church or Court, would not have
been so carried on. But I will not dwell here. I wish we might learn such
instances from some other example, and not from our selves.

Instr. 2. Sions Apostasy brings upon Sion sad Calamity. It Is a truth, that
Israel embraces not God, til God first embrace Israel: it is also a truth, that
God forsakes not Israel, till Israel first forsake him. Ier. 5. 25. If good
things be withheld from us, Iniquity is the cause. ^am. 3. 39. if evil things
be brought upon us, the cause is sin. There was a time when Solomon was at
rest, 1 Kings 5.4. There was no adversary, nor evil occurrent; there was a time
(again) when Solomon had many adversaries, 1 King. 11.14,23,26. Solomon has
rest, while he is in his integrity; Solomon has adversaries, that was the time
of his Apostasy. Is there no dispensation but Judah must serve Shishak? 2 Chronicles. 12. 8. what is the reason thereof? it is because they would not subject
themselves to the yoke of God: not the power of the Egyptians, but their
non-subjection to God, made them subjects to Shishak. jer. 14. 11. and 7. 16.
jeremiah, pray not for them, I will not hear, says the Lord: there is no
dispensation, jer. 27. 12. non-subjection to the yoke of Christ, subjected
I^dah to the yoke of Babylon. Abuse of Liberty, is that which forfeiteth the
use of liberty.

Instr. 3. Sions Malady is not cureable with Calamity, Isai. 48. 10. would not
one think a furnace should cu^e the outcast? they are so good, that they are
called the good (...), and yet so bad, as that seventy years captivity would
not make them good enough for the end. Those that were seventy years in the
furnace do cry out, Lord, why have thou hardened our hearts from thy fear? Isai,
63. 17. you that think you have a new man, do not forget that you have within
you also an old man, and calamity will not remove it. The hard-heartedness of
good people is very strange. Heb. 3. 8. Harden not your hearts: Oh! provoke him
not as at Meribah! what does 'Paul cry out against, and so David, and Moses?
Meribah, Meribah! this, this lies at the hearts of such, the inseparable, the
insuperable, invincible non-subjection of Israel to the ways of God, this is
not cureable with calamity.

Instr. 4. Though Sions malady be such, as that, looked at in it self, it cannot
be cured, yet looks at in Gods promise, and it cannot want a cure. Look upon it
in itself, and it seems incurable, looked at in the Physician, and it cannot
but be cured. Jeremiah looking at his sufferings, he will speak no more; but
looking at Gods promise, and it is as fire in his bones, he cannot but speak.
2. King. 8. 10. there is a quaerie put to the Prophet, whether Benhadad shall
live; the prophet answers, He may certainly recover, howbeit, the Lord has
showed me, he shall surely dye, i. e. the disease was not such but the might
have recovered: so may I by allusion invert and say, Sions disease is
incurable, but yet she shall certainly recover. Look at Sion in the glass of
Providence, and she is as a woman forsaken, and grieved in spirit, Isai. 54.
5,6. and 66. 4. husbandless, as to reproach; and yet at the same time thy Maker
is thy husband: if we look at Sion in the glass of the Promise, this Outcast
is both Marah, and Hephzibah, both a Widow, and Beulah. Look at the Outcasts
tears, as an effect of man's not caring for her, but as an occasion, and
demonstration of Gods care for her, Psalm. 126. 5,6. that Sion sheddeth tears,
denominateth her Marah; that Sions tears are seed, denominateth her Hephzibah.
Psalm. 56 8. that tears fall from David's cheeks, this is matter of sorrow; that
David's tears fall into Gods bottle, is matter of joy.

Instr. 5. Gods touching an impenitent Outcast with repentance, is a signal of
Gods having mercy thereon. Sions recovery by repentance from her backsliding,
is an effect of grace, and a forerunner of the set time of Sions mercy Sions
impenitency, is the life and strength of Sions (of the Outcasts) calamity
Repentance does break the yoke of Babylon; Impenitency does lay on the yoke of
Babylon. You may truly say, the date of the Outcast captivity, and the date of
their impenitency, is the same. The enemy is never harder-hearted to Sion, then
when Sion is hard-hearted to her God. Their affliction was not the hardness of
the Babylonians hearts, but Lord, why have thou hardened our hearts: Isai 63.
17. when the Outcasts return to Sion, they shall go weeping with their faces
th^^herward, Jer. 50. 4,5.

^se 2. Exhortation. The text opens my mouth to call upon Gods Outcasts to
accept of Gods plaster. God proposes to us Remedy, or Calamity: we have our
option, whether that of the plaster, or of the sore; make we our choice. If we
accept the plaster, the time of mercy, even the set time is come; if you do
not accept it, you may look at it as the beginning of sorrow. That we are
Outcasts, this does speak us sick; but our not accepting the remedy, speaks
our sickness incurable. To be Outcasts, this argues that we are cast off by
men; but our not accepting the remedy, speaks us cast off by God: the
condition of an Outcast supposes us sinners; but the rejection of the remedy
does say that we are castawayes: for an Outcast to need a medicine, is common
to good and bad; to accept it, is proper to the good.

Let us then accept the Lords Plaster. As an Ingredient thereto, I shall
propose this Direction; viz.

1. Learn we to judge aright of Liberty; Scripture-liberty. Gal. 5. 1. Paul
bids us stand fast in our liberty: and those accursed ones he looks unto,
Chap. 1. who also pleaded for liberty, and whom the Assertors of true Liberty
should accordingly pronounce accursed. Blessed men plead for liberty, and
cursed men plead for liberty. The Gn^stick in 2 Pe. 2. 19. does plead for
liberty: Good men plead for liberty, and bad men plead for liberty: the best
men plead for liberty, and the worst men plead for liberty. If you ask what
Liberty is? you may look at it as a Power, as to any external restraint, or
obstruction on man's part, to walk in the Faith, Worship, Doctrine and
Discipline of the Gospel, according to the Order of the Gospel. When you hear
men plead for Liberty, see that it be not Liberty falsely so called.

2. Acknowledge Order Divine, and in particular in that great Point of a
Ministerial Judge. There are that make little of Order, and yet we may think,
not any made so little, as 'Paul made much of it: Let All things be done in
Order. 1 Cor. 14. 40. it seems an Apostolical spirit does conclude, that
sometimes better such a thing not done, then not orderly done. There is a
judgment Discretive, which belongs to every Believer; there is a judgment
Authoritative, that belongs unto the Church, and is set therein by God; and
also there is a judgment Decisive, which belongs unto the Council: Only
remember, that the Supreme Judge is either 1. Authentic, i. e. Jesus Christ:
or 2. Regulative, i. e. the Scripture: or 3. Ministerial, i. e. the Council.
This Question concerning a Ministerial Judge in matters of Religion, is that
which has greatly exercised the Christian world; insomuch that both
Protestants and Papists agree, That the Resolution of this Controversy is of
so great moment, as that hereupon depends the Resolution of all Controversies.
When a Controversy arises in a Church (differences must not always continue)
what shall resolve the same, if a Ministerial Judge be not admitted? Take away
this Order, and how shall Peace, or the Society continue? This truth of a
Ministerial Judge, is reckoned among the Fundamentals -- Secundario, because it
does tend to the preservation of all that else is of the Foundation. You shall
find this Truth impleaded throughout all generations, since the Primitive
times, and pleaded for by all the Orthodox in all the Centuries. Deuteronomy 17. 12.
Standum senten^^oe summi judicis: Israel must stand to this; if it be in
matters of Religion, there is the Priest; if in matters Civil, there is the
Magistrate, and be that stands not, or submits not to the Sentence of these,
let him be cut off from Israel: so requisite a thing is Order. Acts 15. there
is no rest in such a case; what now do they, but refer it to a Council, and
that does determine it. 1. Cor. 14. 32. The Spirit of the Prophets is subject
to the Prophets. I will not acknowledge him a Prophet, that is not subject to
the Prophets. Let not any one therefore under pretense of a Prophet, or
whatever Inspiration or Persuasion soever, exempt themselves from subjection to
Order.

Obj. The major part may err, and is not always the melior part: Councils and
Churches may err, and have erred.

Answ. 1. But is it not true, that the Objector may err? The major part may
err; so says the Delinquent standing before the Church, and must that
evacuate all Church Power? 2. It Is more likely that truth should be with many
Orthodox, Pious, Orderly, etc. In the multitude of Counselors (was anciently
said, Prove. 11. 14.) there is safety. The Objector is one to many, and he is in
his own case a Judge, but a Council in other men's. But if that be not a truth,
that [ We must subject to Order] because the major part may err, then put an
end to Church-administrations, there will be no end of Controversies. But
distinguish we concerning Councils. There is a Council Regular, of Orthodox and
meet Members orderly gathered: There is a Council that is Irregular, and
abusive, as in times of Popery. When the Ark was taken by the Philistims, no
marvel it was not Oraculous to Israel; but what Israelite refused to consult
the Ark of God after its return from the Philistims, because they had abused
it? You tell us, that Popish Councils have erred; and therefore must we forget
that the Councils of the Orthodox have maintained the Truth, and have been the
support of Religion in former times? Look to the Ni^ene, and other Councils.
Councils have been sometimes among the Philistims, among the Papists, and for
so long a time; but shall we esteem the less of Orthodox Councils because of
that (...) 3. Distinguish between the Truth of Order, and Truth Positive. John
8. 17. The testimony of two men is true: this is what God has appointed for
the Preservation of Society Humane and Christian. That is a truth in foro, viz.
in Church or Court, which may not be the truth positive. The God of Truth has
made it for to keep Societies in peace; and if it were not for this
Institution, there could be no sitting in Judgment, or any Polity among men.
4. Remember that the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophet, 1. Cor
14. 32. the Spirits of the Elders are subject to the Elders, etc. If this be
not attended, there can be no Administration, or else there must needs be a
mere rixation and chiding-administration. Where there is liberty and the Old
man, there must needs be much Controversy; 'twere more sad if there were no
Remedy. The non-admission of this help, renders the Churches, in case of
Non-action, like the field of the sleeping Husbandman, Matthew. 13. 25. or else
like the Meeting of Israel at Meribah; either no Administrations, or manifold
Alterations. It Is true, a Ship may live longer in a Calm, then in a Storm, but
yet your Ship may be so long becalmed, that all the Provision may be spent, and
so perish in time; and it may be better perishing in a Storm, then in a Calm: a
Storm is swifter to perishing, but both destructive. Either this Disease or
that is mortal; the difference may be, that the one is Chronical, the other
Acute: both the killing. No (you will say) if such men be there that have a
spirit of Meekness and Patience: Yea, but read Exodus 12. 3. and Psa^. 106. 33.
Moses the meekest man then on earth, yet it went ill with Moses ('it is said) for
their sakes. How long did Moses live at Meribah? sure I am it killed him in a
short time, a man of as good a temper, as could be expected from a mere man: I
tell you, it will not only kill the People, but it will quickly kill Moses.
Take heed of Meribah, and accept of the Remedy against your Disease. Obj. May
not a good man suffer by this means? Answ. Sometimes we are called to suffer;
and subjection to Order may be accompanied with suffering for the Truth: and
better an innocent and good man suffer, then Order, for that preserves the
whole.

3. Sanctify God in his Providential Testimonies against abu^e of Liberty.
Mind Solomon's case beforementioned: Have we not many Adversaries? Are we not
Outcasts? Are we as much in the hearts of others, as formerly? Are there not
those who labor to bereave us of our Liberties? Let us Sanctify the Name of
God herein.

4. Attend we the Examples of the godly wise, for the continuing of our
Liberty, in like cases. You will say, What is that? I answer, An Address to the
Supreme Authority, and a just Apology. If any say, What Example in Scripture
have we for an Address? Let such look to 2 Kings 4. 13. Would thou be spoken
for to the King? This did not unbecome the Prophet to propound to her. Remember
Ezra 7. 6. and 4. 6,13. Est^. 4. 8. Nehem. 2. 4. did Nehemiah do the people
wrong therein? My God (says he) remember me for good in this. There was
Accusations written against them; Rehun and Shimshai write, Tainai and
Shethar-boznai write against them, Sanballat writes: Shall there be those that
Petition against, and shall none Petition for Israel? Ezra's and Nehemiah's
Petitioning, and promoting their Petitions to the King, were not interpreted as
acts of diffidence unto God, or of irregular compliance, nor themselves as men
less friends to the Church and Civil Liberties, nor looked upon as unworthy to
be continued in their Trust and Esteem among the People. Mordecai counsels
Esther to go in unto the King, and speak to him, though it was with the peril
of her life. To make an Address then is not that which is not according to
Scripture. The like I might say relating to an Apology.

5. Let us walk in the use of our Liberty with innocence, and without offense.
To differ from our Orthodox Pious, and Learned Brethren, is such an affliction
to a Christian and ingenuous Spirit, as nothing but love to the Truth could arm
a man of peace against: Our Profession being in a way differing from these and
those, it does the more concern us that our walking be very cautelous, and that
it be without giving any (...) offense. There will offense enough be taken at
the Profession of the Truth, though the Professors thereof give none. The
Profession of the Truth draws upon us enmity, but error in our Profession,
and offensive walking, delivers and betrayeth us into the hand of the enemy.
And give me leave to speak freely, Let us see that we walk without offense
toward Civil Authority: Suffer not your minds to be prejudiced against the
present, and ancient Government of our Nation: Isa. 49. 23. Kings shall be thy
N^^sing-fathers, and Queen thy N^^sing-mothers: it is spoken of Gospel Times. It
is not a Gospel Spirit to be against Kings: it is neither Gospel nor English
Spirit for any of us to be against the Government by King, Lords and Commons.
It was the usual stratagem anciently of the Adversary, to calumniate the
Christians as disaffected to the State, and such as were for Reformation, as
Enemies to Coesar. But juell could testify in his time, Gratias agimus Deo,
etc. (in Apolog. page 16.) That there could be no instance given, wherein they
in that state of Reformation had offered any violence to Princes, etc. So said
that famous Apologist. God make us more wise and religious then so to carry it,
that they should no sooner see a Congregational-man, then to have cause to say,
They see an Enemy to the Crown. Prove. 24. 21. My son, fear thou the Lord, and
the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change. Eccles. 10. 20.
Curse not the King, no not in thy thought. Dan. 6. 22. Innocence was found in
me, (faith Dan^^l) and also before thee, O King, have I done no hurt. Is this
thy voice, my son David? 1 Samuel 26. 17. really so, not hypocritically? We have
severe Observers; Tongues are not untaught to inform against us. It is but
wisdom to give no cause, especially such as our own Consciences cannot
testify for, and such as all Orthodox Churches in the Protestant world will
testify against. In matters of the State-Civil, and of the Church, let it be
shown that we are his Disciples, who ( Matthew. 22. 21.) said, Give unto Caesar
the things that are Cesars, and unto God the things that are Gods: and in
matters of Religion, let it be known that we are for Reformation, and not for
Separation.

6. Lastly, Take care thar the Order of the Gospel may have a free passage in
the Churches; I mean, that our Practice may effectually answer our Doctrine, in
that Book entitled [ The Platform of Church-Discipline] It Is that for which we
are Outcasts at this day; that (for the substance of it) is it that shows
what New England is. I would I might say that there are none among our selves
that are against it. There was a time when the General Court did approve of it,
and when the Members of that Synod pleaded for it. Our reality herein will be,
in no small degree, critical of our Integrity in this Undertaking; and our
Actions must be the demonstrations of our Sincerity: This is a principal
Ingredient of this healing Plaster, and for the defect hereof are such
frequent and scandalous Breaches in our Churches; so many Administrations in
vain, and such sad Non-administration, and Remora's, occasioning that sad
Quaerie of Spectators, Whether the Congregational-way be practicable, yea or
not? I beseech you consider whom it is that it does concern to answer this
Objection; you that are conscientious do not forget it, at whom the stick lies
in one order or another. If we cannot build without the noise of Hammers, yield
that we are not Temple-workmen: yield we must, either that the
Congregational-way is not the way of God, or that We are unfit for the
behavior of the House of God. As concerning the Church Government according to
the Platform of Discipline, the practice of which doctrine who cares for? is
not this that truth which the Synod, Churches, the General Court sometime made
a good Confession of, and that now no man comparatively cares for? Ezra 4. 8.
Rehum cares not for it: ver. 23. Artaxerxes cares not for it: Nehem. 4.
Sanballat, and Tobiah care not for it: the Episcopal man, the Presbyterian care
not for it, the Morellian cares not for it: the Merchant, the Soldier, the
Husbandman, the Labourer cares not for it. Haggai 1. The people of Jerusalem,
the Church Members care not for it. I am apt sometimes to think that Aaron may
be under a temptation of irregular compliance; but mind, Jer. 15. 19. Let them
return unto thee, but return not thou unto them: I may say thus much (and
pardon my speech) A more yiedling Ministry unto the People, I believe is not in
the World. I beseech you let not Caesar be killed in the Senate, after he has
fought it out, and conquered in the Field: let us acknowledge the Order of the
Eldership in our Churches in their way, and the Order of Councils in their way,
duly backed and encouraged; without which, Experience will witness that these
Churches cannot long consist.

God has opened the mouth of the Speaker to you this day, it being a day
wherein after so many attempts and fears, you are betrusted with your
Liberties for another year. You have this years opportunity, and at such a time,
and blessed be the Lord God of our Fathers, who has put such a thing in the
Kings heart, so far to accept your Application to his Majesty, as not only
to give you the opportunity of the year present, but also encouragement for many
years to come. Let all of us be stirred up by the Lord, and at such a time, to
strengthen the hand of ^^^ubbable, and (...), by your professed subjection to
the Gospel of Christ. Do not betray liberty, under the pretense of liberty. You
that are in the honored Magistracy, remember David's troubles, Psalm. 132. 1,5.
he could not rest till the Ark had rest. And those that are in the Ministry,
remember Pa^^'s troubles, and what his cares were, 1 Cor. 11. 28. Let us all
mind what were the troubles and thoughts of heart that were in them that lived
in the days of Malachi, Chap 3. 16. But are there not many that mind only
their cieled houses, etc? and how much does the work of the Outcast lie
unattempted, witness the sick estate of the Churches: and how can it be
remedied, if we will not acknowledge Order? and shall I say that we are real
therein? You have brought upon your selves real troubles, and likewise upon
your Relations and Friends in England, and those here that suffer with you in
this Exile: See then that you be not hypocritical, but real to the Truth which
you have professed. I could tell you, and you must not forget it, That there
have been M^n of Renown, as they are called Numb. 16. 2. Famous in the
Congregation of Israel, that did go out of Egypt, but yet could not endure the
Order of God in the wilderness. Let us show it, that we mistook not our selves,
pretending to come into this Wilderness to live under the Order of the Gospel.
We are Outcasts indeed, and reproached; but let us be such Outcasts as are
caring for the Truth, and therefore not to neglect an Apology: it does become,
and greatly concern Gods Outcasts to mind it. You know there are those who
represent you as disaffected to Government, and as Sectaries, and Schismatics,
and as Fanatics: you see cause to Apologize therein. And for that term of [
Fanatick] you must remember it is not of yesterday, however it be now used or
abused. You may learn the original use of it from that distribution of
Professors, in relation to Church Government, in former times, into four sorts,
viz. Orthodax^, Pontificti, Rationales, and Fanatic^. But I trust that God
does, and Angles and Men shall know that we are Orthodox. Gods Outcasts are
not Fanatics. The Woman in the wilderness may have the vomit of the Dragon
cast in her face, if you let it lie on, you will suffer; wash it off therefore
by an Apology. Thus did jusim (...), Teru (...), I^el, and others in their
time. Give not the advantage of interpreting Silence as Consent, nor think it
labor lost if an Apology will wash your face. And though we may be cast out
by men, yet may we hope that God will look after his Our-cast^, and care for
us, being Outcasts for the Truth. Let it appear that we are such Out casts, to
whom the calamity and temptations of Outcasts are sanctified; Outcasts
healed: Outcasts that care for the truth, and then Outcasts on which God will
bring the blessing of his own people. If this plaster finds acceptance with
you, you shall find esteem, and acceptance, and favor from God and man. Let
us all labor so to carry it, as that we may have this Rejoicing of a good
Conscience to sweeten that bottle full of tears shed in your Outcast condition
in this wilderness, viz. That we came into it, not only with a Spirit
testifying, according to the Scriptures, against the Inventions of men, but
also that we do come up unto the Institutions of Christ; that as we have
departed from Inventions Humane, so we may not be found to be, or here continue
opposers against Institutions Divine; that we are not negligent of, but
faithful to that Order of the Gospel which we are Outcasts for.

THE BELIEVERS CONSOLATION, In the Remembrance of his Heavenly Mansion prepared
for him by CHRIST. BEING THE SECOND SERMON: AND Preached on the LORD'S DAY,
MARCH XXIX. 1663.
John 14. 3. And if I go to prepare a place for you, I will come again, and
receive you to my self, that where I am, there you may be also.
THis Verse, and the former, holds forth a double Consolation, to support the
Disciples against the suffering which they were to conflict with, either In the
way of Truth, or For the way of Truth. This Verse holds forth the second
Argument of Consolation; the former you have in the second Verse: it is taken
from the Place they were to be taken to after Death. And this Argument in this
Verse is taken from the Company they shall have in that place; and that is his
Personal Presence, his full and clear Presence: Where I am, there you shall be
also.

Now this Argument of Consolation is described, 1. From the Scope of Christ in
preparing such a place for them; and it was, that he and they might be there
together: I go to prepare a place for you, that where I am, there you may be
also. 2. It is declared from the Time when they must expect their being taken
to Christ; and that is, when he comes again: I will come again, and receive you
to my self. 3. It is declared from the Efficient of it, the Undertaker of this;
and that is Himself: I will come again, and receive you to my self.

To open the words thus resolved.

1. Touching the Presence of Christ and Believers together [ That where I am,
there you may be also] you must understand this (of his Presence emphatically
so called) of his Presence in the place of Blessedness: In thy Presence is
fullness of joy, Psalm. 16. 11. There is a double Presence of Christ, but he
means here his Presence in Glory, where we shall see him as he is, 1 John 3. 2.
I said, this Argument of their Consolation was declared from the Scope of it; I
go to prepare a place for you, that where I am, there you may be also: it was
one great end of his being a Forerunner. Secondly, he should fail of his
Fidelity and Ability, if there should be a disappointment.

2. From the Time [ When I come again] Christ's coming is either his last Coming
or his coming by Death. Of his last coming you read 1 Thessalonians. 4. 18. Of his
coming by Death, you read Luke 23. 43. To day thou shall be with me in
Paradise. Now the Soul goes to Christ, when He comes to us by Death: at his
last coming both Soul and Body shall be together with him.

3. This Argument of Consolation is described by the Efficient of it, or
Undertaker, [ I will receive you to my self] We may doubt how our Souls, when
we dye, shall come to Heaven: why, says Christ, I will come, and receive you
to my self. They therefore say properly, when they dye, that say, Into thy
hands I commend my Spirit, Psalm. 31. 5. it is a proper saying so to speak,
because Christ he does receive them. And Steven (again) he speaks, Acts 7. 59.
Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. It is a blessed thing to commit our Souls by
Faith to Christ, when they go out of the Body. He comes by the ministry of his
Angels, or otherwise as he please: I will come again, and receive you to my
self. You may remember the words of Steven, he dying, called upon God, and
said, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit: we receive Christ, and we receive the
Spirit of Christ; Now to as many as received him, to them gave he power, etc.
Joh. 1. 12. Christ receives our Spirits (then:) If we receive his Spirit now,
he will receive our Spirits then; I will receive you to my self.

Doct. That the effectual Remembrance, that at Death Christ will receive our
Souls unto Himself, is a Sovereign Preservative to quiet our Souls throughout
all the Sufferings we meet with, either In the way of Truth, and For the way of
Truth, during this life. You shall find in Job 19. 25. says he, I know that
my Redeemer lives: He might say, I know my Estate is gone, and I see that my
Friends are gone, and my Children be gone, and my Health and Strength is gone,
and the Grave is ready for me; but what stays ^obs heart now? I know that my
Redeemer lives. This is a living truth for a dying man; I know that my Redeemer
lives, and that he shall stand in the latter day upon the earth, and I shall
see him, etc. This was now In the way of Truth, for you cannot say that Job was
persecuted For the way of Truth. But you shall find in a way of suffering for
the way of Truth, Phil. 1. 23. I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ:
Having passed through many troubles, I would be out of the body and freed from
the body of death; I desire to depart, and to be with Christ. 2. Cor. 5. 8. We
are confident, and willing rather to be absent from the body, and present with
the Lord. You must either be absent from the body, or absent from the Lord; it
is an hard thing to be absent from the body, but not comparatively: We desire
rather to be absent from the body, and present with the Lord: We shall meet the
Lord, and shall ever be with the Lord. What is the use of this, 1 Thessalonians, 4. 18.
Comfort one another with these words: what are these Comforts? They are nothing
but Promises; Promises rightly applied, these are the Comforts of the holy
Ghost: they hold forth more good, then the affliction does evil. If you would
comfort one another, bring out the Promise, that is comfortable and seasonable.
Comfort one another: with what? with these words; for in them the Comforter
does come and apply comfort.

Reas. 1. Because hereby we are made fit for this rest, fit to be with Christ;
that is, by our trouble, and by this remembrance. Mixing this remembrance with
our trouble, does fit us for this place. 2 Cor. 5. 5. He that works us to the
self-same thing, is God. For what thing? for our heavenly house, our house not
made with hands: he that fits us for these things, is God. And thus does he fit
us by trouble, by these matters of groaning that do pass over us from day to
day. This should be a great encouragement; There is a place prepared for you,
but remember you must be fit for your place: you are not fit for your place, in
that you are merely Regenerate, but you must pass through such a measure of
Obedience both active and passive that is appointed for you, that by this means
you may be meet for the inheritance of the Saints in light. The place is fit
for us already, but we are not fit for it as soon as we are Regenerate. 2 Cor.
5. he does there instance in the troubles of the body, the grief of the outward
man: we are burdened with our body, but all this while a fitting for our
place. If you belong to God, he is working you to the self-same thing; be your
trouble this or that (the Cholick, Palsy, Stone, or whatever) he is working us
for the self-same thing: This is a great matter in our troubles, to consider
that God by them is fitting us for our place in Heaven.

Reas. 2. From the Quality of the Undertaker, that has undertaken the
reception of our Souls to himself; I will come, and receive you to my self. If
it be so, let us that suffer according to the will of God (1 Pet. 4. 19.)
commit the keeping of our Souls to him: you may boldly do it, he sends a fiery
Chariot for Elijah; likely it was an Angel, He makes his Angels spirits, his
Ministers a flame of fire, Heb. 1. 7. Christ has his way to carry your Souls
to Heaven: you do not believe what a condition your Souls will be in, as soon
as ever they are out of the body: do but think what a meeting here is; but we
believe not these things. As Christ, when he sent to his Disciples to comfort
them, ( Luke 24. 11.) they thought they were idle tales: so when we hear of
these things, we look at them but as idle tales; but, says Christ, I will
come, and receive you to my self.

Reas. 3. Taken from the Person we shall be with, namely, Christ. Phil. 1. 23.
You shall be with Christ, which is best of all, or which is far better: There
is no better House then this Mansion, there is no better Presence then his
Presence; therefore will might he say, I. is best of all, or far better.

Instruction 1. Learn from hence, that the most and the greatest Communion that
we have with Christ in this life, still leaves us in a condition of absence
from Christ, compared with that Communion we shall have with him after death:
So says the Apostle, 2. Cor. 5. 8. We are willing to be absent from the body,
and present with the Lord; ver. 6. for while we are at home in the body, we are
absent from the Lord: It is a place of absence form the Lord, that is, compared
with what we shall have after death. If you think of Paul, Who did enjoy Christ
more then Paul did? Did not Paul enjoy Church Communion? Yes; but
notwithstanding this was a place of absence from the Lord, compared with the
society that by death he should be in. Was not Paul acquainted with any godly
men? you know what he says of Timothy; but yet (says he) I am absent from
mine own people. The word that is here translated [ Absent] signifies Absence
from his own people: he loved Timothy well, but he thinks the Spirits of just
men made perfect, exceed the Spirit of Timothy: Here is no Companion that is
like the Company there; here is no Communion will satisfy here. Where most of
Christ is, it is best, but yet it is absence comparatively; We are absent from
the Lord.

Instr. 2. The New man (the Believer) is never at rest till he is with Christ
in his Mansion House. If you never find any such thing in you, but that, if
you might have your desire, you would be here always, believe it you have not
this New man in you: this New man never is at rest, till it comes to Christ. It
is true, there is weakness in the best, and unbelief may prevail too-too much,
but I speak of this new Nature that is in these, and reigns in these that are
Regenerate. You know how it is with those that love one another: after that
Jacob knew what was become of Joseph, there was no staying of Jacob; Let me go
and see him before I dye, Genesis 45,28. What was the reason of it? there was an
entire love one unto another. You know how it is with those that do indeed love
one another, that have been long absent one from another, they cannot rest
until they meet: Was there any did ever love another, as the New man loves
Christ? The New man loves him with a divine love, the coals thereof are coals
of fire, which has a most vehement flame, Cant 8. 6. There are some on earth
that do long after Christ; there are those on earth that do desire after
Heaven: and do any love another, as Jesus Christ loves the New man? There must
be a meeting between these two Lovers; I will come, and receive you to my self.
Mark how John concludes the Revelations, Chap. 22. ver. 21. Behold I come,
says Christ: He that testifies of these things, says, I come; Amen, even so
come Lord Jesus. Here is a longing to be with Christ. In any of your quaeries
concerning Christ, you are never at rest till you come to Heaven: it is the
proper Being of the Sun to be in motion; this New man is a divine man, and his
motion is still unto, and after Christ.

Instruction 3. The death of the Believer, it is a reception of the Soul by
Christ Jesus. Christ receiving of our Souls at Death, is an encouragement to
strengthen us against the fear of Death. Are you afraid of going to your
Mansion house? are you afraid of going to Christ? Mark what the Apostle says,
Phil. 1. 23. I desire to depart, and to be with Christ. The Greek word is a
Mariners Phrase, and signifies as much as to set sail from the shore: I
desire my time were come to be loosed that I might go to my Mansion. There are
three Cords or Bonds that do Entangle us, the loosing from which does sweeten
Death to us: 1. The Bond of the Cross; I desire to be dissolved, and loosed
from the afflictions and miseries of this present life: This is in it is place a
lawful thing to desire in Gods time. 2. There is a Bond of Corruption, the body
of Death; this I desire to be loosed from: O (...) I am, who shall deliver me
from the body of this Death! Romans 7. 24. There are pan^s in the Best; But if
you have the new man in you, you cannot bear them: There is Vainglory there,
and there is impatience there, and there is Envy there, and Unspiritualness,
which the Believer cannot bear; I desire therefore to be loosed from the Body.
It is said of one, Mezentius.
that he would bind a dead Corpse to a living man, and so he would torture
them. This new man is bound to a dead Corpse: there is no part of the
Understanding, Will, or Affections, throughout the whole man, but this dead
Corpse is there. 3. There is the Cord of our absence from Christ: that he
expresses, as if it did in an especial manner move with him to be with Christ,
which is the best of all. Simeon speaking of death, Lord, now let thou thy
Servant depart in peace, Luke 2. 29. as if he should say, Give me my dismission
(as we use to speak, from one Church to another: so here) from a Society
Militant, to a Society Triumphant: So you see here he calls it but a
dismission; it came to pass when the time was come that he should be received
up, Luk, 9. 51. relating to his death: if you did but think that this were the
great business when you dye, namely, the receiving of your Souls, you would
not be troubled: you cannot give up your Souls into better hands. John 5. 24.
you shall there find it is called a passage from one Room to another, he is
passed from death to life: it is like a passing from one room into another.
Look at death as in the Curse, and what more terrible? But look at it in the
Promise, and it has another kind of aspect. 1 Cor. 15. 43. you see there it is
compared to sowing; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power. This is now
with relation to the body, it is but sowing of it, it shall rise again, and
that with advantage: you are not afraid of sowing your seed, that will bring a
glad harvest. It is a going from those that are not our own people, to those
that are our own people, 2 Cor. 5. 6,8. it may be you have a friend here, but
it is not an ordinary thing to meet with a Jonathan here. It is but a going
from them who are not our people, whom we cannot so fully close with; nay you
cannot close with your own souls fully, while here; but you are going from
those who are not your people, to those who are your people, where you shall
find perfect closing with this new man; you are come to the spirits of just men
ma^^ perfect. Would you see what Peter says concerning death, 2 Pet. 1. 14. I
must put off my tabernacle: it is a strange (...) he makes no more of it, then
for Elijah to put off his mantle. What a thing was it for Elijah to let his
mantle fall, he gets him up into his Chariot and lets go his mantle: I speak
this, that you may see what expressions the Scripture gives concerning death: O
let my last end be like his! I tell you it is a lovely thing, Let me dye the
death of the Righteous, let my last end be like his: I tell you there is
another good in their last end, that the unbeleiver is not aware of. It is but
a going out of one place to another. I have done with this, when I have minded
you of that place, 1 These. 4. 14. They sleep, and they sleep in Jesus: They
also that sleep in Jesus shall God bring with him: you see two bodies lie by
the wall, and they look both alike, but (believe it) they are not both alike in
the Promise; if one be a Believer, and the other an Unbeliever, one is gone to
this Mansion place, the other not.

Instr. 4. The presence of Jesus is the place of blessedness: So says Christ
here, I will take you to my self, and you shall be where I am. We shall see
him, we shall be enlightened by him, we shall be satisfied in him, and blessed
with him.

1. We shall see him: 1 Ioh. 3. 2. We shall see him as he is.

2. We shall see him, so as to be enlightened by him. Psalm. 36. 9. In thy Light
we shall see light: They are mavelous Lights, that are in the place of
Blessedness.

3. We shall be satisfied in him. Psalm. 17. 15. As for me, when I awake I shall
be satisfied with thy likeness. A satisfaction there will be at our
Dissolution, though more fully at the Resurrection.

4. We shall be Blessed with him. Blessed are the pure in heart, (Mat. 5. 8.)
for they shall see God. Then you that hear me, look to your hearts, for it is
not whether you are rich or poor; but, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God. But what is it to see God? I shall see my Redeemer, says ^ob:
and that is true, the eyes of our bodies may see the body of Christ; but you
shall see God, you shall see him face to face, you shall see him as he is. I
tell you, the soul of man is never at rest till it sees God. Some shall never
see God and therefore never be at rest; There is no peace, no rest to the
wicked, Isa 57. 21. Says my God. But now the soul it rests when it comes to
see God: He is such an Object, as nothing without him will satisfy our Souls:
may be they may be pleased, as children with a Rattle, for a while here, but
nor satisfied without him; therefore know it, there Souls of ours are more
worth then we are apt to think of, prize them how you will.

Unto the seeing of God (to speak plainly) there are three things that are
required:

1. There is required an Object.

2. There is required the Purifying and Perfecting of the Understanding.

3. There is required the Light of Glory, which may enable the Soul to see that
Object. Now

1. The Object is God, we shall see him: I shall see God, Job 19. 26. not only
see his Redeemer, but I shall see God: whatever might be the meaning of Job,
yet we shall see him as he is, 1 John 3. 2. We shall see him face to face, 1
Cor. 13. 12. It is true, we cannot see infinitely, our capacities cannot be
made infinite; yet we may see him that is Infinite, we may see him
apprehensively, though not comprehensively; yet we shall see him so as to fill
the Soul, though not see him so as to comprehend him, but we shall apprehend so
much of him as we are capable.

2. There is the Perfecting and Purifying of the Understanding: that must be
purified from all Ignorance, Sin, and Darkness, and Mistake.

3. There is the Light which God does communicate of Glory: As we have here the
Light of Grace, so there is the Light of Glory, which enables a Soul to see him
according to the Vision of Glory. But what do we see in the seeing of God? We
see his (...), or Essence; as the Object is united to the Faculty relatively
not formally. We shall see the (...) of God, they which are in Heaven, you
(...) what they are making mention of, Rev. 4. Holiness, A! (...) Eternity: You
know not what (...) is now, but then you shall know it more; you know not
perfect (...) now, but then you shall know it more: and we shall see the
Trinity, (...) that has seen me, (John 14. 9.) has seen the Father: And we
shall see Christ, that Person that is God and Man. And for the Counsel of God,
we shall see it: it shall be an open Book, so far as concerns our happiness.
Now when the Soul comes to this, you will have no further need of enquiry, [
What God is?] or [ What Christ is?] you will never be satisfied till then, you
will never love God perfectly till then, and you will never rest in him here,
as you will then: you shall come to understand that then [ Blessed are the pure
in heart, for they shall see God]

Exhort. 1. It is abundantly to encourage every Christian to constancy in the
profession of the truth, notwithstanding all the suffering we may meet with,
either in the way of truth, or for the way of truth. This is that which John
makes use of, 1 John 3. 2. We shall see him as he is; and, He that has this
hope to see God, purifieth himself, even as he is part, ver. 3. Do you say you
have hope to see God? this is a very purifying meditation. Can you endure any
impurity, and yet maintain this hope in you to see Christ? Acts 24. 15,16. mark
there how it did work with him; And have hope toward God, which themselves
also allow: I have hope that I shall see God, and that there is such a truth as
the resurrection; herein do I exercise my self, to have always a Conscience
void of offense, both toward God and toward Man: they that are false to his
truth, they shall not see him, that dye without Repentance of it: herein do I
labor to keep always a Conscience clear both toward God and man, that this
may not hinder me from a sight of this Mansion: 2 Cor. 5. 8,9. speaking to the
same purpose, We desire to be with the Lord: wherefore we labor, that whether
present or absent, we may be accepted of him. Thus you see what this meditation
does call for: this makes a man or woman of a laboring spirit, it calls for
adherence to the truth: And more particularly, consider then what it is to be a
Christian in earnest, to be such a Christian as walks in that way, wherein they
walk that have the Promise to go to Christ, when their Souls go out of the
body; these are such as the eleven were, not such as Iuda^ was; he went the
other way, he went to his own place. You must be such Christians as the
Apostles were, that is, such as do continue with Christ in the profession of
his truth, that you may be Conquerours in holding on in your Profession.

2. Consider what you must expect while you are in your way; you must expect
such troubles, as nothing will quiet you, but the exercise of Faith in Christ
Jesus. Your hearts they will be assaulted, but let not your hearts be troubled:
the Truth it will cause trouble to you, though you think of carrying of it
never so inoffensively, and amiably among m^n. Christ, by all his good
carriage, could not reconcile those that hated the truth: Hence those that
profess the truth, let them not think strange if they meet with trouble. Then
(Acts 9. 31.) had the Churches rest: Other places have rest very frequently;
but for the Churches, those that profess the Truth to have rest, is a special
favor of God.

3. Your troubles here, while you carry it with a Christian Spirit, they shall
fit you for this blessed estate; as it is said 2 Cor. 5 5. [ He that works us
to the self-same thing.] You may think God means evil to you, when you meet
with affliction and trouble; but, provided you are in the way of Truth, or be
it For the way of Truth, that which God ayms at, is to fit you for your
Mansion-place. Christ would fit us to be in the body, and he would fit us to go
out of the body; He works us to the self-same thing. If you have a strong body,
he would fit you for that body to walk with him in that body. Says Caleb,
Josh. 14. 11. I have as strong a body, as in the day that Moses sent me. Now as
it is a great matter to have such a body, so it is a great matter to walk with
God in such a body: if you have an healthful body, he would fit you to walk
with him in that body, that you may know how to possess your vessel in
Sanctification and honor: not that your body should be the slave of filthy
lusts. Suppose you have a sickly body, 2 Cor. 4. 16. Our outward man decays,
but our inward man is renewed day by day: and he works us to the self-same
thing, by fitting us to go out of the body; Acts 20. 24. that I may finish my
course with joy, and the Ministry that I have received.

4. Concur with God in this scope of his Providence to you; he is fitting of
you to walk with God. If he fit you to go out of the body, or to be in the
body, close with him, as the Patient closes with the Physician; interpret the
Changes that are upon you, of one nature or of another, interpret them as
dispensations whereby God works to fit you to be with him in the body, or to go
to him when you go out of the body. Let us work together with him; I did it to
humble them, Deuteronomy. 8. 16. then close with him, and say, This is his end; and
for that end join with him. You shall find more trouble then rest, while you
are In the way; you shall find more rest then trouble, when you are at the end
of your way. You that are lovers of truth, more then of the pleasures of Sin,
you shall find more trouble then rest while you are in the way; but when you
are out of the body, you shall have full rest without any trouble: you shall
have Truth enough, and Peace enough. That which is hard to gain now, is Union
in the Truth; but then you shall have Union enough, and Truth enough: you shall
find Christ making good that truth to you, that He will come, and receive you
to himself. When Noah put forth his hand, and received the Dove into the Ark,
it was a welcome ease: so will it be to your Souls when they have been wearied
with so many troubles, and Christ Jesus shall come, and receive you to himself,
when your Souls go out of the body; for otherwise the Devil will be ready to
receive them, and to carry them to Hell. Whither went Dives Soul when it went
out of his body? you that are now in Pleasures, whither went Dives Soul? it is
not said he was an Adulterer, or a Drunkard; but he was a man of Pleasures, [
In thy life time then had thy good things, Luke 16. 25.] But what became of
his Soul when it went out of the body? And being in Hell, he lift up his eyes
in torments, etc. ver. 23. Genesis 46. when Joseph received Jacob, and his
Brethren, after so long an absence, judge what a contentment there was: Jacob
fell upon Joseph's neck, and Joseph fell upon Jacobs neck: but their embraces
are not to be mentioned with the embraces of Christ and the Soul. Do good, that
when you dye, the good you have done may receive you into everlasting
habitations. Your works shall follow you. It was the speech of one Ambrose.
, I have not so lived, as that I am ashamed to live any longer; nor am I afraid
to dye. Labor so to live, as you may be useful in the body, and so as you may
not be ashamed to go out of the body, but may say as John did, who was an old
man, and a Disciple, I come quickly: Even so, come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

THE EVANGELICAL WORSHIPPER, Subjecting to the Prescription and Sovereignty of
Scripture-patern. BEING THE THIRD SERMON: AND Preached on the LECTURE-DAY,
APRIL II. 1663.
Heb. 8. 5. Who serve unto the Example and shadow of Heavenly things; as Moses
was admonished of God, when he was about to make the Tabernacle: for see (says
he) that thou make all things according to the pattern showed to thee in the
Mount.
THis Verse illustrates the Argument mentioned in the foregoing words, from an
adjunct, or accident accompanying the Legal Priesthood: The Argument there
used to prove that the Priesthood of Christ excelled that priesthood which
was after the Order of Aaron, was, because they which were of that Priesthood
ministered on Earth, but Christ ministers in Heaven: He was a Minister of the
true Tabernacle while he was on Earth, and he still officiates in his Priestly
Office now he is in Heaven; the Tabernacle which they ministered in, was upon
the Earth, and was made of earthly things, and it was a figure or shadow of
heavenly things: he declares that that Tabernacle was a worldly Tabernacle or
Sanctuary, 1. From the quality of it; it was only a shadow, or example of
heavenly things, and it was a type; but Christ was a Minister of the true
Tabernacle. 2. It is declared from the certainty of it, for He says this: But
how does that appear? It appears from a Divine Testimony; For see (says he)
that thou make all things according to the Pattern showed to thee in the Mount.

For the opening of the words. First, we are to consider what these heavenly
things are: They are called in Chap. 9. 11. Good things to come. In a word, it
means Christ, with all his Benefits; these are the Heavenly things, that the
other were but Shadows of. Therefore it is truly said, that the Ceremonial Law
holds forth Christ, i. e. it makes known the Gospel (being rightly understood)
but after a Legal dispensation.

Secondly, it was a shadow of good things, i. e. it was a pattern that did
shadow out Heavenly things. God showed Moses a Pattern, or Type, in a Vision,
according to which the Tabernacle was to be farmed, and Moses acts accordingly.
The word translated [ Patern] intends as much as a likeness, or example, or a
figure. As for the Divine Testimony, you may see it in Exodus 25. 9. According
to all that I show thee, after the pattern of the Tabernacle, and the pattern of
all the instruments thereof, even so shall ye make it. And in Chap. 39. this
testimony is often given, that All things were done as the Lord had commanded
Moses. But Christ was the Minister of another Tabernacle, i. e. of his Body,
the true Tabernacle.

Doct. Great care must be had in matters of Divine Worship, (or Divine
Administrations) that all things proceed according to the Prescript Word of
God. Or, That all things be exactly corresponding to the Prescript of Gods
Word, Hebrews 7. 14. For it is evident, that our Lord sprang out of Judah, of
which Tribe Moses spoke nothing concerning the Priesthood. The Apostle thinks
he argues well, and conclusively, That Christ was not of the Levitical Order,
because nothing was spoken concerning it of that Tribe. This is a good Argument
in Divinity to say, That there is nothing in Gods Word why you should act such
or such a thing: it is not enough to say that there is nothing expressly against
it; the truth is, there is enough against it, if there be nothing for it. The
Tribe of Judah must not meddle with the matters of the Priesthood: Why so?
because Moses spoke nothing of them in that respect: and in Exodus 25. 9. Moses
himself was to act nothing that he found not in the Pattern. Exodus 26. 30. And
thou shall rear up the Tabernacle according to the fashion thereof, which was
showed thee in the Mount: He must act nothing that he does not find in the
Pattern. It is true, David (for some just cause) made some alteration in the
Worship of God; for the state of Temple-worship, compared with
Tabernacleworship, did call for a change. But how did David proceed in it? 1 Chronicles. 28. 19. All this (says David) the Lord made me understand in writing,
by his hand upon me, even all the works of this pattern: He made no alteration
in Gods Worship, but it was also by a Pattern given to him by God. And for
Solomon, you find that David gave him the Pattern, ver. 11. to build the Temple
according thereunto. And relating to Gospel Times, the time of the Messiah, you
have an eminent text in Ezekiel 43. 10,11. Thou Son of man, show the house to the
House of Israel, that they may be ashamed of their iniquities, and let them
measure the pattern; and if they be ashamed of all that they have done, show
them the form of the house, and the fashion, and the goings out thereof, and
the comings in thereof, and all the forms thereof, etc.

Reas. 1. Because it is the acknowledgement of the Prerogative of Jesus Christ;
I mean that he alone has the honor to institute Divine Worship: He in truth
was the Author of the Tabernacle, and of the Temple and yet he was the
Tabernacle, and the Temple, i. e. the true Tabernacle and Temple. The power of
the Keys, i. e. the instituted Worship under the Gospel, you shall find
Christ is the maker and disposer of those Keys, Mat. 16. 19. It is not for man
to make a Key to open Heaven, he will never be able to pick that lock. Ye shall
reverence my Sanctuary (says God, Levit. 26. 2.) and why so? I am the Lord:
(make a pause here) i. e. it is no less then the Attribute of his Lordship that
is demonstrated in the matters of his Worship: as for instance, Korah was very
near unto the Priesthood, Numb. 16. 1. and yet inferior to the Priesthood,
(and it may be that was some temptation to him to be so near it, and yet
inferior to it) but he must not offer Incense, Numb. 16. 40. but the Priests,
which are the Sons of Aaron, may: Why may not Korah? the reason is, I am the
Lord, I will have this act to be matter of Divine Worship, and not another, and
I will have this man to act, and not another; I am the Lord. Might not any man
take a little perfume, and sprinkle it on the coals? No, God will institute
what acts, and what persons he pleases. I have heard (I think) some say, that
any man may adminster Baptism, or the Lords Supper; and I say it may be a
Child is able to do it: what then? But we must remember what God says, I am
the Lord; and he will be owned in his Institutions. Uzzah was a good man, yet
he may not touch the (...); why not? I am the Lord, 2 Samuel 6. It is one of the
holy Institutions of God, Ye shall all reverence my Sanctuary. Hence it is,
that to the holy things of God, reverence is a great part of duty: and if this
or that be Gods Worship, remember Gods Lordship is in his own Institutions, and
he will make a difference as he pleases: not that Aaron or Moses are better
then others in themselves, they may be worse, but God will have his Lordship
appear in these his holy things. Therefore it is that we must be conscientious
in our reverence of the holy things of God, even in regard of bodily reverence
by comely gestures, for our bodies are the Lords, 1 Cor. 6. Hence [ Sitting] is
not a Prayer-gesture; it is true, if there be great weakness or infirmity of
body, etc. that may give an excuse for the Lord will have mercy, in case rather
then Sacrifice. And therefore also it is that Christ stood up when he read the
word, Luke 4. 16. and in Neh. 8. 5. they stood up at the hearing of the
Wordread. We should show reverence at the holy things of God, because they are
his Institutions, and he is the Lord.

Reas. 2. Because in Divine Worship we acknowledge God to be our Sovereign
Lord, and that we owe unto him absolute Subjection and Obedience, and we
acknowledge our selves to be his absolute Subjects. The act of Worship is an
acknowledgement both of his Sovereignty, and of our meanness: Who am I, that am
but dust and ashes, that I should take upon me to speak unto the Lord? Genesis 18.
In acts of Worship we must exalt Christ, and depress man. Many in these days
are against Forms, but in the mean time let us not forget Worship. For Israel
to wait upon a Rock, was a despicable thing to the Nations; to see so many
thousands come and stand about the Rock was strange, but that Rock was Christ:
this is nothing else but the acknowledgement of God, who will be known in his
own way. And this let me say, Christ himself, that was not only Man but God,
attended the Ordinances while he was here on earth, and so did his Apostles:
this is to show the disevangelical spirit of those that do object against
external Worship.

Reas. 3. Because Divine external Worship is a means of conferring heavenly
things. The Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven open or shut Heaven, Mat. 16. 19.
Naaman must know (if he be cured) whence the Cure comes; he must acknowledge
the Waters of lord^n, and he must acknowledge the Prophet: God could have cured
him without either, but he was not pleased so to do. You feed your Hens and
Chickens, but you throw their meat upon the ground, and make them take it from
thence: so God feeds us with heavenly food but we must receive it in a lowly
manner. You can have no Faith to expect Gods blessing in any way but his own;
any Institutions, so far as they are Humane, you cannot have Faith for Gods
blessing to go with them.

Instructions. 1. The Ceremonial Law understood, teaches Christ; the truths of
Christ are laid up under the types of the Ceremonial Law. When you read the
Ceremonial Law, if you understood it, you would see Christ through it; as for
instance, Heb. 9. the Tabernacle was a figure of Christ's Body, and so was the
Vail: Heb. 10. 20. when they went into the first Court, they remembered the
Incarnation of the Messiah, and so when they looked on the Vail, etc. they who
looked on these types, whose eyes were opened, they saw Christ. Read Lev. 16.
15. compared with Heb. 9. 24. 26. As Christ shed his blood, and so entered into
Heaven, so the High Priest slew the Sacrifice, and then entered into the holy of
holies. And the efficacy of the Merit of Christ, was figured in the incense:
this is to let us see, how clearly we are taught the same truths above what
they of old were, comparing our times with theirs.

Instr. 2. It is the part of those who are Conscientious, to keep themselves
unto Scripture-bounds in holy, or Church-administrations. 2. Cor. 10. 13. the
Apostle would have them walk by a line (it relates to the Grecian exercises,
to which the Apostle does delight to allude:) it comes to one with that which
the Apostle does elsewhere say, ( viz. 2. Tim. 2. 5.) He that striveth is not
Crowned, except he strive lawfully. There is a line of motion to regulate all
administrations, especially Church-administrations; there is a line that does
regulate the Eldership, and a line also to regulate the Brotherhood: so that
all Church administrations, are to be carried on according to that line. This
was Moses his charge; See thou make all things according to the pattern; and do
you think there is not as much Conscience to be made of it now under the
Gospel, to make all things according to the pattern, as in the days of the
Legal dispensation? 1 Cor. 14. 40. Let all things be done according to Order:
the case may be so, that though a thing be done, that is for the matter of it
good, there may yet be more hurt in the disorder of it, then there is good in
the doing of it. If we exercise our own Notions and Apprehensions in matters of
Worship, this is Will Worship. Mat. 15. 9. In vain do they Worship me, teaching
for Doctrines the traditions of men. Mark the opposition [ Me,] and [ Men]: can
men's traditions be an act of Divine Worship? No, its but Will Worship, Col. 2.
^3. there may be that which is plausible to man, yet it is but Will Worship;
there may be parts, and excellencies, but if they are out of place, it is that
which God will not bear with: Exodus 20. 25. He that lifts up his tool upon
(...) Altar has polluted it: it is enough to pollute it, because it is a man's
tool: we must not turn to the right hand nor to the left, but keep our way
right on. The Corinthians turned to the left hand, when they would not
Excommunicate the incestuous person; and they turned to the right hand, when
they would not receive him in, being a penitent: it was an error on the right
hand, in Peter, when he would not have Christ suffer, but a fearful scandalous
one. You shall not add thereto, nor take therefrom. says the Lord, Deuteronomy. 4.
2. and 12. 32. neither Elders nor Brethren must take upon them that which
belongs not to them, nor the Council take that which belongs not to it, nor
the Magistrates what belongs not to them; we must do nothing but according to
the Pattern.

Instr. 3. A Religious Worshipper, or a man truly religious, does not rest in
this, That externals do answer the Prescript Rule of the Word, without
proceeding to internal Worship. You find that God does not only bear
testimony against our Worship, but also against hypocritical Worship. First,
against our Worship, or our Administrations; that (as you see) is Will Worship,
and it is vain Worship, all the Institutions of men are so; they are
Will Worship, i. e. there is sin and defilement in them: we must not set our
posts by Gods posts. But then suppose we are brought to external worship, does
God rest here? no: do you think that God lives on goat's blood? Psalm. 50. 13.
And hence also, Amos 5. 25. says the Lord, you did not offer unto me your
sacrifices during the space of forty years. speaking of the time in the
Wilderness: It is like there was a cessation, in respect of the condition that
they were in; as who should say, then I can be without Sacrifices. Ier. 7.
22,23. God says there, He did not command Sacrifices, or external Worship, i.
e. Comparatively, in respect of Obedience he commanded it not, but I Commanded
them, saying, Obey my voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people:
So God will say to us, He did not Command us to come hither, to set up the
external Worship of the Gospel, i. e. comparatively, in stead of Obedience,
Holiness and Righteousness: this is that which Stephen pleads, Acts 7. 42,43.
Oh house of Israel, you have not offered to me s^am beasts; but you had the
Tabernacle of Moloch, etc. but they could not bear with Stephen when he came to
this: So our Savior Christ tell's them, They have made my House a den of
thieves. Those among you that are given to injustice, drunkenness, or other
scandalous ways, this, or that, I tell you, God requires not your Sacrifices,
but Obey my voy^e, that I may be your God: this is the thing God aime's at. As
for our external worship it ought indeed to be according to the Rule, but this
may be, and yet as it is in Isai. 1. 13,14,15. Your Incense is an abomination,
and your solemn meetings iniqui^y, my soul hates them, says the Lord, they are
a trouble unto me, and when ye make many Prayers I will not hear them, your
hands are full of blood, etc. It would be a dreadful thing if God should say to
any of us that are full of duties, and concerning our Sabbaths, Lords Supper,
our Fasts, our Feasts, I am weary of your Worship, bring no more vain
Oblations, etc. God forbid that we should forget the internal part of worship,
whilst we are exercised in the external. Amos 5. 21. I hate and despise your
feasts, I will not smell in your solemn Assemblies. Look not only to external
regularity, but look we unto inward piety, lest God hate and despise our
Worship. Joshua (says God) Why lie thou upon the ground? Chap. 7. 10,11.
Israel has sinned, and transgressed my Covenant, etc. we have been much in
fastings, and in external duties many years, but what reformation is there? are
we brought sny more unto the Rule in Church and State? I beseech you know, that
God aims at Obedience as the internal substantial part of his Worship.

Instr. 4. That the external Order of the Gospel (Church Order) is no other
then the external Throne of Christ Jesus. Worship that is mixed, partly Divine,
and partly Humane, this is so much defilement in Gods Worship; but when it is
according to the Rule, that is Christ's Throne. Satan has his throne, that is
where Antichrist reigns; and Christ has his Throne, that is where his
Institutions are in force: there Christ fits as Lord. If the Polity be
according to the Gospel, Jesus Christ is there acknowledged Lord, and there is
never a Member but is a Subject: there must be an Order, and according to that
Order there must be subjection: do you think it an easy thing to be subject to
Order? Remember it was matter of trial to those that-came out of Egypt, and
through the Sea (as we have done) yet there were men of renown that could not
bear Church Order. Let me tell you, it is a greater matter to be subject to
Order, then to come over the Seas, or to endure the troubles of a Wilderness;
many will bear a Prison, before they will endure the Government of Christ, and
Gospelorder in his Church.

Use 2. Of Exhortation to us all (in our Churches especially) to sanctify God
according to this truth, viz. That our polity may be a Gospel-polity, and may
be complete according to the Scriptures, answering fully the Word of God: this
is the work of our generation, and the very work we engaged for into this
Wilderness; this is the scope and end of it, that which is written upon the
forehead of New England, viz. The complete walking in the Faith of the Gospel,
according to the Order of the Gospel.

1. And for your direction; first, remember that we have the pattern in the
mount; I mean, we have the Scripture as a Rule, and you have the Platform of
Church Discipline given to you in way of Council, as the Confession of our
Faith to this way of Churchgovernment: you know in what manner it was; that
which (for the substance of it) ownes the cause Congregational: if any are
departed from it, let them look to it, I know none of the Elders that have
receded from it. It was given many years ago as the Confession of our Faith, to
this Country, and to the World: it is distinct from the Episcopacy, and from
the Presbyterian way, form the Morellian way, from that of Separatism: and it
is for the substance of it precisely the way Congregational. And as David said
to Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 28. 10,11. I give unto thee the pattern of the House of
God, etc. what God will do with us he knows best; David lived not to build the
Temple himself, but he left the pattern thereof to his Son Solomon: And so we
have the pattern, only this is complained of, that it is not practiced, though
we have had it many years ago; now practice is the end of Doctrine.

2. Consider, that we are all concerned in this service, I mean in setting up
the Throne of Christ. Moses is concerned, and it is his commendation that he
was a man of God, who erected the Tabernacle, and set up the Worship of God
according to the Pattern in the Mount: and so David and Solomon etc. (...)
Solomon my Son, if thou do hold here, the Lord will be with thee (and let
the Churches look to it, we are all concerned herein, our Fidelity in this
cause is our Crown; see that it be not taken from us.

3. It is a matter of very good Policy; times of trouble and danger may
approach: and we read in Ezr. 3. 3. that they set the Altar upon its Bases, for
fear was upon them, because of the people of the land: one means to secure them
from fear in time of trouble, was with the first to proceed with the things of
Religion, and to be in good earnest to settle them. 1 Chronicles. 28. 20,21. Do it
(says David unto Solomon) and the Lord God, even my God will be with thee: and
not only so, but the priests, and the princes, and the people will be with
thee, etc. But when Solomon falls off from God's Worship, then arises against
him the spirit of Hadad, and the spirit of Rezin, and the spirit of Ierob^am
etc. 1 Kings 11. It is a great point of policy, in troublesome times, viz. the
attending to the Cause of Religion, Without Order the Ark could not move in
David's time, but you see what trouble follows upon it; and Churches cannot
likewise move, until the Order of the Churches be proportionably settled:
Haggai 1. 5,6. Now therefore says the Lord of Hosts, consider your ways; when
the Worship of God was neglected, things went ill with them; You have sown
much, and bring in little; ye eat, but ye have not enough; and again ver. 7th.
Thus says the Lord of Hosts, consider your ways: and in Chap. second, they do
hearken to him, the Lord stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel, and Josuah, and
from the time that they set themselves about the work of the Lord, all things
went well with them. How far the drought, and the last years and other
troubles are here considerable, referring to our selves, let the Scripture be
the interpreter. The matters of outward prosperity have much dependence upon
the carrying on the cause of Religion, and that according to the Order of the
Gospel, or by the Scripture-patern; our safety lies in keeping there, not
turning to the right hand, nor turning to the left hand. In Exodus 39. you have
it mentioned about ten times in that Chapter in way of Commendation, that what
was done was so according as the Lord had Commanded Moses. Let this stand with
us I beseech you (beloved) that for the motion of Elders, of Brethren, of
Councils, of Magistrates, of Churches, settle the same as the Lord has
Commanded, i. e. according to Scripture-prescript and pattern; we are then a
safe People.

FINIS.

