THE SUM OF CERTAIN SERMONS UPON Genes: 15. 6.

Wherein Not only the DOCRINE of JUSTIFICATION by FAITH is Asserted and Cleared,
And sundry Arguments for JUSTIFICATION before FAITH, discussed and Answered,

But Also The nature and the means of Faith, with the Imputation of our sins
to CHRIST, and of Christ's Righteousness to us are briefly Explained and
Confirmed.

Preached at Dorchester in New England by RICHARD MATHER Teacher to the Church
there.

And Now by him Published at the earnest request of sundry well-affected and
Godly Christians.

Printed by Samuel Green at CAMBRIDG in New England 1652.

THE Authors Preface to the Reader.
Christian Reader,
WHen these sermons were first preached in the ordinary course of my ministry
in going forward on the book of Genesis, I had no thoughts at that time that
they should ever have been farther published in this way that now thou see.
But sundry Godly Christians and Brethren having heard them delivered in
preaching, and thinking they might afterward also be useful for the benefit
of themselves and their familyes if they might enjoy them printed, which they
did very much desire, they therefore came to me with a serious and solemn
request that I would further and fulfill their earnest desires in this thing.
Against which motion though I alleged many objections, yet they still
continued to desire as formerly. Whereupon at the last, considering with my self
that God who has the hearts of all men in his hands might in mooving their
hearts to such a desire have some farther intent therein for his own glory and
the good of some or other of his servants, then I at the first did apprehend,
or could perceive, I thereupon began to consider further of the motion: and
having perused and revised some brief notes which I had by me, of those
sermons, I imparted to them a Copye thereof, yet with renuall of my former
objections against printing, and proposing to their consideration whether it
might not be best to satisfy themselves with that written copy, and to let
the printing alone. But their desires continued as before; and thence it commes
to pass that the sermons are committed to public view. Which I thus aquaint
the Reader withal partly as some excuse for my self that I would publish such
plain stuff as here is contained, in such a knowing and Cruicall time as this
is; for the importunity of request has compelled me thereto: and partly that
if any sober and honest hearted christian receive any benefit hereby he may
know to whom he is indebted for the same, even chiefly to the Lord as the
principal Author of all good, and then unto those godly Christians who have
been the instruments of bringing these sermons to be public, which had it not
been through their importunity, had never seen the light in this way.

I deny not but sundry of the things here treated of, viz the grace of Faith,
Justification by faith, and the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness unto
justification, are mayn and principal points of christian religion, and such
as that the ignorance of them or erroneous apprehentio^s about them can not but
be very perilous: in which respect it is the more needful that the people of
God should be established in the belief and love of the truth concerning such
points as these are. And for this cause I the rather yielded to publish what
here thou see, (being so importuned thereunto as I have said) if I might by
the blessing of Christ afford any little help to the end before mentioned. And
so much the rather, because Satan that enemy of all truth and father of lies
has endeavored not only of old but of late also, to corrupt the minds of many
people touching these things. Heretofore and still amongst the popish sort he
would persuade to an opinion of justification by works, and not by faith only.
And now when the perniciousness of that Tenent begins to be more generally
discerned, he labors to undermine the truth another way, instilling into the
minds of some a conceit that they may be justified not only without their own
works but also without the grace of faith. And because it would be too gross at
the first to cry down all use of faith which the Spirit of God in the holy
Scripture does so abundantly urge and extol, and that therefore such a conceit
at the first would hardly take amongst them that have any acquaintance with the
Scripture, therefore the crafty enemy allows for the time that there may be
some use of faith about this matter of justification, viz: to know or be
assured by it of justification preceding, and that though we are justified
indeed before faith, yet we did not know it before, but now do know it by faith.
A palpable perverting of the truth of God plainly and plenteously laid down in
his word, especially in Paul's epistles wherein you shall never read of knowing
by faith that we are justified without faith, or before faith: Such language is
a stranger in Gods book, and amongst the oracles of God, and far discrepant
from the form of wholesome words. wherein nothing is more frequent then that we
are justified by faith. Now to turn this word, We are justified, into this
meaning, we know that we are justified, in which sense it will be hard to find
it so much as once used in any place where justification by faith is spoken of,
is a manifest metamorphosing of the words of the Holy one, and a wresting of
the Scripture (I fear) unto men's own destruction: 2 Pet: 3. 16.

But do you think that Satan will rest here? It is rather to be feared, if this
delusion takes place a while, this use of faith which is yet allowed, will be
denied also. For some are already come to this to deny that there are any gifts
or graces at all in the hearts of justified persons. Which if it were true,
then there is no faith in them: and if there be no faith, then it is not by
faith that men do know their justification; for how can they know it by that
which is not? And so, as now they deny that men are justified by faith, so when
and where this other delusion takes place, to deny all inherent* graces, there
men must hold that justification may not only be, but also be known without
faith, or else not be known at all. A lamentable and dreadful issue whereat
Satan drives, and whereto this opinion tends, if God do not in mercy prevent.

And because this is a time, wherein not only these but many other unsound
opinions, and some of them very pernicious are scattered abroad, therefore I
hope the godly Reader will bear with me, if out of my unfeyned desire of his
salvation and of the honor of Jesus Christ and his truth, I shall here
propound some few helps for a christians preservation in the truth from the
prevailing power of error. And let not this be thought a needless bussiness,
nor let any that loves his own salvation give way to that conceit to think
there is no danger in opinions whatever a man shall hold: for though all
opinions be not alike dangerous* yet there is none but it has danger in it,
especially if it touch the foundation, and so much the more danger by how much
the less suspected. If it were not so, why does the Holy Ghost so often exhort
us and command us to beware of being seduced and beguiled with errors, and
with them that teach them? Math. 7. 15. and 16. 6, 12. and 24. 4, 5. Mark 4.
24. and 12. 38. Ephesians. 4. 14. Phil. 3. 2. Col: 2. 8. Heb. 13. 9. 2 Pet: 3. 7.
Jude 3. 1 John 4. 1, 2. 2 John 7, 8, 10. In which places and many more we are
bidden to beware of false Prophets, and of their doctrine, to take heed that no
man deceive us, to take heed what we hear, and that we be not led away with the
error of the wicked and with every wind of doctrine, and fall from our (...)
stedfastness, that we contend for the faith, and not believe every spirit but
try the spirits whether they are of God, and many such like. All which warnings
so frequent and so serious the Lord would not have given, but that he knows
erroneous opinions are dangerous, and we in danger to be beguiled therewith, yea
and to have our souls to be subverted by them as the Scripture speaks. Acts
15. 24. For which cause also it is that Heresies are reckoned up amongst
Adulterers, Idolatries, Murders, Drunkenness, and other damning works of the
flesh that exclude men out of heaven Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. and are expressly
called damnable Heresies, and the ways thereof pernicious ways 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2.
Where then are they that think it no great matter what opinions a man do hold,
or what judgment he is of in matters of religion, and that no man should be
much misliked for such matters which they call conscience, so long as he is not
otherwise culpable in his conversatio^ for scandal in practice, such as are
murders, whordoms, drunkenness, theevery and the like? which is as if one
should say, there are some works of the flesh which exclude out of heaven, and
subvert the soul, for which a man should not be misliked though he be known to
walk in them, but may have the repute and reward of a right good and honest man
notwithstanding.

Which opinion of the little danger of opinions, as in it self it is very
erroneous, so it is one thing that makes way for other errors to be more
readily entertained and persisted in, Satan having by this means persuaded the
sonns and daughters of men to believe that errors have not much danger in
them, and hence they are not much afraid of them. Whereas if they did steadfastly
believe and seriously consider what the Scripture teaches, how that by such
things men's souls are subverted, and themselves in danger to be excluded out of
Gods Kingdom, and to be destroyed, they would then be more caucious and
considerate what doctrines they entertain, and the more afraid of perishing in
error: but through want of this consideration, corrupt and pernicious
apprehentions do so greatly abound. Otherwise, how could it be that men should
so easily be brought to deny the Sacred Trinity, the Godhead of Jesus Christ,
the Imputation of his righteousness unto justification, the Divine authority of
the holy Scriptures, the immortality of the soul, the morality of the Sabbath,
so making all days alike, yea to deny not only the fourth Commandment, as
Papists have done the second, but also to deny the whole Law of God to be any
Rule of life to a believer, holding also that God sees no sin in his children,
that sin has God for the author of it, that there is no Election, but an
universal Redemption by Christ and free will in man, and that men regenerate
and justified may fall away, that there are no Churches, ministry or Ordinances
of any necessary use in these days to some Christians, but that men may attain
to such attainmets as to have no need thereof, but may live without them or be
above them. Not to mention any more of such like tenants which in these days
do too much abound. Dreadful things you may be sure if they be persisted in,
and yet too many there be that do believe them and vent them, to the extreme
hazard of their own and others souls. And therefore that the godly christian
may by the help of Christ be preserved from these and all other whether
soul-destroying or soul-endangering doctrines, let him carefully make use of
these few helps.

1. Let a man be sure that his profession of religion be in sincerity and
truth, that he may not only have a form of godliness, but the truth and power
of it, and then he shall surely be preserved from destroying errors. For
though false teachers may deceive many, and show signs and wonders for that
end, yet it is not possible that they should finally deceive the Elect and
chosen ones of God Math: 24. 24. or will the sheep of Christ harken to the
voice of a stranger, but will flee from him* John 10. 5, 8. and that saying 1
John 2. 29. they went out from us, but were not of us, and as it shows that
Apostates in their best times were but hypocrites, so it also shows that they
who are but hypocrites are like enough in the end to become Apostates.

2. Stabillity and settledness of mind and judgment in the truth is also a
means to be preserved from being seduced* For it is children that are tossed
too and fro and carried about with every wind of doctrine Ephe. 4. 14. whereas
if the heart be stablished with grace, a man shall not so easily be carried
about with diverse and strange doctrines Heb: 13. 9. no, it is the ignorant and
unstable that wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction 2 Pet. 3. 16. When
there comes a stream or flood of waters on the earth, trees and houses that are
rooted and well grounded do stand firm, but what ever lies loose is swept away:
so the flood of errors may carry away loose and unsettled professors, but such
as are rooted and grounded abide firm and steadfast.

And especially it is good to be well grounded in principles of Catechism; for
these points are fundamental, and therefore are called the foundation Heb: 6.
1,2. And it is not often seen but that they who are led away with erroneous
opinions, and vain and empty whimseys are very defective even in catechisticall
points. The voice of error is, who so is simple, let him come huher Pro: 9. 16.

3. And as a means of both the former, it is very needful and to be of an
humble spirit, truly abased in the sight and sense of a man's own weakness, and
sinfulness, and unworthyness; for such have a promise of being informed in the
truth and ways of God Ezekiel: 43 10, 11. and of direction and preservation Psalm:
25. 9. Babes shall have truths of God revealed to them, which are hid from the
wise and prudent Math: 11. 25. And the reason is, because humble souls are
afraid of themselves, dare not trust to their own understanding and strength,
but depend upon God and Christ to preserve and teach them in the truth. Whereas
others trusting on themselves are therefore near unto a fall, even because they
are proud, and selfconfident Pro. 16. 18. and 28. 14.

4. It is needful for to keep a good conscience by walking in obedience to the
truth and will of God, so far as a man does know already: for to such there is
a promise that they shall know what doctrine is of God and what is otherwise
John 7. 17. Whereas they that take pleasure in unrighteousness are in danger to
be given up to believe lies, and so to be damned 2 These. 2. 11,12. and therefore
it is said, the wise shall understand, but none of the wicked shall understand
Dan: 12,10. As there are few errors in opinion but they bring forth sins in
practice, so sins in practice will bring error in principles, through the
judgment of the Lord upon men for those their sins. They that were led captive
of errors were loeden with diverse lusts 2 Timothy: 3. 6,7. men that will not do
what they know, it is just if they be left in blindness and not know what to
do. When a master gives light to his servants and they do no good therewith,
but abuse it to cards, dice, drinking, drunkenness etc: it is just if he come
and take away the light from them, and so they be left in darkness. In like
sort it is a righteous thing with God to plague the poluted lives and
consciences of men with giving them up to the darkness and delusions of error.
Oh let all them tremble at this, that have much knowledge in their heads, but
little power of grace in their hearts to walk accordingly, but by the power of
unmortified lusts are so carried away as to sin wickedly against the light of
their own knowledge and consciece in one kind or in another; for besides the
great wrath and many stripes that such may expect in another world, they may
also fear that the Lord may leave them to some pernicious error or other even
in this life, and thereby their damnation be the more dreadful. A pure
conscience is a good cask or vessel wherein to preserve and keep the mystery of
faith. 1 Timothy: 3. 9.

5 It was desire of noveltie that overthrew our first parents, Genesis 3. for they
were well if they could have been so content; but having an itching desire to
know more then God saw meet for them hence they were overthrown. And men that
have itching ears, are apt to be turned from the truth and to be turned unto
fables 2 Timothy: 4. 3,4. It argues an ill stomach, and a weak and unhealthfull
constitution of body, when a man can not digest good and wholesome food without
curious sauce. In like sort it is an ill sign of a distempered soul, when the
good old way of the doctrine of faith, and repentance, and the like, is not
savory to a man's spirit, but he must have new notions, and quaint and unquoth
matter, or else it will not go down. Therefore beware of curiosity. The old way
is the good way, let a man seek that and walk in it, and he shall find rest for
his soul Jer: 6. 16.

6 Let a man beware of his compauy. He that delights to walk and talk with them
that have the plague, it is no marvel if he catch infection. Therefore we are
bidden to shun the society of corrupt and erroneous persons, to avoid them, and
have no familiarity of converse with them. Rom: 16. 17. 2 John 10. and to cease
to hear the instruction that causes to err from the words of knowledge Pro.
19. 27. weak christians should not be admitted to doubtful disputations, least
they be staggered Rom: 14. 1. and therefore they must not go to them of their
own accord: and the reason is plain, viz: because we must avoid temptations as
much as lies in us, and therefore not lead our selves into temptation, for then
it may be just with God to leave us to our selves. And therefore it is not safe,
especially for weak christians, to be familiarly conversant with corrupt
persons, or corrupt books, which do frequently come abroad in these days.

7 Lastly, It is specially useful in this case to keep close to the
Scriptures, and to the means appointed of God for our right understanding of
the Scriptures. Therefore we are bidden, Go to the Law and to the Testimony Isai
8. 20. as on the contrary, the ignorance of the Scriptures is noted in the
Sadducees as a mayn cause of their error, 22. 29. If a man's adversary and
enemy can persuade him to throw away his weapons, he may then conceive hope of
prevailing against him with more ease: and therefore it is no wonder if Satan in
these days do breed questions against the Divine authority and necessary and
profitable use of the Scriptures as heretofore he was wont to do amongst the
Papists, for he knows it will be for his advantage against poor souls, if he
can by any means persuade them to lay aside the sword of the Spirit which is
the word of God, Ephe. 6. 17. but he that loves his soul must be more wise,
then to harken to the counsel of Satan herin.

And for means for the right understanding of the Scripture, one is, the Church
of God, and holy communion therewith, another is the Officers and ministers of
Christ therein. In respect of the former it is said that the Law should go forth
of Sion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. Isai 2. 3. that is to say,
from the church. And there it was, even in the Sanctuary that the Psalmist came
to understand that which otherwise was too hard and painful for him Psalm. 73.
16,17. For which cause it is that he that has an ear to hear, must hear what
the Spirit says unto the churches Rev: 2. And even to the Angels themselves
much of the manifold wisdom of God is made known by the church Ephe. 3. 10. If
therefore a man hang loose from the love of Church-society, and the communion of
saints therein, it is no marvel if such an one be drawn away with errors,
because the Curch is the pillar and ground of truth 1 Timothy: 3. 15. The Apostle
exhorting not to forsake the assembling of our selves together as the manner of
some was, presently adds what a dangerous thing it is to sin wilfully after
we have received the knowledge of the truth, that is, to become Apostates, Heb:
10. 25,26. intimating thereby that where there is the former, there men are in
danger of the latter, that is to say, where the hearts of men draw back from
Churchsociety, there they are in danger of Apostasy.

And for the ministers of Christ in his church; as it was said of old that the
Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his
mouth, Mal. 2. 7. so in the new Testament Christ has appointed Officers in his
Church, (...) for other ends, so for this that we may not be children, tossed
to and fro, with every wind of doctrine, Ephe. 4. 11,24. that is, that we
might not be seduced with errors, and them that teach them. In which respect
it is that the Eunuch confesses he could not understand the Scriptures without
some to guide him, Acts 8. 30,31. The Disciples of Christ hearing of an opinion
of the Scribes that Christ was not the Messiah, because of a seeming-strong
objection that Elias must first come, if they had kept this objection to
themselves, they might have been foiled or puzzled therewith: but they were
more wise then so, they do not keep it close and only plod upon it amongst
themselves, but very honestly bring it forth to their Master Christ Jesus, and
so had resolution and satisfaction; Math: 17. 10,11,12,13. A notable example
and worthy of imitation: but when men have met with new notions and
apprehentions, whether from books or otherwise, contrary to the doctrine which
they have received, and shall keep them in hugger mugger, so that their
officers must not know them; the ministers of Christ must not be aquainted with
them, this is a ready way for the endangering of their souls exceedingly; Like
stolen waters which are sweet, and bread eaten in secret which is pleasant,
but the dead are there, and such ghuests are in the depth of Hell: Pro: 9. 17,
18.

Oh therefore let every soul that would be preserved from the infection of
error, carefully look to these things, and let him cry mightily to God through
Jesus Christ for his grace and holy Spirit to preserve him in the truth, and to
bless him in the use of these and other good means for that end; and then he
may with comfort expect that the Lord will preserve him from the evil way of
error and lies, and will guide him in the truth and ways of grace to his
heavenly Kingdom through Jesus Christ; To whom be all glory of service and
affiance for ever.

R. M.

TO The Christian Reader.
THE Justification of a sinner before God, as it is the fruit of the Riches of
his Grace: (Ephe: 1. 7.) So it is the Root of our peace with God: Rom: 5. 1. (
which passes understanding: Phil. 4. 7.) and of our joy in the Holy Ghost,
which is unspeakable and glorious: 1 Pet: 1. 8. This is that gift of his Grace
which fills our hearts with admiration, to wonder at the abundant rich Mercy
of the Lord in pardoning our many and mighty sins (Micah 7. 18.) to wonder
also at the deep demerit of our sins which could not be expiated but by the
precious blood yea and soul-sufferings of the great God our Savior: Tea and to
wonder likewise at our baseness, and filthiness, and folly, that could live so
long in so dangerous and desperate a course, provoking the most High to so
great Anger, and our selves to the confusion of our own faces and souls.

Hence it is that every godly Treatise tending to the discovery of this grace
is wont deeply to affect the hearts of such, as (through grace) have part in
this common salvation. Amongst others of this kind (Good Reader) thou shall
find this little Treatise, to be like Maryes box of spiknard, which washing the
paths of Christ toward us (as that did his feet) will be fit to perfume not
only the whole house of God, with the odor of the ointment of his Grace, but
also thy soul with the oil of gladness, above what creature comforts can afford.
The manner of handling, thou shall find to be solid, and judicious, succinct
and pithy, fit (by the blessing of Christ) to make wise unto salvation. The
presence and blessing of Christ go with it, to refresh thy soul with the savor
of his Ointments:

In whom we rest, Studious of thine edification in his grace, and peace. J.
Cotton. J. Wilson.

Boston 24. 5. 1652.
Geneses 15. 6. And he Believed in the LORD, and He counted it to him* for
righteousness.
IN the former verses of this chapter, is contained a renewing of the Lords
promise to Abram concerning his seed: In this verse is contained the effect and
fruit of that promise, how Abram thereupon believed in the Lord; and then the
benefit that accrewed to him by that believing, how the Lord accounted it to
him for righteousness. For the meaning of the words; It may be first of all
demanded,

Quest 1. What is meant by Abrams believing in the LORD?

Answ: Hereby is meant, not only that he believed the Word of God to be true:
for if that had been all, the Lord would never have justified him by such a
faith, nor have counted it to him for righteousness, as the text affirms that
he did, for the Devils do so believe, and yet are far from being justified.
James 2. 19. But here by is meant morover that he also relied upon God that had
promised by an act of Affiance, Relyance, or Dependence upon him: so much the
various words may import, which are not barely he believed the Lord, but he
believed in the Lord, or on the Lord. Besides believing is an act of the heart,
Rom: 10. 10. Not of the head, or of the understanding only, but of the heart
also: and if a man believe with his heart, then there will be a firm resting
and relying on the thing promised, and on him that promises; as it is said
Isai 26. 3. Thou will keep him in peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, because
he trusts in thee. The heart faints when a man believes not, Gen: 45. 26.
and is fixed or fastened when a man believes in the Lord Psalm: 112. 7, 8. This
that is said here of Abrams believing, is expounded by the Apostle Rom: 4. 18,
19, 20, 21. by Hope above hope, and by not staggering at the promise through
unbelief.

Quest. 2 What means this word He counted it to him for righteousness.

Answ. It is as much as to say, the Lord imputed this Faith of Abram for
righteousness in Gods sight; So it notes that he was justified not by works,
but by this his Faith; and so the Apostle expounds these words Rom: 4. 2, 3, 4,
5.

Quest. 3 Did Abram never believe before now? and was he never justified before
this time;

Answ: Yes doubtless long before this time: for it was by Faith that he left
his own country, and kindred, and came to sojourn in the land of Canaan as the
land of promise: This he did by faith Heb: 11. 8. Which was before this time.
He also had heard many promises of God to him and his seed before now, both in
chap: 12. 2, 3, 7. and chap: 13. 14. which doubtless he did believe.

Quest. 4 Why then is this mentioned now, as if he had not been a justified
believer before?

Answ. One cause thereof may be, because his faith was now more confirmed, He
having lately been in some pang of grief through want of children, verse 2, 3.
as the Disciples of Christ are often said to believe upon some new confirmation
of their faith, though they were believers before, Joh: 2. 11. and 16. 30, 31.
So Joh: 4. 50, 53.

And another reason (considering the time when this is recorded) might be this,
namely, To show that justification is never by the works of the Law, but still
by faith, though a man be adorned and enriched with many excellent works; for
so was Abram before this time: witness his Piety in budding Altars, and calling
on the name of the Lord Gen: 12. 7, 8. and 13, 4, 18. His Religious care in
instructing his family, those 318 trained ones, or catichised ones, as some
render the word chap* 14. 14. His Charity, and Humility that would have no
falling out between Lot and him, and that would condescend far for peace sake
chap: 13. 8, 9. and would hazard his own liberty and life to rescue Lot out of
captivity chap: 14. 14. his contempt of riches, and Care of the glory of God,
in refusing the goods of the King of Sodom chap: 14. 23. All these were
excellent Virtues and good works in Abram, and yet the Holy Ghost tells us he
was not justified by any of them but by believing.

Again, it is observable, that at this time Abram was not Circumcised; for that
Ordinance was not yet appointed, till chap: 17. and yet now we see he believed
in the Lord, and so is justified; to show unto us that it was not by
Circumcision, nor any Ceremonies of the Law that he was justified, but by faith
only; and that he might be the Father of believers even amongst the Geutiles,
though they be not circumcised, and that righteousness might be imputed to
them also, as the Apostle argues Rom: 4. 9, 10, 11. Such weighty reasons there
are, why Abram at this time is said to believe in the Lord, and to be justified
thereby, albeit he were a believer and justified before.

This being said for the explication of the words, we may first observe from
the words this Doctrine,

Doctr: 1 That it is by the Word and Promises of God concerning salvation by
Christ, that men are brought to believe, or to become true believers.

Or thus, Justifying and saving Faith is wrought by the word of the Gospel, as
the means and instrument thereof. For God we see gives forth his gracious
Gospel-promises unto Abram, and the effect of them is this, Abram thereby
believes in the Lord. Other Scriptures do testify the same; Acts 15. 7. Rom:
10. 14, 15. 17. Ephe: 1. 13. Acts 14. 1. Genes: 12. 1, 1, 3, 4, 5. Therefore is
the word called the word of faith Rom: 10. 8. because it is by it that faith is
wrought. Those three thousand in Acts 2. were brought to believe by the word
and Gospel of God which was preached to them by Peter. Regeneration is by the
word, Jam: 1. 18. 1 Pet. 1. 23. and the Spirit is also received by the same
means, Gal: 3. 2. and therefore faith is by the word also. The reason of the
consequence is, because wheresoever Regeneration is wrought, and the Spirit of
grace is bestowed, there saving faith can not be wanting.

Quest: 1 For the explication of this point, it may first of all be demanded,
What is the Gospel?

Answ: It is the Doctrine of salvation by Christ, or of blessedness in Christ,
that part of the word of God, which concerns Remission of sins, and Life
everlasting by Christ Jesus.

Quest: 2 May not faith be wrought by the Law?

Answ: Not by the Law alone; for the Law is not of faith Gal: 3 12. The Law
directly reveals no Christ, not any salvation for sinners, but the curse only
Gal: 3. 10. And inasmuch as faith cannot go beyond the word, therefore by the
Law alone there can be no faith to believe any thing farther then the curse.

Yet nevertheless the Law is of necessary use to prepare the heart for faith.
For Christ is the end of the Law as the Apostle speaks Rom: 10. 4. and if so,
then the Law is a means unto Christ. It shows unto a man his sin* Rom: 3.
20. and 7. 9, 10. and the wrath of God deserved thereby Rom: 4. 15. and herupon
through the spirit of bondage, begets fear and dread in the secure heart Exodus:
20. 18, 19. Rom: 8. 15. Which things are requisite to the begetting of faith in
Christ, because without these the sinful soul will never believe in, nor come
to him for righteousness, as not feeling its need Joh: 5. 40. Rom: 10. 3.

Quest: 3 But what is the work of the Gospel in the begetting of faith?

Answ: First it presents to the sinful and lost soul, Christ the Savior, with
the worth and fullness that is in him; Joh: 3. 16. Acts 13. 38 39. 1 Timothy: 1. 15.
Secondly it encourages the poor lost soul to come to Christ, to believe on
him, and to receive him in the promises of Mercy Math: 11* 28. Joh: 6. 37. 2
Cor* 5. 20. Isai 55. 1, 2, 3. and 61. 1, 2, 3,

Quest: 4 But many have the word, and yet never attain to faith, What may be
the reason hereof?

Answ: What is here said, is most true indeed: many heard by the Apostles, yea
by Christ himself, and yet were never brought to believe. The reason whereof is,
because the word of itself can not do it, without the work of God himself by
his spirit: Paul of himself is nothing, Apollos nothing, nor any other minister
of the Gospel, but God it is that works all, 1 Cor: 3. 5, 6, 7. Paul preached
to Lidia and others, but it was the Lord that opened her heart savingly to
attend to what was spoken Acts 16. 14. And God, as he is bound to none, so he
sees cause not to give his Grace to all, no nor to all that do enjoy the
means, that so they to whom his grace is given, may see themselves the more
indebted for it; and that it is not them selves, nor the word of it it self,
that could ever have brought them to believe, but that God himself has done it
of his free grace. Math: 13. 11. Acts 18 27.

Quest: 5 But if the word be the means of faith, what shall become of Infants,
Idiots, and deaf people that cannot make use of the means?

Answ: The doctrine speaks only of the ordinary and usual way. As for these
that are spoken of, the Lord can work in (...) by other means, either by the
sight of the eye, as in such as can read; (...) if all outward means fail, he
can work by his Spirit alone in the heart and soul inwardly.

Quest: 6 If any ask, What should be the reason that when God works faith, he
should ordinarily and usually do it by his word, and not otherwise?

Answ: The answer is, That his Wisdom has so appointed and seen meet, and
therewith we should rest our selves contented and satisfied It is his pleasure
to save men by preaching 1 Cor: 1. 21. and to create the fruit of the lips to
be peace to the soul Isai 57. 19.

Use 1 Therefore, the case of them that want the word of the Gospel must needs
be miserable and lamentable. For there can be no salvation without Christ Acts
4. 12. 1 John 5. 12. nor without faith in Christ John 3. 18, 36. Heb: 11. 6.
and ordinarily there can be no faith without the Gospel, but by it, Rom: 10.
14, 17. and therefore where this word is wanting, there the people are in a
perishing condition Pro: 29. 18. and millions of people there are in this
condition, having none to speak unto them but Stars, and trees, and the great
book of the creatures, which is not sufficient for salvation, nor for saving
faith; and therefore such people are without Christ, and without God in the
world Ephesians: 2. 12. coming into the world and know not wherefore, and go out of
the world again and know not whither. It were well if there were an heart in us
to bewayl the case of such people; for their misery might have been ours, and
our mercies theirs.

Use 2 They that have the Gospel, have great cause to prize it, and to be very
thankful for it, as for a great blessing, inasmuch as it is the means of
faith, and so consequently of salvation. If we shall despise it or slight it
as the Israelites did Manna, or as little children who do but play with their
meat, and kick it down under their feet, it may then be just with God to take
it away, and that will be a doleful and most heavy judgment; and is often
threatened as such. See Amos 8. 11. Luke 17. 22. John 12. 35, 36. Rev: 2. 4.

Use 3 If the word be the means of faith, Then it behoovs all them who enjoy
the word, to take heed they do not live and die without faith; For the sin and
judgment of such will be the more grievous; even much worse then if they never
had the Gospel. If they had not had the word, they should have had no sin, in
comparison of what now they have; but now they have no cloak for their sin,
John 15. 22. and therefore the judgment and condemnation of such people will be
so exceeding just and dreadful, that the condition of Tire and Sidon, and of
Sodom and Gomorah shall be more tolerable, Math: 11. 22, 23, 24.

And he counted it to him for righteousness.] He, that is the Lord, who was
metioned before; counted, that is, imputed, or reckoned, for this word is
sometime Englished by one of these words, and sometime by another, as may
appear by viewing Rom: 4. 3, 22, 23. Gall: 3. 6. Iam: 2. 23. It, that is, this
faith of his, this believing in the Lord; for righteousness* that is unto
righteousness; that is, that by this he might attain righteousness, or stand
righteous and justified in the sight of God.

Quest. Whether does not this text prove that the object of justifying faith is
not Christ the promised Messiah, or the promise of mercy in Christ; but what
ever God reveals? and that the act of faith as it justifies, is not of the
will in receiving Christ, or adhering to Christ, but only an assent of the
understanding?

Answ: It proves it not; For Abrams faith had respect unto the promised seed,
in whom all nations should be blessed; and so runs the promise chap: 12. and
22. 18. this seed must need include the Messiah specially, as being the head of
all the seed that are blessed; and so much is plainly taught in Gall: 3. 16.
where the seed to whom the promise is made, is plainly affirmed to be Christ:
and if it signify Christ* then doubtless the head,and not the members only.
The promise which Abram believed* was the Gospel Gal. 3. 8. Now what is the
Gospel, but the doctrine or glad tidings of salvation by Christ? That saying
John 8. 56. that Abram rejoiced to see Christ's day, does show that Christ was
the object of Abrams faith.

Now from the words, he counted it to him for righteousness, we have occasion
to consider of three things concerning that great article of faith, our
justificatio^. 1 The Efficient cause thereof; which is the Lord. 2 The
Isntrumental cause, and that is faith, or believing. 3 The Formal cause,
which is accounting, reckning, or imputing.

The first of these may be considered in this conclusion or doctrine.

Doct: That it is the Lord himself that does justify: or that is the Efficient
cause of our justification. Rom: 3. 30. and 8. 30. 33. Gal: 3 8. Isai 50. 8.

Reas: Reason, justification is a judiciary act, the* work of a Judge
pronouncing sentence of absolution upon a man; and this appears by this,
because it is opposed to condemn, as Rom: 8. 33. Math: 12. 37. and so it
differs from sanctification, which is to make a man really holy by changing his
qualityes, whereas justification makes only a relative change in a man in
respect of state, from a state of guiltiness to a state of absolution and
clearing judicially. Now it belongs to God alone to be the Judge of all the
world Genesis 18. 25. Psa. 75. 7. and 94. 2. Heb: 12. 23. 1 Cor. 4. 4. and
therefore justificatio^ being the act and work of God as a judge, does belong to
God only.

Reas 2 Justification either consists in, or conteins in it, the forgiveness of
sins, and not imputing of iniquity; Rom: 4. 4, 5. And therefore inasmuch as God
only forgives sin Isai 43. 25. Psalm: 32. 1, 2. 2 cor 5. 19. Mark 2. 7. it must
needs be that God only does justify.

Use1 Therefore a man can not justify himself. Papists teach that a man by his
works may justify himself with that which they call the second justification,
and wherein they place the merit of eternal life. But the Scripture makes man
passive in his justification, and that this work is wrought by God himself, and
by him only. So that what Christ spoke of honoring of himself John 8. 54* may
well be applied to the matter in hand, that if a man Justify himself, his
Justification is nothing.

Use 2 Hence it follows, that justification once obtained, can not be lost. A
man once justified shall never loose his justified estate, nor fall from it.
For being the work of God, we may say of it as Solomon says in another case,
Eccles. 3. 14. it must be for ever. When God has once justified a man, he will
say as Pilate of his writing, what I have written, I have written; so may the
Lord say, whom I have justified, I have justified,and it shall not be recalled;
according to that Jer. 31. 34. their sin; and iniquities I will remember no
more: their sins may be sought for, but they shall never be found whom I have
once pardoned, and forgiven Ier. 50. 20. Justification is one of those gracious
gifts of God, which are without repentance Romans 11. 29.

Use 3 And if God do justify, it must need; be a great fin for men to be
censorious in judging the servants of God, and to pass rash and hard judgment
against them; as to judge them to be damned hypocrites, vaynglorious persons,
the troublers of Israel, and the like* The Psalmist counted it a heinous thing,
to condemn the generation of (...) children Psalm. 73. 15. and they that judge
others with unjust and rash judgment, may expect to be judged themselves Math.
7. 1. For those whom God does justify, it is not for men to condemn them,
except they would be cross and contrary unto God.

Use 4 But if God do justify his servants, what need they to be much
troubled, though the world do censure and condemn them? It is the judgment of
God that must stand; and he will not condemn them, but has already absolved
and cleared them. Which made the Apostle to say, with me it is a small thing to
be judged of you, or of man's judgment 1 Cor: 4. 3. and the like comfort does
belong to every faithful servant of God, inasmuch as they are justified by the
Lord, what ever men may say or judge of them. It is God that justifies, who is
he that condemns? Rom: 8. 33.

Use 5 Let us not then content our selves to have men to justify us: For
though they excuse us, say well and think well of us, all this is nothing if
the Lord do not so also, but the contrary. Men are apt to think all well if
others do judge well of them; but especialy if professors of religion, and the
faithful do approve of them, then they care for no more. But these should
remember that it is God that justifies, and therefore the judgment of men
should not be rested in, as touching our spiritual estates before God; this
being considered withal, that a Judas may be no worse thought of by the true
hearted Disciples of Christ, then themselves, and yet in very truth be no
better then a Devil. Sometimes the coveteous, and other wicked and wretched
sinners, may be approved, yea and applauded of men, though they be justly
abhorred of God. Psalm. 10. 3. and 49. 18.

Use 6 Content not our selves, to be just in our own eyes, or to justify
onrselves; For alas what will this avail us, since it is God that must justify,
or else we shall never be justified indeed, whatever we may conceive of our
selves. The Pharisees were men that justified themselves before men, but God
knew their hearts; and our Savior tells them thatthings might be beautiful in
the sight of men, and yet be abominable in the sight of God, Luke 16. 15. But
the holy Apostle was otherwise minded, who would not justify his own self,
knowing that he that judged him was the Lord. 1 Cor: 4. 4. It is our wisdom
therefore to seek unto God in Christ for this benefit; for he that is in himself
a sinner, his maine work lies with God in heaven, to seek at his hands the
gracious benefit of remission, and justification. For who can clear a man but
the Judge? who can forgive the debt but the creditor?

The next conclusion, or doctrine that these words afford is this,

Doctr: That, It is by Faith, by the grace of believing, that men come to be
justified, or to be accounted righteous in the sight of God.

We see Abram believed in God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness:
which example is often mentioned by the Apostles, to show that justification is
by faith only, and not by works; Rom* 4. 3. 23, 24. Gall: 3. 6. Jam. 2. 23. and
as it was with Abram, so is it with all the children of Abram, that they are
all justified by the same means, even by faith in Jesus Christ: Romans 4. 5, 9,
11. and 3. 22, 30. and 10. 4. Gal. 2. 16. and 3. 8, 9, 22. Philip. 3. 9. Heb:
11. 7.

Here it will be needful to show how it is that we are justified by faith;
For it is so plentifully and expressly witnessed in Scripture that
justification is by faith, that it were gross ignorance or impudence to deny
it. But in what sense this is to be understood, and in what manner this is
done, there the apprehensions of men do very much vary. For some help therefore
to the clearing of this point, observe these propositions following.

Propos. 1 1 Faith does not justify as it is a work or virtue in us.

Reas: 1 All works of ours are excluded in this buisiness, so that faith and
works are constantly opposed in the matter of justification; Romans 3. 28. Gall.
2. 16. and therefore faith must not here be considered as a work of ours, for
then it must be excluded as all other works must. Reas: 2 Faith is so
considered in our justification, as that it may stand with free grace; Rom: 4.
16. Ephesians. 2. 8. therefore it must not be considered as a work of ours, because
grace and works are opposite, and can not stand together Romans 11. 5, 6. Reas: 3
We can not be justified out by that which is exact, entire and perfect
righteousness; for God must be just in justifying Romans 3. 26. but how could he
be so, if he should justify us otherwise then by a righteousness which is
exact and perfect? his* judgment is according to truth Romans 2. 2. so that he
will not clear the guilty Exodus: 34. 7. Now our faith is imperfect, and not so
exact and perfect as it ought to be Mark 9. 24. Luke 17. 5. 2 Pet. 3. 18. and
therefore by a faith as a virtue, or work of ours, we can not be justified.

Propos. 2 2 Faith does not justify properly, as if the very act of believing,
ipsum credere, (...) were the matter of our righteousness, or the very thing by
which we stand righteous in the sight of God.

Reas: 1 The righteousness by which we are justified is of faith, by faith,
through faith, Phili. 3. 9. Rom: 3. 30. and therefore it is not our faith it
self. Reas: 2 The righteousness whereby we are justified is not our own Phil. 3.
9. rom: 10. 3. But our faith is our own, though wrought in us by the
Holy Ghost. Therefore we have these expressions in Scripture, his own faith, thy
faith, my faith, Hab: 2. 4. Jam: 2. 18. Reas: 3 The thing that must justify
us, must be a perfect righteousness, as was showed before; else how shall God
be just in justifying us thereby? but our faith as was showed before is
imperfect. In this the tenent of the Arminians is more injurious to the Lord,
then that of the Papists; For the Papists hold, and that truly, that God
justifies by perfect righteousness; only herin is their great error, that they
think this perfect righteousness may be found in our selves, in our works, or
our faith etc: But the Arminians would have God to justify man without any
perfect righteousness at all, but to accept his imperfect faith in steed
thereof. Reas: 4 Jesus Christ in his obedience is our righteousness Ier: 23. 6.
1 Cor: 1. 30. 2 Cor: 5. 21. rom: 5. 19. and10. 4. And therefore to make faith it
self our righteousness is injurious to Christ, as placing faith in Christ's
room, and so making ^^ith to be our Christ.

Propos. 3 Faith does justify only relatively, in respect of its object Christ
Jesus, or instrumentally as the hand that receives Christ and his
righteousness. As a man's hand may be said to feed him, because it receives the
meat, or to cloth him, because it receives his apparel, or to enrich him,
because it receives a pearl of great value. So a man's faith is said to
justify him, because it receives Christ, and the righteousness of Christ. And
indeed what ever is done by faith in this and such like matters of our
salvation, all is done with refere^ce to Christ, and as faith is the instrument
that receives Christ, and no otherwise. And therefore what things are said to
be done by faith, we shall find they are still said to be done by Christ. For
instance, we are justified by faith, Rom: 3. 28. Gal. 3. 22, 24. but we are
justified by Christ Isai 53. 11. Eternal life is by faith John 3. 16, 36. but
it is by Christ 1 John 5. 11, 12. We are saved by faith, Ephesians: 2. 8. but we
are saved by Christ, John 3. 17. Math: 1. 21. We live by faith, Hab: 2. 4.
Gal. 2. 20. but we live by Christ, John 6. 57. and 14. 19. Forgiveness of
sins is by faith, Acts 10. 43. and 26. 18. but it is by Christ, Acts 13. 38.
Ephe: 1. 7. In like sort when faith is said to be imputed unto righteousness,
we must understand it that Christ and his righteousness is imputed.

But now, as faith can do nothing but with reference to Christ, so Christ will
do nothing in this buisiness of justifying a sinner, but by faith. But as it is
said Acts 3. 16. His name, through faith in his name had healed the man that
had been lame, so it may be said Christ and his righteousness, through faith in
him, and his righteousness does justify the sinner. For these grounds are
certain, and cannot be denied, 1 That God does not justify any without
righteousness, but by and for a righteousness, and such an one as is entire and
perfect, Pro: 17. 15. Exodus 34. 7. Rom: 2. 2. 3. 26. 2 That this perfect
righteousness is not to be had in our selves, Rom: 3. 10. Psalm. 143. 2. 3 That
this perfect righteousness is in Christ, and not elsewhere, Jer: 23. 6. Isai
45. 24, 25. 2 Cor: 5. 21. Rom: 5. 9, 19. 4 That this righteousness of Christ
cannot justify us, till it be communicated and applied, and so be made ours;
even as meat does not feed a man, till he take it and eat it, apparel does not
warm a man till he receive it and put it on, a pearl though of never so much
value, does not enrich a man till he receive it, and have it in possession as
his own. 5 Faith is the hand and instrument for receiving of Christ and his
righteousness; John 1. 12. Ephesians. 3. 17. and by this means or in this way we
are justified by faith, and not otherwise. Therefore in Gal: 2. 16, 17. we find
that to be justified by faith, and to be justified by Christ are Synonymaes,
that is, of the same signification; for that which in the one verse is called
justification by faith, is in the other called justification by Christ.

Quest: But Christ is the object of love and of other graces, as well as of
faith; why then should faith justify in respect of its object, any more then
love or other graces?

Answ: Because faith is appointed of God in the covenant of grace to this
office; John 3. 16. Acts 16. 31. which can be said of no other grace. And there
is good reason why faith should have this office, even because faith is that
which gives all to Christ, and to Gods free grace in him, for therefore is it of
faith, that it might be by grace Rom: 4. 16. Ephe: 2. 8. it being the very
property,and(as I may say) the ingenie of faith, to bring nothing of its own
for a man's justification, but to come naked and empty unto Christ, to receive
all from him, and from Gods free grace in him.

4 Propos. 4 It is by faith alone that we are justified. Justification is not
only by faith at the first, but always by faith, as long as a man lives. So
that though a man be furnished with never so many excellent virtues, graces,
duties, services, etc: yet it is not by any of them, nor all of them, but still
by faith and by faith only, that he must be justified in Gods sight. For which
purpose this example of Abram is very observable and convincing; for Abram (as
was observed before) had before this time done many excellent services, in
leaving his kindred and country at Gods command, in building Altars, and
calling on the name of the Lord where ever he came, in yielding to his
inferior Lot for peace sake, in rescuing him out of captivity, with the peril
or hazard of his own liberty and life, in his contempt of riches offered to him
by the King of Sodom, etc: Yet after all this the Holy Ghost places his
justification in none of these things, but only in his believing. If Abram had
had no works then it might have been said he was justified by faith through
want of works; but since he abounded with store of excellent works, and yet is
justified by faith, we may conclude that justification is not by faith and
works, much less by works alone, but by faith only. So Paul tells of himself
Phil. 3. 7, 8, 9. that for time past he did count all things loss for Christ,
and faith he for the present I do so also, and for time to come, even when
Christ shall come to judgment, I then desire to be found in Christ, not having
my own righteousness, but that which is by the faith of Christ. Hence it is
said, we are justiffied freely by his grace; Rom: 3. 24. which two words do
show that all works are excluded: and so works are expressly excluded, that
faith alone may be established, Rom: 3. 28. Galla. 2. 16. Ephe. 2. 8.

Use 1 If Justification be by faith, then it can not be by works, nor by any
righteousness of our own, either inherent, or actual, either inward virtues
and graces, or outward duties of obedience, the reason is, because faith and
works are opposite in this matter, and can not stand together; Rom: 3. 28. Gal.
2. 16. And the Scripture plainly teaches that justification by woks is
impossible, Acts 13. 39. Rom: 8. 3.

Use 2 They then are greatly deceived that think a man may have the
righteousness of justification without faith, and that faith is of no use in
this matter but only to assure a man of his justification as already past and
done; whereas the truth is, justification is not before faith, but by faith, viz:
as by an hand or instrument to receive the righteousness of Christ, which
righteousness of Christ, is the matter that being received does justify, and
faith the hand to receive it. That there is no actual justification of a man
before faith whether from eternity, or otherwise, may be farther cleared by
these reasons:

Reas: 1 Justification is after vocation, or effectual calling, for whom he
called, them he justified Rom: 8. 30. and if so, then it is after faith,
because faith is wrought in vocation, as being the answer of the soul to the
call of God, calling the soul to come to God in Christ, whereunto when the soul
does answer and come, (as it always does when the calling is savingly
effectual) this answer, this coming is faith Jer: 3. 22. faith being wrought
in calling, and calling being before justification, it must needs be that faith
is before justification.

Reas: 2 Faith has the same place in Justification as the Israelites looking
on the brazen Serpent had in their healing, Joh. 3. 14, 15. Now they were not
first healed, and then must look up to the Serpent and see what it was that had
healed them; but first they must look up to the Serpent, and so thereby be
healed Numb: 21 7, 8, 9. to teach that we must first look up to Christ by the
eye of a lively faith, and then and thereby be justified from our sins. And
accordingly the Prophet tells us that in the Lord there is righteousness, and
strength, whereby we may be justified and saved; but we are bidden to look unto
him* and then we shall be justified and saved thereby. Isai 45. 22,24,25.

Reas: 3 If a man be Justified before faith, then a man may be in state of
Justification and in state of condemnation both once; For before a man have
faith, he is in state of condemnation, and the wrath of God abides on him,
John 3. 18,36. But these two states are so opposite and contrary, that it is
not possible that a man should be in both at once.

Reas: 4 Before a man be a believer, the Spirit of God witnesses to a man that
he is not justified, but the contrary; For at that time it convinces the soul
to be in a state of bondage, and thereupon fills it with fear, Rom: 8. 15. Now
if a man were justified before, this fear were needless, this bondage were
unjust, and this witness of the Spirit not true, which were horrible to think.

Reas: 5 If a man be not Justified by faith, but before it, and that faith does
only declare and assure unto a man that he is justified already, then a man may
as well be said to be justified by any other grace as by faith, and so there
will be no difference between faith and any other grace in this matter of
justification; The reason is, because other graces may declare a man to be
justified, as signs and fruits: all the graces of Sanctification do that. But
the Apostle makes a great difference between faith and other graces in this
matter, teaching that we are not justified by any of them, but are justified by
faith. The question was not whether good duties commanded in the Law, did
declare a man to be justified, for that the Apostle would never have denied,
but here was the question, whether they did actually justify a man as
Instruments of his justification, and this the Apostle does constantly deny,
and yet every where ascribes this office unto faith.

Reas: 6 The Scripture expressly witnesses of believers, that there was a time
when they were in a state of wrath, and condemnation, without Christ, and
without God in the world, in the same state that others were that should never
inherit the kingdom of heaven, not a people, not beloved, not having obtained
mercy, and many the like, Ephesians: 2. 1, 2, 3, 12. 1 Cor: 6. 9,10,11. Rom: 9.
25,26. 1 Pet. 2. 10. Now how all this should be, and yet at this very time they
be in a state of justification also, is altogether inconceivable and impossible.

Reas: 7 All that are justified do doubtless please God, but without faith it
is impossible to please him, Heb: 11. 6. and therefore without faith it is
impossible to be justified.

Reas: 8 Justification is a benefit afforded only to them that are in Christ,
Rom: 8. 1. 1 John 5. 12. But no man is in Christ without faith, but by faith,
Ephe: 3. 17. Rom: 11. 20,23. they that were without faith, were without Christ
also, Ephesians: 2. 12. And therefore no man is actually justified without faith.

Reas: 9 To say that we are Justified from Eternity has many great
absurdities, or inconveniences in it, and therefore it may not be admitted.
For, 1 Then the people of God never were in a state of sin; For to be in a
state of sin, and to be justified from sin, are contrary. But certain it is,
the time was when the Elect were in a state of sin, of misery, of curse, as the
Scriptures do abundantly testify, Ezekiel: 16. 2,3,4. etc: Rom: 7. 4,5. etc: and
6. 17,18. Tit: 3. 3. And by verse 4. 5,6,7. of that chap: the 3 of the Epistle
to Titus, it appears that Justification came afterward in time. But this
opinion of Justification from Eternity takes away, or denies that ever there
was any state of sin; and theupon all humiliation for such a state is closely
taken away also, and made needless; For why should a man lay to heart his
misery by reason of such a state, and lament it, bewayl it, be greived for it,
if there never was any such state, but that he was in a justified estate from
eternity? 2 Then we were guilty of sin, and condemnation, from Eternity: and
this much more, because Justification is from a guilty and condemned estate:
and the terminus a quo, must needs be before the terminus ad quem, the state
from which, must needs be before the state to which. 3 Then Justification is the
same with Election or Predestination, which in Scripture are made distinct
benefits, Rom: 8. 29,30. 4 Then Justification is without respect to the merits
and obedience of Christ; the reason is, because the eternal actions of God, as
Election and Predestination, are not for Christ's righteousness and obedience,
but Christ himself is the fruit of our Election. If from eternity we be in a
justified estate, then we may say (as Gal: 2. last.) that Christ dyed in vayn;
for what need was there of any atonement to be made by the righteousness and
death of Christ, when by this opinion we were in a justified estate before? 5
Then we may say we are gloryfied from eternity; the reason is, because
Gloryfication does immediately follow Justification, Rom: 8. 39. Titus 3. 7. Now
to say we are gloryfied from eternity, is to excuse Hymeneus and Phyletus, in
that they said the resurection was past already, 2 timothy: 2. 17,18. So many and
great absurdities are in it, to say that we are Justified from eternity.

Reas: 10 If we be Justified by faith, then not before faith; If Abram
believed, and thereupon was accounted righteous, then neither was he, nor can
any other be accounted righteous before believing: But the former of these is
abundantly testified in the Scriptures of truth, Rom: 3. 22,28,30. and 4.
2,3,22,23. Galla: 2. 16. and therefore the latter is true also.

Object: 1 We may be Justified before faith, and yet be said to be justified by
faith, namely, declaratively, faith declaring and assuring to us that we are
justified before; we are said to be Justified by faith, because we know by
faith, that we are Justified.

Answ: This cannot be the meaning of that saying we are justified by faith:
For, 1 Then we may in that sense be said to be Justified by any other grace as
well as by faith, yea by works of grace as well as by faith, because these are
evidences of our Justification: witness 1 John 2. 3,4,29. and 3. 7,10,14. James
2. 14. etc: For example, by love to the brethren, we know we are translated
from death to life, and so are Justified; shall any man now say that we are
Justified by love to the brethren? that were directly to contradict the
Scripture, which faith we are not Justified by works. And yet if to be
Justified, mean no more but to know we are Justified, then we may say indeed
that we are Justified by works, which the Apostle does so plainlyandlargely
gainsay. And therefore to be justified by faith has a farther meaning, then
only that we are Justified.

2 By the like reason we might say that the world was created by faith, which
were a very absurd saying: and yet it is most true that by faith we understand
or know that the world was created by the word of God, Heb: 11. 3. And by the
like reason we might say that we are Elected by faith; for by faith we may
understa^d and know our election. The sum is, though by faith we know our
election, and the creation, yet it were an improper speech, and such as the
Scripture never uses, to say we are elected by faith, or that the world was
created by faith: and in like sort, it were an improper speech, and such as the
Scripture would never have used, to say we are Justified by faith, if no more
had been meant hereby, but only the knowledge or our Justification.

Object.2 God justifies the ungodly, Rom: 4. 5. and therefore such as have not
faith.

Answ: That does not follow. 1 Because that very text faith these ungodly ones
did believe, and that their faith was counted for righteousness. 2 This
exposition of the word ungodly, whom God Justifies, to expound it of
unbelievers, is directly contrary to the Scriptures, which say that God
Justifies those that do believe and have faith, Rom: 3. 26,28,30. Acts 13. 39.
and none others John 3. 18. 3 The ungodly one in this text, is one that has
not fulfilled the righteousness of the Law; and so to justify the ungodly, is
no more but to justify without the works of the Law or not by works, which may
be, and yet not without faith.

4 If we shall extend the word further, then we must not take that saying in
sensu composito, but in sensu diviso, that is, not that he is now when God
justifies him, so ungodly as to be without faith, but that he was so
heretofore, though now God has given him more grace. As when it is said, the
lame man shall leap as an Heart, and the dumb sing, the blind see, and the deaf
hear, Isai 35. 6. Luke 7. 22. No man must herupon imagine, that they did these
things while they so remained; for that was utterly imposible, that a lame man
should leap as an Heart whilst he remained lame, or a dumb man sing whilst he
still remained dumb; and so of the rest: but the meaning is, they that were
once lame, dumb, deaf, should afterward be mabled to leap, sing, see, and
hear; these acts should be performed by such as had been such as is mentioned,
though now they were not such. We may as well conclude from these texts, that
blind men may see, while they continue blind, and so of the rest, as to
conclude from the text in hand, that an ungodly man, an unbeliever is justified
of God, whilst he is an ungodly man, an unbeliever. When some rich man
marryeth a poor beggar, we say he married one that had scarce rags to her
back; but the meaning is not, that he married her in her rags, but bestowed on
her fitting apparel, and so married her. So God justifies the ungodly, such
as had neither faith, nor any other grace; but the meaning is not that he
justifies them in their unbelief, but bestows the grace of faith upon them, and
then Iustifies them.

Object: 3 In believing we do not believe an untruth, but a truth, and
therefore it is a truth that we are Justified before we do believe.

Answ: It is true indeed, that a man must be Justified before he can rightly
believe himself to be Justified, but not before he believe on Christ for
Justification, or unto righteousness. A man can not rightly believe that he is
Justified, before he be Justified, for then he should therein believe a
falsehood: nor can he be Justified before he do believe on Christ for
Justification. The Scripture speaks little of a man's believing himself to be
Justified, but much of believing on Christ that he might be justified, Gal: 2.
16. Rom: 20. 10. Now to believe on Christ, is not an assurance or persuasion of
being Justified already, but is that act of the soul, of the will especially,
whereby a man comes to Christ, receives Christ, relyes on Christ, chooses
Christ etc: that in him he might be justified and saved. And when this is done,
then there is room for that other belief, or persuasion of being Justified
already, but not before; according to that Ephe. 1. 13. after ye believed, ye
were sealed with that holy spirit of promise; To believe a man's self to be in a
good and Justified estate, before he have received Christ by faith, what is it,
but the vain presumption and carnal confidence of poor deluded souls? as if a
woman should persuade her self of title and interest to a wealthy man's estate,
and yet was never married to him. Therefore before a man can believe aright that
he is justified, he must first be united and married to Christ, by believing on
him, and then and thereby he shall be justified indeed, and so he may safely
believe his justification.

Object: 4 All Gods people were justified when Christ made satisfaction for
their sins by his death and resurrection, Rom: 4. 25. he was raised again for
our justification, Now this was above 1600 years ago, and therefore long before
our believing.

Answ: It is true, the death and resurrection of Christ was long before our
believing, and before we were born into the world. But what shall be said to
Abram, Isaak, Jacob, David, and the rest of the Saints, that lived long before
the Incarnation of Christ? It can not be denied but that they believed before
the death and resurrection of Christ. And so, if all Gods people be actually
justified at the time when Christ suffered and rose again, then it must follow,
that though some of them be justified long before they do believe, yet others
have believed long before they were justified. And so by this conceit, we shall
have several ways for the justification of believers, or the people of God,
some without faith and a long time before it, and others not without faith, but
long time after it. But the Scripture knows but one way for the salvation of
Gods people, whether they lived in the times before the coming of Christ in the
flesh, or since, and that is by the Lord Jesus Christ, and faith in him. Acts
15. 11. John 8. 56. The virtue and value of his death and odedience being such,
as that it was sufficient for the justification and salvation of all true
believers, even from the foundation of the world, Rev: 13. 8. and therefore in
the times before his incarnation and passion as well as since.

As for Rom: 4. 25. the meaning thereof is no more but this, that our
justification is purchased and merited by the death and resurrection of Christ,
which it may be, and yet not actually applied till such time as we come unto
him by believing. For the Apostle tells us Rom: 5. 19. that as we are made
sinners, by the sin of Adam, so we are made righteous by the obedience of
Christ. Now how are we made sinners by the sin of Adam? he purchased or
merited for us this lamentable patrimony by his disobedience in eating the
forbidden fruit, but yet this is never actually applied to us till such time as
we become actually his children, and have a being from him by natural
generation. In like sort, Christ by his obedience has merited and purchased
for us this blessed portion of righteousness and life; but yet this is not
actually applied to us till such time as we come to have actually a spiritual
being in him, which is done by spiritual regeneration, and by faith which is
wrought therein. Garments may be fit to cover us and prepared for us, before we
be clothed with them: but that we may be actually clothed with them, we must
first receive them and put them on. And one may as well say, and as truly,
when garments are once prepared and made, that now he is clothed and warmed
with them, though yet he have never put them on, as to say, because Christ has
purchased justification for us, by his death and resurrection, that therefore we
then were actually justified, though yet we have never believed, nor have put
him on by faith.

For the farther clearing whereof, let it be observed and minded, that as the
Father does accept of the Sonns satisfaction, and the Son performs it, so
both the Father and the Son do agree upon the way, the manner, and the time,
when this satisfaction shall be applied to the elect, to wit, when they come to
believe on Christ. The Son did not make satisfaction, and purchase
justification for them to be applied to them whether they believed or no, or
before their believing; nor did the father so accept it. But this was the
appointment and agreement of them both, and their most wise and holy will, that
it should be applied to the elect upon their believing. So much is taught in
John 3. 16. and especially in Joh* 6. 38,39,40. where we read that Christ came
down from heaven to do the will of his Father in saving of the Elect; and that
this will was (not thatany should have life or righteousness by Christ without
believing, no such matter, but) that whosoever sees the Son, and believes on
him, should have eternal life: This was the will of the Father, and this was
that which was performed by the Son. And therefore that a man should actually
be partaker of the justification of life (as the Apostle calls it Rom: 5.) by
the Son of God, before he see the Son and believe on him, is contrary unto the
appointment and holy will both of the Father and the Son.

Object: 5 If a man be justified in the sight of God when he does believe and
was not so before, then it may seem that God is changed?

Answ: This does not follow at all, if we speak of a change in Gods will. His
work is changed indeed, and the state of the creature is changed, but no change
at all in the will of God, because it was the will of God that the creature
while in unbelief should be guilty of sin and wrath; and when brought unto
faith, should then be justified and cleared: So that the change is in the
creature, and not in the will of God. When the world was created, which before
was not, God is now a Creator, and was not so before, yet this change is only
in the creature the object of Gods will, but not in God himself, nor in his
will. Yet one might by this argument as well say that the world was from
eternity, for fear of making a change in God, as say for that reason, that
justification is from eternity: for there is as much change in God in that work
of creation, as in this of justification. It is one thing mutare voluntatem, to
change ones will, another thing velle mutationem, to will a change: of which
the former is not in God, but the latter; so that by one and the same
unchangable will, he wills to have the creature for a time in a state of
wrath, and bondage to sin and Satan etc: and afterward to call him out of that
estate and to justify him. A Physician appoints his patient to take one day
one kind of medicine, the second day another, and the third day another; here
he wills a change in the patient without any change of will in himself. Nor is
there any change in God, though he wills the creature in time of its unbelief
to be in a state of guiltiness, and upon its believing to be be in a state of
righteousness.

Object: 6 God loves his elect before they do believe, and therefore they are
justified before. Answ: This will not follow neither:

Answ: For, can not God love with a love of purpose, but all the effects of
that love must needs be exhibited forthwith? Then we must say the elect are
sanctified before they believe, and gloryfied also, for both these are effects
and fruits of his eternal love. And indeed we may as well say that these are
before faith, and from eternity, as to say so of justification, because all
these are fruits of Gods love as well as justification is. Yea if justification
must be before faith, and from eternity, because of this eternal love of God,
how then comes it to pass that the elect do not believe from eternity? For
sure it is, this calling of the elect and drawing them to Christ by faith, is a
fruit of Gods everlasting love, as well as justification is, Jer: 31. 3. But if
notwithstanding this love of God we can yield there is a time when the elect do
not believe, but are without faith, we may as well yield there is a time when
they are not justified; For this love of the Lord would prove the eternity of
the one as well as of the other, both being streams from the same fountain, and
fruits from the same root: and yet both in time, and one of them a
qualification of the other; Even as God loves his elect before he gives Christ,
(for out of that love he gave Christ, Joh. 3. 16. 1 John 4. 9,10.) and yet when
Christ is given, he does then bestow further fruits of his love; So out of his
love he draws the soul to Christ by faith, Jer: 31. 3. and then makes that
effect of his love a qualiticatio^ for a new and farther effect of his love in
justification; even as justification a qualification for gloryfication, Rom: 8.
30.

Use 3 If justification be by faith, then it is needful for every soul to
labor in the use of means for the attayning of this grace, because it is by
this that we must be justified if ever we be justified. Oh let men consider
what a blessed thing it is to be justified, and to have sin pardoned Psalm. 32.
1,2 and what a woeful misery it is to remain under the guilt of sin, to ly and
die therein, John 8. 24. And the way and means to have it otherwise, to escape
this misery and attain this blessedness, is this faith in the Lord Jesus
Christ. All morrall virtues will not suffice without this; no nor all gifts of
grace, and holy duties of obedience that are possible to be found where this
faith is wanting. Abram had many excellent virtues, and choose service to God
and to men, and yet he is not justified by any of them, but by faith only.
Without this faith it is impossible to please God, Heb: 11. 6. or to escape his
wrath and everlasting condemnation, Joh. 3. 18,36. Mark 16. 16. What though
there be righteousness and merit enough in Christ? yet this will not justify
us without faith. If a rich man would bestow some precious pearl that is worth
thousands, and thousands of pounds? this is enough indeed to make a beggar or
broken-bankrupt rich, but yet not till he do receive it. Even so in this case;
It is not through want of merit and righteousness in Christ, but through want
of faith in their own hearts, that many thousand sinners do perish
everlastingly.

Quest: By what means may this faith be attained?

1 Answ: It is good to be well informed of the misery of a man without faith,
how such an one for the present lies under the wrath and displeasure of God
John 3. 36. Heb: 11. 6. how he is incapable of mercy Math: 13. last. Heb: 3.
last. how the means of grace will never do him good, as long as he remains in
that condition Heb: 4. 2. and that so continuing, his damnation is certain and
unavoidable John 3. 18. Mark ^6. 16. If these things were well considered and
thought on, it might by the blessing of God awaken secure and unbelieving
sinners out of their sinful security.

2 It is needful for a man to be convinced that naturally he wants faith:
John 16. 8. John 3. 27. as the Apostle confesses, Rom: 7. 18. in me, that is
in my flesh there dwells no good thing. Until a man be convinced of this, he
will never seek for faith; for who will seek for that, whereof he feels not any
want; Nor will God give faith till men see and feel their want and need of it;
Luke 1. 53. It is not Gods manner to give grace to them that feel no want of
grace; but where he has a purpose to bestow it, there he first convinces the
soul of its want. It is needful also to be convinced of a man's want of power
to believe of himself: Else, if a man bring a faith of his own making, this is
not faith of a right stamp, for that is a faith of the operation of God, Col.
2. 12. Therefore the soul must be convinced of that John 6. 44. and have the
experimental feeling of in himself, that he can not come to Christ by
believing except he be drawn; and therefore must feelingly cry out, Draw me
that I may runn after thee, Cant. 1. 4. Yea and farther, a man must be
convinced of his great and deep unworthyness that ever God should work faith in
him, or give the grace of believing to such a wretch, and this in regard of his
many and great sins, in regard of his slighting of Christ, and grace many a
time when it has been offered, in regard that there are thousands others in
whom God may glorify his rich grace, and let him die without any part or
portion therein. When a man comes to this, then if God work faith in him, he
will be very thankful, and give God the glory of it; and God loves to dispense
all his favors in such a way, as may be for the glory of his free grace. Ephe.
1. 6.

3 A third means for the begetting of faith, is a right and serious
consideration of Gods promises. God has made many great and precious promises
in his word, and the pondering and musing on them, is one special means for
the begetting and strengthening of this grace: Acts 15. 7. and Rom: 10 17. It
is by the promises that we are made partakers of the divine nature, 2 Peter 1.
4. It is a great mistake in some poor souls, to think that the promises are of
no use, but only to comfort them that are believers already, yea and such as
know themselves so to be; and therefore these as long as they discern not faith
in themselves, they dare meddle with no promises, but lay them aside and let
them ly by, as things that do not concern them, but only concern others; whereas
one use of the promises is for the begeting of faith. And therefore when we can
not bring Hope and Faith to the promise, we must go to the promise for them.
Therefore thou that art full of doubting and fears, do thou seriously consider
the promise, weigh it, think much on it, pray over it, that God would give thee
an heart to believe; and if it will not be at the first, think again, weigh it
again, pray again, etc: and by much veiwing and gazing on it* God may work
faith in thee, though thou had none before, as by much beholding the glory of
the Lord in the glass of the Gospel, we are changed into the same Image, 2
Cor. 3. 18. This may well be meant by that hiding of the Treasure, Math: 13.
44,45. namely that he hides the promises of mercy in the Gospel, in the bottom
of his heart and soul, by serious meditation and consideration of them.
Particularly, it is good to consider the large extent of these promises, how
they are general, excluding none but such as by unbelief do exclude themselves,
as these texts do witness, Joh. 3. 16. Rev: 22. 17. Isai 55. 1. So that no man
may say, I know not whether I be elected, whether God purpose any good to me
etc: For the promise is general and indefinite to whosoever will receive it by
faith. The freeness also of the promise should be considered; Isai 55. 1.
without money, without price. What can be more free then gift? that we may have
mercy, if we will receive it. God was not sought unto by fallen man for mercy,
but he provides a means of mercy of his own accord, of his own love, John 3.
16. which he had not needed to have done, but that it so pleased him. Which may
answer the objection that the soul is wont to make against believing, from its
own unworthyness, as not daring to believe on Christ, unless it were more holy,
sanctified etc: If a King make love to a poor milk-maid, and offer himself to
her, it is not for her to refuse and put off the motion till she be a Queen,
for if she match with him he will make her a Queen though he do not find her
one.

4 It is useful in this case to think much and consider seriously of him that
makes the promise; his Name and blessed Attributes Isai 50. 10. as his Power,
infinitely able to do what ever we need, Rom: 4. 21. 2 Timothy: 1. 12. Math. 9. 28.
Psalm. 115. 3. So his Truth and Faithfulness, that never did nor can deceive,
nor fayl to perform what ever he promises, Heb: 6. 18. and 11, 11. So his
Grace and Mercy, his Wisdom and Goodness, yea his very Justice it self, might
be helpful in this case; for being just he will not require satisfaction
twice, and once he has received satisfaction in the sufferings and obedience
of Christ. To consider these Attributes of God might be very useful and
helpful in this case, as it is said Psalm. 34. 5. they looked unto him and were
lightened. But one cause of the want or weakness of faith is, that men look too
much at creatures, at sense, at reason, at their own baseness, weakness,
unworthyness, and look not sufficiently at God.

5 A serious consideration of him through whom all the promises are
accomplished, and made good, might be also helpful in this matter; and that is
the Lord Jesus, who is the mediator of that better Covenant, established upon
better promises, then the old covenant was, Heb: 8. 6. Now in him there is, 1
All fullness, Col: 1. 19. So that what ever we want it is fully to be had in
him. In him is Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, 1 Cor: 1.
30. In him is life, John 14. 6 19. Wisdom Col. 2. 3. Righteousness, Jer. 23. 6.
Peace, E^^e. 2. 4. the Spirit of Grace and Holiness above measure, John 3. 34.
and 1. 16. Favor with God, Math: 3. 17. Col. 1. 13. Power to conquer all the
enemies of our salvation, as being King of kings, Lord of lords 1 Timothy: 6. 15.
Able to Succor in all Temptations, Heb: 2. 18. Mighty to Save, Isai 63. 1. God
having laid help upon him, has laid help upon one that is Mighty, Psalm. 89.
19. and able to save to the uttermost all that come to God by him, Heb: 7. 25.
2 And as there is in him all this Fullness, so there is in him as much Freeness
and readiness, to communicate of this his fullness unto them that trust in him,
and sue to him. When he was on earth, he invited men to come to him, and never
any so did, but they were helped; and his heart is still the same; So that he
has not lost his mercy by receiving glory, but is still a merciful high
Priest on the behalf of poor sinners Heb: 2. 17. So that such as come to him,
he will in no wise cast them away, John 6. 37. Therefore let us look unto him
Isai 45. 22. and seriously consider this Apostle and high Priest of our
profession Heb: 3. 1. and as long as we so do, we shall do well; but if we
turn the ey of our mind from him, then we fall and sink through unbelief: eveu
as it were with Peter, who as long as he kept his ey upon Christ, he walked on
the water, as firmly as you could do on boards: but when he looked too much on
the winds and waves, and kept not Christ in his ey, then he began to sink,
Math: 14. 30.

6 Lastly, It is good to consider that to believe is not only lawful, but a
necessary commanded duty, and the contrary a very grievous sin. Some say they
could desire to believe, if they thought they might. May I? dare I, faith the
soul, apprehend the promise and receive Christ? may I do it? which is as if one
should say, may I obey the Commandment of God? may I do the will of God? which
ought not to be a question. And sure it is, God would gladly have ye to
believe, if it might be after him; (I speak of his revealed will in his word)
Else, what means that protesting, that he delights not in the death of a
sinner Ezekiel: 33. 11. That beseeching men to be reconciled to God 2 Cor: 5. 20.
That Commanding men to believe, 1 John 3. 23. Commending and rewarding such as
do, Math: 15. 28. Threatening and punnishing the contrary Mark 16. 16. John 3.
18,19,36. Heb: 3. last. And therefore whereas the poor soul says, dare I
believe? we might rather merveil how men dare refuse; for this is to put
horrible indignity upon God, as if he meant not as he says, but deals
deceitfully and falsely with poor sinners; it is to make God a liar 1 John 5.
10. As if the God of Truth and Faithfullness had nothing to do, but to
dissemble and to deceive poor souls; which should be an abhorring to our
thoughts to imagine. Consider then that obedience is better then complement; yea
better then sacrifice; and faith is a singular kind of obedience, Rom: 1. 7. If
therefore the question be, what shall I do to be saved, the answer from the Lord
is, believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved: Acts 16. 30,31.
And if the question be, But how may I do to believe? the answer is, Cry
mightily unto God, the giver of faith, that he would bless these and such like
means for the working of this precious and needful grace.

Use 4 If justification be by faith, then it is needful for every soul to
examine and try themselves, whether they have this faith or no, whether they be
true believers or not: For by this we are justified, and without this faith we
can not be justified, nor have any well grounded assurance of eternal life. See
but that one Scripture John 3. 18,36. He that believes has everlasting life;
he that believes not shall not see life, but is condemned already, and the
wrath of God abides on him, and then tell me whether it be not needful for
men to try whether they have this faith or not. For which duty we have also a
plain commandment, 2 Cor: 13. 5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the
faith or no.

Object: What needs this? For are we not all believers in Christ? we sure are
not Infidels?

Answ: Answ:1 The heart is deceitful Jer: 17. 9. So that many think themselves
better then they are, Rev: 3. 17. Gal. 6. 3. Pro: 30. 12. 2 It is most certain
all have not faith, but many an one lives and dies utterly destitute of this
precious grace 2 These. 3. 2. Deuteronomy: 32. 20. 3 Yea many that enjoy the Gospel,
live under the means, and hear many a sermon, yet many of these live, and die
without faith; Heb: 4. 2. John 12. 37,38. And therefore let it not seem a
needless thing to examine our selves whether we be in the faith or no.

You will say, If there be any, or many that want faith, yet you are none of
that number. Answ: Stay a while till you consider some signs and marks, whereby
the want of this grace may be known: which are such as these.

1 From the general nature of faith, which is a supernatural work of God,
Math: 16. 17. John 6. 44. Ephesians. 1. 19. Col: 2. 12. And therefore let a man have
nothing, but what he has by nature, and it is most certain he has no faith;
there is so much Athisme, unbelief, distrust, carnal confidence etc: in the
natural and corrupt heart of man, that though he may presume, and though he may
despair, yet while he has no more but what he has by nature, it is certain he
neither does nor can believe. Yea though he may perform some acts of moral
obedience to the Law, at the least in outward things, there being some seeds as
it were for such things left in nature Rom: 2. 14. yet there are no seeds left
at all for Evangelical faith; but this must be wrought and created by the
supernatural and Almighty power of God. Which shows the faith of many to be
vain* and nothing but a mere conceit, because they have nothing in them but
mere nature, nothing that needed any Almighty power for the producing of it:
their faith is but a faith of their own making, they never having found any
great difficulty in beleiving; that we may say their faith is too easily gotten
to be ought worth.

2 A second sign may be taken from the means of working faith, which is the
ministry of the word, by ministers sent of God for that purpose; so much is
plainly taught in Rom: 10. 14,15,17. Acts 15. 7. 2 Cor 3. 5. And therefore where
there is faith, there can not but be an high prizing of the word, and of the
ministers thereof, as the instrumental cause and means of faith. A man can not
esteem lightly of the word, if he have any faith, because by the word his faith
was begotten: nor lightly esteem of the ministers, because by them in these
days the Lord usually begets faith: For the former of these see Psalm. 119.
93. and Jer: 15. 16. I will never forget thy Precepts, by them thou have
quickened me; they are the joy and rejoicing of my heart: And for the latter
see Rom: 10. 15. Gal. 4. 15. How beautiful are the feet of such men? they
would have pulled out their eyes, if it had been possible to have given Paul.
What shall then be thought of them that lightly esteem the word of God? To hear
it, or not to hear it, are much what both alike to them; and when they come to
the assembly, they regard but little how they there behave themselves, but take
liberty to wandering thoughts, and gazing looks, or else fall fast asleep it may
be by half a dozen at a time. If these men have any faith it was begotten by
the word; and if they have none, yet if they ever must have any, it must be
begotten by this means. And is it possible they should have any faith, or any
true desire of faith, who do no more esteem the means thereof? And what may be
thought of them that despise the ministers of the Gospel? who are so far from
counting their feet beautiful, that they rather take pleasure to vex them,
molest them, or suffer them almost to starve for want of necessaries? It is by
the ministers of Christ that men are brought to believe; and can they be
counted believers, by whom the faithful ministers of Christ are despised or
lightly esteemed?

3 A third evidence against many, that they want this grace of faith, may be
taken from the consideration of the subject in whom this faith is wrought,
which is none other but a poor lost humbled soul, a soul that is convinced of
its sinfulness and wretchedness, of its inability to help it self, and of its
utter unworthyness to receive any help or mercy from God, and therefore mourning
in the sense hereof. Such as these are the men that are invited to come to
Christ Math: 11. 28. that is, to believe on him; and such as these it is whom
he came to seek and to save, Luke 19. 10. but did not come to call others
Math: 9. 13. And therefore where this is wanting, we can not see that there can
be any faith. And the reason is plain, because till men be brought to this,
they neither will nor can believe. That they will not, is evident in the Jews,
who through want of this that here is spoken of, did not submit to the
righteousness of God in Christ Jesus Rom: 10. 3. and for this cause, our
Savior tells them John 5. 40. ye will not come to me, that ye may have life.
Till the prodigal had spent all his portion, and began to feel himself be in
want, he never thought of returning to his fathers house Luke 15. And that
without this humble and lowly frame, men can not believe is plain from that of
our Savior John 5. 44. how can ye believe, who seek honor one of another,
and seek not the honor that comes from God only? So that till men be changed
from this spirit of pride, self-conceitedness, and vain glory, and be brought
to true abasement of spirit, and self-denial, our savior tells us they will
not, nay they can not believe. How shall a man swim as long as he feels the
ground with his feet? how shall he build his house upon the rock, as long as
the sand is not by deep digging removed and cast away? Luke 6. 48. In like
sort, how shall a man believe till he be taken off from all his own bottom, by
a spirit of humiliation, being clearly convinced of his own wickedness,
weakness, and unworthyness in the sight of God, and bitterly mourning in the
sight and sense thereof, and lamenting after Christ? Till men be brought to
this in some measure of truth, there can not be any saving faith: Till the
fallow ground of a proud and hard heart be broken up, men do but sow among
thorns, Jer: 4. 3,4. the faith which they have is but a temporary faith at the
best, and such as will not continue, because the stoniness of the heart has
not been removed by the work of Gods spirit in conviction, contrition, and
humiliatio^ Math: 13. 5,6,20,21. And from this it is that so many professors do
so fearfully fall away; that one becomes a mere worldling, an other falls to
profaneness and loose living, another turns opimonist, drinking in the poison
of some pernicious tenent; all this apostasy is because they never were
believers in truth, for then they should not have fallen away, and why were
they not believers in truth? even from hence, because the stoutness and
stoniness of their hearts was never taken away. Oh therefore all you that are
professors of the Gospel, and think ye do believe, examine well your selves upon
this point of true humiliation; for if there you be not right, your faith is
not right, nor will it hold out and continue in the day of trial.

4 A fourth trial may be taken from the object of faith; and there is to be
considered the object of faith quoe justificat, and quae justificat, which does
justify, and as it does justify: In the former respect, the object of faith
is the whole word of God; Acts 24. 14. What God can speak, it can and does
believe, when it knows it to be spoken of God. which discovers the faith of
many to be unsound, because though they say they believe the promises, yet they
believe not the commandments, for then they would obey them, and assent to
them with their whole hearts; nor do they believe the threatenings, for then
they durst not so securely continue in sin, but would surely tremble and be
afraid because of them; as Psalm. 119. 120. Isai 66. 2,5. Holy David did believe
the Commandments Psalm. 119, 66. and so did blessed Paul, confessing the Law to
be holy, and the Commandment to be holy, just and good, and such as he
delighted in, Rom: 7. 12,22. As for them that can not endure to be ruled by the
Law and the Commandments of it, nor to be awed by its threatenings, their faith
is not sound, as not believing the whole word of God, though they pretend a
belief of that part which consists of promises. In the latter respect the
object of faith is Christ only, and his righteousness: He is that blessed
promised seed, that is chiefly intended in the promise to Abram, and which his
faith did mainly look at John 8. 56. and is the object of true faith as it does
justify and save; Acts 16. 31. Joh. 3. 16,36. Therefore where there is this
faith, there will be many thoughts of Christ, many desires after him, many
longings for him, an high prizing of him, to count him precious1 Pet. 2 6,7.
the chiefest of ten thousands Cant: 5. 10. A pearl and treasure, worthy to be
bought with the sale of all that ever a man has Math: 13. 44,46. and that all
other things are but loss and dung in comparison of this Christ and his
righteousness, Phil. 3. 7,8,9. Therefore where the soul scarce ever thinks of
Christ, or does not much esteem him and prize him, or not so esteem him as to
count health, wealth, friends, liberty, life it self, and all a man's own
righteousness, and what ever can be named amongst creatures, to be all nothing,
in comparison of this Lord Jesus Christ, there we may be well assured that as
yet there is not any faith, Luke 14.26.

5 Lastly, Such an excellent grace as faith, can not be without many excellent
effects and fruits: such as are Humility, Purity, Love, weanedness from the
world, and the like. First for Humility, a soul that is lifted up with high
conceits of its self is destitute of faith, for such a frame, and true faith
are quite contrary and inconsistant; Hab: 2.4. therefore the text says, the
soul of such an one is not upright in him: Look at them that have been most
eminent in faith, as David, Paul, the Centurion, the woman of Canaan, and we
shall find they have ever been low-thoughted of themselves; Psalm. 131. 1,2.
Ephesians. 3. 8. 1 Timothy: 1. 15. 1 Cor: 15. 9. Math: 8. 8. Math: 15.27. For Purity,
faith does fetch such virtue from the blood and spirit of Christ, and the
promise, as does so purify the heart, Acts 15. 9. and 26. 18. that it can not
allow of any sin, but unfainedly hates it all, Rom: 7. 15. and loves holiness,
Psalm. 119. 5,97. And for weanedness from the world, the example of Moses is
notable, who by his faith refused all the pleasures, profits, and preferments
of Pharaohs Court: preferring the society of the saints, and the very rebuke of
Christ before them* all: Heb: 11. 25,26. And therefore it is said, that faith is
the victory that overcomes the world, 1 John 5. 4 So that by it the heart is
preserved from being too much discouraged, when worldly comforts are wanting, 1 Samuel: 30. 6. Hab. 3. 17,^8. and taught so much the more to draw near to God at
such times Psalm. 56. 3. and 109.4.

Lastly, this faith does so work by love, Gal. 5. 6. (and love we know is the
fulfilling of the Law Rom: 13. ^0.) that where there is this faith, there can
not but be obedience to all the will of God, Heb: 11. 8. etc: and the more
faith the more obedience, and the more good works; whereas a faith that has not
works is dead, and no better then the faith of Devils, Jam: 2. 19,20.

If now upon examination and trial, a man shall find himself without faith, oh
then let such an one bewayl his condition, and seek unto God for this precious
faith, in the use of such means as were mentioned in the precedent use. But if
it shall be found upon due and serious search to be otherwise, then let such a
man be unfeynedly thankful and comfortable, and that shall be the next use.

Use 5 For if justification be by faith, then they that truly believe can
never be sufficiently thankful, inasmuch as now they are counted just and
righteous in the sight of God. Consider either the contrary to this justified
estate, or the thing it self, and we shall see there is in it mavelous great
cause to be thankful and rejoice.

For the former; let these particulars be minded:

1 That it is amongst the greatest of miseryes, when a man shall be without the
forgiveness of his sins: So much is manifest by the lamentations of the godly,
who have greatly lamented this thing, Psalm. 90. 8. Job 7. 20,21. As also by the
Imprecations against the wicked, against whom it is wished as the greatest
evil, that their sins might not be covered, nor blotted out, Nehe. 4. 5.
Psalm. 109. 14. The Comminations also of God do show the same; for it is
threatened and denounced against men as one of the sorest of evils, that their
sins shall ly down with them in the dust, that they shall die in their sins,
and that the Lord will never forget their wicked works, Job 20. 11. John 8. 24.
Amos 8. 7. And Lastly, when the Apostle reckons up the inconveniences and
mischiefs that must unavoidably follow, if Christ be not risen from the dead,
he names this as one of the worst, that then we are yet in our sins: If Christ
be not risen says he, then is our preaching vain, and your faith vain, yea and
ye are yet in your sins 1 Cor: 15. 14,17. All which do clearly show, that it
is a doleful and dreadful condition to be without the the pardon and
forgiveness of sins.

2 As doleful and dreadful as it is, yet till a man attain this benefit of
justification, all his sins do remain in Gods sight as fresh and clear, as the
very day when they were first committed: therefore they are said to be written
with a pen of iron, and the point of a diamond Jer: 17. 1. to be sowed up as in
a bagg and sealed Job 14. 17. that they might not be out of the way, or hard to
find And our Savior speaking of such as then were, (many of them at least)
dead and gone, says, (not they were, but) they are thieves and robbers, John
10. 8. intimating that the guilt of those sins did cleave unto them, fresh in
the sight of God to that day, So Judas is a traitor to this day, Cain a
murderer to this day, and all unbelieving sinners, unjustified persons,
whether alive or dead, the guilt of all their sins does remain upon them to
this day.

3 And if so, then though conscience may be asleep and benumbed for a time, yet
the time will come when it will awake, to the galling, and vexing and
tormenting of the guilty soul, with most dreadful terrors and horrors; hence
we read of Cain crying out in the anguish of his soul, my sin is greater then I
can bear, Gen: 4. 13. and of Judas crying out, I have sinned in betraying
innocent blood, and in despair going to the halter to let out his wretched
soul, Math: 27. 4,5. Yea and Joseph's brethren apprehending themselves in some
danger in Egypt, have this doleful ditty in their mouths, we are verily
guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul when he
besought us, and we would not hear; and therefore is this evil come upon us,
Gen: 42. 21. So that if sin be unpardoned, though conscience for the present
may be asleep and quiet; yet a time will come when this sleepy Lion will awake
and roar.

4 And this is certain, that if the guilt of sin remain, the punishment thereof
can not always be avoided, though it may be forborne or withheld for a
time. For the Lord is a just God, and will by no means clear the guilty Exodus:
34. 7. but tribulation and anguish, indignation and wrath, shall one day take
hold of every one that does evil, on the Jew first and also on the gentiles
Rom: 2. 8,9. Sin makes a man indebted to Gods justice, and considering what
God is, how his wrath is a consuming fire, Heb: 12. last. it must needs
therefore be a fearful thing to fall into the hands of this living God, Heb:
10. 31. For how can a man's heart endure, or his hands be strong in the day
that God shall deal with him* Ezekiel: 22. 14. who can dwell with that devouring
fire? who can stand with those everlasting burnings? Isai 33. 14.

Such a doleful thing it is to have sin unpardoned, and to be unjustified.

But on the other side, See what happiness it is to have sin remitted, and the
person justified: 1 It is acknowledged by David, Hezekiah, and others as a
point of great blessedness, Psalm. 32. 1,2. Isai 38. 17. Psalm. 85. 2. 2 It is
also promised as a special blessing of the new covenant, that God will therein
forgive the iniquities of his people, and remember their sins no more. Jer:
31. 34. 3 The godly have earnestly sought it at Gods hands by prayer, which
they would not have done, had it not been in their esteem a great blessing,
Hosea 14. 2. Psalm. 25. 18. and 51. 1,2, 9. 4 It is such a blessing as that if
it be once granted, it shall never be recalled, but shall abide for ever;
sins, once pardoned are so cast into the depth of the sea, Mich. 7. 19. that
they can never be found any more Jer: 50. 20. nor will God call them to
remembrance again Jer: 31. 34. 5 It is such a complete and perfect blessing,
that God does not only pardon some of the sins of his people, but even all
their sins and trespasses whatsoever; 1 John 1. 7. Col: 2. 13. Psalm. 51. 7.
Isai 1. 18. 6 And on this ground they are bidden be of good comfort Math: 9. 2.
and the Prophets must speak comfortably unto them, because their iniquity was
pardoned Isai 40. 1,2. 7 It is such a blessing, that it shall undoubtedly be
followed with eternal life and glory, Tit. 3. 7. Rom: 8. 30. which may be one
reason, why it is called justification of life Rom: 5. 18.

All which things considred, both the misery of being still under the guilt of
sin, as unpardoned, and the happiness of a justified estate, They therefore that
have title to such a great blessing as justification is, have cause for ever to
be comforted, to be thankful to God for so great a blessing; And all this is
the portion of true believers; For they are the men to whom the Lord does not
impute sin, but righteousness, and whom he justifies freely by his grace in
Jesus Christ; so that as righteousness was imputed to Abram, even so it is and
shall be to all that are believers, who are the children of Abram,
righteousness shall be imputed to them also; Rom: 4. 5,11,23,24. Gal. 3. 7,9.
Rom: 3. 22,25,26,30. Act 10. 43. and 13. 39.

Know therefore all you that are true believers in Christ, that your sins are
pardoned, and your persons justified and accepted in Christ Jesus: God is now
reconciled to you through his dea^ Son, and your sins shall never be laid unto
your charge, for you are justified and cleared in Gods sight, and therefore be
glad in the Lord, and rejoice ye just and justified persons, and shout for joy
all ye that are upright in heart; Psalm. 32. 11.

Quest But what needs much to be said for the comforting of believers? will not
they be forward of themselves to take the comfort of their justification?

Answ: Many indeed that are destitute of faith are forward enough, and too much
to apply comfort to themselves, when it does not belong unto them, as Currs in
the house are ready to snatch at the childrens bread, and run away with it as
if it were a portion for them: as Haman, when the King but spoke of the man
whom the King delighted to honor, presently applied the speech to himself,
thinking whom will the King honor rather then my self, Hest. 6. 6. But they
that are believers indeed, have many times need to be comforted concerning
their justification; and therefore the Lord speaks so earnestly to his Prophets
Isai 40. 1,2. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, and say unto Jerusalem that her
iniquity is pardoned, intimating thereby, that his people have sometimes need,
yea much need to be comforted concerning the pardon of their sins and their
justificatio^. For though they be believers, and their sins pardoned, and
their persons justified in Christ, yet sometimes they can scarce believe
themselves to be so happy; as Job, though he had called and God had answered
him, yet would scarcely believe that God had harkned to his voice, Job 9. 16.
And David, though Nathan had told him that the Lord had put away his sin, and
that he should not die, 2 Samuel: 12. yet he is not so quickly persuaded* and so
easily satisfied touching this point* but that after this he still prays and
cries for pardon Psalm. 51. as if he had never heard those words of the Prophet:

And as the children of God have many times need to be comforted touching this
point, so the ministry of the word is a means of Gods ordayning for the
comforting of them; Isai 57. 29. 1 These. 3. 2. Isai 40. 1,2. and therefore to
comfort them concerning their justification, must not be looked at as a
needless labor.

Quest: If God do give them faith, and thereby do justify them and pardon their
sins, why do they not know it? and how comes it to pass that they are
pardoned and justified in heaven, and not in their own consciences also?

Answ: This comes to pass; 1 To show that not only faith and forgiveness, but
even comfort it self, is the free gift of God, and depends not necessarily and
infallibly so on faith, repentance etc: but that these may be, and yet there be
little comfort and joy, at least for a time. And therefore it is that God is
called the God of comfort, 2 Cor: 1. 3. and his spirit the Comforter, John 14.
and 15. and 16. and God is said to be he that speaks peace unto his people,
Psalm. 85. 8. all to show that peace and comfort and joy are blessings, the
dispencing whereof the Lord has reserved in his own hand. According to that Job
34. 29. when he gives quietness, who can make trouble? and when he hides his
face, who can behold him. 2 It thus comes to pass, that the godly may feel
the smart and bitterness of sin the more, and so be more deeply humbled in
sense thereof. 3 That they may be more watchful afterward. If David like his
broken bones, and his roaring all the day long, etc: then let him be bold to be
tampering with sin again. But by this means God keeps his children from
turning again to folly, they know what it has cost them before, and they will
no more buy the pleasure of it so dear. 4 That they may learn to be the more
pittyfull to others in the like distresses; as Christ must suffer and be
tempted, that he might succor them that are tempted: Heb: 2. 17,18. 5 That
they might afterward more heartily and cheerfully praise and laud the Lord; as
they that have been in deep afflictions and are delivered out of the same;
Psalm. 107. 6 Lastly this comes to pass through the difficulty and
supernatural way of believing. Natural conscience expects justification by
works, and therefore has much ado to close with mercy in a way of free grace.
Faith is not like other graces and duties, which have some (though obscure)
footsteps in the naturall-dictates of conscience, as to worship God, love God
etc: Rom: 2. 14. but faith is wholly supernatural, Math: 16. 17. so that Adam
in his innocence knew not this way of believing in, and trusting to the
righteousness of a Redeemer and mediator. As Christ, the object of faith is
only by divine revelation, no counsel of men or Angels could ever have devised
such a way of justification, so faith it self as the organ and instrument to
apply (...) righteousness, is not by humane light, but wholly from above. And
faith being thus supernatural, it is therefore the more difficult, not only to
be attained, but also to be discerned.

Quest: How then may faith and justification be known, that one may have the
comfort of the same?

Answ: It is good for a man to examine himself by the trialls before mentioned,
from the principal efficient, the instrumental means, the object, the subject,
and the effects of faith. But withal it is needful to pray for the
illumination of Gods spirit, which is able to clear up our faith and our
justification by faith; but without this it will never be satisfyingly
discerned and known. For it is the Spirit that sheddeth abroad the love of God
into our hearts, Rom: 5. 5. witnesses that we are the children of God Rom: 8,
16. seals believers to the day of redemption Ephe. 1. 13. and 4. 30. and
enables us to know the things that are freely given us of God 1 Cor: 2. 12.

Two things concerning justification have been spoken unto already, viz: the
chief author or efficient of it, which is the Lord, and the instrumental cause
or means of it which is faith.

In the next place, we are to consider of the third and last particular here
expressed, and that is the form or manner of it, and that is by imputing,
accounting, or reckoning; He counted it to him for righteousness.Whence the
Doctrine is,

Doctr: That, As justification is from God as the Author of it, and by faith as
the instrument or means of it, so for the form or manner of it, it is by
accounting, reckoning, or imputing.

I name these three English words, as our english tongue uses them all, though
they all import the same thing, one and the same word in the original being
sometimes englished by one of them, and sometimes by another.

Now for the farther opening of this point, it is to be observed that there are
three things which are said to be imputed or not imputed in this matter of
justification; Sin, Faith, and Righteousness.

First of all Sin, and of this the Scripture phrase is negative, that sin is
not imputed, when a man is justified. This expression of the not imputing of
sin is found in such scriptures as these, Rom: 4. 8. Psalm. 32. 2. 2 Cor: 5. 19.
in which places the Holy Ghost speaks of justification. In like sort is the
word used 2 Samuel: 19. 19. and in that of Paul 2 Timothy: 4. 16. where he prays
that their sin that forsook him in his appearing before the Emperor might not
be laid to their charge, or not imputed unto them; for it is the same word that
is often englished imputed, in Rom: 4. So this phrase imports that when the
soul is justified, his sin is not accounted, imputed or reckoned to him at all
in the sight of God, but he stands clear before him as if he had never sinned.

2 Faith is said to be imputed; Rom: 4. 5,9,22,23,24. And how is that meant,
when faith is said to be imputed? There are two ways how that is understood:
First of all, when faith it self is said to be imputed, that is, to be imputed
and reckoned to us as our own, though it be not our own any otherwise then as
the gift and work of God in us, according as it is said to be the gift of God
Phil. 1. 29. Ephe. 2. 8. and that no man can come to Christ (that is believe in
him) except he be drawn by the father, Ioh. 6. 44. But yet when God has given
faith, he then imputes and reckons this faith as ours, though himself have
wrought it in us. And this may seem to be needful, to the end that Christ and
his righteousness which by faith we possess, may be our own and imputed and
reckned to us as our own. For though Christ's righteousness be a perfect
righteousness, and we possess it by faith, yet how can it be accounted ours,
unless faith it self the means of possessing it, be counted ours? but when
faith is accounted ours, then the righteousness of Christ possessed by faith,
is accounted ours also. If we take the imputing of faith in this sense, then
when faith is said to be imputed, or counted for righteousness, that particle [
for] must not be so understood as if faith it self were in the room and steed
of righteousness; for it has been showed before, that such an apprehention will
not stand or agree with truth. But the word [ for,] does here only note why, or
wherefore, as if it were rendered faith is i mputed, unto righteousness, that is
to say, to the end we may attain unto righteousness; And in another place the
same preposition is englished unto, twice in one verse; Rom: 10. 10. with the
heart man believes unto righteousness, with the mouth confession is made unto
salvation: and so it might be here Rom: 4. faith is imputed unto righteousness.
This exposition of the phrase when faith is said to be accounted or imputed for
righteousness, is given by some very godly and judicious, (...) Forbes
and I mention it as worthy consideration.

But that sense of the word which is more usually given, and wherein I should
rest, is when faith is taken relatively for its object, which is Christ and his
righteousness; and so these words faith is accounted for righteousness, have
this meaning, that Christ and his righteousness are so accounted. For as has
been showed before, it is not unusual that faith should be taken in this sense,
namely, for its object Christ Jesus. That which in one verse is called faith,
in another is called Christ; Gal. 2. 16,17. so likewise Gal. 3. 23,25. of which
sense more has been spoken before.

3 There is yet another expression in this matter of imputation, and that is
the imputing of righteousness; which phrase is used Rom: 4. 6,11.

So then for the form and manner of justification* there is the not imputing of
sin, and the imputing of righteousness, and the imputing of faith unto
righteousness.

But for farther opening of this point of Imputation, sundry questions may be
proposed, viz:

Quest:1 1 What is that righteousness which God does impute unto us for our
justification?

Answ: It is the righteousness of Jesus Christ, our Redeemer and Mediator,
that which was wrought by him in his own person; this righteousness of his is
imputed unto us by God, and the imputation of it is the formal cause of our
justification.

That this righteousness of Christ is imputed to us, such reasons as these may
make manifest:

1 If righteousness be imputed (as the text plainly and expressly affirms that
it is, Rom: 4. 6,11.) then it must either be our own righteousness that is so
imputed, or else the righteousness of some other. But our own righteousness it
can not be; for we being all sinners have none such of our own as can
justify us; Rom: 3. 10. Psalm. 1^. 3. 2. Isai 64. 6. And besides, this
righteousness is said to be imputed without works Rom: 4. 6. that is without
our own works; so that the righteousness of our own works is not imputed. It
must then be the righteousness of another: Now that other can be none else but
Christ alone. Any other whose righteousness may be imputed for justification,
besides Christ can not be imagined.

2 The text is plain that we are justified by Christ and his righteousness:
Jer: 23. 6. Isai 45. 24,25. Rom: 5. 9,19: 1 Cor: 1. 30. And if so, then his
righteousness is imputed to us, because there is no other way how it can be
communicated to us but by imputation. And yet communicated it must be, else how
shall we be justified by it? Riches, Pearls of great value, can make no man
rich, till they be applied and become his own; and so it is in this case.

3 As we are made sinners by the sin of Adam, so are we made righteous by the
righteousness of Christ; Rom: 5. 19. 1 Cor: 15. 22. But we are made sinners by
the sin of Adam by imputation; for the guilt and punishment of that sin can no
otherwise be made ours: And therefore we are made righteous by the righteousness
of Christ by imputation.

4 Look how Christ was made a sinner by our sin, so are we made righteous by
his righteousness, 2 Cor: 5. 2^. Now how was Christ made a sinner by our sin?
not inherently, as if there were any sin inherent in him, either in his heart
or life; the Scripture is express against that, Heb: 4. 15. 1 Pet: 2. 22. for
he knew no sin, in that sense 2 Cor: 5. 21. It were a most wicked thing to
imagine any such matter of him. And therefore it remains that he was made a
sinner by imputation only; he was made sin for us 2 Cor: 5. 21. the Lord has
laid on him the iniquity of us all, Isai 53. 6.

Quest: 2 But now this also may be questioned by some, Whether our sins were
imputed to Christ? and whether he bare any punishment due to us for our sins?

Answ: There are sundry reasons that may clear this also:

1 It may be cleared by all those Scriptures where it is said that Christ
suffered, and dyed for our sins, Rom: 4. 25. and 5. 6,8. 1 Cor: 15. 3. 1 Pet:
3. 18. Isai 53. 5,8. Heb: 2. 9. Christ did not die without a cause Gal. 2. last:
for our sins were the cause. And if our sins were the cause of his death, and
that he dyed for them, then they were imputed to him, so that when he suffered
and dyed, he bare the punishment of our sins.

2 Christ is said to bear our sins, 1 Pet. 2. ^^, Isai 53. 11,12. Now to bear
them does imply that he bare the punishment of them, and that they were imputed
to him for that end. For whereas some do think, that to bear our sins does
signify no more but that he bare them away from us, without bearing himself
any punishment deserved by them, it is manifest that the phrase of bearing
sin, or bearing iniquity, can have no such meaning, but that it signifies to
bear the punishment deserved by sin: as where it is said of such and such
offenders, that they shall bear their iniquity, Lev: 20. 17. and 5. 1. that
every one shall bear his own burden Gal. 6. 5. and 5. 10. and that the son
shall not bear the iniquity of the father, nor the father the iniquity of the
son, Ezekiel: 18. 20. can any man imagine that here to bear iniquity should
signify to bear it away from himself or from another? If any could so do,
there were no evil in such a bearing, but that were a lawful, yea a
commendable and blessed bearing of another man's sin; But the text speaks of
bearing iniquity in an other sense, wherein no man shall bear the iniquity of
another, but every man bear his own burden, his own sin; that is the punishment
of his sin. Therefore inasmuch as the Lord Jesus bare our sins, he bare the
punishment due by them, they being imputed to him for that end.

3 Christ was made a curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. and this implies that he bare
the punishment of sin for us; for to be made a curse or to be cursed is always
used in that sense, Math: 25. 41. 2 Pet: 2. 14. Gal. 3. 10.

4 Christ was a ransom or a price of redemption for us; Math: 20. 28. 1 Timothy: 2.
6. 1 Cor: 6. 20. and this does imply that the punishment of our sins was laid
upon him.

5 Christ was a sacrifice for us, or for our sins, Heb: 9. 26, 28. and 10. 12.
and John 1. 29. Math: 26. 28. And inasmuch as all the sins of the people were
put and laid upon the sacrifice Lev: 16. 15,16,17. and verse 21,22. and Lev: 10.
17. therefore this implies and teaches that all our sins were imputed to
Christ,and the punishment of them laid upon him.

6 What can be more plain then what is written in Isai 53. 6. 2 Cor: 5. 21. he
was made sin for us, God has laid on him the iniquity of us all?

Quest: 3 But how can this stand with justice, that our sins should be
imputed to Christ, and he be punished for them? can it stand with justice that
one should be punished for another sin and the innocent for the guilty?

Answ: Yes, there is no injustice at all in it, that the surety be responsible
for the debt, as Philem: 18. Paul becoming surety for Onesimus, says to
Philemon, put that on my account, let it be imputed to me, let me answer and
pay it. Now Christ was our surety, Heb: 7. 22. More particularly thus; it is no
ways unjust that one be punished for the sin of another, when the things here
following do all concur: 1 When all that are concerned in it are willing and do
consent. 2 When there is a near relation and union between the offender and the
sufferer.

3 When the sufferer has free dominion over that from which he parts in his
sufferings for another. 4 When he has power to break through and overcome all
his sufferings, and to reassume his former condition again. 5 When this way is
not to the dishonor of any, but for the greater honor and glory of all. And
so it is in all the particulars when the Lord Jesus did suffer for us.

Quest: 4 But if God do not grant forgiveness, atonement, righteousness,
without the punishment of our sins laid on Christ, and suffered by him, where
then is there any Grace or Mercy in our salvation? For it seems God does not
save us without satisfaction to himself?

Answ: Yet there is much grace and mercy in our salvation notwithstanding what
is here said: for, 1 It is mercy to us, though it be merited by Christ. 2 It
was great grace and mercy to accept of satisfaction from another; for the
rigor of the Law would not allow of this, but exacts satisfaction from the
sinner himself in his own person. And therefore there was in it great grace to
us, that God by his sovereign power would in this point dispece with the rigor
of the Law. 3 It was yet a point of farther grace, and mercy, that he himself
would find out this remedy, this way of salvation by another. For we our selves
could never have found out such another, nor could any other creature have
found it out for us. So that though justice be satisfied, and punishment be
suffered, yet our salvation is of free grace and mercy notwithstanding, Justice
and Mercy most sweetly concurring in our salvation by Christ Jesus.

Quest: 5 If then the righteousness of Christ be imputed to us, What was that
righteousness of Christ that is imputed?

Answ: Such a righteousness as man now owes to yield and perform unto God: and
that is two-fould* 1 Passive, in a way of suffering penalty or punishment for
his transgression: this every sinner does owe to God by the sentence of his
just Law, which requires that the sinner be accursed and suffer death for his
sin, Gal. 3. 10. Rom: 6. 23. 2 A sinner owes obedience de novo; and is still
bound to obey the Law, though he must and when he has satisfied for former
breaches. It stands not with reason that paying the penalty threatened for
transgression, he should thereby become lawless, or free from thenceforth from
the debt and duty of obedience which the Law requires. And this being the
righteousness that a sinner owes, this therefore is the righteousness which
Christ performed for as, and which is imputed to us for our justification, even
both his active and passive obedience; Therefore it is said that he fulfilled al
righteousness, Math: 3. 15. even all that the Law requires of fallen man,
whether it be suffering or doing: both which seem to be comprehended in that
one saying Phil: 2. 8. that Christ humbled himself and became obedient even to
death, the death of the cross; which place implies that there is an obedience
which falls short of death, and an obedience in suffering death, and that
Christ for our sakes and an our steed performed both. In which respect also it
is that he is said to be the end of the Law for righteousness; Rom: 10. 4. Now
the end of the Law is perfect righteousness, in doing what is commanded, and in
suffering punishment in case of sin and transgression; and so Christ being the
end of the Law, has therefore performed both these things for us, which the Law
requires of sinners, viz: to do what it commanded, and to suffer what is due
for sin.

Quest: 6 If this righteousness be imputed to us, does it not then follow that
we are as righteous as Christ? and that every believer is a redeemer and
savior of others? for Christ was so.

Answ: This will not follow at all; and the reasons are: 1 Because the sin of
Adam is imputed to all the sonns of Adam, and yet every son of Adam is not a
cause and fountain of sin to all others, as Adam was: and so we may say in the
case in hand. 2 The virtue that is in the head is communicated to all the
members, and yet it does not follow that every member is hereby made an head,
to communicate virtue to all the other members, as the head does: so here. 3
Though Christ's righteousness be sufficient for all the elect universally, and
for every one in particular, yet when it is applied it is not applied to every
particular person of them, as it is a price for all, but as it is a price
sufficient for himself.

Use 1 It behooveth then all the children of God to take heed of such spirits
as deny the doctrine of Imputation. Popish writers have sometimes made a jest
and a mock of this doctrine, calling imputed righteousness a putative
righteousness, a new no justice; and some others that in profession otherwise
are far from popery, yet cannot yield that there is any imputing of our sins
to Christ, or of Christ's righteousness to us. Against all which conceits, let
that be minded and considered which has here been said for the clearing of
these things. And to sober minds it should weigh much, that the term of
imputing righteousness is frequently found in Scripture, and the very word
imputing no less then nine or ten times in that one chap: of Rom: 4. though it
be englished sometimes reckoned, sometimes accounted, and sometimes imputed.

Use 2 By this we may see the great grace of God; in that we having no
righteousness of our own (and that yet without righteousness we could not be
justified,) he is graciously pleased to impute unto us the righteousness of
Christ, that by it we might be justified, and that faith should be imputed for
righteousness Had we had any works of our own that might have sufficed in this
matter, then indeed the reward might have been reckned not of grace but of
debt: but now when righteousness is accounted by faith, and is imputed to
believers without works, this does exceedingly set forth the riches and
freeness of Gods grace; Rom: 4 4, 15. and therefore it is of faith, that it
might be by grace Rom: 4. 16.

Use 3 And in as much as our sins were imputed to Christ, and the punishment
of them imposed upon him, therefore the godly have in this respect great cause
to be deeply affected with sin, and to grieve for it. For it was not Judas,
nor all the malicious Jews, no nor Herod, nor Pilate, nor all the rest of the
wicked world that could have brought Christ to his painful passion and death,
no nor have so much as touched the least hayr of his head, had not the sins of
Gods people been imputed to him and laid upon him; but he was bruised for our
iniquities: for the transgression of Gods people was he smitten, Isal 53. 5,8.
So that our sins were the cause of his sufferings; which consideration should
be a means and motive for the awaking of our hearts with godly sorrow? as it is
written Zach: 12. 10. they shall look on him whom they have peirced; and they
shall mourn therefore with bitter mourning, as a man for his only son, and for
the loss of his first born. They that do deny that when the Lord Jesus
suffered, he bare the punishment of our sins, do not a little hinder the
exercise of repentance and godly sorrow for sin, in all those in whom this
opinion takes place, there being no one consideration more effectual and
available for stirring up the exercise of this grace, then this that we are
speaking of, that our sins were the cause of Christ's sufferings, the thought
whereof should exceedingly break and melt our hearts.

Use 4 And if righteousness be imputed to believers, for their justification,
oh then how may this comfort and stay the hearts of all poor penitent
believers, and mourning souls, who can see much sin in themselves for which
they might justly be condemned, but can see nothing in themselves for which
they might be justified; and hereupon are vile in their own eyes, abhoring
themselves, looking and lamenting after Christ. Be not dismayed, all you that
are such, but be it spoken to the stay and comfort of your hearts, that though
you can not be justified by any inherent righteousness of your own, yet you may
be justified by the imputed righteousness of another. Abram we see believed in
the Lord, and it was imputed unto him for righteousness; do you then believe in
the Lord Jesus Christ, and righteousness shall be imputed unto you also, and
thereby you shall be justified, though you have no inherent righteousness of
your own, that can any thing avail for this purpose.

Use 5 Lastly if righteousness be imputed to believers for their justification,
let us then all learn highly to prize and earnestly to desire this imputed
righteousness. Shall we now content our selves with any inherent righteousness
of our own, whether inward virtues, or outward performances, and think to be
justified in the sight of God? no, no, all righteousness of ours is but as
filthy rags Isai 64. 6. there is no man living that can be justified before
God by that means, or in such a way, Psalm. 143. 2. It is the Lord Jesus who is
our righteousness, Jer: 23. 6. and he it is who is made unto us Wisdom,
Righteousness, and Redemption 1 Cor: 1. 30. and in comparison of this Lord
Jesus Christ and his righteousness which is by faith, even the righteousness
which is of God by faith, all other righteousness, all other things in the
matter of justification are but loss, and to be esteemed as dung, as they were
unto the Apostle Paul; Phil. 3. 7,8,9. And they that neglect this righteousness
without them, that it might be imputed to them, and content themselves with
their own righteonsness, inherent in them, or wrought by them, shall one day
find that they have been miserably deceived and deluded, like those that kindle
a fire unto themselves, and compass themselves about with their own sparks, but
in the end do ly down in sorrow, Isai 50. 11. Wherefore let all that fear God,
yea all that desire to walk wisely for their own everlasting comfort, seek
first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and then all other things
shall be added to them, Math: 6. 33. Yea let them hunger and thirst after
righteousness, for such are blessed and shall be filled; Math: 5. 6.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A
ABram adorned with many good works, and yet justified only by faith page 2, 12.
Attributes of God, the consideration of them, a means (...) begetting of faith.
page 24.
B
Bear iniquity, what is meant thereby. page 39,40,41. Believing in the Lord, is
not only to believe the word to be true, but also implies Relyance on God, page
1. Farther confirmation of faith called believing p. 2 To believe on Christ,
and to believe a man's self to be justified differ: p. 17,18 To believe on
Christ is not only lawful, but commanded p. 9,25. See Faith.
C
Change none in God, though he wills a change in the creature. page 20. Christ
the object of faith, p. 6,29,30 How he dyed and rose again for our
justification, p. 18,19,20. Consideration of his f^lness and freeness of grace,
a means for the begetting of faith, page 24. Comfort to believers p. 33. How it
comes to pass that believers do not always feel the comfort of a justified
estate page 34,35. how attained p. 36.
F
Faith the object of it as it justifies, page 6, 29, 30. does not justify as
a work or virtue in us p. 9. Is not the very matter or thing by which we stand
just p. 9, 10. does justify only in respect of its object, Christ, p. 10. does
all with reference to Christ; ibid. Why Love and other graces do not justify
as well as faith, Christ being the object of them also, p. 11. faith only does
justify p. 12. no actual justification before it p. 13,14,15. we are not
justified by it declaritively only page 16. should be labored for, six means
whereby p. 21, to 26. the misery of a soul without it p. 22. means for the
trial of it p. 26, etinde. Faith a supernatural grace 27. the humbled soul the
subject of it p. 28. of the fruits of it page 30,31. Forgiveness of sins, the
dreadfulness of being without it p. 3,31. the happiness of being forgiven page
32,33.
G
Gospel, what, page 2. the means of faith p. 4. what is its work in the
begetting of faith, page 4. Grace, justificatio^ is of Gods free grace page 43.
yea though we be not justified without Christ's satisfaction p. 41,42.
H
Humbled soul the subject of faith, p. 28. See sorrow for sin.
I
Imputation the form of justification, page 36. the meaning of that saying,
faith is imputed for righteousness, p. 37. Of Christ's righteousness to us p.
38,42. of our sins to Christ p. 39. and how this can stand with justice p. 41.
imputed righteousness to be sought p. 44. Justice, how to impute the sins of
one to another can stand therewith p. 41. how Justice and Mercy do accord in
justificatio^ and salvation by Christ p. 40 41. Justification the work of God
p. 6,7. can never be lost p. 7. is by faith p. 9,10. and by faith only 12. no
actual justificatio^ before faith, ten reasons p. 13 etc: objections for
justification before faith answered, p. 16, to 22. absurdities of justification
from eternity 14,15. purchased by Christ though not applied before faith p.
18,19. the blessedness of a justified estate and the contrary p. 31 to 33. how
free when it is not without Christ's satisfaction P. 41.
L
Law alone can not beget faith, and yet is necessary to prepare for faith p. 3.
Love of God eternal, yet justificatio^ and other fruits of it exhibited in time
20,21.
M
Mercy in our salvation, though it be not without the satisfaction of Christ
page 41,42. Ministry of the word a means of faith page 27. See word.
P
Promises of God, the consideration of them a mean for the begetting of faith
23. Punishment of our sins laid on Christ, and how this can stand with justice
40,41.
R
Righteousness of Christ i^pu^ed is both active and passive p. 42. we are not
as righteous as Christ, though his righteousness be imputed to us, page 42. we
should not content our selves with righteousness inherent, but seek for imputed
also p. 44. Comfort against the imperfection of our own righteousness page 44.
S
Sorrow for sin, where it is not, there is no faith 28. the sufferings of
Christ for our sins, a means of godly sorrow p. 43.
U
Ungodly how God justifies them 16.
W
Word the means of faith p. 3,4,27. why many have it and yet never attain to
faith page. 4. their case lamentable that want it, p. 5. what to be thought of
Infants, Idiots, deaf persons that can not hear the word page 4.
Errata.
In page 1. line 20. for various, read very. p 2. l. 27 28. for his, r. this.
l. 24. for the, r. this. p. 15. l. 9 for theupon, r. thereupon. p. 16. l 19 for
only that, r. only to know that. p. 25. l. 18. for were, r. was. p 26. l. 1.
for deals, r. dealt. p. 29. l. 22. for there, r. here

FINIS.

