THE BOOK OF THE GENERAL LAUUES AND LIBERTYES CONCERNING THE INHABITANTS OF THE
MASSACHUSETTS COLLECTED OUT OF THE RECORDS OF THE GENERAL COURT FOR THE SEVERAL
YEARS WHEREIN THEY WERE MADE AND ESTABLISHED; And now revised by the same Court
and disposed into an Alphabetical order and published by the same Authority in
the General Court held at Boston the fourteenth of the first month Anno 1647.

Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God and
they that resist receive to themselves damnation. Romans 13. 2. CAMBRIDGE.
Printed according to order of the GENERAL COURT. 1648.

And are to be sold at the shop of Hezekiah Usher in Boston.

TO OUR BELOVED BRETHREN AND NEIGHBORS the Inhabitants of the Massachusetts,
the Governor, Assista^^s and Deputies assembled in the General Court of that
Jurisdiction wish grace and peace in our Lord Jesus Christ.
S O soon as God had set up Political Government among his people Israel he
gave them a body of laws for judgment both in civil and criminal causes.
These were brief and fundamental principles, yet withal so full and
comprehensive as out of them clear deductions were to be drawn to all
particular cases in (...) times. For a Commonwealth without laws is like a
Ship without rigging and ^^eeradge. Nor is it suffi^i^^t to have principles or
fundamentals, but these are to be drawn out into so many of their deductions as
the time and condition of that people may have use of. And it is very (...) and
injurious to the body of the people to put them to learn their duty and
liberty from (...), nor is it enough to have laws except they be also just.
Therefore among other privileges which the Lord bestowed upon his peculiar
people, these he call them specially to consider of, that God was ne^rer to
them and their laws were more righteous then other nations. God was said to be
amongst them or near to them because of his Ordinances established by himself
and their laws righteous because himself was their Lawgiver: yet in the
comparison are employed two things, first that other nations had something of
Gods presence amongst them. Secondly that there was also somewhat of equity in
their laws, for it pleased the Father (upon the Covenant of Redemption with
his Son) to restore so much of his Image to lost man as whereby all nations are
disposed to worship God, and to advance righteousness: which appears (...) that
of the Apostle Romans 1. 21. They knew God etc: and in the 2. 14. They did by
nature the things con^eined in the law of God. But the nations corrupting his
Ordinances (both of Religion, and Justice) God withdrew his presence from them
proportionably whereby they were given up to abominable lusts Romans 2. 21.
Whereas if they had ^^alked according to that light and law of nature they might
have been preserved from such moral evils and might have enjoyed a common
blessing in all their natural and civil Ordinances: now, if ^t might have been
so with the nation who were so much strangers to the Covenant of Grace, what
advantage have they who have interest in this Covenant, and may injoye the
special presence of God in the purity and native simplicity of all his
Ordinances by which he is so near to his own people. This has been no small
privilege, and advantage to us in New England that our Churches, and civil
State have been planted, and grown up (like two (...)) together like that of
Israel ^n the wilderness by which we were put in mind (and had opportunity
put into our hands) not only to gather our Churches, and set up the Ordinances
of Christ Jesus in them according to the Apostolic pattern by such light as
the Lord graciously afforded (...), but also withal to frame our civil
Polity, and laws according to the rules of his most holy word whereby each do
help and strengthen other (the Churches the civil Authority, and the civil
Authority the Churches) and so has prosper the better without such
^emulation, and contention for privileges or priority as have proved the
misery (if not ruin) of both in some other places.

For this end about nine years since we used the help of some of the Elders of
our Churches to compose a m^dell of the Judicial laws of Moses with such
other cases as might be referred to them, with intent to make use of them in
composing our laws, but not to have them published as the laws of this
Jurisdiction: nor were they voted in Court. For that book entitled The
Liberties etc: published about seven years since (which conteines also many
laws and orders (...) for civil and criminal causes, and is commonly (though
without ground) reported to (...) our Fundamentalls that we own as
established by Authority of this Court, and that after three years experience
and general probation: and accordingly we have inserted them into this volume
under the several heads to which they belong yet not as fundamentalls, for
diverse of him (...) been repealed, or altered, and more may justly (...) shall
discover defects or inconveniences for N^h^l simul natum et perfectum. The same
must we say of this present Volume, we have not published it as a perfect body
of laws sufficient to carry on the Government established for future time nor
could it be expected that we should promise such a thing. For if it be no
disparagement to the wisdom of that High Court of Parliament in England that
in four hundred years they could not so compile their laws, and regulate
proceedings in Courts of justice etc: but that they had still new work to do of
the same kind almost every Parliament: there can be no just cause to blame a
poor Colonie (being in furnished of Lawyers and Statesmen) that in eighteen
years has produced no more, nor letter rules for a good, and settled Government
then this Book holds forth. nor have you (our Brethren and Neighbors) any
cause, whether you look back upon our Native Country, or take your observation
by other States, and Common wealths its Europe) to complain of such as you
have employed in this service; for the time which has been spent in making
laws, and repealing and altering them so often, nor of the charge which the
Country has been put to for those occasions, the Civilian gives you a
satisf^ctorie reason of such continual alterations additions etc: Crescit in
Orb dolus.

These Laws which were made successively in diverse former years, we have
reduced under several heads in an alphabeticall method, that so they might the
more readilye be found, and that the diverse laws concerning one matter being
placed together the scope and intent of the whole and of every of them might
the more easily be apprehended: we must confess we have not been so exact in
placing every law under its most proper title as we might, and would have been:
the reason was our hasty endeavor to satisfy your longing expectation, and
frequent complaints for want of such a volume to be published in print: wherein
(upon every occasion) you might readily see the rule which you ought to walk
by. And in this (we hope) you will find satisfaction, by the help of the
references under the several heads, and the Table which we have added in the
end. For such laws and orders as are not of general concernment we have not
put them into this book, but they remain still in force, and are to be seen in
the book of the Records of the Court, but all general laws not here inserted
nor mentioned to be still of force are to be accounted repealed.

You have called us from amongst the rest of our Brethren and given us power
to make these laws: we must now call upon you to see them executed: remembering
that old and true proverb, The execution of the law is the life of the law. If
one sort of you viz: non-Freemen should object that you had no hand in calling
us to this work, and therefore think your selves not bound to obedience etc. We
answer that a subsequent, or implicit consent is of like force in this case, as
an express precedent power: for in putting your persons and estates into the
protection and way of subsistence held forth and exercised within this
Jurisdiction, you do^^^citly submit to this Government and to all the wholesome
laws thereof, and so is the common repute in all nations and that upon this
Maxim. Qui sentit commodum sentire debet et onus.

If any of you meet with some law that seems not to tend to your particular
benefit, you must consider that laws are made with respect to the whole
people, and not to each particular person: and obedience to them must be
yielded with respect to the common welfare, not to thy private advantage, and
as thou yeil^est obedience to the law for common good, but to thy disadvantage:
so another must observe some other law for thy good, though to his own^ damage;
thus must we be content to bear ^anothers burden and so fulfill the Law of
Christ.

That distinction which is put between the Laws of God and the laws of men,
becomes a share to many as it is mis-applyed in the ordering of their obedience
to civil Authority; for when the Authority is of God and that in way of an
Ordinance Romans 13. 1. and when the administration of it is according to
deductions, and rules gathered from the word of God, and the clear light of
nature in civil nations, surely there is no humane law that tends to common
good (according to those principles) but the same is ^ediately a law of God,
and that in way of an Ordinance which all are to submit unto and that for
conscience sake. Romans 13. 5.

By order of the General Court. INCREASE NOWEL SECR.

THE BOOK OF THE GENERAL LAUUES AND LIBERTYES CONCERNING etc:
F ORASMUCH as the free fruition of such Liberties, Immunities, privileges as
human^tie, civili^ie and christianity call for as due to every man in his
place, and proportion, without impeachm^t and infringement has ever been, and
ever will be the tranquillity and stability of Churches and Comon-wealths; and
the denial or deprivall thereof (...) disturbance, if not ruin of both:

It is therefore ordered by this Court, and Authority thereof, That no man's life
shall be taken away; no man's honor or good name shall be stained; no man's
person shall be arrested, restrained, bannished, dismembered nor any ways
punished; no man shall be deprived of his wife or children; no man's goods or
estate shall be taken away from him; nor any ways indamaged under color of Law
or countenance of Authority unles it be by the virtue or equity of some
express law of the Country warranting the same established by a General Court
and sufficiently published; or in case of the defect of a law in any particular
case by the word of God. And ^n capital cases, or in cases concerning
disme^bring or banishm^t according to that word to be judged by the General
Court [1641

Ability.
All persons of the age of twenty one years, Exc^m^^i^at^ and condemned persons
may dispose of their estates
and of right understanding and memory whether excommunicate, condemned or
other, shall have full power and liberty to make their Wills and Testaments
and other lawful Alienations of their lands and estates. [1641] see children.

Actions.
All Actions of debt, accounts, slander, and Actions of the case concerning
debts and accounts shall henceforth ^e tried where the Plantiffe pleases; where
all act (...) shall be tried.
so it be in the jurisdiction of that Court where the Plantiffe, or Defendant
dwellethe unles by consent under both their hands it appear they would have
the case tried in any other Court. All other Actions shall be tried within that
jurisdiction where the cause of the Action does ar^se. [1642]

2 It is ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, That every person
impleading another in any court of Assistants, Fees 10 ss.
or County court shall pay the sum of ten shillings before his case be entered,
unles the court ^ee cause to admit any to sue in form^ pauper^s. [1642]

3 It is ordered by the Authority aforesaid, That where the debt or damage
recovered shall amount to ten pounds in every such case to pay five shillings
more, and where it shall amount to twenty pounds or upward there to pay ten
shillings more then the first ten shillings, more 5 ss.
which said additions shall be put to the judgment and Execution to be levied
by the Marshall and accounted for to the Treasurer. more 10 ss.
[1647]

4 In all actions brought to any court the Plantiffe shall have liberty to
withdraw his action or to be non-suted before the Jurie have given in their
verdict; Liberty to withdraw or be nonsuted.
in which case he shall always pay full cost and charges to the Defendant, and
may afterward renew his suit at another Court. [1641] see Causes. see Records.

Age.
It is ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that the age for
passing away of land, or such kind of hered^taments, or for giving of votes,
verdicts or sentences in any civil courts or causes, Full age and Age of
discretion.
shall be twenty and one years: but in case of choosing of Guardions, fourteen
years. [1641 1647]

Ana-Baptists.
Forasmuch as experience has plentifully and often proved that since the first
arising of the Ana-baptists about a hundred years past they have been the
Incendiaries of Commonwealth and the Infectors of persons in main matters of
Religion, and the Troublers of Churches in most places where they have been,
and that they who have held the baptizing of Infants ^lawful, have usually held
other errors or heresies together therewith (though as heretics use ^o do they
have concealed the same until they espied a fit advantage and opportunity to
vent them by way of question or scruple) and whereas (...) of this kind^ have
since out coming into New England appeared amongst our selves, some whereof as
(...) before them have (...) the Ordinance of (...) of making wa^re, (...) the
law (...) of Magistrate^ (...), and (...) Inspection (...) breach of the first
Table: which opinions if co^^ved a^ by us are like to be increased among us and
so necessarily bring (...) and trouble to the Churches and hazard to the whole
Commonwealth.

It is therefore ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, that if any person
or persons within this ^urisdiction shall either openly condemn or oppose the
baptizing of Infants, Oppose Bapt; etc.
or go about secretly to seduce others from the approbation o^ use thereof, or
shall purposely depart the Congregation at the administration of that Ordinance;
or shall de^^y the Ordinance of Magistracy, or their lawful (...) or to punish
the outward breaches of the first Table, continue obstinate. Banished.
and shall (...) and obstinately to continue therein, after (...) persons shall
be (...) ^anishment. [1644]

Appeal.
It is ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that it shall (...) of
every (...), condemned, or (...) many (...) Court (...) to the Court (...) As
all (...) to appeal from the (...) other persons deputed to (...) and determine
small (...), Appeal to shire Courts.
(...) Jurisdiction where the cause was determined. Provided they tender their
(...) and put in (...) of the Court or other (...) Appeals to prosecute into
(...) and also to satisfy all damages before (...) which shall not be (...)
after judgment, Security to prosecute etc. Execution respited.
except by (...) of the (...) and if the cause be of a criminal and not capital
nature [in which case we admit (...) or three of six or seven, Criminal causes
or (...) of (...) number of Magistrate^ or other (...) then present shall
actually (...)] then also to (...) for the good behavior and appearance at the
same time, (...)
And if the (...) of appeal be in matter of law (...) to be determined by the
(...). Ma^ter of [Law [Fact
(...) the (...) and (...). And (...) further ordered (...) all appeal^ with
the secur^^^ (...) foresaid shall be recorded at the charge of the party
appealing and certified unto the Court to which they are (...).

2 Whereas the (...) is put to great charges by this Court's attending su^es
(...) or renewed either by appeal, (...)
petition or review* It is ordered by this Court etc* Authority (...), That in
all such cases if it appear to the Court that the Plantiffe (...) any such
action, (...)
appeal, petition or review has no just cause of any such proceeding the said
Plantiffe shall bear the whole charges of the Court both for (...) and expenses
which? they shall judge to have been expended by his occasion: and may further
impose (...) fine^ upon him as the merit of the cause shall require, (...)
but if they shall find the Defendant in* fault they shall impose the charges
upon such Defendant. [1642] [1647] (...) Highways. see Lying* see Town-ships;
(...)

Appearance Non-apearance.
It is ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, That no man shall be
punished for not appearing at or before any civil Assembly, Court, Council,
Magistrate or Officer; not for the omission of any Office o^ service if he
shall be necessarily hindered by any apparent act or providence of God which he
could neither foresee nor avoid: (...)
provided that this law shall not prejudice any person of his just cost and
damage in any civil (...) [1641] see Arms. see Indians. see Military. see
Summons.

Arrests.
It is ordered and decreed by this Court and Authority thereof, That no man's
person shall be arrested or imprisoned for any debt or fine if the law can
find any competent (...) of satisfaction otherwise from his estate. None
arrested or imprisoned.
And if not his person may be arrested and imprisoned, where he shall be kept
at his own charge, not the Plantiffs, till satisfaction be made; unles the
Court that had cognizance of the cause or some s^per our Court shall otherwise
determine: provided nevertheless that no man's person shall be kept in prison
for debt but when there appears some estate which he will not produce, to which
end any Court or Commissioners authorized by the General Court may administer
an oath to the party or any others suspected to be privy in concealing his
estate, but shall satisfy by service if the Creditor require it but shall not
be sold to any but of the English nation. [1641: 1647] see sect 1. page 1.

Attachments.
It is ordered by this Court and Authority thereof that no attachment shall be
granted in any civil action to any Forreigner against a settled Inhabitant in
this Jurisdiction before he has given sufficient security or caution to
prosecute his action and to answer the defendant such costs as the Court shall
award him. Forreigner shall not attach Inhabit^^s ^out cautio^.
And further it is ordered that in all attachments of good^ and chattel, or of
lands, or hereditaments legal notice shall be given unto the party or left in
writing at his house, or place of usual abode, otherwise the suit shall not
proceed; notwithstanding if he be out of this Jurisdiction the cause shall then
proceed to trial, Respit of judgment
but judgment shall not be entered before the next court. Of execution.
And if the Defendant do nor then appear judgment shall be entered but
execution shall not be granted before the Plantiffe has given security to be
responsall to the Defendant if ^e ^h^ll reverse the judgment within one year
or such further time as the Court shall (...). 1644] see actions. see El^w^uts.
see Presidents. see Rates. see Recorder.

Bakers.
It is ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, that henceforth every Baker
shall have a distinct mark for his bread, and keep the true assizes as
hereafter is expressed viz. When wheat is ordinarily sold at these several
rates hereafter mentioned the pen^ie white loaf by averdupois weight shall
weigh when wheat is by the busheli -- at 3 ss. 0 d. The white 11 o^ces 1 qr.
wheaten 17 o^c. 1 qr. household 23 o^c. 0. at 3 6 10 1 15 1 20 2. at 4 0 09 1
14 0 18 2. at 4 6 08 1 11 3 16 2. at 5 0 07 3 11 2 15 2. at 5 6 07 0 10 2 14 0.
at 6 0 06 2 10 0 13 0. at 6 6 06 0 09 2 12 2. and so proportionably: Penalty.
under the penalty of forfeiting all such bread as shall not be of the
several assizes as is aforementioned to the use of the poor of the town where
the offense is committed, and otherwise as is hereafter expressed: and for the
better execution of this present Order; Clerk of market. Their power.
there shall be in every market town, and all other towns needful, one or
two able persons annually chosen by each town, who shall be sworn at the next
county Court. or by the next Magistrate, unto the faithful discharge of his or
their office; who are heerby authorized to enter into all houses, either with a
Constable or without where they shall suspect or be informed of any bread baked
for sale: and also to weigh the said bread as often as they see cause: Butter.
and to seize all such as they find defective. As also to weigh all butter
made up for sale; and bringing unto, or being in the town or market to be
sold by weight: which if found light after notice once given shall be
forfeited in like manner. bread not marked. Clerks fee.
The like penalty shall be for not marking all bread made for sale. and the
said officer shall have one third part of all forfeiture, for his pa^nes; the
rest to the poor as aforesaid. [1646]

Ballast.
It is ordered by this Court and Authority thereof; that no ballast shall be
taken from any town shore by any person whatsoever without allowance under the
hands of the select men upon the penalty of sixpence for every shovel-full so
taken; Penalty.
unles such stones as they had laid there before. 2 It is also ordered by the
Authority aforesaid; that no ship nor other vessel shall cast out any ballast
in the chanel, Penalty.
or other place inconvenient, in any Harbor within this Jurisdiction upon the
penalty of ten pounds. [1646-1642]

Barratri^.
It is ordered, decreed and by this Court declared; that if any man be proved
and judged a common barrater, vexing others with unjust, frequent and endless
suits: ^t shall be in the power of Courts both to reject his cause and to
punish him for his Barratri^. [1641]

Benevolence.
It is decreed, that this Court hereafter will grant no benevolence, except in
foreign occasions and when there is money in the Treasury sufficient and our
debts first satisfied. [1641]

Bills.
It is ordered by the Authority of this Court that any debt, or debts due upon
bill, or other specialtie assigned to another; shall be as good a debt and
estate to the Assignee as it was to the Assigner at the time of it is
assignation. And that it shall be lawful for the said Assignee to sue for and
recover the said debt, due upon bill, and so assigned, as fully as the
original creditor might have done, provided the said assignement be made upon
the backside of the bill or specialtie. [1647] see usur^e.

Bond-slavery.
It is ordered by this Court and authority thereof, that there shall never be
any bond-slavery, villenage or captivity amongst us; unless it be lawful
captives, taken in just wars, and such strangers as willingly fell themselves,
or are sold to us: and such shall have the libertyes and christian usages
which the law of God established in Israel concerning such persons does
morally require, provided, this exempts (...) from servitude who shall be
judged thereto by Authority. [1641]

Bound, of towns and persons.
Forasmuch as the bounds of towns and of the lands of particular persons are
carefully to be maintained, and not without great danger to be removed by any,
which notwithstanding by deficiency and decay of marks, may at unawars be done,
whereby great jealousies of persons, trouble in towns and encumbrances in
courts ^o often arise, which by due care and means might be prevented: --

It is therefore ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that every
town shall set out their bounds within twelve months after their bounds are
granted. Boun^^es of town set out within 12 mon.
And that when their bounds are once set out: once in the year three or more
persons of a town, Perambulation.
appointed by the select men, shall appoint with the adjacent towns to go the
bounds betwixt their said towns, and renew their marks; which marks shall be a
great heap of stones, or a trench of six foot long and two foot broad. The most
ancient town to give notice of the time and place of meeting for this
perambulation. In 1 or 2 (...) on pain of 5 (...)
Which time shall be in the first or second month, upon pain of five pounds
for every town that shall neglect the same; provided that the three men
appointed for perambulation shall go in their several quarters by order of
the Select men and at the charge of the several towns.

And it is further ordered that if any particular proprietor of lands lying in
common with others shall refuse to go the bounds betwixt his land and other
men's once a year in the first or second month, Particular per (...):
being requested thereunto upon one weeks warning, he shall forfeit for every
day so neglecting, Penalty 10 ss.
ten shillings, half to the party moving thereto, the other half to the
town. [1641 1647]

Burglarie and Theft.
Forasmuch as many persons of late years have been, and are apt to be injurious
to the goods and lives of others, notwithstanding all care and means to
prevent and punish the same; --

It is therefore ordered by this Court and Authority thereof that if any person
shall commit Burglarie by breaking up any dwelling house, House, field or high
ways. First offense.
or shall rob any person in the field, or high ways; such a person so
offending shall for the first offense be branded on the forehead with the
letter ( B) If he shall offend in the same kind the second time, Third offense
death.
he shall be branded as before and also be severally whipped: and if he shall
fall into the like offense the third time he shall be put to death, as being
incorrigible. And if any person shall commit such Burglarie, or rob in the
fields or house on the Lords day besides the former punishments, he shall for
the first offense have one of his ears cut off. Lords (...)
And for the second offense in the same kind he shall loose his other ear in
the same manner. And if he fall into the same offense a third time he shall be
put to death if it appear to the Court he did it presumptuously. [1642 1647]

2 For the prevention of Pilfring and Theft, [orchard Rob [[ [garden Steal
goods.
it is ordered by this Court and Authority thereof; that if any person shall be
taken or known to rob any orchard or garden, that shall hurt, or steal away any
grafts or fruit trees, fruits, linen, woollen, or any other goods left out in
orchards, gardens, backsides, or any other place in house or fields: or shall
steal any wood or other goods from the waterside, Treble damage.
from men's doors, or yards; he shall forfeit treble damage to the owners
thereof. And if they be children, or servants that shall trespass heerin,
Whipped.
if their parents or masters will not pay the penalty before expressed, they
shall be openly whipped. And forasmuch as many times i^ so falls out that small
thefts and other offenses of a criminal nature, are committed both by English
and Indian, in towns remote from any prison, or other fit place to which such
malefactors may be committed till the next Court, One Magistr^ may hear and
determine.
it is therefore heerby ordered; that any Magistrate upon complaint made to him
may hear, and upon due proof determine any such small offenses of the aforesaid
nature, according to the laws here established, and give warrant to the
Constable of that town where the offender lives to levy the same: provided the
damage or fine exceed not forty shillings: provided also it shall be lawful
for either party to appeal to the next Court to be holden in that
Jurisdiction, Appeal. Magistrate and Cost: to make return
giving sufficient caution to prosecute the same to effect at the said Court.
And every Magistrate shall make return yearly to the Court of that
Jurisdiction wherein he lives of what cases he has so ended. stocks or whip
And also the Constables of all such fines as they have received. And where the
offender has nothing to satisfy (...) Magistrate may punish by stocks, or
whipping as the cause shall deserve, Servants and workmen.
not exceeding ten stripes. It is also ordered that all servants and workmen
imbeazling the goo^^ (...) masters, or such as set them on work shall make
restitution and be liable to all law^^ and penalties as other men. [1646]

CAPITAL LAWS.
IF any man after legal conviction shall HAVE OR WORSHIP any other God, but the
LORD GOD: Idolatry.
he shall be put to death. Exodus 22. 20 Deuteronomy. 13. 6. and 10. Deuteronomy. 17. 2. 6.

2 If any man or woman be a WITCH, Witchcraft.
that is, has or consulteth with a familiar spirit, they shall be put to
death. Exodus 22. 18. Levit. 20. 27. Deuteronomy. 1^. 10. 11.

3 If any person within this Jurisdiction whether Christian or Pagan shall
wittingly and willingly presume to BLASPHEME the holy Name of God, Blasphemy.
Father, Son or Holy Ghost, with direct, express, presumptuous, or high-handed
blasphemy, either by wilful or obstinate denying the true God, or his
Creation, or Government of the world: or shall curse God in like manner, or
reproach the holy Religion of God as if it were but a politic device to keep
ignorant men in awe; or shall utter any other kind of Blasphemy of the like
nature and degree they shall be put to death. Levit. 24. 15. 16.

4 If any person shall commit any wilful MURDER, which is Man slaughter,
committed upon premeditate malice, Murder.
hatred, or cruelty not in a man's necessary and just defense, nor by mere
casualty against his will, he shall be put to death. Exodus 21. 12. 13. Numb.
35. 31.

5 If any person slays another suddenly in his ANGER, or CRUELTY of passion,
he shall be put to death. Levit. 24. 17. Numb. 35. 20. 21.

6 If any person shall slay another through guile, either by POISONING, or
other such devilish practice, Poisoning.
he shall be put to death. Exodus 21. 14.

7 If any man or woman shall LIE WITH ANY BEAST, ^^stialitie.
or bruit creature, by carnal copulation; they shall surely be put to death:
and the beast shall be slain, and buried, and not eaten. Lev. 20. 15. 16.

8 If any man LIES WITH MANKIND as he lies with a woman, both of them have
committed abomination, Sodomi^^ Genis. 19. 5.
they both shall surely be put to death: unles the one party were forced (or be
under fourteen years of age in which case he shall be seveerly punished) Levit.
20. 13.

9 If any person commit ADULTERY with a married, Adultery.
or espoused wife; the Adulterer and Adulteress shall surely be put to death.
Lev. 20. 19. and 18. 20. Deu. 22. 23. 27.

10 If any man STEALS A MAN, Man-stealing.
or Mankind, he shall surely be put to death Exodus 21. 16.

11 If any man rise up by FALSE-WITNES wittingly, False-wittnes.
and of purpose to take away any man's life he shall be put to death. Deuteronomy. 19.
16. 18. 16.

12 If any man shall CONSPIRE, Conspi^a^ie.
and attempt any Invasion, Insurrection, or public Rebellion against our
Commonwealth: or shall endeavor to surprise any Town, or Towns, ^ort, or
Forts therein; or shall treacherously, and perfidiously attempt the Alteration
and Subversion of our frame of Polity, or Government fundamentally he shall be
put to death. Numb. 16. 2 Samuel 3. 2 Samuel 18. 2 Samuel 20.

13 If any child, Child curse or smite (...)
or children, above sixteen years old, and of sufficient understanding, shall
CURSE, or SMITE their natural FATHER, or MOTHER; he or they shall be put to
death: unles it can be sufficiently testified that the Parents have been very
unchristianly negligent in the education of such children; or so provoked them
by extreme, and cruel correction; that they have been forced thereunto to
preserve themselves from death or maiming. Exodus 21. 17. Lev. 20. 9. Exodus 21.
15.

14 If a man have a stubborn or REBELLIOUS SON, Rebellious So^
of sufficient years and ^derstanding ( viz.) sixteen years of age, which will
not obey the voice of his Father, or the voice of his Mother, and that when
they have chastened him will not harken unto them: then shall his Father and
Mother being his natural par^^ts, lay hold on him, and bring him to the
Magistrates assembled in Court and testify unto them, that their Son is
stubborn and rebellious and will not obey their voice and chastisement, but
lives in sundry notorious crimes, such a son shall be put to death. Deuteronomy. 21.
20. 21.

15 If any man shall RAVISH any maid or single woman, (...)
committing carnal copulation with her by force, against her own will; that is
above the age of ten years he shall be punished either with death, or (...)
greiv^^^ (...) according to circumstances as the Judges, or General court shall
determine. [1641]

Cask and Cooper.
It is ordered by this Court and authority thereof, (...).
that all cask used for any liquor, fish, (...)
or (...) to be put to sale shall be of London assize, and that fit persons
shall be appointed from time to time in all places needful, to gage all such
vessels or cask (...) such (...) shall be found of due assize shall be marked
with the Gagers mark, (...).
and no other who shall have for his ^^ines four pence for every tun, Who shall
appoint Gager.
and so proportionably. And every County court or any one Magistrate upon
notice given them shall appoint such Gagers ^o view the said cask, Coopers brand
and to see that they be right, and of found and well seasoned tim^er, and that
every Cooper have a distinct brand-mark on his own cask, upon pain of
forfeiture of twenty shilling in either case, and so proportio^ably for lesser
vessels. [1642 1647]

Cattle. Cornfieldsd, Fences.
It is ordered by this Court and authority thereof, each petty make good his
(...).
That in all cornfieldsd, which are enclosed in common: every party
interested therein, shall from time to time make good his part of the fence,
(...)-catle put in till corn be out
and shall not put in any cattle, so long as any corn shall be upon any part of
it, upon pain to answer all the damage which shall come, thereby. [1647]

2 Where (...) that there has been much trouble and difference in several
towns, Occupiers of land may orde^ (...)
about the fencing, planting, sowing, feeding and ordering of common fields, It
is therefore ordered by the Court and authority thereof, that where the
occupiers of the land, or of the greatest part thereof (...) agree about the
fencing or improvm^t of such their said fields, that the the Select men in the
several towns shall order the same, or in case where no such ^xe, then the major
part of the Freem^n (with what convenient speed they may) shall determine any
such difference, ^xe: party: (...).
as may arise upon any informatio^ given them by the said occupiers, excepting
such occupier's land as shall be sufficiently fenced in by it self, which any
occupier of land may lawfully do^. [1643.1647]

3 Whereas this Court has long since provided that all men shall since their
corn, meadow ground and such like against great cattle, to the end the increase
of cattle especially of cowes and their breed should not be hindered, there
being then but few horses in the country, which since are much increased, many
whereof run in a sort wild, doing much damage in corn and other things,
notwithstanding fences made up according to the true intent of the order in
that case established: many whereof are unknown, most so unruly that they can by
no means be caught, or got into custody, whereby their owners might answer
damages: and if sometimes with much difficulti^ and charge they be; they are in
danger of perishing before the owner appears or can be found out: all which to
prevent.

It is ordered by this Court and authority thereof; That every town and
peculiar in this Jurisdictio^ shall henceforth give some distinct Brand-mark
appointed by this court (a coppie of which marks each Clerk of writs in every
town shall keep a record of) upon the horn, or left buttock or shoulder of all
their cattle which feed in open common without constant keepers, Double damage.
whereby it may be known to what town they do belong. And if any trespass not
so marked they shall pay double damages: nor shall any person knowing, or after
due notice given of any beast of his to be unruly in respect of fences, suffer
him or them to go in c^mon or against com fields, or other impropriate enclosed
grounds fenced as aforesaid, Fetters.
without such shackles or fetters as may restrein and prevent trespass therein
by them from time to time. And if any horse or other beast trespass in corn,
or other enclosure being fenced in such sort as secures against cows, oxen and
such like orderly cattle: the party or parties trespassed shall procure two
sufficient Inhabitants of that town, of good repute and credit to view and
adjudge the harms, (...) viewed
which the owner of the beast shall satisfy, when known, upon reasonable
demand, whether the beast were impounded or not. But if the owner be known, or
near residing as in the same town or the like, he shall forthwith have notice
of the trespass and damage charged upon him, that if he approve not thereof he
may nominate one such man, who with one such other chosen by the party
damnified as aforesaid, shall review and adjudge the said harms, provided they
agree of damage within one day after due notice given, and that no after harms
intervene to hinder it. Which being forth with discharged, together with the
charge of the notice, Notice of damage.
former view and determination of damages, the first judgment shall be void,
or else to stand good in law. And if any cattle be found damage faisant, Damage
faisant
the party damnified may i^pound or keep them in his own private close, or
yard till ^e may give notice to the owner, and if they cannot agree, the owner
may replev^e them, or the other party may retu^ them to the owner and take his
remedy according to law. [1647]

4 It is ordered by the authority of this Court that for all harms done by
goats, Goats shall pay double damage
there shall be double damage allowed: and that any goats taken in corn or
gardens, the owners of such corn or gardens may keep or use the said goats till
full satisfaction be made by the owners of such goats. [1646]

5 Forasmuch as complaints have been made of a veri^ evil practice, of some
disordered persons in the country* who use to take other m^ns horses,
sometimes upon the commons and sometimes out of their own grounds, and
^^closures, and rid^ them at their pleasure without any leave or priva^e of the
owners:

It is therefore ordered and enacted by the authority of this Court, Unruly
taken
that whosoever shall take any other man's horse, mare, ass or drawing beast,
either out of his enclosure, or upon any common or elsewhere, (except such be
taken dam^^^ faisant and disposed of according to law) without leave of the
owner: and shall ride or use the same, he shall pay to the party wronged,
treble damages, Penalty.
or if the complainant shall desire it then to pay only ten shillings, Corporal
punishment One Magistr: power.
and such as have not to make satisfaction, shall be punished by whipping,
imprisonment, or otherwise as by law shall be adjudged, and any one Magistrate
or County court may hear etc determine the same. [1647]

6 For the better preserving of corn from damage by all kind of cattle, and
that all fences of corn fields may from time to time be sufficiently upheld and
maintained;

It is therefore ordered that the Select men of every town within this
Jurisdiction shall appoint from year to year two (or more if need require) of
the Inhabitants thereof to view the common fences of every their corn fields,
(...) m^n to appoint m^n to viewfen^:
to the end, to take due notice of the real defects and insufficient thereof,
give notice of defects. Owners to mend in 6 days else Viewers to have doubl pay
who shall forth with acquaint the owners thereof with the same: and if the said
owners do not within six days time or otherwise as the Select men shall
appoint, sufficiently repair their said defective senses, then the said two or
more Inhabitants appointed as aforesaid shall forth with repair or renew them
and shall have double recompense, for all their labor, care, cost and trouble,
to be paid by the owners of the said insufficient fence or fences, and shall
have warrant from the said Select men directed to the Constable to levy the
same, either upon the corn or other estate of the delinquent. upon due proof
Provided the defect of the fence or fences be sufficiently proved by two or
three witnesses. [1647]

7 Where lands lie in common unfenced, if one man shall improve his lands by
fencing in several and another shall not, Pa^^itio^ fenc.
be who shall so improve shall secure his land against other men's cattle; and
shall not compel such as join upon him to make any fence with him; except he
shall also improve in several as the other does. And where one man shall
improve before his neighbor and so make the whole fence, if after his said
neighbor shall improve also, he shall then satisfy for half the others fence
against him, according to the present value and shall maintain the same: and if
the first man shall after lay open his said field, then the said neighbor shall
injoye his said half fence so purchased to his own use, and shall also have
liberty to buy the other half fence paying according to present valuation to
be set by two men chosen by either party one: the like order shall be where any
man shall improve land against any town common. provided this order shall not
extend to house lots not exceeding ten acres, House lots not exe: 10 acrs.
but if in such, one shall improve, his neighbor shall be compellable to make
and maintain one half of the fence between them whether he improve or not. In
(...) fence not d^m: exc: by swine calve unruly cattle, or wilful spoil
Provided also that no man shall be liable to satisfy for damage done in any
ground not sufficiently fenced except it shall be for damage done by swine or
calves under a year old, or unruly cattle which will not be restreined by
ordinary fences, or where any man shall put his cattle, or otherwise
voluntarily trespass upon his neighbors ground, and if the party damnified
find the cattle damage faisant he may impound or otherwise dispose of them as
in Sect: 3. [1642]

Causes. Small causes.
For easing the charge and encumbrance of courts by small causes, It is ordered
by this Court and authority thereof, That any Magistrate in the town where he
dwells may hear and determine by his discretion (not by Jurie) according to the
laws here established, One Magistr: may end can not exc: 40 ss
all causes arising in that County wherein the debt, trespass or damage does
not exceed forty shillings, who may fend for parties, and witnesses by
Su^mons or Attachment directed to the Constable who shall faithfully execute
the same. And it is further ordered that in such towns where no Magistrate
dwells, or 3 (...):
the Court of Assistant or County court for each Shire shall from time to time
upon request of the said towns signified under the hands of the Constable
appoint three of the Freemen as Commissioners to such cases any two whereof
shall have like power to bear and determine by their (...) (not by Jurie) all
such causes aforesaid according to the laws here established, send for partys
and witnesses. give oath to witnesses.
who also have heerby power to send for part as and witnesses by So^mons or
Attachment directed to the Constable, as also to administer oaths to witnesses
and to give (...) the Defend^^ to answer if they see cause, Co^mis: may charg
Constable: with party in some cases.
and if the party sentenced refuse to give (...) own ^^nd for appearance or
satisfaction where no goods appear in the same town where the Plantiffe or
Defendant dwells, they may charge the Constable with the party to carry him
before a Magistrate or Shire court (if then sitting) to be further proceeded
with according to law; but the said three men may not commit to prison in any
case. (...) in any town at pl^ lib
And it is further ordered that such as be found in any town shall be liable to
be sued in that town at liberty of the Plantiff.

And forasmuch as the Governor, Deputy Governor and Assistants are under an
oath of God for dispensing equal justice according to law, (...) and Commis:
swo^^.
It is ordered by the Authority aforesaid; that henceforth all Associates for
County courts when and where there be any; and all such Freem^ authorized as
aforesaid, shall be sworn before each Shire court, or some Magistrate in that
County unto the faithful discharge of the trust and power committed to them.
And it is further ordered by the Authority aforesaid, that in all small causes
as aforesaid, Cau: concer: Magistr: and (...):
where only one Magistrate dwells within the town, and the cause concerns
himself, as also in such towns where no Magistrate is, and the cause concerns
any of the three Freemen aformentioned, Sell: men may end.
that in such cases the five, seven, or other number of Selected townsmen shall
have power to hear and determine the same: and also to grant execution for the
levying, and gathering up such damages, for the use of the person damnified.
court reject such cause if not first heard as a^ors.
And any Court may reject any such cause shall the cases beforementioned in
this law, if it were not first brought to the power heerby authorized in towns
to end the same. [1647]

Charges public.
Is is ordered by this Court that no Governor, Magi: and offic: charges
Deputy Gove^: Assistant, Associate, Grand, o^ Petty Jurie-man, at any court;
nor any Deputy for the General court, not any Co^missioner for martial
d^sciplin at the time of their public meetings; shall at any time bear his own
charges: but their necessary expenses shall be defrayed either by the town, how
defrayed
or the Shire on whose service they are, or by the Country in general. [1634.
1641]

2 It is ordered by this Court that in all ordinary public works of the
Co^mon-weal, one Assistant and the Overseer of the work shall have power to send
their warrants to the Constables of the next towns to send so many laborers
and artificers as the warrant shall direct, Publ: works
which the Constable and two other or more of the Freemen which he shall take
to himself shall forthwith execute: for which service such Assistant and
Overseer aforsaid shall have power to give such extraordinary wages as they
shall judge the work to deserve. suitable wages
Provided that for any ordinary work no man shall be compelled to work from home
above a week together. And for all extraordinary public works it is ordered
that one Assistant and the Overseer of the said work shall have power to send
their warrants to the Constable of any town for so many men of any condi^^^
except Magistrates and Officers of Churches and Commonwealth, persons exe^:
as the warrant shall direct, which the Constable and two or more that he shall
choose shall forthwith send: to advise and att^d the same. 1634

3 This Court taking into consideration the necessity of an equal contribution
to all common charges in towns, and observing that the chief occasion of the
defect heerin arises from hence, that many of those who are not Freemen, nor
members of any Church do take advantage thereby to withdraw their help in such
voluntary contributions as are in use.

It is therefore ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, Every Inhabi: pay
to ch^^^ and co^mon-weal.
That every Inhabitant shall henceforth contribute to all charges both in
Church and Commonwealth whereof he does or may receive benefit: and every such
Inhabitant who shall not voluntarily contribute proportionably to his ability
with the Freemen of the same town to all common charges both civil and
ecclesiastical shall be compelled thereto by assessment and distress to be
levied by the Constable or other Officer of the town as in other cases: or
distreined
and that the lands and estates of all men (wherever they dwell) shall be rated
for all town charges both civil and ecclesiastical as aforesaid where the
lands and estates shall lie: Land and (...) to pay where they are.
their persons where they dwell. [1636 1643 1644]

4 For a more equal (...) ready way of caysing means for defraying public
charges in time to come: and for preventing such inconveniences as have fallen
out upon former assessments; It is ordered and enacted by the authority of
this Court, Rates. Tres: to send war: to towns every 6 mon:
That the Treasurer for the time being shall from year to year in the first
month without expecting any other order send forth ^us warrants to the
Constables and Select men of every town within this Jurisdiction, requiring the
Constable to call together the Inhabitants of the town who being so assembled:
shall choose some one of their Freemen to be a Commissioner for the town, who
together with the Select men for their prudential affairs shall some time or
times in the sixth month then next ensuing make a List of all the male persons
in the same town, from sixteen years old and upwards; and a true estimation of
all personal and real estate, being, or reputed to be the estate of all and
every the persons in the same town, or otherwise under their custody, or
managing according to just valuation, and to what person; the same do belong
whether in their own town or other where, so near as they ca^ by all lawful
ways and means which they may use. viz: of houses, lands of all sorts as well
unbroken up as other (except such as does or shall lie common for free feed of
cattle to the use of the inhabitants in general whether belonging to towns, or
particular persons but not to be kept or hearded up^ it to the damage of the
Proprietors) mills, ships and all small vessels, merchantable goods, cranes,
wharfes and all sorts of cattle and all other town estate whatsoever; All known
and visible estate
as also all visible estate either at sea or on shore all which persons and
estates are by the said Commissioners and Select men to be assessed, and rated
as here follows viz: every person aforesaid except Magistrates and Elders of
Churches, Persons exempts fr^ pol money 1 d. in the (...). upon estate.
two shillings sixpence by the head, and all estates both the real and
personal at one penny for every twenty shillings, according to the rates of
cattle hereafter mentioned. And for a more certain rule in rating of cattle:
every cow of four year old and upward shall be valued at five pounds, Rates
of cattle
every heifer, and steer betwixt three and four years old four pounds, and
between two and three years old at fifty shillings, and between one and two
years thirty shillings: every or and bull of four year old and upward six
pounds. Every horse and more of four year old and upward seven pounds, of
three year old five pou^ds between two and three year old three pounds, of one
year old forty shillings. Every sheep above one year old thirty shillings:
every goat above one year old eight shillings: every swine above one year old
twenty shillings: every ass above one year old forty shillings. And all
cattle of all sorts under a year old are heerby exempted, as also all hay and
corn in the husbandmans hand, because all meadow, arrable ground and cattle are
ratable as aforesaid. And for all such persons as by the advantage of their
arts and trades are more enabled to help bear the public charge then common
laborours and workm^n, a^ Butchers, Bakers, Brewers, Victuailers, Smiths,
Carpenters, Tailors, shoe-makers, Joyners, (...) etc
Barbers, Millers and Masons with all other manual persons and artists, such
are to be rated for their returns and gains proportionable unto other men for
the produce of their estates. Provided that in the (...) by the poll, such
persons as are disabled by sickness, lamenes or other infirmity shall be
exempted. And for such servants and children as take not wages, Impotent
persons exempt: (...)
their parents and masters shall pay for them, but such as take wages shall pay
for themselves. And it is further ordered that the Commisioners for the
several towns in every Shire shall yearly upon the first fourth day of the
week in the seventh month, Co^miss: meet in 7 month at Shire town
assemble at their shire Town: and bring with them fairly written the just
number of males lifted as aforesaid, and the assessments of estates made in
their several towns according to the rules and directions in this present order
expressed, and the said Commisioners being so assembled shall duly and
carefully examine all the said lists and assessments of the several towns in
that Shire, and shall correct and perfect the same according to the true intent
of this order, to perfect assessments.
as they or the major part of them shall determine, and the same so perfected
they shall speedily transmit to the Treasurer under their hands or the hands of
the major part of them and thereupon the Treasurer shall give warrants to the
Constables to collect and levy the same; so as the whole assessment both for
persons and estates may be paid in unto the Treasurer before the twentieth day
of the ninth mo^th, Constable to collect and pay in 9 mo^th
yearly, and every one shall pay their rate to the Constable in the same town
where it shall be assessed. Nor shall any land or estate be rated in any other
town but where the same shall lie, is, or was improved to the owners, Land rated
where it lies
reputed owners or other propietors use or behoof if it be within this
Jurisdictio^. And if the Treasurer cannot dispose of it there, the Constable
shall send it to such place in (...) or elsewhere as the Treasurer shall appoint
as the charge of the Country to be allowed the Constable upon his acco^t with
the Treasurer. And for all peculiars viz: such places as are not yet laid
within the bounds of any town the same lands with the persons and estates
thereupon shall be assessed by the rates of the town next unto it, Pecul^^^
the measure or estimation shall be by the distance of the Meeting houses.

And if any of the said Commissioners or of the Select men shall wittingly fail
or neglect to perform the trust committed to them by this Order in not making,
Commiss: or Select men defaulting
correcting, perfecting or transmitting any of the said Lists or Assessments
according to the intent of this Order; every such offender shall be fined
forty shillings for every such offense; (...) 40 ss.
or so much as the Country shall be damnified thereby, so as it exceed not
forty shillings for one offense. Provided that such offense or offenses be
complained of and prosecuted in due course of law within six months. (...)
And it is farther ordered that upon all distresses to be taken for any of the
rates and assessments aforesaid: the Officer shall distrein goods, or cattle if
they may be had, and if no goods then lands or houses, if neither goods nor
lands can be had within the town where such distress is to be taken, then upon
such return to the Treasurer he shall give warrant to attach the body of such
person to be carried to prison, there to be kept till the next court of that
Shire; except they put in security for their appearance there, or that payment
be made in the mean time. And it is farther ordered that the prizes of all
sorts of corn to be received upon any rate, Priz^^ of corn
by virtue of this order, shall be such as this Court shall set from year to
year; and in default thereof they shall be accepted at the prcie current to be
judged by the said Commissioners of Essex, Midlesex and Suffolk. And it is
farther ordered that all estates of land in England shall not be rated in any
public assessment. And it is heerby declared that by public rates and
assessments, Lands in Englands exempt Intent of public rates.
is intended only such as are assessed by order of the General court for the
cou^trys occasion and no other. [1646 1647]

Children.
Forasmuch as the good education of children is of singular behoof and benefit
to any Commonwealth; and whereas many parents and masters are too indulgent and
negligent of their duty in that kind. It is therefore ordered that the Select
men of every town, Can^ of Select men
in the several precincts and quarters where they dwell, shall have a vigilant
eye over their brethren and neighbors, to so^, first that none of them shall
suffer so much barbarism in any of their families as not to endeavor to teach
by themselves or others, their children and apprentices so much learning as may
enable them perfectly to read the english tongue, (...) all children m^^ read
on ^en: of 20 ss.
and knowledge of the Capital laws: upon penalty of twenty shillings for
each neglect therein. Also that all masters of families do once a week (at the
least) catechize their children and servants in the grounds and principles of
Religion, and if any be unable to do so much: that then at the least they
procure such children or apprentices to learn some short orthodox catechism
without book, Catechism
that they may be able to answer unto the questions that shall be propounded to
them out of such catechism by their parents or masters or any of the Select men
when they shall call them to a trial of what they have learned in this kind.
And further that all parents and masters do breed and bring up their children
and apprentices in some honest lawful calling, labor or imploym^t, either in
husbandry, or some other trade profitable for themselves, and the Commonwealth
if they will not or cannot train them up in learning to fit them for higher
employments. And if any of the Select men after admo^iti^ by them given to such
masters of families shall find them still negligent of their duty in the
particulars aforementioned, whereby children and servants become rude, stubborn
and unruly; the said Select men with the help of two Magistrates, Unruly
children
or the next County court for that Shire, shall take such children or
apprentices from them and place them with some masters for years (boys till
they come to twenty one, placed forth
and girls eighteen years of age complete) which will more strictly look unto,
and force them to submit unto government according to the rules of this order,
if by fair means and former instructions they will not be drawn unto it. [1642]

2 Whereas sundry Gentlemen of quality, and others often times send over their
children into this country unto some friends here, Extravagancy
hoping at the least thereby to prevent their extravagant and riotous courses,
who notwithstanding by means of some unadvised and ill-affected persons, which
give them credit, in expectation their friends, either in favor to them, or
prevention of blemish to themselves, will discharge what ever is done that way^
they are no less lavish and profuse here to the great grief of their friends,
dishonor of God and reproach of the Country.

It is therefore ordered by this Court and authority thereof; Debts of persons
in n^^ge no:recoy.
That if any person after publication heerof shall any way give credit to any
such youth, or other person under twenty one years of age, without order from
such their friends, here, or elsewhere, under their hands in writing they shall
lose their debt whatever it be. And further if such youth or other person incur
any penalty by such means and have not wherewith to pay, (...) of their disor:
to pay their fine.
such person, or persons, as are occasions thereof shall pay it as delinquents
in the like case should do. [1647] See Ability.

3 If any parents shall wilfully, and unreasonably deny any child timely or
convenient marriage, Parents (...)
or shall exercise any unnatural severitie toward them, such children shall
have liberty to complain to Authority for redress in such cases. [1641]

4 No Orphan during their minority which was not committed to tuition, Orphan
not dis^^ (...) of Authority.
or service by their parents in their life time, shall afterward be absolutely
disposed of by any without the consent of some Court wherein two Assistants (at
least) shall be present, except in case of marriage, in which the approbation
of the major part of the Select men, in that town or any one of the next
Assistants shall be sufficient. Minority of women.
And the minority of women in case of marriage shall be till sixteen years.
[1646] See Age. Cap: Laws. Lib: co^m^: marriage.

Clerk of writs.
It is ordered by this Court and Authority thereof; that in every town
throughout this Jurisdiction there shall henceforth be a Clerk of the writs
nominated by each town and allowed by each shire Court, or court of Assistants
to grant Summons and Attachments in all civil actions: and attachments (or
Summons at the liberty of the Plantiffe) shall be granted when the party is
a stranger not dwelling amongst us or for some that are going out of our
Jurisdiction, or that are about to make away their estates to defraud their
creditors, Doubtful in (...).
or when persons are doubtful in their estates not only to the Plantiffe, but
to the Clerk of the writs, signified under the hands of two honest persons, Cl:
gr^^t repl:
near dwelling unto the said party. And the said Clerks of writs are
authorized to grant replevins and to take bond with sufficient security of
the party to prosecute the Suit whose fees shall be for every Warrant two
pence, a Replevin or Attachment three piece, and for Bonds four pence a p^^ce.
All Attachments to be directed unto the Constables in towns where no Marshall
is. Also the said Clerks shall grant S^mons for Witnesses. [1641] See Recorder.

College.
Whereas through the good kind of God upon us there is a College founded in
Cambridge in the County of Massachusetts Harvard College. Harvard Coll.
for encouragement whereof this Court has gives the summe^ of four hundred
po^rats and also the revenue of the Fervie betwixt Charlstown and Boston and
that the well ordering and man^^ging of the said College is of great
concernment,

It is therefore ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, That the Governor
and Deputy Gover: for the time being and all the Magistrates of this
Jurisdiction together with the teaching Elders of the six next adjoining towns
viz: Cambridge, Commissioners.
Water-town Charlstown, Boston, Roxburie and Dorchester, and the President of
the said College for the time being, to establish orders.
shall from time to time have full power and authority to make and establish
all such orders, statutes and constitutions, as they shall see necessary for
the instituting, guiding and furthering of the said College, and several
members thereof, from time to time, in Piety, Morality and Learning, as also
to dispose, order and manage to the use and behoof of the said College and
members thereof, dispose gifts and reven.
all gifts, legacyes, bequeaths, revenues, lands and donations as either have
been, are, or shall be conferred, bestowed, or any ways shall fall or come to
the said College. And whereas it may come to pass that many of the Magistrates
and said Elders may be absent and otherwise employed in other weighty affair*
when the said College may need their present help and counsel. It is therefore
ordered that the greater number of Magistrates and Elders which shall be
present with the President, power of (...) port.
shall have the power of the whole. Provided that if any constitution, order or
orders by them made shall be found hurtful unto the said College, Lib: of
appeal
or the members thereof, or to the weal public then upon appeal of the party
or parties greived, unto the company of Overseers first mentioned, Power to rep.
they shall repeal the said order or orders (if they see cause) at their next
meeting or stand accountable thereof to the next General court. [1636 1640 1642]

Condemned.
It is ordered by this Court that no man condemned to dye shall be put to death
within four days next after his condemnation, (...); within 4 days
unles the Court see special cause to the contrary, or in case of martial law:
(...)
nor shall the body of any man so put to death be unburied twelve hours unles
it be in case of anatomy. [1641]

Constables.
It is ordered by this Court, Constables rect (...) ^^other
That Constables are to whip or punish any to be punished by order of
Authority (where there is not another officer appointed to do it) in their
own towns; unles they can get another to do it.

2 It is farther ordered by the Authority aforesaid, That any person tendered
to any Constable of this Jurisdiction by any Constable or other Officer
belonging to any foreign Jurisdiction in this Country, Form Juris: Offense
(...).
or by warrant from any such authority, such shall presently be received, and
conveyed forthwith from Constable to Constable, till they be brought unto the
place to which they are sent or before some Magistrate of this Jurisdiction who
shall dispose of them as the justice of the cause shall require. And that all
Hue-and-cries shall be duly received and dilligently pursued to full effect.
Hue-and-cries pursued. Consti^^y put forth Hu-and-cries.
[1641] [164^]

3 It is ordered by the authority of this Court, That every Constable within
our Jurisdiction shall henceforth have full power to make, sign and put forth
Pursutes or Hue-and-cries after Murderers, Manslayers, Peace-breakers, Th^evs,
Robbers, Burglarers and other Capital offenders, when no Magistrate is near
hand, appehend diverse offenders
also to apprehend without Warrant, such as are overtaken with drink, swearing,
Sabboth-breaking, lying, vagrant persons, night-walkers, or any other that
shall offend in any of these. Provided they be taken in the manner, either by
sight of the Constable, or by present informato^ from others. As also to make
search for all such persons, either on the Sabbath day or other, Search for the
(...)
when there shall be occasion, in all houses licensed to sell either beer or
wine, or in any other suspected or disordered places, commit to custody
and those to apprehend and keep in safe custody, till opportunity serve to
bring them before one of the next Magistrates for further examination. Provided
when any Constable is employed by any of the Magistrates for apprehending of
any person, All to (...) Constable:
he shall not do it without warrant in writing, and if any person shall refuse
to assist any Constable in the execution of his office, in any of the things
aforementio^ed being by him required thereto, they shall pay for neglect thereof
ten shillings, on penalty of o^s.
to the use of the Country to be levied by warrant from any Magistrate before
whom any such offender shall be brought. And if it appear by good testimony,
that any shall wilfully, obstinately or contemptuously refuse or neglect to
assist any Constable as is before expressed, willful neglect 40 ss.
he shall pay to the use of the Country forty shillings. And that no man may
plead ignorance for such neglect or refusal, it is ordered that every
Constable shall have a black staff of five foot long, Constable: staff.
tipped at the upper end, about five inches with brass, as a badge of his
office, which he shall take with him when he goes to discharge any part of his
office: Magistr: Constable: etc (...) and^crie of Cap: offenses on penal. of 40 ss.
which staff shall be provided at the charge of the town, and if any
Magistrate or Constable or any other, upon urgent occasion, shall refuse to do
their best endeavors, in raising and prosecuting Hue-and-cries by foot, and if
need be, by horse, after such as have committed Capital crimes, they shall
forfeit for every such offense to the use aforesaid forty shillings. [1646]
See in-keepers, Masters, Oaths, Rates, Unt^^^ly death, watching.

Conveyances fraudulent,
It is ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, That all cove^^ns or
fraudulent alc^^tions or conveyances of lands, tenements or any ^ered^t^^ents
shall be of no validity to defeat any man from due debts or legacyes, Invalid.
or from any just title, claim or possession of that which is so fraudulently
conveyed.

2 For avoiding all fraudulent conveyances and that every man may know what
(...) or interest other men may have in any houses, lands or other heriditam^ts
they are to deal in, it is therefore ordered by the (...) of this Court;

That after the end of October 1640 no morgage, bargain, sale, or (...) made of
any houses, lands, rents or other hereditaments where the Graunter (...) in
possession, shall be of force against other persons except the Graunter and his
(...), unles the same be acknowledged before some Magistrate and recorded as is
hereafter (...): and that no such bargain, (...) recorded
sale or grant already made, in way of morgage, where the Graunter remains in
possession shall be of force against other but the Graunter of his Heirs,
except the same shall be entered as is hereafter expressed within one month
after the date aforementioned: within a mo^th
if the party be within this Jurisdiction or else within three months after he
shall return. or 3 months
And if any such Graunter being required by the (...); his (...) or Assigns to
make an acknowledgment of any grant, Graunter refuse to (...): imprisoned
sale, bargain or morgage by him made shall refuse so to do, it shall be in
the power of any Magistrate to send for the party so refusing, and commit him
to prison without Bail or Main-prison, unt^ll he shall acknowledge the same,
and the Grauntee is to enter his caution with the Recorder, and this shall save
his interest in the mean time. And if it be doubtful whether it be the deed
and grant of the party, he shall be bound with Suerties to the next court of
Assistants and the caution shall remain good as aforesaid. And for recording of
all such grant, sales, bargains or morgages; it is further ordered, that there
shall be one appointed in every Share chosen by each court of the said Shires
for Recorders to enter all such graunts, recorded in (...) Shire in a mo:
sales, bargains, morgages of houses, lands, rents and other hereditaments as
aforesaid together with the names of Graunter and Grauntee, and certified to
(...) Secr: in 6 months.
thing and estate granted and the date thereof. All which entries shall be
certified unto the Recorder or Secretary for the General Court within six
months from time to time. [1640] [1641]

Council.
This Court considering how the weighty affairs of this Jurisdiction whether
they concern this peculiarly or have reference to the rest of our confederated
Colonies may be only and speedily-transacted in the vacancy of the General
Court for the satisfaction of the Commissioners, its respect of the weighty and
sudden occasions which may be then in hand, does heerby express and declare,
That the General Court ought to be called by the Governor, In case impor: a
G^eral court called by the Governor
when the importancy of the business does require it, and that time and
opportunity will safely admit the same, and that all other necessary matters,
are to be ordered and dispatched by the major part of the Council of the
Commonwealth; and therefore to that end letters signifying, briefly, standing
Co^ci^ how to be called How many may act for impressing men.
the business and the time and place of meeting for consultation ought to be
sent unto the Assistants. Also it is heerby declared, that seven of the said
Assistan^^ meeting, the Governor or Deputy Governor being one is a sufficient
Assembly to act, by impressing of soldiers or otherwise as need shall be. And
in case of extreme and urgent necessity, when endeavors are reasonably used
to call together the Assistants and the business will not admit delay, then the
acts of so many as do assemble are to be accounted, and are accounted valid,
and all other things.
and sufficient. Also it is intended that the general words aforementioned
contein in them power to impresse and send forth soldiers, and all manner of
victails, vessels at sea, carriages and all other necessaries, and to send
warrants to the Treasurer to pay for them. [1645]

Courts.
For the better (...) of justice and easing the Country of unnecessary charge
and travelle^^ it is ordered by this Court and Authority thereof;

That there shall be four Quarter Courts of Assistants yearly kept by the
Governor, 4 courts of Assistants
or Deputy Gover: and the rest of the Magistrates, the first of them on the
first third day ( viz: tuisday) in the fourth month called June: the second on
the first third day of the seventh month the third on the first third day of
the tenth mo^th: the fourth on the first third day of the first month called
March. 4 Cou^ courts at Boston
Also there be four County Courts held at Boston by such of the Magistrates as
shall reside in, or near the same, viz: by any five, four or three of them, who
shall have power to assemble together upon the last fifth day of the eight
(...), second and fifth months every year, for all civil cause and crim: not
extend: to life etc
and there to hear and determine all civil causes and criminal, nor extending to
life, member or banishment according to the course of the court of Assistants,
and to summon Juries out of the neighbor towns, and the (...) shall and other,
Officers shall give attendance there as at other Courts. 4 quar^ Courts in
Essex.
And it is further ordered that there shall be four Quarter Courts kept yearly
by the Magistrates of (...) with such other persons of worth as shall from time
to time be appointed by the General (...) nominatio^ of the towns in that Shire
by orderly agreement among th^^selves, (...) in Commission with them so that
with the Magistrates they be five in all and so that no Court be kept without
one Magistrate at the least: and so any three of the Commissioners aforesaid
may keep Court in the absence of the rest: not kept with (...) Court
yet none of all the Magistrates are excluded from any of these Courts who can,
and please to attend the same. And the General Court to appoint from time to
time, which of the said Magistrates shall specially belong to every of the
said Courts. Two of these Quarter Courts shall be kept at Salem, the other at
Ipswitch. The first, the last third day of the week in the seventh month at
Ipswitch. 7 month at Ipswitch. (...): at Sal^ etc:
The second at Salem the last third day of the tenth month. The third at
Ipswitch the last third day of the first month. The fourth the last third day
of the fourth month at Salem. All and every which Courts shall be holden by the
Magistrate of Salem and Ipswitch with the rest of that County or so many of
them as shall attend the (...); but no Jurie men shall be warned from Ipswitch
to Salem nor from Salem to (...). Also there shall be a Grand Jurie at either
place, once a year. for all civil and crim^^ of exc: cases of l^f^, li^^s, or
(...) Court at (...) for Midlesex.
Which Courts shall have the same power in civil and criminal causes as the
courts of Assistants have (at Boston) except trials for life, lin^s or
banishment, which are wholly reserved unto the courts of Assistants. The like
liberty for County courts and trial of causes is granted to the Shire town
of Cambridge for the County of Midlesex, as Essex has, to be holden by the
Magistrates of Midlesex and Suffolk and such other men of worth as shall be
nominated and chosen as aforesaid, one of which Courts shall be holden on the
last third day of the eight month, and another on the last third day of the
second month from year to year. And the like liberty for County Courts and
trial of causes is granted to the County of Norfolk to be holden at
Salisburie on the last third day of the second month; Courts at Salisburie and
Hampton for Norforlk
and another at Hampton on such day as the General Court shall appoint to be
kept in each place from time to time. And if any shall find himself greived
with the sentence of any the said County courts he may appeal to the next court
of Assistants. Appeal to court of Assist
Provided he put in s^ffici^^ (...) according to law. Lastly, it is ordered by
the Authority aforesaid that all causes brought to the courts of Assistants by
way of appeal, and other causes specially belonging to the said courts, shall
be first determined from time to time: Divorce.
and that cause, of (...) shall be tried only in the said court of Assistants.
[1635 1636 1639 1641 1642]

2 For the more speedy dispatch of all causes which shall concern Strangers,
who cannot stay to attend the ordinary Courts of justice, It is ordered by this
Court and Authority thereof;

That the Governor or Deputy Governor with any two other Magistrates, Cour^^
extraordinary.
or when the Governor or Deputy Governor cannot attend it, that any three
Magistrates shall have power to hear and determine by a Jurie of twelve men, or
otherwise as is used in other Courts, all causes civil and criminal triable in
County Courts, which shall arise between such Strangers, or wherein any such
Stranger shall be a party. And all records of such proceedings shall be
transmitted to the Records of the Court of Assistants, to be entered as trials
in other Courts, at parties charge
all which shall be at the charge of the parties, as the Court shall determine,
so as the Country be no ways charged by such courts. [1639]

3 For the electing of our Governor, Deputy Governor, Assistants and other
general Officers upon the day or days appointed by our Pattent to hold our
yearly Court being the last fourth day of the week ( viz: Wednesday) of every
Easter Term; it is solemnly and unanimously decreed and established.

That henceforth the Freemen of this Jurisdiction shall either in person or by
proxy without any Summons attend and consummate the Elections, Court of
Election (...) out Summons.
at which time also they shall send their Deputies with full power to consult of
and determine such matters as concern the welfare of this Commonwealth: No
member of Court (...) depart ^ou^ license.
from which General Court no Magistrate or Deputy shall depart or be discharged
without the consent of the major part both of Magistrates and Deputies, during
the first four days of the first Session thereof, under the penalty of one
hundred pounds for every such default on either part. And for the after
Sessions, if any be, the Deputies for Dover are at liberty whether to att^d or
not. [1643]

4 Forasmuch as after long experience we find diverse inconveniences in the
manner of our proceeding in Courts by Magistrates and Deputies sitting
together, and account it wisdom to follow the laudable practice of other
States, Gen: Cour^.
who have ^^yd ground works for government and order for issuing business of
greatest and highest consequence: it is therefore ordered by this Court and
Authority thereof,

That henceforth the Magistrates may sit and act business by themselves,
Magistrates act apart.
by drawing up Bills and Orders which they shall see good in their wis edom,
which having agreed upon, they may present them to the Deputies to be
considered of, how good and wholesome such orders are for the Country and
accordingly to give their assent or dissent. The Deputies in like manner
sitting apart by themselves and consulting about such orders and laws as they
in their discretion and experience shall find meet for the common good: which
agreed upon by them they may present to the Magistrates who having seriously
considered of them may manifest their consent or dissent thereto. And when any
Orders have passed the approbation of both Magistrates and Deputies, then to be
engrossed: ^ils read over (...) last day of the Session. Matter of Judicature
which in the last day of this Court or Sessions shall be deliberately read
over. Provided also that all matters of Judicature which this Court shall take
cognizance of, shall be issued in like manner (unles the Court upon some
particular occasion or business agree otherwise). [1644]

Criminal causes.
It is ordered by this court and Authority thereof, That every man that is to
answer for any criminal cause, heard nex: Court
whether he be in prison or under Bail his cause shall be heard and determined
at the next Court that has proper cognizance thereof and may be done without
prejudice of justice. [1641] See Courts, Lib. com: Punishment, Torture.

Cruelty.
It is ordered by this Court and Authority thereof; That no man shall exercise
any tyrany or cruelty toward any bruit creatures which are usually kept for
the use of man. [1641]

Damages pretended.
It is ordered by this Court and Authority thereof; That no man in any Suit or
Action against another shall falsely pretend great damages or debts to vex his
adversary, and if it shall appear any does so, ^^inable.
the Court shall have power to set a reasonable fine on his head. [1641]

Death untimely.
It is ordered by this Court and Authority thereof; That whenever any person
shall come to any very sudden, Tried by inquest.
untimely or unatural death, some Assistant or the Constable of that town shall
forthwith summon a Jurie of twelve discreet men to inquire of the cause and
manner of their death, who shall present a true verdict thereof, to some near
Assistant, or to the next court (to be holden for that Shire) upon their oath.
[1641]

Deeds and writings.
It is ordered by this court and Authority thereof; That no conveyance, deed or
promise whatsoever shall be of validity, Invalid.
if it be gotten by illegal violence, imprisonment, threatening or any kind of
forcible compulsion, called Dures. [1641]

Deputies for the General Court.
For easing the body of Freemen now increasing, and better dispatching the
business of General Courts, It is ordered and by this Court declared;

That henceforth it shall be lawful for the Freemen of every Plantation to
choose their Deputies before every General Court, Towns choose Deputies, their
power before the Court
to confer of, and prepare such public business as by them shall be thought fit
to consider of at the next General court. And that such persons as shall be
hereafter so deputed by the Freemen of the several Plantations to deal on their
behalf in the public affairs of the Commonwealth, shall have the full power
and voices of all the said Freemen derived to them for the making and
establishing of Laws, their power in Court
granting of lands, and to deal in all other affairs of the Commonwealth
wherein the Freemen have to do: the matter of election of Magistrates and other
Officers only excepted wherein every Freeman is to give his own voice. matter of
election except
[1634]

2 Forasmuch as through the blessing of God the number of towns are much
increased, It is therefore ordered and by this Court enacted;

That henceforth no town shall send more then two Deputies to the General
Court; N^ther of (...) for each town.
though the number of Freemen in any town be more then twenty. And that all
towns which have not to the number of twenty Freemen shall send but one Deputy,
and such towns as have not ten Freemen shall send none, but such Freemen shall
vote with the next town in the choice of their Deputy or Deputies til this
Court take further order. [1636 1638]

3 It is ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, That when the Deputyes
for several towns are met together before, or at any General court, Deputies
may setle differ: about elect: of Deputies and order their own body.
it shall be lawful for them or the major part of them to hear and determine
any difference that may arise about the election of any of their members, and
to order things amongst themselves that may concern the well ordering of their
body. And that hereafter the Deputies for the General court shall be elected by
papers as the Governor is chosen. [1634 1635]

4 It is ordered by this Court and Authority thereof; That the Freemen of any
Shire or town have liberty to choose such Deputies for the General court either
in their own Shire, Town, Whence chosen.
or elsewhere, How qualified.
as they judge fittest, so be it they be Freemen and inhabiting within this
Jurisdiction. And because we cannot foresee what variety and weight of
occasions may fall into future consideration, and what counsels we may stand
in need of: we decree that the Deputies to attend the General court in the
behalf of the Country shall not at any time be stated and enacted but from
court to court, Stated but for one year at most.
or at the most but for one year, that the Country may have an annual liberty
to do in that case what is most behoof^^^all for the best welfare thereof.
[1641]

Distress.
It is ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, That no man's corn or hay
that is in the field or upon the cart, nor his garden-stuffe, nor any thing
subject to present decay shall be taken in any distress, Secured.
unles he that takes it does presently bestow it where it may not be imbeazled
nor suffer spoil or decay, or give security to satisfy the worth thereof if it
comes to any harm. [1641]

Dowries.
Forasmuch as no provision has yet been made for any certain maintenance for
Wives after the death of their Husbands, be it ordered and enacted by this
present Court and Authority thereof;

That every married Woman (living with her Husband in this Jurisdiction or
other where absent from him with his consent or through his mere default, What
wives are dow^ble
or inevitable providence, or in case of divorce where she is the innocent
party) that shall not before marriage be estated by way of jointure in some
houses, lands, whereof.
tenements or other hereditaments for term of her life, shall immediately after
the death of her Husband have right and interest by way of ^^^er, in, and to
one third part of all such houses, lands, tenemets, ^ents and hereditaments as
her said Husband was seized of, to his own use, either in possession, reversion
or remainder in any estate of inheritance (or franc-tenement not then
determined) at any time during the marriage to have and enjoy for term of her
natural life according to the estate of such Husband free, for life.
and freely discharged of and from all titles, debts, rents, charges,
judgments, free of encumbrance.
executions and other encumbrances whatsoever had, made, or suffered by her
said Husband during the said marriage between them; or by any other person
claiming by, from, or under him otherwise then by any act of consent of such
Wife, as the laws of this Court shall ratefye and allow: and if the Heir of the
Husband or other person interrested, shall not within one month after lawful
demand made, assign and set out to such widow, her just third part with
conveniencie or to her satisfaction according to the intent of this Law, How to
be assigned
then upon a writ of dower in the court of that Shire where the said houses,
lands, tenements or other hereditaments shall lie; or in the court of
Assistants (if the same lie in several Shires) her dower or third part shall be
assigned her to be set forth in several by mets and bounds, by such persons as
the same Court shall appoint for that purpose, with costs and damages,
Limitation
with all costs and damages sust^ined. Provided always that this Law shall not
extend to any houses lands, tenements or other hereditaments sold or conveyed
away, by any husband bona fide for valuable consideration, before the last of
the ninth month now last past. And it is farther inacted that every such Wise
as is before expressed immediately after the death of her Husband, shall have
interest in, and unto one third part of all such money, Third of personal estate
goods and chattels, real and personal of what kind soever as her Husband
shall dye possessed of (so much as shall be sufficient for the discharge of his
Funeral and just debts being first deducted) to be allowed and set out to her
as is here before appointed for her Dowry. Provided always that every such
widow so endowed as aforesaid shall not commit or suffer any strip or wast,
restraint from want.
but shall maintain all such houses, fences and inclo^ures as shall be assigned
to her for her Dowry, and shall leave the same in good and sufficient
repairations in all points. [1647]

Drovers.
It is ordered by this Court and Authority thereof; That if any man shall have
occasion to lead or drive cattle from place to place that is far off, Liberty.
so that they be weary or hungry, or fall sick or lame, it shall be lawful to
rest and refresh them for a competent time in any open place that is not corn,
meadow, or enclosed for some particular use. [1641]

Ecclesiastical:
1 All the people of God within this Jurisdiction who are not in a Church way
and be orthodox in judgment and not scandalous in life shall have full
liberty to gather themselves into a Church estate, provided they do it in a
christian way with due observation of the rules of Christ revealed in his word.
Provided also that the General Court does not, nor will hereafter approve of
any such companyes of men as shall join in any pretended way of Church
fellowship unles they shall acquaint the Magistrates and the Elders of the
neighbor Churches where they intend to join, Approbation.
and have their approbation therein.

2 And it is farther ordered, that no person being a member of any Church which
shall be gathered without the approbation of the Magistrates and the said
Churches shall be admitted to the Freedom of this Commonwealth. Non-appoba:


3 Every Church has free liberty to exercise all the Ordinances of God
according to the rules of the Scripture. Ordinances


4 Every Church has free liberty of election and ordination of all her
Officers from time to time. Officers.
Provided they be able, pious and orthodox.

5 Every Church has also free liberty of admission, recommendation,
dismission and expulsion or deposall of their Officers and members upon due
cause, Members.
with free exercise of the discipline and censures of Christ according to the
rules of his word.

6 No injunction shall be put upon any Church, No humane Ordinances.
church Officer or member in point of doctrine, worship o^ discipline whether
for substance or circumstance besides the institutions of the Lord.

7 Every Church of Christ has freedom to celebrate days of Fasting and
prayer and of Thanksgiving according to the word of God. Fasts and Feasts


8 The Elders of churches also have liberty to meet monthly, Elders meet:
quarterly or otherwise in convenient numbers and places, for conference and
consultations about christian and church questions and occasions.

9 All Churches also have liberty to deal with any their members in a church
way that are in the hands (...) justice, Members under civil justice.
so it be not to retard and hinder the course thereof.

10 Every Church has liberty to deal with any Magistrate, Deputy of court,
or other Officer whatsoever that is a member of theirs, civil Officers.
in a church way in case of apparent and just offense, given in their places,
so it be done with due observance and respect.

11 We also allow private meetings for edification in Religion amongst
christians of all sorts of people so it be without just offense, Private meet:
both for number, time, place and other circumstances.

12 For the preventing and removing of error and offense that may grow and
spread in any of the Churches in this Jurisdiction, and for the preserving of
truth and peace in the several Churches within themselves, and for the
mainta^n^inc^ and exercise of brotherly communion amongst all the Churches in
the country.

It is allowed and ratified by the authority of this Court, as a lawful
liberty of the Churches of Christ, Monthly meetings.
that once in every month of the year (when the season will bear it) it shall
be lawful for the Ministers and Elders of the Churches near adjoining,
together with any other of the Brethren, with the consent of the Churches, to
assemble by course in every several church one after another, to the intent,
For preaching and conference
that after the preaching of the word, by such a Minister as shall be requested
thereto, by the Elders of the Church where the Assemby is held, the rest of the
day may be spent in public christian conference, about the discussing and
resolving of any such doubts and cases of conscience concerning matter of
doctrine, or worship, or government of the Church as shall be propounded by any
of the Brethren of that Church; with leave also to any other Brother to
propound his objections, or answers, for further satisfaction according to the
word of God. Provided that the whole action be guided and moderated by the
Elders of the Church where the Assembly is held, Moderators.
or by such others as they shall appoint. And that nothing be concluded and
imposed by way of Authority from one, No Presbyterial authority over Chur:
or more Churches, upon another, but only by way of brotherly conference and
consultations, that the truth may be searched out to the satisfying of every
man's conscience in the s^gin of God according to his word. And because such an
Assembly and the work thereof cannot be duly attended if other Lectures be held
the same week, it is therefore agreed with the consent of the Churches, no
Lectures (...) week.
that in what week such an Assembly is held all the Lectures in all the
neighboring Churches for the week days shall be forborne, that so the public
service of Christ in this Assembly may be transacted with greater diligence and
attention. [1641]

13 Forasmuch as the open contempt of Gods word and Messengers thereof is the
desolating (...) of civil States and Churches and that the preaching of the
word by these who^^ God (...) send, is the chief ordinary means ordained of God
for the converting, (...)
edifying and saving the souls of the Elect through the presence and power of
the Holy Ghost, thereunto promised: and that the ministry of the word, is set up
by God in his Churches, for those holy ends: (...)
and according to the respect or contempt of the same and of those whom God
(...) set apart for his own work and employment, (...) of all Christian States
is (...) furthered and pro^^^; it is therefore ordered and decreed,

That if any christian (so called) within this Jurisdiction shall
contemptuously behave hmself^ toward the Word preached or the Messengers thereof
called to dispense the same in any Congregation; cont^^^ of the word etc
when he does faithfully execute his Service and Office therein, according to
the will and word of God, either by interrupting him in his preaching, or by
charging him falsely with any error which he has not taught in the open face
of the Church: or like a son of Korah cast upon his true doctrine or himself
any reproach, to the dishonor of the Lord Jesus who has sent him and to the
disparagement of that his holy Ordinance, and making Gods ways contemptible
and ridiculous: that every ^^ch person or persons (whatsoever censure the
Church may pass) shall for the first (...) be convented and reproved openly by
the Magistrate at some Lecture, first offense openly reproved etc: Second offen:
and bound to their good behavior. And if a second time they break forth into
the like contemptuous carriages, they shall either pay five pounds to the
public Treasure; or stand two hours openly upon a block or stool, four foot
high on a lecture day with a paper fixed on his breast, written in Capital
letters (AN OPEN AND OBSTINATE CONTEMNER OF GODS HOLY ORDINANCES] that others
may fear and be ashamed of breaking out into the like wickedness. [164^]

14 It is ordered and decreed by this Court and Authority thereof; That
wher^soever the ministry of the word is established according to the order of
the Gospel throughout this Jurisdiction every person shall duly resort and
attend thereunto respectively upon the Lords days and upon such public Fast
days, and days of Thanksgiving as are to be generally kept by the appointm^t
of Authority: Absence from church Assem:
and if any person with (...) Jurisdictio^ shall without just and necessary
cause withdraw himself from hearing the public ministry of the word after due
means of conviction used, he shall forfeit for his absence from every such
public meeting five shillings. All such offenses to be heard and determined by
any one Magistrate or more from time to time. (...) 5 ss.
[1646]

15 Forasmuch as the peace and prosperity of Churches and members thereof as
well as civil Rights and Liberties are carefully to be maintained, it is
ordered by this Court and decreed, That the civil Authority here established
has power and liberty to see the peace, Civil authors may preserve peace in
chu; Punish chur: members nor shall chur: c^ns: dis^nul civil dignity.
ordinances and rules of Christ be observed in every Church according to his
word. As also to deal with any churchmember in a way of civil justice
notwithstanding any church relation, office, or interest; so it be done in a
civil and not in an ecclesiastical way. Nor shall any church censure degrade or
depose any man from any civil dignity, office or authority he shall have in
the Commonwealth. [1642]

16 Forasmuch as there are many Inhabitants in a^^ers towns, who leave the^r
several habitations and thereby draw much of the in-come of their estates into
other towns whereby the ministry is much neglected, it is therefore ordered by
this Court and the authority thereof;

That from henceforth all lands, What is (...) for the ministry.
cattle and other estates of any kind whatsoever, shall be liable to be rated
to all common charges whatsoever, either for the Church, Town or Commonwealth
in the same place where the estate is from time to time. And to the end there
may be a convenient habitation for the use of the ministry in every town in
this Jurisdiction to remain to posterity. It is decreed by the authority of
this Court that where the major part of the Inhabitants (according to the order
of regulating valid town act*) shall grant, (...)
build, or purchase such habitation it shall be good in law, and the particular
sum upon each person assessed by just rate, shall be duly paid according as in
other cases of town rates. Provided always that such grant, deed of purchase
and the deed of gift thereupon to the use of a present preaching Elder and his
next successor and so from time to time to his successors: to go to successors.
be entered in the town book and acknowledged before a Magistrate, recorded.
and recorded in the Shire court. [1647] See charges publ: sec: 3.

Elections.
It is ordered by this Court and Authority thereof: That for the yearly
choosing of Assistants for the time to come in stead of papers the Freemen
shall use indian corn and beans. Election by indian corn and beans. (...) no
m^n put in above one, on penal: of (...) ss.
the indian corn to manifest election, the beans for blanks. And that if any
Freeman shall put in more then one indian corn or bean for the choice or
refusal of any public Officer, he shall forfeit for every such offense ten
pounds. And that any man that is not free or otherwise has not liberty of
voting, (...) non-Frem: any, on like penalty.
putting in any vote shall forfeit the like sum of ten pounds. [1643]

2 For the preventing of many inconveniences that otherwise may arise upon the
yearly day of Election, and that the work of that day may be the more orderly,
easily and speedily issued, it is ordered by this Court and the authority
thereof.

That the Freemen in the several towns and villages within this Jurisdiction,
shall this next year from time to time either in person or by proxy scaled up,
Election by proxies how to be carried
make all their elections, by papers, indian corn and beans as hereafter is
expressed, to be taken, sealed up, and sent to the court of Election as this
order appoints, the Governor, Deputy Governor, Major General, Treasurer,
Secretary and Commisioners for the united Colonies to be chosen by writing,
open or once folded, not twisted or rolled up, that so they may be the sooner
and surer perused: and all the Assistants to be chosen by indian corn and
beans, (...).
the indian corn to manifest election as in Sect: 1: and for such small
villages as come not in person and that send no Deputies to the Court, the
Constable of the said village, together with two or three of the chief Freemen
shall receive the votes of the rest of their Freemen, and deliver them together
with their own sealed up to the Deputy or Deputies for the next town, who
shall carefully convey the same unto the said Court of Election. [1647]

3 Forasmuch as the choice of Assistant; in case of supply is of great
concernment, and with all care and circumspection to be attended; It is
therefore ordered by this Court and Authority thereof,

That when any Assistants are to be supplied, (...) supplied
the Deputies for the General Court shall give notice to their Constables or
Select men to call together their Freemen in their several towns: by vote
sealed up:
to give in their votes unto the number of seven persons, or as the General
Court shall direct, who shall then and there appoint one to carry them sealed
up unto their Shire towns upon the last fourth day of the week in the first
month from time to time; which persons for each town so assembled shall appoint
one for each Shire to carry them unto Boston the second third day of the
second month there to be opened before two Magistrates. opened at Boston
And those seven or other number agreed upon as aforesaid, that have most votes
shall be the men which shall he nominated at the court of Election for
Assistants as aforesaid. Which persons the Agents for each Shire shall
f^^thwith signify to the Constables of all their several towns in writing
under their hands with the number of votes for each person: signified to (...)
Freemen.
all which the said Constables shall forthwith signify to their Freemen. And
as any has more votes then other so shall they be put to vote. [1647]

4 It is decreed and by this Court declared That it is the constant liberty of
the Freemen of this Jurisdiction to choose yearly at the court of Election out
of the Freemen, Gen: officers [chosen how[ [discharged.
all the general Officers of this Jurisdiction, and if they please to discharge
them at the court of Election by way of vote they may do it without showing
cause. But if at any other General Court, Explainat: of gen: Officers.
we hold it due justice that the reason thereof be allodged and proved. By
general Officers we mean our Governor, Deputy Governor, Assistants,
Treasurer, General of our wars, our Admiral at sea, Commissioners for the
united-Colonies and such others as are, or hereafter may be of the like general
nature. [1641] See courts Sect: 3.

Escheats.
It is ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, That where no Heir or Owner
of houses, lands, tenements, goods or chattels can be found: they shall be
seized to the public Treasury till such Heirs or owners shall make due claim
thereto, unto whom they shall be restored upon just and reasonable terms. [1646]

Farms.
It is ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, That all Farms which are
within the bounds of any town shall henceforth be of the same town in which
they lie, except Me^^ford. [1641] See (...) see watches

(...) Market^
It is ordered by the Authority of this Court that there shall henceforth be a
Market kept at Boston in the county of (...) upon the fifth day of the week from
time to time. At Boston.
And at Salem in the county of Essex upon the fourth day of the week from time
to time. And at L^n on the third day of the w^^k from time to time. (...).
Charls-town.
And at Charls-town at the county of Middlesex upon the sixth day of the week
from time to time. Two (...).
It is also ordered and heerby granted unto Salem aforementioned to have two
Fayrs in a year on the last fourth day of the third month and the last fourth
day of the seventh month from year to year. Water-town.
Also Water-town in the County of Middlesex is granted two Fayrs on the first
sixth day of the fourth month and the first sixth day of the seventh month from
year to year. Dorchester.
Also Dorchester in the County of Suffolk is granted two Fayrs on the third
fourth day of the first month and the last fourth day of the eight month from
year to year [1633 1634 1636 1638]

Ferries.
For settling all common ferries in a right course both for the Passengers and
Owners, it is ordered by this Court and authority thereof;

That whosoever has a Ferry granted upon any passage shall have the sole
liberty for transporting passengers from the place where such Ferrie is
granted, Privilege of Ferries.
to any other ferrie-place where ferrie-boats use to land, and any ferrie-boat
that shall land passengers at any other Ferrie may not take passengers from
thence if the ferrie-boat of the place be ready. Men may pass in own or
neighbors (...). Double pay in the night Now Ferry m^ may recover their pay.
Magistr: and Dep: passage free:
Provided this order shall not prejudice the liberty of any that do use to
pass in their own or neighbors ca^^ooes or boats to their ordinary labor or
business. Also Ferrimen are allowed to take double pay at such common Ferries
after day light is done, and those that make not present pay, being required,
shall give their names in writing or a pawn to the Ferriman, or else he may
complain of such before a Magistrate to get satisfaction. And it is ordered
that all the Magistrates and such as are, or from time to time shall be chosen
to serve as Deputies of the General Court, with their necessary attendants viz:
a man and a horse at all times, during the time of their being Magistrates or
Deputies [and not their whole families] shall be passage free over all Ferries.
Provided where Ferries are appropriated to any, paid by the Country for them
and others 6 li. per (...):
or rented out and so be out of the Countries hands their passage shall be paid
by the Country. And the Ferrimen of Charls-River are allowed for the passage
of the Magistrates, Deputies, Grand and petty Juriemen, prisoners; Keepers and
Marshals, by agreement with them six pounds per annum* to be paid by the
Treasurer.

And whereas men do pass over the common Ferries in great danger oftentimes,
and the Ferrimen excuse themselves by th^^ importunity of passengers and want
of law to enable them to keep due order touching passengers, its therefore
heerby further ordered;

That no person shall press or enter into any ferrie-boat contrary to the will
of the Ferrimen or of the most of the passengers first entered upon pay^ of ten
shillings for every such attempt: Secur passen:
and that every Ferrim^n that shall permit and allow any person to come into
his boat against the will of any of the Magistrates or Deputies or any of the
Elders shipped in such boat or the greater part of the passengers in the said
boat, shall forfeit for every person so admitted or received against such
their will so declared the sum of twenty shillings. Ferriman's power.
And it shall be in the power of any of the Ferrimen to keep out or put out of
his boat any person that shall press, enter into, or stay in any such
ferrie-boat contrary to this Order. And it is further ordered that all persons
shall be received into such ferrie-boats according to their coming, first or
last, only all Public persons or such as go upon public or urgent occasions,
men shall pass as they come exc: public persons etc:
as Physicians, Surgeons and Midwives and such other as are called to (...)
labors, such shall be transported with the first. [1641 1644 1646 1647] See
College.

Fines.
Whereas diverse persons indebted to the (...) for public Rates, and others for
Fines who for avoiding payment sometime ^^ll their houses and lands, and s^^d
away their goods to other Plantations, it is therefore ordered by the authority
of this Court,

That the Treasurer shall grant (...) to the Marshall to attach the bodies of
such persons, where no est: is (...) person attached.
and keep them til they make satisfaction; and all such persons as are to pay
any fines if they have not lands or goods to be distreited shall have their
bodies attached to make satisfaction. The court may disch: from prison.
Provided that any Court of Assistants or County Court may discharge any such
person from imprisonment if they shall find them indeed unable to make
satisfaction. [1638]

Fire.
It is ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, In what cases he (...)
kindles (...) shall pay all damages
that whosoever shall kindle any fyres in woods or grounds lying in common or
enclosed, so as the same shall run into such corn grounds or enclosures; before
the tenth of the first month or after the last of the second month, or on the
last day of the week, or on the Lords day shall pay all damage, and half so
much for a Fine, and be fined of corporally punished
or if not able to pay then to be corporally punished by Warrant from one
Magistrate or the next County Court as the offense shall deserve, not exceeding
twenty stripes for one offense. Provided that any man may kindle fire in his
own ground at any time, so as no damage come thereby either to the Country or
any particular person. Wilful burning timber, (...) etc. double damage
And whosoever shall wittingly and willingly burn or destroy any frame, timber
hewed, sawn or ryven, heaps of wood, charcoal, corn, hay, straw, hemp or flax
he shall pay double damages.

Fish. Fishermen.
U PON the petition of the Inhabitants of Marble-head this Court does heerby
declare that howsoever it has been an all^^ed custom for foreign fishermen to
make use of such Harbors and Grounds in this Country as have not been
inhabited by English men, Forr: Fishermens custom for timber etc:
and to take timber and wood at their pleasure for all their occasions, yet in
these parts which are now possessed and the lands disposed in propriety unto
several towns and persons and that by his Majestyes grant under the Great
Seal of England,

It is not now lawful for any person either Fisherman or other, not allowed.
either Forreiner or of this Country to enter upon the lands so appropriated
to any town or person, or to take any wood or timber in any such place without
the license of such town or Proprietor: and if any person shall trespass
heerin the Town or Proprietor so injured may take their remedy by Action at
law, or may preserve their goods or other interrest by opposing lawful force
against such unjust violence. Lib: for ou^ own Fishermen
Provided that it shall be lawful for such Fishermen as shall be employed by
any Inhabitants in this Jurisdiction in the several seasons of the year to
make use of any of our Harbors and such lands as are near adjoining, for the
drying of their fish or other needful occasions, as also to have such timber
or firewood as they shall have necessary use of for their fishing seasons
where it may be spared, upon due satisfaction.
so as they make due satisfaction for the same to such Town or Proprietor.
[1646]

Forgerie.
IT is ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, That if any person shall
forge any Deed or conveyance, Testament, Bond, Bill, Releas, Acquittance,
Letter of Attourny or any writing to pervert equity and justice, he shall
stand in the Pillory three several Lecture days and render double damages to
the party wronged and also be dissabled to give any evidence or verdict to any
Court or Magistrate. [1646]

Fornication.
IT is ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, That if any man shall
commit Fornication with any single woman, they shall be punished either by
enjoining to Marriage, or Fine, or corporal punishment, or all or any of these
as the Judges in the courts of Assistants shall appoint most agreeable to the
word of God. And this Order to continue till the Court take further order.
[1642]

Freemen, Non-Freemen.
W HERAS there are within this Jurisdiction many members of Churches who to
exempt themselves from all public service in the Commonwealth will not come
in, to be made Freemen, is is therefore ordered by this Court and the Authority
thereof,

That all such members of Churches in the several towns within this
Jurisdiction shall not be exempted from such public service as they are from
time to time chosen to by the Freemen of the several towns; Who are
compellable to publ: services
as Constables, Jurors, Select-men and Surveyors of highways. And if any such
person shall refuse to serve in, or take upon him any such Office being legally
chosen thereunto, he shall pay for every such refusal such Fine as the town
shall impose, not exceeding twenty shillings as Freemen are liable to in such
cases. [1647]

Fugitives, Strangers.
IT is ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, That if any people of other
nations professing the true Christian Religion shall flee to us from the
tyra^^ie or oppression of their persecutors, or from Famine, Wars, or the like
necessary and compulsarie cause, they shall be entertained and succored
amongst us according to that power and prudence God shall give us. (...)
[1641]

Gaming.
U PON complaint of great disorder by the use of the game called Shuffle-board,
in houses of common entertainment, whereby much precious time is spent
unfruitfully and much waft of wine and beer occasioned, it is therefore ordered
and enacted by the Authority of this Court;

That no person shall henceforth use the said game of Shuffle-board in any such
house, Shuffle board
nor in any other house used as common for such purpose, upon pain for every
Keeper of such house to forfeit for ^^ery such offense twenty shillings:
penalties.
and for every person playing at the said game in any such house, to forfeit
for every such offense five shillings: No gaming for money on pen: of treble
value.
Nor shall any person at any time play or game for any money, or monyworth upon
penalty of forfeiting treble the value thereof: one half to the party
informing, the other half to the Treasury. And any Magistrate may hear and
determine any offense against this Law. [1646 1647]

General Court.
IT is ordered, Who have power to ^eprive.
and by this Court declared that the Governor and Deputy Governor jointly
consenting, or any three Assistants concurring in consent shall have power out
of Court to reprive a condemned malefactor till the next Court of Assistants:
or General Court. to pardon.
And that the General Court only shall have power to pardon a condemned
malefactor.

Also it is declared that the General Court has liberty and Authority to
send forth any member of this Commonwealth, None free from foreign Ambessie,
that accepts the service.
of what quality and condition or office whatsoever into foreign parts, about
any public Message or negotiation: notwithstanding any office or relation
whatsoever. Provided the party so sent be acquainted with the affairs he goes
about, and be willing to undertake the service.

Nor shall any General Court be dissolved or adjourned without the consent of
the major part thereof. Major part in Gen: Court dissolve or adjourn.
[1641] See Counsel, Courts.

Governor.
IT is ordered, A casting vote in the Gove^: and Pre^^^d: in Courts and.
and by this Court declared that the Governor shall have a casting vote
whenever an equivote shall fall out in the Court of Assistants, or general
Assembly: so shall the President or Moderatour have in all civil Courts or
Assemblies [1641] See Gen: Court.

Heresy.
A LTHOUGH no humane power to Lord over the Faith and Consciences of men, and
therefore may not constrein them to believe or profess against their
Consciences: yet because such as bring in damnable heresies, tending to the
subversion of the Christian Faith, and destruction of the souls of men, ought
duly to be restreined from such notorious impiety, it is therefore ordered and
decreed by this Court;

That if any Christian within this Jurisdiction shall go about to subvert and
destroy the christian Faith and Religion, by broaching or mainteining any
damnable heresy; as denying the immortality of the Soul, or the resurrection
of the body, or any sin to be repented of in the Regenerate, or any evil done
by the outward man to be accounted sin: or denying that Christ gave himself a
Ransom for our sins, or shall affirm that we are not justified by his Death and
Righteousness, but by the perfection of our own works; or shall deny the
morality of the fourth commandment, or shall endeavor to seduce others to
any the heri^ies aforementioned, every such person continuing obstinate therein
after due means of conviction shall be sentenced to Banishment. Banishment.
[1646]

Hydes and Skins.
W HERAS some persons more seeking their own private advantage then the good of
the public do transport raw hydes and pelts, R^^^id^s
it is ordered and by this Court enacted,

That henceforth no person shall deliver aboard any ship or other vessel,
directly or indirectly any raw hyde, skin, pelt or leather unwrought with
intent to have the same transported out of this Jurisdiction upon pain to
forfeit the same of the value thereof. Forfeit.
And that no Master of any ship or vessel shall receive any raw hyde, skin,
pelt, or leather unwrought directly or indirectly, aboard his ship or vessel to
be so transported upon the like penalty. Provided that any person stranger or
other may transport any hydes or skins brought hither from beyond the seas by
way of Merchandise, or the skins of Beaver, Moos, Bear and Otter. [1646]

Hygh-wayes.
T O the end there may be convenient highways for Travelers, it is ordered
by the Authority of this Court;

That all common highways shall be such (...) may be most easy, and safe for
travelers: to which purpose every town (where any such highway is made, at
to be made) shall appoint two or three men of the next town, By whom laid out.
whose Inhabitants have most occasion thereof, chosen and appointed by their
said town, who shall from time to time lay out all common highways where they
may be most convenient; Places exempted.
notwithstanding any man's propriety, (so as it occasion not the pulling down
of any man's house, or laying open any garden or orchard): who in common grounds
or where the soil is wet, myrie, or very rockie shall lay out such highways
the wyder, viz: six, eight, ten or more rods.

Provided that if any man be thereby damaged in his improved ground the town
shall make him reasonable satisfaction by estimation of those of the two towns
that laid out the same. Recompense to Propriet:
And if such persons deputed cannot agree in either case it shall be referred
to the County Court of that Shire; or to the Court of Assistants who shall have
power to hear and determine the Case. And if any person find himself justly
grieved with any act or thing done by the persons deputed aforesaid: Appeal.
he may appeal to the County Court aforesaid, or to the Court of Assistants,
but if he be found to complain without cause he shall surely pay all charges of
the parties and Court during that Action and also be fined to the Country as
the Court shall adjudge. [1639]

2 It is ordered and declared by this Court that the selected Townsmen of
every town have power to lay out (by themselves or others) particular and
private ways concerning their own town only: Private ways in towns.
so as no damage be done to any man without due recompense to be given by the
judgment of the said Townsmen, and one or two chosen by the said Townsmen
and one or two chosen by the party: and if any man shall find himself justly
greived he may appeal to the next County Court of that Shire who shall do
justice therein on both hands as in other cases of appeals. [1642]

3 UPON information that diverse highways are much annoyed and encumbered by
gates and rayls erected upon them, it is ordered and enacted by the Authority
of this Court,

That upon any information or complaint made either to the court of Assistants,
or any County Court or to any Magistrate of any such gates or rayls erected,
Our Magistr: power to order redress
or to be erected upon any common highway, the same Court or Magistrate shall
appoint a Committee of discreet and indifferent men to view such encumbrance,
and to order the reformation thereof. And if the parties whom it shall concern
shall not submit to such orders, they shall require them to appear at the next
Court for that (...): and also shall certify the encumbrance found and order
by them made, under their hands unto the said Court, or appear in person to
prosecute the cause; where it shall be heard and determined for the case and
conveniencie of Travelers, with due respect to the Proprietors cost and
damage, but no person shall stand charged with the repair of common highways
through his own ground. [1647]

Idleness.
IT is ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, that no person, Houshol^^
^or other shall spend his time idly or unproffitably under pain of such
punishment as the Court of Assistants or County Court shall think meet to
inflict. And for this end it is ordered that the Constable of every place
shall use special care and diligence to take knowledge of offenders in this
kind, Constable care and duty
especially of common coasters, unproffitable fowlers and tobacco takers, and
present the same unto the two next Assistants, The power of two Assistants
who shall have power to hear and determine the cause, or transfer it to the
next Court. [1633]

Jesuits.
T HIS Court taking into consideration the great wars, combustions and
divisions which are this day in Europe: and that the same are observed to be
raised and fo^^^ed chiefly by the secret underwritings, and solicitations of
those of the Jesu^ticall Order, men brought up and devoted to the ^^ligion and
court of Rome; which both occasioned diverse States to expel them their
territories; for prevention whereof among our selves, it (...) ordered and
enacted by Authority of this Court,

That no Jesuit, or spiritual or ecclesiastical person [as they are termed]
ordained by the authority of the Pope, or Sea of Rome shall henceforth at any
time repair to, or come within this Jurisdiction: And if any person shall give
just cause of suspicion that he is one of such Society or Order he shall be
brought before some of the Magistrates, One Magistr:
and if he cannot free himself of such suspicion he shall be committed to
prison, or bound over to the next Court of Assistants, Banishment.
to be tried and proceeded with by Banishment or otherwise at the Court shall
see cause: and if any person so banished shall be taken the second time within
this Jurisdiction upon lawful trial and conviction he shall be put to death.
Provided this Law shall not extend to any such Jesuit, spiritual or
ecclesiastical person as shall be cast upon our shoars, by shipwreck or other
accident, so as he continue no longer then till he may have opportunity of
passage for his departure; nor to any such as shall come in company with any
Messenger hither upon public occasions, or any Merchant or Master of any ship,
belonging to any place not in en^^itie with the State of England, or our
selves, so as they depart again with the same Messenger, Master or Merchant,
and behave themselves in offensively during their abode here. [1647]

Impost.
IT is ordered by Authority of this Court that (...) upon (...) lying within
this Jurisdiction shall be, Worr^^^co.
and be reputed as a part of the town of Springfield and liable to all charges
there, as other parts of the same town, until upon erecting some other
Plantation near unto it it shall be thought fit by this Court to annex it to
such new Plantation.

It is also ordered that the Trading-house at Worr^^^co and all other
Trading-houses erected or to be erected, Trading-houses.
maintained or used within this Jurisdiction, for trading with the Indians only
o^ chiefly (...) contributarie to all public and common charges, both in Town
and Country, and every such person as shall inhabit or trade in any such
Trading-house or near the same shall pay unto the public Treasury (by the
hands of such as shall be assigned to receive the same) for every skin of
Beaver, Two pen^e a (...).
Otter, Bear or Moose two pence. And if such person so assigned shall have
cause to suspect that any such Tra^^ has not given a true account of all such
skins so traded, he shall inform one of the next Magistrates thereof, who shall
send for such Trader and require him to deliver account upon his (...), which
if he shall refuse to do, he may commit him to prison on take bond with
Surety for his appearance at the next Court of Assistants to answer his
contempt, and be proceeded with according to justice.

And it is farther ordered that all such skins so received, by way of trading,
in, or near any such Trading-house for which the said Impost of two pence a
skin shall not be satisfied within one week after dema^nd thereof shall be
forfeited to the public Treasury, or the va^^e thereof: Forfeit.
to be levied by Warrant from any one Magistrate upon any skins or other goods
in such Trading-house. [1647]

2 For the better support of the Government of this Commonwealth and the
maintenance of Fortifications for the protecting and safe-guarding of our
Coasts and Harbors, for our selves and others that come to trade with us, it
is ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof,

That every person, Merchant, Seaman, or other that shall being wines into any
our Harbors, in any ships or vessels whatsoever (except they come directly
from England as their first Port) before they land any of the said wines, more
or less, Entry of wine
shall first make entry of as many Buts, Pipes, or other vessels, as they or
any of them shall put on shore, by a note under their hands, delivered unto the
Officer at his house (who is to receive the Customs) upon pain of forfeiture
and confiscation of all such wines as are landed before such entry made, on
pain of forfeiture.
wheresoever found, the one half to the Country, the other half to the
Officer: and the Merchants or Owners of such wines of any kind, as soon as he
lands them, Custom when paid.
shall deliver and pay unto the said Officer, what is due for Custom of them
according to this Order, in wine according (...) proportion of the goodness of
the parcel that is brought in, as the Officer and Own^^ (...) agree, to the
contentment and satisfaction of the said Officer, or else the Owner and Officer
to nominate a third man who shall put a small price between them, in point of
valuation of the wines for Customs: but if they cannot agree, upon notice from
the Officer unto the Treasurer for the time being, he shall determine the price
thereof, and being so ordered the Officer and Merchant shall accept thereof. And
it is farther ordered that he that is the chief Officer to receive such
Customs shall have under him a Deputy or Deputies who shall be as Searchers
or waytors in several places to take up such wines, Customers Deputy.
by the chief Officers appointment, and to take notice of what is landed in any
place that the Country be not defrauded, who shall have such due recompense as
the chief Officer in his discretion shall agree with them for, either by the
Butt or Pipe or by the year. All wines to pay customs according to these rates
following viz: for every Butt or pipe of Fyall wines or any other wines of
those Western Islands five shillings. Rates of wine
For every Pipe of Madarie wines six shillings eight pence. For every Butt or
Pipe of Sherris sack, ^al^go or Canarie wines ten shillings. For Muscadel^,
Mal^sies and other wines from the Streights ten shillings. For Bastards, Tents
and Alligants ten shillings: and proportionably for greater or lesser vessels
of each kind. For every Hogshead of French wines two shillings six pence, and
proportionably for greater or lesser vessels.

And for better recovering of any such Customs of ^^ints or forfeitures, for
not entering according to this Order and for refusing of payment of such
Customs to the satisfaction of the Officer, it is further ordered, Customers
power.


That the said Officer has heerby power and is required to go into all Houses
or Cellars where he knows or suspecteth any wine to be, and from time to time
shall seiz upon such wines as are not entered according to this Order: and also
seiz upon, and take possession of so much wines as to make payment of what
Custom is due according to entries made, and is refused or neglected to be paid
in due manner according to that Order. Constable: etc: to aid the Customer:
And all Constables and other Officers are heerby required to assist and aid
the Officer in the discharge of his duty, and helping to break open such Houses
or Cellars, if the Owners of such wines shall refuse to open their doors or
deliver their keys in a peacable way. And any Smith, Carter, Owner of boat,
Porter or other that shall be required by the Officer to put to their hand to
help and assist in taking, loading and transporting such wines for the use of
the Country, and shall refuse or neglect such service for due hire shall
forfeit to the common Treasury ten shillings for every such default, on
penalty of 10 ss.
to be levied by the Constable by warrant from any one Magistrate. And all
debts due unto the Country for custom of wines, where wines are not to be
found, they are to be recovered by way of Action, Custom recovered by Actio^
according to a course of law as in other cases, and this Order to be in force
to recover Customs from all those that have landed wine in this Jurisdiction
already and not paid Custom.

Impresses.
IT is ordered, and by this Court declared, that no man shall be compelled to
any public work, Only by Gen Court upon due recompense.
or service, unless the Press be grounded upon some act of the General Court;
and have reasonable allowance therefore: nor shall any man be compelled in
person to any office, Pres-free, for defects:
work, wars, or other public service that is necessarily and sufficiently
exempted, by any natural or personal impediment; as by want of years, grea^es
of age, from foreign wars:
defect of mind, failing of senses, or impotencye of lims. Nor shall any man
be compelled to go out of this Jurisdiction upon any offensive wars, which this
Commonwealth, or any of our friends or cons^ederates shall voluntarily
undertake; but only upon such vindictive and defensive wars, Limitation.
in our own behalf, or the behalf of our friends and cons^ederates; as shall be
enterprized by the counsel, and consent of a General Court, or by Authority
derived from the same. Nor shall any man's cattle or goods of what kind soever
be pressed, for cattle and goods. Limitation twofold.
or taken for any public use or service; unles it be by Warrant grounded upon
some act of the General Court: nor without such reasonable prizes and hire as
the ord^^^tie rates of the Country do afford. And if his cattle or goods
shall perish, or suffer damage in such service, the Owner shall be sufficiently
recompensed. Recompense
[1641]

Imprisonment.
IT is ordered, and by this Court declared; that no m^ns person shall be
restreined or imprisoned by any authority whatsoever before the Law has
sentenced him thereto: Who be baylable.
if he can put in sufficient security, Bail or Mainprize for his appearance,
and good behavior in the mean time: unles it be in crimes Capital, and
contempt in open Court, and in such cases where some express Act of Court does
allow it. [1641]

Indians.
IT is ordered by Authority of this Court; License to buy their land.
that no person whatsoever shall henceforth buy land of any Indian, without
license first had and obtained of the General Court: and if any shall offend
heerin, such land so bought shall be forfeited to the Country.

Nor shall any man within this Jurisdiction directly or indirectly amend, none
must repair their guns
repair, or cause to be amended or repaired any gun, small or great, belonging
to any Indian, nor shall endeavor the fame. nor sell gun or ammunition on pen:
of 10 li.
Nor shall sell or give to any Indian, directly or indirectly any such gun, or
any gunpowder, shot or lead, or shot-mould, or any mi^itarie weapons or
armor: upon pain of ten pounds fine, at the least for every such offense: and
that the court of Assistants shall have power to increase the Fine; or to
impose corporal punishment (where a Fine cannot be had) at their discretion.

It is also ordered by the Authority aforesaid that every town shall have
power to restrein all Indians from profaning the Lords day. Who may restrein
them from prof, (...) the Sabbath.
[1633 1637 1641]

2 Wherein it appears to this Court the notwithstanding the former Laws, made
against (...), powder and Ammunition to the Indians, they are yet supplied by
indirect (...) therefore ordered by (...) and Authority thereof;

That if any person after publication heerof, No arms sold to Indian or
Forreiner ^out license.
shall sell, give or barter any gun or guns, powder, bullets, shot or lead to
any Indian whatsoever, or unto any person inhabiting out of this Jurisdiction
without license of this Court, or the court of Assistants, or some two
Magistrates, (...) on for^: for (...) gun 10 li, for 1 li, powder 5 li, 1 li,
shot etc: 40 ss.
he shall forfeit for every gun so sold, given or battered ten pounds: and for
every pound of powder five pounds: and for every pound of (...), shot or lead
forty shillings: and so proportionably for any greater or suffer (...). [1642]

3 It is ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, that in all places, the
English and such others as co-inhabit within our Jurisdiction shall keep their
cattl;e from (...) the Indians corn, (...) preservation of their corn.
in any ground where they have right to plant; (...) and of any of their (...)
be destroyed for want of fencing, or hearding; the town shall (...)
satisfaction, and shall have power among themselves to lay the charge where the
occasion of the damage did ar^^e. (...)
Provided that the Indians shall make (...) the cattle of such a town, farm, or
person did the damage. And for encouragement of the Indians toward the fencing
in of their corn fields, such towns, farms or persons, whose cattle may annoy
them that way, shall direct, Help in Fencing.
assist and help them in felling of trees, ryving, and sharpening of ray^^ and
holing of posts: allowing one Englishman to three or more Indians. And shall
also draw the fencing into place for them, and allow one man a day or two
toward the setting up the same, and either lend or sell them tools to finish
it. Provided that such Indians, to whom the Country, or any town has given,
or shall give ground to plant upon, or that shall purchase ground of the
English shall fence such their corn fields or ground at their own charge as the
English do or should do; and if any Indians refuse to fence their corn ground
(being tendered help as aforesaid) in the presence and hearing of any Magistrate
or selected Townsmen being met together they shall keep off all cattle or lose
one half of their damages.

And it is also ordered that if any harm be done at any time by the Indians
unto the English in their cattle; Indians hurting cattle Satisfaction.
the Governor or Deputy Governor with two of the Assistants or any three
Magistrates or any County Court may order satisfaction according to law and
justice. [1640 1648]

4 Considering that one end in planting these parts was to propagate the true
Religion unto the Indians: and that diverse of them are become subjects to the
English and have engaged themselves to be willing and ready to understand the
Law of God, it is therefore ordered and decreed,

That such necessary and wholesome Laws, which are in force, and may be made from
time to time, to reduce them to civilitie of life shall be once in the year (if
the times be safe) made known to them; by such fit persons as the General Court
shall nominate, having the help of some able interpreter with them.

Considering also that interpretation of tongues is appointed of God for
propagating the Truth: and may therefore have a blessed success in the hearts
of others in due season, it is therefore further ordered and decreed,

That two Ministers shall be chosen by the Elders of the Churches every year
at the Court of Election, (...)
and so be sent with the consent of their Churches (with whomsoever will freely
offer themselves to accompany them in that service) to make known the heavenly
counsel of God among the Indians in most familiar manner, by the help of some
able Interpreter; as may be most available to bring them unto the knowledge of
the truth, and their conversation to the Rules of Jesus Christ. And for that
end that something be allowed them by the General Court, to give away freely
unto those Indians whom they shall perceive most willing and ready to be
instructed by them.

And it is farther ordered and decreed by this Court; (...)
that no Indian shall at any time powaw, or perform outward worship to their
false gods: or to the devil in any part of our Jurisdiction; whether they be
such as shall dwell here, or shall come hither: and if any shall transgress
this Law, the Powawer shall pay five pounds; the Procurer five pounds; and
every other countenancing by his presence or otherwise being of age of
discretion twenty shillings. [1646]

Inditements.
IF any person shall be indicted of any capital crime (who is not then in
durance) and shall refuse to render his person to some Magistrate within one
month after three Proclaimations publicly made in the town where he usually
abides, there being a month betwixt Proclaimation and Proclaimation, his lands
and goods shall be seized to the use of the common Treasury, till he make his
lawful appearance. And such withdrawing of himself shall stand in stead of
one wittnes to prove his crime, unles he can make it appear to the Court that
he was necessarily hindered. [1646]

In-keepers, Tippling, Drunkenes.
F ORASMUCH as there is a necessary use of houses of common entertainment in
every Commonwealth, and of such as re^^l wine, beer and victuals; yet because
there are so many abuses of that lawful liberty, both by persons entertaining
and persons entertained, there is also need of strict Laws and Rules to
regulate such an employment: It is therefore ordered by this Court and
Authority thereof;

That no person or persons shall at any time under any pretense or color
whatsoever undertake to be a common Victuailer, No common Victuailer. Cook,
Vintner etc without license.
Keeper of a Cooks shop, or house for common entertainment, Tav^^ner, or
public ^^ller of wine, ale, beer or strong-water (by re-tale), nor shall any
fill wine privately in his house or out of doors by a less quantity, or under
a quarter (...) without approbation of the selected Townsmen and License of the
Shire Court where they dwell: upon pain of forfeiture of five pounds for every
such offense, On pen: 5 li.
or imprisonment at pleasure of the Court, where satisfaction cannot be had.

And every person so licenced for common entertainment shall have some
inoffensive Sign obvious for strangers direction, Sign
and such as have no such Sign after three months so licenced from time to
time shall lose their license: and others allowed in their stead. No beer above
two pence the quart Any may sell out of doo^s of 1 d. a quart.
And any licenced person that sells beer shall not sell any above twopence
the ale-quart; upon penalty of three shillings four pence for every such
offense. And it is permitted to any that will to sell beer out of doors at a
penny the ale-quart and under.

Neither shall any such licenced person aforesaid suffer any to be drunken, or
drink excessively viz: above half a pint of wine for one person at one time;
or to continue tippling above the space of half an hour, or at unseasonable
times, or after nine of the clock at night in, In-holde^^ forfeit
or about any of their houses on penalty of five shillings for every such
offense.

And every person found drunken viz: so that he be thereby bereaved or disabled
in the use of his understanding, Penalty of (...) 10 ss. ex^: 3 ss. 4 ^. Tip^:
unseasonably.
appearing in his speech or gesture in any the said houses or elsewhere shall
forfeit ten shillings. And for excessive drinking three shillings four pence.
And for continuing above half an hour tippling two shillings six pence. And for
tippling at unseasonable times, or after nine a clock at night five shillings:
for every offense in these particulars being lawfully convict thereof. And for
want of payment such shall be imprisoned until they pay: Stocks.
or be set in the Stocks one hour or more [in some open place] as the weather
will permit not exceeding three hours at one time.

Provided notwithstanding such licenced persons may entertain seafaring men,
or land travelers in the night-season, Proviso.
when they come first on shore, or from their journey for their necessary
refreshment, or when they prepare for their voyage or journie the next day
early; so there be no disorder among them; and also Strangers, Lodgers or other
persons in an orderly way may continue in such houses of common entertainment
during meal times, or upon lawful business what time their occasions shall
require.

Nor shall any Merchant, Cooper, Owner or Keeper of wines or other persons that
have the government of them suffer any person to drink to excess, The laws
further extent
or drunkenes, in any their wine-Cellars, Ships, or other vessels or places
where wines doelye; on pain to forfeit for each person so doing ten shillings.

And if any person offend in drunkenes, excessive or long drinking the second
time they shall pay double Fines. Second offense double penal: Third offen:
Whipping.
And if they fall into the same offense the third time they shall pay ^^eble
Fines. And if the parties be not able to pay the Fines then he that is found
drunk shall be punished by whipping to the number of ten stripes: stocks.
and he that offends in excessive or long drinking shall be put into the stocks
for three hours when the weather may not hazard his life or lims. Fourth offen:
And if they offend the fourth time they shall be imprisoned until they put in
two sufficient Sureties for their good behavior.

And it is farther ordered that if any person that keeps, or hereafter shall
keep a common house of entertainmen, Victuailer (...): ^third time (...):
shall be lawfully convicted the third time for any offense against this Law:
he shall (for the space of three years next ensuing the said conviction) be
disabled to keep any such house of entertainment, or sell wine, beer or the
like; unles the Court aforesaid shall see cause to continue them.

It is farther ordered that every in-keeper, or Victuailer shall provide for
the of strangers (...) one or more enclosures for Summer and (...) and
provender for Winter with conveni^^^ (...) room and attendance under penalty
of two shillings six (...) for every days (...)* (...) for horses.
and double damage to the party thereby wronged (...) it be by inevitable
accident.

And in it farther ordered, by the Authority aforesaid, Vintner.
that no Tave^ner or seller of wine by retale, ^i^unced as aforesaid shall take
above nine pounds profit by the Butt or (...) of wine, (and proportionably for
all b^lden vessels) toward his wast in drawing and otherwise: pay to (...) the
(...).
out of which allowance every such Taverner or Vintner shall pay fifty
shillings (...) be Bu^t or Pipe and proportionably for all other vessels to the
Country. For which he shall account with the (...) too general or his Deputy
every six months and discharge and (...). All which they may do by selling six
pence a quart in (...) (which they shall no time exceed) more then it cost by
the Butt, beside the benefit of their (...) which they know how to make use of.
give account.
And every Taver^^e^or Vint^l^ shall give a true account and notice unto the
Auditor or his Deputy of every vessel of wine he (...) from time to time
within three days; upon pain of forfeiting the same or the value thereof.

And all such (...) strong water shall pay in like manner two pence upon every
^^art to the use of the Country, Two points a quart for retai^ of strong water.
who also shall give notice to the Auditor or hi^ Depu^^^^ (...) and bottle or
other quantity they buy within three days upon (...).

Also it is ordered that in all places where week day Lectures are kept, all
Taver^^^ers, (...) and Tablers that are within a mile of the Meeting House,
Com: houses (...) Lecture time,
shall from time to time clear their houses of all persons able to go to the
Meeting, during the time of the (...) (except upon extraordinary cause, for the
necessary refreshing of strangers u^expectedly repairing to them) upon pain of
five shillings for every such offense over and besides the penalties incurred
by this Law for any other disorder.

It is also ordered that all offenses against this Law may be heard and
determined by any one Magistrat^, One Magistr: may he (...) etc.
who shall heerby have power by Warrant to send for parties, and witnesses, and
to examine the said witnesses upon oath and the parties without (...) concerning
any of these offenses: and upon due conviction either by (...) of the said
Magistrate, for affirmation of the Constable; and one sufficient witness with
circumstances concurring, Fines levied.
or two witnesses, or confession of the party to levy the said several
fines, by Warrant to the Constable for that end, who shall be accountable to
the Auditor for the same.

And if any person shall voluntarily confess his offense against this Law
(...) any the particulars thereof, ^his oath shall be taken in evidence and
stand good against any other offending to the same time. Delinq^^ents (...)


Lastly, it is ordered by the Authority aforesaid that all Constables may,
Constable: search
and shall from time to time duly make search throughout the limits of their
towns upon Lords days, and Lecture day^^ in times of Exercise; and also at all
other times, so often as they shall (...) for all offenses and offenders against
this Law in any the particulars thereof. And (...) information, or complains of
any of their Inhabitants, or other (...) persons ^^^other Taverner, Uictuai^er,
Tabler or other; they shall refuse or neglect to make search as aforesaid,
Constables neglect.
or shall not to their power perform all other things belonging to their place
and Office of Constableship: then upon complaint and due proof before any one
Magistrate within three months after such refusal or neglect* they shall be
fined for every such offense ten shillings, to belevied by the Marshal as in
(...) Warrant from such Magistrate before whom they are convicted, or Warrant
from the Treasurer upon notice from such Magistrate. [1645 1646 1647] See
(...), Licenses.

(...)

IT is ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, that the Constable of
every town upon (...) from the Recorder of each Court, shall give timely
notice to the freemen of (...) many able discreet men as the Process sh^l direct
which men so chosen he shall warn to attend the Court whereto they are
appointed, and shall make return of the Process unto the Recorder aforesaid:
Juries for trials.
which men so chosen shall be impannelled and sworn truly to try betwixt party
and party, who shall find the matter of fact with the damages and costs
according to their evidence, Verdict according to fact
and the Judges shall declare the Sentence (or direct the Jurie to find)
according to the law. And if there be any matter of apparent equity as upon
the forfeiture of an Obligation, Equity and law in the same case
breach of covenant without damage, or the like, the Bench shall determine such
matter of equity.

2. Nor shall any trial pass upon any for life or bannishment but by a
special Jurie so summoned for that purpose, Trial for life etc: by 12 (...)
or by the General Court.

3. It is also ordered by the Authority aforesaid that there shall be
Grand-Juries summoned every year unto the several Courts, Juries for inqui^^e
in each Jurisdiction; to inform the Court of any misdemeanors that they shall
know or hear to be committed by any person or persons whatsoever within this
Jurisdiction. And to do any other service of the Commonwealth that according
to law they shall be enjoined to by the said Court; may be for trial also.
and in all cases wherein evidence (...) so obscure or defective that the Jurie
cannot clearly and safely give a positive verdict, Positive verd* Non lique^
whether it be Grand, or Petty Jurie, it shall have liberty to give a Non
liquet or a special verdict, in which last, that is, a special verdict the
judgment of the Cause shall be left unto the Bench. And all Jurors shall have
liberty in matters of fact if they cannot find the (...) yet to find and
present in their verdict so much as they can. Partial verd:


4. And if the Bench and Jurors shall so differ at any time about their verdict
that either of them cannot proceed with peace of consc^^nce, Differ: twixt Jury
and Bench issued
the Case shall be referred to the General Court who shall take the question
from both and determine it.

5. And it is farther ordered that whenever any June of trials, or Jurors
are not clear in their judgments of consciences, Jurie in (...) doubts any
advise op^ty (...) set^ but once a year except:
concerning any Case wherein they are to give their verdict, they shall have
liberty, in open Court to advise with any man they shall think fit to resolve
or direct them, before they give in their verdict. (...) And no Freeman shall
be compelled to serve upon Juries above one ordinary Court in a year: except
Grand-jurie men, who shall hold two Courts together at the least, and such
others as shall be summoned to serve in case of life and (...) or bannishment.
[1634] [1641 1642] See Secre^it.

Justice.
IT is ordered, and by this Court declared; that every person within this
Jurisdiction, (...) liberti^.
whether Inhabitant or other shall enjoy the same justice and law that is
general for this Jurisdiction which we constitute and execute one toward
another, in all cases proper to our cognizance without partiality or delay.
[1641]

Lanas, Free lanas,
IT is ordered, and by this Court declared; that all our Lands and Heritages
shall be free from all Fines and Licenses upon alienations, and from all Harms,
Wardships, Liveries, Primersei^^ns, year, day and waft, Escheats and
forfeitures, upon the death of Parents or Ancesters, be they natural,
unnatural, casual or judicial and that for ever. [1641] See Ability, Escheats,
Strangers.

Leather.
T HIS Court taking into serious consideration the several (...) and abuses
which in other places have been and are commonly practiced by the Tanners,
Currters and workers of leather* as also the abuses and inconveniences which
acrue to the sever all members of this Commonwealth, by leather not
sufficiently tanned and wrought, which is occasioned by the negligence and
unskilfullnes of those several tradesmen which before, in, and after it is in
the hands of the Tanner may be much bettered or impaired, for prevention
whereof, it is ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof;

That no person using or occupying the seat or mystery of a Butcher, Currier,
or Shoemaker by himself or any other, Butcher: (...) no Tann.
shall use or exercise the feat or mystery of a Tanner on pain of forfeiture
of six shillings eight pence for every hyde or skin by him or them so tanned
whilst be or they shall use or occupy any of the mysteries aforesaid.

Nor shall any Tanner during his using the said trade of tanning, use or
occupy the feat or mystery of either Butcher, Tanner no Butcher, Currier
Shoem.
Currier or Shoemaker by himself or any other upon pain of the like forfeiture.

Nor shall any Butcher by himself or any other person gash or cut any hyde of
ox, Gash: hyde or skin 12 (...)
bull, steer, or cow in fleaing thereof, or otherwise whereby the same shall be
impaired or hurt, on pain of forfeiture for every such gash or cut in any hyde
or skin twelve pence.

Nor shall any person or persons henceforth bargain, buy, make any contract, or
bespeak any rough hyde of ox, Rough hyds
bull, steer or cow in the hair, but only such persons as have and do use and
exercise the art of tanning.

Nor shall any person or persons using, or which shall use the mystery or
faculty or tanning at any time or times hereafter, offer or put to sale any
kind of leather, which shall be insufficiently or not thoroughly tanned, well
tasted and d^yed, Penalty.
or which shall not then have been after the tanning thereof well and thoroughly
dried, upon pain of forfeiting so much of his or their said leather as by any
Searcher or Sealer of leather lawfully appointed shall be found insufficiently
tanned, or not thoroughly dried as aforesaid.

Nor shall any person or persons using or occupying the mystery of tanning,
set any their Fats in tan-hills or other places, Leather taking ukinde heats,
Penalty 10 li
where the woozes or leather put to tan in the same shall or may take any
unkind heats; nor shall put any leather into any hot or warm woozes whatsoever
on pain of twenty pounds for every such offense.

Nor shall any person or persons using or occupying the mystery or faculty of
currying, C^rriers duty
currie any kind of leather, except it be well and thoroughly tanned; nor shall
currie any hyde being not thoroughly d^yed after his wet season; in which wet
season he shall not use any stale, urin, or any other deceitful or subtle
mixture, thing, way or means to corrupt or hurt the same: nor shall currie any
leather meet for utter sole leather with any other then good hard tallow, nor
with any less of that then the leather will receive: nor shall currie any
kind of leather meet for upper leather and inner soles, but with good and
sufficient stuff, being fresh and not salt, and thoroughly liquored till it
will receive no more: nor shall burn or scald any hyde or leather in the
currying, but shall work the same sufficiently in all points and respects;
Penalty.
on pain of forfeiture for every such offense or act done contrary to the true
meaning of this Order the full value of every such hyde ma^^ed by his evil
workmanship or handling, which shall be judged by two, or more sufficient and
honest skillful persons, Curriers or others, on their oath given to them for
that end by any Assistant.

And every town where need is, or shall be, shall choose one or two persons of
the most honest and skillful within their several Townships, and present them
unto the County Court, Searchers sworn, their duty
or one Magistrate who shall appoint and swear the said persons: by their
discretion to make search and view within the Precincts of the^-limits as often
as they shall think good and need shall be, who shall have a Mark or Seal
prepared by each town for that purpose, and the said Searchers or one of them
shall keep the same, to (...).
and therewith shall seal such leather as they shall find sufficient in all
points and no other.

And if the said Searchers, or any of them shall find any leather sold, or
offered to be sold, brought, or offered to be searched or sealed, which shall
be tanned, wrought, converted or used contrary to the true intent and meaning
of this Order, it shall be lawful for the said Searchers, seiz defective
or any of them to seiz all such leather and to retain the same in their
custody, until such time as it be tried by such Tryers, and in such (...) as
in this Order i^ appointed viz. upon the forfeiture of any leather the Officer
so sei^ing the (...) shall within three days call to (...) four or six men,
Tryers of (...) that sei^ed
honest and skillful in such ware to view the same in the presence of the
party (who shall have timely notice thereof) or without him, who shall certify
upon their oaths unto the next County Court for that Shirts, or unto one of the
Assistants the defect of the same leather, except the party shall before
submit to their judgment.

The like power shall the said Searcher have to search all leather wrought into
shoes and boots, Searching (...) Seal chief defaulting.
(...) as also to seize all such as they find to be made of insufficient
leather, (...) not well and sufficiently wrought up (...) And if any Searcher
or Sealer of leather shall refuse with convenient speed to seal any leather
sufficiently tanned, wrought and used according to the true meaning of this
Order, or shall seal that which shall be insufficient, the^^ every such
Searcher and Sealer of leather shall forfeit for every such offense the full
value of so much as shall be insufficiently tanned.

And the Fees for searching and sealing of leather shall be one penny a hyde
for any parcel less than five, Searchers Fee
and for all other parcels after the rate of six pence a (...) which the Tanner
shall pay upon the sealing of the said leather from time to time. paid by the
(...).


Lastly it is ordered by the Authority aforesaid that the several Fines and
(...) in this Order mentioned, Fines (...):
(...) shall be equally divided into three parts and distributed as (...) viz.
due path to the common Treasure of the Shire wherein the offense is committed,
another third part (...) the common Treasury of the Township where such
offender inhabiteth (...) and the other third part to the Seizer or Seizers of
such leather, (...) or boots, as i^ insufficiently (...), c^rried or wrought
from time to time [1640]

Levies.
F ORASMUCH as the Marshal^ and other Officers have complained in this (...)
they are oftentimes in great doubt how to (...) themselves no (...) of their
offices, it is ordered by the Authority of this Court;

That in case of Fines and Assessements to be levied, and upon Exc^ution in
civil Actions, the Officer shall demand the same of the party, Officer shall
dem^^nd (...) refuse may break open etc
or at his house or place of usual abode, and upon refusal or nonpayment he
shall have power (calling the Constable if he see cause for his assistance) to
break open the door of any house, chest, or place where he shall have (...)
that any goods liable to such Levy or Excu^tion shall be; the person
and if he be to take the person he may do the like, if upon (...) shall
refuse ^o render himself.

And (...) charges the Officer shall necessarily be put unto upon any such
occasion, Necessary charge
he shall have power to levy the same, as he does the debt, Fine, or
Execution: and where the Officer shall levy any such goods upon execution as
cannot be conveyed to the place where the party dwells, for whom such
Execution shall belevied, without considerable charge, he shall levy the said
charge also with the Execution.

The like order shall be observed in le^ying of Fines. Provided it shall not be
lawful (...) (...) Things not subject to levy. Officer not (...) our estate
such Officer to levy any man^ necessary bedding, apparel, tools, or Arms,
neither implements of hous^hold which are for the necessary upholding of his
(...), but in such cases he shall (...) his land or person according to law:
and in (...) case shall the Officer be put to seek out any man's estate farther
then his place of us bode; but if the party will not discover his goods or
lands, the Officer may take his person.

(...) it is also ordered and declared that if any Officer shall do injury to
any by color of his Office, in these or any other cases he shall belyab^e upon
complaint of the (...) wronged, by Action or Information to make (...)
restitution. [164^]

Liberties Common.
IT is ordered by this Court, decreed and declared; that every man whether
Inhabitant or Forreiner, Freedom in publ. Assemb. [(...) [Strangers.
Free or not Free shall have liberty to come to any public Court, Counsel,
or Town-meeting; and either by speech or writing, to move any lawful,
seasonable, or material question; or to present any necessary motion,
complaint, petition, bill or information whereof that Meeting has proper
cognizance, so it be done in convenient time, due order and respective manner.
[1641]

2 Every Inhabitant who is an hous-holder shall have free fishing and fowling,
Fishing and fowl: where the Sea^eb^s and flows except proprieties.
in any great Ponds, Bays, Coves and Rivers so far as the Sea ebs and flows,
within the precincts of the town where they dwell, unles the Freemen of the
same town, or the General Court have otherwise appropriated them. Provided that
no town shall appropriate to any particular person or persons, any great Pond
cont^ining more then ten acres of land: and that no man shall come upon
another propriety without their leave otherwise then as hereafter expressed;
the which clearly to determine, it is declared that in all creeks, coves and
other places, about and upon salt water where the Sea ebs and flows, to low
water no^ executing 100 rod.
the Proprietor of the land adjoining shall have propriety to the low water
mark where the Sea does not ebb above a hundred rods, and not more wheresoever
it ebs farther. Provided that such Proprietor shall not by this liberty have
power to stop or hinder the passage of boats or other vessels in, water (...)
free and ponds above 10 acrs
or through any sea creeks, or coves to other men's houses or lands. And for
great Ponds lying in common though within the bounds of some town, it shall be
free for any man to fish and fowl there, and may pass and repasse on foot
through any man's propriety for that end* so they trespass not upon any man's
corn or meadow. [1641 1647]

3 Every man of, or within this Jurisdiction shall have free liberty, Removals
free
(notwithstanding any civil power) to remove both himself and his family at
their pleasure out of the same. Provided there be no legal impediment to the
contrary. [1641] See Arrests, Records, Witnesses.

Lying.
W HERAS truth in words as well as in actions is required of all men,
especially of Christians who are the professed Servants of the God of Truth;
and whereas all lying is contrary to truth, and some sorts of lies are not only
sinful (as all lies are) but also pernicious to the Publick-weal, and
injurious to particular persons; it is therefore ordered by this Court and
Authority thereof,

That every person of the age of discretion [which is accounted fourteen
years] who shall wittingly and willingly make, Age of discretion 14 years
or publish any Lie which may be pernicious to the public weal, or tending to
the damage or injury of any particular person, or with intent to deceive and
abuse the people with false news or reports: One Magistr. may hear etc: First
offense 10 s^ or s^ocks.
and the same duly proved in any Court or before any one Magistrate (who has
heerby power granted to hear, and determine all offenses against this Law) such
person shall be fined for the first offense ten shillings, or if the party be
unable to pay the same then to be set in the stocks so long as the said Court
or Magistrate shall appoint, in some open place, not exceeding two hours. Sec:
offense 20 shill: or whipped. Third offense 40 shill: or whipped, Fourth offen:
10 ss more or 1 stripes more
For the second offense in that kind whereof any shall be legally convicted the
sum of twenty shillings, or be whipped upon the naked body not exceeding ten
stripes. And for the third offense that way forty shillings, or if the party
be unable to pay, then to be whipped with more stripes, not exceeding fifteen.
And if yet any shall offend in like kind, and be legally convicted thereof,
such person, male or female, shall be fined ten shillings a time more then
formerly: or if the party so offending be unable to pay, then to be whipped
with five, or six more stripes then formerly not exceeding forty at any time.

The aforesaid fines shall be levied, or stripes inflicted either by the
Marshal of that Jurisdiction, Who shall excecute.
or Constable of the Town where the offense is committed according as the Court
or Magistrate shall direct. And such fines so levied shall be paid to the
Treasury of that Shire where the Cause is tried.

And if any person shall find himself greived with the sentence of any such
Magistrate out of Court, Liberty to appeal.
he may appeal to the next Court of the same Shire, giving sufficient security
to prosecute his appeal and ^bide the Order of the Court. And if the said Court
shall judge his appeal causlesse, he shall be double fined and pay the charges
of the Court during his Action, or corrected by whipping as aforesaid not
excceding forty stripes; and pay the costs of Court and party complaining or
informing, and of Witnesses in the Case.

And for all such as being under age of discretion that shall offend in lying
contrary to this Order their Parents or Masters shall give them due correction,
under 14 years corrected by Parents* the parties Action sa^^d
and that in the presence of some Officer if any Magistrate shall so appoint.
Provided also that no person shall be barred of his just Action of Slander, or
otherwise by any proceeding upon this Order. [1645]

Magistrates.
T HIS Court being sensible of the great disorder growing in this Commonwealth
through the contempts cast upon the civil Authority, which willing to prevent,
do order and decree;

That whosoever shall henceforth openly or willingly defame any Court of
justice, or the Sentences or proceedings of the same, (...) etc:
or any of the Magistrates or other Judges of any such Court in respect of any
Act or Sentence therein passed, Convict: Penalty.
and being thereof lawfully convict* in any General Court or Court of Assistants
shall be punished for the same by Fine, Imprisonment, Disfr^^chiseme^^ or
Bannishment as the quality and measure of the offense shall deserve.

And if any Magistrate or other member of any court shall use any reproachful,
Members of Court transgressing: reproof.
or un-bes^^ming speeches, or behavior toward any Magistrate, Judge, or
member of the Court in the face of the said Court he shall be sharply reproved,
by the Governor, or other principal Judge of the same Court for the time
being. And if the quality of the offense be such as shall deserve a farther
censure, further c^^sure,
or if the person so reproved shall reply again without leave, next superior
Court
the same Court may proceed to punish any such offender by Fine, or
Imprisonment, or it shall be presented to, and censured at the next superior
Court.

2 If in a General Court any miscarriage shall be amongst the Magistrates when
they are by themselves, Offenses in (...) Gen: Court
it shall be examined, and sentenced amongst themselves. If amongst the
Deputies when they are by themselves, it shall be examined, and sentenced
amongst themselves. If it be when the whole Court is together, it shall be
judged by the whole Court, and not several as before. [1637 1641]

3 And it is ordered by the Authority of this Court that the Governor, Who
may call (...) Gen: Court
Deputy Governor, or greater part of the Assistants may upon urgent occasion
call a General Court at any time. [1641]

4 And whereas there may arise some difference of, Judgment in doubtful cases,
it is therefore further ordered;

That no Law, Order, What shall be a valid Act
or Sentence shall pass as an Act of the Court without the consent of the
greater part of the Magistrates on the one party, and the greater number of
the Deputies on the other part.

5 And for (...) all occasions of partial and undue proceeding in Courts of
justice* and (...) of jealousies which may be taken up against Judges in that
kind, (...) is further ordered,

That in every Case of civil nature between party and party where there
shall fall out so (...) relation between any Judge and any of the parties as
between Father and Son, When a Magistrate shall have no vote
either by nature or marriage, Brother and Brother; in like kind Uncle and
Nephew, Land lord and Tenent in matters of considerable value, such Judge
though he may have liberty to be present in the Court at the time of the
trial, and give reasonable advice in the Case, yet shall have no power to vote
or give sentence therein, neither shall sit as Judge, but beneath the Bench when
he shall so plead or give advice in the Case. [1635] See Burglary, Causes,
Charges publ: Sect: 3. Death (...) D^uke^es, Elections Sect: 3, Gaming,
Highways, in-keepers, Leather, Marriage, Masters Servants, Oaths,
Transportation.

Manslaughter.
IT is ordered by this Court and Authority thereof; that if any person in the
just, and necessary defense of his life, or the life of any other, shall kill
any person attempting to rob, or murder in the field, or highway, se de
^endend^
or to break into any dwelling house of he conceive he cannot with safety of
his own person otherwise take the Felon, or Assailant, or bring him to Trial
he shall be holden blameles. [1647]

Marriage.
F OR preventing all unlawful marriages, it is ordered by this Court and
Authority thereof,

That after due publication heerof no persons shall be joined in marriage
before the intention of the partie^ ^^oceeding therein has been three times
published at some time of public Lecture or Town-meeting, Three times
published or posted fourteen days
in both the towns where the parties or either of them do ordinarily reside;
or be set up in writing upon some post of their Meeting House door in public
view, there to stand so as it may easily be read by the space of fourteen
days. [1639]

2 And whereas God has committed the care and power into the hands of Parents
for the disposing their Children in marriage: so that it is against Rule to
seek to draw away the affections of young maidens under pretense of purpose of
marriage before their Parents have given way and (...) in that respect. And
whereas it is a common practice in diverse places for young men irregularly and
disorderly to watch all advantages for their evil purposes to insi^^ate unto
the affections of young maidens, by coming to them in places, and seasons
unknown to their Parents, for such ends; whereby much evil has grown amongst us
to the dishonor of God and damage of parties, for prevention whereof for time
to come it is further ordered by Authority of this Court,

That whatsoever person from henceforth shall endeavor directly, No pretense
of marriage to any maid without consent of Parents on pain of (...) first
offense, Sec: offense 10 li, and good behavior. Third offen: imprisoned.
or indirectly to draw away the affections of any maid in this Jurisdiction
under pretense of marriage, before he has obtained liberty and allowance from
^er Parents or Governors (or in absence of such) of the nearest Magistrate; he
shall forfeit for the first offense five pounds, for the second offense toward
the same party ten pounds, and be bound to forbear any farther attempt and
proceedings in that unlawful design without, or against the allowance
aforesaid. And for the third offense upon information, or complaint by such
Parents or Governors to any Magistrate, giving Bond to prosecute the party,
he shall be committed to prison, and upon hearing and conviction by the next
Court shall be adjudged to continue in prison until the Court of Assistants
shall see cause to release him. [1647]

3 Whereas diverse persons both men and women living within this Jurisdiction
whose Wives, and Husbands are in England, or els-where, by means whereof they
live under great temptations here, and some of them committing lewdnes and
filthiness here among us, others make love to women, and attempt Marriage, and
some have attained it; and some of them live under suspicion of uncleannes, and
all to the great dishonor of God, reproach of Religion, Commonwealth and
Churches, it is therefore ordered by this Court and Authority thereof (for the
prevention of all such future evils)

That all such married persons as aforesaid shall repair to their said
relations by the first opportunity of shipping upon the pain, or penalty of
twenty pounds, Mar: persons to go to their Wives on pain of 10 li. except they
show cause. Constable to Summon on pain of (...).
except they can show just cause to the contrary to the next County Court, or
Court of Assistants to be holden at Boston after they are summoned by the
Constable there to appear, who are heerby required so to do upon pain of
twenty shillings for every such default wittingly made. Provided that this
Order do not extend to such as are come over to make way for their families,
or are in a transient way only for traffic, or merchandise for some smalltime.
[1647]

4 As the Ordinance of Marriage is honorable amongst all so should it be
accordingly solemnized. It is therefore ordered by this Court and Authority
thereof;

That no person whatsoever in this Jurisdiction shall join any persons together
in Marriage but the Magistrate, Who may (...) marriage.
or such other as the General Court, or Court of Assistants shall authorize in
such places where no Magistrate is near. Nor shall any join themselves in
Marriage but before some Magistrate, not before due publication.
or person authorized as aforesaid, Nor shall any Magistrate, or other person
authorized as aforesaid join any persons together in Marriage, or suffer them
to join together in Marriage in their presence before the parties to be married
have been published according to Law. [1648] See Children Sect. 3. 4.

Marshal.
F ORASMUCH as delay in executing justice is dangerous to any State, and whereas
many offenders are punished only by Fines or pec^^^rie is M^^lcts; if there be
delay or neglect in Officers, that such Fines and Penalties are not duly
levied, then sin is unp^nished, the Name and Ordinance of God may thereby be
reproached, it is therefore ordered by this Court and Authority thereof;

That every offender that shall at any time he fined for the breach of any
paenal Law, All fines paid presently or security giv^n
such person or persons so offending shall forthwith pay his or their Fine or
Penalty, or put in security speedily to do it, or else shall be imprisoned,
or kept to work till it be paid that no loss may come to the Commonwealth:
and what other fines or debts be already due, The Marshal by w^r: f^o^: (...)
Treasurer to levy all fines on pain of tw^ s^cil: (...) pound or fine.
or shall be due to the Country the Marshal for the time being upon Warrant
from the Treasurer, and according to his oath shall be faithful in doing the
duties of his place, in levying, and returning of the same upon pain of
forfeiting two shillings out of his own estate for every pound, or else such
Fine as any Court of justice shall impose on him for his neglect. [1646] Sea
Actions, Causes, Clerk of Writs, Oaths.

Masters, Servants, Laborers.
IT is ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, No servant shall give
or truck withou^^ his Masters leave Corporal punishment or Fine. How long men
shall work.
that no servant, either man or maid shall either give, sell or truck any
commodity whatsoever without license from their Masters, during the time of
their service under pain of Fine, or corporal punishment at the discretion of
the Court as the offense shall deserve.

2 And that all workmen shall work the whole day allowing convenient time for
food and rest.

3 It is also ordered that when any servants shall run from their masters,
Pursuit after servants or Inhabit: ^^ed. Impresse
or any other Inhabitants shall privily go away with suspicion of ill
intentions, it shall be lawful for the next Magistrate, or the Constable and
two of the chief Inhabitants where no Magistrate is to press men and boats or
pinnaces at the public charge to pursue such persons by Sea or Land and bring
them back by force of Arms.

4 It is also ordered by the Authority aforesaid, that the Freemen of every
town may from time to time as occasion shall require agree amongst themselves
about the prizes, Wages to be for by towns.
and rates of all workmens labors and servants wages. And every person
inhabiting in any town, whether workman, labourer or servant shall be bound to
the same rates which the said Freemen, Penalty for giving or tak: more wages.
If (...) was diffr. County court decide it
or the greater part shall bind themselves unto: and whosoever shall exceed
those rates so agreed shall be punished by the discretion of the Court of that
Shire, according to the quality and measure of the offense. And if any town
shall have cause of complaint against the Freemen of any other town for
allowing greater rates, or wages then themselves, the Quarter Court of that
Shire shall from time to time set order therein.

5 And for servants and workmens wages, wherein wages may ^e pai^ and hour to be
valued.
it is ordered, that they may be paid in corn, to be valued by two indifferent
Freemen, chosen the one by the Master, the, other by the servant or workman,
who also are to have respect to the value of the work or service, and if they
cannot agree then a third m^n shall be chosen by the next Magistrate, Proviso
for (...): c^^^cts
or if no Magistrate be in the town then by the next Constable, unles the
parties agree the price themselves. Provided if any servant or workman agree
for any particular payment, then to be paid in specie, or consideration for
default therein. And for all other payments in corn, Corn, how to be prized in
all payments.
if the parties cannot agree they shall choos two indifferent men, and if they
cannot agree then a third as before.

6 It is ordered, Servants flying fr^; (...) cruelty releiv:
and by this Court declared, that if any servant shall flee from the tyranny
and cruelty of his, or her Master to the house of any Freeman of the same
town, they shall be there protected and su^^eined till due order be taken for
their releif. Provided due notice thereof be speedily given to their Master from
whom they fled, proviso for due notice
and to the next Magistrate or Constable where the party so fled is harbored.

7 Also that no servant shall be put off for above a year to any other,
Servants not put off without license Two Magistr:
neither in the life time of their Master, nor after their death by their
Executors or Administrators, unles it be by consent of Authorite assembled in
some Court, or two Assistants: otherwise all, and every such Assignment to be
void in Law.

8 And that if any man smite out the eye, Servants maimed etc. Discharged.
or tooth of his m^n-servant, or maidservant; or otherwise maim, or much
disfigure them (unles it be by mere casualtie) be shall let them go free from
his service, and shall allow such farther recompense as the Court shall adjudge
him.

9 And all servants that have served diligently and faithfully to the benefit
of their Masters seven years shall not be sent away empty: Faithful servants
recompensed, unfaithful fined, detained
and if any have been unfaithful, negligent, or unprofitable in their service,
notwithstanding the good usage of their Masters, they shall not be dismissed
till they have made satisfaction according to the judgment of Authority.
[1630 1633 1635 1636 1641] See Oppression*

Militari^ Affairs.
F ORASMUCH as the wise, and well mannaging the Militia of this Commonwealth
is a matter of great concernment, therefore that it may be carried an end with
the utmost safety and certainty for the best benefit of the Country, it is
ordered by this Court and Author it is thereof; Serg: Major how to be chosen.


That henceforth there shall be one Sergeant Major of every Regiment chosen by
the trained soldiers of every Town in each Shire, not only Freeman, but all
others that have taken, Oath of fidelity.
and shall take the Oath of fidelity (except unsettled persons) who upon
Warrant from the General Court, or Sergeant Major General shall meet together
in their several Towns from time to time, where no Magistrate is (...) chief
Officer may give the Oath
and give in their Votes for such a man, or men as they shall judge fit for the
Office of Sergeant Major of that Regiment, and where ^o Magistrate is in the
Town, or near hand to give Oath to such soldiers as desire to take the same
before the Election, power is heerby given to the Captain, or in defect thereof
to the next chief Officer of the Company in all Towns to administer the said
Oath of fidelity; who shall certify the next Court of that County the names
of all soldiers so (...) to be recorded there: which Votes of the whole Company
shall be sealed up, and delivered to one, or both the Deputies of the said
Town, or any other Freeman that the Town shall appoint to carry them to the
Shire town of each County at such time as the Warrant shall direct, and there
before one or two of the nearest Magistrates to open the Proxies with the said
Deputies or Freemen. And he that shall have the greater number of Votes, being
a Freeman, shall be presented by one of the said Magistrates of each Shire unto
the Sergeant Major General within one week after the Election, Serg: Major Gen:
shall enstall him continue til new chosen.
who shall enstall, confirm and establish each Sergeant Major in his place for
one year; who shall also retein their place and power, till a new Election be
made by the General Court, or otherwise according to this Order. And to avoid
the vacancy of a place so necessary for time to come, ^ajor Gen: to provide
for supply etc:
it is ordered, that if any such Officer leave their places, or be removed out
of them the Sergeant Major General for the time being shall within one month at
the farthest after such a change send forth his Warrants to each town in the
same Shire to make chois of one or more for Majors according to the form
aforementioned.

2 And it is farther ordered, that every Sergeant Major not only has
liberty, but also is heerby enjoined once every year at least, and oftener
upon any needful occasion, Every Regiment to train once a year at com: of the
Major Gener:
or command from the Major General to draw forth his Regiment into one
convenient place, and there to put every Captain and Officer of their
Companyes in their places, and to instruct them in their duties according to
the rules of military Discipline, and to exercise his Regiment, whether it
shall consist of Horse, Pikes or Muskeriers according to his best skill and
abilities as if he were to lead them forth against an enemy. And farther, that
every Sergeant Major not only has power, but is enjoined by the Court twice
e^erie year to send forth his Warrants or Summons to require the chief Officers
of each Company in his Regiment to meet at such time and place as he shall
appoint, The chief Officers of every Regim: to meet twice a year by war: from
(...) Major for what ends
and there, with them to confer, and give in command such Orders as shall by
them be judged meet for the better ordering and settling their particular
Companyes in military Exercises: and that these Officers of particular
Companyes shall bring with them a note from the Rolls of their several Clerks
of the names of such in their several Companyes as remain delinquents, and have
not given satisfaction to the Captain, or chief Officers of their Companyes for
all defects either in their arms, ammunition, appearances, watches, offenses, or
the like. And that the Sergeant Major with the consent of those Officers, then
met together, shall impose such Fines or Penal^^^ according (...) Law upon
delinqents as shall be judged equal, punish delinquents.
and shall give order to the Clerks of the several Bands to take distress for
the same, within one month after such order, if before, they give not
satisfaction.

3 And because (...) and understand many defects to be in making appearances,
in Arms unfit for service and otherwise, we order that it shall be inserted
into the Oath of every Clerk of the B^^nd as follows,

First, that upon every training day twice, once in the forenoon, as also in
the afternoon at such time as the Captain, or chief Officer that is then in
the field shall appoint (...) call, or cause to be called over the List of the
names of all the soldiers; and that he shall give his attendance in the field
all the day (except he have special leave from his Captain, Clerk of (...) his
duty.
or chief Officer) for the taking notice of any defect by the absence of
soldiers, and other offenses that do often fall out in the time of Exercise,
as well as in the calling over of the Rolls.

Secondly, that twice every year, at least, he shall view all the Arms and
Ammunition of the (...) to see if they be all according to Law: to which end, by
direction of the Captain, or chief Officer of the Band he shall give notice to
the soldiers that upon such a training day appointed, they he required to bring
(in the fore-noon) all their Arms and Ammunition into the field that is required
by Law; where they shall be approved or disallowed by the judgments of the
said chief Officers then in the field, Also, the Clerk shall see that every
Muske^ier have one pound of powder, twenty (...) and two fathom of match, with
Musket, Sword, (...) and Rest, upon the penalty of ten shillings for every
defect. And to levy five shillings forfeit upon all soldiers that shall be
absent from training, or defective in watching and warding, except they he
discharged, or their Fine mittigated in any the particulars aforementioned, by
the chief Officers of the Company. And that the Clerk as often as be shall see
occasion is enjoined to use all diligence to view every ones Arms, whether
they be completely furnished with all Arms and Ammunition that the Law requires.

Thirdly, he shall see that all Inhabitants, as well Seamen as others have
Arms in their houses fit for service, with Powder, Bullets, Match and other
ammunition as other soldiers: (...)
and that Fishermen, Ship carpenters and all others, not exempted by Law
(except Deacons, who heerby are freed from watching and warding) shall watch on
provide a sufficient Watchman in their room, and to train twice a year
according as the Order.

Fourthly, mil^t: Officers appoint what Arms.
that the military Officers of each Company shall appoint what arms every
soldier shall serve with, so that there be two third^ Muskets, and those which
serve with Pa^es to have their Cors^^^s and Head-pieces.

Fifthly, that the Clerk shall within one week after every training day truly
present a List of the names of all that are delinquents, and of the defects of
the Band to the Captain, Clerk to present defects within one week.
or chief Officer of the Company, that he may have them all in a readiness to
carry with him when the Major of the Regiment shall appoint his meeting, which
have not before given satisfaction at home, according to Law. And the Order
that gives power to Magistrates to releaf upon nonappearance is heerby
repealed.

Sixthly, Clerks duty about (...)
that the Clerk (without all partiality) shall demand, and receive all Fines,
which if any shall refuse to pay, then he shall make distress upon the goods
of all such persons as first by the chief Officer of their own Company at home,
or by the Major and chief Officers met together ( at before mentioned) shall be
judged delinquents. How fines shall be employed.
And that the Clerk with the advice of the chief Officers of their own company
shall speedily lay out all Fines received either in Ensign, Drum^, Halberds,
candle, or wood for their Court of Guard, or to provide Powder or Arms for the
poorer sort, or otherwise for the use of the Company. The Clerk not charged
(...) any former Orders
Provided, that no Clerk of the Band shall stand charged with the execution of
any former Order by virtue of his said Office, other then such as are committed
to his care and charge by this present Order.

Lastly, refusing to be Clerk etc
if any Clerk of a Band, chosen, shall refuse either to accept the place, or to
take his Oath, he shall pay to the use of the Company forty shillings, and the
Company shall choos another, forty shillings fine fourth part of (...) fines
to the Clerk mi^it: watch how to be ordered.
and all that refuse the said Place, or Oath as before shall pay forty
shillings a piece till one does accept the Place. And he that does hold the
Place shall have a fourth part of the Fines for his labor.

4 For the militaris Watch in all Towns it is ordered;

First, that the Watch shall be set and have their charge by the direction of
the chief military Officers of that place, half an hour after sunsetting.

Secondly, that the Watch being set [which shall stand double, a Pike and a
Musket together] shall examine all persons that they shall meet withal within
the compass of their Watch or Round: and all such as they suspect they shall
carry to the Court of Guard there to be kept until the morning, and before
they be dismissed they shall carry them to their chief Officers to be examined
and proceeded with according to Law.

Thirdly, if the Sentinel, or Watch shall meet with such persons as shall prove
too strong for them, or by their carriage shall give just cause of suspicion,
or will not submit to their command, or if they shall either draw upon them, or
offer any such affronts, in words or actions as shall put them in fear or
hazard of their lives, they shall charge their Pike and discharge their Musket
upon them, and return with speed to their Court of Guard and raise an Alarm.
Ca^tion for preve^t: Manslaughter
Provided always that in times of peace when the Council of war, or the chief
Officers of any Company shall not apprehend danger by the neernes of an enemy,
it shall not be in the liberty of any Sentinel to hazard the killing of any
person, or persons, except in his own necessary defense, but if the cause
require it he shall raise an Alarm, or retire to the Court of Guard.

5 For the well ordering of the military Companies and affairs throughout this
Jurisdiction* (...) is ordered by this Court and Authority thereof;

That the military Officers of each Company upon three or four days warning
or more, Who shall appoint training days
in any public Meeting, or otherwise in their own Town shall from time to time
appoint the days for training their Companies; so as there be eight days
appointed for the same every year, and none of them to be in the fifth or sixth
months.

Also, Days of gen: training ^educted from the 8 days of the Company
it is ordered, for ease of all soldiers when, and where the Regiments are
exercised,

That so many days as they shall necessarily expend by the injunction of the
Sergeant Major, both in marching to and from exercise at General trainings,
shall be deducted out of their eight days annual trainings.

And that all Magistrat^, Deputies, and Officers of court, Elders and Deacons,
the President, persons exempt from trainings.
Fellows, Students and Officers of Harvard-Colledge, and all professed
Schoolmasters, allowed by any two Magistrates, the Treasurer, Auditor general
and Surveyor General of the Arms, Public Notaries, Physicians and Ch^^urgions,
allowed by two Magistrates, Any Court may discharge upon cause
Masters of ships and other vessels above twenty tons, Millers and constant
Heards-men, and such other as by any Court shall be discharged, either for
bodily infirmity, or other reasonable cause shall be exempt from ordinary
trainings, and from watchings and wardings but not their sons or servants, save
one servant of every Magistrate and Teaching Elder allowed exemption: whose
sons and servants shall be exempted.
and all such as keep families at remote Farms shall not be compellable to send
their servants to watch and ward in Towns. And the sons, and household servants
of the Major General for the time being shall be exercised by his own order,
Major Ge^..
and not otherwise compellable to attend the ordinary trainings. persons exempt
shall have Arms except.
But all persons whatsoever exempted as aforesaid, except Magistrates and
Teaching Elders shall be provided of Arms and Ammunition, as other men are.

6 Also that every soldier Listed in any trained Band, having taken the Oath
of fidelity, who have vote in election of mil: Officers to be allowed by the
next Cou^: court
and every Freeman (though not so listed) shall have his Vote in nomination of
military Officers of that Company, or Town whereof he is, provided they be
Freemen. And every Captain, Lieutenant and Ensign so nominated shall be
presented to the next County Court to be allowed.

7 And if any person who is by Law to provide Arms or Ammunition cannot purchase
them by such means as he has, where Arms (...) cannot be had*
he shall bring to the Clerk so much corn, or other merchantable goods as by
apprizement of the said Clerk and two others of the Company (whereof one to be
chosen by the party) shall be adjudged of greater value, by a fifth part then
such Arms or Ammunition is of, he shall be excused of the penalty for want of
Arms (but not for want of appearance) until he be provided. And the Clerk shall
endeavor to furnish him so soon as may be by sale of such goods so deposited,
want of ability to bring Arms
rendering the party the overplus. But if any person shall not be able to
provide himself Arms or Ammunition through mere poverty, if he be single, he
shall be put to service by some Magistrate, and the Constable shall provide him
Arms and Ammunition, and shall appoint him when, and with whom to earn it out.

8 Also, assize of muskets and their furniture
that no Musket shall be allowed for service under bastard musket bore, and not
under three foot nine inches in length, nor any piece above four foot three
inches long. And every such soldier shall be furnished with a priming wire,
Worm, Scourer and Mould, fitted to the bore of his Musket: and every soldier
with a Snap-sack. Snap-sack.


9 It is also ordered by the Authority aforesaid; Smiths etc: atte^d repair
for country pay etc: Penalty (...) pounds. Pen: ten shil:
that upon any military expedition upon occasion of an enemy all Smiths and
other needful Workmen shall attend the repairing of Arms, and other
necessaries: for which they shall not refuse such pay as the Country affords
upon pain of five pounds for every such neglect. And for such neglect at any
other time more then ten days, to forfeit for every such offense ten
shillings. Suveyor Ge^: may sell country Arms Town Arms safely kept pen. 10.
ss. the week.


10 Also, power is given to the Surveyor general to sell any of the common
Arms, when he sees occasion.

11 And every Town which shall have any arms or ammunition belonging to the
common Store of the Town shall provide a meet place to keep the same in; and
shall safely preserve the same upon pain of ten shillings for every weeks
default therein.

12 Also, the military Officers of every Company in such places and at such
times as they shall apprehend danger from an enemy, Bring arms to Meet: houses
shall have power to order the soldiers of their Companies what arms to bring
to the Meeting Houses, Secur: Arms at ^arms Exercising youth and:
at the times of the public Assemblies* and to take order for the securing the
arms and ammunition at remote Farms. Also, in every Company some under Officer
shall be appointed by the chief Commander to exercise such children as by their
Parents and Masters allowance shall resort to the Traynings. mil^: w^tches in
time of danger. Shooting in night Penalty 40 ss.


13 it is also ordered, that in the times of danger the watches and wards shall
be set by the military Officer, in such places as they shall judge most
convenient, and if any man shall shoot off a gun after such watch is set
(except in case of Alarm) he shall forfeit to the Treasury forty shillings.
See Watches.

14 And for an Alarm, either the distinct discharge of three Muskets or the
continued beat of the Drum or the fyring of a Beacon, What shall be a gen:
Alarm (...) very trained Soldier must take it Penalty, five pond What (...)
speci^l Alarm what to be done upon it.
or discharge of a Piece of Ordinance and two Muskets after it, or any of these
in the night; or the sending of a messenger on purpose to give notice of an
enemy at hand shall be accounted a general Alarm, which every trained Soldier
is to take immediately, on pain of five pounds. And besides the said general
Alarm there shall be a special Alarm for the Town viz: one Musket discharged,
which the Centinell shall answer by going to all the houses in his quarters and
crying arm, arm. And if the danger appear the chief Officers may either
strengthen their quarters, or give a general Alarm; and they shall set their
Sentinels or Courts of guard where they shall judge most convenient: and upon
certain intelligence of an enemy at one Town, the Commanders of the three next
Towns shall repair thither with a sufficient company according to the
intelligence given them of the enemies strength.

15 Also any three chief Officers of each company shall heerby have power to
punish such Soldiers as shall commit any disorder, Three chief Officers may
punish contempts etc: upon trayning days, or watches and wards or send the
offender to a Magistr: The Gover: General.
or contempt upon any day, or time of military exercise, or upon any Watch or
Ward by Stocks, Bil^^oes or any other usual military punishment, or by Fine,
not exceeding twenty shillings, or may commit such offender to the Constable to
be carried before some Magistrate, who may bind him over to the next Court of
that Shire if the cause so require, or commit him to prison.

16 It is heerby declared, that it belongs to the place of the Governor for
the time being to be General of all the military Forces. But when occasion of
service shall be against an enemy, the General Court or standing Council may
appoint some other to that Office until the Forces raised shall be disbanded.
watch-hous in every town.


17 Lastly, even Town shall provide a sufficient Watch house before the last of
the fifth month next upon pain of five pounds. [1645 1647] See Council.

Mills, Millers.
IT is ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, Toll. weights and skoals.
that no Miller shall take above the sixteenth part of the corn he grindes. And
that every Miller shall have always ready in his mill, weights and skoals
provided at his own charges, to weigh corn to and from mill, if men desire it.
[1635 1638]

Monopolies.
IT is ordered, decreed and by this Court declared; that there shall be no
Monopolies granted or allowed amongst us, but of such new invention that are
profitable for the Country, and that for a short time. [1641]

Oaths, Subscription.
IT is ordered and decreed, How for publ: Oaths bind.
and by this Court declared; that no man shall be urged to take any oath,
^^subscribe any Articles, Covenants, or remonstrance of public and civil
nature but such as the General Court has considered, allowed and required. And
that no oath of Magistrate, Counceller or any other Officer shall bind him any
farther, or longer then he (...) resident, or reputed an Inhabitant of this
Jurisdictio^ [1641]

Oppression.
F OR avoiding such mischeifs as may follow by such ill disposed persons as may
take liberty to oppress and wrong their neighbors, by taking excessive wages
for work, or unreasonable prizes for such necessary merchandises or other
commodities as shall pass from man to man, it is ordered, That if any man
shall offend in any of the said cases he shall be punished by Fine, or
Imprisonment according to the quality of the offense, as the Court to which he
is presented upon lawful trial and conviction shall adjudge. [1635]

Payments.
IT is ordered by the Authority of this Court, that all payments of Debt,
Legacyes and Fines shall be satisfied in kind according to covenant or
engagement, Satisfaction according to covenant.
or in default thereof in corn, cattle, fish or other commodities at such rates
as this Court shall appoint from time to time, or by apprizement of indifferent
men to be appointed by the Officer one, and either party one. Provided that in
all and every the cases aforesaid all just damages shall be satisfied together
with the debt, or other payment to the party for not paying in kind according
to the bargain. [1640]

Pipe-staves.
W HERAS information has come to this Court from diverse foreign parts of the
insufficiency of our Pipe-staves in regard especially of worm holes, whereby
the commodity is like to be prohibited in those parts, to the great damage of
the Country; it is therefore ordered and en^cted by the Authority of this
Court,

That the Select-men of Boston and Charlstown and of all other towns in this
Jurisdiction where Pipe-staves use to be shipped; Searchers of Pipe-staves
shall forthwith, and so from time to time as need shall require nominate two
men of each town, skillful in that commodity, and such as can attend that
service to be Viewers of Pipe-staves; sworn.
who so chosen, shall by the Constable be convented before some Magistrate, to
be sworn diligently and faithfully to view and search all such Pipe-staves as
are to be transported to any parts of Spain, Portugal, or within either of
their Dominions, or elsewhere to be used for making of tight cask, Assize of
Pipe-staves
who shall cast bye all such as they shall judge not merchantable both in
respect of worm-holes and due assize viz that are not in length four foot and
half, in breadth three inches and half without sap, in thicknes three quarters
of an inch, and not more or less then an eight part of an inch then three
quarters thick: well, and even hewed and sufficient for that use. And they or
some one of them shall at all times upon request give attendance; attend
Register.
and they shall cater in a book the number of all such merchantable Pipe-staves
as they shall approve, and for whom.

And if any man shall put aboard any Ship, Owners shipping ^^awfull Pipest^ves.
(...) cask Forfeit. Searchers allowance.
or other vessel any Pipe-staves other then shall be so searched and approved,
to the end to be transported to any part of Spain or Portugal, except they
should be shipped for dry cask, he shall forfeit the same whole parcel or the
value thereof; and the said Viewers shall he allowed two shillings for every
thousand of Pipe-staves which they shall so search, as well the refuse as the
merchantable, to be paid by him that sets them a work.

And if any Master or other Officer of any Ship, Master, shipping u^lawfull
Pipe-staves
or other vessel shall receive into such Ship or vessel any parcel of
Pipe-staves to be transported into any of the said Dominions which shall not be
searched, and allowed as merchantable, and so certified by a note under the
hand of one of the said Viewers such Master shall forfeit for every thousand
of Pipe-staves sound^ly received five pounds; Forfeit.
except he can procure one of the said Viewers to come aboard and search such
staves as they shall be delivered into the Ship.

Provided, Dry cask.
cask staves or other red oak staves may be transported into those parts, which
may be of good use for dry cask. And that there be the like Officers chosen
for Salem and P^sca^away, where staves may be shipped away as well as from
Boston [1646]

Poor.
IT is ordered by this Court and Authority thereof; To be settled where, and by
whom.
that any Shire Court, or any two Magistrates out of Court shall have power to
determine all differences about lawful settling, and providing for poor persons:
and shall have power to dispose of all unsettled persons into such towns as they
shall judge to be most fit for the maintenance, and employment of such persons
and families, for the case of the Country. [1639]

Pound, Pound breach.
F OR prevention, and due recompense of damages in corn fields, and other
enclosures, done by swine and cattle, it is ordered by this Court and
Authority thereof;

That there shall be one sufficient Pound, or more made and maintained in
every Town and Village within this Jurisdiction, for the impounding of all
such swine and cattle as shall be found in any corn field or other enclosure.
And who so impounds any swine or cattle shall give present notice to the Owner,
if he be known, otherwise they shall be cried at the two next Lectures or Mark
ts, and if swine or cattle escape out of pound the owners, if known, shall pay
all damages according to law. [1645 1647]

2. Whereas impounding of cattle in case of (...) has been always found both
needful and profitable, and all breaches about the same very offensive and
injurious, it is therefore ordered by this Court and Authority thereof;

That if any person shall resist, or rescue any cattle going to the Pound, or
shall by anyway or means convey them out of pound or other (...) of the Law,
Rescues (...)
whereby the party wronged may lose his damages, and the Law be deluded, Fine.
that in case of mere rescues the party so offending shall forfeit to the
Treasury forty shillings. And in cause of pound breach five pounds, Pound
breach. Fine. (...) with Battery.
and shall also pay all damages to the party wronged and if in the rescues any
bodily harm be done to the person of any man or other, they may have remedy
against the Rescuers; and if either be done by any not of ability to answer
the Forfeiture and damages aforesaid, they shall be openly whipped, Whipped.
one Magistr:
by Warrant from any Magistrate before whom the offender is convicted, in the
Town or Plantation where the offense was committed, damage satisfied by s^rv:
not exceeding twenty stripes for the (...) rescues or pound breach. And for
all damages to the party they shall satisfy by service as in case of theft.
And if it appear there were any procurement of the Owner of the cattle
thereunto, and that they were Abbetto^^ therein, they shall also pay Forfeiture
and damages as if themselves had done it. [1647]

Powder.
IT is ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that whosoever shall
transport any Gunpowder out of this Jurisdiction without license first
obtained from some two of the Magistrates, shall forfeit for every such
offense all such powder as shall be transporting or transported, or the value
thereof. And that there may be no^ defect for want of an Officer to take care
therabout, Searches for powder.
this Court, the Court of Assistants, or any Shire Court shall appoint meet
persons from time to time in all needful places, who have heerby power
granted them, to search all persons and vessels that are or any way shall be
suspicious to them to be breakers of the Court Order in this respect; and what
they find in any vessel, Forfeit divided.
or hands without order, as aforesaid, to keep the one half to their own use,
in recompense of their pains and vigilance, the other half forthwith to deliver
to the Treasurer. [1645] See (...)

Prescriptions.
IT is ordered, (...) evil.
decreed, and by this Court declared; that no Custom or Prescription shall ever
prevail amongst us in any moral case [our meaning is] to maintain any thing
that can be proved to be morally sinful by the Word of God. [1641]

Prisoners, Prisons.
IT is ordered by Authority of this Court; that such malefactors as are
committed to any common Prison shall be conveyed thither at their own charge,
Their charges.
if they be able, otherwise at the charge of the Country. [1646] See Marshal.

Profane swearing.
IT is ordered, and by this Court decreed, than if any person within this
Jurisdiction shall swear rashly and vainly either by the holy Name of God, or
any other (...), (...) 10 ss.
he shall forfeit to the common Treasury for every such several offense ten
shillings And it shall be in the power of any Magistrate by Warrant to the
(...) to call such person before him, and upon sufficient proof to pass
sentence; and (...) the said penalty according to the usual order of Justice.
And if such person be not able or shall utterly refuse to pay the aforesaid
Fine, (...).
he shall be committed to the Stocks there to continue, not exceeding three
hours, and not less than one hour. [1646]

Protestation (...) Remonstrance.
IT is ordered, decreed, and by this Court declared; that it is, and shall be
the liberty of any member, Freedom of dis^^^s.
or members of any Court, Council or civil Assembly in cases of making or
executing any Order or Law that properly concern^th Religion, or any cause
Capital, or Wars, or subscription to any public Articles, or Remonstrance in
case they cannot in judgment and conscience consent to that way the major^
(...) or Suffrage goes, to make their (...) Remonstrance or Protestation in
speech or writing, and upon their request, to have their dissent recorded in
the Rolls of that Court, so it be done christianly and respectively, for the
manner, and the dissent only be entered without the reasons thereof for avoiding
tediousnes. [1641]

Punishment
IT is ordered, Once for one offense, None in humane.
decreed, and by this Court declared; that no man shall be twice sentenced by
civil Justice for one and the same Crime, Offense or Trespass. And the bodily
punishments, woe allow amongst us none that (...)-humane, barbarous or cruel.
[1641] See Appearance, Torture.

Rates, (...).
W HERAS much wrong has been done to the Country by the negligence of
Constables in not gathering such Levies as they have received Warrants from the
Treasure^, during their Office, it is therefore ordered;

That if any Constable shall not have gathered the Levies committed to his
charge by the Treasurer then being, The Constable: levy Rates after his Off^: is
expired. If defective (...) Treasurer distr: Constable: goods else himself pays
Town pays for Constable: remedy where one suffers for (...) town
during the time of his Office, that he shall notwithstanding the expiration of
his Office have power to levy by (...) all such Rates and Levies. And if he
bring them not in to the old Treasurer according to his Warrants, the Treasurer
shall distrein such Constables goods for the same. And if the Treasurer shall
not so distrein the Constable, he shall be answerable to the Country for the
same. And if the Constable be not able to make payment, it shall be lawful for
the Treasurer, old or new, respectively to distrein any man, or men of that
Town where the Constables are unable for all arrerages of Levies. And that man,
or men upon petition to the General Court shall have order to collect the same
again equally of the Town, with his just damages for the same. [1640] See
Charges (...): Constable, Ecclesiastical: Fines.

Records.
W HERAS Records of the evidence and reasons whereupon the Verdict and Judgment
in cases does pass, being duly entered, and kept would be of good use (for
president to posterit^e, and to such as shall have just cause to have their
causes reviewed) it ^s therefore ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof.

That henceforth every Judgment given in any Court, presidents for posterity
with all the substantial reasons shall be recorded in a book, to be kept to
posterity. And that in all Towns within this Jurisdiction where there is no
Magistrate, Trials by three men their records
the three men appointed, and sworn to end small causes not exceeding forty
shillings value shall from time to time keep a true Record of all such Causes
as shall come before them to be determined. And that every Plaintiff shall
pay one shilling six pence for every Cause so tried, and Fees.
toward the charge thereof. And that the times of their meetings ^e published,
that all may take notice thereof that are concerned therein. And also that in all
Towns where a Magistrate shall end such small Causes, One Magistr: to record
he shall keep the like Record, and take the like Fee of one shilling sixpence.

2 Also, small causes tryable where
it is ordered by the Authority aforesaid that where parties dwell in several
Towns it shall be in the liberty of the Plaintiff in which Town to try his
Action.

3 Also, Town records, kept by Clerk of writs his Fee. Transcript recorded in
(...)
that hereafter the Clerk of the Writs in several Towns shall record all
Birt^^ and Deaths of persons in their Towns; and that for every Birth and
Death they so record they are allowed the sum of three pence: who shall yearly
deliver in to the Recorder of the Court belonging to the Jurisdiction where
they live a true Transcript thereof, together with so many pence as there are
Births and Deaths to be recorded, under the penalty of forty shillings for
every such neglect.

4 And it is ordered by the Authority aforesaid that all Parents, Masters of
servants, Executors and Administrators respectively shall bring in, to the
Clerks of the Writs in their several Towns the names of such persons belonging
to them, Births-deaths (...) certified,
or any of them, as shall either be born, or dye. And also, that every new
married man shall likewise bring in a Certificat of his marriage under the hand
of the Magistrate which married him to the said Clerk of the Writs, who shall
under the penalty of twenty shillings deliver as aforesaid unto the Recorder a
Certificat under his hand, with a penie a name, as well for the recording of
marriages as the rest. And for each neglect the person to whom it does belong
shall forfeit as follows viz if any person shall neglect to bring in a note
or Certificat as aforesaid, together with three pence a name to the said Clerk
of the Writs to be recorded more then one month after such Birth, Death, or
Marriage he shall then pay six pence to the said Clerk: if he neglect two
months twelve pence, if three months five shillings. Presentment
All which forfeits shall be returned into the Treasury. Also, the Grand-Jurors
may present all neglects of this Order.

5 It is ordered, decreed, and by this Court declared; that every man shall
have liberty to record in the public Rolls of any Court, Oaths recorded for
^et^ing estates.
any testimony given upon oath in the same Court, or before two Assistants; or
any Deed or Evidence legally confirmed, there to remain in perpetuam rei
memoriam. Free (...) of Records.
And that every Inhabitant of the Country shall have free liberty to search
and view any Rolls, Records or registers of any Court or Office except of the
Council. And to have a Transcript or exemplification thereof written, examined
and signed by the hand of the Officer of the Office, paying the appointed Fees
therefore. Criminal and civil proceedings recor:
Also, every Action between party and party and proceedings against
delinquents in criminal Causes shall be briefly and distinctly entered in the
rolls of every Court by the Recorder thereof, that such Actions be not
afterward brought again to the vexation of any man. [1639 1642 1643 1644 1647]
See Conveyances fraudulent.

Replevin,
IT is ordered, decreed and by this Court declared; that every man shall have
liberty to replevi^ his cattle or goods impounded, distreined, seized or
extended, unles it be upon Execution after judgment, and in payment of Fines.
Provided he puts in good security to prosecute the Replevin, and to satisfy
such demand as his Adversary shall recover against him in Law. [1641] See
Clerk of Writs, Presidents.

Schools.
I T being one chief project of that old deluder, Satan, to keep men from the
knowledge of the Scriptures, as in former times keeping them in an unknown
tongue, so in these later times by persuading from the use of Tongues, that so
at least the true sense and meaning of the Original might be clowded with
false glosses of Saint-fo^ming-deceivers; and that Learning may not be buried
in the graves of our fore-farthers in Church and Commonwealth, the Lord
assisting our endeavors: it is therefore ordered by this Court and Authority
thereof;

That every Township in this Jurisdiction, In what town: Schools (...) be
erected. how maintained
after the Lord has increased them to the number of fifty Householders shall
then forthwith appoint one within their Town to teach all such children as
shall resort to him to write and read, whose wages shall be paid either by the
Parents or Masters of such children, or by the Inhabitants in general by way of
supply, as the major part of those that order the prudentials of the Town shall
appoint. Provided that those which send their children be not oppressed by
paying much more then they can have them taught for in other Towns. Proviso.


2 And it is farther ordered, that where any Town shall increase to the number
of one hundred Families or Householders they shall set upon a Grammar School,
Gram^: (...)
the Masters thereof being able to instruct youth so far as they may be fitted
for the Universitie. town neglect: to pay (...) the next School
And if any Town neglect the performance heerof above one year then every such
town shall pay five pounds per annum to the next such School, till they shall
perform this Order. [1647]

Secrecy.
IT is ordered, decreed, and by this Court declared; that no Magistrate, Juror,
Officer or other man shall be bound to inform, present or reveal any private
crime or offense wherein there is no peril or danger to this Colonie, or any
member thereof, when any necessary tie of conscience, Proviso
grounded on the word of God binds him to secrecy; unles it be in case of
testimony lawfully required. [1641] See Oath Grand-Jur^^.

Secretary.
T O the and that all Acts of the General Court may be amply, distinctly and
more exactly drawn up, engrossed and recorded, and the business of all
particular Courts may also be iner^ duly ^^tred, and severally recorded for
public good, it is ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof;

That henceforth there shall be one able, judicious man chosen at the Court of
Election annually (as other general Officers are chosen) for Secretary of the
General Court. And that all other Courts shall choos their own Officers from
time to time. [1647]

Ships, Ship-masters.
W HERAS now the Country is (...) with the building of Ships, which is a
business of great importance for the Com^^on good, and therefore suitable care is
to be taken that it be well performed according to the commendable course of
England and other places, it is therefore ordered by this Court and the
Authority thereof;

That when any Ship is to be built within this Jurisdiction, Surveyor appointed
for vessels (...) 30 tuns.
or any vessel above thirty tuns, the Owner, or builder in his absence shall
before they begin to plank, repair to the Governor or Deputie-Governour, or
any two Magistrates upon the penalty of ten pounds, who shall appoint some
able man to survey the work and workmen from time to time as is usual in
England. his power.
And the same so appointed shall have such liberty and power as belongs to his
office. And if any Ship-carpenter shall not upon his advice reform and amend
anything which he shall find to be amiss, then upon complaint to the
Governor or Deputy Governor or any other two Magistrates, they shall appoint
two of the most sufficient Ship-carpenters of this Jurisdiction, Two
Ship-carpenters chosen and sworn. their office.
and shall authorize them from time to time as need shall require to take view
of every such ship, and all wo^^ks thereto belonging, and to see that it be
performed and carried on according to the rules of their Art. And for this end
an oath shall be administered to them to be faithful and indifferent between
the Owner and the Workmen; their charges.
and their charges shall be born by such as shall be found in default. And
those Viewers shall have power to cause any bad timbers, or other insufficient
work or materials to be taken ou^, and abounded at the charge of them through
whose default it grows. [1641 1647]

2. It is ordered by the Authority of this Court, that all ships which come
for trading only, from other parts, Freedom for foreign ships
shall have free access into our Harbors, and quiet riding there, and free
liberty to depart without any molestation by us: they paying all such duties,
and changes required by law in the Country, as others do. [1645]

Straies.
IT is ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; that whosoever shall
take up any (...) beast, How disposed, Constable. Cr^ed three days.
or find any goods lost whereof the owner is not known, he shall give (...) of
to the Constable of the same Town within six days, who shall (...) book and
take order that it be cried at their next Lecture day, or ^^^ral Town-meeting
upon three several days. And if it be above twenty (...) the next Market or
two next towns public meetings, where no Market is within ten miles; upon pain
that the party so finding, and the said Constable having such notice and
f^^ling to do as is here appointed, to forfeit either of them for such (...)
one third part of the value of such straie, or loft goods.

And if the finder shall not give notice as aforesaid within one month, Fin^^
neglecting etc. Forfeit.
or if ^e keep it more then th^^e months, and shall not apprize it by
indifferent men, and also (...) with the Recorder of the County Court where it
is found, he shall then forfeit the full value thereof. Resti^^: to (...) owner.
And if the Owner appears within one year after such publication he shall have
restitution of the same, or the value thereof paying all necessary charges, One
Magistr: or 3 men. No Owner appears in the year.
and to the Constable for his care and pains as one of the next Magistrates or
the deputed three men of the Town shall adjudge. And if no Owner appear within
the time prefixed the said Stray or lost goods shall be to the use of the
finder, paying to the Constable ten shillings, or the fifth part of the value
of such Strait or goods lost, at the finders choice.

Provided that every such finder shall put, and keep from time to time a With
or Wreath about the neck of all such stray beast within one month after such
finding, Proviso A with about the neck etc.
upon penalty of losing all his charges that shall arise about it afterward.
Provided also, that if any Owner or other shall take off such With or Wreath,
or take away such beast before he have discharged according to this Order,
(...) the value.
he shall forfeit the full value of the thing apprized as aforesaid, to the use
of the finder, as is before expressed. [1647]

Strangers.
IT is ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; that no Town or person
shall receive any stranger resorting hither with intent to reside in this
Jurisdiction, nor shall allow any Lot or Habitation to any, or entertain any
such above three weeks, except such person shall have allowance under the hand
of some one Magistrate, Strangers allowed by whom, and when.
upon pain of every Town that shall give, or sell any Lot or Habitation to any
not so licenced such Fine to the Country as that County Court shall impose,
not exceeding fifty pounds, nor less then ten pounds. How towns and persons
suitable for entertain;
And of every person receiving any such for longer time then is here expressed
or allowed, in some special cases as before, or in case of entertainment of
friends resorting from other parts of this Country in ami^^^ with us, shall
forfeit as aforesaid, not exceeding twenty pounds, monthly forfeit. Constable: duty.
nor less then four pounds: and for every month after so offending, shall
forfeit as aforesaid not exceeding ten pounds, nor less then forty shillings.
Also, that all Constables shall inform the Courts of new comers which they
know to be admitted without license, from time to time. [1637 1638 1647] See
Fugitives, (...) com: Trials.

Summons.
IT is ordered, and by this Court declared; that no Summons, Pleading,
Judgment or any kind of proceeding in Court or course of justice shall be
abated, arested or reversed upon any kind of circumstantial errors or
mistakes, Circu^stant: errors not prejudice Six days allowed the Defendant.
if the person and the Cause be rightly understood and intended by the Court.

2. And that in all cases where the first Summons are not served six days
before the Court, and the Case briefly specified in the Warrant where
appearance is to be made by the party summoned; it shall be at his liberty
whether he will appear, or not, except all Cases that are to be handled in
Courts suddenly called upon extraordinary occasion^. Proviso.
And that in all cases where there appears present and urgent cause any
Assistant or Officer appointed shall have power to make out Attachments for the
first Summons. Where, and by whom Attachments granted etc.
Also, it is declared that the day of Summons or Attachment served, and the day
of appearance shall be taken inclusively as part of the six days: [1641 1647]
see Presidents:

Suits, vexatious suits.
IT is ordered and decreed, and by this Court declared; that in all Cases where
it appears to the Court that the Plaintif^e has willingly and wittingly done
wrong to the Defendant in commencing and prosecuting any Action, Suit,
Complaint or Indict^^^^ in his own name or in the name of others, Treble (...):
and Fine.
he shall pay treble damages to the party greived, and be fined forty
shillings to the Common Treasury. [164^ 1646]

Swyne.
IT (...) ordered by this Court, and by the Authority thereof; that every
Township within this Jurisdiction shall henceforth have power, Town make orders.
and are heerby required from time to time to make Orders for preventing all
harms by swine in corn, meadow, (...) and gardens; as also to impose penalties
according to their best discretion: (...) appoint one of their Inhabitants by
Warrant under the hands of the Select-men, impose pens levy them.
or (...) Constable where no Select-men are, to levy all such Fines and
Penalties by them in (...) case imposed (if the Town neglect it).

And where Towns border each upon other, whose Orders may be various,
satisfaction shall be made according to the Orders of that Town where the
damage it done. Orders of neigh: towns various. yoaked etc:


But if the swine be sufficiently ringed and yoaked, as the Orders of the Town
to which they belong does require, then where no fence is, or that it be
insufficient through which the swine come to trespass, insufficient ^ence.
the Owner of the land or fence shall bear all damages.

And if any swine be impounded for damage done as aforesaid, and there be kept
three days, Swine in (...) Pound 3 days how disposed.
and that no person will own them; then the party damnified shall give notice
to the two next Towns (where any are within five miles compass) that such
swine are to be sold, by an out-crie, within three days next after such notice
by the party damnified; and in case none will buy, he shall cause them to be
apprized by two indifferent men (one whereof shall be the Constable, or one
chosen by him) signified under their hands in writing, and may keep them to his
own use. And in both cases if the Owner shall after appear, the overplus
according to valuation as aforesaid (all damages and charges being paid) shall
forthwith be rendered to him. And if any Town shall neglect to take order for
preventing harms by swine according to this Law, Town not order: swine forfeit
2 li.
more then one month after due publication heerof, such town shall forfeit to
the Treasury forty shillings for every month so neglecting, to be levied by
the Marshal by Warrant from the Treasurer, One Magist: may hear etc:
upon due conviction before any Court or Magistrate, and signified to the
Treasurer from time to time. [1647]

Tile-earth.
IT is ordered by the Authority of this Court; that all Tile-earth to make
sale ware shall be dug before the first of the ninth month, and turned over
in the last, and first month ensuing, a month before it be wrought upon pain of
forfeiting one half part of all such tiles as shall be otherwise made, to the
use of the Common treasury. [1646]

Tobacco.
T HIS Court finding that since the repealing of the former Laws against
Tobacco, the same is more abused then before does therefore order,

That no man shall take any tobacco within twenty poles of any house, Tobac:
where not to be taken Penal: 10 ss, recompense besides. Nor in any In except
etc:
or so near as may ind^nger the same, or near any Barn, corn, or hay-cock as
may occasion the fyring thereof, upon pain of ten shillings for every such
off^^^, besides full recompense of all damages done by means thereof. Nor shall
any take tobacco in any Inn or common Victualing-house, except in a private
room there, so as neither the Master of the said house nor any other Guests
there shall take offense thereat, which if any do, then such person shall forth
with forbear, pen: 2 ss: 6 d. Penalty to the Informer and poor.
upon pain of two shillings six pence for every such offense. And for all
Fines incurred by this Law, one half part shall be to the Informer the other to
the poor of the town where the offense is done. [1638 1647]

Torture.
IT is ordered, decreed, and by this Court declared; that no man shall be
forced by torture to confess any crime against himself or any other, unles it
be in some Capital case, where he is first fully convicted by clear and
sufficient evidence to be guilty. After which, if the Case be of that nature
that it is very apparent there be other Conspirators or Conf^^oeranes with him;
then he may be tortured, yet not with such tortures as be barbarous and
inhumane.

2. And that no man shall be beaten with above forty stripes for one Fact at
one time. whipping.
Nor shall any man be punished with whipping, except he have not otherwise to
answer the Law, unles his crime be very shameful, and his course of life
vi^ious and ^^^^^igate. [1641].

Townships.
IT is ordered, offensive behavior (...) not above 20 ss. by law etc:
decreed, and by this Court declared, that if any man shall behave himself
offensively at any Town-meeting, the rest then present shall have power to
(...) him for such offense, so be it the (...) or penalty exceed not tw^ty
shillings.

2. And that the Freemen of every Township, and others authorized by law,
shall have power to make such Laws and Constitutions as may concern the welfare
of their Town. Provided they he not of a criminal but only of a prudential
nature, and that their penalties exceed not twenty shillings (as aforesaid) for
one offense, limitation.
and that they be not repugnant to the public Laws and Orders of the Country.
And if any Inhabitant shall neglect or refuse to observe them, power to levy
Penalties.
they shall have power to levy the appointed penalties by distress.

3. Also that the Freem^ of every town or Township, with such other the
Inahbitants as have taken the Oath of fidelity shall have full power to choos
yearly, or for less time, within each Township a convenient number of fit men
to order the planting and prudential occasions of that Town, Select Townsmen
their power in writing etc. not above nine.
according to instructions given them in writing.

Provided, nothing be done by them contrary to the public Laws and Orders of
the Country. Provided also that the number of such Select persons be not above
nine.

4 Farther, it is ordered by the Authority aforesaid, that all Towns shall
take care from time to time to order and dispose of all single persons, Single
persons In-mates.
and In-mates within their Towns to service, or otherwise. And if any be
grieved at such order or dispose, they have liberty to appeal to the next
County Court.

5 This Court taking into consider (...) the useful Parts and abilities of
diverse Inhabitants amongst us, which are not Freemen, which if improved to
public use, the affairs of this Commonwealth may be the easier carried an end
in the several Towns of this Jurisdiction does order, and heerby declare;

That henceforth it shall and may be lawful for the Freemen within any of the
said Towns, to make choice of such Inhabitants (though non-Freemen) who have
taken, Non-(...), chosen ^o office in Towns.
or shall take the Oath of fidelity to this Government to be Jurie-men, and to
have their Vote in the choice of the Select-men for the town Affairs,
Assessements of Rates, and other Prudential, proper to the Select-men of the
several Towns. Provided still that the major part of all companyes of
Select-men be Freemen from time to time that shall make any valid Act. Caution.
As also, where no Select-men are, to have their Vote in ordering of Schools,
hearding of cattle, laying out of Highways and distributing of Lands; any
Law, Use or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding. Caution.
Provided also that no non-Freeman shall have his Vote, until he have attained
the age of twenty one years. [1636 1641 1647] See Eccles^^^st: Freeman^,
Highways.

Treasure.
IT is ordered, decreed and by this Court declared; Public Treasure
that the general or public Treasure, or any part thereof shall never be
expended but by the appointment of a General Court, nor any Shire treasure but
by the appointment of the Freemen thereof, Town Treasure.
nor any Town treasure but by the Freemen of that Township; except small sums
upon urgent occasion, when the Court or the Freemen cannot direct therein,
provided a just account be given thereof. [1641]

Trespass.
IT is ordered, decreed, and by this Court declared; that in all trespasses, or
damages done to any man or men, if it can be proved to be done by the mere
default of him or them to whom the trespass is done, it shall be judged no
trespass, nor any damage given for it. [1641] See Punishment.

Trials.
W HERAS this Court is often taken up in hearing and deciding particular Case
between party and party, which more properly belong to other (...) Courts, it
is therefore ordered, and heerby declared,

That henceforth all Causes between party and party shall first be tried in
some in^eriour Court. No Cause between partys come first to (...) Gun: Court
Review
And that if the party against whom the Judg^ment shall pass shall have any
new evidence, or other new matter to plead, ^e may desire a new Trial in the
same Court upon a Bill of review. And if justice shall not be done him upon
that Trial he may then come to this Court for releif. [1642] See Causes, (...).

2 It is ordered, and by this Court declared, that in all Actions of Law it
shall be the liberty of the Plaintiff and Defendant by mutual consent to
choos whether they will be tried by the Bench or a Jurie, (...): liberty for
trials
unles it be where the Law upon just reason has otherwise determined. and of
delin^: in criminals:
The like liberty shall be granted to all persons in any criminal Cases.

3 Also it shall be in the liberty both of Plaintiff and Defendant, challenge^
and likewise every delinquent to be judged by a Jurie, to challenge any of
the Jurors, and if the challenge be found just and reasonable, tales de
circumstant^^^s
by the Bench or the rest of the Jurie as the Challenger shall choos, it shall
be allowed him, and tales de circumstant^^^s impan^elled in their room.

4. Also, children, Idiots, distracted persons and all that are strangers or
new comers to our Plantation shall have such allowances, and dispensations in
any Case, Inf^nts, Idiots, strangers, like liberty
whether criminal or others, as Religion and reason require, [1641].

Votes.
IT is ordered, decreed and by this Court declared; that all, and every
Freeman, and others authorized by Law, Freedom of votes and Caution.
called to give any Advice, Vote, Verdict or Sentence in any Court, Council or
civil Assemble, shall have full freedom to do it according to their true
judgments and consciences so it be done orderly and inoffensively, for the
manner. liberty to be silent or neuter
And that in all cases wherein any Freeman or other is to give h^^ Vote be it in
point of Election, making Constitutio^s and Orders or passing Sentence in any
case of Judicature or the like, if he cannot see light or reason to give it
positively, one way or other, he shall have liberty to be silent, and not
plessed to a determinate vote. And farther that whenever any thing is to be
put to vote, and Sentence to be pronounced or any other matter to be proposed,
or ^^ad in any Court or Assembly, if the President or Moderator shall refuse
to perform it, where the Preside: will-not put to vote.
the major part of the members of that Court or Assembly shall have power to
appoint any other meet man of them to do it. And if there be just cause, to
punish him that should, and would not. [1641] See Age, Townships Sect. 5.

Usuri^.
IT is ordered, decreed and by this Court declared, that no man shall be
adjudged for the mere forbearance of any debt, above eight pound^ in the
hundred for one year, and nor above that rate proportionably for all sums
whatsoever, ^ills of Exchange excepted, neither shall this be a color or
countenance to allow any usuri^ amongst us contrary to the Law of God. [1641
1643].

Watching.
F OR the better keeping Watches and Wards by the Constables in time of peace,
it is ordered by this Court and Authority thereof;

The every Constable shall present to one of the next Magistrates the name of
every person who shall upon lawful warning (...), Constable: present defaults to
(...) next Magistrate. Fi^^ 5 shil: to the use of the watch.
or neglect so watch or ward, either in person or by some other sufficient for
that service. And if being convented, he cannot give a just excuse, such
Magistrate shall grant Warrant to any Constable to levy five shillings of
such offender for every such default; the same to be employed for the use of
the Watch of the same Town. And it is the intent of the Law that every person
of able body (not exempted by Law) or of estate sufficient to hire another,
shall be lyable^^ watch and ward, or to supplye i^ by some other when they
shall be thereunto required. Who are compellable to watch
And if there be in the same house diverse such persons, whether sons, servants
or sojourners, they shall all be compellable to watch as aforesaid.

Provided that all such as keep families at their Farms, being remote from any
(...), shall not (...) compellable to send their servants or sons from their
Farms to watch, and ward in the Towns. [1636 1646] See Constables, Military:

Weights and Measures.
T O the (...) measures and weights may be one and the same throughout this
Jurisdiction (...) is ordered by the Authority of this Court. (...)


(...) within one month after publication heerof the Auditor general shall
provide upon the Countries charg such weights and measures, of all sorts as are
hereafter expressed is for (...) Standards to be sealed with the Country Seal
viz. one Bushel, (...) one Peck and one Half-peck, one Al^^^uars, one
Wine-(...) and (...) and one lord: (...)
(...) as also a Set of brass^ weights to four pounds, which shall be after
sixteen (...) to the Pound, (...)
with fit Sho^^s and Steel-(...) to weigh and try withal.

2. And it is farther ordered by the Authortie aforesaid, that the Constable of
every Town within this Jurisdiction shall within three months after
publication heerof provide upon the Towns charge all such Weights, (...): duty
(...).
at the least of, (...), (...)
or such like* and (...) sufficient, Measures as are above expressed, tried and
fi^ed by the Countries Standards, and sealed by the said Auditor general, or
his Deputy in his presence (which shall be kept and used only for Standards
for their several town) who is heerby authorized to do the same; his F^^, two
pence.
for which he shall receive from the Constable of each town, two pence for
every weight and measure so proved, sized and sealed. And the said Constables
of every town shall commit these weights and measures unto the custo^ (...) of
the Select-men of their towns, for the time being, Constable: and Select-men
appoint a Sealer, to be sworn (...) next County Court, his power and ^ury.
who with the said Constable are heerby enjoined to choos out of their company
one able man to be the Sealer of such things for their town from time to time,
and till another be chosen: which man, so chosen, they shall present to the
next County Court there to be sworn to the faithful discharge of his duty, who
shall have power to send forth his Warrants by the Constables to all the
Inhabitants of their town to bring in all such measures and weights as they
make any use of, in the second month from year to year, at such time and place
as he shall appoint, and make return to the Sealer in writing of all persons so
summoned that then and there all such weights and measures may be proved and
sealed with the towns Seal (such as in the Order for town cattle) provided by
the Constable of each towns charge: his Fee. one penny.
who shall have for every weight and measure so sealed, one penny from the
Owners thereof at the first sealing.

And all such measures and weights as cannot be brought to their just Standard
he shall deface, What meas: destroyed, No ^ees.
and after the first sealing shall have nothing so long as they continue just
with the Standard. And that none may neglect their duty therein, it is farther
ordered by the Authority aforesaid, that if any Constable, Select-men or
Sealer do not execute this Order, as to every of them appertains, they shall
forfeit to the common Treasury forty shillings for every such neglect the
space of one month: and also that every person neglecting to bring in their
weights and measures at the time and place appointed, they shall pay three
shillings four pence for every such default, one half part whereof shall be to
the Sealer, and the other half to the common Treasury, which the Sealer shall
have power to levy by distress from time to time. [1647]

Wharfage.
IT is ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof; that these Orders shall
be observed by all such as shall bring goods to any (...), and these rates
following be allowed; Rates for wharfage.
first, for wood by the tun three pence, for timber by the tun four pence, for
pipestaves by the thousand nine pence, for boards by the thousand six pence.
For Merchants goods, whether in c^^k or otherwise, by the tun six pence; for
dry fish by the (...) all one penny, for corn by the quarter one penny and a
half penny, for great cattle by the head two pence, for Goats, Swine or other
small cattle, except such as are sucking upon the dame, by the head a
half-pennie: for hay, straw and all such combustable goods by the load six
pence. For stones by the tun one penny, for cotton wool by the bag two pence,
for sugar by the chest three pence. Provided that Wharfage be taken only where
the Wharfs are made and maintained. And that wood, Wharf^ made and maintain or
(...) placing goods.
stone and weighty goods shall be set up an end, or laid seven foot from the
side of the Wharf, upon penalty of double Wharfage, and so for other goods. And
that no goods lie upon the Wharf above forty eight hours, without farther
agreement with the Wharfinger: and that it shall ^e lawful for the Wharfinger
to take according to these (...) out of the goods that are landed, except they
be satified otherwise.

2 And it is farther ordered, that none shall cast an Anchor, Graplin or Killack
within, or (...) Cove, cast: Ankers. pen: 10s. and damages.
where it may endanger any other vessels, upon penalty of ten shillings half
on the Country, half to the Wharfinger besides paying all damages.

3 And that it shall not be lawful for any person to cast any dung, draught,
dirt, or any thing to fill up the Cove, or to annoy the neighbors, cast: dung
etc: (...): 40 s^.
upon penalty of forty shillings, the one half to the Country, and the other
half to the Wharfinger. [1647]

Wills Intestate.
IT is ordered, and by this Court declared; that when Parents dye Intestate,
(...) eldest son shall have a double portion of his whole estate real, and
personal unles the General Court ripen just cause al^edged shall judge
otherwise. And when Parents dye intestate (...) no (...) their daughter (...)
partners, unles the General Court upon just reason shall judge otherwise. [164^]

Witnessed.
IT is ordered, decreed and by this Court declared, that no man shall be put to
death without the testimony of two or three Witnesses, or that which is
equivalent thereunto. [164^]

2 And it is ordered by this Court and the Authorize thereof, that any one
Magistrate, Testimony taken before One Magist:
or Commissioner authorized thereunto by the General Court may take the
Testimony of any person of fourteen years of age, or above, of found
understanding and reputation, in any Case civil or criminal; how ordered:
and shall keep the same in his own hands all the (...), or deliver it to the
Recorder, public No^^rie or clerk of the writs to be recorded, that so nothing
may be altered in it. Provided, that (...) any such (...) shall have his abode
within ten miles of the Court, Where witnesses to appart in person.
and there living and not disabled by sickness; or other infirmity, the said
Testimony so taken out of Court shall not be received, or made use of in the
Court, except the (...) be also present to be farther examined about it.
Capital cases.
Provided also, that in all capital cases all witnesses shall be present
whatsoever they dwell.

3 And it is further ordered by the Authority aforesaid, that any person
summoned to appear as a (...) in any civil Court between party and party,
Charges of (...) in civil cases to be laid down
shall not be compellable to travel to any Court or place where he is to give
his Testimony, except he who shall to summon him shall lay down or give him
satisfaction for his travel and expenses, outward and home-ward; and for such
time as he shall spend in attendance in such case when he is at such Court or
place, the Court shall award due recompense. And (...) ordered th^^ two
shillings a day shall be accounted due satisfaction to any (...) for travel
and expenses, Allowance to witnesses by the day.
and that when the Witness dwells within three (...), and is not at charge an
puffs over any other Ferrie then bet^^^ (...) and (...) then one shilling six
pence per d^^n shall be accounted (...). And if any (...) such payment or
satisfaction shall fail to appear to give his Testimony be shall be liable to
pay the pa^^ies damages upon an action of the Case. And (...) Witnesses (...)
criminal (...) shall (...) satisfaction, Witness not appearing pay damages.
paid by the Treasurer upon (...) from the (...) of Judge before whom the case
is tried. And for a general rule to be observed in all criminal causes, (...)
witness in criminal cases paid by the Treasurer, levied of (...) delinquents
(...) where the Fines are put (...) and also what they are other (...) it ^s
further ordered by the Authority aforesaid, that the changes of Witnesses in
all such cases shall be bo^^: by the parties delinquent^, and shall be added to
the (...) imposed; that so the Treasurer having upon Warrant from the Court or
other Judge (...) such Witnesses, it they be repayd him with the Fine; that so
the Witnesses may be timely satisfied, and the country not damnified; [1649]

Wolves.
W HERAS (...) and damage does be full this Commonwealth by (...) of Wolves
which destroy great wonders of our earth notwithstanding (...) for (...) whole
by this Court for suppressing of them, therefore for the better (...) of, any
(...) of so great (...) it is ordered by this Court (...).

That any person either English or Indian that shall kill any (...) ten miles
of any (...) in this jurisdiction, shall have (...) them so killed ten
shillings paid due of the (...) of the Country (...) that due-proof be (...)
thereof unto the (...) next adjoining where (...) Wolves were killed: and also
they bring a Certificat under (...) Magistrates (...) the Constable of (...) to
the Treasurer. Provided also that then Orde^^d intend only such Plant^^^^ as do
(...) with as to public charges, and for such Plantation (...) the (...) of
(...) that do not join (...) public charges they shall make payment upon their
own charge. [1645].

wood
F or (...) earth and (...).

That where wood is brought to any town or house, by (...), it shall be thus
accounted and affi^ed. A (...) of four tuns shall be accounted three load;
twelve tun nine loads, twenty tun fifteen loads. Six tun four load and half,
fourteen tun ten load and half, twenty-four tun eighteen load. Eight tun six
load, sixteen tun twelve load, twenty eight tun twenty one load. Ten tun seven
load and half, eighteen tun thirteen load and half; thirty tun twenty two load
and half. Except such wood as shall be sold by the Cord, which is, and is
heerby declared to be eight foot in length, four foot in height, and four foot
broad. [1646 1647]

Workmen
B ECAUSE the harvest of hay, (...), hemp and flax comes usually so (...)
together that much loss can hardly (...) avoided, it is (...) ordered by the
Authority of this Court:

That the Constables of every town, upon request made to them, shall require
any artificers or handy-crafts-men meet to labor, to work by the day for their
neighbors in mowing, reaping of corn and inning thereof. Provided that those
men whom they work for shall duly pay them for their work. And that if any
person so required shall refuse, or the Constable neglect his Office herein,
they shall each of them pay to the ^^e of the poor of the town double so much
as such days work comes unto. Provided no artificer or handy-crafts-man shall
be compelled to work as aforesaid, for others, whiles he is necessarily
attending on the like business of his own. [1646]

Wrecks of the sea.
IT is ordered, decreed and by this Court declared; that if any ships or other
vessels, be it friend or enemy, shall suffer ship-wreck upon our Coasts, there
shall he no violence or wrong offered to their persons, or good; but their
persons shall be harbored and releived, and their goods preserved in safety,
till Authority may be certified, and shall take farther order therein. Also,
any Whale, or such like great fish, cast upon any shore shall be safely kept,
or improved where it cannot be kept, by the town or other proprietor of the
land; till the General Court shall set order for the same. [1641 1647]

(...) and Forms of things frequently used.
TO ( IB) Carpenter, of ( D). You are required to appear at the next Court,
Summons.
holden at ( (...)) on the day of the month next ensuing; to answer the
complaint of ( N C) for withholding a debt of (...) due upon a (...) or (...):
or ^^r two heifers etc fold you by him, (...), or for a trespass done him in
his corn or hay, by your cattle or for a flaunder you have done him in his
name, or for striking him, or the like, and heerof you are not to fall at your
peril. Dated the day of the month 1641.

TO the Marshal or Constable of ( (...)) or to their Deputy. You are required
to attach the body and goods of ( W^) and to ^^ke B^^d of him, Attachment.
to the value of (...) with sufficient Su^^tie or Sureties for his appearance
at the next Court, holden at ( S) on the (...) day of the (...) month; then,
and there to answer to the complaint of ( I M) for etc: as before. And so make
a true return thereof under your hand. Dated the day etc:

By the Court R F.

KNOW all men by these presents, Bond for appearance
thee (...) ( AB) or ( D) Yeot^^an, and ( C C) of the same Carpenter, do bind
our selves, our (...) and Executors to ( R F) Marshal, or M O Constable of D
aforesaid, in pounds upon condition that the said A B shall personally appear
at the next Court, at (...) to answer L M in on Action of And to abide the
order of the Court therein, and not to depart without license.

TO the Marshal or Constable of (...) You are required to replace three (...)
of T (...) now distreined or impounded by A B, Replevin.
and to deliver them to the (...) T P. Provided he give Bona to the value of
(...) with sufficient or Suerties, to prosecute his Replevin at the next Court,
holden a^( (...)) and so from Court to Court till the Cause be ended, and to
pay such costs and damages as not said ( A (...)) shall by (...) recover
against (...); and so make a true return thereof under your hand. Dated etc.

By the Court R F.

W HERAS upon serious consideration, was have concluded a conf^d^racie with the
english Colonies of New-Pl^^outh Conne^i^^^^ and New Haven, Commissioners for
the united Colonies.
(...), and respect to our Nations does (...).

Woe have this Court chosen our trusty and well-beloved friends ( S I) and (
(...)) for this Colonie, for a full and complete year, as any occasions and
exigents may (...) and particularly for the next Meeting at ( L). And do invest
them with full power and authority to treat, and conclude of all things,
according to the true (...) and meaning of the Articles of consideration of the
united Colonies, their power
concluded at (...) this ninth day of the third month 1643.

I ( A (...)) being by Gods providence an Inhabitant within the Jurisdiction of
this Common wealth, do freely and sincerly acknowledge my self to be subject
to the Government thereof. Oath of fidelity.
And do here swear by the great and dreadful Name of the Ever-living God,
that I will be true and faithful (...), and will accordingly yield assistance
thereunto, with my person and estate, as (...) from bound: and will also truly
endeavor to maintein and preserve all the Labors (...) and Privileges
thereof, sub^^^ting my self unto the wholesome Laws made, and established by the
same. And f^rther, that I will not plot or practice any evil against it, or
consent to any that shall (...) but will (...) discover and reveal the same to
lawful Authority now here established, for the speedy preventing thereof. So
help me God in our Lord Jesus Christ.

I ( A (...)) being by Gods providence an Inhabitant within the Jurisdiction of
this Commonwealth, and now to be made free; do here freely acknowledge my
self to be sub^e^^ (...) thereof: Freemans Oath.
and therefore (...) by the (...) and dreadful Name of the Ever-living God,
that I will be true and faithful to the same and will according (...) support
(...) equity I am bound, and will also truly endeavor to maintein and
preserve all the Liberties and Privileges thereof, submitting my self unto the
wholesome Laws made and established by the same. And farther, that I will not
plot or practice any evil against it, or consent to any that shall so do; but
will timely discover and reveal the same to lawful authority now here
established, for the speedy prevention thereof.

Moreover, I do solemnly bind my self in the ^ight of God, that when shall ^e
called to give my voice touching my such matter of this State, wherein Freemen
are to deal; I will give (...) and (...) as I shall in (...) own conscience
judge best to conduce and tend to the public (...) of the Body, without
respect of persons, or favor of any man. So help me God etc:

WHEREAS you ( (...)) are chosen to the place of a Governor over this
Jurisdiction, Governors Oath.
for this year, and (...) a new be chosen and sworn, you do (...) wear by the
Living God, that you will ^n all things concerning your place, according to
your best power and skill carry and demean your self for the said (...) of your
Government, according to the Law of God, and for the advancement of his
Gospel, the Laws of (...), and the good of the people of this Jurisdiction.
You shall do justice to (...) without partiality, as much as in you lies:
you shall not exceed the limitation of a Governor in your place So help (...)
God etc:

WHEREAS you (...), Deputy (...)
are chosen to the place of the Deputy-(...) etc: (...) in the Gover^^^^ (...).

WHEREAS you ( (...)) are chosen to the place of Assistant over this
Jurisdiction, Assistants
for this year, and till new be chosen and sworn: you do here swear by the
Living God, that you will (...) endeavor according to your best skill, to
carry and (...) your self in your place, for the said time, ascending to the
Laws of God and of this land, for the advancement of the Gospel and the good
of the people of this Jurisdictio^. You shall dispense justice equally and
(...), according to your best skill in all cases wherein you shall act by virtue
of your place. You shall not wittinglie and willingly exceed the limitations
of your place. And all this to be understood, during your abode in this
Jurisdiction. So help you God in our Lord Jesus Christ.

WHEREAS you, ( (...) E) have been chosen to the Office of Sergeant Major
General, of all the military Forces of this Jurisdiction, for this present
year: Major General.
You do h^er swear by the Ever-living God; that by your best skill and
ability you will faithfully discharge the trust (...) to you, according to
the tenor and purport of the Commission given you by this Court. So help you
God. etc:

I ( (...)) being chosen Teasurer for the Jurisdiction of the Massachusetts, for
this year, Treasurer
and until a new be chosen; do promise to give out Warrants with all
convenient diligence, for collecting all such sums of money as by any Court, or
otherwise have (...) or shall be appointed, and to pay out the same, by such
sums and in such (...) I shall be lawfully appointed by this Court, if I shall
have it i^ my (...) of the Common Treasury. And will return the names of such
Constables as shall be failing in their Office, in not collecting and bringing
in to me such sums as I shall give Warrant for. And will render a true account
of all things concerning my said Office wh^^ by the General Court I shall be
called thereto. So help me God in our Lord Jesus Christ.

YOu ( W (...)) here (...) by the Name of the Living God; that in the Office of
a Public Notarie, Public Notarie.
to which you have been chosen, you shall demean your self (...) and
faithfully (...) of your Office. And in all writings, (...) that you are to
give ^estimonie unto, when you shall be required, you shall perform the same
(...) and (...) according to the nature thereof, without delay or (...). And you
(...) and keep a true Register of all such things as belong to (...). So help
(...)

YOu ( E M) shall diligentl^e, faithfully, and with what speed you may,
collect (...) up all such (...), and sums of money, in such good, as you can
find, Marshal.
of (...) person for which you shall have Warrant so to do by the Treasurer for
the time being. (...) And with like faithfullnes, speed and diligence levy the
goods of every person for which you shall have Warrant so to do, by virtue of
any Execution granted by the Secretary, or other Clerk authorized thereunto,
for the time being. And the same goods so (...) shall with all convenient speed
deliver (...) to the Treasurer, or the (...) shall belong. And you shall with
like care and faithfullnes, (...) directed to you, which shall come to your
hands; and return the same to the Court where they are returnable, at the times
of the return thereof.

And you shall perform, do and execute all such lawful commands, directio^s
and (...), as by lawful (...) here established shall be committed to your care
and charge, according to your Office. All these things in the presence of the
Living God you bind your self unto, by this your Oath to perform, during all
the time you continue in your (...), ^^^hout favor, fear, or partiality of
any person. (And if you meet with (...) case of (...) which you cannot resolve
by your self, you may suspend till you may have advice from Authority) So
help etc:

YOu ( N D) do swear by the Living God, that you will well and truly serve
this Commonwealth in the Office of Auditor General, whereunto you have been
chosen; Auditor General.
so long as you shall continue in the same. You shall keep a true account of
all (...) to your charge. You shall not omit or delay without just occasion, to
examine, sign and dispatch all accounts and bills which shall be brought to you
for that end, without taking any Fee or reward for the same, other then the
General Court has allowed, or shall allow: and shall give a true account of
all your business, when you shall be thereto required by the said Court. So help
you God etc.

YOU ( M N) being chosen Associate for the Court, for this year, and till new
he chosen or other order taken, Associates.
do here swear, that you will do equal right and justice in all cases that
shall come before you, after your best skill and knowledge, according to the
laws here established. So help you God etc:

Wheresoever any three men are deputed to end (...) Causes, the Constable of
the place within one month after, shall return their names to the next
Magistrate, who shall give Summmons for them forthwith to appear before him;
who shall (...) to them this Oath:

YOu ( A B) being chosen and appointed to end small Causes, not exceeding
forty shillings value, Three (...).
according to the laws of this Jurisdiction, for this year ensuing, do here
swear by the Living God that without favor or affection, according to your
best light, you will true Judgment give and make, in all the Causes that come
before you. Se help you God etc:

YOu swear by the Living God, that you will diligently inquire, and faithfully
present to this Court, Grand ^urie.
whatsoever you know to be a breach of any law established in this Jurisdiction
according to the mind of God; and what (...) criminal offenses you apprehend
fit to be here presented, unles some (...) and relig^^^^ty conscience truly
grounded upon the word of God bind you to (...) and whatsoever shall he
legally committed by this Court to your judgment you will return a true and
just Verdict therein, according to the evidence given you (...) established
amongst us. So help you God etc:

You swear by the Living God, that in the Cause or Causes now legally to be
committed to you by this Court, Petty ^uris.
you will true trial (...), and just verdict give therein, according to the
evidence given you, and (...) of this Jurisdiction. So help you God etc:

YOu do swear by the great Name of Almigh^i^ God, Life and death.
that you will well and truly try, and true deliverance make of such person at
the (...) as you shall have in charge, according to your evidence. So help you
god and^

YOu swear by the Living God, that the evid^nce you shall give to this Court,
concerning the Cause now in question, Witnesses.
shall (...) the truth, (...) truth, and nothing but the truth. So help you God
etc:

YOu swear by the Living God, that you will truly present the cause and the
(...) of the death of ( J K) according to evidence, Untimely death.
or the light of your knowledge and conscience. So help you God etc:

The forms of the Oath to be (...) to the Sergeant Majors of the several
Regimen, and so, mutatis, mutandis to the other military Officers.

Whereas you ( R S) have been chosen to the Office of Sergeant Major, of the
Regiment in the County of M. for this present year, Sergeant Major and other
chief Officers.
and until another be chosen in your place; You do here swear by the Living
God, that by your best skill and ^illtie you will faithfully discharge the
trust committed to you, according to such commands and directions as you shall
from time to time upon all occasions receive from the Sergeant Major General,
by virtue of his Commission from the Court, and according to the Laws and
Orders by this Court made and established in this behalf. So help you God etc:

YOu ( R. B) swear truly to perform the Office of a Clerk of attained Bond, to
the utmost of your ability, Clerk of the Band.
or endeavors, according to the particulars specified [and peculiar to your
office] the militari Laws. So help etc:

YOu shall faithfully endeavor with all good conscience, to discharge this
trust committed to you, Commissio: of martial discipli^^.
as you shall apprehend to conduce most to the s^^^tie of th^^ Commonwealth.
You shall not by any sinister devices, or for any partial respects, or private
ends do any thing to the hindrance of the effects of any good and seasonable
Counsels. You shall appoint or remove no Officer by (...) partiality, or for
personal resp^^^ or other prejudice: but according to the merit of the persons
in your apprehentions. You shall faithfully endeavor to see that martial
discipline may be strictly upholden, not easing or burthening any, otherwise
then you shall judge to be just and equal. You shall use your power over men's
lives, as the last and only means which in your best apprehentions shall be
most for the public safety in such case. So help you God in our Lord Jesus
Christ.

WHEREAS you ( E G) are chosen Constable within the Town of ( C), for one year
now following, Constable.
and until other be sworn in the place: you do here swear by the Name of
Almighty God, that you will carefully intend the preservation of the peace, the
discovery and preventing all attempts against the same. You shall duly execute
all Warrants which shall be sent unto you from lawful Authority here
established, and shall faithfully execute all such Orders of Court as are
committed to your care: and in all these things you shall deal seriously and
faithfully while you shall be in office, without any sinister respects of
favor or displeasure, So help you God etc:

WHEREAS you ( J G) are chosen an Officer for the searching and sealing of
leather within the Town where you now dwell, Leather Sealer.
for the space of a year, and till another be chosen and sworn in your room.
You do here swear by the Ever-living God, that you will carefully and duly
attend the execution of your said Office, with all faithfullnes for the good of
the Commonwealth, according to the true intent of the Laws in such case
provided, So help you God etc:

YOU ( C D) here swear by the Living God that you will from time to time
faithfully execute your Office of Clerk of the Market, Clerk of Market.
in the limits whereto you are appointed, for this ensuing year, and till
another be chosen and sworn in your place: and that you will do therein
impartially, according to the Laws here established, in all things to which
your Office has relation. So help you God etc:

YOU ( S S) do here swear by the Ever-living God, that you will to your power
faithfully execute the Office of a Sear^^e^, for this year ensuing, Searcher.
and till another be chosen and sworn in your place, concerning all goods
prohibited; and in special, for Gunpowder, Shot, Lead and Ammunition: and that
you will diligently search all vessels, carriages and persons that you shall
know, suspect, or be informed are about to transport, or carry the same out of
this Jurisdiction contrary to Law. And that you will impartially seiz, take,
and keep the same in your own custody: one half part whereof shall be for your
service in the said Place; the other you shall forthwith deliver to the
Treasurer. All which goods so seized and disposed, you shall certify under
your hand to the Auditor-general within one month from time to time. So help
you God etc:

WHEREAS you ( T. D.) are chosen Apprizers of such lands or goods as are now to
be presented to you, Apprizers.
you do here swear by the Living God, that all partiality, prejudice and
other sinister respects laid aside, you shall apprize the same, and every part
thereof, according to the true and just value thereof at this present, by common
account, by your best judgment and conscience. So help you God etc:

WHEREAS you ( J. B.) are chosen to be Viewers of Pipe-staves within the Town of
( B) you do here swear by the Ever-living God, Viewers of Pipestave.
that at all convenient times while you shall be in place, when you shall be
required to execute your Office, you shall diligently attend the same; and
shall faithfully without any sinister respects, try and sort all Pipe-staves
presented to you, and make a true entry thereof according to law. So help you
God in our Lord Jesus Christ.

FINIS

