SEVERAL LAWS AND ORDERS Made at Several GENERAL COURTS In the Years 1661.
1662. 1663.
PRinted and Published by Order of the General Court held at Boston the 20th of
October, 1663.
By EDWARD RAWSON Secr'.
MAY the 22. 1661.
THis Court, being desirous to try all means, with as much lenity as may
consist with our Safety, to prevent the Intrusions of the Quakers, who besides
their absurd and Blaspemous Doctrines, do like Rogues and Vagabonds come in
upon us, and have not been Restrained by the Laws already provided; Have
Ordered, That every such Vagabond Quaker, Order against Quakers and Vagabond
Rogues.
found within any part of this Jurisdiction, shall be Apprehended by any person
or persons, or by the Constable of the Town wherein he or she is taken; and by
the Constable, or in his absence by any other person or persons, conveyed
before the next Magistrate of that Shire wherein they are taken, or
Commissioner invested with Magistratical Power: And being by the said
Magistrate or Magistrates, Commissioner or Commissioners, adjudged to be a
Wandering Quake^, viz. One that has not any Dwelling* or orderly allowance as
an Inhabitant of this Jurisdiction; and not giving civil Respect, by the usual
Gestures thereof, or, by any other way or means manifesting himself to be a
Quaker, shall by Warrant under the Hand of the said Magistrate or Magistrates,
Commissioner or Commissioners, directed to the Constable of the Town wherein he
or she is taken, or in absence of the Constable, to any other meet person, Be
stripped naked from the Middle upwards, and tied to a Carts tail, and Whipped
through the Town, and from thence immediately conveyed to the Constable of the
next Town toward the Borders of our Jurisdiction, as their Warrant shall
direct; and so from Constable to Constable, till they be conveyed through any
the outwardmost Towns of our Jurisdiction

And if such Vagabond Quaker shall return again, then to be in like manner
Apprehended, and conveyed as often as they shall be found within the Limits of
our Jurisdiction. Provided every such Wandering Quaker having been thrice
Convicted and sent away as abovesaid, and returning again into this
Jurisdiction, shall be Apprehended, and Committed by any Magistrate or
Commissioner as abovesaid, unto the House of Correction within that County
wherein he or she is found, until the next Court of that County; where if the
Court judge not meet to Release them* they shall be Branded with the Letter R.
on their left Shoulder, and be severely Whipped, and sent away in manner as
before. And if after this, he or she shall return again; then to be proceeded
against as Incorrigible Rogues, and Enemies to the Common Peace* and shall
immediately be Apprehended, and Committed to the Common Goal of the Country,
and at the next Court of Assistants shall be brought to their Trial, and
Proceeded against according to the Law made Anno 1658. p ^.36. for their
Punishment on Pain of Death. And for such Quakers as shall arise from amongst
our selves, they shall be Proceeded against as the former Law of Anno 1658.
page 36. does provide, until they have been Convicted by a Court of Assistants;
and being so Convicted, he or she shall then be Banished this Jurisdiction; and
if after that, they shall be found in any part of this Jurisdiction, then he or
she so Sentenced to Banishment, shall be Proceeded against as those that are
strangers and Vagabond Quakers, in manner as is above expressed.

And it is further Ordered, That whatsoever (...) arise about Apprehending,
Whipping, Conveying, or otherwise (...) Quakers, to be laid out by the
Constables of such Towns where it is (...) and to be repaid by the Treasurer
out of the next Country Levy And further, That the Constables of the several
Towns are hereby Empowered from time to time, as necessity shall require, to
Impress Cart, Oxen, and other Assistance for the execution of this Order.

AUGUST the 7th. 1661.
THe Court judges it meet to Declare, That the Law tit. Ships, second Section,
Laws about Shipping and Fishing Repealed.
That all Ships which comes (...) Trading only from other parts, shall have
free access into our Harbor, etc. shall and is hereby Repealed.

And also that the first Section of the Law tit. Fish, Fishermen, page 32.
shall and is hereby Repealed.

MAY the 7th. 1662.
As an Addition to the Laws about Apparel.
WHereas excess in Apparel among^^ us, unbecoming a Wilderness-condition, and
the Profession of the Gospel, whereby the Rising Generation are in danger to be
Corrupted and Effeminated; which Practices are witnessed against by the Laws of
God, and sundry Civil and Christian Nations: It is therefore Ordered and
Enacted by this Court, Addition to the Law for Apparel
and the Authority thereof, That all persons within this Jurisdiction, whether
the Children, or Servants that are under government in Families, that shall
wear any Apparel exceeding the quality and condition of their Persons or Estate
or that is apparently contrary to the ends of Apparel; and either of these to
be so judged by the Grand Jury and County Court of that Shire where such
Complaint or Presentment is made: All such persons being Convicted, shall for
the first Offense be Admonished; for the second Offense pay a Fine of Twenty
shillings; for the third Offense, Forty shillings; and so following, as the
Offenses are multiplied, to pay Forty shillings a time to the Treasury of that
County. Also if any Tailor shall make or fashion any Garment for such Children
or Servants under government as aforesaid, contrary to the mind and order of
their Parents, or Governors, Every such Tailor shall for the first Offense be
Admonished; and for the second Offense forfeit double the Value of such Apparel
or Garment as he shall fashion or make, contrary to the mind and order of
their Parents or Governors: Half to the Owner, and half to the Country. And
all Grand Jury men are hereby Enjoined to Present all those whom they do judge
breakers of this Order.

WHereas in the Law tit. Public Charges, page 14. Sheep are to be assessed at
Twenty five shillings a head, and that they are now fallen to about a fourth
part (...) the Price they then were ordinarily sold for, whereby many are
discouraged for keeping such useful Creatures: It is therefore Ordered by this
Court, How to Rate Sheep.
and the Authority thereof, That henceforth the Rate for Sheep shall be at ten
shillings a Head; Any thing in the said recited Law to the contrary
notwithstanding.

IT is Ordered* The Keepers discharge of Prisoners in Case.
That when any persons are Committed to Prison in any Civil Action, the Keepers
of the Prison shall not stand charged with their Supply of Victuals, or other
Necessaries. And in case the Prisoner has no Estate, and will (...)
Magistrate, that he is not worth Five pounds, the Plaintiff shall provide (...)
his Relief, or otherwise the Keeper shall not stand charged with him: and all
such Charges the Plaintiff shall have power to levy with the Execution, before
the party he delivered from Prison.

THis Court being sensible of the increase of Profaneness and Irreligiousness,
by reason of the Vagrant and Vagabond life of sundry persons, as well
Inhabitants (...), that wander from their Families, Relations and Dwelling
places, from Town to Town, thereby drawing away Children, Servants, and other
persons, both younger and elder, from their lawful Callings and Employments,
and hardening the (...) of one another against all Subjection to the Rules of
Gods Holy Word, and the ^^^^blished Laws of this Colony: All which to prevent,
Order about Vagabond and Wandering persons.
This Court does hereby Order and Enact, That all such persons, where ever they
may be found in any place of this Jurisdiction, be Apprehended by the Constable
of the said place, with or without further Warrant, and brought before the next
Magistrate; who if upon Examination shall find them to be such as do not give
a good and satisfactory account of such their Wandering up and down, they shall
proceed with and against them as Rogues and Vagabonds, and cause them to be
Corporally punished, and sent from Constable to Constable, until they come to
the place of their abode: Or in case they will not confess where their abode is
within this Colony, nor yet voluntarily depart out of the same; then to be sent
to the House of Correction, there to remain until the next Court of that County.

OCTOBER the 8th. 1662.
COmplaint being made to this Court, of abuse offered to Justice, through
liberty granted, by the Keepers of the Prisons, to such persons as stand
Committed for Payment of Fines, and on Execution granted in Civil Cases: This
Court do Order, Keepers of Prisoners danger.
That no person or persons Committed as abovesaid, shall be permitted by the
Keeper of the Prison to go at liberty without the Precincts of the Prison, but
by the License of the Court that Committed him, or of the Creditor for whom
Execution is granted; On Penalty of Paying the Fine imposed, and satisfaction
of the Execution in any Civil case.

WHereas it has been commonly practiced, that Attachments have been directed
to the Marshall to be served in any Town under the Jurisdiction of that Court
whereof the Marshall is Officer, notwithstanding the Law does Order, That all
Attachments shall be directed to the Constable in such Towns where no Marshall
dwells: It is hereby Ordered and Declared, Marshals may serve Attachments.
That the said Custom shall be accounted Legal, and shall not abate the
Proceeding to Trial of any Cause. Provided no more Costs be charged on the
Defendant, then by Law are due to Constables for serving Attachments.

THis Court heretofore, for some Reasons inducing, did judge meet to suspend
the execution of the Laws against Quakers, as such, so far as they respect
Corporal Punishment or Death, during the Courts pleasure. Now forasmuch as new
Complaints are made to this Court of such persons abounding, especially in the
Eastern parts, endeavoring to draw away others to that wicked (...): It is
therefore Ordered, That the last Law tit. Vagabond Quakers (...) ^661. be
henceforth in force in all respects. Order against Vagabond Quakers May 1661.
in force.
Provided that their Whipp^^^ (...) but through three Towns: And the Magistrate
or Commissioners signing such Warrant shall appoint both the Towns, and Number
of Stripes in each Town to be given.

WHereas it appears, that notwithstanding such wholesome Orders as have been
hitherunto by the Select men of Boston, provided for the Restraint of all
persons from violent Riding in the streets of the said Town: Yet nevertheless,
many take the liberty and boldness to Gallop frequently therein, to the great
endangering the Bodies and Limbs of many persons, especially Children, who are
ordinarily abroad in the streets, and not of age or discretion suddenly to
escape such danger. This Court having seriously considered the Premises,
Penalty for Galloping in Boston streets.
being careful to prevent a Practice that is like to be of such dangerous
consequence, Do Order, That no person whatsoever shall after the Publication
hereof, Gallop any Horse within any the streets of the said Town, upon Penalty
of forfeiting Three shillings and four pence for every such Offense, upon
conviction before any one Magistrate or Commissioner of Boston, to be paid to
the Treasurer of the County of Suffolk; unless it appear on extreme necessity.

OCTOBER the 20th, 1663.
FOr the better Regulating of Elections upon the Day of Election, and avoiding
the inconveniences which may attend the same: It is Ordered by this Court, That
henceforth the General Court, both Magistrates and Deputies, shall meet
together in the Court Chamber at seven of the clock that morning, and become a
Court, and begin and consider of such things as are necessary in reference to
the Work of the (...)

2. That (...) time to come all Votes of the Freemen in each Town within this
Jurisdiction, be sent in Proxies sealed up as the Law requires: Order for
Regulation of Elections.
And that none be admitted to give Votes personally at the Day of Election,
except the Members of the General Court.

3. That the Constable of each Town shall some convenient time before the Day
of Election, give due notice to all the Freemen of that town, to meet together
to give their Votes for Elections: And that none shall be admitted to give
their Votes for any other, unless the person Voting be also present, or send
his Vote sealed up in a Note directed to the Deputy or Townsmen, met together
for that Work.

4. That the Constable shall cause a List of the Number of Names of such as
give their Votes fairly Written, and Sealed with the Votes.

5. That no person be made Free upon the Day of Election. And a Copy hereof to
be Published immediately after the breaking up of this Court.

THis Court having perused and considered the Letter received from His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, dated the 24th of June last, relating
to an Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for the Encouraging and Increasing
of Shipping and Navigation. As an Addition and Explanation of former Orders
made by this Court concerning these Affairs; It is hereby Ordered and Enacted,
That the several Officers hereafter mentioned, Officers authorized about
Shipping.
are hereby Deputed and Authorized to see that the said Act be performed, so
far as it concerns the Government of this Plantation, both in Seizing Ships
or Vessels inhibited by the said Act to trade here; taking Bonds of all Ships
and Vessels that Lades in our Ports any Commod^^^ expressed in the said Act, of
the Growth, Product or Manufactory of the English Plantations, who shall not
produce Certificate that they have given Bond already, as the said Act
requires. And in case of Neglects or Contempt, to Seize such Vessels or Ships
that Lades the aforesaid Goods without giving Bond, or showing Certificates:
And to keep accounts of all such Ships and Vessels, with the Names of the
Masters, that Lades here as aforesaid, and Return an Account twice every year,
with Copies of the said Bonds and Certificates, unto the Governor for the time
being, by him to be transmitted to London, directed to the Chief Officer there.

The Officers appointed, are as follows: For the Ports of Boston and
Charlestown, Mr. Edward Rawson. Their Names,
For Salem, Marble-head, and Gloucester, Mr. Hilliard Veren. For the River of
Piscataquam, and Isle of Shoals, and Ports adjacent, Captain Brian Pendleton.


The Fees they are Authorized to take of every Shipmaster, are For taking Bond,
and transcribing the Copy, Five shillings. For Receiving and Entering a
Certificate, Two shillings six pence. And Fees.
For giving Certificate, and Recording it, Two shillings six pence. Their part
of Seizures, as the said Act directs.


And that all employed in this trust, do from time to time make Return of all
Bonds and Certificates by them passed, to Mr. Rawson, Order requiring Bond of
Shipmasters, etc.
who by the Governors Advice shall make Return thereof for England, as the Act
of Parliament requires. And that Mr. Rawson do from time to time present the
Council of this Commonweal, or in default thereof the Court of Assistants,
with true Accounts of all Bonds and Certificates, and Copies of all Letters
that he shall send for England, in any wise referring to this matter.

Moreover it is Ordered, That the Secretary take special care forthwith to send
by the first opportunity, Font Copies of the Councils, and one of the Copies of
the Act of Parliament relating thereunto, to the Four General Governments of
New England, viz. Plymouth, Co^^cticot, New Haven, and Road-Island.

Common Attorney no Deputy.
IT is Ordered by this Court, and the Authority thereof, That no person who is
an usual and Common Attorney in any Inferior Court, shall be admitted to sit
as a Deputy in this Court.

WHereas it is found by experience, that there are many who are Inhabitants of
this Jurisdiction, who are Enemies to all Government, Civil and Ecclesiastical,
who will not yield obedience to Authority, but make it much of their Religion
to be in opposition thereto; and refuse to hear Arms under others, who
notwithstanding combine together in some Towns, and make Parties suitable to
their Designs, in Election of such persons according to their Ends: It is
therefore Ordered by this Court, and the Authority thereof, Persons exempt from
Voting in Elections.
That all persons, Quakers or others, which refuse to attend upon the Public
Worship of God here Established; that all such persons, whether Freemen or
others, acting as aforesaid, shall and hereby are made Incapable of Voting in
all Civil Assemblies, during their obstinate persisting in such wicked ways
and courses, and until Certificate be given of their Reformation.

And it is further Ordered, That all those Fines and Mulcts of any such
Delinquents as aforesaid, which are not gathered nor paid (...) several
Treasurers of the Countries, as also what Fines shall be laid on them for the
future, shall be delivered by the Order of the County-Treasurers respectively,
to the Select men of the several Towns whereunto they belong, to be by them
improved for the Poor of the Town.

FOr a more full and clear understanding of the intent of this Court in
reference to Commissions granted to Military Officers: Officers Commissions.
It is Ordered and hereby Declared, That all Commissions of Inferior Officers
be and do stand good and in force, notwithstanding the Death or Removal of
their Superior Officers.

It is also further Ordered, That all trained Soldiers, whether Horse or Foot,
shall repair to their several Quarters, and lodge their Arms immediately after
their dismission upon Training days: And whosoever shall either singly or in
companies remain in Arms, and vainly spend their time and Powder by inordinate
shooting in the day or night after their Release; Disorder in Soldiers to be
punished by the Officers.
such Soldiers upon conviction shall be punished by their Superior Officers
Order, upon the next Training-day, at the Head of the Company, by sharp
Admonition, or otherwise with any usual Military Punishment, at the discretion
of the chief Officer: Provided the Magistrate have not taken notice of the
matter before.

It is also further Ordered, That all Soldiers, whether Horse or Foot, who
shall disobey the lawful Commands of their Superior Officers upon any
Training-day, either in time of Exercise in the Body, or otherwise Refusing to
perform any Service which their Officers in their discretion shall judge
expedient, in order to the furtherance and promoting Military Work; such
refractory Soldiers shall be punished either by Admonition, or otherwise, at
the Head of the Company, with any usual Military Punishments, at the discretion
of the Chief Officers.

It is also further Ordered, and be it hereby Enacted, Troopers allowance of 5
^ per Annum, repealed
That the Law limitting Troop* not to exceed Seventy persons in a Troop, as
also for Allowance of Five shillings per Annum, is hereby Repealed, in
reference to any that shall be Listed after the Publication of this Order. And
that henceforth none shall be admitted to be a Listed Trooper* but such whom
themselves or Parents under whole government they are, do pay in a single
Country Rate for One hundred pounds Estate, and in other respects qualified as
the Law provides: And the same certified under the Hand of the Constable of the
Town where they live.

BE it also Enacted by the Authority of this Court, Penalty for drinking
Healths etc. in Ships or Vessels.
That no Masters of Ships or Seamen, having their Vessels Riding within any of
our Harbors in this Jurisdiction, shall presume to Drink Healths, or suffer
any Healths to be drunk within their Vessels by day or night; or to shoot off
any Gun after the daylight is past* or on the Sabbath Day, on Penalty for
every Health twenty shillings, and for every Gun so shot, twenty shillings. And
the Captain of the Castle is hereby Enjoined to give notice of this Order to
all Ships that pass by the Castle.

FINIS.

