THE MYSTERY OF Israel's Salvation, EXPLAINED and APPLIED: OR, A DISCOURSE
Concerning the General Conversion of the ISRAELITISH NATION.

Wherein is Showed, 1. That the Twelve Tribes shall be saved. 2. When this is
to be expected. 3. Why this must be. 4. What kind of Salvation the Tribes of
Israel shall partake of (viz.) A Glorious, Wonderful, Spiritual, Temporal
Salvation.


Being the Substance of several SERMONS Preached INCREASE MATHER, M. A. Boston
in New England.

Hear the word of the Lord O ye Nations, and declare it in the Isles afar off,
and say, he that scattered Israel will gather him, and keep him as a shepherd
does his flock,

Jer. 31 10. And then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man, and then shall
all the Tribes ((...)) of the Land mourn, and they shall see the Son of Man
coming in the clouds of heaven with Power and great Glory,

Matthew. 24 30 In the days of the voice of the seventh Angel, when he shall
begin to sound, the Mystery of God shall be finished, as he has declared to
his Servants the Prophets,

Rev 10.7. Printed in the Year 1669.

Si scientiam horae Iudicii Filius non erubuit refer ad Patrem, sed dixit
quod verum est, neque nos erubescimus quae sunt in Questionibus majora secundum
nos, reservare Deo. Irenae. Advers. Haeres. l. 2. c. 48.

Confitemur in Terra nobis Regnum repromissum, sed alio statu; utpote Post
Resurrectionem, etc. Tertullian lib. 3. Advers. Marcion. cap. 24.

(...). Orig. Contra Celsum. l. 3.

(...). Sibyll.

AN EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader!
HOw happy would be the condition of Gods people in this world? How sweet and
amiable would their conversing together be? How honorable to God and Christ,
and to the Gospel of Truth and Peace in the sight of all? if their love to
every Divine truth, and mutually among themselves, in the truth, and for the
truths sake, did so shine forth, that it might be said of them, as it was
observed and said in former times by Heathen Persecutors; See how these
Christians love one another? This is the real character of Christ's Disciples,
and a proper effect of that purity of heart, which proceeds from effectual
faith in Jesus Christ; therefore the Apostle Peter says in, 1 Pet. 1.22.
Seeing ye have purifyed your souls in obeying the truth through the spirit unto
unfeigned love of the Brethren: See that ye love one another with a pure heart
fervently. But here is one maim and misery, that, as our knowledge of the truth
is imperfect, ^o our love to it, and one to another is imperfect; though the
way of love (...) a more excellent way, as the Apostle argues, 1 Cor. 13. From
the defect hereof, or herein, it is, that differences in apprehensions cause
such distances and animosities among those who agree in fundamentals, through
the remainders of flesh, even in the regenerate; though we are taught whereto
we have already attained, to wa^k by the same rule, and to mind the same thing,
expecting, that if in anything we be otherwise minded, God will reveal this
unto us, Phil. 3.15, 16. As for needless contradictions, and causless
oppositions, what do they else but weaken the hearts and hands of Saints in the
work of the Lord, and strengthen adversaries in their malicious and subtle
designs and enterprises against the truth? Both which might be prevented, if
Gods people would stand fast in one spirit, with one mind striving for the
faith of the Gospel. Wisdom expects to be justified of her Children, and
therefore teaches them to cry after knowledge, and to lift up their voice for
understanding, to seek her as silver, and to search for her as for hid
treasures. Which is to be done by searching the Scriptures diligently, with
servent prayer, for the illumination of the spirit of truth, that we may find
those spiritual treasures which yet he hid in these rich Mines. Though all the
words of wisdom's mouth are plain to him that understands and right to them
that find knowledge; yet men's too much indulging their own conceits even in
Doctrins of faith, and of Gods worship in Church Order, has caused many
Disputes and Controversies among Learned men, by their misunderstanding or
mis-applying sundry Texts of Scripture to the corrupting of their minds from
the simplicity that is in Christ. Therefore if self-confidence and leaning to
our own understanding, must be carefully avoided in such weighty matters, which
are more clearly and plain^y expressed; much more in darker portions of
Scripture, such as Prophesies of future times and things are: and among them,
those that concern the effectual Vocation and Salvation of Israel (which is the
Subject of the ensuing Treatise) concerning which the Angel Gabriel, commanded
Daniel to shut up the words, and seal the Book, even to the time of the end,
Dan. 12.4. Which shows, that this Prophecy, though it be obscure before, yet
when the time for the accomplishing of it approaches, many shall be stirred up
to inquire with all diligence into the meaning of it, which is meant by their
running to and fro, and the promise for their encouragement so to do, is, that
knowledge shall be increased, that is, by the assistance and blessing of the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah, the root of David, who alone is worthy to open the
sealed Book, Rev. 5.5, 9.

The Reverend Author has worthily engaged in this running to and fro, and has
given an account of what discoveries he has made of the present truth, by the
travel of his soul in searching the Scriptures, to find out what was formerly
hid from many. When I heard that his spirit was excited to handle this Subject,
in his public Sermons, I was glad, believing that the holy spirit inclined him
thereunto, and would assist him therein. As I believed, so I found, when I read
his Manuscript; which though straits of time, and multiplicity of diversions,
did not permit me to peruse so exactly, as to examine every passage accurately
and critically, yet the substance and principal Contents of it ( viz. First,
that the elect Israelites of the ten, as well as of the two Tribes called
Judah, shall be converted. Secondly, That this will not be before Romes ruin.
Thirdly, That the great and settled glory of the Church on earth will not be
before the coming of Christ to judgment) seemed to me to be clearly drawn from
the Scripture of truth, and to be by him held forth, seasonably, piously,
elaborately, judiciously, and modestly.

1. Seasonably; These Sermons being preached in a time when constant reports
from sundry places and hands gave out to the world, that the Israelites were
upon their journey toward Jerusalem, from sundry Foreign parts in great
multitudes, and that they were carried on with great signs and wonders by a
high and mighty hand of extraordinary providence, to the admiration and
astonishment of all that heard it, and that they had written to others of their
Nation, in Europe and America, to encourage and invite them to hasten to them.
This seemed to many godly and judicious to be a beginning of the accomplishment
The Authors opinion (as is to be seen in the following Tractate) was and is,
that the late and present rumors about the Jews, will prove an eminent, if not
an ultimate impletion of that Prophecy, Matthew. 24 24.
of that Prophecy concerning the noise and shaking, and coming together of
those dry bones spoken of in Ezekiel. 37.7. which was to be a preparitory to that
which follows in verse 8, 9, 10, 11. This being to be accomplished in its
season, the Lord was pleased to fix the mind and meditations of the godly
Author upon that great truth, the Salvation of all Israel, as a word upon its
wheels, uttered with due respect to circumstances, which Solomon likens to
Apples of Gold in pictures of Silver, Prove. 25.11.

2. Piously; His aim and intention being to promote the glory of God, and the
Edification of his people in godliness; whereunto the subject of his Discourse
has a direct tendency, as the Apostle Peter proves, 2 Pet. 3.10. to 15. and
accordingly the Reader will find it to be improved in the following Treatise.

3. Elaborately; As appears in the more than ordinary pains taken by him in
searching the Scriptures, and variety of Learned Writers, both Ancient and
Modern.

4. Iudiciously; This is evident in his solid exposition of sundry Texts
alleged by him, and in his Arguments for Confirmation of the truth, and in his
satisfying Answers unto Objections proposed.

5. M^destly; For he neither does peremptorily determine matters disputable,
nor does he arrogate unto himself any light above others in this Mystery; but
expresses his desire and hope that some others will be excited to take pains
about this Subject, and in eodem circo currere ad Palmam.

It remains for my finishing this Epistle, that I humbly caution the wise
hearted Reader, against two great Impediments of his impartial and right
judging, of what is presented to his view in the ensuing Discourse, viz. Pride
of understanding and Evil prejudice.

1. Pride of understanding, which renders men self pleasing with pertinacy,
Cuckow-like, qui s^am cantilenam approbat, with contempt to others, whose
apprehensions differ from their conceptions: This is a Leaven that swells and
sowers men's Spirits; This makes men self-willed, which is forbidden in a
Bishop, Titus 1.7. (...): And it is noted as a brand of the false Prophets, 2
Pet. 2.10. Such read good Books with a mind rather to contradict, than to
receive the truths published by others, because Homine imperito nunquam
quidquam injustius, qui nisi quod ipse facit nihil rectum putat.
themselves were not the publishers of them. A public spirit is a good
Antidote against this poison, which will cause a man to rejoice in the
proceeding and prospering of any work, for the public good in the hands of
others, though themselves had no hand in it; as Luther said to Melancthon; si
nos non erimus digni, fiat per alios.

2. Evil prejudice; There is a good prejudice, when a man from good principles
has a right judgment settled in his mind, whereby he is prepared to discern
good from evil, and truth from error, in what he reads. In way of
contra-distinction to this, I call its opposite evil prejudice, which arises
from evil causes; I shall instance in two.

"1. Tradition, not warranted by Scripture. There was a common opinion among
the Jews received by such a Tradition, that the Messiah at his first coming,
would set up a glorious worldly Kingdom amongst them, like that of David and
Solomon, and that he would free them from their sujection to the Romans, and
make them Rulers of the earth. This error wrought ill effects, not only in the
unbelieving Jews, whom it hindered from receiving Christ, when he was come in
the flesh by their being offended at him, for his outward, mean, and afflicted
condition, and death on the Cross; but also in his own Disciples, whom it
hindered from understanding and believing whatsoever Christ spoke of his
sufferings and death. Yea, this error was so deeply rooted in them, that after
Christ's Resurrection they asked him, Lord, will thou at this time again restore
the Kingdom to Israel, Acts 1.6. Christ's answer in ver. 7. shows, that they
erred about the time, intimating that this was not the season, but another time
was appointed for that, viz. at Christ's second coming for the salvation of all
Israel. Yet concerning this his second coming, to set up his Kingdom on earth,
some acknowledge no kingdom of Christ on earth, but spiritual and invisible in
the hearts of the elect. The kingdom of Christ has indeed been set up by his
effectual operation of the spirit in the Ministry of the Gospel, from the first
publishing of the Gospel, according to Psalm. 24.7, 9. and 110.2, 3. But there
is another, a Political Kingdom of Christ to be set up in the last times,
foretold by Dan. in Chap. 2.44, 45. and 7.14, 18, 22. to 28. and by the Angel
Gabriel unto the Virgin Mary, Luke 1.32, 33. and by the Apostle John, in Rev.
19. and 20. chap. Yea, and all the Prophets from Samuel, and those that follow
after, as many as have spoken, have likewise foretold of these days: As Peter
says, Acts 3.24. But about this also they, who of late were called fifth
Monarchy-men, did err on the other hand, especially two ways. First, By
anticipating the time, which will not be till the pouring out of the sixth and
seventh Vials. Secondly, By putting themselves upon a work which shall not be
done by men, but by Christ himself, sitting upon his white horse, who will in
righteousness judge, and make war, who has eyes as a flame of fire, and a Name
written that no man knew but himself, and will be clothed with a Vesture dipped
in blood (according to that Prophecy in Isa. 63.2.) and his Name is called the
word of God. And the armies which were in heaven follow him upon white horses,
clothed in fine Linen white and clean, Rev. 19.11. to 15. etc.

2. The second evil cause, from whence this evil prejudice arises, is from the
abuse of these spiritual truths by carnally-minded persons. Such were those
carnal Chiliasts or Millenaries, who dreamed of a worldly happiness consisting
in carnal and sensual contentments to be enjoyed in the 1000 years, Prophesied
of in Rev. 20. The loathsomeness of their absurd error, wrought such a
loathing of their opinion in sundry godly Learned Writers, that they declined
the literal exposition of the first Resurrection, Rev. 20 12. Which will be of
the just (as it is called in Luke 14.14.) in the beginning of the thousand
years, when Christ will judge Antichrist and other living enemies of his
Church, and after the end thereof will be the general Resurrection to the
general judgment, as is noted and proved by that Learned man Mr. Mede (who was
no phanatick, as the Prelates themselves will grant) out of Rev. 20. and other
places of Scripture. This kingdom of Christ must be placed (as he says)
between Christ's appearing in his kingdom, and the last Resurrection of all the
world unto the general judgment. (I suppose he means according to 1 Cor.
15.24, 25. and so includes the finishing of the general judgment in the end of
the world within the time of Christ's kingdom.) And that this is that kingdom of
Christ whereof Daniel prophesied in Dan. 7.13, 14. and 18, 22, 26, 27. and the
Apostle John, Rev. 20. he proves by two Arguments, and concludes, that they go
about to take away the Pillar of Evangelical faith, concerning the glorious
coming of Christ, who neglecting the Ancient Tradition of the Church, endeavor
to transfer the prophecy in Rev. 20. elsewhither. Yet some expound the first
Resurrection in a spiritual sense (declining the Literal) and understand it of
the elects effectual receiving the truth; but this has been done in all Ages,
since the first publishing of the Gospel gradually, as Prove. 4.18. and
therefore is not the meaning of that prophecy. And Dr. Thomas Goodwin proves
the bodily Resurrection of the Martyrs from Rev. 20.5, 6, 7. by clear and good
Textual Arguments, in his Sermons on Ephesians. 1.21, 22. p. 32. and on Rev. 5.9, 10.
p. 18. to the end. They also note that the thousand years wherein Satan was
bound, begins in the year 300. after Christ, when the Persecutions of
Christians by the Heathen Emperors ceased: But this agrees not with the
binding of Satan in the bottomless pit during that thousand years; for it is
manifest, that since that time Satan has by his instruments seduced and
persecuted the Saints as much, at least, as at any time before: How then can it
be said, that he was then bound for 1000 years? Alstediu^, a very Learned and
indefatigably industrious Writer, wrote a Book, wherein he proves, that the
1000 years foretold in Rev. 20. are yet to come; and to avoid all appearance of
symbolizing with the carnal Chiliasts, he Intituleth his book, Diatribe de
mill annis Apocalypticis, non illis Chiliasturum and phantastarum, sed B. B.
Danielis and Iohannis. And he places the happiness of that time 1. In the
Resurrection of the Martyrs and their reigning on earth. 2. The increase of the
Church, and the Conversion of Israel, and the fullness of the Gentiles. 3. The
freedom of the Church from the persecutions of enemies. 4. Their long lasting
peace. 5. The Reformation of Doctrins. 6. The Majesty and glory of the Church.
7. Their sincere joy; whereunto may be added, such a perfection of light, and
holiness, and love, as is attainable on this side of heaven. To conclude, when
true principles are held forth in the Letter of any Text, and some draw false
inferences from thence, let the mis-collections of vain men be refuted, and the
truth be declared, and the declaration thereof be accepted of all the Saints:
How often does the Apostle Paul complain of men's abusing his holy Doctrins? Did
he therefore avoid the holding forth of such truths? No, he confirmed those
truths, and refuted the contrary errors with detestation. See Romans 3.3. to 9.
and 5.20, 21. with 6.1, 2, and 9.19, 20. And even that Doctrine which borders
upon the Subject of the following Treatise delivered by him for the comfort of
the Saints in, 1 These. 5.14. to 18. was abused by some whom he refuted in 2
These. 2.1. to 13. And the Apostle Peter professes his consent with the Apostle
Paul, and he adds a description of the new heavens, and a new earth, wherein
dwells righteousness, and this says he, we look for according to his promise
(that promise is in Isa. 65.17. and 66.22.) which shall be here before the
general judgment, and the end of the world, 2 Pet. 3.7. to 16. This time Paul
calls, the time of the manifestation of the Sons of God, for which he says,
the earnest expectation of the creature waits, in hope that then it shall be
delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the
Children of God, Romans 8.19. to 23. This state of things on earth, is called the
world to come in Heb. 2.5. Dr. Tho. Goodwin in his Sermons upon Ephesians. 1.21, 22,
has acutely and judiciously proved, that the world to come meant in Heb. 2.5.
is a state between the state of the world as now it is, and the state of things
after the day of judgment, when God shall be all in all. It is of purpose, and
in a more special manner appointed for Jesus Christ to be King in. This he
proves clearly and at large, both from the Context in Heb. 2. and from Psalm.
8. and from other Texts of Scriptures, of which I have not now time to speak,
but refer the Reader to those Sermons of the Drs. mentioned, which are
Entitled, The World to come, or the kingdom of Christ asserted. And the
Apostle Peter, vindicated the Apostle Paul in this point against the unlearned
and unstable, which wrested his words, as also they did other Scriptures (to
extort a sense from them which they never intended) to their own destruction.
Now the good Lord give us understanding in all things! and bless the Labors of
this faithful Servant of Jesus Christ, for the good of many. I rest

From my study in N. Haven in N. E. the 18 th. day of Sept. 1667. Thine in the
Truth truly, JOHN DAVENPORTE.

TO THE READER.
THe scope of this Treatise, is to hold forth the calling of the Jews, their
reduction into their own Land, and the glorious estate of the Church which
shall then be. Some have conceived there shall be no other calling of them,
than what was at their return out of the Babylonish Captivity. It Is true, that
then some of all Tribes came out of the Eastern parts, and the twelve Tribes
are mentioned, Acts 26.7. but Isaiah speaks of a Remnant left, which should be
recovered a second time. Chap. 11.11.
Some acknowledge the calling of the Jews, but not a National call, which the
Apostle clearly intimates, Romans 11.15. The Rejection of them was National, and
such will be the Reception of them, which Cornel. a Lapid. acknowledges, Vid.
Crocium in Anti weig* c. 13. p. 380.
only he excepts the Tribe of Dan. because none are sealed of that Tribe, Rev.
7. but all Israel shall be saved, even that Tribe with the others, not Israel
the Elect, for that is no Mystery, but Israel the Jewish Nation, which was cut
off, shall be called and saved, and that is a Mystery, Romans 11.25. Some do grant
the whole body of the Jewish Nation shall be called, but not come into their
own Land, for the Lord Christ has prophesied, that their house shall be left
desolate, but not for ever; it was prophesied of their former house, that it
should be desolate, Isa. 6.11. yet after it was restored and inhabited, and
Christ intimates as much of this, Luke 13.35. it should lie desolate till he
came again: Then it shall be restored and inhabited by the Jewish Nation. At
that time the thousand years mentioned, Rev. 20.4. will begin, and a glorious
state of the Church be in the world, exceeding any condition it has ever yet
been in. This glorious estate some will not own, because they would not have
people look for a greater glory than their present Church has: Some call it
Heresy, so the Doctrine of Christ was called in Paul's time, some say it is
Novelty, and thereupon dislike it, but its ancienter than J^stin Martyr, its an
Apostolical truth, Rev. 20.4. Those who had suffered for the witness of Jesus
lived and reigned with Christ a 1000 years: Trap in loc.
but its not said, they lived again. In the next ver. it is said the rest,
(...), they lived not again, therefore the others did: and this living again,
is called the first Resurrection, which cannot be meant of regeneration, for
they were regenerated before they suffered. They lived and reigned. It may be
worthy inquiry, whether these souls be not the New Jerusalem coming down from
God out of heaven, and so be the Tabernacle of God with men, and fulfill that
Rev. 5.10. We shall reign on the Earth, what need a new heaven, and a new
earth, if the reigning with Christ he spiritual and heavenly, so they reigned
during the old heaven and earth; but these passed away, and new were made, Rev.
21.1, 2, 3. Wherein shall dwell Righteousness, 2 Pet. 3.19. etc. Of these three
things, viz. the call of the Jews, their possession of their own Land, and
their glorious estate, the Author of this Work has spoken both Learnedly and
judiciously: and though he touch upon the time when these things shall be, yet
he does it with great wisdom, moderation, and caution. He does not fix the
(...) and (...) of time, which many having done, have exposed themselves to
censure. He conceives the time to be near, and gives good grounds for such a
conception, and two signs thereof, viz. the sleepiness of wise and foolish
Virgins, which imports the Bridegroom is near and coming, and the present
shakings of Nations, which are forerunners of deliverance. God shakes
foundations and pillars of States when he is about doing great things for his
people, Joel 3.16. Jer. 50.46. Unto these may be added, First, The strong
workings of men's spirits at this day; for not only Protestants, but Papists,
Jews, Turks, Mahometans, and other Idolaters do expect some great Revolution of
Affairs, as Travelers that have been amongst them do relate. Secondly, The
wickedness of Potentates indulging their lusts, abusing their power, ruling by
their own will, persecuting those are good, and interposing unduly in the
things of God, and oppressing the poor. Thirdly, The great distractions and
confusions which are at this time in the Governments, Counsels, and
Transactions of worldly Rulers, States, and Kingdoms, their Foundations are out
of course, and they know not what to do. These and many others do raise the
Faith and expectation of observing men, that the Lord will shortly appear, and
do some wonderful things for his people. Reader, this Work needs not letters
Commendatory, it speaks for it self, being Learned, Elaborate, well-composed,
containing many Mysterious truths and matters of great weight, with Rules to
understand the same. Buy and try what worth is, and you will find the the
Author has cast into the treasury of the Church not (...), not (...), but
(...), which will enrich thy understanding, and find acceptance with thee and
those who have their senses exercised to discern such things; and put thee and
them upon praying, that the Lord would appear in glory, build up Sion, and save
all Israel,

Which is the prayer of him that loves truth, and thee in the truth, W. G.

TO THE READER.
COncerning the calling of the Jews, which is the subject matter of the ensuing
Treatise, the Apostle calls it Romans 11.25.
a mystery, whereof he would not have us to be ignorant, although a point near
of kin to the resurrection from the grave; for the receiving of them into grace
again, shall be Ezekiel. 37.7 -- 11.
the coming together, the uniting, reviving, and raising of dry dispersed
bones, and as Romans 11.15.
life from the dead. The conversion of the Gentiles was Ephesians. 3.3, 4, 5, 6.
once a mystery, and so is this now of the Jews, and rather a greater; For the
Gentiles were never made partakers of so much grace, nor of so great Rom* 3.1,
2, and 9.4, 5.
privileges as the Jews; Those were Luke 14.21, 23.
the poor, the maimed, the halt, and the blind, begging in the highways and
lanes, when the Jews were the only Citizens under heaven. These Acts 13.46.
put away the Gospel from them, and not only so, but Acts 13.45.
greatly envyed it to the Gentiles; yea, Acts 7.52.
they killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, 1 These. 2.15, 16.
and persecuted the Apostles, being contrary to all men, and forbidding the
Gospel to be preached to the Gentiles that they might be saved, filling up
their sins always, till wrath came upon them to the uttermost; And their
posterity, from generation to generation, during these sixteen hundred years,
have continued most obstinate contemners of Christ, and of Gospel Grace; And
yet, This is the Nation of which such glorious things are spoken as to their
conversion, when Hos. 1. last.
the children of Judah, and the children of Israel, shall be gathered together
under one head in that great day of Jezreel.

Rev. 1.1.
In the Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to show unto his
servants things to come, we find not any express mention of the Jews
conversion, and yet enough is spoken therein from whence we may collect it.
Their calling is a mystery, and that Book a mystery, and it speaks of their
calling myste^iously.

1. It is not for nothing, that many things are expressed in this Book after
the manner of the Jewish Religion; It mentions the Rev. 11.1, 2.
Temple, and the Altar, and them that worship therein, and the Court without
the Temple, and of the giving it to the Gentiles; It speaks also of Rev. 14.1.
Mount Sion, and of Rev. 11.19.
opening the Temple and the Ark of the Testament seen therein, and Rev. 15.6.
the coming of the 7 angels out of the Temple, and of Rev. 18.14.
God's people coming out of Babylon, and of Rev. 7.4.
sealing an hundred forty and four thousand out of all the Tribes of the
children of Israel, etc. Such forms of speech are frequently intermixed, as
might draw the Jews to the study of the mystery contained in this Book, and to
show them, that God has a respect to them as well as to the Gentiles, as
touching what is therein contained.

2. Under the sixth Trumpet, Rev. 10.5, 6, 7.
The Angel (which is Jesus Christ) who sets his right foot on the sea, and his
left foot on the earth, lifts up his hand to heaven, and swears by him that
lives for ever and ever, that there should be time no longer; but in the days
of the voice of the seventh angel, when he shall begin to sound, the mystery of
God should be finished, as he has declared to his servants the Prophets.

Now the question is, what this mystery may be which must be finished after the
sounding of the seventh Trumpet, which is the concluding Trumpet, after which
none shall sound, till the 1 These. 4.16.
Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the
Archangel, and with the Trumpet of God, which is called the 1 Cor. 15.52.
last trumpet. This mystery then is such a one as is to be finished in the
close, or last part of the world.

1. There is a mystery to be finished at the Resurrection of the dead says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.51.
Behold, I show you a mystery, we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be
changed. But this is not the mystery here meant, for we do not find this
declared to God's servants the Prophets.

2. There is a mystery of iniquity, 2 These. 2.7. Rev. 17.5.
such is Antichristianism, which must be finished and Rev. 11.15. -- to the end.
utterly destroyed under the seventh Trumpet. But neither is this the mystery
here spoken of, which is called The mystery of God, whereas Antichristianism is
the mystery of iniquity, and so the Devil's mystery.

3. This mystery then must be that of the calling and in-coming of the Jews,
with the fullness of the Gentiles, for I find no other mystery. And this is
called Romans 11.25.
a mystery by the Apostle, and such a one also as has been abundantly declared
to God's servants the Prophets, as you will see in the ensuing Treatise. And
this interpretation of the mystery of God to be finished under the seventh
Trumpet, answers the scope of the Angel who spoke of it to John. For the
appearing of the Angel in that form, and the little book in his hand, and his
taking that solemn Oath, are all consolatory to the Church greatly suffering
under Antichrist during the sounding of the sixth Trumpet; and what can be more
comfortable, than to hear that these sufferings of the Church are not long to
continue, but the calling of the Jews, and coming in of the fullness of the
Gentiles, the spreading of the everlasting Gospel, and enlarging the kingdom of
Christ (so much narrowed by the power of Turk and Pope under the sixth Trumpet)
and the final confusion both of Turk, and man of sin, are drawing on, and to be
accomplished under the seventh Trumpet? So that this place in the Revelations
of John, seems clearly to lead us to the calling of the Jews.

3. Rev. 16.12.
We find the sixth Angel pouring out his vial upon the great River Euphrates
whereby the water, thereof is dried up, that the way of the Kings of the East
may be prepared. Now I humbly conceive, that the Jews lie fairest for the claim
o^ this Title of the Kings of East. For they are called Kings, both when their
rejection and calling again are Isa. 24.21, 22, 23.
prophesied of. And they are Kings of the East, as inhabiting especially the
Eastern parts of the world, and rising also at their calling like the Sun, with
great light and glory; as it is written, Isa. 60.1, 2, 3.
Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon
thee; for behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the
people, but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon
thee, and the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and Kings to the brightness of
thy rising. As therefore they shall come from the East, so their call^ng and
conversion shall greatly inlighten the world, like the rising Sun which runs
his race from East to West; And Mat. 24.27.
as the lightning comes out of the East and shines even to the West, so shall
the coming of the Son of man be, who shall come Rev. 16.15.
as a thief in the night under the sixth vial, when he shall 2 Timothy 4 1.
appear at the setting up of his Kingdom with more power and glory in the world.

And as upon these accounts these Kings may be said to be of the East, so will
their possessions and inheritances fall to them, especially in the Eastern
parts of the world, when the Turk (who now posseseth them, and who shall fall
together with the Pope) shall be destroyed. But what is the preparing of the
way of these Kings of the East? It is that which is prophesied of by Isa.
62.10, 11, 12.
Isai^h; Go through, go through the gates, prepare ye the way of the people, cast
up, c^st up the high way, gather out the stones, lift up a standard for the
people; Behold, thy salvation comes, behold, his reward is with him, and his
work before him. And they shall call them the holy people, the redeemed of the
Lord; and thou shall be called, sought out, a City not forsaken. But how is
their way prepared? By removing all impediments out of the way of their
conversion. And what these impediments are, we shall the better understand, by
considering, 1. Whither the Jews shall then go. 2. What to do. Whither shall
they go? viz. Westward, to join with the Churches of the Gentiles in the
beginning of the sixth vial, as hearing of the destruction of Rome, under the
fifth. For then will their eyes begin to be opened to see Christ to be the true
Messiah, when they shall see the most eminent judgment of God in the ruin of
the seat of the Beast. After which the beast will survive for a time till the
close of the sixth vial; during which interval, the Jews will be stirred up to
join with the Christian Gentiles, to effect the final ruin of spiritual
Babylon. To this end, their way must be prepared; How? By the drying up of the
waters of the great River Euphrates, i. e. By diminishing and weakening the
power of the Turk, who lies as the great impediment in this their way. For the
waters of this great River, signify the great power of the Turk, and the vast
multitudes of people under his Dominion; for thus, the numerous host of the
King of Assyria is called, Isa. 8.7.
the waters of the river, (viz. Euphrates) strong and many. And like as when
the sixth Trumpet sounded, the four angels which were bound in the great River
Euphrates, were loosed, and the number of the Army of the horsemen was two
hundred thousand thousand, i. e. the power of the Turk was exceeding great:
Even so, when the sixth vial (which answers to the sixth Trumpet) is poured
out, we have the contrary effect wrought, viz. the drying up of the waters of
Euphrates, i. e. the great abatement of the Turkish power. God now removes
this hindrance out of the way of the Kings of the East, who at present have two
great impediments obstruct^ng their conversion. 1. The Idolatry of Rome. 2. The
power and prosperity of the Turk, the potent and professed enemy of
Christianity. And though the first of these shall be removed in the ruin of
Rome by the pouring out of the fifth vial upon the seat of the Beast, yet the
second impediment lies still in the way, till by the sixth vial the waters of
the great River are made foordable; and dreined so low, that the Jews may be
able to wade through them to join with the Gentiles, to the utter overthrow both
of Turk and Pope. How the power of the Turk shall be thus lessened, whether by
intestine commotions, or by wars from abroad, or by the prevailing of the
Gospel in his Dominions upon the fall of Rome, I know not; but it is certain,
that the waters of Euphrates shall be dried up, and the way of the Kengs of the
East prepared; besides which, they must be dried up also to make way for the
Jews to repossess their own Land. Amos 9.14, 15.
For God will bring again the cap^ivity of his people Israel, and they shall
build the w^st Cities, and inhabit them, and they shall plant vineyards, and
drink the wine thereof; they shall also plant gardens, and eat the fru^t of
them; And I will plant them (says the Lord) upon their Land, and they shall no
more be pulled upon of their land which I have g^ven them. And this preparing
the way of these Kings, is prophesied of under the expression of drying up
great waters, as when the Lord says, Isa. 11.15, 16. with Isa. 51.10, 11. and
54.11, 12, 13.
He will utterly destroy the tonuge of the Egyptian sea, and with his mighty
wind will he shake his hand over the River, and smite it in the seven streams,
and make men to go over dry-shod; and there shall be an high way for the
remnant of his people which shall be left from Assyria, like as it was to
Israel in the day that he came up out of the land of Egypt. When the Lord
delivered Israel out of the Land of Egypt, he dried the Red sea to prepare
their way through the Wilderness into Canaan; And when he delivered them out of
Babylon, observe what is said again; Isa. 44.27, 28.
He says to the deep, be dry, and I will dry up the Rivers; that says of
Cyrus, He is my shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure, even saying to
Jerusalem, Thou shall be built, and to the Temple, Thy foundation shall be
laid. Now to these places the Holy Ghost alludeth, when it is said, The sixth
angel poured out his vial upon the great River Euphrates, that the way of the
Kings of the East might be prepared.

4ly, There is something yet further in the Book of the Revelations pointing to
the conversion of the Jews. For it is remarkable, that the Apocalips speaks
Hebrew three several times, though only in three words, but still in passages
very applicable to the Jews. 1. It is said of the King of the Locusts (which is
Antichrist) Rev. 9.11.
that his name in the Hebrew tongue, is Abaddon, but in the Greek tongue, his
name is Apollyon. It is said by some of the Book of the Revelations, That every
word is a mystery; certainly some words therein are so more eminently, and
among others these two, Abaddon and Apollyon; both signifying, one that is a
destroyer, viz. of men, such as is Antichrist; And his name is here expressed
both in Hebrew and Greek. 1. In opposition to Jesus Christ, Jesus being an
Hebrew name, signifying a Savior, and Christ a Greek name, signifying
anointed. 2. To denote, that, as Christ is the Savior, so Antichrist is the
destroyer, both of Jews and Gentiles; for so he is by his Idolatry, at which
the Jews are offended, and with which the Gentiles are infected. 3. To show,
that as he has destroyed both, so he shall be destroyed by both. 2 These. 2.3,
8.
He is the son of perdition, and shall go into perdition. Rev. 17.11.


Now, It is considerable, that the vials do answer to the Trumpets, so that
what was done under the Trumpets as to the raising of Antichrist, To this
purpose, compare Rev. 8.7. -- to the end, with Rev. 16.
is undone by the vials in order to his overthrow. The vials unravel all that
sad work which was wrought by the Beast under the Trumpets. And therefore,
whereas Antichrist was visibly and conspicuously placed upon his throne or seat
under the fifth Trumpet, the same throne or seat of his (which is Rome) is cast
down under the fifth vial; by the ruin whereof the Jews will begin to have
their eyes opened, and to understand the meaning of Abaddon, the Hebrew name
given him under the fifth Trumpet; And then they will begin to stir, and never
desist, till (at last, under the sixth vial) they join with the Gentiles, to
destroy Abaddon and Apollyon, the destroyer both of Jew and Gentile.

2. We have another Hebrew word, and we find it under the sixth vial, under
which we have one of the clearest Revelation-proof of the Jews conversion. The
word is Armageddon; about which the apprehensions of expositors are various;
but it is taken by very many, and by all that I meet with, for an Hebrew word,
denoting the name of the place where the Kings of the earth, and of the whole
world, shall be gathered together to the battle of the great day of God
Almighty. And who shall put this name upon that place, but the Jews, joining
with the Gentiles both against Turk and Pope? They shall have the honor of
imposing it in their own language, after their ancient manner when they had
obtained great victories over their enemies, as when they called the name of
the place Numb. 21.4.
Hormah, when they destroyed the Canaanites; and 1 Samuel 7.12.
Ebenezer, and another time 2 Samuel 5.20.
Baalperazim, when they destroyed the Philistines; and 2 Chronicles. 20.26.
Berachah, where God destroyed the Nations that came up against Iehosophat.
This, I say, is conceived to be the occasion of the imposition of this Hebrew
name, Armageddon, upon the place of the destruction of these enemies of Jesus
Christ. Surely the Christian Gentiles will not impose an Hebrew name upon the
place, but name it rather by a word of another language, were not the Jews (who
shall have the pre-heminence in that day) in conjunction with the Gentiles at
the destruction both of Turk and Pope.

3. We have another Hebrew word under the same vial, and that is, Hallelujah, a
word used Rev. 19.1, 3, 4, 6.
four times in the Revelations, in opposition to the cry of Alas, Alas, three
times used by the Kings and Merchants Rev. 18.10, 16.19.
lamenting the fall of Babylon; so that the heavens ring with Al^sses on the
one side, and with Hallelujahs on the other, at the ruin of the great whore.
This then is an Hebrew word, often used in the Psalms, Mr. Ainsworth on Ps.
104. last.
and the first time that it is there mentioned is, in Ps. 104. last. Let the
sinners be consumed out of the earth, and let the wicked be no more; Bless thou
the Lord, O my soul; Hallelujah. i. e. Praise ye Iah, or, Praise ye the Lord.
The words are a prayer, yet a prophecy is employed in them, viz. that sinners
shall, at last, be consumed out of the earth, and that will be when their
ringleader, the man of sin is consumed with the breath of Christ's mouth, 2
These. 2.3. with 8.
and, (...), that wicked, or lawless one, is destroyed with the brightness of
his coming. And the first and last time that this word is used in the New
Testament is, Rev. 19.1.3, 4, 6. Now we find the Churches of the Gentiles often
praising God in the Rev. 4.10, 11. and 5.9, 10. and 7.10. and. 11.17. and 14.3.
and 15.3, 4. and 16.5, 7.
Revelations. But we find not Hallelujah, till we come to the sixth vial,
whereof the 19th. Chapter of the Revelations is the exposition. For now the
Jews are called, and the Lord God omnipotent reigns, not in the ordinary way
of his Sovereignty, so as he did always, but now Rev. 11.17.
he has taken to himself his great power and reigns; which great power he
seemed before to have laid aside, now re-assuming it, and making it manifest by
two most eminent evidences obvious to the eyes of all men, viz. the destruction
of the great whore, and the conversion of his ancient people the Jews. For now
is fulfilled what was prophesied, Mic. 4.7. Zeph. 3.19, 20.
I will make her that halted a remnant, and her that was cast off a strong
Nation; and the Lord shall reign over them in Mount Sion from henceforth even
for ever. And Jesus Christ is now ready to appear to his ancients, and to
accomplish what He himself did foretell them, Matthew. 23.39.
Ye shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed is he that comes
in the name of the Lord. This will be a time of great joy both to Gentile and
Jew, when God shall be praised and glorified over and over in Hebrew. As for
the Gentiles, they would not thus exult in the redoubled praises of God and the
Lamb; and that too in a language proper to the Jews, if the seed of Abraham
should not be among them: As Christ's kingdom would seem to want enlargement,
so the Gentile^ complete matter of praise and joy, without this glorious
accession of the Kings of the earth into the kingdom of Jesus Christ; whereas
now there is abundant cause to sing and triumph, and that too again and again,
in Hebrew, when the Princes of the people shall be gathered together, even the
people of the God of Abraham.

But I shall not detain you any longer from reading the complete Discourse of
Israel's Salvation, which to me, in the perusal, has yielded both delight and
profit. I will not say much more, only I subscribe to the judgment of that
pious, learned and judicious servant of Christ, who has also prefixed his
Epistle to this Treatise, a Book written in a plain and clear style, only
richly trimmed in the border. I have no more to add, but my longings for the
accomplishment of the great things of these last days, and to say, O that the
salvation of Israel were come out of Sion! When the Lord brings back the
Captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.

Yours to serve you in Christ, W. H.

The Authors PREFACE To the READER.
THat there shall be a General conversion of the Tribes of Israel, is a truth
which in some measure has been known, and believed in all ages of the Church
of God, since the Apostles days. For proof whereof it might easily be showed
that the Sic inter Graecos, Origines, Chrysostomus, Theophylactus, Oecumenius,
Gennadius, Dionysius, Clemens Alex. Ac inter Latinos, Ambrotius, Primasius,
Hilarious, Bernardus, Haymo, etc.
Ancients (Fathers as they are called) did many of them so believe. Yea even in
the dark times of Popery, sundry Beda, Aqui^as, Anselmus, Carthusianus,
Cajetanus, etc.
of the Schoolmen did assert this truth. And since the glorious light of the
everlasting Gospel has (according to the Scriptures) broke forth to the
consuming of the man of sin, this amongst many other precious and holy truths,
has been abundantly born witness unto by the chief Sic P. Martyr, Beza,
Iunius, Gualter, Piscator, Danaeus, Polanus, Pareus, Mornaeus, Lud. Capellus,
Perkinsus, cum multis aliis quos vide citatos apud Voet. in Disp. de Generali
conversione Iudaeor. p. 127, 128.
Reformers of Religion in this and the last Century. Nor is it so much doubted
of at this day, as heretofore ^t has been. But there is another thing asserted
in the subsequent Discourse which seems a Paradox unto not a few, that is to
say, the notion of the Chiliad.

Now I must confess there are many things that stick and sway with me, so as to
cause me to be very slow in condemning simple Chiliasm as erroneous. One thing
is, that I find it passed for current and unquestionable truth in the very next
age to the Apostles. However now there are that dare affirm, that the notion of
the Chiliad is Heretical, yet in the Primitive times, we read of Quidam ex his
qui putantur recte credidisse supergrediuntur ordinem Promotionis Iusto um, sed
habent haereticos conceptus. Qui universam rep^obant Resurrectionem, quod mirum
est si nec ordinem Resur^^ctionis sciunt. Iren. Advers. Haeres. l 5. P. Penult.
and (...) etiam Justin Mar^yr Di^^. Cum Tryphone Iudaeo.
none but Heretics that questioned the truth of it. Justin Martyr, who
flourished An. 150. says that he did (...), etc. Justin Martyr, ib.
firmly believe the Instauration of Jerusalem, and the thousand years according
to the Doctrine of the holy Prophets and Apostles; and moreover he says, that
no thoroughly Orthodoxal Christian ever doubted of it, only some
Pseudo-Christians, that dis-believed the Resurrection, denied the Chiliad also.
Now (as Mr. Mede observes) this is such a Testimony of Antiquity as is
absolute, the like cannot be given again unto any extra-fundamental point of
Religion. And Irenaeus, who was contemporary with Justin Martyr, has Iren.
Contra Haeres. l. 5. c. 22.
asserted the Chiliad. Let it be considered, that Irenae^s was the Scholar of
Polycarp, which Polycarp was the Auditor of John the Apostle, and (as Lege
Polycarpi vitam.
writers affirm) saw Christ in the flesh. Surely the blessed Disciple of such a
Teacher would hardly have entertained such a notion, if there had been that
Heterodoxy in it, which some imagine. Likewise Contra Marcion. l. 1. c. 29. l.
3. c. 34. l. 4. c. 29. and de Resurrectione carnis, c. 25.
Tertullian, Homil* 13. in Ierem. and contra Celsum l. 3.
Origin, Lege Cyprian. in lib. de exhorta. Martyr. in Praefat. etc. 11.
Cyprian, De Divino Prae^io l. 7. c. 24, 26.
Lactantius, who lived in the second or third Century. I might add Vide Eusebius.
l. 3. c. 33. and 7. c. 19. and Hieron. de Script. Ecclesiast.
Nepos, Coracion, Apollinarius, were all of them sufficiently (and if the
reports of adversaries may be credited more than so) Chiliastical. Neither do I
altogether slight the Testimony of Papias, who says, he received the notion of
the Chiliad from the mouth of the Apostle John. I know, but matter not,
Eusebius Vide Eusebius ubi supra.
his censure of Papias, any more than I would regard it, if I should hear one
say of Eusebius (and indeed some Beza in Prolegom. ad Apocal.
judicious and learned men say little less) that he had (...). I do likewise
think, that Irenaeus his testimony concerning Papias, that that John, who
taught him the Doctrine of the Chiliad, was indeed the Apostle John, is rather
to ^e credited than Eusebius (a man that labored to make the world believe,
that the Apocalypse is not of divine Apostolical Authority) history, who says,
it was another John, a private Presbyter only, which Senior John is by Jerome
[lege eum de Scrip. Eccles. in verbo Johannis, and in verbo Papias] esteemed
the Author of the second and third Epistles of John. Be it so, that the Author
of those Epistles was the same John who taught Papias the Doctrine of the
Chiliad. Moreover it is of weight with me, that however many, yea, most of our
Reforming Worthies have been against the Chiliad; yet some that have been
inferior to none amongst our modern Classical Authors, have esteemed Chiliasm
to be no error (much less heresy) but a Scripture truth. Alstedius is one,
whose great learning and piety is known and acknowledged amongst all impartial
Judges, yet he In Diatrib. de Mill Annis Apocal.
has elaborately asserted the Chiliad. Piscator in Dr. Piscator insignis
Theologus, de cujus eruditione quam sub^imiter sentiam paucis explicare non
possum: vix inter Scholasticos parem, certe superiorem, agnoscere non possum.
Twiss. contra Armin de Praedest. l. 1. part. 1. Digr. 2. s. 4. c. 4. and de
electione l. 1. part. 2. Sect. 25. Digr. 8.
Twiss his judgment was an incomparable Divine, yet he was for a literal
Interpretation of the Apocalyptical Chiliad. And (as In Libro supra citato. p.
229.
Alstedius testifyeth) not long before his death wrote more fully upon that
argument. And if we consider our English Worthies, not a few do present
themselves, even stars of the first magnitude, to bear witness unto this truth.
Such as are now living I need not insist upon, otherwise I might mention those
Reverend men of God. Dr. See his Sermons of the world to come, on Ephesians. 1.21,
22. Printed Anno 1650.
Goodwin, Mr. In his Sermon upon Mat. 24.30. in M. S. S.
Davenport, Mr. Upon Ezekiel c. 37. v. 24. p. 478.
Greenhill, as assertors of the substance of the Chiliastical notion. But
amongst them that are now resting from their labors, and followed with a
glorious reward of their works, there is Mr. Lege cum in Comment. Apoc. ad
finem, and a^ibi passim.
Mede, Dr. See his Letters to Mr. Mede, Printed with Mr. Medes Works.
Twiss, Mr. See his Glimpse of Sions Glory: And upon Hos. 1.11. and chapter 2. v.
18. and on chapter 3. v. 5. p. 527
Buroughs, Mr. See his Annotations to the Translation of Alstede Diatribe.
Burton, (not to mention others) all of them great and famous propugners of the
truth in their Generations, and these held the Chiliad.

Surely then methinks men should take heed how they judge those things to be
dreams and phansies, which the most holy and eminent of the servants of God,
that have had the greatest intimacy of Communion with him, and the largest
discoveries of his secret and blessed Counsels, have esteemed as great and
heavenly mysteries. It was a candid and ingenuous expression of Hieroms
(however he were otherwise a bitter enemy to the Millenary opinion) that Licet
non sequamur, tamen damnare non possumus; quia multi virorum Ecclesiasticorum
and Martyrum ista dixerunt. Hieron. in Ierem. 19. ver. 10.
although he could not wholly approve of it, yet he durst not condemn it,
because many Martyrs and famous Doctors in the Church had so taught

If any should say, but our Divines have (some of them) termed Chiliasm Vide
Whitak. de Pontif. Rom p. 330 and Rainold. de lib. Apocr. Lact. 131. and Alsted
Cronol. in Iudice in verbo Chiliastae and Millenarii.
Heresy; It might be answered, That all is not Heresy, which good and learned
men have so accounted. Witness Aug. de Haeres. c. 53. Confer etiam Epiphan.
Contra Aerian. Haeres. 75. Videsis Arnobium, Advers. Gentes l. 4. Sub finem
libri.
Austin's putting Aerius in the Catalogue of Heretics, because he opposed
Prelacy, and stated fasts and festivals, and praying for the dead, etc. But the
special reason why learned and judicious men have looked upon the notion of the
Chiliad, as Heretical, is, because some that were for that opinion, maintained
that the Saints after their resurrection should again live a sensual life, in
the enjoyment of carnal pleasures. And truly such Doctrine as that let it be
branded with the name of Heresy, and rejected with all abhorrency.
Nevertheless to maintain that there will be heavenly and spiritual joys amongst
the Saints upon earth during the great day, even Austin will acknowledge to be
a De Civit. Dei. l. 20. c. 7.
tolerable opinion, and that he had once an apprehension not much differing
from that.

Again it swayeth something with me when I consider that the Chiliad was not
denied until Antichrist began to reign, and other opinions far worse than that
came in the room of it. And it sticks more with me, that the first opposers
of Chiliasm were faign to deny the divine Apostolical Authority Sic Dionysius
Alex. apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 7. c. 20. Edit. Lat.
of the Apocalypse, and of the Lege Eusebius. ibid. lib. 3. cap. 3.
second Epistle of Peter. In those days they acknowledged that indeed the
Author of the Book of the Revelat^on was a Chiliast, and so was the writer of
the second Epistle of Peter, but therefore they said (that so they might be
sure to avoid Chiliasm) that neither that Epistle of Pe^er, nor the Apocalypse,
were Canonical Scripture. (...) were desperate shifts. And it is not nothing
with me, that those learned Worthies who wholly deny the Millenary notion,
charge them with a tincture of Non satis long (inquit C^. Voetius in Disp. de
Regno Mill^nario p. 1259, 1260) recedunt a Chiliasmo qui Iudaeorum Conversorum
habitationi corporali and peculiaria separatae eorum Politiae tum
Ecclesiasticae tum civili. Vide Brightmannum, Finxam, Pannonium de circulo
operum and judiciorum Dei. Franciscus, Lambertus Chiliasmi lacinia^ sibi
servare videtur dum spondet statum Ecclesiae sine sectis, falsis Prophetis,
etc. Haec Voetius. S^inec^erus (apud Prideux. orat) p. 120. habet eos pro
Fanaticis qui Iudeorum conversionem fore credunt, etc.
Chiliasm, who maintain that the Jews shall be repossessed of the Land of their
Fathers, and that they shall have an external temporal glory and happiness
above other people; or, that there will a time come when the Churches shall for
a thousand years be freed from persecution. Now all these notions pass for
current amongst us. And therefore i^ indeed it be so that they savor of
Chiliasm, let those that believe them judge of what nature the notion of the
Chiliad is, that they who oppose it find a necessity (...) deny those other
with us received notions.

But above all, that which presses me so, as that I cannot gainsay (taking it
in a sober and spiritual sense) the Chiliastical opinion, is, That I take these
four things (...) Principles, and no way doubt but that they are Demonstrable.

1. That the thousand Apocalyptical years are not past, but future. If I were
of that opinion, which indeed not a few learned men are of, that that time
began either at the Sic Ar^tius, Bilney, Wickleff, Walt. Brute, Chytraeus,
Benno, Cardinalis, etc.
birth or Sic Viegas, Pererius, Augustinus, Primasius, Beda, Andreas.
passion of Christ, or at the Sic Iunius, Pareus, Deuteronomy, Broughton, Bibliander,
Usserius.
destruction of the Jewish state, or at Sic Brightmannus, Majerus, Forbesius,
Alcasar, Castiglius, Willetus, Gerhardus, Guil^, and Cartwright in Col. 1.16.
Constantines enthronization, I should then be far from believing as now I do:
But let me say, that the Arguments alleged for those Interpretations, are
easily answered, and the contrary proved irrefragably (fi quid ego judico) yea,
and that I do not think it possible to make any complete (that I say not with
Mr. Mede any tolerable) work of it in expounding the Apocalypse, except this be
taken pro confesso, that the Chiliad is yet future.

2. I do likewise take it for a Principle, that the coming of Christ to raise
the dead, and to judge the earth, will be within much less than this thousand
years.

3. I suppose, that received Principle among Divines will hold good, that the
conversion of the Jews will not be till this present state of the world is Lege
Bedam in libr. de atatibus Mundi. Estium ad did. 47. l 4 sent. Ios. Acostam de
Temp. Noviss. l. 3. c, 11. Stellam in Luc 21.24. Ac inter nostros, Zanchium de
fine saeculi, Perkins in symbol. Apost. ubi de ultimo Iudicio, etc. Vossium in
These. Theol. and Hist. p. 221. vide etiam Hadnanum Finum in Flagello Iudaeor.
near unto its end. I say not until the morning of the resurrection be almost
ready to dawn.

4. The Scripture is to me exceeding clear, that, after the Jews conversion,
there will be a glorious day for the elect upon earth, and that this day shall
be of very long continuance.

There is not time here to expatiate upon these Axioms* otherwise I could urge
a multitude of things to prove them. And if they be, (or if the two first of
them be) granted, Chiliasm follows clearly and undeniably.

Thus have I given a summary account of what has persuaded me to own that
which is in the worlds account an incredible Paradox. Eusebius calls it
(...), and (...), but I trust, though the notion of the Chiliad (in the sense I
accept it) be (...) yet that it is not (...).

The truth is, I was exceeding backward to entertain such a notion, and did
long oppose it, as conceiving it might be at best an innocent error of some
that wished well to the kingdom of Christ: But blessed be the Lord God who gave
me an heart at that very time to search (according to my poor measure) the
Scriptures and other Books which might be helpful in this case, both such as
argued for, and such as argued against the Chiliad; and to look up to him that
is in heaven and hears on earth, that I might see and embrace the truth, and
only the truth. And methinks, I would desire no more, if I could but persuade
all serious and gracious men to go that way to work in this matter. But (alas)
it is the great infirmity of many good men, that if any thing (though of never
so circumstantial a nature, for as for fundamentals, let no one dare to
question there) be voiced for an error they fall upon it in great zeal without
ever looking up to heaven, that if what they oppose be truth, they might be
convinced of it, as well as if it be otherwise that they might be strengthened
in bearing witness against error, and hence the Lord never lets them see their
mistakes. But as a learned and worthy Divine, Dr. Owen in Review of Schism
against Cawdry p. 36.
says concerning Independency (so called) for a man to search the Scriptures,
and other writings impartially, and to look up to him that is the fountain of
light and truth for his spirit to guide into all truth, etc. is a course that
he would wish all men to beware of that would not be made Independents. So say
I concerning that, and add withal, That it is a course I would have all men
beware of that would not become sober Chiliasts.

All this notwithstanding, I am not of their judgment who usually pass under
the notion of Millenaries. For I do not think that there are any more than two
personal comings or Residencies of Christ upon the earth, spoken of in the
Scripture. Nor do I believe that Christ will reign personally upon the earth a
thousand years before the day of judgment. Only I conceive, that the great and
last day so much celebrated by the Prophets and Apostles, will begin at the
final destruction of Antichrist, even then when the thousand Apocalyptical
years shall begin.

Neither let any one be offended with the seeming Novelism which is in these
notions. that has been an old Artifice, whereby the enemy of truth has kept
the world from embracing of it. Who knows not that the Heathen V. Lactant. de
Origin erroris l. 2. c. 7, 8. Chrysostom. Hom. 7. in 2 Cor. and in Orat. 2.
Contr. Iudaeos and Camerarium in Caetal. Caesarum in Theodosio. Ac revera hanc
objectionem plane Ethnicam, Clemens, Justinus, Origines, Tertullianus,
Ambrosius, Augustinus, abunde in suis Scriptis refutarunt.
pleaded Antiquity against Christians, and therefore would not receive the
Gospel. And Papists are wont to charge Reformers with Novelism. And I do
believe, that that is the reason why the spirit terms the Gospel, Rev. 14.6.
the everlasting Gospel, even on purpose to contradict and confute that popish
slander which accuses the Reformation with Novelism. What though these truths
have lain obscured a great while, during the dark reign of Antichrist? yet God
has his time to bring his truth to light, and he is not wont to do it all at
once, nor all in one age, but by degrees. Certainly new discoveries of old
truths ought not to be branded with the odious name of Novel opinions. But
enough was said before to wipe off the dirt of such a calumny, when we showed,
that the Primitive and purest age of the Church believed the Chiliad, however
now, amongst some, it is deemed a new and strange Doctrine.

If any should further object that in some places in this Discourse there is
too much weight laid upon Rabbinical observations, etc. To that I would say;
far be from u^ to give heed unto Jewish Fables; And since the Jews Lege Owen de
Not. and studio Theol. Hist. Quod aliqui de veteribus in Ecclesia Christiana
doctoribus affirmarunt idem de Iudaeis dici potest Scriptoribus. Quo Seniores
eo saniores, quo juniores eo jejuniores. Consule Scripta Fagii aliorumque hac
de re dicentium.
ceased to be the Church of God* and so have been forsaken of his Spirit, their
writing (especially where they speak of Christ) are of far less worth than
before that; yet I add, that there is a multitude of places in the New
Testament (and in the old too) which no one can clearly understand, except he
be acquainted with the notions, customs, phrases, etc. which were formerly in
use amongst the Jews. Many terms are found in the New Testament, which are not
in the old, but are in the Jewish writing^ being in use amongst the Jewish
Doctors whilst there was a Jewish Church, and from them (being consonant to the
mind and meaning of the spirit) borrowed by the Apostles. So are the terms of
Paradise, the (essential) word of God, the kingdom of Heaven, the kindgom of
God, the second death, the day of judgment, the world to come, etc. And
therefore these things cannot be clearly understood, except recourse be had
unto those writings, to see what they meant by them. Why should we for the sake
of the ^ares, reject the wheat also? of Jewish Interpreters it has been
observed (as is also said of Origin, ubi been nemo melius, ubi male nemo pejus)
that as when they do ill, they are the worst, so when they do well, they are
the best expositors. In a word, we may find in some humane Scripts of the Jews,
not only the same phrases, proverbs, parabolical notions, and expressions, but
also the very same arguments made use of, for the very same end, which is to be
seen in the blessed Scriptures of the New Testament. Therefore surely a good
and profitable use is to be made of those writings, and solid Criticisms may be
gathered from them. They that are acquainted with the learned works of Drufius,
Amama, Buxtorf, Iac. Capellus, with his learned Brother Lud. Capellus, Lud de
Dieu, Mede, Ainsworth, Hottinger, Heinsius, Vide si libet ejus Praefat. ad
Annot. in Genes. ubi Pontificios, qui dicunt Protestants nimium Rabbinorum
scriptis indulgere, refutavit. Lege etiam Authors quos citat ante Annot. in
Exodus
Chr. Cartwright, etc. know full well the truth of this; let not any unlearned
judge rashly, understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm. If
these things satisfy not, I know no other way, but we must be content to be
called Iudaizers: Nor is that reproach, since Aegi^^^s Hunnius, (the Lutheran)
has written a book de Ca^vi^o Iudaizante, much to be accounted of.

But I would not detain the Reader too long in the porch. Only remember, that
this Discourse is the substance of several Lecture-Sermons preached in the
ordinary course of my Ministry to a plain Auditory, and therefore not Elegancy
of phrases, or wisdom of words (I thank Christ I have learned to slight such
vanities in the sacred and awful things of God.) But (as far as the nature of
the suctject will permit) Truths plainly delivered, are to be expected; and
that (in some poor measure) I trust the Reader will find.

However, it is a satisfying thought unto me, when I consider, that, as it is
true, if what is here asserted be found stubble when the day of fire comes, I
shall have no reward for all my pains, studies, and poor endeavors in seeking
to understand, and to evince these things unto others; so on the other hand, if
what I have affirmed or propounded, (for in some things which are more
disputable, nihil affirmo, sed propono) be built upon the golden foundation,
then in that day (which the Lord hasten) when every man shall receive according
to his works, it will not repent me of what I have publicly taught or written,
nor will they that have dis-believed and opposed these Truths, then at all
rejoice in what they have in that respect done.

Now the Lord fit us for what ever the birth may be which his divine and holy
providence is traveling with at this day. Surely there is some great thing
upon the wheel, and it seems as if it might be said, the captive exile
hastneth; Do not the signs of the times begin to show their faces very
apparently? Do not the waves of the Nations begin to stir? Do not the floods
lift up their voice? The Lord has been opening his armoury, and bringing forth
the weapons of his Indignation; a sound of Battle is in the Land, and of great
destruction. Behold, they whose judgments it was not to drink of the Cup, have
assuredly drunken, and art thou he (O Roman Antichrist, thou with thy upholders
and followers!) that shall altogether go unpunished? thou shall not go
unpunished, but thou shall surely drink of it. The Lord, the Lord of Hosts
shall lop the bow with terror, and the high ones of stature shall be hewn
down, and the haughty shall be humbled. The Stars of Heaven, and the
Constellations thereof shall not give their light. And although it may be, we
may die in the storm, yet the Generations to come are like to see days of
glory. Let us then give him, that turns the shadow of death into the
Morning, no rest, till he make Jerusalem a praise in the Earth: For Sions sake,
and for Ierusalems sake, let us not hold on^ peace, till the Righteousness
thereof go forth as brightness, and the salvation thereof as a Lamp that
burns, that she may be a Crown of Glory, and a Royal Diadem in the hand of
the Lord.

From my Study in Boston N. E. 4m. 21. 1667. J. M.

THE MYSTERY OF Israel's Salvation, EXPLAINED and APPLIED: OR, A DISCOURSE
Concerning the General Conversion of the ISRAELITISH NATION.

Wherein is Showed, 1. That the Twelve Tribes shall be saved. 2. When this is
to be expected. 3. Why this must be. 4. What kind of Salvation the Tribes of
Israel shall partake of (viz.) A Glorious, Wonderful, Spiritual, Temporal
Salvation.


Being the Substance of several SERMONS Preached

By INCREASE MATHER, M. A.

Teacher of a Church in Boston in New England.

Hear the word of the Lord O ye Nations, and declare it in the Isles afar off,
and say, he that scattered Israel will gather him, and keep him as a shepherd
does his flock,

Jer. 31 10. And then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man, and then shall
all the Tribes ((...)) of the Land mourn, and they shall see the Son of Man
coming in the clouds of heaven with Power and great Glory,

Matthew. 24.30. In the days of the voice of the seventh Angel, when he shall
begin to sound, the Mystery of God shall be finished, as he has declared to
his Servants the Prophets,

Rev. 10.7. London, Printed for John Allen in Wentworth-street, near Bell-Lane,
1669.

THE MYSTERY OF Israel's Salvation opened.
ROMANS 11.26. All Israel shall be saved.


ONE of those great and glorious things which the world, especially, the people
of God in the world, are in expectation of at this day, is, The general
conversion of the Israelitish Nation. Now having a desire, whilst the hand of
Christ shall continue me amongst you, to fulfill the Ministry which I have
received in the Lord; I have therefore purposed with my self (by the help of
the Spirit of Grace and Truth) to treat upon this subject: And so much the
rather, by how much I perceive by the Word and Works of God, that the day is
approaching wherein this great Mystery of God shall receive its accomplishment.
And in order unto the discoursing upon this matter, the words which have been
read unto you are pitched upon. For I know not any Scripture containing a more
pregnant and illustrious testimony and demonstration of the Israelites future
voca^^on, than this which we have before us; it being a main scope of the
Apostle in this ^hapter* to ma^^ (...) Mystery unto the Gentiles. And this the
^postle does elaborately prove, by many (...), both before, and in, and after
this verse. We shall not stay upon any large T^tius capitis Analysia lege apud
Willet de vocatione Iudaeorum, Cap. 3.
Analysis of the words, The several Arguments insisted upon, may be mentioned
under the Reasons of the Doctrine (if the Lord will) hereafter to be spoken
unto: I^ may now suffice to take notice, that in this verse there are three
things contained; 1. A prediction, All Israel shall be saved. 2. The time when
this prediction shall be fulfilled. And so, i. e. Et sic, pro, and tunc (...)
pro (...). Pareus in loc. Consule versionem Syriacam and Aethiopicam in Bibl.
Polyglott.
and then; which words bear reference unto the words immediately preceding in
the former verse; so that the sense may be, When once the fullness of the
Gentiles is come in, then shall all Israel ^e saved. There is indeed a fullness
of the Gentiles, which shall be after the conversion of the Jews, Psalm. 98.3,
4. In bringing in which fullness, the saved Tribes of Israel, shall be very
instrumental, Isa. 66.19. But there is also a fullness of the Gentiles, which
shall Videsis quae habet ^eurnius in Legate. Evang. ad Indos, cap. 4.
precede the Jews conversion, and upon which it shall follow immediately, Luke
21.24. 3. We have the proof of this prediction, and the Argument from which the
Apostle proves his prediction of Israel's salvation, is from divine ^^stimony,
(as says he) it is written; q. d. (...) in the word of God, that a deliverer
(...) away ungodliness from Jacob, then it (...) needs be true, that all Israel
shall be saved; but it is so written, therefore this prediction is a most
undoubted verity.

The words of the Text fall under the first of these particulars, viz. The
prediction it self. And for the opening and clearing of the words, three things
may be enquired into; 1. Who are meant by Israel. 2. What by all Israel. 3.
What by being saved. Q* 1. Who are here meant by Israel: Ans. 1. Israel many
times in the Scripture is put for those ten Tribes which revolted from the
house of David unto Jeroboam in the days of Rehoboam. The ten Tribes are often
called Samaria, the denomination being from the Metropolis, Isa. 7.9. And
Ephraim, because the first King over the ten Tribes was an Ephraimite, 1 Kings
11.26. But mostly they are called by the name of Israel, the denomination being
from the major part: For the ten Tribes were the greater part of Isreal's
posterity, and therefore after the ten Tribes became a distinct kingdom, he
that was King of them is styled, The King of Israel, as the King over the two
remaining Tribes is styled King of Judah.

2. Israel is sometimes put for those that did remain of Jacob's posterity,
after that the ten Tribes were by the Assyrians carried into perpetual
captivity. The very same persons which are sometimes called Jews, are at other
times called Israelites, Mat. 10.5, 6. Go not into the way of the Gentiles, nor
into any City of the Samaritans, but unto the lost Sheep of the house of
Israel. Now, the house of Israel there, does note those that were the
posterity, not so much of the Assyrian, as of the Babylonian captivity. And,
Act. 2. They which are called men of Judea, verse 14. are called men of Israel,
verse 22. So Romans 9. they who are called Jews, verse 24. are called Israel,
verse 31. Hence Paul, that was a Jew of the Tribe of Benjamin, is also said to
be an Israelite, Romans 11.1. 2 Cor. 11.22. Phil. 3.5. Consider also, Luke 1.16.
And the reason why the Jews ^re called Israelites is: 1. Because that is the
more ancient and honorable name. Israel is a name of power and principality;
2. Because there were many particular persons belonging to the ten Tribes who
lived in the Land of Judea. See 2 Chronicles. 10, 17. and 11.3. When Jeroboam
advanced h^s superstitious worship, there were many out of all the ten Tribes
who joined themselves with those that were looked upon as Jews, in
contradistinction to Israelites, 2 Chronicles. 11.13, 14, 16. And afterward, in Asa
his time, there was an abundance of Israelites that fell from Jeroboam to the
house of David, Chap. 15. verse 9. And after that, in Hezekiahs time, there
were more Israelites that joined themselves unto the house of Judah, upon a
godly letter which Hezekiah wrote to them to that purpose, Chap. 30. verse 6,
10, 11. And after all this, even when the seventy years of the Babylonian
captivity were expired, many of the ten Tribes (and more might have done it had
they not wanted gracious hearts) returned with the Jews unto the Land of
Canaan. Consider 2 Chronicles. 36.23. with Ezra 2.70. Now the posterity of those
Israelites who returned out of Babylon to Judea, are (as some learned conclude)
the ((...)) twelve Tribes spoken of in the New Testament, Act. 26.7. Iam. 1.1.
For they did consist not only of the Tribes of Judah and Benjamin, but there
were many Families of other Tribes amongst them, whence they might come to bear
the name of twelve Tribes. See Luke 2.36. Wherefore. 3. Israel is often used in
Scripture as significant of both these, both the ten Tribes, and the two Tribes
conjoined, Psalm. 114.1. Hos. 11.1. And thus we may understand Israel here in my
Text. Though the two Tribes be principally intended, yet I would not interpret
the words exclusively, as to the other ten Tribes, partly because it is a good
rule in interpreting the Scripture, to give it the largest sense the words will
bear, and partly because the ten Tribes shall be saved at last as well as the
two Tribes.

Q. 2. What is meant by all Israel? Answ. There are diverse interpretations
which have been given Lege Voet. disp. de generali conversione Iudaeorum, p.
126, 127.
thereof. For, 1. Some think, that by all Israel is meant some Few of all
Israel. But that cannot be the meaning of the words, for the note of
universality, All Israel, will not bear such a particular restrained
interpretation. That shows the Proposition to be an universal, and not a
particular Axiom. Surely, the Scripture is not wont to use such Akurologies,
harsh improprieties of speech, as to say all, when not all but a few only are
intended. Besides, the Apostle opposes that salvation of all Israel, which he
predicts as future in the words of my Text, unto the salvation of a remnant,
which at that present time when he wrote this Epistle to the Romans was
accomplished, v. 5. 2. Others think, that by all Aliqui Israelem spiritualem
accipiunt, puta omnes ex Iudaeis and gentibus credentes and salvandos. Ita
Theod. A^gust. Hieron. Caesarius apud Nazian. verum patet Apostolum toto hoc
capite non de spiritua^^ (...) de carnali Israele agere. Corn. a lapide in loc
sic etiam Estius.
Israel, is meant all the elect of God. But though it be a truth, that all the
elect of God shall be saved, no link of that golden chain of salvation which
begins in election, and ends in eternal glory, can ever be broken, Romans
8.29, 30. And although it be likewise true, that Israel is sometimes used in
Scripture for the elect of God, Gal. 6.16. So Rev. 7.4. All the elect of God,
during the reign of Antichrist, are there called the sealed ones of the tribes
of Israel; yet that is not the true meaning of all Israel in my Text, for the
Apostle in this Chapter discourses of natural Israel. We must know there is a
double Israel spoken of in the Scripture; 1. There is spiritual Israel, h. e.
-- such as in respect of faith and Religion, are the Lord's peculiar ones,
Psalm. 73.1. Ioh. 1.48. Romans 2.28, 29. Ephesians. 2.12. And in this respect it may be
that Iether is See Ainsworth on Psalm. 14.7 and in praefat. to Annot. on Genes.
p. 3. Ita R. Salomo. confer. Ioh. Drusii Not. in Sulpicii Severi Histor. p.
103, 104.
called an Israelite (though he were a Gentile born) scil. in respect of his
faith and Religion.

2. There is carnal or natural Israel, h. e. those that are by generation of
the seed of Jacob, who was afterward called Israel. Hence we read of Israel
after the flesh, as well as Israel after the spirit, 1 Cor. 10.18. Romans 9.4, 5.
Gal. 4.23. Now of this Israel does the Apostle here speak, as you may see Romans
11.14. Nor indeed had he declared V. P. Martyr in loc.
such a mystery as he speaks of, verse 25. if only he had said that the elect
should be saved. Doubtless the Romans knew that before, whereas this salvation
of Israel was a mystery that they little thought of, and thence behaved
themselves too arrogantly and contemptuously toward the, at present, forlorn
and rejected Israelites, which error of theirs our Apostle labors to
correct, by informing them, that there would a time come when Jews should be
saved as well as Gentiles.

3. Others Sic Thomas Cajetanus, and Dominicus a Soto.
there are, that by all Israel understand, all and every one of the natural
posterity of Jacob. As if the Apostle's meaning were, that every particular
person amongst the children of Israel should partake of this salvation; but in
that there is a mistake also. For when this salvation shall take place, which
is here spoken of, there will be diverse particular persons amongst the
Israelites that will stand it out against the call of God, for which they shall
be destroyed, according to that Text,, Loquitur de finali Iudaeorum conversione
Lawen. strict. p. 23.
Act. 3.23. We may suppose, that some of the Jews will adhere obstinately to
their old antiquated Cemonies, for which the Lord will be dreadfully provoked
to cut them off. So some Fink on the calling of the Jews.
interpret, Isa. 66.3, 4. Consider also, Eze. 20.37, 38. And many have
alleged Dan. 12.2. to confirm this; which Scripture they do therefore
interpret allegorically, as if the meaning of the place were, that after Zion
is raised out of the dust of affliction, and brought out of that grave of
sorrow and misery which (...) present the Jews are in, many of them shall
perish for their iniquity. And indeed the arguments that are brought by those
which favor this allegorical interpretation, Vide Brightmanni Scholi^ in Dan.
12. Huit in loc. and Buroughs on Hos. 1.11.
are of force against them that restrain the words to intend nothing but the
ultimate resurrection of the last judgment. Nevertheless, in as much as the
Church of the Jews in old time built her faith of the reserrection upon that
very Text principally, and in as much as a literal interpretation of Scripture
ought never to be rejected for an allegorical one, except necessity compel
thereunto, I am slow to embrace a metaphorical sense of that Scripture, Dan.
12.2. Why may not the true meaning of the place be this? viz. That after the
Jews are brought into their own Land again, and there disturbed with Gog and
Magog (not John's, but Ezekiel's Gog and Magog, at the battle of Armageddon)
who shall think with great fury to destroy the converted Israelites. After this
shall begin the resurrection of the dead, some of which, namely, the Saints of
the first resurrection, shall be raised to everlasting life; but other some, i.
e. the wicked, after the time belonging to the first resurrection is expired,
shall be raised to everlasting shame.

This I do believe is the true scope of that place. He that is otherwise
minded, let him abound in his own sense.

4. Others think, that by Mr. Strong in his Sermon on Romans 11.26. Totus Israel
nihil aliud declarat quam Israelis plenitudinem; cui opponitur (...). Sed
notandum est de tota gente in genere, non de singulis hic disseri, ut de
plenitudine gentium statuendum est. Beza in Romans 11. v. 12, 26.
all Israel, is meant the body of the Israelitish Nation. And that seems to
be the genuine interpretation of the words; for in other Scriptures, all is
used to signify many, Mat. 3.5. It is said, That all Judea was baptized by
John, confessing their sins. Doubtless there were some in Judea, that neither
confessed their s^ns, nor were baptized by John, therefore all notes a
multitudinous number: And so is All to be taken, Isa. 66.23. Joel 2.28. 1 Cor.
15.22. and in many other Scriptures. So when it is said, All Omnis Israel, i.
e. multi Israelitae. Vatablus.
Israel shall be saved, h. e. very many Israelites shall be saved. Yea, all
here notes, not only many, but most; it signifies not only a Majority, but a
very full and large Generality. Hence the same thing is called their fullness,
Romans 11.12. Now as when the fullness of the Gentiles shall be brought in, that
must not be extended to every particular person, nor yet to a few only, but to
the body of Gentile Nations, whom that prophecy does concern; so may we say
concerning this fullness of Israel. Moreover, such as was Isreal's (...).
rejection, such must their re-assumption into divine favor be, Romans 11.15.
But their rejection was not of every par^icular person, nor yet of a few only,
but of the body of the Nation; so shall their salvation be National.

Q. 3. What is meant by being saved? Answ. In this salvation there is, 1. The
term from which; 2. The term to which it shall be. 1. The term from which, viz.
from a state of bondage and misery. And this is double, either, 1. Temporal;
oftentimes in the Scripture, salvation is put for deliverance from temporal
bondages and miseries, Neh. 9.27. And this is part of the Apostles meaning
here; for all Israel has been in temporal outward bondage and misery this long
time. It is now near 1600 years since the house of Israel was left unto them
desolate; since which time the generality of the Jews have been in woeful
servitude, and hated and hissed at of all Nat^ons, in almost all places of the
world, as the Lord, many hundreds of years before it came to pass, threatened
them, that for their disobedience it should be, Deuteronomy. 28.37. Thou shall become
an astonishment, a Proverb, and a byword amongst all Nations, whither the Lord
shall lead thee. And ver. 43. The stranger shall get above thee very high, and
thou shall come down very low. And ver. 48. Thou shall serve thine enemies
which the Lord shall send against thee, and he shall put a yoke of iron upon
thy neck. And ver. 68. You shall be sold to your enemies for bondmen and
bond-women, and no man shall buy you. I remember Josephus Of Wars of Jews, lib.
7. c. 15.
relates, that infinite numbers of Jews were exposed to sale at the Roman
destruction of Jerusalem, till at last no one would buy them; and then surely
was that word of the Lord fulfilled.

2. This salvation implies deliverance from spiritual bondage and misery.
Hence in the Text it is expressed by turning away ungodliness. And salvation is
very often used in the Scripture in that sense, viz. for deliverance from
spiritual bondages, Mat. 1.24. Luke 1.71, 74, 77. And therefore when the
Apostle says, That all Israel shall be saved, this also is part of his
meaning; That the whole nation of the Jews shall be saved from the blindness of
their minds, saved from the hardness of their hearts, saved from the unbelief
of their souls, saved from that curse and wrath of God which lies upon them,
and which has remained upon many of them, for more than 2000 and diverse
hundreds of years.

2. There is the term unto which this salvation shall be, viz. unto a glorious
state of happiness. And this is, 1. Temporal. The Jews who have been trampled
upon by all Nations, shall shortly become the most glorious Nation in the whole
world, and all other Nations shall have them in great esteem and honor, Isa.
60.1, 3. Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is
risen upon thee. The Gentiles shall come to thy light, and Kings to the
brightness of thy rising.

2. This salvation implies spiritual and eternal happiness. Usually, salvation
in the Scripture is taken in that sense, for the communication of spiritual and
eternal good unto the soul, Mark 16.16. 1 Pet. 1.8, 9. Salvation implies grace
for the soul, and glory for the soul. And this is the main thing here intended.
All Israel shall be saved, i. e. they shall be converted unto God, they shall
be made partakers of much grace here, and of eternal glory hereafter. The
salvation of the world to come is comprehended under this saying, All Israel
shall be saved. For the words may well have reference unto a speech that the
Alludit ad dictum Hebraeorum, omnem Israelitam habiturum partem in futuro
saeculo. Grotius, Hoc dictum vide in Tract. Synod. c. 10. Lege Capelli obser.
in N.T. p. 120.
Hebrews made frequent use of; sc. That every Israelite shall have a part in
the world to come. Therefore everlasting life, which shall be vouchsafed in the
world to come, Mark. 10.30. is here intended.

Having thus (by the help of Christ) cleared the groundwork and foundation,
the Doctrine to be raised thereupon is plainly this.

Doct. That the time will surely come, when the body of the twelve Tribes of
Israel shall be brought out of their present condition of bondage and misery,
into a glorious and wonderful state of salvation, not only spiritual but
temporal.

Now in the Doctrinal handling of this Truth, four things may be attended; 1.
To show that the twelve Tribes shall be saved. 2. When this salvation is to be
expected. 3. Why all Israel shall be saved. 4. What kind of salvation it is,
which all Israel shall in the appointed time partake of.

1. We are to show, that the twelve Tribes shall be saved. And this is evident,
if we consider, 1. That the two Tribes or Jews, 2. That the ten Tribes or
Israelites (so distinguished in the days of old) shall be saved.

1. The two Tribes or Jews shall be saved. We shall not here insist upon such
arguments as some have stood upon. Austin lays weight upon a typical
argument, sc. That as the Gileadites rejected Iephtha, but afterward they
returned to him again; so the Jews should reject Christ, but afterward they
should embrace him. And others Sic Willet, Beza, Fagus, etc.
there are who lay much weight upon an argument drawn from the secret wonderful
providence of God in preserving the Jewish Nation entire from mixtures with
other Nations where they are dispersed. The providence of God has suffered
Vide Lazium de Migrationibus gentiam.
other Nations to have their blood mixed very much: As you know it is with our
own Nation, there is a mixture of British, Roman, Saxon, Danish, Norman blood;
but as for the body of the Jewish Nation, it is far otherwise. Let an English
family live in Spain five or six hundred years successively, and they will
become Spaniards; but though a Jewish family live in Spain a thousand years,
they do not degenerate into Spaniards, (for the most part.) It is true, that a
Genealogical distinction amongst the Jews is now perished, because the Messiah
being come, there is not now (though before that there was) any need of such
distinction, yet a National distinction there still remains; whence some
conclude, that there will be in due time a National conversion of that people.
But albeit, this argument is not to be slighted; yet I choose rather to build
upon plain Scripture Proof. Consider then, Zech. 12.6, 10, 11. And Mat. 23. two
last verses. Where it is clearly intimated, that a day shall come when the
desolated Jewish Nation shall account him blessed that comes in the name of
the Lord. And Luke 2.32. Christ must become the glory of his people Israel, i.
e. the Jewish Nation. Now, they did never yet own Christ to be their glory, he
was rejected of that Nation (...).
Chap. 17.25. therefore a time must come, when he shall be owned and gloried
in, by that People and Nation. Consider also, Chap. 21.24. where our Savior
intimates, that when the Gentiles have fulfilled their times of apostasy and
iniqu^ty, Jerusalem shall be no longer trodden under foo^ by them. One place
more look into, sc. 2 Cor. 3.15, 16. Even unto this day, when Moses is read,
the vail is upon their hearts: Nevertheless, when it shall turn unto the Lord,
the vail shall be taken away. The Jews might see from the writings of Moses,
that the Messiah is already come; for the Scepter and Lawgiver is utterly
departed from Judah, therefore Shiloh must needs be come, Genesis 49.10. And they
might see this from the Prophets; for within 490 years after Cyrus his
proclamation for rebuilding the Temple, Messiah must come, Dan. 9.25. whereas
it is above two thousand years since that proclamation; and Christ was to come
before the utter destruction of Bethlehem, and in the time of the second
temple, Mich. 5.2. Hag. 2.9. whereas there is no Bethlehem, nor any Temple, for
many a day; why then do not the Jews acknowledge Christ? Alas, there is a vail
of miserable blindness upon their hearts, that they cannot, they will not, see
the Truth: But, says the Apostle, This shall be taken away. And (says he) it
shall turn. What is that? I answer: (...). Conversus fu^rit, nim. Israel.
Erasmus.
It, there may note the body of the Jewish Nation, or the words may be read,
Vide Heinsii exercit. in N. T. p. 398, 399.
They shall turn (i. e. the blinded minds of the Jews shall turn) unto the Lord.

2. The ten Tribes shall be saved as well as the two Tribes. Some that have
acknowledged a general conversion of the Jews, yet have denied that ever the
ten Tribes should partake of that salvation: yea, even some R. Akiba negat
december Tribus habituras partem in futuro saeculo. At contrarium astruunt R.
Eliezar, and R. Menasseh, ac fere universa Rabbinorum Schola.

De conversione 10 Tribuum scribunt Brightmannus, Finxus, Alstedius, P.
Cunaeus, Justus Heurnius. Atque juxta Heurnium primo 10 Tribus convertentur,
deinde Tribus Iudae and Benjamin. Vide etiam Rivetum in Hos. cap. 1.


Jewish Rabbis, have denied this; but methinks the Scripture is mavelous
clear and full for this as well as for the former particular. You Will say, But
how is it proved, that the ten Tribes or Israelites, shall be saved as well as
the two Tribes or Jews? Answ. 1. Because we read often in the Scripture
concerning Isreal's salvation, as well as concerning Iudahs salvation. Now
though Israel in the New Testament does sometimes note the two Tribes or Jews
(as has been said) yet, in the old Testament, Israel usually signifies the
ten Tribes, and not the Jews strictly so callled. And it is an old observation,
that Certum est assentiente omnibus authoribus nostris Hieronymo, quod cum Judah
cum Israele conjungitur, per Israelem 10 Tribus ^ntelliguntur. Menasseh Ben
Israel in spe. p. 77.
when Israel is put in contradistinction unto Judah, the one notes the ten
Tribes, as the other the two Tribes. But we read often of the salvation of
Israel, as in contradistinction unto Judah. See Ier. 30.3. and 33.7, 14, 24,
26. Moreover, the ten Tribes are usually signified by the names of Samaria,
Gilead, Achor, Carmel, Ephraim, Joseph, etc. Now the Scripture speaks of a
restoration to be vouchsafed unto Samaria, Gilead, Achor, Carmel, Ephraim,
Joseph. See Ier. 31.5, 6, 18, 20. Zech. 10.6, 7, 9, 10. Mic. 7.14. Obad. 19.
Ier. 50.17, 19.

2. It is evident, that the ten Tribes shall be saved as well as the two
Tribes, because there is a promise of the reunion of Israel and Judah, and
that they shall become one entire body. Now that could not be, if only the two
Tribes should partake of this salvation. There must a time come when Ephraim
shall not envy Judah, nor Judah vex Ephraim, Isa. 11.13. From the days of
Jeroboam and Rehoboam, there were bitter envyings between the house of Israel
and the house of Judah, which could never be healed: And at this day, there are
most bitter ha^reds amongst the Jews, one against another. Those Jews which are
called (...) Legendo dicti: i. e. Textuales, Scripturarii, de quibus vide
Hottinger. Thesaur. Philol. p. 40, 41. Seldom de Anno Hebr. Skikkard. in
Bechin. Hopper. p. 103. Buxtorf in Lex. Talmud Rad. (...) Shindler. Lex
Pentagl. p. 1648.
Karaim, that is to say, a Sect of Israelites which do only receive the
Scriptures without the Talmud) are more odious than Christians are unto the
Talmudical Jews. Now there must a time come when this enmity of the Jews, both
amongst themselves, and against the Israelites, shall be done away, and a
glorious union be restored amongst them, as it was in David's time, or in
Solomon's time, when the twelve Tribes were not divided into two distinct
Kingdoms, so shall it be again. Consider Ier. 3.8, 18. Ezekiel. 37.16, 19. Hos. 1.
last. This promise and prophecy will be fulfilled Cum Apostolus dicit, totu^
Israel salvabitur, alludit ad Ezekiel. 37.22. Beza in Romans 11.26.
when all Israel shall be saved.

3. There is an express promise in the Scripture, that all the twelve Tribes
shall be saved, and therefore not only the two, but also the ten Tribes must
partake of this salvation: And this promise is sometimes expressed under the
notion of all the house of Israel being saved, Jer. 31.1. Ezekiel 20.40. and
39.25. And sometimes under the notion of all the Tribes of Israel, Zech. 9.1.
The burden of the word of the Lord in the Land of Hadrach and Damascus shall be
the rest thereof, when the eyes of man, as of all the Tribes of Israel shall be
toward the Lord. The meaning of the words may be, that the time will come, when
the eyes of all the tribes of Israel shall be toward the Lord as one man, and
then God will make fearful destruction amongst enemies.

4. Jacob prophesied, that the Tribes of Dan and Joseph should own Christ, Genesis
49.18, 26. And from thence we may argue, that the ten Tribes shall be converted
and saved, as well as the two Tribes.

Quest. But when will this salvation of Israel be accomplished.

Answ. That is the second thing to be spoken unto in the prosecution of this
point. And in the first place, let me premise this distinction; That the
salva^ion of Israel, (I speak of a salvation upon Earth) may be looked upon
either as inchoat, or consummate. The inchoat salvation of Israel, I take to be
at the conversion of the Tribes unto Christ, and their repossession of the land
of their fathers. The consummate salvation of Israel, I take to be that
glorious condition which they shall be in after the destruction of Ezekiel's
Gog and Magog, when the Kingdom shall become the Lords all the world over, and
his Saints shall reign upon earth: Now whatever you shall hereafter hear, I
desire you would receive as with this distinction, otherwise there will seem to
be a repugnancy in things which are indeed very consentaneous amongst
themselves. Having then premised this distinction, let us proceed in the fear
of God, to enquire, when Israel shall be saved. I might detain you about the
computation of Prophetical and Apocalyptical times, but that would be less
profitable for you, because, at last, you would be left at uncertainties;
therefore we shall not insist there: But what I have to say in answer to this
enquiry, may be laid down in sundry Pr^positions, which we shall (by the help
of Christ) endeavor to clear unto you, from the Scriptures of Truth.

Pro^os. 1. An infallible demonstration of the exact time when Israel shall be
saved, cannot be given. The Apostle says, 1 Cor. 13, 9. That we Prophecy but
in part; to be sure* it is true concerning the particular time, when
Prophetical Mysteries shall be fulfilled, that therein our knowledge is
imperfect. After men have said all that they can say about this matter, all is
but an humane conjecture, and not an infallible divine conclusion; as to the
day, or Month, or year, when this salvation shall have its effect. Hence even
the Jews themselves have a saying, Vide Menasseh-Ben-Israel, ubi supra. Sect.
27.
That the time when the fifth Monarchy shall begin, is kept secret. An
infallible demonstration of the exact time when Rome shall be destroyed can not
be assigned, as is evident, because, if a man would form an argument, to make a
demonstration of the time when that shall be one part of the argument, will be
grounded upon humane testimony, sc. upon Cronology, and therefore the
conclusion must needs be humane, and not divine. For it i^ Conclusio semper est
similis Antecedenti ant parti debiliori. Ram. Dial. l. 2. c. 11.
a rule in reason, that the conclusion does always follow the pars debilior in
any argument; if therefore either part of the argument be humane, then the
conclusion issuing therefrom must needs be humane also; and yet it is an
easier thing to be demonstrative, as to the particular time when Antichrist
shall be ruined, than to assign infallibly the particular time when the Jews
shall be converted, for the year of Antichrists downfall is noted in the
Scripture (did we but know when to begin the account) scil. That it must be
1260. years after his first rise and reign; but I cannot, for my own part by
searching find out, that the particular year when the Jews shall be converted,
is any where in all the Scripture once mentioned. I know many are wont to
allege that place, Dan. 12.11. to prove that the Jews shall be converted at
such or such a time: But truly, I do believe that those 1290. days which Daniel
there speaks of are past and gone long ago; That those 1290 days are past, is
the judgment of Arnoldus de Nova Villa. The Author of Problems concerning
Antichrist, page 186. Mr. Stevens in his Calculation of the number of the
beast. Mr. Symonds on Apocal. p. 93. Mede de numeris Danielis, and alibi
sparfius Wolphius in Cronol. p. 116. Alsted Cronol. c. 6. Lud. Capel. in
specil. p. 30. and Dr. Twiss in Letters to Mede.
nor is it any new or singular opinion so to think. Besides, the Scripture does
more than obscurely intimate, that the day of Isreal's salvation is known unto
the Lord alone, and that therefore it is not for us to be curiously prying into
that which the Father has kept in his own power, consider Psalm. 102.13. Zech.
14.7. Acts 1.6, 7. And therefore it is not good to be bold and definitive in
determining the particular time, when either this or other Prophesies in the
word of God shall be fulfilled, especially, considering how the adversaries of
the Truth have been hardened by false and peremptory timings of such matters as
these we are speaking of.

Prop. 2. When the salvation of Israel is near unto its accomplishment, the
mystery of it shall be more clearly and fully understood, than in former times
it has been. For it is a true and ancient observation, Omnes Prophetiae
priusquam habeant effectum, aenigmata and ambiguitates sunt hominibus: Cum
autem venit tempus and evenerit quod Prophetatum est, tunc Prophetiae habent
liquidam and certam expos^^io^em. Iren. 2.4. c. 43. Procopius Praef. ad Com. in
Genesis Vide Usser. de statu and succes. Ecles. c. 1.
That the event is the best Interpreter of Prophecies. It is now a great
question which of the vials are past, and which future: But if God let us live
to hear of the destruction of Rome, we shall then know which of the vials are
past, and which are to come; and all the mystery of God will then be
marvellously discovered. Besides, after-ages stand upon the shoulders of them
which went before them, and therefore the age immediately preceding the
fulfillment of these Prophesies, may well see further into them, than others
have done. As in other Prophesies so in this, when the time of the end is at
hand, they are to be unsealed, Dan. 12.4, 9. Rev. 32.10. And one reason of this
is, because, when God is about to accomplish this great and glorious design of
his grace and providence, he will have much prayer to be made for it, and
therefore will he discover it unto his servants, that so they may be stirred up
to cry mightily unto the Lord, that he would perform the intents of his heart.

Prop. 3. Before this salvation of Israel be accomplished, the Pope and Turk
shall be overthrown and destroyed. Hence, Numb. 24.24. He shall perish for
ever, i. e. not Heber, but they that afflict Heber. Either it is meant of
Assure, i. e. the Turk, or else the meaning is, that Chittim shall perish, i. e.
the Sic Targum Onk^los and Targum Hierosol.
Roman, who are of the posterity of Chittim, perish they must, and that for
ever. And of the destruction of both these enemies, does Moses seem to
prophecy, Vide H^urnium libro supra citato. p. 144.
Deuteronomy. 32.43. consider the place at le^sure. It cannot be understood of such
enemies as did oppress the Jews before the first coming of Christ, for the
Nations, i. e. the converted Gentiles (so the Apostle expounded the words, Romans
15.10.) will rejoice at the destruction of these enemies, when as the Gentiles
were not converted before the coming of Christ. Therefore the words are to be
understood of those which at the time of the Jews future and hastening
conversion, shall be their opposers and oppressors.

1. The Pope, (Antichrist) shall be destroyed before all Israel be saved.
Divines are wont to observe, that an heavy stumbling block in the way of the
Jews conversion, is their judging of all Christian Religion by Baptism. Now,
they hate Iconolatry, i. e. the Idolatry of image worship; God has so plagued
them for that sin, that even ever since the Babylonian captivity, they have
dreaded it. And therefore seeing such hideous Idolatry amongst the Papists,
until the Lord has born witness against Popery, and for the Reformed Religion
by the destruction of Rome; it is not to be expected, that the Jews will
embrace the true Christian Religion. But the truth of this is further evident,
if we consider, 1. That the four Monarchys must be destroyed, before the fifth
or Jewish K^ngdom be established, Dan. 2.44, 45. and 7.21, 22, 26, 27. And
therefore it is said, Rev. 10.6. That there should be time no longer: How, time
no longer? is the meaning of the words, that there should be an utter ceasing
of time? no, but Vide Medum in loc.
that there should be time no longer to the four Monarchys, especially, to the
Roman Antichristian Monarchy; and then it follows in verse the 7 th. That the
Mystery of God shall be finished. 2. This is further evident, because, there is
no entering into the Temple before all the vials be poured forth, Rev. 15. last.
As the Priests could not enter into Solomon's Temple, (1 King. 8.10, 11. 2 Chronicles. 7.8.) until the seven days dedication was over, so the Priestly Nation
of Israel cannot enter into the Temple till the seven vials be poured forth.
And if no man shall enter into that pure (Temple) Church Estate, which will one
day be in the world, ( Rev. 11.19.) until all the vials be poured forth;
surely, a whole Nation cannot enter into that estate before that time.

3. The truth of this is likewise manifest, because the fifth vial shakes Rome
in pieces; whereas the Jews are not converted till the sixth vial; yea, in the
sixth vial their salvation is but begun, by clearing all obstacles out of the
way, Rev. 16.10. The fifth Angel poured his vial upon the seat Gr. (...).
or throne) of the beast. Now what is the seat of the beast, but Rome? That
which was the seat of the Dragon, is the seat of the beast, so says the
spirit, Rev. 13.2. But the City of Seeds quatuor. Roma, Antiochia, Alexandria,
Domus Sanctuarii, seeds maxima est Roma. Shindl. Lex. Pentag. in verb. (...) ex
Gr. Arab.
Rome is that which was the seat (or throne) of the Dragons, i. e. the Heathen
Emperors as acted by Satan, therefore it is a vain thing for us to expect any
general conversion of the Jews, until such time as we hear that Rome is burnt
with fire.

4. This is yet further manifest, from Rev. 19.1. where it is said, after these
things I heard a great voice of much people in heaven, saying, Allellujah,
salvation, and glory, and honor, and power unto the Lord our God. What is the
meaning of this? It may note unto us, that after Rome is destroyed, the Jews
shall be brought into Christ; for Allelujah being See Mr. Cotton on the Vials.
an Hebrew word, may intimate, that the persons therein especially concerned,
are Hebrews, or Israelites; as when in Chap. 9. verse 11. there is both an
Hebrew, and a Greek word used; it shows that both Jews and Gentiles were
therein concerned, that both of them should be poisoned with Mahumetism, and
stung with Saracenical locusts: So here, the Hebrew word used, may signify
that the Hebrew Nation is concerned. But when shall they say, Allelujah? the
Text says, after these things, i. e. after the pouring forth of the vials full
of the wrath of God upon the Antichristian world, after the destruction of
Babylon, which was decribed in the foregoing Chapter. And a great See Mr.
Medes Works in Folio. p. 726.
Interpreter has well observed, that this manner of transition, to say, after
these things is never used in the Apocalypse, but when that which follows is
in time after that which went before. Now then, if all these things be laid
together, and weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary, it is very evident that
Rome must be destroyed before the Jews can be converted. And why may not this
be one thing meant by Plenitudo ge^tium non dependet e conversione Iudaeorum,
sed viam ipsi sternit ut sequatur. Rectius igitur alii post deletam Romani
Idolomaniam, and e medio sublatis Mahometismi blasphemiis Iudaeos arbitrantur
salutem consecuturos. Prideaux orat. de vocat. Iudaeor. vide etiam Alsted.
diatrib. p. 78.
the fullness of the Gentiles coming in? sc. that when the Gentiles shall have
fulfilled the days of their Antichristian Apostasy, and when the time is come
that the Gentiles shall set themselves to destroy Antichrist, then all Israel
shall be saved. Consider therefore Romans 11.25.26. with Rev. 17.17. and Dan.
12.7. Consider, also 28 Chapter of Ezekiel. and you will find, that Tyrus, as a
Type of mystical Babylon, must be destroyed before Israel's Redemption be
accomplished. And the Jews of old had it for a received principle, Consule
Targum in Thren. 1.22. and in cap. 4. ver. 22. Hinc illud R. Kimchii in Abdiam,
Cum Roma devastabitur, erit Israeli Redemptio.
that their glorious time should not come, till Rome were first made a
desolation.

2. The Turk must likewise be destroyed before all Israel be saved. For that
Eastern Antichrist (as some are wont to call him) having the Land of Israel in
his possession we may be sure they shall never peaceably enjoy the Land of
their Fathers again, as long as he has any power to hinder it; therefore
judicious Interpreters Sic Brightman in Apoc. 20. Dr. Stoughton de faelicitate
ultimi saeculi. p. 122. Finch calling of Jews. p. 135.
have expounded that Text, Isa. 27.1. to be a Prophecy of the destruction of
the present Turkish power, and that this shall be before the salvation of the
Tribes of Israel be accomplished, is very manifest from diverse Scriptures, unto
those that understand the meaning of the spirit in them: We shall endeavor by
the Lords help to open two or three Scriptures that do hold forth the light of
this truth unto us. One Scripture which says as much as this comes to, is
that Dan. 11.44, 45. Tidings out of the East, and out of the North shall
trouble him, therefore he shall go forth with great fury to destroy, and
utterly make away many: and he shall plant the Tabernacle of his Palace
between the Seas, in the glorious holy Mountain, yet he shall come to his end,
and none shall help him. Now for the right understanding of this Scripture, we
must remember that the scope of the 11. Chapter of Daniel, is to show what
should befall the Jews under the Persian, Grecian, and Roman Monarchy. Fidenter
asserimus in sequentibus nullum sermonem esse de Epiphane sed ulterius
procedere Propheta^ de quarto imperio loqui. Cocceius de Antichrist. p. 74.
This Roman Monarchy begins to be described in verse 36. and therefore the
words which are translated, And the King shall do according to his will (which
has occasioned many to Interpret the Text of Antiochus) may be read: For (...)
Articulus vel notat (...) aliquis. Rex aliquis, ut Genesis 14.13. and 9, 24. Dan.
9.25. vel articulus respiciat ad antedicta: Populus Romanus factus erat. ver.
18. and.30. Cocceius 16. p. 75.

(...) Articulus hoc loco non est (...), sed ut alibi nonnunquam solet, tantum
certum and eximium quid designat, sic Isa. 7.14. Mede. Consule ejus opera in
^olio. p. 1105. and p. 821, 826, 977.

(...) ( inquit Friedlibius in Theol. ^^eg. in Daniel) non est semper
demonstrati^am, etc.

(...) Sape ni^il admodum notitiam juvat, sed adhibetur ex more lingua tant^m,
non raro pl^nastice ad luxuriem usque elegantem and suavem. Bu^torf. Thesaur.
p, 351.


a King shall do according to his will: And if the words were so translated,
the transition from the Grecian unto the Roman Kingdom would be much more
evident: Moreover the Apostle Paul does interpret the words, as describing Vide
Graseri Hist. Antich. p. 124.
the Roman Antichrist, 2 These. 2.4. And in another place the same Apostle
says, that the spirit speaks See Mede of the Apostasy of the last times.
expressly, i. e. in the written word ((...)) 1 Timothy 4.1. that the Apostate
Church (or the Roman Antichrist) should do so, and so as you may there
perceive. Now where does the spirit by word speak so, except in this place in
Daniel; therefore the words do contain a Prophetical description of the Roman
state. Now observe further, verse 40. it is said at the time of the end, i. e.
when this Roman Kingdom shall be under its last, (that is to say, the
Atichristian) state, The King of the South shall push at him, h. e. The
Saracens who came out of the Southern parts should disturb and trouble the
Antichristian world; And History does abundantly manifest the truth of that.
Lege Brightman and Huit. in Dan. 11.
And the King of the North must come against this Roman Antichristian state,
like a whirlwind, h. e. the Turks, who arose out of the North quarters, shall
make dreadful destruction upon the Antichristian state; and who knows not
that this divine prediction has been fulfilled in those fearful devastations,
which the Ottomanical family has made upon the Roman Empire? And thus the
Angel goes on, even to the end of this Chapter, to describe this King of the
North, for verse 41.42, 43, 44, 45. will not agree with Antiochus his
proceedings (as some would force the words) but they do most exactly agree unto
the Turkish Empire; So then the sum is, That the King of the North, i. e. the
Turkish Ottomanical family, shall after the Israelites are gathered together
out of the Eastern and Northern parts, and repossessed of the Holy Land,
endeavor with great fury to destroy them ( scil. at the battle of Armageddon.)
But this furious Turk shall come to his end, and then will follow that glorious
salvation of Israel, which my Text speaks of.

Another Scripture which we may consider to this purpose, is that Mat. 24.29,
30. Immediately after the tribulation of those days, h. e. after the last and
sorest tribulation of the Jewish Nation is over, the Sun shall be darkened, and
the Moon shall not give her light, and the Stars shall fall from heaven, and
the powers of the heavens shall be shaken, and then all the tribes of the Land
shall mourn. Now what is meant by darkning of the Sun, and Stars falling from
heaven, etc? Some adhere unto a li^eral interpretation, as if the words did
Bucanus loc. Com 38. and 15. Vide etiam Parei. Com. in Mat. 24.29.
sign^fie frequent eclipses of the Sun; yea, some imagine that the Stars shall
really fall from the heaven to the earth; but this cannot be, for how should
the Stars fall upon the earth, when one Star is greater than the earth? others
there Solis obscuratio calamitates and tristem statum significat. Raupius in
Ianua Theol. p. 534. Hinc Atticus scribens ad Ciceronem* de Calamitoso tempore,
Sol ( inquit) mihi e mundo excidiss^ videtur.
are that suppose the darkning of the Sun, etc. may signify sore calamities
and troubles in the world; and that interpretation is not wholly to be
rejected. But that does not fully satisfy: wherefore we must know that the
Scripture has many Oriental notions and expressions in it, which albeit they
are not so usual amongst us, yet in former times they were most frequent. Now
it was the manner in the Orient, to describe the political by the natural world
Hinc Achmetes in Disciplina Indorum, Sol (ait) ad Regis Personam interpretando
refertur, a ia maxima sidera ad viros Regis Amplissimos, etc. Consule Medum in
Apoc. 6.
so that they did signify Monarchs by the Sun. See Genesis 37.9, 20. 2 Samuel 21,
17. 2 King. 20.11. And inferior Magistrates according to the Oriental
description, were signified by stars. Hence it is said of Antiochus, that he
cast down some of the host of heaven, and of the stars to the ground, Dan. 8,
10. meaning, that he destroyed some of the Jewish Priests and Magistrates, as
you know is related in the story of the Macca^^es. Hence the Legatur Ioh.
Driedo de Script. Eccles. lib. 3. Tract. 3. Pene initio.
King of Babylon is called Lucifer, Isa. 14.12. And it is an usual thing in the
Prophets, to describe the ruin of great States and Kingdoms, by saying, The
Sun shall be darkened, and the stars shall fall from heaven. See Isa. 34.2, 4,
5. Ier. 49.7. to 22. Ezekiel. 32.6, 7. Joel 3.15. Hag. 2.21, 22. Ier. 4.23, 25,
28. The overthrow of the Pagan Roman Empire, is described in such terms as
these are, Rev. 6.12, 13, 14. And so of the Roman Christian Empire, Rev. 8.10,
11, 12. wherefore the darkning of the sun, and falling of the stars prophesied
to be at the end of the present tribulation of the Jews, may signify the ruin
of great Monarchs and Kingdoms, and especially of the Turkish Monarchy. A
Learned Finch Sum of Divinity, chap. 9. p 533.
writer confineth the words to that particular, but other Antichristian powers
are likewise to be included. It was an insolent and fastidious expression of
one of the Popes, Gregorius 9. inter alia hoc emblema Profert, Duo sunt
luminaria magna, Sol, hoc est Papa, and Luna, hoc est imperator. Alsted.
Cronol. cap. 32.
that there were two great lights, the Sun (says he) that is the Pope; and the
Moon, that is the Emperor; and truly, when this prophecy shall be fulfilled,
woe to those Lights, they shall sit in obscure darkness: Nevertheless, though
the ruin of other Antichristian powers may be comprehended under that
expression, of darkning the Sun and the Moon, etc. yet the Turkish power is, I
suppose, pricipally intended: And this must be before the tribes shall mourn,
viz. with such a mourning as that, Zech. 12.10.

A third Scripture, to prove that the Turk must be destroyed before the tribes
of Israel be saved, is that, Rev. 16.12. The sixth Angel poured out his vial
upon the great River Euphrates, and the water ther^^^ was dried up, that the
way of the Kings of the East might be prepared. Now by Kings of the East, the
Israelitish Nation may be signified; for Israelites are so called in Scripture
even Kings, or a Kingdom of Priests, Exodus 19.2. And there are that think
(though that interpretation of the place is not to me satisfying) that by Vide
Brightman in Apoc. 16.12.
Kings of the earth, Isa. 24.21. the Jewish Nation is meant. However the
Scripture puts upon them a royal appellation, and they may be termed Kings of
the East, because when the Israelites shall be converted, they shall especially
come forth out of the Eastern parts of the world. Therefore in that place
before mentioned in Daniel, it is said, that tidings out of the East should
trouble the (Turk) King of the North: And such a thing as this I do believe is
intimated, Ezekiel. 43.2. where it is said, Behold the glory of the God of Israel
came from the way of the East, and his voice was like the noise of many waters,
and the earth shined with his glory: Consider the place, with Rev. 19.6. But
then what is meant by Euphrates, which must be dried up for the Kings of the
East?

Answ. 1. This may be understood literally, See 2 Esdr. 13.47.
that the River Euphrates (and other Rivers also) shall be dried up for the
Israelites to pass over, when God shall cause their captivity to return: For I
would not unnecessarily reject Una eademque Scriptura in multos deduci potest
sensus: summa tamen haec est tenenda, quemque locum suum certum habere sensum,
simplicem and literalem, R. Solomon Iarchi in Prefat. in Cant. vide Hottinger.
Thesaur. Philol. p. 236.
a literal interpretation of any Scripture, especially considering that
oftentimes in the New Testament it is said, that this and the other thing came
to pass, that so there might be a literal fulfilling of such Scriptures, which
yet had a mystical interpretation, as in Rev. 8.5. the Earthquake there spoken
of, is to be interpreted mystically of a great shaking brought upon the Roman
Empire, in answer unto the prayers of the persecuted and martyred Saints; yet
there was also at the same time a De quo Terrae-motu scribit Ammianus
Marcellinus, l. 26. cap. 14.
literal fulfilling of that prophecy in a most horrendous Earthquake, which
Historians make mention of. And thus may we say concerning the exsiccation of
Euphrates; and understand it both literally and spiritually. And this literal
interpretation does very well suit with other Scriptures: Read Isa. 11.15.
which intimates unto us, that the Branches of the River Nilus, which has
seven streams, shall be dried up for the Israelites at their return, and so
shall Euphrates, ver. 16. Consider also Isa. 27.12. with* Zech. 10.11. And why
should this seem incredible? Josephus Antiq. l. 3. c. 7.
says (albeit there Brightman ubi supra.
are that question the truth of that story) that in Alexanders time the
Pamphylian Sea was dried up for him and his Army to pass over in his expedition
against the Persian Empire. And other Haiton cap. 16. refert Symonds in Apoc. p
155. See the life of Clenches l. K. of Tartars.
Historians do relate, that Anno Dom. 1211. appeared a great Comet; and soon
after the Tartarians came out of their seats into the European world, through
the Caspian Sea, which gave them way miraculou^ly, as an Angel had directed
them. If there should be any thing of truth in these reports, which many
judicious Authors have credited, it makes much for a literal interpretation of
the place we have before us.

But 2. By Euphrates may be meant the Turkish Empire: There are Confer
Brightmam and Medum in loc.
especially two reasons which do constrain me to close with that interpretation
(not excluding the former.) One is because I find that in another place in the
Book of the Revelation, the Turkish power is signified by Euphrates, Rev. 9.13,
14. I heard a voice saying, loose the four Angels which are bound in the great
River Euphrates. The meaning of the place may be, That the Turks which lay on
both sides the River Euphrates, and were divided into four Sultanies or
Kingdoms should be let loose, partly by composing their civil dissentions, and
partly by being united under one Ottomanical head, to make a dreadful irruption
upon the Roman Empire. Again, Euphrates is used in the Old Testament, as being
significative of the Assyrian Empire, Isa. 8.7. The Lord brings upon them the
waters of the River, Vide Targum.
i. e. Euphrates, which, by way of eminency, is called the River. See 1 Kings
4.21. Psalm. 72.8. and 80.11. even the King of Assyria: So that you see the King
of Assyria is expressed by Euphrates. Therefore the Turk being the Assyrian of
the world at this day, may well be expressed by the same term. So then the sum
of all is, that when it is said that Euphrates must be dried up, that the way
of the Kings of the East may be prepare: It notes, that divine providence will
by some means or other, bring a fatal destruction upon the Turkish Empire, in
order to making the way clear for Isreal's salvation. In a word, (and so I pass
off from this proposition;) Rome shall be destroyed before the conversion of
the Jews: and as for the Pope and Turk, they shall be utterly destroyed after
the Jews conversion, yet before or together with the consummate salvation of
the Tribes of Israel. The utter destruction of all Antichristian power is in
order of nature before, but in time it does synchronize with the consummate
salvat^on of Israel.

Prop. 4. It will be in a time of very great trouble when Israel shall be
saved: As it is said concerning the second Temple, Dan. 9.25. that it should be
built in troublous times: So it is true of Ezekiel's Temple (which the Jews are
wont to call the third Temple, and tha^'s one reason why they embrace not the
Christian faith Lege P. Galat. lib. 5. cap. 10.
because they say, when Messiah comes, he shall build the third Temple,
understanding that literally, which they ought to understand only in a mystical
sense, Rev. 21.22. And applying those things to the first coming of Messiah,
which belong to his second coming. I say it is true of Ezekiel's Temple) that
the building thereof shall be in very troublous times, though after the buiding
is finished, there shall be the most glorious times that ever were since the
world began. Before Sion can be delivered, as to this last and great
deliverance which my Text speaks of, she must be in pain, and distress, and
anguish* Isa. 26.17. Yea, the Tribes of Israel must be reduced unto an extreme
hopeless, helpless estate as to man, or outward appearance before their great
salvation shall break forth, Ezekiel. 37.11. Hos. ^.15. As when Israel was
redeemed out of Egypt, they were in a most forlorn, and seemingly for ever and
one estate, according to that Scripture, Ezekiel. 16.5. (for that is the proper
meaning of the place) so must it be with them again before this their great
deliverance, Ier. 30.7. Alas! for that day is great, what day is that? even the
day when Israel and Judah shall be returned to the Land of their Fathers, ver.
3. there is none like it, it is even the time of Jacob's trouble.

Yea, I am persuaded, that after the Israelites shall be in their own Land
again, they shall be brought into the greatest distress that ever any people
were in in this world. Dan. 12.1. There shall be such a time of trouble, as
never was since there was a Nation unto that same time. And when is that? even
then when the Israelites shall again possess the glorious holy Mountain, chap.
11. ver. 45. For even all the Nations of them which shall be destroyed with the
fire that Christ shall be revealed from heaven in, shall combine against the
converted Israelites, whereby they will be brought in^^ mavelous distress:
Let him that has understanding consider for this, these Scriptures, Joel 3.1,
2. Zech. 12.2, 3. and 14. from verse 1 to 12. Rev. 16.14, 15. Mal. 4.1, 2, 3.

And as it is true, that Isreal's salvation will be i^ a time of very great
trouble unto that Nation, s^ there must immediately precede this glorious day,
Qu^s ergo non videt magnam aliquam and horibilem totius mundi mutationem
expectandam esse. Gualt. in Romans 11. Hom. 66.
most dreadful shakings and over-turnings, confusions and destructions all the
world over. Well therefore might Balaam say, whe^^ the inspiration of the
Almighty moved him, Ala^ who shall live when God does this! Numbers 24* 23.

Before this salvation is over, the great battle o^ Armageddon must be fought,
which will be the mos^ terrible day of battle that ever was. Turk and Pope, and
House of Austria, etc. the great Dragon of the bottomless pit acting and
breath^ng in them all* you must expect that they will rally their broken
forces, and combine together to destroy the Kingdom of Christ amongst Jews and
Gentiles, and thi^ will cause trouble and amazement, and a great shaking over
all the earth, Rev. 16.13, 14. Besides, before this day, God will be very
terrible in his doings amongst the Children of men, he will overthrow great
Kingdoms, and make Nations desolate and bring defenced Cities into ruinous
heaps: And therefore if now the time should be at hand wherein this mighty work
shall be brought to pass, you must expect to hear that the devouring plagues of
God are utterly consuming all things. Look then to hear of Pestilencies, Fires,
Wars among the Nations, such as the like was never known since the world began.
All Europe, Asia, and Africa, will be in a flame, when this day is come.
Redibunt Iudaei ad terram suam vi and armis; and cum regna orientalia and
Australia ad arma conclamantia, contra insurgent (Bestianis interim in
occidente vires recolligentibus contra ecclesiam Christianam, adeo ut totus
orbis bello conflagrari vi^^bitur) illi rebus praeclare gestis de stratis
hostibus frequentes victorias repertobunt, etc. Author clavis Recusae. p. 14.
Asia is like to be in a flame of War between Israelites and Turks, Europe
between the followers of the Lamb, and the followers of the beast, the
worshippers of Christ and Antichrist; yea, then you must look to hear such
dreadful, doleful things, that the first hearing of them will make your hearts
to ache, ears to tingle, and your souls within you to stand amazed with horror.
Consider Luke 21.25, 26, 27, 28. -- (...), etc.

Prop. 5. There is reason to hope that the salvation of the Tribes of Israel is
near to be revealed. Indeed to determine justly how nigh the conversion of the
Jews is; for my own part, I look upon it, as presumptuous and unwarrantable,
for the reasons before mentioned. Only in general, that the time is near, we
may safely conclude. Q. But what reason is there for such a conclusion? Answ.
1. Because the Scripture says that this work must be brought to pass in the
last days, Numb. 24.14. Hos. 3. last. Ier. 30.24. In the latter days you shall
consider it, h. e. when the latter days are come, then you shall understand the
truth of this Prophecy, that your enemies shall be destroyed, and your selves
saved. And indeed it will be in the latter part of the last days, when this
salvation shall begin; for the Jews shall be converted, when Antichrist is near
unto his total ruin. Now that the latter part of these last days are
accomplished in some measure is evident, if we consider the characters of the
last times laid down by the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3. begin. It would be too long to
insist upon all the character^ of the last time, which the Apostle there does
mention. Only let us take notice of three or four o^ them, and then judge if we
are not fallen into those times 1. Men shall be covetous, that is one character
of the last times; if we see men laying up a world of money, and unjust gain,
procured by usury, by bribery, by selling Offices, and the like unrighteous
practices, it gives us sad occasion to think of this word. 2. Unthankful; when
the best friends in the world are forgotten, and those that have been
instruments of great deliverances, are requited evil for all their love; such
ingratitude is a character of the last times. 3. Truce Breakers, when there are
those that will promise any thing to serve their own ends, but never do as they
have promised. And when the most Solemn Covenants, not only with men, but with
God are made nothing of; this is what the word has foretold shall come to
pass in the last times, 4. Traitors i. e. such as shall betray the Saints of
God; for that is the Scripture notion of a Traitor, one that is false and
perfidious to an interest of Jesus Christ. Lege Cyprian ad Magnum.
Such an one as Iuda^ was, is a Traitor, Luke 6.16. and such as the Pharisees
were, are Traitors in the language of Scripture. So then, by these things it is
evident, that the last times are come, and therefore the conversion of the Jews
hastneth.

2. That large measure of the spirit of grace which God has given to some of
his people, is a comfortable ground of hope that Isreal's salvation is not far
off: As when salvation is near to come, men ought to be very holy, Isa. 56.1.
So the Saints of God are wont to be so. When the Lord intends to bestow eminent
mercy upon his people, he uses to prepare them for it, by pouring abundantly
of his Spirit upon them, Luke 1.17. Now the conversion of the Jews will be an
eminent mercy unto Gentile Churches, Romans 11.15. Therefore before that day, the
Lord will refine his people. And has he not done so? why have the Churches of
Christ been put into the furnace of late? Surely it is that they might come
forth, as gold comes out of the fire. Great tribulation is upon the Saints in
other places of the world, that so they might come forth with their garments
washed in the blood of the Lamb. And doubtless, as the Lord God is hardening the
wicked for the day of destruction; so he is sanctifying his people, and fitting
them for a day of great salvation, by the present judgments, persecutions, and
general calamities which are come, and coming upon the world.

3. The wickedness of the wicked, is grown to a monstrous height, and that is a
sign it will not be long before the deliverer come unto Sion. When righteous
men are more and more righteous, and when wicked men are more and more wicked,
it is a sign that the Lord is coming to finish the Mystery of God, in creating
the new world wherein the righteous should dwell, Rev. 22.11, 12. Mal. 3.13,
14, 15, wherefore if we would know whether this salvation of Israel be near or
no, then we must consider whether the Antichristian Generation have filled up
the measure of their iniquity, collate Genesis 15.16. with Luke 21.24. And truly,
there is reason to think that the iniquity of the Antichristian world is almost
full. For ^hen is sin full, when according to all the dimensions of it, the
measure thereof is filled up, scil. when the breadth, and length, and height,
and depth of sin is fulfilled. And is it not coming to that ^pace at this day?
sin has filled up its breadth, when i^ is become universal. And how does the
iniquity of the Antichristian Generation abound in this respect? Have not some
Lands received (if not the mark) the number of the beasts name, which once had
almost wholly cast him off? Does not Popery spread it self abroad, and prevail
exceedingly? However to be sure, there was a time when all the world wondered
after the beast. And sin has filled up that dimension of its length when it
has been of long continuance. And has not the iniquity of Antichrist been so?
It might be proved, that the Blasphemy ( i. e. the Idolatry) Isa. 65.7.) of
Antichrist has continued above 1200 years. Again, sin has filled up that
dimension of its height when it is grown insolent against heaven, when there is
sinning with an high hand, when hideous blasphemies are spoken against the God
of heaven. Thus must it be immediately before the calling of the Jews, Rev.
16.11, 12. And is it not so at this day? How do the wicked blaspheme God? Do
they not blaspheme prayer, and blaspheme the word? Do they not blaspheme the
Son of God? Again, sin has filled up that dimension of (...) depth, when men
are hellishly bent to do wickedly, when the sins of men are as deep as hell,
when they are (...) of rage and malice against goodness, which is the principal
sin of hell. If we see that the Antichristian party is full of malice against
God, against the Ministers of God, against the Saints of God, then know that
sin is coming to its depth apace: So when the haters of the Lord are not
bettered by judgments, but when the mighty hand of God is lifted up they
trespass yet more against the Lord. These are signs that Antichrist is filling
up his measure of iniquity, and so that the Redemption of Israel hasteneth.

4. We may reason from that great and general expectation which is in the
hearts of the Lords people, that the salvation of Israel is near to be
revealed. It is observable, Vide Hornbeck, contra Iudaeos. l. 3. cap. 1.
that at Christ's first coming there were some that had at that very time great
expectations of his coming. Simeon was one in whose heart God by his spirit,
had put this earnest expectation, Luke 2.25. And besides Simeon, there were
many other gracious souls which were then looking for the consolation of
Israel, verse 38. yea, it was generally expected that Christ would then appear.
Hence the Woman of Samaria said unto our Savior, John 4.25. Messiah comes in
the present Tense, does come; and not in the future Tense, shall come; q. d. We
are now all expecting such a thing as this, the time spoken of by the Prophet
for Messiah coming is fulfilled, and therefore we conclude that now he is
coming; even so when the Lord is appearing to build up Sion (albeit a death may
come upon those expecta^^ons for a while) he will raise up great hopes and
expectations in the hearts of his people touching this matter: And that you see
is strangely come to pass already, though I believe, many that have much
confidence now, will ere long despair of ever seeing that which now they
suppose (but very unreasonably as to the time) they shall see it may be the
next year. Nevertheless it is not for nothing that the Lord has raised such
expectations in the world. And it is good for us from hence to draw a wise and
sober encouragement unto faith and prayer, that the Lord would be pleased to
accomplish this work so much looked for, and hasten it in its season.

5. We may argue from the works of God, that the salvation of Israel is near to
be revealed. The present disposition of divine providence makes it evident,
that God is about some great work. And why may it not be this work, or in order
to preparing things for this great day of Isreal's salvation? Consider well the
workings of providence before this great and notable day which I am speaking
of. There must be wonders in the heavens, and in the earth blood, and fire, and
pillars of smoke, the Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into
blood, Joel 2.30, 31. Now when there have been terrible Comets, and many other
amazing prodigies visible to the world; and when Towns and Cities have been
desolated with fire, and the smoke of their burning has darkened the Sun, and
made the Moon to look as red as blood; has not this Scripture been fulfilled?
Surely these things do declare, that some notable day of the Lord is at hand.
Christ's first coming was signified by Lege Alsted. Cronol. cap. 49.
a Comet, whereupon Caesar enquired of one that went under the notion of a
Prophetess; what should be the meaning of that Comet? and answer was returned,
that there was an Hebrew Child born, ( viz. Christ) that should be the greatest
man that ever was, and that there was a new Religion, ( viz. the Christian
Religion) shortly to be set up in the world. And what if the providential
coming of Christ to destroy Rome, and to convert the Jews, should be signified
by Comets and other prodigies? The ruin of the Jewish state by the Romans had
Vide Joseph. de Bello. Iud. 2.7. cap. 12.
fearful sights to fore-run it, Luke 21.11. And why may not their restoration,
and the great changes which then shall come upon the world, be signified by the
same kind of providence? Add to this, the present shakings and dashings of the
Nations one against another, with that distress which is upon the earth; men's
hearts failing them with expectation of what is coming, and the waves of many
Nations begin to roar and lift up their voice, so must it be when the
Redemption of Israel draws nigh, Luke 21.25, 26, 27, 28. That the Lords name
is near his wondrous works do declare, Psalm. 75.1.

6. The light of those truths which do concern the calling of the Jews, is
wonderfully broken forth of late time. Not long since it seemed very
paradoxical to affirm, that ever there should be a general conversion of the
Jewish Nation: But that truth of late has gained ground much throughout the
world. And albeit there have ever been some amongst the Orthodox that have in
the general Thesis concurred, that such a thing shall be in the appointed
season; yet as to the glory of this day and the happy time which then shall
come and continue unto the Church, there has been little known in many ages
during the reign of Antichrist: Only in these late days, these things have
obtained credit, much more universally than heretofore; And that is a sign that
the time of the end draws on apace, Dan. 12.4, 9. Rev. 22.10.

Prop. 6. Between the inchoation and the consummation of Isreal's deliverance,
there will a considerable space of time intervene.

From the time of Isreal's coming out of Egypt, unto the time of their quiet
possessing the Land of Canaan, there was the space of 46 years. Also the second
Temple was 46 years in building, ( John 2. 20. Ego simpliciter accipio de
tempore quo extrui ab Herod Caeptum erat templum, and ab ipsis fundamentis
instauratum. A primis ab Herod jactis Tempsi fundamentis, ad id momentum quo
istud Christo objiciunt Iudaei, fluxerunt praecise 46. anni. Lud. Capel.
Spicil. p. 60.
or in Herod's repairing of it.) And some conceive that Ezekiel's Temple will be
about 45 years in finishing, because of the difference which is in Daniels
numbers, chap. 12. verse 11, 12. But although I am far from their opinion, who
think those days are to be understood of natural, and not of Prophetical days;
and therefore that they were fulfilled in Sic Iunius, Broughton, Rol^oc,
Po^inus, W^llet, etc.
Antiochus his time) yet I believe that both the 1290, and the 1335 days or
years are past and gone, and that therefore no such conclusion can be grounded
upon that place. Nor would I go about to determine how long this work of
Isreal's salvation shall be in finishing after once it is begun. I love not to
utter things that have not (to my own understanding at least) a solid
foundation upon the Scripture: Only I say in the general, it will be the work
of some years. It may be some of you may think that if this work should now
begin, that then it would be all over within a few Months, or within a year or
two: but you will surely find your selves mistaken, for there are yet diverse
vials to be poured forth before this work be over. Now the pouring forth of a
vial, does take up a considerable space of time: Some assign Sic Author Clavis
Recusae.
the space of six times six ( i. e. 36) years to every vial, Phialae aliquot
saecula sibi poscunt nec pauciora quam december. Cotterius, in Apoc. cap. 20.
others a far larger space of time; but though those principles will not hold,
yet every vial must have some considerable time for its pouring forth. For a
vial is (...). Scapula.
a vessel of large quantity with a narrow mouth; so that if a vial be full, it
must have some time to be poured forth. A vial is not emptied at once in an
instant, but gradually. Therefore inasmuch as there are diverse vials full of
the wrath of God to be poured forth between the inchoation and consummation of
Isreal's deliverance; it is evident, that there must a considerable space of
time intervene between the beginning, and the finishing of this work.

Let us then consider, that there is 1. A preparatory salvation of Israel.
Hence we read of the way of the Kings of the East being prepared, Rev. 16.12.
See also Ezekiel. 37.7. As I prophesied, there was a noise, and behold a shaking,
and the bones came together bone to his bone. When this salvation of Israel
shall begin, it will make a noise, and a sound all the world over, even such a
noise as shall make the Nations stand amzed. The dead bones when they begin to
stir will make a rattling all the world over, and a shaking: As when the Jews
were returned out of Babylon, there was a noise and a shaking, for the
Babylonian Empire was shaken in pieces, and all the earth was moved at the fall
thereof. Even so when the twelve Tribes of Israel shall be saved, Babylon shall
be shaken, the Turkish Empire shall be shaken, the house of Austria shall be
shaken, and other Kingdoms shall be shaken; and this shaking is preparative:
Read the verses following. 2. There is a plenary salvation of Israel. This does
not take place till after the destruction of Ezekiel's Gog and Magog, i. e. the
Turk, Ezekiel. 39.22. And (which will be at the same time) the utter abolition of
the man of sin.

Prop. 7. When once God shall begin this work of Isreal's salvation, it shall be
carried on with speed and irresistible might.

"1. The work will be carried on with speed. And this may well stand with what
before was said. For that which is long in respect of us, considering our hasty
expectations, is in it self speedy, Hab. 2.3. Luke 18.8. All motions when they
come near their center are most swift; As an arrow that is shot out of a bow,
when it comes near unto the earth is most speedy in its motion, so it is here.
Hence it is said, that the Israelites at their return shall even fly, Isay
11.14. Besides the Lord Jesus is eager in his pursuit, when once he is near
unto the possession of his glorious kingdom upon earth: As Satan when he
knows that his time is but short, he rages exceedingly, and does more
mischief than ordinary, so may we say that the Lord Jesus will do more good in
destroying the great enemies of his kingdom, than in the ordinary course of his
providence has been known: So that Christ will do more work, and destroy more
adversaries in a few years in the last times, than in many years in former
days. The heart of Christ does even long to be possessed of his kingdom, when
he sees the time is at hand. Therefore the Lord will hasten this work of
Isreal's salvation in its season, Isa. 60.22. when once the wheel is set a
going, when once the Lord is upon the wing, he will come leaping over the hills
like a Roe upon the mountains.

2. The work shall then be carried on irresistibly.

Heretofore there have been attempts (as hereafter may be said more abundantly)
toward the salvation of Israel which have all ended in miserable
disappointments: But when the appointed time is come (though stops and
seeming-retrograde motions there may be sometimes, that is a usual method of
divine providence) it shall be carried on successfully at last. The Lord will
pluck up the mountains by the roots when they stand in his way, Zech. 4.7. No
enemies shall be able to stand before the saved Tribes of Israel, Numb. 24.8.
Zech. 9.13. For the Lord from heaven will fight for them: As when the Jewish
state was destroyed by the Romans, the Lord did fight against them. And
therefore Titus refused to be crowned for that victory Philostr. lib 6. cap.
14. Joseph. de Bello Iud. l. 7. c. 16.
for (said he) If their God had not fought against them, I could never have
overcome them: So when the Lord shall in mercy return them to the Land of their
fathers again, he will fight for them, Rev. 16.14. Hos. 1.7. Zech. 9.14.

And thus much may suffice for the second thing propounded to be spoken unto in
the Doctrinal discussion of that great truth which we have before us. In the
third place we proceed to inquire into the Reasons of this point. Why the
Tribes of Israel shall be saved? Briefly, there are such reasons as these to be
assigned, why this salvation shall come to pass.

"1. Because of the free rich grace and mercy of God: This was the very reason
why God took the Israelites to be his people at first in the days of old, when
they, and they only were the Militant Church, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. And the same reason
remains still to be given why the Lord will take them to be his people again.
Why did not God cast off the Israelites sooner? certainly they deserved it long
before, but because of his own infinite grace and goodness, the Lord did not of
a long time reject them. So he will not cast them off for ever, for the same
reason: As the justice of God is a ground of the Israelites rejection, Romans
11.22. So his mercy is a ground of their reception into divine favor again.
Hence it is said, that the Lord does this for his own sake, and not for the
sake of any thing in the Israelites themselves, Ezekiel. 20.44. and 36.32.

" R. 2. From the stability of Gods election, 2 Timothy 2.19. Dan. 12.1. It is not
possible that so much as one elect soul should miss of salvation, though all
the deceivers on earth, and all the devils of hell should do their utmost to
destroy such a soul, Matthew. 24.24. John 17.12. Sure then it cannot be that an
elect Nation should miss of salvation. Whence was it that some few of Israel
were saved in the Apostles days, and not others as well as they? This was the
reason, because some belonged to election, which others did not, Romans 11.7. And
this is one reason which the Apostle gives in this Chapter, verse 28. to prove
that a time will come when all Israel shall be saved, viz. because of election.
Consider John 10.16.

" R. 3. Taken from the power of God: This also is another reason given by the
Apostle in this Chapter, to prove that the Israelites shall again be taken into
Covenant with God, notwithstanding their present rejection, because verse 23.
God is able to graff them in again. And that God is able to do this difficult
(and to nature and reason impossible) work, is proved in verse 24. from the
calling of the Gentiles, if (says the Apostle) God has called the Gentiles,
and so contrary to nature graffed that which was wild into the good Olive tree:
Sure then he is able to graff the Israelites, which are the natural branches
into their own Olive tree: But God has called the Gentiles, therefore he is
able to call the Jews again to become his people, therefore this shall be done.

Yea verily, such is the infinite power of Jehovah, that he is able to bring
this mighty work to pass by a beck of his finger. Hence it is said, Zech. 10.8.
I will hiss for them and gather them: The Lord can as easily gather the
dispersed Israelites out of all corners of the earth, as a man can hiss, or
whistle, or call a creature that will come to him with the beck of his hand.
Such is the power of the great God. Alas, there are many in the world that
these things seem incredible unto; but as the Apostle said to them, Acts 26.8.
Why should it be thought a thing incre^ible with you that God should raise the
dead? So I say in this case, why should it be thought a thing incredible, that
God should raise the dead Jews out of the grave of sin and utter darkness, and
that he should breathe the breath of life into those dry and dead bones? Indeed
if the work were to be done by men or Angels, or any creature alone, well might
it be thought a thing incredible: But inasmuch as the great God, to who^
nothing is or can be too hard, (inasmuch as he who has made heaven and earth)
has engaged his omnipotency to bring this work to pass, most certainly it
shall be accomplished in the appointed time.

Reas. 4. That so the divine Prophesies of the Scripture may be fulfilled. It
must needs be that what ever God has spoken by his holy Prophets should be
accomplished, Isa. 44.6. Hence diverse times in the Scripture it is said, that
this and the other thing came to pass, that so that might be fulfilled which
was before spoken by the Prophets. See Matthew. 1.23. and 13.14, 34, 35. and
26.54, 56. Now the Prophets have spoken concerning this salvation of the Tribes
of Israel: This mystery of God has been declared by the Prophets, Rev. 10.7.
Yea the truth is, that all the Prophets which have written since the world
began have spoken more or less concerning this matter; for this you may see an
express place of Scripture, Acts 3.21, 24. And let any man unto whom God has
given understanding, impartially search the writings of the Prophets, and he
shall find that this was their great design, to foretell the glory of Messiah
his kingdom, which will appear after all Israel shall be saved. The truth is,
that there is not any one prophetical book (the book of Jonah is rather an
History than a Prophecy) in all the Scripture, be it in Old Testament or in
New, which does not speak something concerning the salvation of Israel.
Therefore this must needs be brought to pass.

" R. 5. Because of the Covenant of God. This also is another reason used by
the Apostle in this Chapter, to prove that all Israel shall be saved, ver.
27.28. And the strength of that argument lies in this, that the Covenant of
God is everlasting. Hence it is said, verse 25. Blindness is happened unto Israel
but in part, i. e. their blindness is neither universal (for a remnant were
saved in the Apostles days, verse 5.) nor perpetual; for because of Gods
everlasting Covenant, this blindness shall not be everlasting blindness. And if
we observe the Scripture, we shall find, that the salvation of Israel is still
grounded upon Gods Covenant. See Levit. 26.42. Ezekiel. 16.60. Zech. 9.11.

Qui irritum facit foedus Abrahami, Patris nostri, non habebit partem in futuro
saeculo Vide Hospinian. de Orig. Fest. fol. 19. ex R. Maimon. de circumcis.
cap. 3. s. 8.
The Jews have a saying frequently amonst them, That if any one do make void
the Covenant of their Father Abraham, he shall have no share in the good things
of the future world. But what do they l^ss than make void the Covenant of
Abraham, who deny that the Jews shall be converted? And truly shall I say t^
you, that they who make a nothing of the Covenan^ of God with faithful
Ancestors, will see their erro^ if ever they see the Jews converted.

R. 6. Because of the many fervent and faithful prayers which have been put up
unto God for Isreal's salvation. How many of the Saints have prayed in faith for
this? Did not Moses do so* Deuteronomy. 33.7. which prayer of the man of God wa^
indeed in part fulfilled in the return of the Babylonish captivity, but a
further answer thereunto is yet behind. Did not David for this pray in the holy
Ghost, Psalm. 14.7. Oh (says the Psalmist) that the day were come when the
deliverer shall come unto Sion, and all Israel shall be saved! And what shall
we say of Paul's prayer continually, if this were not it? Romans 10.1. And are not
Confer Brightmanni Scholia in Cant. and Mr. Cotton in loc. Leigh Critica Sacra
in verbo. (...).
those words, Can. 6.13. an earnest prayer of Gentil^ Christian Churches for
the conversion of the Jews? In the book of Canticles the Church in general is
signified by the Daughters of Jerusalem, and the Jewish Church in special by
the Shulamite, because of the peace and perfection which shall be in that
Church after the Tribes are converted.

And thus have you heard the reasons of this truth. We come now in the fourth
place to enquire what kind of salvation it is which all the Tribes of Israel
shall partake of?

Answ. They shall partake 1. Of a glorious, 2. A wonderful, 3. A spiritual, 4.
A temporal salvation. Now of these in their order.

1. All Israel shall be saved with a glorious salvation. See Isa. 60.1, 3. and
62.2, 3. and 66.11.

Quest. But in what respects will the salvation of the Tribes of Israel be a
glorious salvation?

Answ. 1. In respect of the place which the Israelites shall again possess,
viz. the Land promised unto their Father Abraham. Some Sic Willetus, Prideux,
Voetius, etc.
that have believed and asserted a general conversion of the Jews, yet have
doubted whether they should ever again possess the Land of their fathers; But
the Scripture is very clear and full for this, that I see not how it can justly
be denied or questioned. See Isa. 61.4. Ier. 30.3. Ezekiel. 36.33, 34, 35. And
Zech. 12.6. " Jerusalem shall be inhabited again in her own place, even in
Jerusalem, which must not be restrained unto the return from the Babylonian
captivity, for it must be in that great day (even the time of Messiah) spoken
of verse 3, 4, 8, 11. Besides, in the former Chapter, the crucifying of Christ,
and the rejection of the Jewish Nation was prophesied of. Now after this must
Jerusalem be inhabited again. Consider also Chap. 14. verse 9, 10, 11. where
you will find, that when the time comes (which is surely yet to come) that
there shall be one Lord, and his name one; Jerusalem shall be again inhabited.

Now in this respect Isreal's salvation may well be esteemed glorious, for the
Land of Judah is in Scripture language a glorious Land, as being indeed a Type
of heaven, the place of everlasting glory. See Dan. 11.41, 45. and 8.9. with
Ezekiel. 20.6, 15. Isa. 36.17. Mal. 3.12.

Secondly, the salvation of Israel will be glorious in respect of the multitude
of them which shall be saved: The Israelites shall come flocking in mavelous
multitudes, when this gloriou^ day is come. See Ier. 31.8. Ezekiel. 36.38. and
37.10. and 43.2.

And this is evident, if we consider that the Iew^ and Israelites are scattered
even throughout the whole world more or less, and that many parts of the earth
do abound with them, Deuteronomy. 28.64. Isa. 43.5, 6. There are many Israelites in
Europe. Some Viz. Anno Dom. 1211. le^e R. Abrabaneel in Isa. ^6. Hornbeck
Prolog. in Iudae. page 6.
write that at one time there were driven out of Spain as many Jews as came out
of Egypt in the days of Moses, and Confer ^undem ibid.
that there were at another time twice as many Jews expelled France as there
came Israelites out of Egypt in the days of old. Salonica is full of none but
Jews See Lithgows Travels p. 115, 116.
where they do (and no where else in the world do they so) if reports of
Travelers may be credited, speak Hebrew as their natural language. And there
are that affirm Purchase Pilgr. l. 1. chapter 13. p. 119.
that in those two Cities of Salonica (called of old, an^ in the Scripture
Thessalonica) and Constantinople there have inhabited sixteen hundred thousand
Israelites. And in that one City of Rome have been numbered sometimes ten,
sometimes twenty thousand Jews. And Africa Vi^^ Leo. Afric. lib. 2. c. ^.6. etc.
does more abound with Israelites than Europe. But especially it is true
concerning Asia, that most numerous multitudes of Israelites are there. Vide
B^^hani Geogr. Sacr. l. 3. c. 1^. p. 220.
In Media there are exceeding many. Josephus Antiq. l. 11. c. 5.
says, that in his time the ten Tribes were known to be beyond Euphrates in
vast and innumerable companies. Hence Agrippa in that oration which he made to
the Jews De Bello Iud. l. 2. c. 16.
to dissuade them from rebelling against the Roman Empire, tells them (as
Josephus relates the story) that their brethren beyond Euphrates would not
help them. And Consule Hierom. in Joel 3.6. vide quoque Magdeb. Cent. 4. p.
1457.
Ierom (who lived 400 years after Christ) says, that in his time the ten
Tribes were known to be in Media, whither the Scripture says they were
transported in the Assyrian captivity, 2 Kings 17.6. And R. Benjamin in Iti^^r.
Confer Purchase ubi supr. p. 123.
another that lived long after Ierom, says, that traveling those parts, he
saw numerous multitudes of Israelites, being the posterity of the ten Tribes,
and that they were distinguished by their Tribes, the Tribe of Reube^ being in
such a place, the Tribe of Gad in such a place, etc. So that if one may believe
a Jew, the body of the ten Tribes still remains about those parts where the
King of Assyria had placed them. Likewise Mornae de ver. Rel. Christ. c. 26. p.
423.
Tartaria does abound with Israelites. Mornae ibid. Boterus Relat 2. Atque
Anonymus quem habeo M. SS. multis id argumentis conatur probare.
Some think that the Tartars are the ten Tribes: But Purchase l. supr. citato.
p. ^20. Fuller Miscel. l. 2. cap. 6. Vo^t. Disp. part. 2. p. 134, 144, 147,
681. ubi citat Besoldum and alios.
others upon better grounds affirm the contrary, that the Tartars are not the
progeny of the ten Tribes, yet many Israelites there are scattered amongst
them. And many of them are in China. Hence some learned Sic Iunius in loc. and
Men. Ben. Israel in spe. p. 48. Sic etiam Heurnius de legate. Evan. c. 4. p. 135.
men are of opinion, that by the Land of Sinim, Isa, 49.12. is meant China. But
although I think not so, for Sinim there may well be interpreted (according to
the exact scope of that place, declaring a gathering of Israelites out of the
four corners of the earth) as signifying the South, and therefore the word may
well intimate a place Sic interpretantur R. Abenezra, and Saadias apud
Kimchium. Bochartus in lib. ante citato. p. 312, 346, 359. Engl. Annot.
in Egypt called Sin) yet it is true, that many Israelites are dispersed in
those parts. In a word, it is justly believed, that if all the Israelites which
be in the world were Si Iudaeos spectemus manifesta veleris benedictionis
ves^igi^ in illi^ conspici possunt, maxim quoad numerasam and incredibilem
multitudinem, qua omnes alias gentes quotquot in toto terrarum orb sunt long
superant. Gualt. in Romans p. 159. confer etiam Bezam in Romans 11.25.
together, they would make the greatest Nation upon the whole earth. Hence the
Scripture (...) intimates (for why should we unnecessarily refuse literal
interpretations?) that at the return of Israel, the Land of their Fathers will
be too little for them, such will the multitude of their number be, and that
therefore they must have other Countries adjoining for their possession.
Consider Zech. 10.10. Isa. 49.19, 20. and 54.2, 3. Numb. 24.17, 18. Obad. 19.

3. The salvation of Israel will be glorious, in respect of the continuance of
their happiness, when once this great work is brought unto perfection.

Justly how long this glorious day shall continue, is not for us to say, for
therein the Scripture is silent; Only it is evident, that it will be for
Generations one after another. If you look into that place in the Prophet, from
whence the Apostle takes the words of my Text ( viz. Isa. 59.20, 21.) you will
see that the saved state of Israel must continue at least for three
Generations. See also Ezekiel. 37.25. yea this glory will continue for many
Generations, Isa. 60.15. Hence the new heavens and the new earth, which God
will create when the salvation of all Israel shall be consummate, is said (not
to be for a while, and so to pass away, but) to remain before him, Isa. 66.22.
Yea this glorious state and condition of Israel is said to l^st for ever,
partly because they shall never more be brought into the hands of any
oppressors, and partly because this their glory will be of very long
continuance, Joel 3.20.

4. This salvation of the Tribes of Israel will be glorious unto them, inasmuch
as the Israelitish Nation shall then be acknowledged and respected in the world
above any other Nation or people. Consider Zech. 8.22, 23. and 9.16. Ier. 22.8.
Isa. 61.5, 9. and 14.1, 2. Zeph. 3. last. Mic. 4.8. Ezekiel. 16.61.

And there is good reason why it should be thus, 1. Because they are as it were
the Eldest Brother, Luke 15.25. Exodus 4.22. Genesis 9.27. The Jews were the people
of God before the Gentiles. There was a time when they were the only Church
upon earth, Amos 3.2. John 4.22. So that the Gentile-Church which now is, is
surrogate Israel, Romans 11.17. and is therefore often called Israel in the book
of Revelation. It is also observable, that the first Christian Church which
ever was in the world did consist wholly of Jews, Romans 1.16. Matthew. 10.5, 6.
Acts 13.46. and 1.15.

2. Because the Messiah, the Lord Jesus Christ the Savior of the world
according to his humane nature, was an Israelite, Genesis 12.3. Heb. 3.16. And of
the Tribe of Judah, Heb. 7.14. It is evident (says the Apostle) that our Lord
sprang out of Judah: Although now the Jews have raised great controversies
about the Genealogy of Christ, yet in those days it was so manifest that Jesus
of Nazareth was sprung from Judah, that no Jews (although such as denied that
Jesus was the Christ) could ever deny that he came of the Tribe of Judah;
Therefore the Apostle says, that it is evident, our Lord came of Judah, q. d.
no man doubts of that. For Messiah came from the house of David, Acts 2.30.
therefore he was of the Tribe of Judah: And this is manifest, if we compare
Matthews and Lukes Genealogy of Christ. Mary the Mother of Christ was of the
house of David. Eli was Marys natural father, for he was Joseph's legal Father
(or Father-in-law) Luke 2.23. which is evident, because Jacob was Joseph's
natural Father, Matthew. 1.16. Therefore Mary being Elie's Daughter, was
naturally descended from the line and loins of David; Therefore Christ sprang
of Judah. It is true indeed, that Christ descended from Ruth, who was a
Moabitess, to signify that Gentiles should by him be saved as well as Jews,
but the rest of his Predecessors were Israelites. Now this is the greatest
thing which the Jews have to glory in, and that which makes the Israelitish
Nation to be above others desirable, Hag. 2.7. Therefore the Apostle speaking
of the privileges and glories which the Israelites had above other people,
mentions this in the last place, as being more than all other things that may
be said or thought of, Romans 9.5. As it is true, that the humane nature is
exalted above the Angelical nature in respect of Christ, Ephesians. 1.20, 21. Col.
1.15. because it may be said that Christ is a man, but not that Christ is (in
respect of nature) an Angel; So, in respect of Christ, the Jewish Nation is
exalted above every Nation, because it may be said that Christ was an
Israelite, but not that he was of any other Nation.

5. This salvation of Israel will be glorious inasmuch as the Lord Jesus Christ
shall then possess his Davidical kingdom. If we search the Scriptures, we shall
find that there is a threefold kingdom of Christ. 1. Providential, whereby he
governs the world, in respect whereof he is called the King of Nations, Jer.
10.7. See Matthew. 28.18. John 5.27. 2. Spiritual, in respect whereof he is
styled the King of Saints, Rev. 15.3. and this is either. 1. Internal in the
souls, hearts and consciences of men, and is very fitly termed the kingdom of
grace, Col. 1.13. Romans 14.17. or 2. External, i. e. Ecclesiastical, under this
consideration comes the kingdom of Ordinances. Christ, as King and Head of his
Church, has appoi^^^d a Government and Ordinances therein. Thus it is said,
Acts 1.3. that the Lord after he was risen, appearing to his Disciples, spoke
to them of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God, part of the meaning of
which Scripture may well be, That Vide Parker de Polit. Eccles. lib. 2. cap.
42. Sect. 7.
Christ did then instruct his Disciples concerning the Order and Government of
his Church, what Officers, what Seals, what Censures, etc. he would have
observed therein: But besides these, there is 3. See Mr. Strong's Sermon on
Romans 11.26.
Christ's Davidical kingdom: Of this we read Luke 1.32, 33. the Lord God will
give him the Throne of his father David, and he shall reign over the house of
Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no end: compare the place,
and consider it with Isa. 9.7. Ier. 13.13. and 29.16. and 36.30. Surely the
Throne of David denotes more than an Internal or Ecclesiastical kingdom: Now
this Davidical kingdom shall Christ possess after the conversion of the Jews,
and reunion of all the Tribes. Hence the battle spoken of under the 6th. vial,
which prepares the way for the Kings of the East, is said to be at Armageddon,
Rev. 16.16. in which words amongst other things there may be See Mr. Cotton on
the 6th. vial.
an allusion unto that battle wherein Saul was slain, by means whereof, way was
made for David to possess his kingdom, even so after the battle of Armageddon
shall be fought and finished, way will be made for the Lord Jesus Christ to
possess his Davidical kingdom. See Ezekiel. 21.27. and 34.23, 24. and 37.24, 25.
Hos. 1. last, and 3. last. And of this very kingdom does Obadiah prophecy,
verse 21. when he says, the kingdom shall become the Lords, then will that
saying be fulfiled indeed, that the Lord of hosts shall reign in mount Sion,
and in Jerusalem, and before his ancient people gloriously, Isa. 24.23.

6. This salvation will be glorious, inasmuch as thereby great advantage will
come unto the Gentiles. They shall hold out the sweet breasts of
Gospel Ordinances in such power and glory as shall be greatly to the
satisfaction of elect Gentiles, Isa. 66.10, 11. Some Sic Gualter ubi supra, and
Danaeus in Aug. de Haeres. c. 97. in fine* Plenitudo gentium] i. e. cacitas
erit Israeli donec numerus eorum qui ex gentibus credituri sunt Plene
compleatur intretque in ovile Christi. Com. A Lapide in Romans 11.25.
indeed have thought, that as when the Gentiles were called, the Jews were
rejected, so when the Jews shall be recalled, that the Gentiles shall be
rejected: And it is a terrible truth, that the Apostate Antichristian Gentiles
shall then be rejected and destroyed, even whole Kingdoms and Nations together,
but otherwise, not judgment, but great and glorious mercy shall redound unto
Gentiles by the conversion of the Jews, Romans 11.30, 31. And the Apostle says,
if the world ( i. e. the Gentiles, who are often called the world in Scripture,
in contradistinction to the Jews, who only were the Church formerly) gained by
the fall of the Jews, surely the Gentile world shall much more gain by their
return, verse 12. And the truth of this is evident, 1. Because when the blessed
time is come that all Israel shall be saved, a world of unconverted Gentiles
shall be brought home unto God also, Isa. 2.3. and 60.5. Zech. 2.11. Many
Nations shall be joined to the Lord in that day, and shall be his people: So
Chap. 8.22. and verse 23. It is said that ten men (i. e. December interdum
accipitur pro multis; quia denarius est absolutus and perfectus numerus,
unitatum ut maxima ita and fini^. etc. Shindl. Lexic. Pent. p. 1404.1405.
(...). Vide quae habet Chr. Chartwright in Genesis 31.7. and authors ab eo
citatos.
many Genesis 31.41. Job 19.3. Eccles. 7.19.) Out of all languages shall take hold
of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, we will go with you, for we have
heard that God is with you. Although it be certain that God will preserve an
holy seed for a Church upon earth, (...) converting work will not go forward so
as were to be desired, till the time come when all Israel shall be saved, and
then will converting work go on gloriously all the world over, even amongst
Indians and Infidels, and such as never heard of the name of Jesus. See Ezekiel.
16.53, 55. When I shall bring again the captivity of Sodom and her daughters,
and the captivity of Samaria and her daughters, then will I bring again the
captivity of thy daughters in the midst of them: What now is the meaning of
this Scripture? Is it that Sodom should ever be dwelt in again? No, for God
has made it a perpetual desolation, turning the place into a mare mortuum, to
be as it were a standing Type of that lake which burns with fire and
brmstone, which is the second death: As of old in the days of the first Temple,
Hell was called Heb. (...). Septuag. V. Mede in loc.
the place of Giants (Prove. 21.16.) from that fearful destruction which came
upon the old world, and called Tophet and Gehenna from the slaughter of the
Assyrians, by the Angel in the valley of the Son of Hinnom, so Hell is called a
lake of fire and brimstone in allusion to Sodoms destruction. Sure then the
meaning of the place is not, that ever Sodom shall be restored again; Is it
then that the Jews shall never be converted? No, for that is contrary to more
than a thousand Scriptures: But by Sodom, the Gentiles may be signified, and by
Samaria the ten Tribes; so that the meaning may be, that when the Lord will
have mercy on the Jews, he will also have mercy on the Gentiles, and on the ten
Tribes. Therefore Ezekiel and Paul do very well agree; for Paul says, that
when all Israel is saved, a fullness of the Gentiles shall come in; And Ezekiel
says, that when Sodom shall be brought out of the captivity of Satan and
powers of darkness, then shall the Jews have an happy and glorious day. Gentile
Nations will be so affected with the power of God appearing in the conversion
and restitution of the Jews, as that they will thereupon become the Lords
people, Ier. 16.19. And how glorious will this be? if the conversion of one
soul causes joy in heaven, Luke 15.7, 24. certainly it will be a glorious day
when so many thousands and thousands of souls; yea, whole Nations of men shall
be converted to God by Jesus Christ.

2. The salvation of Israel will be advantageous, not only to the unconverted
amongst elect Gentiles, but also to them which are already converted.

The news of the Jews conversion will put life into all the Churches upon
earth, Romans 11.^5. It will be (unto the Gentiles) as life from the dead. For
Gentile Churches shall be enlightened, and therefore enlivened from Jewish
Churches. Then Cum Elias venerit, solvet nodos.
shall many dark and difficult questions be resolved, which at present cause
sad thoughts of heart, Rev. 21.24. Ezekiel. 43.11. Isa. 2.3.

7. Upon the salvation of all Israel there will follow a reformation of all
things, there will be a See Mr. Strong's Sermon on Isa. 2. p. 648. Universi
Fabrica liberabitur a servitute corruptionis, and restituetur nativa suae
integritati and pulchritudini, cum plenitudo temporis advenerit juxta illud,
coelos novos and terram novam, etc. Vide quae habet nosset Davenantius in
Colos. 1.20.
glorious renewall of the whole Universe.

I know there have been many foolish dreams about the renewal of the universe,
the Platonical year, etc. but doubtless the finger of Satan has been deep
therein, that so the glory of these truths might be unknown. I say then, it is
an holy truth, that after the salvation of Israel is consummate, the state and
face of things will be quite altered through the world. Hence it is said, Rev.
21.1. That when New Jerusalem comes down from heaven, there shall be no more
Sea: i. e. either there shall be no more corruptions in Religion, or (which
interpetation suiteth with the Prophetical notion of Sea) the meaning is, that
there will be no more such troubles and combustions, motions and commotions,
dreadful shakings and confusions, as shall be in the world a little before the
Jews conversion; but all things shall be quiet, and and calm, and peaceable,
and days of glorious tranquillity throughout the earth. Hence it is said in the
same verse, that there shall be a new heaven, and a new earth: i. e. a new
state and face of the world. As this present state of the world is called a new
world in respect of that which was before the flood, which is termed the old
world, so the state of things after the consummation of Isreal's salvation, may
in respect of this present state of the world be termed, a new world; for the
world will then as far excel (and more) what the world now is, as the world at
present does come short of what it was before the flood. Hence the Apostle
Peter says, 2 Ep. chap. 3. ver. 13. we, according to his promise, expect a new
heaven and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness. This cannot be meant
merely of the new Gospel Dispensation, because that was already come, whereas
the Apostle speaks of this as future, as a thing under expectation, and not
under present fruition: Nor can it be meant of the state of glory in heaven,
because the Apostle says, according to his promise, which promise is in Isa.
65.17. and that speaks expressly concerning a state here upon earth. Consider
verse 21. Therefore the creation of the new heaven and earth, notes a glorious
renewal of this inferior world; and therefore it is said, Rev. 21.5. Behold I
make all things new: Now many times things are altered for the worse, and not
for the better; seldom has there been any great reformation in the Church, but
a sad after-clap has come, that so that reformation might be sealed with
suffering: After that Paganry was overthrown by Constantine, then came a
Julian, who set it up again: And, you know that in our own Nation after that
Popery was pulled down by our English Josiah (as he is usually and deservedly
called) there came dark and bloody Marian days, wherein Popery had another turn
like the blaze of a snuff a little before utter extinction, but when Isreal's
salvation is consummate, the alteration will be no more for the worse, but for
the better only. Now the truth of this will be evident, if you consider that
those two principal things which put all the world out of order, shall then
cease. For 1. One thing which puts all the world out of order is contention and
division, Iam. 3.16. But when once the salvation of Israel is accomplished, the
contentions and bitter strifes of men will be at an end. For the Israelites
shall have unity and unanimity amongst themselves, Isa. 11.13. Ier. 32.39. Nor
shall there be such schisms and divisions amongst Gentile Churches as hitherto
has been, to the infinite scan^al of Christian Religion. Before Popery got up,
Christians were miserably divided amongst themselves, that Pagans were wont to
deride them upon their public Theaters for their divisions and contentions one
with another. And, since the Reformation, what woeful and most sinful
heart-burnings have there been amongst the professors of a more pure Religion.
Though the Reformation in respect of purity of Doctrine has been a Sea of
glass, yet in respect of contentions (as well as persecutions from adversaries)
amongst themselves, it has been mingled with fire, Rev. 15.2. But after
Isreal's salvation there will be no more of this; For there shall be one Lord,
and his name one, and that over all the earth, Zech. 14.9. one shall not say, I
am a Calvinist, and another I am a Lutheran, another I am th^s, and another I
am that; Such carnal schisms shall then be at an end. 2. Another thing which
brings confusion upon the face of the world, is that desolating sin of
persecution. Observe the Scripture, and you shall find, that when God has
brought desolating and astonishing plagues upon the earth, it has been chiefly
for the sin of persecution. Hence come overturnings, overturnings,
overturnings, hence come Wars, Plagues, Famines, Fires, and eternal
desolations. What was that sin which ruined the four Monarchies? It was the sin
of persecution. See Ier. 50.17, 18. Rev. 6.9, 12, 13, 14. And what was that sin
which brought like a whirlwind of the Lord, destruction upon the Jewish state
and Nation, and that long, and lasting, and most doleful ruin which continues
to this day? It was because they persecuted his Saints, and stopped (...)
mouths of his messengers, 1 These. 2. (...), 16. But after Isreal's salvation is
consummate, (...) more persecution shall be heard of in the world, no not for a
thousand years together. Nay, the Saints shall never more be delivered into the
hands of persecutors after this glorious day, Ezekiel. 28.24. and 45.8. The Jews
of old were not to have any fire upon the Sabbath day, which might singnifie
unto us, that, in that glorious Sabbatism, that rest for the people of God,
which shall one day be upon this earth, there will be freedom from fires of
contention and persecution* And this is manifest 1. Because persecution is from
the Devil. It is he that stirs up wicked instruments to molest the Servants
of God for Righteousness sake, Rev. 2.10. 1 These. 2.18. Now Satan must be bound
for a thousand years, Rev. 20.1, 2, 3. "2. Because persecution is from
Antichrist. The Devil and the Pope are the two great Authors of persecution.
Look into the world, and you shall find, that where Saints are persecuted (i.
e.) suffer for Righteousness) it is caused by Antichrist, or some Limb or Horn
of Antichrist: But Antichrist shall be utterly destroyed (as has been showed)
when the salvation of Israel shall be consummate. Therefore when the beast
shall be slain, and his body given unto the burning flame, there will be no
more destruction in all the Lords holy mountain.

Thus have you heard the first particular, as to the kind and manner of Isreal's
salvation, viz. that it will be glorious.

Secondly, the salvation of all the Tribes of Israel will be wonderful as well
as glorious. And although it be true that what has been said concerning the
glory of this day, does sufficiently evince that it will be a wonderful day,
nevertheless because I would not multiply too many particulars under one
general head, therefore for methods sake, I choose to mention this, as a
distinct head from the former. And the truth of this is further evident; 1.
Because the Scripture does plainly express as much as this comes to. scil.
that the day of Isreal's salvation will be a wonderful day, Joel 2.26. You shall
praise the name of the Lord your God that has dealt wondrously with you, and
verse 30. I will show wonders says God, speaking concerning this very time of
Isreal's conversion and salvation. Hence that day is called a great day, because
God will then do great and wonderful things, such as the like shall not be
again, Hos. 1. last, great shall be the day of Iezreel: By the day of Iezreel,
is meant especially the day when the twelve Tribes of Israel shall be saved.
Now this is said to be a great day, because then God will take unto himself his
great power, and show the greatness of his being, and holy Attributes, in
working great deliverances, and in destroying great enemies, and so as to cause
great admiration in the world. And hence also this salvation of Israel is
called a Mystery, as in the verse before my Text, I show you (says the
Apostle) a Mystery, that blindness is in part happened to Israel, till the
fullness of the Gentiles be come in, and so all Israel shall be saved. So that
the mystery which the Apostle speaks of is not only (as some have restrained
the words) that blindness is happened to Israel; Albeit that is indeed a very
mysterious thing, that they, which were once the people, and the only people of
God, should be rejected by him for so long a time, well might the Apostle, even
in that respect break forth into such an holy ecstasy and admiration, saying, O
the depth both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how are his judgments
unsearchable, and his ways past finding out? but that is not all the mystery; It
is likewise a wonderful mystery, that this blindness, which is happened to
Israel, should only be a partial, and not an eternal blindness, that this
blindness should last no longer than till the Gentiles have fulfilled their
time; And that then all Israel should be saved: This is the wonder of wonders.
As the conversion of the Gentiles was a mystery made known unto the Jews, Ephesians.
3.9. So the conversion of the Jews is a mystery made known unto the Gentiles;
yea, it is a most excellent admirable mystery; therefore it is called the
mystery of God, Rev. 10.7. When the seventh Angel shall sound the Trumpet, the
mystery of God shall be fulfilled: The mystery of God in that place may note
the reversion of the Children of Israel unto the Land of their Fathers, and
their conversion, together with the restoration of all things to their first
glory. Now, why is it called, the mystery of God? Is not this one reason of it,
to signify unto us the divineness, and admirable excellency of the mystery?
It Is an usual Hebraism in the Scripture to express a thing that is
superlatively excellent and admirable by the name of God. Thus we read of harps
of God, and mountains of God, and Cedars of God: i. e. very excellent ones, so
the mystery of God, i. e. a most excellent mystery. And therefore this
salvation will be wonderful. For a mystery is as much as to say, Mysterium est
sacrum secretum occultam havens intelligentiam. Vide Voet. disp. de Gentisism.
p. 642. Origo Vocabuli Hebraica est. (...) est ocultare, und^ (...) quasi res
occulta. Drusius. vide Ama^a Antib. Bib. l. 3.
a divine wonderful secret, such a wonderful secret, that the knowledge thereof
would not be had amongst the sons of men, were it not for divine extraordinary
revelation of the spirit: Therefore the Incarnat^on of the Son of God is called
a mystery, 1 Timothy 3.16. because i^ is a thing unknown to nature: men that have
nothing but the Law of Nature, never thought of such a thing: And for the same
reason the Resurrection of the body is called a mystery, 1 Cor. 15.51. Behold
(says the Apostle, speaking concerning the Resurr^ction of the body) I show
you a mystery: And why a mystery, but because it is such a wonderful secret,
that, had it not been for divine Revelation, men had been wholly ignorant
thereof. I know some Sic Plato, Zoroastres, Oracula Sybillina, Mahumadistae in
Alcorano, etc.
heathen writers have spoken concerning the Resurrection of the body, but then
doubtless they had that knowledge from Quod autem Resurrectio ^it actu futura,
per rationem aliqua^ naturalem no^ potest cer^o demonstrari; nec a priore nec a
posteriore, sed proprie est de fide. Ames. Theol. l. 1. c. 41. Th. 14. Maxim
verisimile est Platonem and alios Philosoph^s nonnulla Mosis scripta logisse,
unde rerum divinaram notitiam hauserunt. Hinc illud Numenius (quod profert
Clem. Alex. l. 1. Strom.) (...). Vid. Just. Mart. Orat. Paran. p. 17.
something else, than from the book of nature. Now thus may we say of the
conversion of the twelve Tribes, that men had never once imagined, that such a
thing should come to pass, had not the word and spirit of God revealed it.

2. It is a wonderful thing, that ever the Israelitish Nation should be
preserved in the world, through so many and stupendous changes as have
attended that afflicted Nation. The truth is, that never any Nation upon earth
was under so dreadful an hand of God, so sore, and of so long continuance, as
the Jewish Nation has been, and is: This and more is affirmed by our Savior,
Matt. 24.21. For there shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the
beginning of the world to this time; no, nor ever shall be: So that this last
and most grievous tribulation of the Jewish Nation. It is not only the greatest
calamity that ever did befall any Nation since the world began, but the greatest
that ever shall befall any people to the worlds end, that indeed one might
wonder that ever the Nation should be upheld in being in the midst of such
wasting and woeful judgments; Therefore it is added, verse 22. Except those days
should be shortened, no flesh should be saved; but for the elects sake those
days shall be shortened: The meaning is, that such direful vengeance and wrath
will befall the Jewish Nation, that were it not that there is an elect seed to
proceed out of their Loins in due time to be called, that whole carnal Nation
would be utterly destroyed. Consider Isa. 65.8. Besides, there never was any
Nation guilty of such prodigious wickedness as the Jewish Nation has been
guilty of, whereby they have infinitely provoked the most high to cast and cut
them off for ever.

I remember a writer of their own Josephus of Wars of Jews. lib.
says, That at the time when the Romans came and destroyed Jerusalem, the
people were so wicked, that he does believe (he says) that if the Romans had
not come to lay them desolate, God would have sent fire down from heaven to
have consumed them, as he did Sodom and Gomorrah. But why speak I of Sodom and
Gomorrah? for the wickedness of Sodom was not comparable, to the wickedness of
the Jews. Nay it is not possible for any creature, no not for the Devils
themselves to be guilty of a greater wickedness, than the whole Nation of the
Jews was guilty of, when they rejected and crucified the Lord of life and
glory. And yet for all this (which is a wonderful thing) the providence of God
has so ordered, that this people does not cease to be a Nation, no, nor ever
shall do. We may therefore say, that concerning the Jewish Nation, which we
cannot positively and infalliby affirm of any other particular Nation under
heaven. scil. that it shall continue in being to the end of the world, Ier.
31.36. Thus says the Lord that gives the Ordinances of the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, if these Ordinances depart from before me says the Lord, then the seed
of Israel shall cease from being a Nation before me for ever: The meaning is,
that they shall never cease to be a Nation as long as the Sun and Moon
endures, as long as heaven and earth remain undisolved, as long as the frame
of nature is kept from ruin: And this I take to be the genuine Interpretation
of those words, Matthew. 24.34. Verily I say unto you, that this Nation shall not
pass till all these things be fulfilled: (...) pro gente usurpatur Matthew.
24.34. Leigh Crit. Sacr. atque sic Medus noster, im^ vero Pareus (...) vertunt.
Sic Beza in Mat. 11.16. Piscator in Matthew. 23.36. Ac revera notum est (...)
apud Hellenistas Nationem significare. Consule Brunfelsium, Aretium, and inter
criticos Vatablum in loc. and Winkelmanni Coment. in Marc. 13. p. 415. Optima
est sententia Lutheri, Bakii, etc. quod Christus docere voluerit, Iudaeos, in
vastatione Ierusolomo^um, non esse totaliter dele^dos, sed ad consummationem
saeculi perdarat^ros. Friedlib. in Har^. Evang. obser. p. 172.
I choose rather to read the words, this Nation, than as it is in our
Translation, this Generation, because the Greek word (...) properly signifies
a Nation, and is so rendered in other places, as Phil. 2.15. Be without rebuke
in the midst of a perverse Nation, the Greek word is (...), the same which in
the place mentioned in Matthew, is translated Generation. Besides, the scope of
our Savior seems to be to prevent an objection which might arise in the
hearts of his Disciples, for they might well say within themselves: But if such
fearful and fatal calamity must come upon the Jews, what then will become of
the poor Nation ^ will not our Nation then be brought to an anihilating
confusion? No says Christ, all that misery which you have heard of shall come
upon the Jews, and after this, the son of man shall appear unto their
conversion: And after this all the elect of God shall be called, and gathered
together unto Christ, that are in the four quarters of the earth, Verily I say
unto you, all this shall be before the Jewish Nation shall cease to be a
Nation. Now this is wonderful!

3. It is evident, that this salvation of Israel will be wonderful, because men
are so unapt to believe it. The truth is, that there is a natural aversness in
the hearts of sinful men from giving due respect and credence to prophetical
Scripture; such is the lamentable corruption of men's nature, that they are more
apt to be taken with fond, foolish, false prophesies that have nothing of a
divine inspiration in them, than with the blessed and holy prophesies contained
in the Scriptures of truth, Luke 24.25. He said unto them, O fools, and slow of
heart to believe all that the Prophets have spoken! So that even the Disciples
of Christ may be slow of heart to believe the things spoken by the Prophets.
Yea, I am persuaded that it is one of the greatest sins of many that truly fear
God, that they are so slow and negligent in searching into the things spoken by
the Prophets. Now this salvation of Israel is a principal thing spoken of by
the Prophets: Yea, all the Prophets have said something concerning this very
thing; therefore men are slow to believe here. We may say concerning the
salvation of the Jewish Nation, as was said of their destruction by the
Caldeans, Hab. 1.5. Behold ye among the heathen, and regard and wonder
marvellously, for I will work a work in your days, which you will not believe
though it ^e told you. Even so when the salvation of Israel is come out of
Sion, the Lord will work such a work as that the Gentile Nations shall wonder
marvellously; yea, it will be such, that men will not believe it though they be
told of it beforehand, and told of it too from the word of the Lord.

As the Jews were very slow in believing the conversion of the Gentiles, Acts
10.45. They of the circumcision were astonished because that on the Gentiles
also was poured the gift of the holy Ghost: what? that the spirit of grace
should be given to the Gentiles, it was wonderful, even to astonishment. See
also chap. 11. ver. 18. When they heard these things, they glorified God,
saying, Then also has God granted to the Gentiles repentance unto life, q. d.
here is a strange thing indeed come to pass, here is such a thing as we little
imagined, but men ever thought the contrary; what? that the Gentiles should
have repentance to life given them. So the truth is, that Gentiles are too slow
to believe the conversion of the Jews. Some there are that will not so much as
believe the thing, that ever such a thing shall come to pass whilst the world
stands. Others there are that do believe the thing, but as to the manner of
it, and that glory which shall follow, there they are at a stand, and know not
how to believe; others again believe both that the thing will be, and also that
it will be a very glorious day, but as to the time when this shall be, they are
exceedingly in the dark, they cannot think that it will be so soon, as most
certainly it will be: The time surely draws on apace (as has been showed)
and yet there are that do not believe that it will be these many score; nay,
some hundreds of years. Thus are men, one way and another way, dis-believing
concerning this great truth. Hence it is that so much is spoken of this matter
in the holy Scriptures. I have many times thought on it with admiration that
there is not any one thing in all the word of God more abundantly witnessed
unto than this truth, that all Israel shall be saved: What should be the reason
of that? doubtless there are diverse reasons for it; one is, because the Lord
would not, by any means have his people ignorant of this great truth: Therefore
the Apostle says, Brethren I would not have you ignorant that blindness is
happened to Israel, only till the Gentiles have fulfilled their times, and that
then all Israel shall be saved; men are apt to think with themselves it is no
great matter, though they be ignorant in such truths as these are, as being
truths of a lesser concernment, and the men of the world are ready to think
with themselves, what should they trouble themselves so about the conversion of
the Jews? But now God would not have such a spirit as that to be in his people;
therefore the Lord lays wait upon this point, and comes over and over with
it many an hundred time by his spirit in the mouths of his Prophets. Again,
another reason why there is so much said in the Scripture concerning this
salvation of Israel, may be, because it is that which men are most unapt to
believe, I cannot think the spirit of God would so often inculcate this truth,
if there were not such a reason as that for it: And why, think you, are men so
unapt to believe this truth? but because of the strangeness and wonder that is
in it; It is a thing beyond humane sense and reason.

4. It is evident, that the salvation of Israel will be wonderful, if we
compare it with those former deliverances which in the days of old have been
vouchsafed unto the Tribes of Israel. It is indeed true, that God has in
former times bestowed more eminent and wonderful salvations upon the
Israelitish Nation that upon any Nation in the world, Psalm. 147.20. He has not
dealt so with any Nation. It is true, in respect of deliverances and salvations
which were vouchsafed unto them, as well as in respect of the Covenant, and
Word, and Ordinances of God which were bestowed on them, that God dealt not so
with any Nation as with the Hebrew Nation; nevertheless, this salvation which
we are now speaking of as yet to come, will be more wonderful than any of those
former which heretofore have been. That deliverance of the Jews by Cyrus out of
Babylon, was very wonderful, yet nothing so wonderful as this will be, as is
evident, because that was but a Type of this, and therefore it is, that in many
places in the Scripture, the very same expressions are used to signify both
that deliverance out of Babylon, and this which is to come; so the Vision of
the dry bones in Ezekiel does firstly refer to the Jews captivated in Babylon,
but principally to the forlorn estate of the Jews at this day, and the like may
be said concerning many passages in other of the Prophets, that they do firstly
concern the Babylonian condition of the Jews, but lastly their present
condition; but because that deliverance was a Type of this, therefore this will
be the more eminent and wonderful, for the Type must needs come short of the
Antitype.

Again, when the Children of Israel were brought up out of Egypt, it was a very
wonderful deliverance; for God did then cause many great signs, and wonders,
and miraculous demonstrations of his power and providence to be seen: Read
Psalm. 78.11, 12. He showed them wonders, mavellous things did he in the sight
of their fathers, in the Land of Egypt, and in the field of Zoan; what wonders,
what mavelous things? verse 12, 14, 19. He divided the Sea, and caused them
to pass through, and he made the waters to stand as an heap, in the day time he
led them with a cloud, and all the night with a light fire, he clave the rocks
in the wilderness, and gave them drink as out of the great depths: And so the
Psalmist goes on to show what wonders the Lord did for the Children of Israel,
when he brought them out of Egypt. And I am persuaded that God, whose ways are
everlasting, when the time comes that all Israel shall be saved, will do as
great and glorious (yea greater) wonders Hinc i^lud Iudaeorum, omnia priora
miracula ad Messiae miracula, nihil erunt. Ac illud, quae diebus postremis
fient miracula, ad miracula Aegypti, ut substantia ad accidens, sese habebunt.
Vide Midrash Cohelesh. c. 1. and Talmud. in Tract. Beracoth. c. Nee^ aillai
corin.
amongst them as ever were done in the days of old, in the years of ancient
Generations; Therefore it is said, Isa. 11. last, It shall be to Israel like as
it was in the day that he came up out of the Land of Egypt, i. e. in respect of
miraculous providence, in drying up great waters before them, etc. Consider
Hos. 2.15. and Mic. 7.15. Moreover, when the Children of Israel were delivered
out of Egypt, God did miraculously fight from heaven for them against their
adversaries, God did wonderfully fight from heaven against Pharaoh, and God did
wonderfully fight from heaven against the Amorites; so it will be again, when
the day comes that all Israel shall be saved. See some Scriptures for it, for
I would be loath to speak such things as these without book. See then Isa. 31.4.
The Lord of hosts shall come down to fight for Mount Sion: And verse 18. then
shall the Assyrian fall by the sword, not of a mighty man, and the sword not of
a mean man shall devour him: The Assyrian was the most formidable enemy which
the Jews had in the Prophet Isaiah's time, and therefore that name may be made
use of to signify him that shall be the Assyrian of the world at the Jews
conversion: Now when it is said that neither the sword of a mighty man, nor of
a mean man shall devour him, the meaning is, that this Assyrian shall be
destroyed, not by any humane sword at all, but by the glittering sword which
the Lord does whet in heaven. Moreover we are to know that after the twelve
Tribes shall be returned into the Land of their Fathers Omnes Rabbini in eo
consentiunt, Israelitas post reditum in patriam suam, non plene and perfect
omni pace and tranquillitate fruituros, nisi demum post confectum postremum and
ultimum bellum Gog and Magog. Menasseh-Ben-Israel de Resur. l. 3. c. 5.
then will Gog and Magog come up against them, with a most formidable army,
thinking with great fury to destroy the Israelites, by reason whereof they
shall be in mavellous distress, but out of this distress will God deliver them,
by miraculous judgments out of heaven upon their adversaries, Ezekiel. 38.21, 22.
I will call for a sword against him (says the Lord God) I will plead against
him with pestilence, and with blood, and I will rain upon him, and upon his
bands, and upon the many people that are with him, an overflowing rain and
great hailstones, fire and brimstone. Consider also Rev. 20.9. which words,
though they are not the same (for Ezekiels Gog and Magog comes only out of the
North quarters, whereas John's Gog and Magog comes out of all quarters of the
earth) yet they are an allusion to that place in Ezekiel. Thus you see that
this salvation of the Twelve Tribes of Israel will be like that deliverance out
of Egypt; yea, we may truly affirm, that it will be a greater salvation, than
that out of Egypt was: And for this also the Scripture is express, Ier. 23.7,
8. Behold the days come says the Lord, that they shall no moan say, the Lord
lives which brought up the Children of Israel out of Egypt, but the Lord
lives which brought up, and which led the house of Israel out of the North
Country, and from all the Countries whither I had driven them, and they shall
dwell in their own Land: And this is manifest, 1. Because the Israelites are
more scattered now than when they were in Egypt, even into all Countries are
they driven, as it is there said: Now they are become like a Lamb in a large
pasture, as the Lord threatened them it should be, Hos. 4.16. i. e. here a ^ew,
and there a Jew, scattered up and down the world. Now to save a dispersed
Nation, a scattered Nation; yea, a Nation that is scattered all the world over
from one end of heaven to the other end of heaven, that there is not such a
Vagabond people under the Cope of heaven again, as are the Jews, I say the
salvation of such a dispersed Nation, is more wonderful, than the salvation of
a Nation that are together; therefore this deliverance will be more wonderful
than that out of Egypt was. 2. The present affliction which does abide the
Jewish Nation, has been of far longer continuance than their Egyptian bondage
was. For they were in Egypt but See Joseph. Antiq. lib. 3. chap. 6.
about 215 years, whereas their present misery has lasted 215 years seven
times told and more, therefore this salvation will be more wonderful than that
out of Egypt was. 3. Notwithstanding that deliverance out of Egypt, they were
subject unto captivities and calamities one upon the back of another, but,
after this deliverance, they shall never be brought into bondage again any more
at all, Joel 3.17. Then shall Jerusalem be holy, and there shall no strangers
pass through her any more, Dan. 7.18. the Saints of the most high shall take
the kingdom and possess the kingdom for ever, even for ever, and for ever.
Therefore this salvation will be more wonderful than that out of Egypt.

5. It is evident, that this salvation of Israel will be wonderful, if we
consider the state from which they shall be saved, scil. from a state of death.
I find that some of the V. Menasseh-Ben-Israel de Resurrect. l. 3. c. 2.3, 6.
and in Consiliatore ad I^zech. Quest. 12. Sic etiam R. Eli^zer. referente Pet.
Galatino l. 12. c. 1.
Jewish Rabbis have an opinion, that their restoration and the resurrection
from the dead shall be contemporary. Whether there will not be a particular
resurrection soon after the Jews conversion, is a controversy that I intend
not here to meddle with, only it is certain, that the ultimate, universal
resurrection from the dead will not be till long after that. Nevertheless it is
true, that the salvation of Israel is described by expressions taken from the
resurrection of the last day, to signify unto us that it will be such another
wonderful work of God as that is. What more wonderful than that the bodies of
men which have been dead and rotting in their graves for ages, after-ages,
should be raised, and brought to life again? This is a mighty wonder: even so
that the Jewish Nation, which have been perishing in a cruel grave, and there
lain dead for many hundreds of years, to be made alive again, to say the least
of it, it is a wonder. See the Scripture here a little, Ezekiel. 37.12, 13. Thus
says the Lord God behold, O my people, I will open your graves, and and cause
you to come up out of your graves, and bring you into the Land of Israel, and
ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I have opened your graves, O my people,
and brought you up out of your graves. Mark how the Lord insists upon this, out
of your graves, out of your graves, out of your graves, out of your graves; not
less than four times in two verses is it spoken. See also Isa. 26.19. Thy dead
shall live ^y dead body, they shall arise: For so I c^use to read the words,
our version of them seems to me to darken the sense. There are variety of
interpretations of the place, which I shall not trouble you with. Some Jewish
R. Solomon. lege quae sunt in Gemara Sanhedrin. cap. 11.
interpreters, and Irenaeus lib. 5. cap. 15, 34. Tertul. de Resur. cap. 31.
August. de Civ. Dei l. 20. Clemens Romanus in Epist. ad Corinth. p. 65. P.
Rami. Theol. l. 1. c. 24. Bucan. loc. com. 36. p. 4 13.
others, both ancient and modern Divines, understand the words literally, and
those that are not content with a literal interpretation, yet do not doubt but
in them there is an allusion to the resurrection of the last day, and so an
argument fetched from the power of God to confirm the Jews in the belief of
their salvation, intimating, that if God be able to do such an incredible thing
to flesh and blood, as to raise the dead out of their graves, then he is able
to accomplish such an incredible thing as Israel's salvation. If we take the
words to be spoken by the dead Jews, then the meaning of them may be this,
though I am (says Israel) as dead men are, yet I shall live, yea though I am
as a carcass or dead body, yet I shall rise. Now the Jews are said to be in a
state of death, and of the grave in two respects especially, 1. In respect of
affliction and woeful misery. The deeps of affliction are like unto a grave, and
misery is a kind of living death; For comfort is the life of a man's life, and
therefore affliction destroying a man's comfort, is justly called by the name of
death, Psalm. 44.16. Thou have broken us in the place of Dragons, thou have
covered us with the shadow of death, h. e. Thou have brought sore and heavy
calamity upon us, Isa. 56.10. we are as dead men in desolate places, i. e. we
are in a very afflicted, miserable, forlorn estate. And also Psalm. 88.4, 5, 6.
Lam. 3.6. And truly so may we say concerning the Israelitish Nation, it is an
afflicted people, that indeed the very name of that Nation is called afflicted,
Isa. 54.11. O thou afflicted, and tossed with tempest, and not comforted: And
it would pity a man's heart to read in some books, See Harrisons Messiah already
come in his Epistle to the Jews. Vide Hor^beck contra Iud. Prolog. p. 20.
what cruel and worse than Egyptian slavery the poor Jews are in at this day,
in some parts of the world. 2. The Israelitish Nation is said to be in a state
of death, and of the grave in respect of sin. For sin is the most deadly death,
it is such a death as kills an immortal soul, Matthew. 8.22. let the dead bury
their dead, i. e. le^ those that are spiritually dead, bury those that are
corporally dead, let such as are dead in sin, go bury their dead relations,
John 5.25. The hour now is that the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of
God, which (although it is true, that some which were corporally dead were not
long after [that hour] Christ spoke those words, quickened by the Son of God,
yet it is true that the place) may be understood of a spiritual sinful death,
Ephesians. 2.1, 5. You has he quickened who were dead: How dead? In respect of
Trespass: and sins, so Col. 2.13. Now thus may we say concerning the Jews at
this day, they remain in a state of sin, and therefore in a state of death: And
how should it be otherwise, as long as they re^ect him that is the way, the
truth, and the life? To live, and yet to reject him that is eternal life, is
not possible. Well did the Lord Jesus say to them, John 8.24. Except you
believe that I am he, you shall die in your sins. Now the wretched Jews will
not believe that Jesus Christ is he, that Jesus Christ is the true Messiah, the
Savior of the world, therefore they live, they die in sin: so then their
salvation will be wonderful. For any one soul to be brought out of the grave of
sin, is wonderful, no less a wonder, than for a body that has been rotting in
the belly of the earth to be brought out alive from thence: But what a miracle
then will it be when a whole Nation shall be brought out of a grave of sin? who
can choose but wonder at the thought of it?

6. This salvation of Israel will be the more wonderful, inasmuch as the Jews
have heretofore many a time and often made fruitless and miserable attempts to
deliver themselves out of their present tribulation. Such has been the
dreadful, direful wrath of God against that stubborn and stiff necked people,
that he has left them often to be deluded with vain hopes and attempts of
salvation. And there are two ways especially, whereby the Jews have vainly
sought to deliver themselves. 1. By harkening unto false Christ's that have
risen up amongst them. Thus the true Messiah told the Jews that it would be,
John 5.43. I am come in my fathers name, and ye receive me not, if another
shall come in his own name, him you will receive: As Profecto puto ob nullam
aliam causam ecclesias in Galatia, Corintho, etc. Per Pseudo-Apostolos sic
turbatas esse, quam quod suos veros doctores neglexerint. Luther in Gal. 6.6.
when God sends an able and faithful Ministry amongst a people, but they are
not duly encouraged, he will plague such a people by suffering false Teachers
and Ministers of Satan to rise up amongst them. When a Ministry that has light
in it is not duly received, what will God then do? He will even remove the
Lights into corners, and snuffs shall be set up in their rooms, so because the
Jews received not the true Messiah, therefore the vengeance of God gave them
enough of false Christ's: we read of two or three false Messiah in the
Scripture. In Acts 5.36. Before those days rose up Theudas boasting himself to
be somebody, to whom a number of men, about 400, joined themselves, who was
slain, and all as many as obeyed him were scattered and brought to naught: And
there was Joseph. Antiq. l. 20. c. 2. Ruffinus c. 5.
another Pseudo-Messias amongst the Jews, whose name also was Theudas, of whom
Josephus Eccles. Hist. l. 2. cap.
speaks, that he was a great Magician, etc. Indeed Eusebius thinks that
this Theudas in the Acts, and that in Josephus were the same, but others Vide
Bezam in lac. Origin. contra Celsum l. 1. Isaac Causab. exerc. 2. n. 59. Drusii
Praeter. l. 5.
upon good grounds suppose them to be two distinct persons, not living at the
same time. See also verse 37. And after this man rose up Judas of Galile in the
days of taxing, and drew away much people after him, he also perished, and as
many as followed him were scattered. Josephus also Antiq. l. 18. c. 12.
speaks of one Judas, who endeavored to make himself a King amongst the
Jews, drawing away multitudes after him. Again Acts 21.38. Art not thou that
Egyptian which before these days made an upr^ar and leddest out into the
wilderness 4000 men that were murderers. Josephus Of Wars of Jews l. 2. c. 12.
likewise says that in the days of Nero, there was an Egyptian rose up, who,
by his pretending to be a Prophet, and by his Magical lying wonders, procured
many followers, though to their own destruction; And besides these false
Christ's mentioned in the Scripture, theee are many others spoken of in humane
stories. It may not be amiss to instance in some; which I do not, to cast a
darkness upon the providence of God in the present st^rrings which we hear are
amongst the Israelites. I thank the Lord I am not of that spirit, I pity those
which do in a scornful tryumphing manner say, All that you hear is nothing, but
a company of Arabians make a tumult: The Lord pity such men, they little think
what spirit they are of: But I give these instances to cause sobriety in
conjectures concerning the present dispensations of divine providence; for as
yet there is no stirring amongst the Jews, but what may possibly die and come
to nothing at last; Wherefore to proceed: About 135 years Vide Calvis. Cronol.
p. 345, 346. Scaliger in Cron* Eusebius. ad An. 1648. Buxtorf. Synag. Iud. cap.
36. Genebrard. Cronol. l. 2. ad An. 4157. Raimundi Pug. fid. part. 2. c. 4.
Philo Iud. in Brev. de Temp.
after Christ, there arose a certain Impostor amongst the Jews, who called
himself Barchochaeb, i. e. the Son of the Star, saying he was the person meant,
Numb. 24.17. where it is said, a Star shall arise out of Jacob: But afterward
the Jews called this Barchochab, by the name of Barcotzba, i. t. the Son of
lying; And well did he deserve the name, for he belyed his Nation almost into
utter ruin; for by his means a world of Jews got head together and made a
great Rebellion against the Roman Empire, until many hundreds and thousands of
them were cut off. And the effect of this woeful attempt was, that the Jews
might not after that so much as come within Jerusalem, only some few had leave
to come once a year to bewail the misery of their City and Nation, and
Soldiers were appointed to stand by them all the while, nor might they
continue weeping above so many hours, except they would give more money to pay
for their tears. This story is mentioned by Justin Martyr In Apologia ad
Antonin. Pium.
as a thing that was newly done in his days. Again Anno 432. a Vide Calvis. and
Alsted. in Cronol. ad An. 432.
Pseudo-Messias (some think it was the Devil in humane shape) rose up amongst
the Jews, who told them, that he was Moses come from heaven, and that he would
lead them through the waters, etc. as he had done their fathers out of Egypt,
whereupon a multitude of silly Jews followed him to their own perdition. Again,
Anno 1130 De quo Maimon. and R. Benjamin, and Gentius in Histor. Iudaic. p. 169.
there arose in Persia one David el David, who had the confidence to go to the
King of Persia himself and to tell him, that he was the Messiah; This David el
David used Magical incantations, and by his lying wonders caused great
amazement to be in the world, and also procured a mavelous multitude of
deluded Israelites to follow him, till at last both he and they were destroyed.
Many See Herberts Travels. p. 118. Calvis. Cronol. in An. 202. and 457. and
721. Vide etiam Theoph. l. 21. c. 16. Hornbech. contra Iudaeos. l. 3. c. 1.
other instances I could give you here, but I forbear. These are enough to
confirm the truth of that which our blessed Savior says, Matthew. 24.24. There
shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great signs and
wonders, inasmuch as if it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect.
Truly it has been so, many a false Christ has risen amongst the Jews, who, by
signs and lying wonders, has seduced many. Therefore when the Children of
Israel shall indeed be delivered out of their misery, it will be so much the
more wonderful, because they have met with so many, and so doleful
disappointments heretofore. 2. The Jews have attempted to deliver themselves
out of their misery by blind and legal humiliations. For An. 1502. it was
Memorabile est illud, quod Anno quingentesimo secundo, Iudaeos, omnium consensu
ubicunque terrarum locutos, solenni se obstriuxisse decreto, ut annum une fere
integrum jejunio, Planctuum, lachrimis, senes, vi^^, juvenes, omnes se^
afflige^^es. Willet de vocat. Iud. in Epist. dedic p. 5.
generally agreed upon by the Jews throughout all Europe, that they would spend
a whole year in prayer, and fasting, and penance, as far as their bodies were
able to bear, and they did so, Men, Women, and Children, and yet they had no
deliverance. Indeed it is true, that God does sometimes bestow outward
deliverances upon men, because of legal humiliations, so it was with Judah in
Rehobohams time, and with Israel in Ahabs time: And there is some reason to
believe that the Jews, many of them, will be repossessed of their own Land
again before such time as they have any general Evangelical repentance. And
thus some interpret that place, Ier. 31.19. After Ephraim was turned, he
repented; namely, that after the Israelites shall be returned to their own Land
again, the spirit of repentance shall be poured forth upon them. Consider Ezekiel.
36.24, 25. and Zech. 12.10. Nevertheless inasmuch as the Jews have heretofore
found legal humiliations in vain) therefore their deliverance, when it comes,
will be the more admirable.

7. This salvation will be wonderful in respect of the Fertasse ita, futurum
est ut Deus novo quodam and extraordinari^ modo usurus sit in convertendis
Iudaeis. Sebaldus Schnell in Disput. contra Abravanel in Isa. 34.
way and means of the conversion of the Tribes of Israel.

Chrysostom of old called the conversion of the Jews very fitly and truly,
(...), a strange thing, and a wonder. The truth is, that the conversion of any
soul is a miracle. The conversion of souls, is the only standing miracle which
remains in the Church of God; For it is beyond the power of nature to produce
such a thing as soul-conversion: But what a miracle then will the conversion of
the Jews be? for a whole Nation to be converted, and that at once, a Nation
born at once, and such a Nation as the Jews, who have ever been so opposite to
God, and to Jesus Christ, and to the Gospel, and to the spirit of grace? how
miraculous will this be? But besides this, I conceive and believe that the
conversion of the Jews will not be brought to pass only by the ordinary means
of preaching the Gospel, but by Vision, as Paul's was, by a glorious
manifestation of the person of the Son of God from heaven unto all the Tribes
on the earth, causing them to mourn. There are many Scriptures and reasons
which make me inclinable to such an apprehension, but intending to handle that
subject by it self, I here desist; for I would not anticipate my self.

So much may suffice to be spoken of the second particular, which is the
wonderfulness of Isreal's salvation.

We come now in the third place, to show that this salvation of Israel will be
a spiritual salvation. And the truth of that is evident, 1. Because the Tribes
of Israel shall be delivered out of the hands of spiritual evils and
adversaries: As now their blindess of mind and hardness of heart, is a
spiritual evil; for the mind is a spirit. Hence the Apostle says, be renewed
in the spirit of your mind, Ephesians. 4.23. i. e. in the mind which is a spirit: now
the Jews remaining in unbelief, are under the power of a blind and hardened
mind, Romans 11.7. The rest were blinded, and verse 25. blindness is happened to
Israel; or as the word may better be rendered, hardness is happened to Israel.
(...) male vertitur, caecitas cordis, non quod ad sensum attinet, sed quoniam
haec vox, (...), non caecitatem proprie, sed ex consequente tantum significat,
nam proprie duritiem significat. Cameron. in Matthew. 19.3. Proprie significat
callosam concretionem, instar tophi, ut in articulo Podagricorum, quae in
membro callo obducto non facile admittit tactum, and sensum, s^d duritie sua
quasi repellit, etc. Chemnit. Harm.
The Greek word notes a brawny hardness, a desperate obduration, such as
makes stupid and senseless: And they that have had to do with unbelieving
Israelites, have seen the truth of this. From hence it comes to pass, that
though the Jews have the Scriptures of the Old Testament, which they keep and
read with great diligence, and those very Scriptures testify plainly
concerning Christ, that nothing can be more evident, than that Jesus is the
Christ, yet the Jews believe it not, but as it is said, Acts 13.27. Because
they know not the voices of the Prophets, they have fulfilled them in
condemning him. And why know they not the voices of the Prophets? that spoke so
clearly and abundantly of Christ's coming, both first and second, and time, and
place, and manner, and of his two natures and all, why do not the Jews
understand this? surely it is because they are under the power of a blind mind
and hard heart. See therefore 2 Cor. 3.14, 15. their minds were blinded, for
until this day remains the same veil untaken away, in the reading of the old
Testament, which veil is done away in Christ, but even unto this day, when
Moses is read, the veil is upon their heart. Now what is this veil which the
Apostle here speaks of? I answer Duplex velum Iudaeorum oculis obductum est:
Prius indurata mentis; Posterius legis ipsius: Nam Christus in lege tr^ditur
obscurius and v^luti pe^ nubem atque involucrum. Lud. Capel. Spicil. p. 102.
there is a double veil, 1. There is an external veil, a veil upon the object
read, the books of Moses, h. e. the ceremonial Law. There is a Temple and an
Altar, there are Sacrifices, Washings, Sabbaths, etc. Now the poor blind Jews
are not able to look through this veil of Moses Law, unto Jesus Christ the
truth, the Antitype of all such cerimonious observations, they cannot behold
the Sun of Righteousness through the cloud and darkness of the Law. 2. T^ere is
an internal veil upon the minds and hearts of the Jews, that is to say,
blindness and hardness which is upon them; they are under a strange and stupid
error of conscience, whence they think, they do well to adhere unto the
Mosaical dispensations, and to oppose Christ and his Gospel; And they are under
perverseness and obstinacy of will, whence they shut their eyes against the
light, and grow blind against the Sun, that they neither do nor will believe,
when conviction is held out before them, they will not come to Christ, that
they might have light and life, he has stretched forth his hands all the day
long unto a gainsaying and a rebellious people, he would have gathered them
under his wings many a time and often, but they would not be gathered by him;
This is a dark and dreadful veil upon the heart of that Nation, but they shall
be saved from it, therefore verse 16. Nevertheless when it shall turn to the
Lord, the veil shall be taken away. In a word, all sin is a spiritual enemy,
such an enemy as would destroy a man's spirit, as would (that I may so speak)
suck the blood of a man's soul; therefore the Apostle exhorts to beware of sin,
because it wars against the soul. Now the Jews remaining in unbelief, are under
the power of this enemy, John 8.34. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that
commits sin, is a servant of sin: Certainly the Jews commit sin when they
reject the counsel of God against themselves, when they go on contradicting and
blaspheming the Son of God, when they put away the word of life from them,
therefore they are in woeful servitude unto sin. But the day will come when they
shall be freed from this bondage, for they shall at last own and embrace the
Lord Jesus Christ. In the latter days ('it is said) they shall seek the Lord, and
David their King: And by that means they will be freed from sin, verse 36. If
the Son make you free, then you shall be free indeed: Therefore when they shall
once believe on the Son of God, they shall indeed be made free from sin, so 2
Cor. 3.17. Now the Lord is that spirit, and where the spirit of the Lord is,
there is liberty; the Lord, i. e. the Lord Jesus Christ who is the Lord even
Jehovah, (for the Lord in the New Testament does often answer to Jehovah in the
Old Testament) and who is a spirit, where he is embraced and believed on with
all the heart, there is liberty from bondage of the Law, and liberty from the
thraldom of sin. And the truth of this is also held forth in this very verse
wherein my Text is. All Israel shall be saved (says the Text) for a deliverer
shall come out of Sion, and turn away ungodliness from Jacob. So that the house
of Jacob, even all Israel, must be saved from ungodliness: And of this same
thing there is a promise, Ezekiel. 36.29. I will save you from all your
uncleanness. And admirable to this purpose is that place, Ier. 50.19, 20. I
will bring again Israel to his habitation in those days; and at that time,
says the Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be
none, and the sins of Judah, but they shall not be found.

Again Satan is a spiritual adversary, he is called by the name of an evil
spirit, and the Devils are said to be spiritual wickednesses in high places, he
thirsts after the blood of souls, he goes up and down like a roaring Lion,
seeking to make a prey of the immortal spirits of men. Now, alas, the
unconverted Jews are under the power of this spiritual adversary, 2 Cor. 4.4.
The God of this world has blinded the eyes of them that believe not. Ephesians. 2.2.
The Prince of the power of the air works in the hearts of the Children of
disobedience: or, as the word is, (...).
the children of unperswadableness. Now the Jews have hitherto been children of
unperswadableness, so that it is an easier matter to convert any one unto
Christ, than to convert a Jew. Lonicerus (out of Suidas) has a strange story
to this purpose concerning Theodosius the Jew. Vide ^oniceri exempl. 3. Prac.
p. 266. Hanc tamen Suidae Narrationem vir doctis. Jacob. Capellus in Heb. 7.14.
non veretur fabulam nominare. Sic and magnus noster Rain^ldus de lib. Apocr.
Praete^t. 139.
Nay when thy are convinced that Christ is come, yet they deny it: And hence it
has come to pass, that seldom any considerable number of Jews has been
converted, except by miracle, as it was in the day of the Apostate V. Calvis.
Cronol. in An. 363. Magdeb. cent. 4. p. 431. Socrat. l. 3. c. 20. Theod. l. 3.
c. 17. Sozomen. l. 5. c. 21. Amia^. Marc. l. 23.
Julian. Julian out of the horrid and hellish despite of his heart against
Christ, bad the Jews go and re-edifie the Temple, they accordingly laid the
foundation, but behold in a night God sent a terrible Earthquake, that
overthrew all that they had ddone, that not a stone was left upon a stone, and
the tools which the Jews wrought with (as the story says) were consumed by
fire from heaven, by reason of which miraculous providence, many Jews were
converted to Christ: But without some such miracle as this, it has scarcely
hitherto been known, that any considerable number of them has been converted,
therefore they are children of unperswadableness, and therefore under the power
of Satan. Besides it is evident that they are so, because they have long, and
long ago, ceased from being the Church and people of God. Therefore Romans 11.11.
we read of their fall, that is to say, their falling from that relation which
once they stood in toward God, and of their casting away, verse 15. and of
their being broken off, verse 17. h. e. they are broken off from that Covenant
and Church relation which once they stood in. This is true concerning the
Israelites or ten Tribes, according to that, Hos. 1.9. call his name Loammi,
for you are not my people, and I will not be your God. And it is true
concerning the Jews or two Tribes, as we may see Zech. 11.10, 11. I took my
staff Beauty and cut it asunder, that I might break my Covenant, which I had
made with all the people, and it was broken in that day. Now inasmuch as they
cease to be any ways of the visible Church, therefore they are externally in
the same capacity with the Pagan world, and therefore under Satan's Regiment,
because he is the Prince of the world, John 16.11. why are excommunicate
persons said to be delivered unto Satan, but because they are Authoritatively
declared to be no longer of the visible Church, See Gelaspy Aarons Rod. p. 297.
but of the world, and therefore in the hands of Satan, who is the worlds God
and Prince? Thus may we say concerning the Church of Israel, God has given her
a Bill of divorce, God has excommunicated her for the present: But there is a
day coming, when God will receive them into favor again, and then they shall
be under the powers of darkness no longer, Luke 1.71. they shall be saved from
the hands of their enemies, and from the hand of all that hate them, which
words although they are comprehensive of temporal, yet they are not exclusive
of spiritual enemies. Besides, we read Rev. 20. That not long after the Jews
conversion an Angel comes down from heaven ( i. e.) Christ the Angel of the
Convenant) and takes hold of Satan, and lays him in chains, and shuts him
fast under the bars of the bottomless pit.

2. The Tribes of Israel shall not only be thus delivered from the hands of
their sp^ritual enemies, but they shall have spiritual life bestowed upon them.
Indeed it is true, that first a civil life must enter into them, but after that
a spiritual life. These two we have plainly distinguished one from the other,
Ezekiel. 37.7, 8. the bones came together, bone to its bone, but there was no
breath in them: Here is a civil life, for bone comes to his bone, but no
spiritual life, for as yet there is no breath in them; even so, when the day of
Isreal's salvation comes, we must first expect to hear that the Jews are
gathering together out of one Country, and out of another Country, and making
head toward their own Land, before we hear of their conversion, but afterward,
it follows therefore, verse 14. It is said, I will put my spirit in you, and
you shall live. This spiritual life is in regenerating grace, when the day of
Gods power passes over the soul to make it willing and obedient. Converting
grace may well be called life, because it makes them that were dead to become
alive, therefore it is said concerning the converted prodigal, He was dead, but
he is alive: Also because grace is the inchoation, the seed, the bud of eternal
life and glory. Grace reigns to eternal life, Romans 5. last, holiness ends in
everlasting life. chap. 6.22. Likewise grace is rightly called spiritual life,
because the Author of it is the blessed spirit of God, therefore all saving
graces are said to be the fruits of the spirit. Gal. 5.22. And John 3.5. It is
said, except a man be born of water, and of the spirit, he cannot enter into
the kingdom of God, i. e. except he be regenerated by the spirit of God, whose
operations are like unto water, to cleanse, and purge, and purify the soul.
Now, thus it true, that the Tribes of Israel shall have converting grace
bestowed upon them. The Lord has promised to put his fear into their hearts,
Jer. 32.40. And this is one thing intended in the Text, when it is said, that
all Israel shall be ^aved, s^il. that there shall be a general conversion of
the Israelitish Nation. And it is true concern^ng all the Tribes of Israel,
therefore it is said, Matthew. 24.30. All the Tribes of the earth shall mourn;
which, that it is (in part at least) meant of a penitential mourning, I doubt
not. As when the children of Israel were brought out of Egypt, not only a
civil, but a spiritual life was conferred upon them, according to that
Scripture, Ezekiel. 16.6. When I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thy own
bloods, I said unto thee in thy bloods, live; yea I said unto thee in thy
bloods, live, h. e. when I saw thee under bloody bondage by reason of Egyptian
Taskmasters, when there was a bloody proclamation gone forth out of Pharoahs
Court, that all thy Male children should be destroyed, then I looked upon thee,
and caused a political life to enter into thee, and when thou were in a filthy
bloody condition by reason of sin, corrupt nature and Idolatry which thou
layest in whilst in Egypt, I bestowed the grace of my Covenant upon thee, etc.
So it is in the like sort true, that when all Israel shall be saved, not only a
life of liberty, but a life of grace shall enter into them.

Yea 3ly. There shall be plentiful effusions of the spirit of God upon the
Tribes of Israel, when the day comes that all Israel shall be saved.

And this will be in two respects; 1. In respect of gifts. 2. In respect of the
saving grace of the spirit.

1. There will be a plentiful effusion of the spirit of grace upon the Tribes
of Israel, in respect of the gifts thereof, Zech. 12.8. He that is feeble among
you at that day, shall be as David, h. e. (as some interpret) they that are of
low, mean, contemptible parts shall be so raised and enlaged, that they shall
be like unto David, who was a man of extraordinary gifts and qualifications;
bu^ what shall they then be who are as David? It follows, the house of David
shall be as Elohim (...). Sept. i. e. Sicut Angelus quiest in Dom^ Dei. Vide
Corn. A Lapide in loc. h. Chald. Paraphrastes, instar Heroum, h^bet. Consule
Verse. Arab. in Bibl. Polyglo^. and Drusium atque Vatablum inter Criticos Sacros.
(for so is the Hebrew word) i. e. like unto the blessed Angels. They shall
have most Seraphical gifts bestowed upon them, yea, they shall be like to the
Angel of the Lord, h. e. they shall be like unto Jesus Christ, the Angel of the
everlasting Covenant: Christ was anointed with the oil of Gods spirit above his
fellows; but they shall receive in abundant measure of that spirit which was in
Jesus Christ even above measure. In a word, the Scripture seems to intimate
that those extraordinary gifts of the spirit, which are now ceased in the
Church, will be then revived. See Joel 2.28, 29. I will pour out my spirit upon
all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy, your old men shall
see dreams, your young men shall see visions also upon the Servants, and upon
the handmaids, in those days will I pour out my spirit. It is indeed true, that
there was Hujus va^ici^ii complementum, Petrus Apost^lus ostendit jam partim
factum in admirabili spiritus sancti effusione super Apostolos and Apostolicam
Ecclesiam in Pentecoste: Partim praedicie futurum ante extremum Domini
adventum, quando ecclesia horribilibus calamitatibus implicabitur. Pareus in
Apoc. 6.12.
a partial fulfillment of this prophecy in the days of the Apostles, yet that
there is a further accomplishment thereof to be expected, is most evident from
the context. Those extraordinary effusions of the spirit, which were in the
Apostles days, were but a sprinkling and first fruits, in respect of what shall
one day be made good upon the Israelitish Nation. And we may argue, if the
first fruits of the fulfillment of this prophecy and promise to Israel, were so
great and glorious, what then will that full harvest be in the day when all
Israel shall be saved? yet the converted Israelites shall excel in that which
is more excellent than gifts. For 2ly. An abundant measure of saving grace
shall be poured forth upon them. They shall be made the most gracious, holy
people that ever were upon earth. When Ezekiels Temple shall be built, it will
be most holy, Ezekiel. 43.12. It will (...)
be holiness of holinesses, as the Hebrew phrase is, it being the manner of the
Hebrews to express the superlative degree by a substantive plural. Yea such a
measure of the spirit of grace shall be poured forth upon them, that they shall
be holy even in their civil converse amongst men, Zech. 14.20, 21. In that day
there shall be upon the Bells of the worses, holiness unto the Lord, yea every
pot in Jerusalem and in Judah shall be holiness unto the Lord of hosts. The
meaning may be that they shall act from holy principles, and for holy ends, in
all that they do, whether they buy or sell, whether they tarry at home or go
abroad, whether they eat or drink, or make use of this or that creature for
their comforts, they shall see God, and enjoy God, and seek the glory of God in
all. This is excellent, and thus holy shall they be: As for sin and corrupt
nature which remains more or less in the Saints whilst they are in this world,
it shall be wonderfully restrained and consumed by the spirit of grace in these
converted Israelites, Isa. 4.4. The Lord shall wash away the filth of Sion, and
shall purge the blood of Jerusalem by the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit
of burning. As for the bloody filth of sin which is upon them, Gods spirit
shall teach them to judge themselves for it, and also shall consume and burn up
their dross for them. Therefor he is said to be a spirit of judgment and of
burning. Many there are both ancient and modern Divines, who think that after
the Jews conversion, the Saints upon earth shall be brought into a sinless
estate, that there shall be such a glorious renovation of all things here
below, that this world shall be as it was before sin entered into the word, and
death by sin. What I conceive to be the truth of God concerning that matter,
and needful for you to know, I shall (by the help of his grace) plainly declare
unto you in these following Conclusions.

Conclus. 1. The Tribes of Israel shall be converted before Jesus Christ comes
to raise the dead, and to judge the world, Mal. 4.5, 6. Behold, I will send you
Elijah the Prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord,
and he shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hear^s of
the children to their fathers, least I come and smite the earth with a curse.
The meaning of the place may be this, that although the childen of Israel for
the present are in such a state of sin and enmity against God, that if their
godly Ancestors should come and see them, they would be ashamed to own them for
their children; yet before the coming of the great day of judgment they shall
be turned to serve the God whom their fathers served. It is true, that there
was a partial and typical fulfillment of this Scripture in the Ministry of John
Baptist, who was a blessed instrument of converting many of the children of
Israel, before that great and notable day wherein the Jewish heaven and earth
was utterly dissolved (which day may be looked upon as a Type of the last and
great day) nevertheless, that there is yet a Read Mr. Medes Discourse on Mar^
1.14, 1^. and Alsted. ^atrib. de Mill Annis. p. 213.214.
greater accomplishment of this prophecy to be expected, we may plainly
discern from the words of our Savior Christ, Mat. 17.11, 12. Jesus said, Elias
shall first come and restore all things, but I say unto you, that Elias is come
already: As if the Lord had said, although it be a truth that one in the spirit
of Elias must come before the great day of judgment, yet it is true, that such
an one is come already, and so that prophecy in part fulfilled in the Ministry
of John Baptist. But observe further, the Lord says, that Elias shall come in
the future Tense, which how can it be meant of John Baptist, who was beheaded
when our Savior thus spoke to his Disciples? Moreover, the Lord says, that
Elias at his coming shall restore all things. Did John Baptist restore all
things? was the first coming of Christ the time of the restitution of all
things? the Scripture says, that it is to be at the second coming of Christ,
Acts 3.21. wherefore it remains that there is yet another to come in the spirit
of Elias, who shall be a no^a^le instrument in the hand of Christ to prepare
the Jews for the day of judgment. Again, see what the Scripture says, Acts
3.19. Repent ye therefore and be converted to the blotting out of your sins,
that so the times of refreshing may come from the presence of the Lord: We have
it translated, when the times of refreshing shall come. But I find many Sic
Syrus, and Arabs, and Athiopicus Interpres. Tertullian vertit, ut superveniant.
Irenaei interpres, and venient. Versio Tertulliana Cl. Medo, Heinsio, Lud. De
Dieu, and Caspari Stresoni placet.
Versions that read the words as we have now rendered them. And indeed the Greek
(...) ut. non significat Causam finalem, sed consequens, sive se quelam. Leigh
Critica.
(...), properly signifies, that so they may come; So then, before the times
of refreshing come, h. e. before the great day of judgment begins, when the
Saints shall be freed from the annoyance of every evil, it is necessary that
Israel should rerepent and be converted, and have their sins blotted out. And
indeed, they must either repent before that day comes, or never repent at all,
for then the professed enemies of Christ shall find repentance will be too
late. If the Jews should not repent before Christ's coming from heaven to judge
the world, they must needs perish in that deluge of fire (as Contra Haeres.
lib. 5. cap. 29.
Irenaeus calls it) wherewith the wicked opposing enemies of Christ shall be
destroyed at that day. They would be smitten with a curse, as you have it, Mal.
4. last, if they should not be turned to seek the Lord before that great day.
Consider Mal. 4.1. with 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9. and Isa. 66.15, 16. See also 2 Pet.
3.7. The heavens and the earth which are now, are reserved unto fire against
the day of judgment, and perdition of ungodly men. Therefore if ungodliness
should not be turned away from Jacob before the day of judgment, fire would
then consume them. See also verse 9. where it is said, The Lord is not slack
concerning his promise, but is long suffering to us ward, not willing that any
should perish, but that all should come to repentance. Now, what is the meaning
of this Scripture? I take the true and genuine interpretation of the place be
this, See Mr. Medes excellent Paraphrase on 2 Pet. chap. 3.
says the Apostle, the reason why Jesus Christ does not come immediately to
judge the world, and to destroy the ungodly, is not because he is unmindful of
his word, or any way slow, (as some have sinfully imagined) in performing what
he has promised; no, that is not the reason of it, but it is rather because of
his long suffering toward us Israelites, he is not willing that our Nation
should perish, but would have all Israel to be saved; now, if he should come
immediately to judgment, then our Nation being at present without repentance,
must needs perish amongst the ungodly that then shall be consumed with fire.
This I believe is the true scope of the Apostle in those words. Moreover, it is
conceived by some, that the reason why the Saints, whom Christ shall find alive
at his coming, must be caught up to meet the Lord in the air, 1 These. 4.17. is,
that so they might escape that conflagration whereby the wicked upon the earth
shall be destroyed: As in the days of Noah when the world was destroyed by
water, they that were not in the Ark perished: So when the day comes that the
world shall be destroyed by fire, (which fire See King Edw. 6. his Catechism.

Hinc Origines (...). Contra Celsum. l. 3.


shall also purify the earth, and make it fit for the Lord and his Saints to
reign on during the judgment day) they that are not with Christ (who was
typified by the Ark) but setting themselves in a way of opposition against him
in his Members upon earth, shall be consumed with that fire. Nevertheless, I do
not think hat it is any Heresy to believe (though I am not of that persuasion)
that the rapture of the Saints into the air to meet Christ will not be at his
next coming to destroy Antichrist, and to set up his glorious kingdom upon
earth (which coming of Christ some great Divines look upon rather as a personal
appearance, than a personal residence upon earth) but that this rapture will be
at Christ's coming to destroy Gog and Magog at the ultimate judgment, when the
Lord will be for a long time resident in this lower world. By all this then it
is apparent that before Jesus Christ comes to judge the world, the Jews shall
be converted.

Conclus. 2. From the time of the Jews conversion, even till the day of
judgment, they will not be in a sinless perfect estate. Albeit it is true that
there shall be an eminency of gifts and grace among them, yet it is a vain
thing to dream of a state of perfection upon earth before the last day. Hence
we read of steps or stairs in Ezekiels Temple, Ezekiel. 40.22, 26, 31, 34, 37.
What is the meaning of that? but, that after Ezekiels Temple shall be begun,
there will be a gradual going on toward perfection, they shall go from step to
step, appearing before God in Sion, they shall go on from one degree of grace
to another. Therefore there will not be an absolute freedom from sin. Besides
the thing is mavelous clear if we duly consider what is said, Ier. 31.29, 30.
In those days, (i. e. in those days when all the Tribes of Israel shall be
saved) they shall say no more, the fathers have eaten a sour grape, and the
childrens teeth are set an edge, but every one shall die for his own iniquity,
every man that eats a sour grape, his teeth shall be set an edge. The meaning
of the place may be this. Vide Zanch. de peccat. Orig. p. 46.
The Israelites, or ten Tribes, they complained that misery lay upon them
because of the sin of Ierchoam; the Jews or two Tribes, they complained that
they suffered for the sin of Menasseh. Now says God, the time will come, when
by reason of the grace of my new and everlasting Covenant, you shall not suffer
any thing for the iniquity of your Idolatrous forefathers, only then for your
own personal transgressions, you shall die. Now then, how can it be, that after
the Israelites are brought under the new Covenant dispensations, every one that
sins shall die for his own iniquity in case there should then be no more
sinning? In a word, after the Jews conversion, the soul that (...) shall die,
as we have it, Ezekiel. 18.4. Therefore after the Jews conversion there will be
sinning.

Again, where there is hypocrisy, there is sin, but there will be hypocrisy
in the Church, after God shall have brought home his anient people. Some Nullus
aggregabitur in hanc Ecclesiam nisi qui fuerit in electis. Haec Ecclesia nullis
conspurcabitur ^ypocritis, and simulatis Christianis (...) olim, pura omnium
zizaniorum and loliorum. Brightman in Apoc. 20.15.
of very great note and worth, have thought that there would a time come long
before the day of judgment, when the Church upon earth would be so pure, that
not an hypocrite would be in it: But how can that stand with the words of
Christ, who has assured us that there will be tares in the field, i. e.
hypocrites in the Church, even till the end of this world, whereas the Jews
shall be converted before (though toward) the end of this world. Therefore
there must be tares, therefore there must be hypocrites, and therefore sin in
the Churches of Israel after their conversion unto Christ.

Conclus. 3. During the time of the day of judgment the raised Saints of God
shall be wholly freed from sin and all imperfections. It is indeed true, that
before the Resurrection of Christ diverse were raised from a state of death unto
life, who yet were afterward subject unto sin. Thus may we say concerning that
Widows Son which was raised from death in the days of Elijah; the Jews have a
tradition, that that Widows Son was the Prophet Jonah, if so, to be sure he had
more than a little of sin and corrupt nature in him after his Resurrection.
Thus also may we conceive of Lazarus and others mentioned in the Scripture, as
rising from the dead before our Saviors Resurrection. And that they were
subject unto sin, is evident, because they dyed again; And that is proved,
because Jesus Christ was the first born from the dead, See Mr. Ieanes on Col.
1.18.
Col. 1.18. Acts 26.23. Rev. 1.5. Now, why is Christ said to be the first born
from the dead? Is it not, because he is the first that had a Resurrection, even
a Resurrection to a state of immortality? Though there were others that rose
from the dead before Christ, yet their Resurrection was not perfect, for they
dyed again, stand in need of another Resurrection unto immortality, therefore
Christ is the first born from the dead. But at the last day, all the Saints
shall be raised unto a sinless immortal state. And this is manifest, because
the last enemy which shall be destroyed is death, 1 Cor. 15.26. But if the
Saints after their Resurrection should be subject unto sin, there would be
another enemy far worse than death, scil. sin to be destroyed after the
abolition of death, which is expressly contrary to what the holy Apostle faith.

And hence we read concerning the new Jerusalem, which comes down from God out
of heaven (which new Jerusalem I take to be the very same with the first
Resurrection spoken of, Rev. 20.) that there is in it nothing that defiles,
nor any besides such whose names are written in the Lambs book of life, Revel.
21.27.

And in this sense only it is true, that there will a time come (according to
those blessed Petitions in that pattern of prayer, commonly called the Lords
prayer) Tum demum regnum Dei n^bilissimum advenerit, cum tr^rio temporum
judicio corporibus assumptis vivi mort^ique judicabuntur: tum enim absque
murmr peccati, absque ^^b^llione carnis Deus regn^bit and imperabit: Itaque
judicii illius adventus hac precation^ atque adoratione exoptatur. P. Rami
Theol. l. 3. c. 6.
when in the kingdom of God his will shall be done on earth, even as it is done
in heaven, Matthew. 6.10. I say I doubt not to affirm to you, that there will be
such a day, when the Saints upon earth shall do the will of God with as much
perfection as it is now done by the Angels of heaven. But stay a while, look
not for that day till the Resurrection of the just, and then you shall see it.
So that it is a great and a precious truth, that there will be a day when the
Saints of God shall even upon earth be for a long time in a sinless glorious
estate. For the day of judgment will be upon earth; For where should men be
judged, but in the place where they have lived, either to the honor or to the
dishonor of the great God and Judge of all the earth? Therefore Job speaks, as
you find chap. 19. verse 25.26. I know (says he) that my Redeemer lives, and
that he shall stand at the latter day, (i. e. the day of Judgment) upon the
earth, and that in my flesh I shall see God, so Zech. 14.4. It is said, his
feet shall stand in that day upon the Mount of Olives. And as it is true, that
the judgment will be upon the earth, so likewise it shall be a day of long
continuance. Can a world of men, even all that have been alive from Adam, to
the last man that ever shall be born into the world; I say, can all those
millions of millions of men and women that have been, are, or ever shall be
upon the earth, be called to a particular account for all the words, thoughts,
and actions of their lives? can the secrets of all hearts be disclosed in the
hearing of heaven and earth in a little space of time? No verily, but the
preparation for eternal judgment will take up more time than a few weeks, or
months, or ages. I do believe, that a thousand years will be but a part, a
morning as it were, of that great and last day, after which all things must be
swallowed up in the amazing gulf of an endless eternity.

Moreover, we may argue thus. The world to come will be of long continuance.
Consider Isa. 66.22. Hence this world to come is called, an everlasting
kingdom. Jesus Christ is the Prince and Father of the world to come, and he is
an everlasting father, Isa 9.6. The Et si ista verba (...) non sunt in
Exemplari Vaticano, sunt tamen in Pl. 11. Vide Vulg. verse. tat. and Eusebius.
Evang. Them. l. 7.
Septuagint render the words, the father of the world to come. But the day of
judgment is called the world to come, Matthew. 12.32. whosoever speaks against
the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in thi^ world, nor in the
world to come, i. e. neither now nor at the day of judgment. Consider Matthew.
19.28. with Mark 10.30. And see Heb. 2.5. unto the Angels he has not put in
subjection the world to come, whereof we speak. What now does the Apostle mean
by the world to come? it cannot be meant of the present state of the world for
Mundus futurus non de Praesenti mundo intelligitur, quia Praesens orbis
subjicitur Angelis. Estius.
that is subject to the Ministering, gubernation of holy Angels, who are
therefore styled, Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, and Powers, etc. whereas
this world to come is not subject to Angels Dr. Goodwin on Ephesians. 1.21.
or a great Divine well ob- (as serves) there will then be no need of the
Ministry of the holy Angels, because the evil Angels shall be shut up in hell,
and the raised Saints shall then do that which is the work of the Angels in
this present state of the world. It cannot be meant of the state of eternity in
heaven, for that is not put in subjection unto Christ as Mediator. When the day
of judgment is over, then Christ delivers up the kingdom to the father, and the
son himself becomes subject, 1 Cor. 15.25, 28. (...) designat (...), ut recte
observavit Iac. Capollus.
Besides the Greek phrase denotes a state upon earth. It remains therefore
that by the world to come Aptissime Theod. Thom. and Lyranus accipiunt orbem
futurum quem post resurrectionem Pater Christo subjiciet. Corn. a Lapide.
is meant nothing else but the day of judgment when indeed the Angels
themselves shall be judged, and when the Lord Jesus alone shall be exalted to
become judge of all the world, and every knee in heaven and earth, and under
the earth shall bow unto him. Besides, observe the Apostle adds whereof we
speak. And where was that, but in chap. 1.6. when he shall bring again the
first begotten into the (...) Proprie Habitabilis. Leigh.
habitable world he says, let all the Angels of God worship him. I marvel why
the words are translated. (...). non autem, (...). Add quod A^ristus secundus
subjunctivi significationem habet futuri. Atque hunc interpretationem sequntur
nonsolu^ Cl. Medus noster. Homesius. Heinsius. Camero eajus argumenta
validissima sunt. sed etiam inter Pontificios, Estius, Ribera. Corn. a Lapide,
atque inter Antiquos, Ambrosius, Nyssenus, and alii. Sat equidem scio nonuullos
Socini asseclas hanc interpretationem sequi, At inquam ego, cum ipsi inimici
verum confiteantur magis confirmatur ipsa veritas.
And again, when he brings the first begotten into the world, when as they
ought to be read, when he brings again the first begotten into the world, and
not again when he brings, etc. which words do evidently point at the day of
judgment, and that Psalm ( viz. Psalm. 97.) out of which the Apostle takes
those words, treats of Christ's second coming to judgment, and not of his
first coming in the form of a Servant; therefore, by the world to come is meant
the day of judgment, therefore the day of judgment w^ll be of long continuance,
therefore there will (...) day when the S^ints upon earth shall for a long time
be in a sinless glorious estate. And then will that Scripture, which is now
fulfilled spiritually, be fulfilled literally, Rev. 5.10. We shall reign on
earth, but expect not that the kingdom under the whole heaven should be given
unto the Saints of the most high, until such time as the judgment shall sit,
Dan. chap. 7. And this is the best and clearest answer, that I know, to that
object^on, which some have made against those who maintain that there will be a
glorious day for the Church upon earth, after which the Saints shall endure no
more persecution, viz. That this is against the Doctrine of Christ and the
Apostles, who say, that all that will live godly shall suffer persecution, and
if we will reign with Christ, we must suffer for him, and have many
tribulations, and that this world is an evil world, etc. True, it must be thus
as long as the present state of the world continues, but in the new world, or
world to come, which the Scripture speaks of, the condition of the Saints
will be quite otherwise than in this present world it is wont to be.

4. It is evident, that the Tribes of Israel shall partake of a spiritual
salvation, if we consider the visible Church estate which they shall be in
after their conversion.

Albeit now there is no Church amongst the Jews, yet the time is at hand, when
God will erect many glorious Churches amongst them, and upon every dwelling
place of Sion, and upon all the glory he will be a defense. And the Church
polity which Israel shall then be under, will not be a carnal one (such as was
from Moses unto Christ) but a very spiritual polity, for they shall be no more
under the Mosaical paedagogy, no more under the ceremonial Law. It has been
charged upon those who did in the Primitive times assert the glorious reign of
Christ upon earth, that they did also maintain that there would be sacrifices
and other ceremonies of Moses Law, so Hieron. in Ier. 19.10. and in Zech. 14.10.
Ierom says, that the ancient Doctors held. I do believe, that that is a very
injurious charge; and that it never once entered into the heart of any of those
godly and Learned Teachers in the Church to imagine such a thing. However, sure
I am, that the word of the Lord (...) express to the contrary. Hence the Jews,
after the (...) conversion, are said to be under, not the old, bu^ the new
Covenant, i. e. not under the old but the new manner (for the Covenant of grace
as to the substance of it is for ever the same) of administration of the
Covenant. Hence the Lord says to Israel. But not by thy Covenant, Ezekiel. 16.61.
The truth is, that Christ, by his coming, abolished the ceremonial Law, and
nailed it to his Cross, and buried it in his grave. And a most loathsome work
do they perform both to God and man, that dig up the ceremonies out of that
grave where Jesus Christ buried them, above sixteen hundred years ago. Hence
Psalm. 45.10. forget thy fathers house, i. e. mind no more, neither Chald.
Paraph. in loc.
old Idolatries, not yet set your heart upon old antiquated ceremonies which
your father^ used.

A little to particularize here.

1. The Officers, the Ministry in the saved Tribes of Israel will be very
spiritual. Then will the Lord cloth his Priests with righteousness, Psalm.
13^.9. See Mal. 3.3. He shall sit as a refiner and p^rifier of silver, he shall
purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may
offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness. There shall be a wonderful
spiritual glory upon the Ministers of God in those days, Dan. 12.3. Those that
be (...)
Teachers shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and they that turn
many to righteousness as the Stars for ever and ever. As it is said of John
Baptist, that he was a burning and a shining light; so shall all the Ministers
of God be in that day which is hastening apace; They shall be set in a brighter
firmament of Church Estate, than ever yet was in the world, and their shining
shall be answerable. To be sure, there shall in that day be no (...) qui nigras
induunt vestes Arias Montanus. Alii a Pullis quas gestabant vestibus R. D.
Kimki. Alii a stigmatibus qua suo corpori inurebant. Stuckius de sacrif. p. 66.
verbum (...) significat sacerdotem gentilem nigris vestibus Indutum. Vide
Targum in Iud. 17.12. Hinc apud Rabbinos Mo^achus vocatur (...). Shindl. Lex.
Pentaglot. p. 871. Vide si placet quae habet Hottingerus in Thesaur. p. 33.
more Chemarims, no more of those black Priests which wear the marks of Baal
about them continually* I marvel not that that sort of men are enemies unto
these truths; If they could hinder it, Ministers should never preach of them,
people should never hear of them, nor one nor other should ever dive into them.
Why? their guilty-self-condemned hearts misgive them, that when this day comes
they must ^^ll, when Sion awaketh to put on her beautiful garments, and to
shake her self from the dust, Woe to Babylon, and to all the Babylonish brood!
they shall perish from off this earth, and from under these heavens.

2. There will be spiritual members in the Church, as well as spiritual
officers. And this will be not only here and there, even (as it is at this day
amongst a few Churches who in conscience to God endeavor that their building
may be of living stones, which I look upon as a first fruits of what shall be
hereafter) in a particular Church or two, but universally, Isa. 60.21. thy
people shall be all righteous. There will not be a profane person tolerated in
the Church in those days, Zech. 14. last, there shall be no more a Canaanite in
the house of the Lord. And what ever it is now, I am sure then, mere civility
and morality, together with an outward profession will not be thought enough to
qualify for Church Member-ship, except there be experience of the regenerating
grace of God in the soul. See Ezekiel. 44.9. No stranger uncircumcised in heart,
no^ uncircumcised in flesh shall enter into my sanctuary. So that circumcision
in flesh, baptism, and outward profession, will not be enough to give
admittance into the Church of God, except there be the circumcision of the
heart; and what is that, but regeneration?

"3. There will be spiritual ordinances. Then will the blessed day come, when
the pure ordinances of God shall be no more corrupted with the cursed
inventions of men. Ezekiel. 43.7, 8. My holy name shall the house of Israel no
more defile by the carkases of their Kings, i. e. by their rotten idols which
their Kings caused them to serve; nor in their setting up their threshold by my
threshold, and their post by my post, h. e. the inventions of men shall no more
be set up cheek by joul with the sacred Institutions of God. For indeed the
condition of that sin cannot stand with the peace and prosperity which shall be
in the world after the day of Isreal's salvation. It is an usual thing with the
God of jealousy to send death, famine, and sword, generation after generation,
for that sin of corrupting his worship with humane inventions, according to
what the Lord has said in the second commandment, sc. That if men Non imago,
non simulacrum prohibetur, sed non facies tibi.
do make any thing to themselves in the worship of God, he will visit the
iniquity, as upon the father, so upon the son. And wherefore is it, think you,
that God is at this day about to bath his sword in heaven, and to darken the
Sun and Moon, and to cause the Stars of heaven to loose their shining? verily
the Lord is shaking this once more, not the earth only, but the heavens, and
proceeding to do a mavelous work amongst his people, even a mavelous work,
and a wonder, to cause the wisdom of the wise to perish ( as he has done
already) and the understanding of the prudent to be hid, because they that
profess his name have their fear toward God taught by the precepts of men.
Wherefore when the day is come that all Israel shall be saved, inasmuch as then
peace and prosperity shall run down like a River, and like a mighty stream all
the world over, the sons of men shall no more set up their post by Gods pillar,
says he, whose name is the Lord of hosts.

We come now in the fourth and last place to show (as God shall help) that
(...) ^he Tribes of Israel shall partake of a Tempora^ ^^lvation. For the Jews
are not only in spiritual, but in ^^mporal bondage also, and therefore they
shall partak^ not only of spiritual, but also of a temporal salvation. The
truth of this may be evinced and cleared in some particulars.

First the thing is evident, inasmuch as the day will come when the children of
Israel shall be no more oppressed by the great ones of the earth; There will be
a time when the man of the earth shall no more oppress, Psalm. 10.18. Hence Isa.
54.1^. thou shall be far from oppression, for thou shall not fear, and from
terror, for it shall not come near thee. Hence Peter said unto the Jews, that
after their repentance, times of refreshing shall come, Acts 3.19. Now what do
these times of refreshing note, but a day, wherein there shall be freedom from
all persecution and corporal oppressions?

And hence we read of the Redemption of Israel, as in that verse from whence
the Apostle demonstrateth the words of my Text, sc. Isa. 59.20. it is said, the
Redeemer shall come to Sion. Now that very word Redemption does usually
signify temporal as well as spiritual salvation, a deliverance of the body as
well as of the soul, Luke 21.28. your redemption draws nigh, what is that?
Calvin Harm. Piscator in Luc. 21.28. v. A^es. Med. Theol. l. 1. c. 41. Th. 3.
great Interpreters take it to be the same with that redemption which the
Apostle speaks of, when he says, Romans 8.23. we wait for the redemption of
our body. However, sure it its, that the time will come when strangers shall be
able to oppress the children of Israel no more, but the quite contrary shall be
true, sc. that their oppressors shall be brought under them. See Zech. 10.4.
out of him (i. e. out of Israel) came forth (or shall come forth, for the words
are a Prophecy of what shall be, and not an History of what has been) the
corner, out of him the nail, i. e. the Magistrates and Rulers, who are compared
unto corner stones, and to nails, because the safety of the whole building and
body politic greatly depends upon them; out of him the battle bow, i. e. the
Military man, out of him every oppressor together, i. e. such as shall
suppress, not Israel but the enemies of Israel. So Isa. 14.2, 3. They shall
take them captives, whose captives they were; and they shall rule over their
oppressors. And it shall come to pass in that day that the Lord shall give them
rest from their sorrows, and from their fears, and from the hard bondage
wherein they were made to serve. See also Chap. 60. verse 14. with Ezekiel. 39.10.

Nor shall any amongst themselves oppress their poor brethren. Indeed it has
been so formerly, which caused the Apostle to use that interrogation, do not
rich men oppress you? Iam. 2.6. But after this day of salvation which we are
speaking of, it shall be so no more; Ezekiel. 46.18. The Prince shall not take of
the peoples inheritance by oppression. Isa. 60.17. I will make thy officers
peace, and thy exactors righteousness. For it is observable, that the children
of Israel were not subject unto oppression from their own Rulers, until such
time as they cast off that Theocraty, or Government by Judges which was of
divine appointment. See 1 Samuel 12.3. Now after the Jews conversion, such a
Government as that was, will be restored again amongst them. Isa. 1.26. I will
restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy counselors as at the beginning.
S^on and her converts shall be redeemed with righteousness.

Yea 2ly. There w^ll a time come when the Israel of God shall be saved from all
outward afflictions: Not only from persecution and oppression from men, but
(...) all external and corporal calamities: And (...) shall be upon earth too;
for I am not speaking of that salvation which the elect of God shall (...)
eternally after the end shall come, but of what shall be upon earth sometime
before Jesus Christ has delivered up his Mediatory kingdom. Now I say there
will a time come when upon earth the Israel of God shall be wholly freed from
affliction, Zeph. 3.15. Thou shall not see evil any more, Isa. 61. Beg. liberty
shall be proclaimed to the captives, the opening of the prison to them that are
bound, and to them that mourn in Sion shall be given beauty for ashes, joy for
mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness. So that after the
time comes that the Jews shall mourn, that they shall look upon him whom they
have pierced and mourn bitterly, they shall no more lie in the ashes of
affliction and outward calamity. See Chap. 51.11. sorrow and mourning shall
flee away: Affliction shall vanish. And hence it is said of the new Jerusalem,
Rev. 21.4. God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no
sorrow, nor crying, nor any more pain, for the former things are passed away.

3ly, The truth is further evident, in that there will a day come, when the
Israel of God shall enjoy length of days as to natural or corporal life.

As if Adam had never sinned, he had enjoyed a natural life upon earth for a
long time. And indeed it was especially a natural life, which the Covenant of
works promised. When it was said to Adam, Do and live, the meaning was, Thou
shall then live a long and happy life upon earth: even so when God shall make
all things new, the Saints shall be wonderfully delivered from natural, as well
as spiritual death. Therefore it is said that when new Jerusalem comes down
from heaven, there shall be no more death. And of this we have a promise made
to Israel, Hos. 13.14. I will ransom them from the power of the grave, I will
redeem them from death. See also Isa. 65.17. behold, I create new heavens, and
a new earth; and v. 20. there shall be no more thence an infant of days, or an
old man that has not fulfilled his days, verse 22. for as the days of a tree
(or rather the tree) are the days of my people, and mine elect shall long enjoy
the work of their hands. Hanc interpretationem sequi videntur, Septuaginta,
Chaldaeus, Paraphrastes Justinius Martyr, and alii.
Some interpret the place that they shall live as long as Adam should have
done, in case he had been confirmed in his integrity by eating of the tree of
life which was in the midst of Paradise. However the Scripture must be
fulfilled, which says that the meek shall inherit the earth, Psalm. 37.11.
Matthew. 5.5. The meek shall inherit not only heaven, but the earth, heaven and
earth are theirs, they have a right to both in respect of the promise; they are
heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ. The meek, for the present, how do
they inherit the earth, when the wicked turn them off from the earth at their
pleasure? well, but the time will come, when they shall inherit the earth.
Abraham, and so the children of Abraham, shall become heirs of the world, h. e.
of the new world, which according to divine promise we look for in time to be
created, Romans 4.13. 2 Pet. 3.13.

4ly, There will a day come, when the saved Tribes of Israel shall enjoy great
outward peace, and in that respect it might well be said that they shall
partake of a temporal salvation. Indeed a little before the conversion of the
Jews, there will be the most terrible doings in the world that ever was heard
of, in respect of wars and commotions, the waves of the Sea roaring, confused
noise and garments rolled in blood, blood and fire, and vapor of smoke; but
after the kingdom shall be restored unto Israel, then will be glorious day^ of
peace and tranquillity. See some Scriptures for this; Hos. 2.18. I will break
the bow and the sword, and the battle out of the earth, and will make them to
lie down safely, Zech. 14.11. And men shall dwell in it, and there shall be no
more utter destruction, but Jerusalem shall be safely inhabited. Yea there will
be wonderful peace and prosperity in those days, such as never was since the
world began. Isa. 66.12. I will extend peace to her like a River. See also
Chap. 60. ver. 18. and Mic. 4.3, 4. And ye shall judge among many people, and
rebuke strong Nations afar off and they shall beat their swords into plough
shares, and their spears into pruning hooks: Nation shall not lift up sword
against nation, neither shall they learn war any more, but they shall sit every
man under his vine, and under his fig tree, and none shall make them afraid;
for the mouth of the Lord of Host's has spoken it. Then certainly it shall
com^ to pass that there willl a day be upon earth when the nations shall be at
peace, and war shall be learned no more, if^ the mouth of the Lord of Host's
has spoken it.

5ly, The time will come when the Land of Israel shall be made exceeding
fruitful, therefore we may well assert a temporal salvation. I say there will a
time come when there shall be great V. Lactant. l. 7. c. 4. Buroughs on Hos.
2.18.
plenty as well as great peace over the earth, Zech. 8.12. the seed shall be
prosperous, the vine shall give her fruit, and the ground shall give her
increase, and the heavens shall give their dew, and I will cause the remnant of
this people to possess all these things, Joel 3.18. And it shall come to pass
in that day, that the Mountains shall drop down new wine; and the hills shall
flow with milk, and all the Rivers of Judah shall flow with waters, etc. These
expressions of the mountains dropping down new wine, etc. are the high and
hyperbolical Metaphors of a prophetical strain, whereby may be signified the
admirable fertility of the earth. And it must needs be so, because the
barrenness of the earth was a fruit of the curse for the sin of man. God said
to Adam, after he had sinned, cursed is the ground for thy sake: But now, when
new Jerusalem comes down from heaven, the curse shall be removed, Rev. 22.3.
there shall be no more curse, but the Throne of God, and of the Lamb shall be
in it, and his servants shall serve him. For the truth is, that in the new
heaven and the new earth, which is promised in the Scripture, things shall be
restored unto that glorious perfection which they were in at the first creation
before the Apostasy, Ezekiel. 36.35. They shall say, this Land which was desolate
is become like the Garden of Eden, i. e. like Paradise. See Isa. 51.3. Hence
the Prophets have spoken of the times of the restitution of all things, Acts
3.21. why, the restitution of all things? But because man by sin, has put all
the world out of order, sin has brought a curse and confusion, and sad
disorder even upon the frame of nature, but See Deoda^e on Act. 3.21. and Engl.
Annot. and Mayer in loc.
the days will come when all the creatures shall be restored unto their right
order and use, for which they were made at the first. Therefore also the
Apostle says, Romans 8.20, 21. the creature was made subject unto vanity not
willingly -- the creature it self also shall be delivered from the bondage of
corruption, into the glorious liberty of the children of God. The unreasonable
creature is become subject unto vanity, bondage, and corruption, but it is as
it were against its will; and therefore the creatures do all in their kind,
sigh and groan before the great God that he would deliver them from this
servitude, that they might no more be made use of to the dishonor of their
blessed Creator; and therefore the creatures shall be delivered, and made use
of only for that end which they were at first made for. And this shall be in
the day when the glory of the sons of God shall be manifested. Non bestiae per
hoc tempu^ sanguine alentur, non aves prada sed quieta and placida erunt omnia.
Canis non venabitur, accipitres non nocebunt, infans cum serpentibus ludet,
etc. Lact. l. 7. c. 24. Atque hinc Sybilla Erythea sit cauit, (...) -- (...),
etc.
And hence the state of the new heaven, and the new earth is described by such
things as were when Adam was in Paradise, but never since, Isa. 65.25. The Wolf
and the Lamb shall feed together, and the Lion shall eat straw like the
Bullock, and dust shall be the serpents meat, they shall not hurt nor destroy
in all my holy mountain says the Lord. Lege Calvin in Isai. c. 11. ver. 6.
Before the fall, the Woolf and the Lamb, the Bullock and the Lion could live
quietly by one another, man was not subject to hurt by serpents or venomous
creatures, there was not that enmity in any of the creatures to seek the
destruction of one another. Even thus shall it be again: as Adam was a Type of
Christ, Romans 5.14. So was Adams world, a Type of Christ, the second Adam his
world, when he shall come to judge the earth. I know some Jewish Doctors deride
at these things Vide M^inon in Iud. Chazeka c. ult. Rabbi Samuel i^ Sanhedri^.
c. Chelek.
saying that when the new heaven and new earth spoken of in the Scripture shall
take place, there will be no alteration in the nature of things, only that
their Nation shall have a temporal Monarchy and Dominion over all other
Nations. But what if such Rabbis Mede.
should be amongst the number of those scoffers which the Apostle Peter
speaks of, who say, that all things shall continue as they were from the
creation, and that Messiah, at his coming, shall not destroy the old world and
create a new one?

It is also true, that these truths have been very much obscured, they have
been little searched into, little known, little believed in the world. It may
be some of you think that they are new and strange notions: But if you think
them new, I can assure you upon diligent search, that these things passed for
current Doctrine in the Church of God for diverse hundred of years in the
Primitive and purest days of the Christian Church. Yea they were never called
into question until the third or fourth Century, when Antichrist began to rise.
And then indeed it was high time that those truths, which do so much concern
the glory of the kingdom of the Messiah, should be opposed and obscured, when
the great enemy of Christ began to get head in the world. And ever since,
albeit some of the Lords Worthies have born witness unto these very truths, yet
they have been exceedingly darkened; partly by those that have gone beyond what
is written in the word, and partly by those that have set themselves to oppose
what the word says. Nevertheless, if these be (as I am persuaded verily they
are) the faithful and true sayings of God; it will be our great sin, if we
should neglect to search into them: But how sinful a thing then must it needs
be to oppose and contemn these Mysteries of God?

Thus have you heard the Doctrinal part of this great truth concerning Isreal's
salvation spoken unto. Only, before we proceed to infer any uses from the
Doctrine, thus far (as the Lord has helped) treated upon, it may not be amiss
to remove some objections, which may be made against the things delivered,
especially against this last particular, of a glory upon earth, yet to come to
the Saints of God.

Obj. 1. Those Scriptures which speak of temporal salvation, are not to be
interpreted literally, but mystically, Hieron. in Jer. 31.27.
spiritual things being set forth by corporal, heavenly things by terre^e.

Answ. 1. By way of concession, there is something of truth in that assertion,
That often in the old Testament Leg^ Hornbe^^^ co^ti^ Iuda^s. l. 3. c. 2.
spiritual and heavenly things are set forth by terrene and corporal
Allegories; And this principle takes place when we read of a glorious Temple,
Altar, Priests, Sacrifices, Incense, etc. to be in the days of Messiah, these
things are not then to be interpreted literally, but allegorically: These
expressions are used ad capt^m auditorum and pro more saeculi, as being
suitable and accommodated to that Age and state of the Church. The holy
Prophets were wont to speak in the style and dialect of the Church and Age they
lived in. Yet (...) This principle must not be extended too far, partly because
it is a wrong to the Scripture to make unnecessary allegories; As Augustine De
civitate Dei.
long since well observed, a literal interpretation of Scripture is not to be
refused when it will stand with the Analogy of faith. It is a diminishing of
the word of God, causlesly to reject such an interpretation. Also because it
gives occasion of great offense to the Jews, when they perceive Christians
deny that which their Prophets have so abundantly affirmed. It is not (as
Prideux orat. de voc. Iud. Voet. disp. de signis and naturae miraculis, and in
Disp. de Regno Millenario.
some have thought) the best way to deal with the Jews, when they urge, that in
the days of Messiah, they must have such glory bestowed upon them, as the like
never was in the world, to tell them that all those things must be understood
spiritually, and not literally, which in the Prophets look that way; A^ non
optima cum Iudaeis agendi ratio esset, non ut clarissimae illae de secundo
adventu Prophetiae (...) primum torqueantur, etc. Dum enim nos clarissimas
illas de rebus in secundo adventu Christi Prophetias ad primum torquemus,
Iudaei nos derisui habent and in infidelitate sua magis obfirmantur. Clavis
Apoc. In fine.
but it were better yield to them, that they shall have such glory as the like
never was, only that this must not be at Messiah first appearing. Besides, the
Scripture is so abundant in terms which signify a corporal salvation as well
as spiritual, that I cannot but think that the holy Ghost foreseeing that men
would be ready to make this objection, the more frequently uses these literal
expressions, that so a mystical ^nterpretation might not be looked upon as
sufficient.

Obj. 2. Does not Christ say that the kingdom of God comes not with
observation, Luke 17.20. How then is it true, that Christ shall have such a
glorious kingdom upon earth as we have heard?

Answ. 1. The meaning of our Savior in that place may be, that his first
coming should not be according to the Pharisees expectation: Fieri potest ut
aliud sit (...) quam vulgo existimatur. Ut men's sit, non venit regnum Domini
expectando: notum quanto spatio Messiae regnum Iudaei expectaverint, quanta
animo conceperant. Respondet Dominus non adventurum expectantibus qui j^m
venisset: etiam dicturos frustrae hunc aut illum esse qui inter eos versaretur.
Heinsius.
The words rendered with observation may be read with expectation. The kingdom
of God, i. e. the kingdom of Messiah, which is called the kingdom of God, and
the kingdom of heaven, because it is that kingdom which Daniel prophesied the
God of heaven should set up, was not to begin as the Pharisees and other Jews
thought it would. You (says Christ to the Pharisees) make account that as soon
as Messiah comes, he will deliver you out of the hands of the Romans, and
become a great earthly Monarch; but you are much mistaken, therefore it is
added, ver. 21. The kingdom of God is amongst you, i. e. the Messiah is now
amongst you; for I do not take the meaning of those words to be, that Christ's
kingdom is regnum animarum in the souls and consciences of men, though that be
a great truth, Vide Bezam, Heinsium, Iunium, Tremelium, and Pisca^^^em in loc.
yet though there be veritas rei in that exposition, there is not veritas loci,
but Christ would give them to understand, that Messiah was already come and
conversing amongst them.

2. We must distinguish between the first and second coming of Christ. The
Pharisees were willingly ignorant of this necessary distinction; nor do the
Jews, even to this day, believe, that there is any such distinction to be made
of Messias's coming* Nay their Rabbis do expressly teach the contrary, sc. that
there shall be Menassch. Ben Israel de Resurrect. l. 3. c. 3.
but one coming of the Messiah. And because the Scriptures of the old Testament
are clear for two comings of Christ, therefore the Jews have embraced an
heretical fiction that there shall be Idem in spe Israelis p. 78. and Rabbini
in Talmud passim. C^nsule etiam Targum in Zech. 9.9. and Cant. 4.5. Porchetus
ostendit, veteres Iudaos Mes^^um filium Joseph, and filium David, pro uno
eodemque habuisse: Ac (inquit) Christus uterque fuit, filius Joseph educatione
and filius David natura.
two Messias's, one of the Tribe of Judah, and another of the Tribe of Joseph.

Now then by applying this distinction, the answer to the objection is clear
and easy, viz. that the first coming of Christ should not at all be according
to the Jews expectation in respect of visible glory, but at the first he was to
come in the form of a Servant, as an abject amongst men, and to be abhorred of
his own Nation according to the savings of the Prophets; but the second coming
of Christ shall be in as great visible (and yet spiritual) glory as ever the
Jews expected that the coming of Messiah would be, Matthew. 24.30. They shall see
the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory, and
Chap. 25.31. The Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy Angels
with him; then shall he sit upon the Throne of his glory. And hence it is
observable, that Christ did never absolutely deny his having such a visible
glorious kingdom upon earth, as that which his Disciples then looked for, only
he corrected their error as to the time of this kingdoms appearing. The
Disciples said, Lord will thou at this time restore the kingdom to Israel? Acts
1.6. Christ did not say to them, that there should never ^e any such
restoration of the kingdom to Israel, as their thoughts were running upon,
only tells them that the times and seasons were not for them to know, thereby
acknowledging that such a kingdom should indeed be as they (for the substance
of it) did from the holy Prophets expect; Thus, Luke 19.11. There were some
that thought that the kingdom of God would immediately appear. Now therein was
their error; not in expecting a glorious appearance of the kingdom of God, but
in that they made account this would be immediately. Whereupon our Savior, to
correct that error as to the time of his kingdoms coming, speaks a Parable
of a certain noble man that went into a far Country to receive for himself a
kingdom, and so to return. What is this far Country, but heaven? when Jesus
Christ ascended to heaven, then he began his glorious kingdom: Hence our
Savior said, Mark 9.1. there be some of them that stand here which shall not
taste death till they have seen the kingdom of God come with power. What is the
meaning of that? The Sic Theophylact, E^thymius, etc.
Ancients are wont to expound it of the transfiguration of Christ which
followed a few days after those words were spoken; and indeed in that
transfiguration the words of Christ were typically fulfilled: But I take the
special design of Christ to be, an intimation to his Disciples of his Beza in
Matthew. 16. ult.
ascension. Some of you says Christ shall see me ascend into the heaven of
heavens, there to sit reigning till my enemies be made my footstool. Now this
is expressed by saying, they should see the kingdom of God come with great
power, or as Matthew has it, the Son of man coming in his Skingdom. Wherefore
it is most certain that Christ went to receive a most glorious kingdom, at his
ascensio^ into heaven, therefore at his return from heaven the glory of the
kingdom of God will appear.

Obj. 3. Does not Christ say, my kingdom is not of this world, John 18.36. how
then is it true that Christ shall have such a glorious kingdom upon earth as
that which has been spoken of?

Answ. 1. That may be in this world which is not of the world, so John 17.14.
they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world. And yet both Christ
and they were then in the world. 2. The kingdom of Christ may be said not to be
of this world, because it is not of a carnal earthly, but of an high and
heavenly nature. It is an heavenly kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.18. The very kind and
nature of it is so. This brings to mind a Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 15.
Edi^. Lat.
remarkable story which Eusebius relates to have fallen out in the days of the
Emperor Domitian, it is this. There were (says he) some malicious Jews, who
out of envy at the truth informed the Emperor, that such and such persons
were, as concerning the flesh, near akin unto Christ; whereupon the Emperor
sent for those persons, intending to have killed them; but when he heard them
say, that the kingdom of Christ was not of a terrene, but only of a celestial
nature, he dismissed them without doing them any hurt. And hence it is, that
the kingdom of Christ is not carried on by earthly and carnal, but by spiritual
weapons, 2 Cor. 10.4. our weapons are not carnal. The kingdoms of this world
how are they got? and how are they kept? Is it not by fire, and blood, and
sword? but so it is not with the kingdom of Christ, he subdueth the world, by
the power of his word and spirit, that is the bow whereby he conquereth the
Nations before him, Rev. 6.2. And this interpretation suiteth exactly with the
scope of our Savior in the place alleged, therefore he says, his servants do
not fight; It is therefore a woeful mistake in those men, who say, that the
Saints, as such, must take up arms and destroy the ungodly of the world before
them, and when they have done so, they will invite Christ to come from heaven
and reign over them. Nay verily, but the weapons of Saints as such are not
swords and spears, but Preces and lacrymae sunt arma Ecclesiae. Ambrose.
prayers and tears. 3. I answer, That though the kingdom of Christ be not of
this world, yet it is of the world to come. Christ does not say my kingdom ^s
not of any world, only it is not of this world. And indeed that glorious kingdom
promised unto Christ and his Saints upon the earth, is not to be expected in
this world, but in the world to come, i. e. at the day of judgment. Sometimes
indeed the world to come is taken more comprehensively, for Dies Messiae, the
whole time of the Messiah; therefore the Apostle says, that upon them the ends
of the world were come, and that Apostates may taste of the powers of the would
to come, yet more than once in the Scripture is the world to come taken more
strictly for Dies judicii, vel secundi adventus Messiae, the day of judgment as
we showed you the last opportunity. Consider Ephesians. 1.20, 21. Luke 20.34, 35, 36.
Then, and not till then, will be the time when the Saints shall judge the
world, and have dominion over all the earth. There are many mistakes about this
matter. Some deny that ever the Saints shall have a glorious kingdom upon the
earth; others say, that it shall be, but long before Jesus Christ comes to
judge the world. But the truth is, that great glory promised to the Saints, the
new heaven and the new earth wherein dwells righteousness, will be neither
before, nor after, but during the time of the day of judgment. Then shall every
knee bow, and every tongue confess unto God, Romans 14.10, 11. Thus Psalm. 66.4.
it is said, All the earth shall worship thee, and shall sing unto thee, they
shall sing to thy name. Selah. Now in the Septuagint that 66 Psalm is in the
Title of it called (...). Vide Called. Paraph. in ver. 9. Istius Psalmi. Vulgat.
Lat. Aethi^p. and Arabic. Interor^s isla verba habent. Attamen Grotius
existimat Graecem Ecclesiam ea addidisse.
a Psalm of the Resurrection. Then therefore will that Scripture be fulfilled,
that All the earth shall worship God, sc. after the resurrection at the last
day. Let us consider the Scripture a little further, Psalm. 96.11. O let the
heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad, let the Sea roar, and the fullness
thereof, let the field be joyful, and all that is therein, then shall all the
Trees of the Wood rejoice. Now when is that, that the creatures shall thus be
delivered and restored to their primitive beauty and glory? ver. 13. before the
Lord, for he comes, for he comes to judge the earth, he shall judge the world
with righteousness, and the people with his truth. See also Isa. 44.23. And
hence the Apostle, Romans 8.20, 21, 22, 23. gives us to understand, that the
creature which is at present subject to corruption, h. e. the air which may
become Pestilential and unwholsom, and so subject unto corruption in that
respect; and the water which may be corrupted and distempered with winds, and
storms, and tempests; and the earth which is subject to blastings with the
fruits thereof, etc. shall be delivered from this subjection to corruption at
the time when the bodies of the Saints shall be redeemed from the power of the
grave, as well as freed from molestation and oppression by wicked and
unreasonable men. Hence Psalm. 49.14. It is said, the upright shall have
dominion over them in the morning: So that there will a day come when the
Saints of God shall have dominion over the wicked; yea, over all the rich and
great ones amongst the wicked of the earth (according to the scope and context
of that place) but when will this day of the upright's dominion be? even in the
morning, i. e. at the resurrection of the just (as Sic Calvin, Iunius,
Piscator, Ainsworth, and Translators, etc.
Interpreters are wont to expound it) which is resembled unto the morning. And
indeed the first resurrection (the dead in Christ shall arise first, blessed
and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection) will be the morning of
the day of judgment: and therefore the day of judgment, when the raised Saints
shall have dominion over the world, may well be called the morning by the
Psalmist. Again see Matthew. 19.28. ye which have followed me; (there the stop
should be made in reading the words) in the regeneration when the Son of man
shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye shall also sit upon twelve Thrones,
judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. So that there will be a day when the
Saints upon earth shall sit upon Thrones of judgment. But when? even in the
regeneration, (...), i. e. in renovatione mundi vel potius post renovationem
mundi in altero saculo: Quanquam nomen (...) videtur potissimum intelligendum
de restitutione corporum and resurrectione. Piscator sic and Jac. Capellus.
Intelligitur totius naturae nostrae perfecta renovatio, and plenaria moriis
abol^tio. Ge^h. Harm. Vide Parcum in loc. Confer etiam Verse. Syriac. Arab. and
Aethiop.
that is to say at the resurrection, when there will be a (...), a regeneration
or renovation of the world. Hence the Vide Epiphanium adversus Manetem. Ac
Justinius Martyr in Dial. Cum Tryph. resurrectionem corporis vocat (...). Porro
Augustinus [de Civ. Dei lib. 20 c. 5.] hac habet verba, Quod autem ait in
regeneratione proculdub^o mortuorum resurrectionem n^mine voluit regeneration's
intelligi. Add quod ipse Varro de corporis resurrectione philosophatus est,
qu^m deserte (...) vocavit.
are wont to call the day of judgment, (...), the regeneration (or renovation)
of (or from) the Lords presence. Moreover that by the regeneration, we are to
understand the resurrection, is evident, because Mark and Luke, instead of the
word regeneration, say, the world to come. Yet more, the truth hereof is
evident from Dan. 7.26, 27. The judgment shall sit, -- and the kingdom, and
dominion, and greatness of the kingdom under the whole heavens shall be given
unto the people of the Saints of the most h^gh, etc. So that when the time
comes that the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven shall be given
to the Saints, the judgment shall sit. Now, that by the judgment fitting is
meant, the great day of judgment, is to me past a doubt. For whence is that
term of the day of judgment? we do not find it in the old Testament, but often
in the new. And the reason why Christ and his Apostles used that term, was,
because it was much used in the Church of the Jews, and had a Scripture
foundation. Hence we read of the day of judgment more frequently in the Jews
writings then in the new Testament it self. Now the Jews took up that term, of
the day of judgment, from the 7th. Chap. of Dan. Therefore no doubt but that by
the judgment sitting, is meant the great day of judgment; therefore till that
day the kingdom under the whole heaven comes not into the hands of the Saints.
Again, Acts 3.19. The times of refreshing are said to be from the presence of
the Lord. Therefore Jesus Christ will be personally present (and that he will
not be till the judgment) when the times of refreshing shall come. And in the
Scripture the day of judgment is described by Hinc in Epist. Polycratis (apud
Eusebius. l. 3. c. 25.) de obitu Philippi and Iohannis ait, (...).
the presence of the Lord, 2 These. 1.9. Moreover to be acquainted with the
writings and notions which were of old in use amongst the Jews, is of wonderful
advantage toward the understanding of many places in the Scripture, especially
in the new Testament. Now the Jews were wont to call the day of judgment, (...)
or the world to come, by that very name of a time of refreshing. Hence they
were wont to say, That one hour of refreshing in Vid. Heins^i exerc. in N. T.
p. 256.
the world to come, was better than a whole life in the present state of the
world. And in verse. 21. It is plainly expressed, that in the glorious time of
the restitution of all things, Jesus will come again from heaven. And is not 2
These. 1.7. a clear place to prove, that the glorious Sabbatism which remains
for the Saints upon earth will begin at Christ's coming from heaven to judge the
world? Hence also Christ's kingdom is said to be at the time of his appearing to
judge the quick and the dead, 2 Timothy 4.1. And Rev. 11.15. the seventh Angel
sounded, and there were great voices in heaven, saying, the kingdoms of this
world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall
reign for ever and ever. So that when the time comes that all the kingdoms of
the world shall become the kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, the seventh
Angel sounds the Trumpet. Now by the seventh Trumpet (as Sic Andraas, Aretas,
Beda, Primasius, Foxus, Bullingerus, Tossanus, Marloratus, Alphonsus, Pareus,
Medus, Piscator, and alii.
Interpreters do very unanimously carry it) we are to understand the last
Trump, which shall usher in the resurrection of the dead, and the day of
judgment, wherefore verse. 18. it is said, thy wrath is come, and the time of the
dead, that they should be judged, and that thou should give reward unto thy
servants, the Prophets, and to thy Saints, and them that fear thy name small
and great, and should destroy them which destroy the earth. By all these
Scriptures then it is abundantly evident, That the glorious kingdom which
Christ with his Saints shall have upon earth, will not be till the great day of
judgment. Only remember that the Scripture speaks of a first and a second
resurrection, and so of a first and an ultimate judgment. For as in a day there
is an evening and a morning, so in this great day, even the day of judgment,
there is an evening and a morning: The one contains that blessed thousand
years John speaks of, the other contains that space which shall be between
the resurrection of the unjust, and the time when Christ shall give up his
Mediatory kingdom, when God shall be all in all.

You Will say, but this is cold comfort for us, we expected a glorious time for the
Saints upon earth to be at hand, but you tell us that that great glory promised
to the Saints upon earth, when new Jerusalem comes down from heaven, is not to
be expected before the day of judgment.

Answ. Truly I do tell you so, yet I trust not I, but the Lord; Nevertheless as
for such of you as do indeed love and long for the appearing of the great God,
and our Savior Jesus Christ: I shall say two things to you which are full of
admirable consolation. 1. That the day of judgment is not so far off as the
world imagines it is.

Not that I can Lege August. Epist. ad Hesychium.
any way approve of their presumption, who go about to determine justly, how
long it shall be to the day of judgment; Nay, if that principle which was
Traditio D^mus Eli^ Sic etiam R. Ketina and R. Ash, qui fuit Author Talmud
Babylon. An. Chapter 367.
an ancient and common tradition amongst the Jews whilst they were yet the
Church of God, and which from them many Learned men Vide Alsted. Cronol. cap.
1. Cyprian ad Fortunatum Iren. l. 5. c. ult. Lactan. l. 7. c. 14. Gregor. in 1
Reg. 9. Corn. a Lapid. in Apoc c. 20.
have taken up, should hold true, viz. That this world should continue six
thousand years (according to the days of the week at the first creation) and
that the 7th. thousand should be the glorious Sabbatism or rest upon earth
which remains for the people of God, yet no one can tell justly when the day
of judgment shall begin, for none can tell justly how old the world is.
According to the The Author of Revelation revealed, thinks the world was 6000
years old above ten years since. And according to Epiphanius, Orosius, Ierom,
Philo, Isidore, Eusebius, Nauclerus, Bid, Suidas, Cuspinian, the world was
above 5000 years old at the birth of Christ. Nay, according to Regi^montanus,
and Alphonsus, the world was then 6984. years old. Lege Alsted. Cronol. c. ult
sic etiam Craconius, On^phrius, Gau^icus, Lauretus, and Martyrologium Romanu,
lege Voet. Dis^ut. de tempore Not. Christi. Drusii Notas in Sulp. Severum. l.
2. p. 251.252.
account of some, the world is even now above 6000 years old; According to the
present Jewish Viz. That begun by R. Hittel, which makes the world to be now
54^7 years old.
supputation the world will not be so old near this 600 years; And others there
are, Following the Samaritane Pentiteuch.
who, upon very probable grounds, think that the world wants not an hundred
years of being 6000 years old. Thus there is great variety in computations.
Doubtless (as one observes) by this confusion in accounts, the Lord has put a
check to the ambitious and curious minds of men, who else would have been (as
some have) too rashly determining the very time of Christ's coming to judge the
world, whereas God will have that day to come upon all the earth like a snare.
Nevertheless we may safely affirm in the general, that the time is nearer than
most are aware of. E vicino Praecedit finem saculi mysteriosa illa populi
Iudaici conversio, de qua Apostolus. Romans 11. etc. Za^ch. de fine saeculi. p.
88.
Divines are wont to make the conversion of the Jews an immediate sign
fore-running the day of judgment. Consider Rev. 11.14. when the second woe is
past, the third woe will come quickly. By that time the Jews conversion is well
over, (if not before) the second woe will be past, that is to say, the Turk
shall no more scourge the Christian world. Now after this, the third woe comes
quickly, That is, the day of judgment, which will be the most terrible and
woeful day to a world of ungodly ones, that ever was since man was placed upon
the earth; That day will burn as an Oven, and all that do wickedly shall be as
stubble. Furthermore weigh in your thoughts this argument: The final
destruction of Antichrist will not be until Jesus Christ come to judge the
earth. So Daniel plainly expresses it, that Antichrist must prevail more or
less even till the Lords coming to judgment, Dan. 7.21, 22. And so says the
Apostle, 2 These. 2.8. The Lord will consume the wicked one with the breath of
his mouth, and (...). In discrimine sunt (...) and (...). Et signanter hic
distinguuntur. Illud est tractim iminuere, hoc est funditus tollere. Cocceius
de Antich. Dissert. p. 38.
abolish him with the brightness of his coming. Mark here I pray you, There is
a consumption to befall Antichrist, and after that, an abolition; The
consumption is to be by the breath of the Lords mouth, i. e. by the power of
his word and spirit. Antichrist has been in a deep consumption above these
hundred years. Bellarmin De R. P. lib. 3. c. 22.
complains that ever since the Protestants have taught that the Pope was
Antichrist, his dominion has been exceedingly diminished. But then there is an
utter abolition of Antichrist yet to come, and that will be by the Epiphany of
the Lords presence, the brightness of his coming, which even they Cartwright in
his Catechism p. 324. Bradshaw in his Expos. on 2 These. See also Confessions of
Helvetia and Auspurg. In Harm. of Confess. p. 88.103. Vide Pare. in Apoc. 19.20.
Cujus verba sunt, Illustri adventu suo abolebit, Quod citra controversiam
intelligendum est de novissimo adventu Domini ad Iudicium.
that are far enough from any Millenary notion or opinion, do nevertheless
(some of them) interpret of a personal coming to judgment: And indeed the day
of judgment is usually signified by that expression, of the coming of the Lord,
2 These. 2.1. and 1 Cor. 16.22. If any love not the Lord Jesus Christ, which
words are an Hebraism, the meaning is, if any maliciously blaspheme the Lord
Jesus Christ, let him be anathema, i. e. accursed; maranatha, i. e. the Lord
comes, the meaning is, let the curse of God remain upon him till dooms day. So
that the day of judgment is signified by that expression of the Lords coming.
Furthermore, in the 9th. Psalm, in the Title of the Psalm it is said to be upon
Muth-labben, that is in English, the death of the son, what son is that, but
the son of perdition, sc. Antichrist. Now in ver. 7, 8. It is said the Lord
has prepared his Throne for judgment, and he shall judge the world in
righteousness, he shall minister judgment to the people in uprightness. So that
when Muth-labben, when the death of the son of perdition shall come, the Lord
will sit upon his Throne judging the world. But the final ruin of Antichrist
cannot be far off. It is certain that the time, times, and half a time allowed
for Antichrists reign is very far spent; therefore the day of judgment draws on
apace. Now what a most comfortable meditation is this? Amen, even so, come Lord
Jesus, come quickly!

2. Consider, That there will be a glorious inchoation and first fruits of that
kingdom which the Saints shall possess at the great day, even before Christ
comes from heaven to judge the earth. For the Jews (as has been showed) shall
be converted before the day of judgment. And Rome (though not the whole
Antichristian state) will be destroyed before the coming of Christ; and the
resurrection of the two witnesses will take place before the sounding of the
7th. even toward the conclusion of the 6th. Trumpet. Consider Rev. 11.11, 12.
So that there must be an heaven established in the world which shall put great
respect upon the slain and silenced witnesses of Jesus Christ, h. e. God will
shake the European Nations (this once more he will shake not the earth only,
but the heaven) until he has brought forth such higher powers as shall promote
the interest of Jesus Christ and his Saints. That I take to be meant by heaven,
even an higher power. For so the Prophetical strain runs. Hence the ruin of
the King of Babylon is described by saying, how art thou fallen from heaven O
Lucifer* and the destruction of the state of Idumea is set forth by saying, the
Lord will has his sword in heaven, the overthrow of the Roman Pagan higher
powers is called a departure of the heavens as a scroll: And hence it is said,
Rev. 12.8. The Dragon found no more place in heaven, i. e. Pagans were no more
suffered to be in any place of Authority, etc. Thus when it is said, that the
witnesses must hear a great voice from heaven, it argues that an higher power
shall be established in the world, which will highly advance and honor the
faithful witnesses of Jesus Christ. Now by comparing the word and works of God
together. I cannot but be persuaded, that the Lord is even now about to bring
this great work to pass, though in such a way as shall astonish all the earth.
It may be in such a way, and by such means as that you read of Judge. 7.22. And
2 Chronicles. 20.23. However sure it is, that when the witnesses are raised, it is by
a spirit of life from God, h. e. the thing will be effected by the mighty
wonder-working hand of Divine Providence. Likewise this work must be brought to
pass suddenly and unexpectedly, which may possibly be intended when it is said,
Rev. 11.12. The witnesses ascended in a cloud, h. e. not only with the
acclamations of a multitude, as thick as clouds, Isa. 60.8. Heb. 12.1. but
suddenly and unexpectedly. For the clouds fly swiftly, and when the heaven is
clear many times, speedily and unexpectedly it is overspread with clouds.
Therefore in the Prophetical strain, a sudden and strange event is signified by
the notion of a cloud. Consider Ier. 4.13. and Isa. 19.1.

Thus have we done with the Doctrinal part of this great Truth, concerning
Isreal's salvation. We proceed now (as the Lord shall help) to infer some Uses
from the Doctrine delivered.

Use 1. Is it so that the time will surely come when all Israel shall partake
of such a salvation as that which has been spoken of? Hence then it follows,
that we should labor to be acquainted with these Truths which do concern the
Mystery of God in Isreal's salvation. Indeed if these things were cunningly
devised fables, or if they were but the uncertain conjectures of men, we might
be held excused, though we should not bestow precious time in looking into
them; but inasmuch as they are things that shall surely come to pass, the evil
will be great if we should not look into these holy Mysteries. We may say of
these things, as the Prophet Daniel spoke concerning that dream which God sent
upon Nebuchadnezar, Dan. 2.45. the dream is certain, and the interpretation
thereof is sure. Now part of that dream was concerning the kingdom of Jesus
Christ, first, as a little stone, by the power of his word and spirit, subduing
the world; and after that as a great mountain filling the whole earth. So that
there will a time come when the kingdom of Christ shall be established all the
earth over, the thing is certain and sure. And therefore John (or Christ by
John) speaking concerning that new heaven, and new earth which shall be when
part of heaven shall come down upon the earth, sc. when new Jerusalem shall
come down from God out of heaven, says, Rev. 2^.6. These sayings are faithful
and true, h. e. they (...) such things as God will faithfully and truly
perform, that nothing shall be unfulfilled of all those sayings which the mouth
of the Lord has spoken. Therefore these are sayings not to be neglected.

Now in the prosecution of this Use, two things may be attended. 1. To lay down
some Motives to stir us up to search into these mysterious things. 2. Some
Rules of direction to be observed, in order to attaining the knowledge thereof.

For Motives consider 1. The divine excellency which is in these mysterious
truths. Indeed all truth is of a divine original. God is the Author of all
truth, because he is the Author of all being, and truth and being are the same:
As all goodness is originally from the goodness of God, so all truth is
originally from the truth of God: Hence God is called, the God of truth, and
his spirit, the spirit of truth; because Veritas a quocunque est, a spiritu
sancto est. Ambros. Prophetae Daemonum si vera loquantur, ista veritas est a
spiritu sancto. Vide Raimund. Bregan. de Theol. Gent. c. 12.
all truth is from God, and from his spirit. But especially this is true
concerning those truths that cannot be known by the book of the creature, but
only by the book of Scripture: and most of all is this true concerning
Prophetical Scripture. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God; but this
is eminently to be affirmed of the prophesies contained in the Scriptures of
truth, 2 Pet. 1.20, 21. Hence the prophetical book of the new Testament is
called by the name of Revelation, Rev. 1.1. The revelation of Jesus Christ; why
Revelation? but because the things contained in that book, had never been known
amongst the sons of men, had it not been for the extraordinary Revelation of
the spirit of Christ. As the Gospel is said to be by revelation, Gal. 1.12.
because the mysteries of the Gospel are not learned out of the book of Nature.
So the prophesies of God's word are called Revelation, because the things
therein contained had never been known unto the world, but by and from the
Revelation of the spirit.

Besides, it is evident, that there is some peculiar excellency in these
mysteries which concerns the glory of Christ's kingdom upon earth, because it
has been the great design of Satan to obscure, and darken, and hide these
truths from the world. From the great subtilty of Satan it has come to pass
that some men of very corrupt minds have asserted that Messiah shall have a
glorious kingdom upon the earth, Some So say Eusebius and Austin. But it may be
questioned whether Cerinthus did indeed hold any such opinion, for neither
Irenaeus, nor Tertullian, nor yet Epiphanius do mention any such thing to be
amongst the Errors of Cerinthus.
say that Cerinthus (adding to this opinion carnal and heretical delusions) did
so maintain; to be sure he was a very desperate Heretic, and may be one of
those Antichrists which the Apostle speaks of when he says, that many
Antichrists were then come, 1 John 2.18. Likewise the Jews in their Talmud have
many gross and carnal conceits about the temporal glory of Messiah his kingdom.
So have many that are of the fifth-Monarchy persuasion. So had those monstrous
De quibus legantur Spanhemius in Histor. Narr. and Sleid^n. Comment. vide
quoque Zuinglium de Authoribus sedition^m.
German Anabaptists which were stirred up by the Devil to oppose the
Reformation in Luthers days. And there is a Viz. Fratres Roseae crucis. V^deat
cui vacat Epist. Dedic. ante Fratris Rogeri Baconis Epistolam. Sed detestabilem
hujus Sectae Idolatriam passim in Disputationibus ostendit Clariss. Voetius. Ac
hisce Fra^ribus addi possint Weigeliani, Paracelsistae, Fran. P^ccius, etc.
Vide Hornbeck Apol. Pro Eccles. Christian. p. 84.
Popish Sect at this present, which does maintain that there will be a glorious
restitution of all things here below. Now by this means Satan has greatly
prevailed to keep the world in ignorance of the true glory of these mysteries;
for many good men are apt to think with themselves, what? shall we believe that
the Saints shall have a glorious reign upon earth? that is an opinion which
Heretics have held, which savours of Judaism, which such and such disorderly
persons have been taken with, and so Satan has his design in keeping many
godly souls from enjoying the comfort of these truths. This then shows, that
there is some divine excellency in these mysteries, otherwise the wicked one
would not so envy Gods children the knowledge of these things. Again, it is
evident, that there is an excellency in these truths, because of the difficulty
which is in coming to the clear understanding of them.

It is an usual observation, that (...). Arist.
precious things are attained with much difficulty; so may we say concerning
truths* as well as things, precious truths are found out with much difficulty.
The sweetest kernel is many times hid under the hardest shell: even so before a
man come to the kernel of these truths, there is an hard shell to be broken
which will cost some pains and difficulty. I say there is difficulty and
obscurity in these truths. Hence, 2 Pet. 3.16. In which (says the Apostle) are
some things hard to be understood. The Antecedent to that relative [which] is
not Epistles, but things (for Lectionem amplector quam pierique codices
sequuntur ut (...) non (...) legatur. Heinsius. See the Dutch-Anno^. in loc.
the Greek is (...), and not (...), h. e. those things concerning the Lords
coming to judge the world, and to create the new heaven, and the new earth,
wherein dwells righteousness. Our beloved Brother Paul, says Peter, has
spoken not only in his Epistle unto Viz. Hebr. 1.6. and 2.5. and 12.14, 28, 29.
you Hebrews, but in all the rest of his Epistles concerning the coming of
Christ to judge the world, and to set up his glogious kingdom upon the earth,
in which things there are some matters hard to be understood. Moreover, this is
wont to be noted as one difference between truths fundamental and
extra-fundamental. In that, as for fundamental truths, the knowledge of them is
easily attained* As he Hilary.
said of old, In perspicuo and facili stat aeternitas. Truths absolutely
necessary to salvation are clear and easy to be discerned: whereas
extra-fundamental truths are many times involved in great diff^culties and
obscurities. And of this sort are the truths which concern that glorious
visible kingdom which Jesus Christ shall one day possess upon the earth. Let no
one say, then we will not labor after the knowledge of these truths, if they
are of a circumstantial nature only: By the same reason you may say that you
will not labor to be acquainted with the order which God has appointed for
the Government of his Church which is his house, because the knowledge of those
things is extra-fundamental; yet surely we should labor to be acquainted not
only with matters of faith, but of order; not only with matters of Doctrine,
but with matters of Worship and Discipline: But inasmuch as these truths
concerning Christ's kingdom are extra-fundamental, therefore the knowledge of
them is difficult* And inasmuch as the knowledge of them is difficult,
therefore the truths are excellent.

Furthermore it is evident, that there is a peculiar excellency in these
truths, because the right knowledge of them makes one blessed. See Rev. 1.3.
Blessed is he that reads, i. e. he that rightly interpeteth: we call the
interpretation of a Riddle the reading of it, so the interpretation of
prophesies (which are Riddles before their accomplishment) is the reading of
them, and they that hear the words of this prophecy, h. e. they that hear one
rightly interpreting the words of that prophecy. Now where can you find
amongst all the books of God, the like solemn encouragement to the reading and
study thereof? what other boo^ is there in all the Bible that begins so,
Blessed is he that understands this book? Therefore undoubtedly there is a
divine and glorious excellency more than ordinary in the truths contained in
that Book which is a more full declaration of the Mystery of God revealed unto
the holy Prophets.

Consid. 2. It is no small evil to be willingly ignorant of these divine and
holy mysteries. Indeed when men are ignorant through weakness or inability
^odiscern the truth, God will many times pass by such weakness as that is: But
if ignorance be either through prejudice conceived against the truth, o^
through a spirit of sloth and negligence whence a man will not take pains to
come unto the knowledge of the truth, it is a very provoking sin. What says
the Apostle? 2 Pet. 1.19. we have a ^ure word of prophecy, whereunto you do
well that you take heed: But what then shall we think of those who as to the
word of prophecy they give no heed unto it? certainly they do not do well, but
they do very ill. Some there are that as to the word of exhortation or
practice, that they take heed unto, and that is so far well, but as to the word
of knowledge or prophecy, they never heed that, in which neglect they do not
well; but ill. Certainly if it be a duty incumbent upon those to whom the Lord
has committed the word, to preach of these truths concerning the restoration
of Israel, then it must needs be a duty incumbent upon people to seek after the
knowledge of these truths. But the former of these is true, Ier. 31.10. Hear
the word of the Lord, O ye Nations, and declare it in the Isles afar off, and
say, he that scattered Israel will gather him. As if the Lord had said, as for
you that are the publishers of my word amongst the Gentiles, you that are
employed in sounding the Trumpet of the everlasting Gospel amongst the Nations,
see that you do not neglect to declare these truths amongst them, which concern
the salvation of Israel. Therefore people ought to be acquai^^^d with such
truths as these are. Indeed men do ill as to themselves, they wrong themselves
exceedingly when they neglect to search into these very truths: For it is said,
2 Timothy 3.16. That all Scripture is profitable, therefore they that neglect
prophetical Scripture, sin against their own spiritual profit and advantage.
And Romans 15.4. The Apostle says not that some things only, but that whatsoever
things were written afore-time, were written for our learning. He does not say
that matters of practice were written for our learning, but as for matters of
prophecy they were written for no bodies learning; the Apostle never spoke
such a word as that, but he affirms the quite contrary: But especially the evil
of this neglect appears, in that it is great ingratitude unto the most high God
for the riches of his grace in condescending to make known his counsels unto
the Sons of men. Shall Jehovah, who humbles himself to look upon the things
that are done in heaven, condescend so infinitely as to make known his eternal
counsels unto men upon the earth. And shall he speak unto us concerning this
Mystery of the restitution of all things, not only by one, or two, or three,
but by the mouth of all his Prophets? And yet shall we mortals be so
ungrateful, and so wretched, as to take no notice of what the Lord has spoken?
shall they be as words spoken in the air? shall we let these truths lie by us
as if they were of no use? God forbid that it should be so. One would think
that every one should rather be taken with admiration at the infinite grace of
God, as David was, Lord! (says he) that thou should speak to me of things to
come: So it should affect our hearts, (...) God should speak unto us of things
(...) come* therefore not to mind (...) be an evil very heinous and pro^oking.

C^^sider ^. That a gracious soul may have much spiritual delight and comfort
in diving into these mysterious truths. John had experience of this, Rev.
10.10. when I ate the book, it was in my mouth sweet as honey. It is true, that
when the book was in his belly, it was bitter, the meaning of which may be,
that bitter afflictions should befall the Church during the reign of Antichrist,
and in respect of those calamitous events, the book is said to be bitter in his
belly. But in his mouth it was sweet as honey, to signify to us that the
understanding of prophesies is a most sweet and comfortable thing. And thus
also the Prophet Jeremy, Chap. 31.26. upon this I awaked, and beheld, and my
sleep was sweet unto me, h. e. he had newly had a Vision concerning the
salvation of all the Tribes of Israel, and upon this, his sleep was sweet unto
him. As sleep is a mavelous comfortable and Tale tuum carmen nobis divine
Poeta-Quale s^por fessis, etc.
refreshing thing unto a man that is weary, so was the contemplation of Isreal's
salvation a mavelous refreshing to the blessed soul of the holy Prophet. The
truth is, that whilst a man is dwelling upon these meditations, he is as it
were in heaven upon earth, he has fellowship with the Angels in heaven; whence
the Angel said unto John, I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren the
Prophets. When men of God in former times have had their minds taken up with
divine Visions, Angels of God have been with them; (...) so it is with the
servants of God at this day, though the Ministry of the holy Angels be more
secret, spiritual and invisible, than sometimes formerly. When the servants of
the Lord are reading, or writing, or meditating, or praying concerning these
Mysteries to the great God of Heaven and Earth, the blessed Angels are standing
by them all the time; and no doubt but that the seven spirits which stand
before the Throne of God, are instruments of much grace and peace toward his
servants, especially when they are engaged in such a work as this is: But there
is that which is better than fellowship with Angels, even communion with the
blessed holy God is to be enjoyed in these Meditations. Yea, much of God is to
be seen and felt in these studies. It is said that the Lord has made darkness
pavillions round about him, 2 Samuel 22.12. And does not Solomon say, 2 Chronicles.
6.1. The Lord has said that he would dwell in the thick darkness, even so it
is most true, that God dwells in the dark prophesies of his word. There he is
to be seen, there are the breathings of his spirit, there is a presence of God
that is unutterable.

And this I may affirm to you, that if there be any man which has not had
communion with God in looking into these Mysteries (which Angels love to pry
into) either it is because he has no grace in his soul, and these Mysteries
indeed are such things as an unregenerate heart can find no sap, nor favor in
them. They are the deep things of the spirit of God, which being spiritually
discerned, the natural man cannot see any beauty in them; nay, his heart
secretly rises against them; or else it is because of ignorance and
unacquaintedness with the truth of these Mysteries, that a man sees not much
of God in them. And so it is too sadly true, that some of the Lords own
children may have very low and unworthy thoughts concerning these Mysteries,
scil* through their weakness and ignorance in the Truth. Thus we read
concerning the Disciples themselves, Luke 24.11. that when they were told of
Christ's Resurrection, they looked upon those words as idle tales, and believed
them not: So there are that look upon the things that concern the first
Resurrection as dreams not to be believed. As if these things were only the
airy, empty speculations of some men with notions above the clouds: But as for
those whose understandings God has opened to conceive and receive these truths
they see a glory in them above the world, that eye has not seen, nor tongue
can express.

Consider 4. That the time wherein the Mystery of God shall be finished draws
on apace. The salvation of all Israel, it is now near to be revealed. And this
is a mavelous encouragement, to look into this Mystery of Isreal's salvation.
For inasmuch as the time of fulfilling prophesies it at hand, we may hope that
they shall be unsealed unto those whose hearts are set upon them, Rev. 22.10.
and Chap. 10. ver. 11. It was said to John, Thou must prophecy again; what is
the meaning of that? Is it (as Sic Andreas and qui ^um sequuntur.
some have thought) that John should be again sent into the world before the
last day? I do not think so. Though something may be said to prove that Mede.
John Baptist shall be raised from* the dead a little before the day of
judgment, to be an instrument of converting the Jewish Nation, yet there is no
reason to believe so concerning John the Apostle. The meaning then of those
words, thou shall prophecy again, may be, Mr. Cotton in loc. in M. S. ^. In
hanc sententiam ire videntur, Pareus, and Lawenus, and Buroughs, in Hos. 1.
that there will a time come, when the gift of inte^^^eting prophetical
Scripture shall be wonderfully revived in the Church, that the book of
Revelation shall be interpreted and understood as clearly almost, as if John
himself were here to preach of these things: And when should this time be, if
not when the prophesies are come to their birth? well, but how does it appear
that the Mystery of God will shortly be finished? This is manifest, because the
signs fore-running the accomplishment of the Mystery of God in the glorious
salvation of all Israel are already working, what sign? what token of this day
can you think of, but that it is even now appearing? I Will mention (by the help
of Christ) two things unto you, that are signs of this great and notable day of
the Lord being near. 1. When the Virgins, not only foolish, but wise also are
asleep; this is a sign that the Mystery of God shall be finished ere long,
Matthew. 25.5, 6. whilst the Bridegroom tarryed, they all slumbred and slept, and
at midnight there was a cry made, behold, the Bridegroom comes: So then, when
the wise Virgins are asleep, amongst the rest, this is a sign that Jesus Christ
is coming (not to the ultimate judgment, but) as a Bridegroom. This is a sign
that the great and blessed Nuptials draw on apace, concerning which Christ
spoke at the Institution of the Lords Supper, saying, I will drink no more of
the fruit of the Vine until that day that I drink it new i. e. not corporally,
but after a spiritual and new kind of manner, in the kingdom of God, Mark
14.25. Consider also Rev. 19.6, 7. There was the voice of a great multitude,
saying, Allelujah, the Lord God omnipotent reigns, the Marriage of the Lamb
is come, and his Wife has made her self ready: When once the Jews are
converted, then will this voice be heard; then will the Lambs Wife be made
ready for the Marriage. Now I say, the foregoing sign of this, is sleeping
amongst the Virgins. And alas is it not so now? Are not all the Virgins asleep?
what else means that strange spirit of worldliness that possesses and
prevails upon great Professors? Lamentable! Professors are ready to comply
with any thing, though it be to the straining of their consciences; what say
they? we must be wise, we must be wise: and though the wisdom of the Serpent,
devoures the innocence of the Dove, they care not. Any thing to save an estate;
what though the men we have to do withal be the enemies of God, and of his
Saints, yet say they, Let us comply as far as ever we can. I do declare unto
you, that, the Lord Jesus is coming to shake men out of these slumbers. Is it
now a time to use base compliances, to save an Estate, when all men's Estates
are going to wrack and ruin? Now must you needs have great things for selves,
when the Stars cannot keep themselves in heaven? I pray God for you, that when
the Lord Jesus comes, you be not blamed and shamed before all the world.

2ly, The present Tumults and shakings of the Nations are a sign, that the
Mystery of God shall be finished ere long, and that the kingdom shall become
the Lord's all the world over. Certainly I do believe that this earthquake
which the Lord of heaven and earth has now begun, will not be over until
Babylon fall and rise no more. A few years ago there was a strange calm upon
the world; what was that a sign of? Truly, that calm, which was on the earth
six or seven years ago, was a prognostic of the Earthquake wherein the
witnesses shall be raised, and a tenth part of the City shall fall. Consider
the Scriptures, see Psalm. 46. (which some are wont to call Luthers Psalm,
because Luther was much delighted in the reading and singing thereof.) Now in
the Title of the Psalm it is said to be upon (...). de Secretis filii. Arab.
Consule Ainsworth on Tit. istius Psalmi.
Alamoth, what is that? the word comes from the Hebrew Alam, which signifies
hid or secret, Vide Kircheri Concord. part 2. p. 791.
and therefore the seventy Interpreters render the word (...), i. e. upon the
hidden things: So then from the Title of the Psalm we may gather, that when the
things therein spoken do come to pass, it is a sign that the Mysteries of God,
even that Mystery which has been hid in God, as the Apostle speaks, is
fulfilling and finishing. Now see ver. 8. Behold the works of God, what
desolations he has made in the earth. Is not this Scripture fulfilling? Is not
the Lord making desolations in the earth? we may gather thence, that the (...),
the hidden things of the Mystery of God are finishing apace. Consider also ver.
9. He makes Wars to cease unto the end of the earth, he breaks the bow, and
cutteth the spear insunder, he burns the chaeriot in fire: There shall such a
day as this come upon the earth, even a day wherein the Nations shall learn War
no more; but before this day there must be terrible doings and desolations made
upon the earth, as a sign of that glorious tranquillity, which the most high
(whose method of divine providence, is to bring light out of darkness, good out
of evil, order out of confusion, peace out of war) will establish on the earth.
I may tell you therefore, that dreadful wars, confused noise, and garments
rolled in blood, are a sign of Christ's appearing to establish his kingdom on
the Earth. I remember Lactantius de Divino Praemio l. 7. c. 19.
Lactantius (who lived in the third Century) has a saying, that before the
Lord Jesus come from Heaven to set up his glorious kingdom here below, there
shall a sword fall from heaven to the earth, whereby the Saints then living
(says he) shall gather courage, as knowing that ere long, their Lord will come
to redeem them out of the hands of all that hate them. Now this is come to pass
at this day, there is a sword fallen from Heaven to the Earth, the God of
Heaven and Earth has put all the world into a bloody frame of revenge and war
one against another. Therefore let the Saints lift up their heads, and let them
know that the Lord is coming, is coming, is coming. The great and terrible day
of the Lord, it is near, it is near, wherein the mighty man shall cry bitterly.

I might also tell you, that direful and astonishing desolations by fire, are a
sign that the time is at hand wherein the Mystery of God shall be finished.
Consider Rev. 16.8. the Angel of the fourth vial has power given him to scorch
men with fire. Now then if the Angel that has power to hurt with fire be in
the dreadful execution of his commission, what shall we gather from thence?
Ante Rome ruinam eruentur funditus Civitates, interibunt igni, etc. Lactant.
ubi supra. c. 16.
Truly that Romes turn is next. Therefore it follows ver. 10. the fifth Angel
poured out his vial upon the seat of the Beast.

Now is it not so at this day, that the world seems to be all on fire? Did
not providence a few days since bring unto our ears doleful and Viz. The
doleful news of Londons conflagration which came hither a few days since. This
was Preached 1mi 1mo. 1666/7.
exanimating tidings, that a fire is broke forth in Gods anger which has burnt
to the foundations of the mountains? that now we may say unto God, how terrible
art thou in thy works? the uttermost parts are afraid at thy tokens! The voice
of the Lord is calling upon us, saying, come and see the works of God, he is
terrible in his doings toward the children of men. But though this calamity be
heavy, yet be comforted, in that these awful tremendos dispensations are such,
as that by the light of this fire we may see the vial full of the wrath of God
is ready to be poured upon the head of Rome. Ye^, such things as these, they
are a sign, not only of Christ's providential coming to destroy Rome, but also
(which will follow not long after that) of his persosonal coming to begin that
long, and last, and great day, when the Saints shall judge the world, Acts
2.19, 20. There must be wonders in Heaven above, and signs in the earth
beneath, blood, and fire, and vapor of smoke, before that great and notable
day of the Lord comes: what is the meaning of all this? part of the meaning of
it may be, that there shall be strange and terrible Tossanus and Strigelius in
loc. Voetius. Disp. part. 1. p. 609. and part. 2 p. 921.
prodigies in heaven and earth, to signify that Christ's coming to judgment
draws on apace.

Blood may note the turning of water into blood: Fire, that there shall be
strange fiery Meteors, flashes of fire in a fearful manner seen in the Heavens;
vapor of smoke, may signify terrible Comets, which (some say) the Hebrews of
old, were wont to call by the name of a Mede on John 10.20. vide etiam Grot. in
Joel 2.30. Zanch. de oper. Dei. ubi de cometis.
pillar of smoke. But besides this, blood may note a bloody sword; and fire
terrible devastations by burning, and (possibly) vapor of smoke Vaporem fumi,
i e. urbium incendia. Melancthon.
may signify burnings by fire also. Now then, is this the day of blood and
fire? The Lord then is roaring from on high, to give us warning, that the great
and notable day is coming. One Scripture more let me mention before I pass off
from this, viz. Hag. 2.6, 7. Thus says the Lord of hosts, yet once it is a
little while, and I will shake the Heaven, and the Earth, and the Sea, and the
dry Land, and I will shake all Nations, and the desire of all nations shall
come. The words are true concerning the second coming of the Messiah, as well
as concerning his first coming. Observe now, I will shake Heaven and Earth, i.
e. the whole The Hebrews of old were wont to express that by those two words,
of Heaven and Earth, which we express by one word of the world. Vide
Castellion. Annot. in 2 Pet. 3. and Med^ Paraphrasin.
world. Particularly, consider what is said. I will shake the heaven, says
God. Is not this come to pass? Are not the powers of heaven shaking? I am
persuaded, that who ever lives a while longer, will hear that the Stars are
falling down from heaven, like untimely figs from a shaken tree. And the earth;
Is not this fulfilling also? Do you not feel an earthquake at this day? Is not
the Lord arising to shake terribly the earth? The earth is moved exceedingly,
the earth reeleth to and fro, the earth is clean dissolved, the transgression
thereof is heavy upon it, the windows from on high are open, and the
foundations of the earth do shake. And the Sea; Is not this sign also
fulfilling? what roarings have there been upon the Sea of late? Is not the day
of the Lord upon the Ships of Tarshish? How are men afraid to venture upon the
Sea? because God is shaking not only the dry Land, but the Sea? I will shake
all Nations; Is not this also fulfilling? God has allarumed all the Nations,
do you not hear the rushing of the Nations? when were all the Nations in such a
posture? Europe, Asia, Africa, America, all are in a tumult. The Lord has
alarmed them all. Men know not where now to go; they cannot think of what
Nation to transport themselves unto, but the shaking of God will take hold on
them in that Nation. Now, these are signs, that he who is the desire of the
Elect amongst all Nations will come ere long. Amen, even so, come, come, come
Lord Jesus!

Consider 5. That some of us are under special advantage to understand these
mysterious truths of God; That is to say, such of us as are in an exiled
condition in this wilderness. Indeed some came hither upon worldly accounts,
but others there are that came into this wilderness purely upon spiritual
accounts; (yea, and that continue here upon no other account) that so they
might bear witness not only against the Name of the Beast, and against his
character, but also against his Number (which some good men may be polluted
with, though as to the character of the Beast, no good man can receive that)
which is the number not of an Angel, but of a man, h. e. that so they might
bear witness against all humane inventions in the worship of God, who is
exceeding jealous as to the manner and means, as well as in respect to the
matter of his worship. Now such of you (I speak to some such this day) may hope
that God will discover much of his counsel to you, if in his fear you search
into what he has declared by his servants the Prophets. Where was John when he
had the Revelation of Jesus Christ? He was, by reason of Ita scribitur in
Codice Arabico. v. Alsted. C^onol. p. 26. and Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. c. 16.
Domitian the King, banished into the Isle of Patmos, Rev. 1.9. So Daniel and
Ezekiel were exiles, when they saw Visions of God. And I have often thought
upon that which is said, Rev. 17.3. Namely, that John was led into the
wilderness to see the destruction of Rome: What should be the meaning of that?
A Learned Viz. That famous Mr. Robert Parker in his Exposition of the 4. Vial.
man and faithful servant of Jesus Christ long since conjectured: That
therefore some Land should be brought into a very desolate
wilderness-condition; and he believed it would be a Protestant Country; yea,
and that this desolation would be by fire, out of which desolated Land, the
ruin of Rome shall arise suddenly and unexpectedly. This I mention because of
the present workings of providence, and God does sometimes give strange hints
to his eminent servants, of what he will do long before hand. But Brightman in
loc.
another thinks that John's being led into the wilderness to see Romes
destruction, may signify, that some faithful ones of God in a wilderness,
shall have a wonderful discovery of those things made unto them. God has led
us into a wilderness, and surely it was not because the Lord hated us, but
because he loved us, that he brought us hither into this Ieshimon. Who knows
but that he may send down his spirit upon us here, if we continue faithful
before him? These then are the Motives to stir us up to search into these
Mysterious truths.

Quest. You will say, but how shall we do to understand them? Now that is the
second thing to be attended in the prosecution of this Use. For answer, such
rules as these are to be observed.

1. He that would understand these mysteries, must be convinced that they are
things intelligible. For this is that which discourageth and keeps off many
from looking into these Truths, that they think with themselves there is nothing
of certainty in these things, all Interpretations of prophetical mysteries are
but conjectural, etc. But as the Apostle speaks of unbelieving prayer, let not
him that asks doubting, think that he shall receive any thing from the Lord:
So I say in this case; If a man be indeed of that persuasion, that there is
noth^ng demonstrative in these mysteries, let not such a man think that he
shall be able to understand any thing to purpose in these mysteries. I beseech
you consider, if it were true which some men of carnal and slothful spirits
would make the world believe, that the book of Revelation is a book not
possible to be understood, would the spirit of God pronounce them blessed, who
read ( i. e. rightly interpret) it? can any man be blessed for reading himself
he knows not what, things that no one can understand? Their sloth and sin is
very great that do so imagine. Besides, the Lord Jesus Christ has procured,
that the book should be unsealed, Rev. 5.4, 5. Therefore let not any Disciple
of Christ be terrifyed with the obscurity of these mysteries, for Christ has
and will unseal the book. It is indeed true, that there is difficulty and In
Apocalypsi Quot ver^a tot sacramenta. Hieron. in Epist. ad Paulin. Res divinae
multum habent caliginis. Cato.
darkness, not a little in prophetical mysteries, for they are the deep things
of the spirit of God: Nevertheless, they are knowable, though the knowledge of
them be with difficulty. Hence our Savior rebuked those which had no
discerning of the signs of the times; therefore there are signs of the times
whereby the fulfilling of prophesies may be discerned; otherwise, our blessed
Savior would never have been so severe in his holy rebukings of those that
wanted this discerning.

2. He that would have good understanding in the Mystery of God, must be sure
to walk before the Lord in simplicity, and in godly sincerity. Sincerity, truth
of grace will do much to help one in this case. Hence it is observable, that
Christ when he blamed the Pharisees for their ignorance in the signs of the
times, he does not call them fools and blind, as often he did, and as they
deserved; but he calls them Hyp^crites. Matthew. 16.3. O ye hypocrites, ye cannot
discern the signs of the times, q. d. If you had sincerity, you would discern
the signs of the times; but because you are graceless hypocrites, you discern
them not. And Matthew. 13.11. Christ says unto his sincere Disciples It is given
unto you to know the Mysteries of the kingdom of heaven. It was given unto them
to understand the Mysteries of the Gospel and kingdom of grace; likewise it was
given unto them to understand the Mystery of the kingdom of the Messiah, in
making all things new, that by the second Adam the world might at last be
restored unto that glorious condition in the which it was created for the first
Adam. This is a Mystery of the kingdom indeed, which the world understands but
little of in truth. See also Dan. 12.10. None of the wicked shall understand,
but the wise shall understand. The wicked shall not perceive what God is doing
in the world, when he is fulfilling what he has spoken of by his Prophets.
Though the works of God, and the word of God, speak plainly enough unto those
that have their hearts set upon the truth, to know it; yet as for profane and
hypocrites, their minds shall be blinded, and their hearts hardened, that they
shall not see nor believe, but the wise, i. e. the righteous (for he, and only
he, is a wise man in the account of God and Scripture, who is a sincere
righteous man) shall understand. See Hos. 14. last. Hence the Apostle says, 1
Cor. 8.3. If any man love God, the same is taught: (So Beza.
the words may be rendered) of God; That Is a man that is like to be taught of
God, who has sincerity of love and grace in his heart toward God.

Yea 3. If a man would have good understanding in these Mysterious truths, then
he should labor for much grace. Not only for sincerity, but for a large
measure of the spirit of grace. All the Prophets of God were very holy men,
Holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy spirit, even so they that
would understand the Mystery of God, which he has declared by his servants the
Prophets, had need be very holy: For unto whom will God discover his counsels,
but unto those whom he loves most? As it is amongst men, a wise man will not
communicate his secret counsels to every one, but unto such as he has a
peculiar affection for, and delight in; even so we may be sure, the blessed God
will not discove^ (...) secret counsels (which have been hidd^^ from the
foundation of the world) to every one: (...) unto such as he has a peculiar
respect for. Hence John, that had the Revelation, was the beloved Disciple; And
Daniel was a man greatly beloved: And that is very observable, which the Lord
himself speaks concerning Abraham, Genesis 18.17. The Lord said, shall I hide
from Abraham the thing which I do? I am, says God, about to bring great
changes, strange and dreadful overturnings in the world, for which my name and
dread shall be spoken of to all Generations, and shall I (...) let Abraham know
of it? a man so dear unto me as Abraham is, shall I not tell him o^ the thing
which I purpose to do?

So that they whom the Lord loves most, are like to have the clearest Visions
and discoveries of his counsels. Now God loves those most, who have most of
the grace of his spirit in their souls. It is true, that as for God's love of
benevolence, it is without any respect unto grace in the creature, whilst the
elect of God are in their blood, the Lord bears unto them a love of good
will: But as for his love of complacency or delight, that is more or less
according as men have more or less grace in their souls, whereby they love and
fear God. See Psalm. 25.14. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him,
and it is his Covenant: (So the words may be read, and so many (...). Septuag.
Inter. Vi^esis Targum, Verse. Vulg. Lat. and Athiopicam in Bibl. Polyglot.
Interpreters carry it) to make them know it, h. e. It is the Covenant of God
to make them that fear him know his secret; what secret is that? Truly there
are secrets of the love and grace of God, secrets of communion with God, which
others know nothing of, but they that fear him are acquainted with them: There
are also secrets of the works of God, Mysteries of divine providence, as well
as mysteries of grace, which he acquaints them with that fear him, that they
shall know what God is doing, and about to do in the world, though others know
nothing of these matters. Therefore the way to have much acquaintance with the
secret of the Lord, is to get much of the fear of the Lord. They that are such
as Nehemiah says of Hananiah, chap. 7. ver. 2. even faithful men, and fearing
God above many, are like to know much of his counsel. Therefore labor for much
grace, Superbo oculo veritas non videtur, sincero Patet. Bem. Sermon. 62. in Cant.
especially for much of that grace which makes a man nothing in his own eyes.
Paul, though he was a man, in respect of Learning and other gifts of Gods
spirit extraordinary; yet he says concerning himself, I am nothing. Now Paul
was one that had an abundance of the Revelations and Visions of God. See Psalm.
25.9. Prove. 11.2.

4. He that would have a clear and good understanding in the mysteries of God,
must be diligent in the use of all means appointed for that end. For we must
not think to attain unto this knowledge by extraordinary Visions and
Revelations, because the word of God, if we will be diligent in comparing God's
word, and his works together, is sufficient to instruct us; yea, even the
Prophets themselves did use great diligence in searching into this mystery of
God concerning the new world (of which you have heard) as when it should begin,
and how it should be carried on, etc. 1 Pet. 10.11. And the Lord Christ gave
the Prophet Ezekiel a charge to be intent in looking into these very Mysteries,
Chap. 40. ver. 4.

If you ask, but what means shall we use to get understanding in these
Mysteries? I answer,

1. Reading and meditation is one good means, that by the blessing of God may
help you to much understanding. Hence Dan. 9.2. I (says the Prophet)
understood by books that seventy years should be accomplished, etc. Daniel,
though he were himself a Licet ipse Daniel Propheta esset and doctor Ecclesia,
non gravatus fuit Ieremiae discipu^us fieri and ex ipsius libris Proficere.
Polan. in loc.
Prophet, yet he disdained not to make use of the books written by Jeremy, that
so he might understand the counsel of God concerning the Tribes of Israel which
then were.

2. Discourses and holy conferences about these matters would be an excellent
means to attain unto a right understanding in them. The Prophet Malachy says,
that they that feared the Lord spoke ^^ten one to another. And truly, if they
that fear God when they meet together, instead of worldly discourse, or vain
unprofitable discourse, and foolish questions which gender strife, would speak
one to another in a serious manner concerning (...) glorious kingdom of Christ,
in the day when he shall restore the kingdom unto Israel, it would be much more
for their comfort in the day of accounts: And the Lord who is in heaven above,
and on earth beneath, would take notice of it, and give a blessed reward for it
in that day. And this is a most suitable subject for Saints to be discoursing
on, Psalm. 145.10, 11. Thy Saints shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and
talk of thy power.

3. Earnest prayer to God for light and understanding in these heavenly
Mysteries, is another means to attain unto the knowledge of them. See Prove.
2.3, 5. Isa. 45.11. Ier. 33.3.

For God is the father of lights, and therefore the best way in the world to be
enlightened, is to have recourse unto him in and through Jesus Christ, who is
the light of the world. In his light we shall see light, Psalm. 36.9. Iam. 1.17.
And certainly this is a very lawful request. Hence the Apostle bids the
Corinthians, 1 Epist. 14.39. covet to prophecy; what is the meaning of that?
but that they should earnestly desire of God that they might be able to
understand and interpret the blessed prophecy of his holy word? Wherefore
betake your selves unto God, that he would give you sound judgment, and right
apprehensions in these Mysteries, that you may not so much as in your thoughts
add any thing unto, or diminish ought from the truth. And I beseech the Lord
to open your eyes, that you may behold wonderful things out of his word.

Use 2. If it be so, that the Tribes of Israel shall be saved. Hence then it
follows, that such is the infinite grace of God, that even the chief of
sinners may be encouraged to return and look unto him, that so they may be
saved. Certainly if the Jews shall be converted, then there is grace enough
with God to convert and save the greatest sinners upon earth. For what guilt
can there be greater, than the guilt which lies upon the miserable Nation of
the Jews? As now a little to instance here, that so all may see and admire the
infinite grace of God in Jesus Christ, encouraging the most vile and sinful
amongst the children of Apostate Adam to return unto him, that they may be
saved by him.

"1. Idolatry is a most heinous sin: A most guilty crime. As Tertullian of old
rightly said of it: It Is, says he, the principal crime that mankind is guilty
of. And indeed there is no Vid. Aquin. 2 ae. 2 a. Q. 94. Art. 3.
iniquity that is a greater abomination unto God: Hence Idols are called
detestable things. Yea the Lord calls Idols by the name of Devils, Deuteronomy.
32.17. 2 Chronicles. 11.15. And from hence it comes to pass that the holy God is
wont to be dreadful in his judging for this sin. This iniquity provokes the
eyes of his glory to send bitter destruction, to make his arrows drunk with
blood, and to furbush his great and glittering sword for the slaughter. Seldom,
if ever, has it been seen, that a Nation which has been taught better, has
fallen to Idolatry, but the God of jealousy has sent the Pestilence; yea, and
sooner or later, the s^ord into the bowels of that Nation, to the end that he
may repay vengeance upon the heads of blind Idolaters. I remember a Non fit
tibi ulti^ Israel in qua non fit uncia de iniquitate vituli. R.
Moses-Ben-Nachman dictus Gerundensis.
Jewish Rabbi has an observation, that never any judgment came upon the
Israelitish Nation, but God put in one ounce of vengeance more for that
iniquity of the Calf in the wilderness. And yet then they only worshipped the
true God after a false superstitious manner: They would worship Jehovah still,
but because they did it in such a way, and by such means as he never commanded,
neither did it enter into his heart; The Lord did surely visit for that
iniquity. Now the Jews lie under the guilt of Idolatry, therefore their
conversion (even that conversion which is yet to come) is described by saying,
they shall be turned from Idols, and cleansed from Idols, and say, what have I
to do any more with Idols? etc. because Idolatry was the reigning sin in the
days of the Prophetsl. Aso because, though the Jews now dread that kind of
Idolatry which their fathers were guilty of, sc. Iconolatry, or the worshipping
of graven Images; yet they worship God in another way than he has appointed;
for out of Christ do they worship, and that is Idolatry; therefore the Apostle,
after he had said, Jesus Christ is the true God, and eternal life, immediately
adds, keep your selves from Idols, 1 John 5. two last. yet the Idolatrous
Jews shall be converted and saved. Therefore the greatest sinners may be saved.

2. Malice against that which is good, is a most grievous sin. It is the sin of
Hell, and of the Devils that are there. Now this guilt lies upon the poor
sinful Jews. Some Quos citatos vide apud Morini exerc. l. 1. exer. 1. c. 2, 3.
have charged them with malicious corrupting of the Heb. Text, that so
Christians might not have the benefit of the Scriptures of the old Testament. I
believe that that is a very false Vide Glass. Phil. Sacr. Joh. Isaac. Contra
Lindan. Bellar. de verbo Dei. l. 2. c. 2. Atque Iudaeos textum hebraicum
malitiose non corrupisse, inter ipsos Pontificios fatentur, Senensis,
Bannesius, Lorinus, Pagninus, Morinus, Buxianus, Valla, Adradius, Genebrardus,
etc. Consule Hottingeri Thesau. Philol.
and injurious charge against them: Nevertheless, it is too true that the heart
of that people is desperately moved with envy and malice against the true
Religion. See Act. 13.45. and 17.5. As Paul, before his conversion, was mad
with blind zeal and malice against the truth: So it is with the Jews; yet
because Paul did, what he did ignorantly in unbelief, he found mercy, so shall
the Jewish Nation when the fullness of the Gentiles is accomplished. Therefore
the greatest sinners may be saved.

3. Blasphemy is a most fearful sin* It is a crime to be punished by the Judge.
Now the Jews lie under the guilt of blasphemy, as it is said concerning the
Papists, Rev. 13.6. That they blaspheme the tabernacle of God, i. e. the humane
nature of Christ in respect of their Idolatrous Mass, Transubstantiation, etc.
So it is true concerning the Jews, that they blaspheme the tabernacle of God.
In another sense, they speak evil of the man Christ Jesus. Yea they are (some
of them at least) guilty of the most hideous and horrid blasphemy against the
Son of God, the only God-man Jesus Christ, that ever was heard of. For they are
wont to curse that blessed name in their Synagogues. Iudaei in suis Synagogis
^er Christo singulis diebus maledicunt. Hieron. l. 22. c. 49. in Isa. Blasphemi
Iudai vocant Christum (...) Per ignominiam, etc. Shindl. Lec. Pent. p. 1972.
In their Lyturgies they pray, that the name of Jesus of Nazareth may be rooted
out of the Earth. O fearful blasphemy! whose heart trembles not at the hearing
of it? In this respect some of the Jewish Lyturgies are worse than the Turkish
Alcoran; For See Purchase Pilgr. l. 3. c. 10.
that speaks honorably of Christ: Likewise they are wont to call the blessed
Gospel Evangelium dici volunt quasi (...) Gualperius.
a Volume of lies, or falsehood. One would think it impossible that such sinners
should ever be saved. And indeed if they knew they did blaspheme (as the
Pharisees knew it, many of them) there were no forgiveness for them: But
because of the infinite grace of him whose name it is to forgive iniquity,
transgression and sin, they may, and in God's time the Nation shall have
repentance and remission of sins given unto them. Therefore the greatest
sinners may be saved.

4. Murder is a most horrid sin. The cry of blood is heard from Earth to
Heaven. Now, the Jews lie under the guilt of Blood and Murder. Some Hows Hist.
of England, p. 200. Calvis. Cronol. p. 423. Cranzius l. 5. c. 40. Wernerus in
Fasc. temporum. Atque hi^^ Proverbium illud, Faelix Respublica ubi non est
Abraham, nec Nimrod, nec Naaman, i. e. nec Iudaus, nec Tyrannus, nec leprosus.
have laid a most hydeous fact to the charge of the Jews, sc. that they have
been wont once a year to steal Christian children, and to put them to death by
crucifying out of scorn and hatred against Christians. But inasmuch as those
reports were taken up in dark and Popish times, it Vide Hor^beck Prolog. Contra
Iudaos. p. 26. Men-Ben-Israel in spe. Sect. 28.
may be questioned whether truth be in them or no. So it has been laid to the
charge of Jews, that Trithemius Hirs. Cron. p. 291.
they poisoned the waters of some Countries that they might be the death of
those that lived therein. However, it is certain, that the most prodigious
Murder that ever the Sun beheld, (yea such Murder as the Sun durst not
behold) has been committed by the Jews, and that the guilt thereof lies upon
the Jewish Nation to this day, even the guilt of the blood of the Savior of
the world, of him that is the Prince of life, and Lord of glory. See Acts 2.23.
and 7.52. Oh! to be guilty of blood, though it were but the blood of the
meanest person in the world, is a sad thing; but to be guilty of the blood of
him that is God as well as man, how doleful is that? whence is it, that coming
unworthily to the Lords Supper is such a dreadful sin? if a man come to the
Table of the Lord either without regenerating grace in his soul, or without
actual preparedness. Though he should have grace, yet if his heart be not in a
right and heavenly frame to come to the Table of the Lord, it is a dreadful
thing; why? because he becomes guilty of the blood of the Lord, not only
guilty, but guilty of blood; yea of the blood of the Lord. Now this is true
concerning the Jewish Nation, that the guilt of the blood of the Lord of Heaven
and Earth lies upon that Nation; yet they shall be converted and saved.
Therefore the greatest sinners may be saved.

5. Unbelief is a most grievous sin, 1 John 5.10. He that believes not has
made God a Liar. What more horrible can be thought of, to call God a Liar? This
does every unbeliever under heaven. This therefore is the condemnation, John
3.19. And when the Lord says that he will punish a man's soul with a
vengeance, he expresses it by saying such an one shall have his portion with
unbelievers, Luke 12.46. The truth is, if a man would study with himself, how
to vex the soul of God, he could not do it more than by unbelief; that is, than
by not accepting of Jesus Christ upon his own terms as propounded, and freely
offered in the glorious Gospel of the blessed God. Yet for all this, the
unbelieving Nation of the Jews shall be converted and saved. Therefore the
greatest sinners may be saved.

Suppose thou had been an Idolater, a Blasphemer, a Murderer, and Unbeliever
(yea, and thou have been so who ever thou art) yet there is salvation to be had
even for thee. Only then thou must do as the Jews shall do when God has mercy
on them* That is, Repent and mourn bitterly, for all the wrong thou have done
to God by sin, and return unto him with all thy heart, and he will not reject
thee. See Zech. 12.10. Ier. 29.12, 13, 14. This then I do proclaim amongst you
from the God of heaven this day* Let the vilest sinner return unto the Lord by
Repen^ance and Faith in Jesus Christ, and though his sins were as Crimson, they
shall be as Wool; though they were as red as Scarlet, they shall become as
white as snow; Wherefore thus says the Lord, let the wicked forsake his way,
and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he
will have mercy on him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.

Use 3. If it be so, that all the Tribes of Israel shall be saved: Hence then
it follows, that we should seek unto God continually that he would hasten the
day of Isreal's salvation. Matters of prophecy and promise should be turned
into prayer. Now there is a prophecy and a promise (my Text contains them
both) That all Israel shall be saved. Therefore let prayer be made by us all
that have any interest in the God of Israel, that he would perform (yea, and
hasten it in its time) what his own mouth has spoken concerning this matter.

Here consider briefly. 1. That thus to pray it our duty. The holy Commandment
of the Lord requires i^, Isa. 62.6, 7. I have set watchmen upon thy walls O
Jerusalem, which shall never hold their peace day nor night; ye that make
mention of the Lord keep not silence, and give him no rest till he establish,
and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth. What a solemn charge is here,
that we should pray continually every night and every day, and that we should
let the Lord have no rest in heaven, till Jerusalem be ma^e a praise in the
earth? And when will that be? Verily when Jerusalem shall be inhabited again in
her own place, even in Jerusalem. Therefore we should be uncessant in prayer
for this! We ought to pray for the Inc^^ation of Isreal's salvation, in the
conversion of the Jewish Nation. Likewise we ought to pray hard for the
consummation of this salvation, in new Ierusalems coming down from God out of
heaven. This did our Lord teach us, when he bid us pray, that the kingdom of
God might come; and that his will might be done on earth as it is done in
heaven. In that kingdom which the God of heaven shall set up at the day of
Messiah his second coming, his will shall be done on earth as it is done in
heaven. Oh! how should we strive in prayer that the coming of this dear and
blessed day may be hastened? Besides, the examples of God's servants, who have
prayed for Isreal's salvation, do bind us to do the like. How earnest was the
Apostle in his desires after this thing? Paul could have been content that any
curse or censure, short of Maranatha should have come upon him, even to have
been Anathema from the Lord, upon condition that the Israelites might have been
converted and saved; Romans 9.3, 4. and 10.1. Brethren (says he) my hearts
desire and prayer to God for Israel is that they might be saved. He speaks
concerning the Tribes of Israel, even of Israel according to the flesh. And
truly so should it be with us all, our desire, yea our hearts desire and our
prayer to God for this Israel ought to be, that they may be saved.

^. Consider that we have many promises to encourage us in making this prayer
before the Lord. We have not only promises, that the thing shall come to pass
in due time, which is encouragement enough; but it is promised, that we our
selves shall be no loosers by praying for this thing. If David could say that
when he fought unto God for his enemies, that his prayer returned into his own
bosom: Surely we shall find, that when in sincerity we seek unto God for
Israel, that prayer will return into our own bosom. Remember what the Lord
says, Psalm. 122.6. pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that
love thee: And though the words are to be extended unto Mystical, there is no
reason why Literal Jerusalem should be excluded out of that Text. See also Rev.
21.6. I will give (says he, who is Alpha and Omega) to him that is athirst, of
the fountain of the water of life freely. To him that is a thirst, for what?
even to him that is athirst for the salvation of Israel, for the conversion of
the Jews, for the creating of the new heaven and the new earth which is
promised, to him that is thus athirst will the Lord give of the fountain of the
water of life freely.

Consider 3. There was a time when the Israelite^ did pray for us, therefore in
equity we should pray for them. Time was when the Jews were the people of God,
and Gentiles were not so: And then did they pray for the conversion of
Gentiles, that Gentiles might have the saving health of God extended toward
them, and the breasts of divine Ordinances to suck grace and consolation from.
Therefore inasmuch as the case is now quite altered, that the Jews are not the
people of God, but many amongst the Gentiles are so: we should in like manner
pray for them, that they may see the salvation of the Lord, Psalm. 67. per
totum, Cant. 8.8.

Consider 4. Prayer may be a means to hasten the coming of this glorious day of
Isreal's salvation. Would we not have Sion to be delivered, and that speedily?
pour forth earnest and continual prayer, and it will hasten the birth of Sion,
that even a Nation shall be born in one day. It is prayer that sets the wheels
of divine providence a going; It is prayer that turns the world upside down.
Therefore you may observe, that seldom does any great ^^teration of the state
and face of things come to pass in the world, but the Lord first sends down a
spirit of prayer into the hearts of his Saints, and that shakes heaven and
earth in pieces in a short time. Observe then (my friends, and brethren,
beloved in the Lord) and be awakened this day, I say, observe, that when the
prayers of Saints ascend before the Throne of God, with the incense of the
merits and intercession of the Lord Jesus, there follows upon it thundrings,
voices, lightnings, and an earthquake, Rev. 8.4, 5. would you then see that
earthquake wherein the mountains of prey, that devour Israel, shall be brought
low, and wherein the Lords house, which is now trampled upon, shall be exalted
on the tops of the mountains? Oh then pray as for your lives all manner of
prayer, even public prayer, family prayer secret prayer; and in all stir up
your selves to call upon the Lord, and say, awake, awake, O arm of the Lord as
in the days of old; awake, as in the years of ancient generations, that Sion
may return with singing, and everlasting joy upon her head.

And shall I tell you (yea from the Lord I will tell you) that the prayers of
poor despicable ones, that know, and fear, and serve God, can do great things
with him that does even whatsoever he pleaseeth in heaven, and on earth, and in
all deep places. Oh consider of it! I remember Melancthon (that great and
Learned Divine) says, he was much encouraged to hope that God would carry on
the work of Reformation in Germany (and the Lord did carry it on with great
success in those days) because he understood that there were many poor godly
women, that were wont to meet together to pray that the work of Reformation
might go forward: Even so if the Lord stir up the hearts of his poor servants
to favor the dust of Sion, and to show it by earnest prayer before him at all
times, surely the day will not be long before the Lord appear in glory to build
up Sion, for he will have regard to the prayer of the destitute, and he will
not despise their prayer. Know ye this, yo^ servants of the Lord, to your
everlasting encouragement. But thou O Lord how long! how long! how long!

FINIS.
The Names of Writers, or Works cited and made use of in this Discourse.
A
IS. Abravaneel Aben-ezra Achmetes Ios. Acosta Ainsworth R. Akiba Alcasar
Alphonsus Alstedius Amama Ames Ambrose Amianus Marcell. Dutch Annot. English
Annot. Andr^as Anselmus Apollinarius Aquinas Aretas Aretius Aristotle Arnobius
R. Ash Augustine Author Anonymus
Clavis Recusae. Problems of Antichrist. That the Tartars are the ten Tribes in
M.S.S.

B
BAnnesius Baronius Bid Bellarmin R. Benjam. Tudel. Benno Card. Bernard
Besoldus Beza Bibliander Biblia Polyglotta Bilney Bochartus Boterus Bradshaw
Raym. Bregan^s Brightman Broughton Bran^elsius Walter Bruce (...) M. Bucer
Bullinger Buroughs Burton Buxianus Buxtorf
C
CAjetan Calvin Calvisus Camerarius Camero Iac. Capellus Lud. Capellus
Carthusi^^us Th. Cartwright Chr. Cartwright Castellio Castiglius Catal. Testium
veritatis. Is. Causabon Centuriators Chemnitius Chrys^stom Chytraeus Clemens
Romans Clemens Alex. Cocceius Cotterius Cotton Cranzi^s (...) (...) (...) Cyprian
D
DAnaeus Davenant Davenport Dent De Dien Deodati Dionysius Driedo Drusius
E
KIng Edw. Cateth. Elias R. Eliezer Epiphanius Erasmus Estius Euselius^
Euthymius
F
FAgius Fayus Finch Forbes Fox Friedlibius Nic. Fuller.
G
P. Galatinu^ Gauricus Gelaspy Genebrard Gennadius Gentius Geogr. Ar^h. Gerhard
Glassius Goodwin Graserus Greenhill Gregorius Grotius Gualperius Gualter Guild
H
HAdrianus Haymo Haiton Harmony of Confessions Heinsius Hesychius Heurnius
Hierom Hilary Homes Hornbeck Hospinian Hottinger Huit Hunnias
I
JOsephus Irenaeus Ioh. Isaac Isid^re Iunius Justin Martyr
K
R. Ketin^ R.D. (...) Conc. Kircher
L
LActantius Fr. Lambertus A Lapide La^enus Lazius Leigh Lonicer Lorinns Luther
Lyranus
M
MAjer R. Maimon Marlorat P. Martyr Martyrologium Romanum Mede Melancthon R.
Menasseh-Ben-Israel R. Moses Ben Nachman Midrash Tihillim Arias Montanus
M^ri^^s (...)
N
NA^^lerus Nazianz^^ Arn. de Nova Villa Nu^enius Nysse^^s
O
(...) Onuphri^s Origines Oresius O^en
P
PAgninus Pannonius Par^us Parker Pererius Perkins Phile Iudaeus Philostratus
Piscator Plato Polanus Polycarp Polycrates Porchetus Prideaux Priu^^sius
Pr^copius Purchase
R
RAimund Rain^ld Ram^s Ra^^ius (...) Ribera Rivet Roll^e Ruffinus
S
R. Sa^dias Sa^arit. Pentite^ch R. Samuel Ios. Scaliger Scapula Seldom
Sel^eccerus Sulp. Sever^s Sebald. Sh^ell Shindler Skikkard Sixth. Senensis
Sleidan Socrates R. Sol. Iarchi A Soto Sozomen Spanhemius Stella Stevens Dr.
Stoughton Streso Strigelius Strong Suidas Sybilla W. Symonds
T
TAlmud Babyl. Hierosol.
Targum O^kelos Jonathan
Tertullian Theodoret Theophanes Theophylact Tossanus Tremelius Trithemius
Trisse
V
VAlla Varrs V^^^bius V^rsio Septuag. Vulgata Let. Syriaca Aethiopica
Viegas Giss. V^rtius Gerh. Vess^^s Usserius
W
WArnerus Whitaker Wiclef Willet Winkelmannus Welphius
Z
ZAnchius Zuinglius.
Places of Scripture opened, and occasion^lly cleared in the preceding
Discourse.
Genesis Chap. Ver. Page 49 10 14 18* 26 17 Numbers ^4 17 87 23 36 24 21
Deuteronomy 28 ^^ 10 43 63 32 43 21 33 7 52 Job 19 26 109 Psa^ms 9 Title with
v. 7, 8. 143 14 7 52 37 11 121 44 19 83 45 10 114 46 Title with 8, 9 158 49 14
134 66 Title with 4 ibid 96 12, 13 ibid Proverbs 21 16 63 Canticles 6 13 52 8 8
180 Isaiah 1 26 11^ 4 4 10^ 8 7 33 11 13 06 14 47 15 31 16 43 14 1^ 29 2^ 21 ^1
23 ^1 26 19 82 27 1 25 31 4, 18 79 49 12, 19, 20 56 65 7 40 8 72 15, 17, 20,
etc. 65, 121 66 3, 4 8 19 2 22 110 Jeremiah 23 7, 8 80 30 24 37 31 10 151 19 89
29, 30 106 36 73 50 19, 20 94 Ezekiel 1^ 5 35 6 98 55 62 60 51 61 114 2^ 37 8
36 24 90 35 122 37 7 46, 97 10, 13 82 16 17 25 57, 61 38 21, 22 80 39 22 46,
106 40 22 ib. 43 2 31 7 116 12 100 44 9 116 45 8 67 Daniel 2 45 145 7 21, etc.
12, 136, 141 8 10 29 11 36 to end, etc. 26, 35 12 1 35 2 8 3 114 11 44, 45 12 4
Hosea 1 7 48 11 17, 69 4 16 80 Joel 2 28, 29 99 30 42 ^ 1, 2 35 17 81 Obadiah
19 57 21 61 Micah 4 3, 4 122 8 58 5 2 14 7 15 79 Habakkuk 1 5 75 Haggai 2 ^,
etc. 59, 83 Zechariah 8 12 1^2 23 62 9 1 17 10 4 11 8 50 10 57 12 6, 10, 11 13,
53 8 99 14 4 109 9, 10, 11 53, 122 20, 21 100, 116 Malachi 4 5, 6 101 Matthew 1
16 59 6 10 109 8 22 84 10 5, 6 4 12 32 110 16 3 166 17 11, 12 102 19 28 135 23
39 13 24 21, 22 71 24 88 29, 30 28, 29, 98 34 73 25 5* 6 156 Mark 9 8 131 14 25
157 Luke ^ 32 60 71 96 2 32 14 3 23 59 17 20, 21 128 19 11 131 21 11 42 24 3,
14, 40 25, etc. 37, 42 28 118 John 2 20 44 3 5 97 5 25 ^4 43 85 18 36 132, 69
Acts 1 3 33 6 20, 130 2 19, 20 161 3 19 103, 118 21 51, 103, 123 23 7 5 36, 37
86 21 38 86 26 7 5 Romans 4 13 121 5 14 125 8 21, 23.118, 124, 134 9 3, 4 179
11 7 91 11 95 12 9 15 39, 64 25 25, 29, 34, 35, 39 1 Corinthians 15 25 111 26
108 28 111 16 22 142 2 Corinthians 3 15, 16 14, 92 17 93 Ephesians 1 20, 21 133
2 2 94 4 23 91 Colossians 1 18 108 1 Thessalonians 4 17 105 2 Thessalonians 2 1
142 7, 9 104 2 4 27 8 141 1 Timothy 4 1 27 2 Timothy 3 1, etc. 38 4 1 138
Hebrews 1 6 111 2 5 110, 111 7 14 58 James 1 1 5 2 Peter 3 7 104 13 65, 121 16
149 1 John 2 18 147 Revelation 1 1 147 3 150 5 10 111 6 2 133 12, etc. 30 7 4,
5 6 8 4, 5 32, 180 10 30 9 11 24 14 33 10 6 ^2 10 153 11 155 11 7 28, 39 11, 12
143, 144 14 141 15, 19 23, 138 12 8 144 13 2 23 6 174 15 2 67 8 23 16 8 160 10
22 12 30, 40, 46 13 36, 27 16 60 17 3 164 19 1 24 6, 7 31, 157 20 1, etc. 68,
52 9 80 21 1 64 6 179 24 64 27 108 22 3 122 6 146 11 3^

FINIS.

