THE RISE, SPRING AND FOUNDATION OF THE Anabaptists, Or REBAPTIZED of our Time.

Written in French by Guy de Brez, 1565. Minister of the Word, and MARTYR.

And Translated for the use of his Countrymen, by J. Sco(...)

Eccles. 1.9. The thing that has been, it is that which shall be; and that
which is done, is that which shall be done: and there is no new thing under the
Sun. CAMBRIDGE: Printed, and to be Sold by Marmaduke Johnson. 1668.

To the Reader.
AS the reviving of this Root of Bitterness in the Quaker, after its being dead
above an hundred years, caused the Translation and first Impression of this
small Book under another Title; so the sprouting forth of its fruits of gall
and wormwood, and the issuings from this corrupt fountain of those streams
which make sad the City of God, have occasioned its second Impression, under
the Name and Title put upon it by its Author Guy de Brez: whose praise in the
Churches by his laborious planting, and faithful watering of them by his blood,
is largely set forth in the famous Book of Martyrs, the third Volume, in the
Continuation of the History by Dr. Edward Bulkly, page 37, 38, 41, 42, 43.
where he is described to be not only an eminent Witness of Christ's Truth unto
the death, but his Labors, Prayers and Sufferings are there recorded to
posterity; his rejoicing in God, when hands and feet were so laden with Iron
Chains, as they eat through his Flesh to the very bones; his glorying in their
rattling, more then if they had been Chains of Gold; his fullness of God, when
shut up in the Dungeon, which for its darkness was called Brunain, where he had
no more air but at one little hole, where drunkards vented their urine; even
then his heart leaped for joy, provoking his wife to comfort, in that God had
not only given her a Husband who was a Minister of Christ's Gospel, but to be
honored with Martyrdom; A Dignity (said he) which the Angels of Heaven are
not capable of. All which declare him a more then ordinary Man of God, and how
worthy of credence these Relations by him held forth are. There also is mention
made of this Book, he being engaged in an holy Conflict (as the Author calls
it) against the pestilent Sect of the Anabaptists, which as Cockle mingle
themselves among the good Corn.

This Translation is a small part of the Book; the rest is Doctrinal, and a
solid Conviction of their Tenants: which whosoever shall intelligently read,
and compare his Reasons with those of our Worthies in these our days, he will
find that as Satan is the old Serpent, so Christ Jesus is the same yesterday,
and to day, and for ever. A threefold Character he gives of them in his
Epistle to his Book: 1. That they multiplied quotations of Scripture against
their true sense and meaning, to gain applause of the weak and unstable. 2.
That they gloried in their specious Holiness of Conversation. 3. That they
professed their readiness to suffer unto death. Of these he warns Christ's
Flock scattered in Flanders, Brabant, etc. being his own Country. If by any
thing the faithful then might be preserved from the scandal which hereby is
cast upon the Gospel, and that they might be provoked to a more affectionate
inquiry, and cordial closing with the truth of Faith, and Order of the Gospel;
which as then was his, so now is the weak desire of him who is

Thine in Christian duty, J. S.

The Rise, Spring and Foundation OF THE ANABAPTISTS.
IN the year 1521 and the year ensuing, there arose a certain number of
mutinous and seditious persons, who secretly made Factions: they chiefly dwelt
in the quarters of Saxony, which bordered upon the River Salah; among whom
their chief was Nicholas Stork. They dreamed dreams, and said, Nicholas Stork,
and his accomplices, they preached dreams,
That they spoke familiarly with God by Visions, they preached their dreams for
truths and Divine Oracles; and because that there should come a new world,
wherein should dwell righteousness: Therefore they ought to exterminate all the
wicked, with all the Princes and unbelieving Magistrates, oppose Magistrat^s
from off the earth (they called all those unbelievers which were not of their
Sect and Faction.) From out of this School came Thomas Muntzer, Dr. Balthazar
Hubmore, Melchior Rink, John Hutt, John Deuter, Lodovike Hetzer, etc. All these
boasted that they familiarly conferred with the Lord. In their teachings, they
with heat of affection did defame and detract from the Ministers of the Gospel:
and Ministers.
afterward with the like violence fell upon the Magistrate, thinking that if
they could make void these two Orders unto the Church, the wolves might safely
fall upon and dismember the Flock; wherefore these wolves, (i. e.) these false
Teachers, have always principally set themselves against the Ministers of the
Church, and the Magistrates, to see if they could drive them out from the
Flock, or at least disgust some of the sheep against their Pastors; that so
estranging them from them, they might undo them.

Their Doctrine suddenly spread throughout all the Country, and in a little
space they gathered much people after them, Their Doctrine spreads, R^baptize
thousands.
and Rebaptized many thousands; insomuch as many simple people were led by a
zeal without knowledge, being by their fair appearance ensnared. They tied
themselves unto the only simple and naked Letter of the Scripture, They va^^ish
over their soul intentions with fair pretenses.
without regard to the sense thereof; they carried it very fairly before all
men: for they had always in their mouths, the love, faith, and the fear of
God, the mortification of the flesh, and the cross; which were the garnish
wherewith (that they might be of value to the simple) they painted and adorned
themselves: but inasmuch as such colors were false, they lasted not long, but
they soon began to fade, and without fraud to appear what they were.

Thomas Muntzer (of whom we formerly spoke) said, That whosoever would be saved
must firstly fly all manifest vices, Muntzers Doctrine.
Murders, Blasphemies against the Name of God: that he must chastise and
macerate his body by fastings and mean apparel; that he must hold forth an
austere visage, speak little, etc. he called these things the Cross* the
Mortification of the Flesh, and Discipline: after that he had so fashioned his
people, he said, That they must withdraw from the multitude, and conversation
of men; and often to think upon God, who he is, and whether he has care of us;
whether Christ suffered death for us, and whether our Religion were to be
preferred before that of the Turks: moreover, that we ought to ask a sign from
God, to be assured whether he has care of us, and whether we owned the true
Religion: if instantly he gave not a sign, that we ought to persist and pursue
in prayers, yea, lively to complain of him, as of one that does us wrong; for
seeing the Scripture promises that God will grant what he is asked for, he does
not well in not giving a sign to the man who desires his knowledge. He said,
That this anger and reproach was very pleasing unto God, because that he
thereby saw the inclination and heart of our spirit, and that without doubt
being thus urged, he would declare himself by some evident sign, quenching the
thirst of the spirit, and doing unto us as formerly unto the Fathers. He said
moreover, That Gods will was declared by dreams, and there laid the foundations
of his doctrine; insomuch that if the dream of any might be interpreted, he
praised him greatly in his Sermons.

After that by this means he had by little and little gained some, he
discovered what he had long before plotted in the City of Alsted, which is in
the Marches of Turing: He began to enroll the names of those that were entered
into league with him, and by solemn Oath they promised assistance, Enrolled the
names of his disciples, and swears them to assist him, to cut off the
unbelieving Magistrates
to dispatch the wicked Princes and Magistrates (for they generally accounted
all Superiors wicked) and to substitute new ones: he said, That it was given
him in charge from God so to do: so did he speak of his dreams and such like
things.

Frederick Prince of Saxony did at first bear with him, ^urther intercedes for
him, with the Elector of Saxony.
and that at the request of Luther. But in the year ^^23. he set himself
seditiously to preach, and publicly to fasten not only upon Ministers of the
Word, but also upon the Magistrates; and furiously declared that their Liberty
was violated, But publicly opposi^g Ministers and Magistrates is driven out of
Alsted.

Co^es to Norimberg, and Mulhuze, where he becomes ^ Preacher.


and that the poor and miserable were tyrannized over, and oppressed by
insupportable Charges, and that their goods and labors were devoured by the
Princes: He saw then, That it was time to bethink him; and then he was driven
out of the City of Alsted; who after he had been some months hidden, he came
to Norimberg, and to a City of Turing called Mulhuze. Now in as much as when he
was at Alsted, he had gained to his Girdle some of the Citizens of Mulhuze, by
means whereof he received the charge of Preaching: And now being but in small
favor with the Senate, he so wrought upon the Commonalty by Mutinies, that
they chose a new Senate; Dri^^s o^t the old S^^ate, (...) a (...).
which was the beginning of the future stirs: afterward the Citizens drove out
the Friars, and seized upon their Monasteries: with one of the principallest
and most rich of them, (...) himself with the spoil of Monasteries.
Muntzer furnished himself; and for the future carried it not only as a
Preacher, but also as a Senator and Counselor; for he said, that he must by
his Divine Revelation judge of the Bible; Judges of the Bible.
and gave sentence upon all according to his will and fancy; and all this was
received as an Oracle and Divine answer: so were they befooled by him. S^^s
seed of Sedition.
In the mean while, he wrote here and there to the Subjects to take up Arms
against their Princes, to the recovery both of their Spiritual and Temporal
Liberties: this speech was so acceptable unto the people, that in the mouths
of many he was the true Prophet.

Having then changed the Magistrates of Mulhuze, and having put in Anabaptists,
there arose many troubles as we have formerly declared; Taught community*
equality of dignity.
for he taught the Community of goods, and that the equality of dignity did
very well resent humanity; and that all the world should abide in the liberty
wherein it was first created; and that there should be an indifferent usage of
goods: he said, That this was divinely revealed unto him; and that Princes and
great ones must be rejected; and that the sword of Gideon was given unto him,
against all Tyrants, to restore the liberty, and new Reign of Christ upon
^^^th. All these pretenses made the people desist from their ordinary labor;
By this, people desist from their labor.
and when they had need of any thing, they took it from those that had, whether
they would or not.

Diverse months he thus led on the train, so as in the year 1525. the
Husbandmen and Laborers took up Arms in Swabe and Francony, They take up Arms,
to the number of forty thousand, who slew the greatest part of the Nobility,
Kill the Nobility.
sacked and burnt their Castles and Fortresses; he went on to prosecute his
Game, thinking the time now to be come, to bring into action what he had
formerly deliberated: he after caused them to found some Artillery in the
Cordiliers Church; he called much people from the fields out of hopes of
pillage, and to make themselves rich.

He in all his affairs consulted with a bold foolish fellow called Phifer,
Phifers dream.
who had dreams and visions in high esteem; and among other discourse he said,
That in a dream he had seen multitudes of Mice in a Stable, which he had made
to fly: which he interpreted so as he had command from God to take up Arms, to
set himself in array to discomfit the Nobility.

Muntzer was somewhat more cool; though he preached with great violence, yet he
would not run any hazard until that the Neighborhood had taken up Arms: and
the more easily to bring about his enterprise, he wrote unto the Laborers in
the Mines of the Territories of Mansfield, admonishing them to fall upon the
Princes without any respect or consideration; for these that were ready in
Francony drew near unto Turing. Thereupon Phifer, who could not forbear, took
the field with his, and sacked the Country about Isfield, pillaged the
Fortresses and Temples (or Churches) and slew diverse Gentlemen, taking others
Prisoners: which having done, he returned laden with plunder; and having so
well sped, the popularity were encouraged: in the mean time they skirmished and
ravined in the Country of Mansfield; wherefore Muntzer thinking that there was
a revolt in all parts, came forth from Mulhuze with 300 seditious men. Upon
these stirs Albert Count of Mansfield at an instant assembled some Troops* of
Horse, and fought Muntzer, so as 200 were left dead upon the place; the rest
being astonished, withdrew, and fled toward Francuse, and sojourning there,
waited for the recruit of their Army; which was the cause of retarding their
stirs.

In the mean time the Princes gathered together, to the number of 1500 Horse,
with some Foot: the Peasants being encamped in a Mount near Francuse, they
could not easily be assailed, by reason of the Carts they had furnished
themselves withal. The poor people being unprovided either of Arms or
Artillery, and for the most part not acquainted with Soldiery; the Princes
being moved with compassion, admonished them by messages, that they would
deliver up the Authors of this Sedition; and that laying down their arms, every
one might with assurance, and without fear of punishment return unto their
houses. Muntzer then fearing his skin, advanced into the midst of the Troops,
and with a stern countenance made his Oration.

You see, Fellow Soldiers and Brethren, how th^se Tyrants near unto you have
conjured to put you all to death, Munt^^rs Oration.
and yet they are so faint-hearted, as that they dare not fight us; they make
foolish and unworthy Tenders to make you lay down your Arms: You know that I am
the Author and Move^ of this Ent^rprize, but not upon mine own Authority or
particular fancy (for it is not of mine own ^ead) but by the Command of God:
These things being thus l^d on, you and I must obey, and not abandon the place
and rank wh^re God has set us Heretofore he commanded Abraham to sacrifice his
Son; who not knowing the issue, without difficulty obeyed the Divine Command:
Genesis 22.2.
wherefore God preserved his Son, and adorned his Faith with great benefits. We
th^n who are in the same estate, ought to persevere, leaving the event of
things unto God: howsoever there is no doubt, but all will fall o^t according
to our wish, and ye shall with your eyes behold the Lord relief; for we shall
destroy as many as there be enemies. In many places of the Scripture. Psalm.
^2.4, 1*3.
God has promised to h^lp the poor and needy, which does truly belong unto us;
for we are poor and mi^erable: and inasmuch as we desire to return and increase
in the knowledge of God, none should doubt of the Victory, or of an happy
issue. B^hold on the contrary the condition of our Enemies, they call
themselves Princes, but indeed they are very Tyrants, for they take no care of
any of you, but they squeeze out all ^our Estates, and swallow them down with
all greediness. Among the people whom God particularly chose, it was ordained
that their Kings should not be unprofitable spend-thrifts; and they were
commanded diligently to read in the Book of the Laws which he had constituted:
but what do these Tyrants now? and how do they spend their time? the^ think
that they are not concerned in the Commonwealth, nor do they inform themselves
how it fares with the poor and miserable: They see not to Justice, but suffer
Ro^^ers upon the Highways; they punish not Thieves, nor do they take ord^r
against evil-doing: they in no wise comfort the fath^rless, nor the widow; nor
do they take care for the instruction of Youth: they only do not advance Gods
honor, but they hinder the same; nor have they any thought, but how to get
other m^ns Estates unto themselves: wherefore they daily find out new
inventions to raise money; nor do they care to procure or maintain peace (wi^h
many the like sp^eches) And afterward he exh^rted them, saying, Be then
courageous, and rid this great unprofitable troop out of the way; knowing that
in so doing you shall fulfill the good pleasure of God. I perceive no means
either of sure or safe composition; for they will never be otherwise minded;
they neither will grant us our Liberties, nor the true Service of God.
Wherefore we ought rather to dye, then to approve of their wickedness, or to
let them snatch the Doctrine of the Gospel from us. In sum, I do assure you
that God will help us, and that the day shall be ours; for he himself has
promised me it openly; he himself, I say, who can neither lie nor deceive, has
commanded me thus to proceed to punish the Magistrate. Behold, how Gods power
appears! when*as a small handful of people overcomes a great number; as for
example, you know what Gideon did with his small company, and Jonathan with his
Armor-bearer; what David did alone against that monster Goliath: I put it out
of doubt (...) shall be noted by the like Victory, and that posterity will
always have it in remembrance; for though we be in bad equipage, not well
furnished with Arms, and things needful, we shall not fail to worst them; and
this frame of heaven and earth will sooner fail, then we shall be forsaken of
God. Take heed lest Reasons judgment make you shake, or the appearance of
danger, that presents, make you ^fraid; but lively fall on the enemies* be not
daunted with their Guns or Artillery, for I will receive all their bullets into
my Gown. Behold, see ho^ o^r God is for us! Contemplate, I pray you, the
witness and sig^ of his good will toward us, lift up your eyes, and behold the
heavenly B^we: I could wish that in our E^sign the same Rainbow were pourtrayed
God evidently shows by this sig^ which appears on high, that he will in the
Battle assist us, denouncing r^in^ and p^rdition unto the Tyrants our enemies:
Be courageous then; and b^ing assur^d o^ his favor, fall on, for God will not
that you should make an agreement with you^ Enemies.

His Oration being finished, the greatest part of his company, by reason of
their present peril, ceased not to be much afraid, all being in disorder, and
without any conduct. Yet there were in the band some bold and desperate ones
bent to do mischief: they being over-forward, and ready to do evil, were
inflamed the more by reason of his Speech, especially the Rainbow before spoken
of did encouarge them; and they judged it as a most sure sign of Victory: there
was this further to their advantage, that their Army was great (it being about
8000 men) and the place advantageous for their defense: these Varlets cried
out, that all should take up their Arms, and with courage they came to close
with the enemy, singing an Hymn, whereby they did implore the aid of the Holy
Ghost. There was sent unto them to parley a young man of a Noble Family, whom
Muntzer against the Law of Arms had slain; herewith the Princes being provoked,
caused the Alarm to be sounded, and ordered their Battle in array.

Philip Prince of Hessia, exhorted the Soldiers to carry themselves
courageously, and to perform their duty; showing them, The Lantgraves Oration.
that although the accusation charged on them by the Enemy should be tra^, yet
it was unlawful for the Commonalty to take up arms against the Magistrate;
which might be proved by Testimony of the Scripture; 1 Pet. 2.13.
and that yet he would neither excuse himself nor the other Princes from their
faults. They cover themselves with the Name of the Gospel, but in truth they
forge nothing but Thefts, Robberies, and the like mischiefs; their endeavor is
to take from others, to abolish Magistracy, to offer violence to other men's
wives and children, and to commit all Crimes without punishment: and seeing
under the fair and holy Name of God, they cloak such villainies, and execrable
misdeeds, there was no doubt but God would avenge those injuries: wherefore
every one ought to fight against them, as against Robbers, and so to maintain
the Public Peace, and to defend every ones Estate, with their Wives and
Children. The cause of the War is most just; and had ^e not been assured, that
the work had been acceptable unto God, who has put the Sword into the hand of
the M^gistrate, Romans 13.2, 3, 4* 5.
he would not have been there.

This Oration being finished, they came to close; and no sooner were the
Artillery and small shot discharged, but these poor people, as men amazed, and
deprived of understanding, neither defend themselves, nor set themselves to
flight for safety, but sang their vulgar song, to invoke the aid of the holy
Ghost: some trusting in the promises of Muntzer, waited for succor from
Heaven. The Harquebusses being discharged, they began to reinforce the battle,
and to slay them right down; then they betook themselves to flight all in a
rout toward Francuse: some of them drew off to the other part of the Mountain,
and some the while bare the brunt of the battle in the Valley against the
Horse; of whom there fell one or two: but so hotly were they pursued, 5000
Slain.
that there were 5000 left in the place: soon after this slaughter the City of
Francuse was taken, and near 300 prisoners, ^00 Prisoners.
which were beheaded. Muntzer having gained the City by flight, hid himself in
an house near unto the Gate; whither by accident there came a Gentleman, whose
Waiting-man going up to see the rooms, he found a man laid upon the bed, who
asked him who he was, and whether he was not fled from the Battle, and whether
he was not one of the seditious? By accident there lay a Purse near unto the
bed; the other takes up the booty, and having opened it, he found therein
Letters, whereby Albert of Mansfield did admonish Muntzer to desist from his
enterprise, and not to cause the poor people to mutiny: these Letters when he
had read, he asked him, if the Letters were not directed to him? which he
denied very stiffly, until being sharply threatened, craving pardon, he
confessed that he was Muntzer: being taken, he was brought before George Duke
of Saxony, and the Lantgrave; Muntzer taken
being asked of them, what had moved him so to abuse the poor people? he
replied, that he had done but his duty; and that those Magistrates that would
not receive the Gospel, were so to be dealt withal. The Lantgrave puzzled him,
proving by Testimony of Scripture, that the Magistrates ought to be had in
reverence; and that all seditions were forbidden by God; and that it was not
lawful for a Christian to avenge his private quarrel: whereunto Muntzer had not
to answer. Afterward he was put unto grievous torture; and as by greatness of
the pain he cried out, Tortured.
George Duke of Saxony said unto him, Truly Muntzer you endure at present, but
think also upon the ruin of so many people, which this day by occasion of thy
sedition are slain: He answered, much laughing, that they would so have it. He
was afterward brought to Welderung a City of the Signory of Mansfield, where
he was sharply drawn and put to torture, and confessed what was his deliberated
purpose, and who were the Accomplices of his Conjuration.

The Princes being come to Welderung and Mulhuze* they caused many of these
seditious persons to be beheaded, and among the rest, that bold fool Phifer, of
whom there has mention formerly bin made: then afterward Muntzer was brought
into the field, who found himself very much discouraged, and overwhelmed in
this extremity; so as without help he could not give account of his faith, as
it commonly falls out with such in the like case: Henry of Brunswick, to help
him, caused him to say after him: when he was ready to die, he confessed
clearly and loudly his fault and error; and being surrounded with Soldiers,
he exhorted the Princes to use greater pity toward the poor people, and that
by this means they should not need to fear; he admonished them also to read
diligently the Book of Kings, which are in the holy Scripture: his discourse
being ended, they cut off his Head. From this mavelous defeat and
discomfiture several escaped, Executed
who seeing their sedition profited them not, and that the Prophets were slain
with their brethren and companions, instead of repenting, and acknowledging the
pestilential venom that lay hid in their Sect, they assemble at Munster the
chief City of Westphalia, Those that escape g^t into Munster. Pret^^d humility,
cry out against the Magistrates (...).
and at first made semblance of humility, holding forth nothing in them that
was splendent or magnificent; yea, they reproved and cried out against all
excellency, greatness and magnificency: they held forth outside-holiness, and
cried out against the sword and power of the Magistrate: Riches and honor were
rejected by them as loathsome vomit (at least, as they made show of;) they
spoke of nothing, but of the mortification of the old man, and of the renewing
of the Spirit, and of a life wholly dedicated unto God: above all, they
despised the world and the things that are therein, but it was because they
could not yet play their pranks, nor themselves have dominion, nor make a new
world according to their model, as they afterward showed unto all.

Bern. Rotman preaches the Gospel with success.

He and other Ministers present Articles against Popish errors.


In the year 1532 Bernard Rotman began to preach the Gospel, without the City of
Munster, in the Temple of S. Maurice, and that not without great effect;
insomuch as that there being certain Ministers, they presented thirty Articles
unto the Magistrates, wherein all the errors of the Papacy were contained;
submitting themselves unto all punishment, if they did not prove all these
Articles to be false, and repugnant to the Word of God. The Senate sent for the
Papists, and proposed unto them those Errors: and because they had always given
them to understand their Doctrine was pure, Papists are convinced,
and founded upon the Word of God (which these Preachers denied, and upon their
lives would evince the contrary) the Magistrates asked them, if they would by
holy Writ confute what was said unto them: being thus questioned, and seeing
the Senate laid the matter much to heart; in brief they answered, that they had
not wherewith to defend their Doctrine; and as for what they had said of their
Ordinances, and manner of doing to be good, it was but upon opinion and
ignorance: And by the Senates command resign their places to the Ministers.
whereupon the Senate forbade them from that time forward, not to meddle with
preaching, seeing they were convinced of Errors and false Doctrines, and
commanded them to resign their places unto those Teachers which had discovered
their errors and abuses. Soon after there was assigned to each his Temple to
preach in, by the consent of the Senate; and all the City was in peace and
tranquillity.

But Satan the enemy of peace and truth, Satan (...) Anabaptist, who disturbs
their peace*
could not long endure the peace and publication of the Gospel; wherefore as he
had already done in other places, with might and main he labored to hinder and
overthrow the Gospel; and in its place to set up these seditious Anabaptists:
so he did the same at Munster, to the great damage of the faithful, the
destruction and infamy of the Gospel.

For in the year 1533: there came to Munster an Hollander named John Becold of
Leyden, By John Becold a Tailor of Leyden, who
by Trade a Tailor or Sewer of Garments; but rather a Raveller or tearer in
pieces: he was a witty fellow, eloquent, cautelous, and very audacious, having
a little read the Scripture, he could fully dissemble matters: in sum, he was a
true and perfect Anabaptist; in the beginning of which familiarity, insinua^es
himself into the company of the Ministers.
he insinuated himself into the company of the Ministers of the Gospel, and
asked them whether they thought it was well done to baptize little children?
they answered, Yes; and then he began to deride and jeer with disdain: he thus
carried matters near nine months; often disputing against, and debating with
the Ministers concerning Baptism; notwithstanding in the mean while,
wheresoever he could, he secretly sowed the Doctrine of the Anabaptists. Then
Bernard Rotman, Rotman opposes them,
of whom w^ spoke before, seeing the drift of the Anabaptists, in (...) sermon
exhorted the people to pray unto God for his (...) that they might keep his
Doctrine pure; and to preserve it from ^he corruptions of enraged men,
especially from the Anabaptists, who secretly crept in among them, and slid
into their companies: for if their opinion prevailed, the state of the
Commonwealth and Religion would be poor and miserable. At that very time there
came to Munster one Her^an Staxrede, but is (...) sed^ced by his Coadjutor
Herman Staxrede
who was Rotmans Coadjutor, who seduced him* and caused him to turn Anabaptist,
against whom he had so much combated and cried down. Henry Rolls an Anabaptist
executed.
This Herman had been the Disciple of Henry de Rolls, whom they of Vtrecht had
lately executed, because he was an Anabaptist; he publicly reproved Childrens
Baptism, saying, That it was an abomination before God. Because of this, there
arose great stirs among the people; and those who formerly were secretly
seduced by John Becold of Leyden, Becolds disciples vent their opinions, hold
rightly meetings
now vented their Opinions, and almost throughout the whole City oftentimes
held Conventicles, and secretly assembled in private houses: and their
Ministers taught only by night, when as others took their rest; which was the
fittest time for the working of their mysteries. These things much provoked the
Senate; and because the nightly meetings and Sermons of the Anabaptists were
ill resented, B^ the Senat^ prohibited, commanded to depart; which they refuse.
they were prohibited and forbidden, and command issued forth to all the lovers
of that Sect, to avoid the City: but they cared not for this command, and were
no sooner gone out at one Gate, but they came in at another, and hid themselves
in the City with their Sectaries; and boasted that they had command from God
not to stir, but fully and gravely to prosecute their Commission. This troubled
the Senate, and they were somewhat astonished at it. Wherefore to prevent
further trouble, it was commanded, That both Anabaptists and Preachers of the
Gospel, should repair to the Townhouse with the learned men. A Disputation,
wherei^ Rotman declares himself: Herman Bus^h co^futes him.
In this Disputation Rotman, who had for some time covered matters, openly
declared himself an Anabaptist, and condemned Childrens Baptism, as wicked and
detestable: but Herman Busch so contradicted him, as by the Word of God he
confuted him; which may yet be proved, by the Acts drawn up by the Public
Notary. This being done, the Senate commanded the Anabaptists to depart the
City; yea, and that forthwith: but again they hid themselves according to their
custom, until fair opportunity presented, that they might come in sight; and
then upon a d^liberated rage, They fall upon a Minister Peter Wirtem. R^n about
the City, crying, Repent and ^e Rebaptized.
they fell upon a Minister named Peter Wirtem, (...) he preached in a Temple or
a Church by the authority of the Senate, and they turned him out. Then many of
them ran about the City, as if they had been divinely transported in their
spirit, crying with a loud voice, Repent and be Rebaptized, otherwise the
wrath of God will fall upon you. Many good people fearing the wrath of God
(whereof they so much talked) and in their simplicity being deceived, and some
for fear of losing their estates, obeyed them: for after the Anabaptists had
got the upper hand of their adversaries, they turned them out, and deprived
them of their estates. Take away their estates.
These things were done in the year 1533, and in the beginning of 34 and when
they had been hidden, they came forth out of their dens and caves, and they
went all together unto the Market place with great cries and howlings, and
commanded, Command all unrebaptized to be put to death, seize on their Arms and
Ammunition.
That all that were not Rebaptized should be put to death as Pagans and
wicked: and forthwith they seized upon the Artillery, Arms, Ammunition and
Townhouse; the rest, namely, the Protestants and Papists, began to run, and to
betake themselves to a place of the City, which was naturally strong, for
defense both of themselves and the people; and they took sundry Anabaptists
Prisoners: this lasted until they came unto Composition, and Hostages on both
sides were given; Opposed, come to Composition.
and it was agreed that Every one should hold his own Religion, and return unto
his own house, and live in peace.

The principal Anabaptists then were Rotman, John Becold of Leyden, Bernard
Knipperdoling, Gerard Cipperbrok, Bernard Crechting.

In the mean time Rotman and Knipperdoling (the Superlatives of this faction)
though they had approved of this Composition, But sent for aid to the
neighboring Towns.
yet they sent unto the neighboring Towns; whereby they gave notice unto those
of their Sect, to leave all their goods, and repair unto them, Promise ten
times more then they lost.

M^ltitudes of the poorer sort, on hopes of preferment repair to them.

The Citizens l^ave the City: Anabaptists are Masters and Rule all.


and that they should not fail to receive ten times more then they left behind
them. Great multitudes both of men and women harkening unto these magnificent
promises, came in unto them, and upon hopes of preferment, repaired unto
Munster; chiefly the poorer sort, who knew not how to subsist. The Citizens and
more wealthy among them, seeing the City to swarm with strangers, withdrew as
fairly as they could, abandoning their place unto the Anabaptists: this was
about Lent, in the Month of February 1534. By this means the Anabaptists
became Masters, and chose a new Senate of their own party, with Consuls; among
whom were Knipperdoling and Cipperbrok: soon after they fell upon the Temple of
S. Maurice, which was near unto the City, and burnt it with the neighboring
Edifices; Burn the Church of S. Maurice.
and pillaged all the Temples, and spoiled the chief Temple. Within a few days
after they flocking together ran about the streets, and in a dreadful manner
cried out, Cry, Repent, repent, depart if ye will not die. Drive out all the
Citizens that were not of their Sect. In this flight many women with child
miscarry.

They Pillage.


Repent, repent; and suddenly changed their tune, saying, Quickly depart ye
wicked, if ye will not die: and at that instant in arms ran to and again, and
drove out of the City all that were not of their Sect, without having regard
either to Age or Sex; so as many women miscarried in these troubles and
confused flight. These being driven out, they fall upon pillaging their
Estates: by this every one may know by what spirit these Anabaptistical
Hypocrites were led: there is no act so fellonious, horrible, cruel and wicked,
that ever was done, which they did not commit. In the beginning they talked of
nothing but the Spirit and Holiness; they said, it was not lawful for a
Christian to be a Magistrate, and that it was not lawful to bear Arms; but
after they had brought all under their paw, and in their power, then it was
lawful to take the Public Arms, with the Townhouse, and to choose a Magistrate
to their mind, yea, with rejection of him that was ordained of God; and thrust
themselves into his place, and to make themselves Consuls and Senators as they
have done: there is not need of much speaking, for the world knows it. Where
now are the fair speeches of those Anabaptists? Do not resist evil: He that
will take away thy coat, give him thy cloak also. These have not only pillaged
and stripped honest men of their clothes, but of all that they had, and have
driven them miserable out of their houses, with their wives and little ones,
and have exposed them to death by the Besiegers of the City.

At that time there arose in the City of Munster a great number of Prophets
(for they usurped that name) the principal of whom were John Matthews of
Harling, and one Pistor, Their Prophet Joh. Matthews commands all their goods
to be common.
who were both audacious, and prating fellows; they boasted of Visions, and of
the Spirit of Prophecy. By Prophetical Authority, this holy Prophet commanded
all the City to bring in all their Gold, Silver, and other moveable goods to be
common, and that none upon pain of death, should reserve any thing for his own
private use: and to this end, there was a Public house appointed. The people
were very much astonished at the rigor of this Edict, yet notwithstanding
obeyed it: it was not possible to retain or conceal any portion; for there were
two Maids Divineresses, who did reveal it, Divineresses reveal such as
retained the goods and all books besides the Bible to be burnt.
if there were any that did retain any thing. Afterward these Prophets
commanded that none should keep any books except the Holy Bible; and that all
others should publicly be brought forth and abolished: he said, that he
received this Command from God; wherefore great numbers of books were brought
together and consumed by fire.

It came to pass that an Artificer named Hubert Trutelin, Hubert Trutelin calls
them Prophets of a T -- and slai^.
who being displeased with the acting of these Prophets reproached them,
calling them Prophets de Merde: he was accused, and all the people were caused
to come together in their Arms: they sentenced the poor man to death; whereat
the people were marvellously frighted. John Matthews the chief Prophet laid
hands upon the poor man, and when as he was thrown down, gave him a stab with a
Pike, without wounding him mortally, whatsoever his endeavors were; then he
commanded him to be taken from thence, and that he should be carried to another
place; and taking the Musket of another young man that was near him, he shot
him through with a bullet: when he was falling to the ground, the Prophet said,
That it was revealed unto him from heaven, that the time of his death was not
yet come; and that God had accepted him to favor, though he died a few days
after; whereof when the Prophet had notice, he took a long Pike, and violently
ran through the City, crying out, that God the Father had given him in command
to repulse the Enemy from the City. As he drew near unto the Camp, John
Matthew^ slain.
a Soldier called Mesnicus faced him, and shot him quite through the belly:
This was the woeful end of this mad Prophet: and although the fraud of these
Prophets was well known, yet the people were so bewitched by them, and so
deprived of their reason, that they much bewailed this their goodly Prophet,
saying, That there would some mischief befall them, because such a Prophet was
taken from them.

John Becold of Leyden commanded the second Prophet after him, to be of a good
courage; because that of a long time before, it had been revealed unto him,
that he should come to such an end, and that he should marry his widow. Two
days after Easter, they ran to the Churches, and rang all the Bells together:
Knipperdoling prophe^ieth
some days after, Knipperdoling prophesied, that all lofty things must be laid
low, and the poor, and the mean, and the low things must be exalted; and
forthwith commanded, that all the Churches should be demolished; with a very
great gravity assuring them, that this command came from God: wherefore he was
without delay obeyed, and the heavenly command (as he called it) put in
execution. At the same time John Becold gave the sword unto Knipperdoling,
Becold makes Knipperdoling Hangman,
and appointed him to be executioner, because it so fell out that he was the
Consul, and had administered the chief Magistrates place. Being now made
Hangman, he is put in a lower rank* Knipperdoling made no scruple of it, which
he accepts They ^ally forth, and make a great slaughter to the number of 4000.
and received this place very acceptably; and whereas the Camp had now been
some months before the City, they stormed it; and of the chief Nobility, and
best Captains and Soldiers there were slain before the City about four
thousand: then all hopes of taking them by force failed. A few days after
Whitsontide John Becold of Leyden, after that assaults had been given without
effect, Becold (...) three days dreams, and (...) as Zachary, and writes the
names of 12 (...).
he went to sleep, and laid and dreamed three entire days together; and when
he awaked, he spoke to no man; but as Zacharias, John the Baptists father, so
he made signs that they should bring him paper; wherein he wrote the names of
twelve men, and among them of some of the best rank, who were to have the
Supreme charge, and to have the whole Government as it was in Israel; for he
said, it was the will of the Heavenly Father, that Munster should be governed
as the heavenly Jerusalem. By this means this wicked one made way that he might
be King: afterward he proposed direct articles unto their Preachers, ^
and required them to confirm them, by testimony of Scripture; otherwise he
would bring them unto the people, that they might ratify and approve them.

The sum of these Articles was, that a man was not bound to have but one Wife,
The (...) concerning plurality of wives,
and that it was lawful to espouse as many as he pleased: but as their
Preachers did consute this sentence, he assembled them at the Council-house
with the twelve; where in the presence of them all he pulled off his cloak, and
cast it upon the ground with the New Testament, and swear by these marks and
signs, Swears it was so re^ealed to him from God,
that these Articles by him proposed were revealed to him from Heaven;
wherefore he threatened them, that if they consented not unto them, God would
never be merciful unto them. Finally, they agreed, and were of his Opinion, and
the Preachers for three days space spoke of nothing but of the point of
Marriage. Without delay John Becold married three wives, He marries three wives.
one of whom was the widow of the great Prophet John Matthews: others like lewd
men followed his example, so as it was a praiseworthy thing to have many
wives. Some of the honest Citizens were sorely displeased to see Marriage thus
profaned, and they gave a sign to gather all those together into the Market
place, The Citizens are displeased, take the Prophets. The common people rescue
them, and cr^^lly torture and kill 50
who loved the Doctrine of the Gospel; and then they ran into the Market place,
and laid hands upon the Prophets, and took Knipperdoling, and all the rest of
the Prophets: But the common people having notice hereof, took arms; and having
rescued the Captives, killed about fifty with great torments, tying them to
trees and posts, discharged Muskets at them: in the mean while the great
Prophet cried out, that he that would do God service, should fire first. They
killed with another sort of death.

This great Prophet John Becold of Leyden having by his vision gained this
point, Becold has 15 wives at on^e
that it was lawful for a man to take together as many wives as he pleased,
played his pranks; for he married but fifteen, and had them all at once; and it
was lawful for any one to have six or seven: for they must thus renew their
Marriage, as they had done their Baptism. And that none might take ill what
they did, they merrily colored over their villainy with testimonies out of Gods
word; they brought the examples of the Patriarchs, Abraham, Jacob, Da^^d and
Solomon, and diverse others, and said that the Word of (...) commanded it,
saying Increase, multiply, and fill the earth. When that sentence was brought,
(...) ^.23.
1 Timothy 3. That a Bishop must be unblamable, the husband of one wife, they
answered, that it was clear from the text, That the Apostle required that of
none but the Bishops, and that for several reasons; that he might not burden
the Church, and that he might the better attend upon his Office; but this was
not forbidden to any other.

Upon the 24 of June 1534. there arose a new Prophet, by Trade a Goldsmiths
named John Twiscoscar; (...) new Prophet John Twiscoscar, declares that God
(...) John Becold (...) the (...)
he having assembled the people into the Market place, made known that the will
and command of the heavenly Father was, that John Becold of Leyden should be
made emperor of all the earth; and that (...) should march into the Field with
a mighty Army, and that (...) should without making any difference destroy all
Kings and Pri^^es, pardoning only the people; that is to say, those which ^^ve^
righteousness; that he might hold the throne of his father David, until that
the Father did deliver up the Kingdom unto him; for the Saints should reign in
this World, after that ^he^ had destroyed all the wicked. These things were
brought to John Becold of Leyden, Who accepts it,
who falling down upon both his knees, and lifting up his hands to heaven,
said, It is several days since I knew this, Brethren, yet I would not divulge
it; but now the Father has made use of another Minister to persuade it. He
made semblance as if he received, the Kingdom against his will; yet he laid
hold on it with both hands, and had long before bri^ed for it, and plotted it.

and cashi^rs the twelve Commanders.
Being now King, he who before was but a Tailor, at that ins^a^t cashiereth the
Twelve; and on the sudden attireth himself with more then Royal Pomp and
Magnificence: he chose great Lords, and commanded that they should make two
Crowns of pure Gold: (...) himself (...)*
he bore a Scepter with a Chain of Gold; and likewise his Spurs with Rowels of
Gold: in brief, he was not clad but with Silk, Velvet and Gold, which they had
stolen out of the Churches: his Horses were accordingly accoutred: he
appointed certain days to give audience to all such as addressed themselves
unto him for any business; and when he went abroad, he was attended upon by his
Servants, His pompous train and attendance.
and Gentlemen of his Court: next unto him there went two young men on
Horseback magnificently clad; he that went on the right hand bare the Crown
and the Bible, the other on the left hand bare a naked Sword, the Pommel
whereof was of pure Gold, and richly adorned with precious Stones: the King had
his Chain of Gold about his neck, and he was all glittering with Gold and
precious Stones: he bare in his hand a Globe of Gold. His waiting-Gentlemen
were twenty eight, clad like Courtiers, with garments of mixed color of green
and blew, to signify his Heavenly and Earthly Power. Upon the Kings Girdle was
written, The power of God is my strength: thus was the Name of God profaned
and blasphemed, to cloak this Villains stinking infamy. Furthermore, his Title
was, The King of the New Jerusalem, King of Righteousness, throughout all the
World. The pomp of his chief Wife (for he had many together) was equal to his
own: his Servants were (...) in green, and bordered with a brown color; and
upon their sleeve there was a World with a little Cross about it, and two
Swords thwarted across. He had his Throne set up aloft, whereunto he ascended
by three steps* and all was beset with Gold and Jewels. The Lawsuits which
ordinarily came before him, were for the most part about Women and Divorces,
insomuch as some who had lived almost all their life long together, now
separated one from another. It came to pass one day, that when the people were
in the Marketplace, close crouding, and in a throng to hear, that
Knipperdoling leaped on their heads, and scrambling with his hands and feet
being now above them, he breathed upon the men one after another into their
mouths, saying, The Father has sanctified thee, Knipperdolings blasphemy
receive the Holy Ghost. One day he fell a dancing before the King, saying,
Thus I am wont to do with my Whore, but now the Father has commanded me to do
it before the King: Confesses himself an whoremaster.
but because he did it too long, and would not make an end, the King was angry,
and went his way. He suddenly mounted into the Throne; but the King surprising
him, threw him down, and three days kept him in Prison.

Is there not here to be seen a wonderful rage and madness? Who could have
believed that any bearing humane shape, should have been left to commit things
so foolish, absurd, villainous and execrable? but it cannot be otherwise with
such as violate, trample upon, and reject the Word of God; they are by Divine
judgment smitten, so as to be an example to the Elect. But let us behold their
goodly glorious King, now mounted with more then Royal Pomp: where is the
spirit of these Anabaptists, who were so ready to reprove and reject others? At
first they cried out against all; if they saw any Matron wear silk, or any man
of fashion to wear a gold Ring, they cried down all* but now their glorious
King Tailor omitteth nothing, that may set forth his Pomp and State. In the
beginning they would not bear to hear, that any honest man should be a Bailiff,
or Governor of a Village; but soon the wind is changed, and now by command
from the Father, their King is not King of a Village, but of the whole World;
for so he caused himself to be styled. During this Siege, the Prophets of
Munster published a Book, which they entitled, The Ristitution; wherein they
maintained Muntzers damnable Doctrine, and an infinite of Errors.

Afterward in the Month of August, on the day which is called S.
Bartholomews, the new Prophet called John Twiscoscar sounded the Trumpet
through the streets, and cried out, that All should meet in Arms about the way
to the great Church; for they must give a repulse to the Enemies of the City:
being thither come, they find a Supper ready, which the King had provided; and
by command the people did sit down, to the number of four thousand: the King,
Queen, and Courtiers waited at the Table. Supper almost being finished, the
King gave unleavened bread to all, Becolds mock-Lords Supper.
saying, Take, eat, declare the death of the Lord: then the Queen presented the
Cup, saying, Drink, declare the death of the Lord. Behold the brave Supper of
these Anabaptists, which was rather a voluptuous Banquet, the Table of Devils,
then the Table of our Lord Jesus Christ. Now when the Supper was ended, the new
Prophet gat him up into the Pulpit, and asked them whether they would obey the
Word of God? they all said, Yes: Twisc^s^ar reveals that 28 Teachers must be
sent forth.
he told them then that the command of the Father was, that they must send
Twenty eight Teachers of the Word. Then he named them in order, declaring the
place whither each should go: Six were sent to Osemberg, as many to Warrendort;
eight to Susar, and as many to Corsfield.

The King and the Queen with those that served at the Table, supped afterward,
The King and Queen and the 28 Teachers sup together.
and those which were appointed to be sent forth. As they were at Supper, the
King rose up, and said, That he had received a Commission from the Father:
whereas upon an adventure there was a Soldier which had been taken, the King
accused him that he was a Traitor as Judas, and with his own hands cut off his
head. This being done, he returned to sit down at Table, and by way of
merriment recited what he had done. After Supper within night, they caused the
twenty eight abovementioned, to depart out of the City; and over and above
their expenses, they gave to every one (...) them certain pieces of Gold, to
leave in such places where their Doctrine should not be received, in witness of
their perdition, and eternal damnation, for their refusal of the peace and
doctrine of Salvation.

And when they were arrived at the places assigned unto them, they began to run
through the City with horrible cries, crying, Repent, repent, otherwise ye will
suddenly perish: then they cast their garments upon the ground, and threw their
pieces of Gold which were given unto them upon their garments, assuring them
that they were sent by the Father, to bring peace unto them if they would
receive it: they commanded them to put all their goods in common; if they did
refuse it, by this sign, and as by a mark, they did bear witness against their
ingratitude, and evil deeds: for behold the time now is come, which was
foretold by the Prophets, wherein the Lord God would, that Righteousness should
reign through all the earth: and after that the King shall have discharged his
trust, and shall have so done, that Righteousness shall reign every where; Then
Christ shall deliver up the Kingdom to the Father.

Upon these words they were apprehended, and in the beginning fairly demanded,
then by the Rack examined of their faith, life, and Ammunition of the City.
They answered, that they alone had the true Doctrine, which they would unto the
death maintain: for since the Apostles time the Gospel was not truly preached,
and that there was no righteousness; that there were four Prophets, two of
which were true, namely, David George, and John Becold of Leyden; two were
false, namely, the Pope, and Luther worse then the Pope. Being asked why they
drove the honest people out of the City, against their faith and promise, and
detained their Goods, Wives and Children; and by what Text of Scripture they
could warrant that unrighteousness? They answered, That the time was now come,
wherein the Word of Christ should be fulfilled, that the meek should possess
the earth; and that God in this man^er gave the goods of the Egyptians unto the
Israelites: After, they declared their Ammunition and Victuals that was in the
City, with their Garrison, some of whom had above five Wives. Moreover, that
they looked for Soldiers from Friseland and Holland, who being arrived, the
King would take the Field with all his Army, to reduce the whole World under
his power and subjection, after he had slain their Kings which did not
righteousness. After they were questioned, and still persisted in their
opinions, they were all beheaded, except one who escaped.

At the same time there arose another Prophet, called Henry Hilvers, a wicked
man, subtle and wary; he came to declare unto the King and the people, that the
heavenly Father had revealed unto him, that three rich Cities with all their
goods should be given unto them by God, namely, Amsterdam, Deventer, and Wesel.
The King hearing this, set himself to consult with his Council, by what means
they might bring these three Cities unto Anabaptism; and to this effect they
sent certain men unto these places. In the first place he sent James Campen^^
to Amsterdam, and commanded him to be Prince in that City, and ordered him John
Matthews of Middleburg to be his consort: they went into Holland, and hid
themselves at a Sectaries house, and there with their mischievous doctrine they
impoysoned many, rebaptized their disciples, and secretly by night held
Conventicles and Meetings; yea, also they scattered their poison in the
neighboring Cities: for in the City of Leyden, in the month of January, in
the year following, 1535, many were put to death for Anabaptism, and for their
seditious counsels and enterprises. Moreover, in the end of the year 1534 the
King sent into Friseland, John Gelen, a subtle man, and well versed in arms, he
having formerly had charge in the Army; the King gave him good store of gold
out of the spoil of the Churches, and gave him in charge to raise an Army in
F^ise; and acted so by certain men that assisted him, that on the 30 of March
1535, he mustered up and raised an Army, and took a Monastery, and drove out
the Friars, and there quartered his Camp, until his Army should augment and be
completed. George Schenck who was then Governor of Frise, speedily assaulted
them as seditious persons: they valliantly defended themselves, but he gained
the Victory and defeated them; but not without great loss: they were all cut
off except sixty, who were brought to Leanard, and after were punished
according to their deserts. Their Captain John Gelen escaped and fled to
Amsterdam, to be the author of some further sedition; where he found many
Anabaptists, whom James Campense had seduced; he promised them great matters,
highly exalting the glory and liberty at Munster, magnificently preaching the
new reign of righteousness upon earth. For by this time the renown of Munster
was spread, which animated the courage of many; seeing so great an Army had
besieged them, yea, and had stormed them often, with the loss of many; and that
they saw the Anabaptists to persist in their purpose: many who were desirous to
be freed from their debts, and to triumph, did greatly desire to enjoy the
liberty of Munster. Henry Gesbell a Citizen of Amsterdam, a stout man, and of
renown for Soldiery, was gained by the Anabaptists, and was very familiar with
John Gelen; who being drawn to their party by large promises, much was wrought
by him: for in the conclusion 600 Anabaptists met together, with whom they
intended and attempted to take Amsterdam, to set up their new reign, as they
had done at Munster: for upon the 10. of May, the first and the chiefest of
them, assembled in the house of Peter Gale; where after consultation they came
forth into the street; for that day the Citizens were merry, and had according
to a custom among them been at a Game.

About 10 a clock, the Anabaptists ran together in the streets, about the
Cross, which was a public place, crying out, Amend your lives, etc. whosoever
will this night be rich and happy, let him march along with us: and as the
number of their people increased more and more, they slew part of them who
(...) charge of the watch, and the other part they took (...). Now the Citizens
assembled themselves, and assaulted (...) Anabaptists; but they carried the
matter so ill, as that their Consul was slain, and the rest put to flight; but
then they reinforced their strength, and gave battle unto the Anabaptists, who
were then defeated, though with much blood which then was shed; among whom John
Gelen, and Henry Gesbel were slain.

James Campense was taken, and executed by the hand of Justice. Afterward in
many parts of those places of Holland, the Anabaptists raised tumults and
seditions; not without loss and great damage unto several honest people, for
they could not keep themselves quiet: for when they were defeated in one part,
they began in another; making in secret many disciples, who waited for the
restoring of the Kingdom unto Israel.

There was a certain man in the Town of Leyden, who being forced unto it by
torments, confessed that the King of the Anabaptists dwelt in Vtricht; but that
he was not yet crowned, but only designed to be Prince in the Kingdom of
Israel: this prisoner was not only found possessed of vessels of silver and
gold, which by evil practice he had stolen; but also guilty of several crimes,
for which he was executed: there is no doubt, but that by this King they did
intend David George.

In the mean while, although at Munster their King and Prophets had made unto
the poor people most great and magnificent promises; yet now every day they
were oppressed with great necessity, and chiefly through Famine, insomuch as
many were starved, and died for want of bread.

The Inhabitants secretly resolved to apprehend the King, and to deliver him up
unto the Bishop, and by this means to purchase their peace: the King making
doubt hereof, and not trusting to himself; he chose twelve men, whom he judged
would be most faithful unto him, and appointed them to be Captains of each
Quarter of the City, that he might be in the better rest and assurance;
afterward he promised the people, that by Easter they should be freed and
delivered from this siege, and all their poverty: for he hoped that the Legates
which he had sent into Frise and Holland, and other Regions, having raised
Soldiers, would make some stirs; and that by this means the siege would be
raised before Munster: but he was deceived by his vain hopes, as we have heard
(for there was a goodly dispatch of his Legates:) He promised great matters to
the Captains which he had chosen; how when the Camp should be raised before the
City, he would make them great Lords and Princes; and particularly he gave unto
John Dents the Empire of Saxony: whereby appeared the bruitishness and
Diabolical rage of this pleasant and goodly King Tailor, to promise to give
that which was none of his own; and to take it away from him, to whom God had
given it.

In the Month of February, the famine was so great, that many died through
hunger and want. One of the Queens (for there were many) called Elisa, out of
pity to the People, occasionally said, That she did not believe that it was
pleasing unto God, that the people should thus perish through famine: The King,
who had store of good provision in his house, not only for necessity, but also
to make good cheer; withal knowing this, brought her into the Market place with
all the other Queens, and commanded them all to fall down upon their knees
about her; and unsheathing his sword he struck off her head from off her
shoulders: and not being contented herewith, he reproached her as a bawd: the
other wives fell a singing after this goodly deed, Glory be unto God in the
highest; and gave thanks unto the heavenly Father: and then they fell a
dancing; the King led the Gallia^d, and exhorted the poor people to leap,
dance, and to rejoice also, who had naught left but a little bread and salt.

When Easter was come, and that there appeared no sign of deliverance, the
people were, and that not without cause, much grieved: The King who all along
fed them with fair promises, fell sick, and continued so six days together,
that he might cover himself with some excuse: after those six days, he came
into the Market place, and there showing himself, he told the people, that he
had promised them deliverance: but it must spiritually be understood, and
behold this was the deliverance; he said, That he had rode the blind Ass, and
that the Father had laid upon him the sins of the multitude; and that he had
born them, and taken them away: and that now they were delivered from all their
sins; which was the deliverance that he had promised unto them. Thus must the
poor and miserable people content themselves, to hear this execrable blasphemy.
The blind Ass of this Gallant, whereupon this devilish and desperate man rode,
was the poor people, that endured and did bear the enormities of such a
villain, whom they adored.

If we should reckon up the miseries, calamities, and other evils which those
of the City endured, it were a miserable thing to hear: diverse who would not
bear the famine, fled to the enemy; not so much looking for mercy, as that
their pain might be expired by death: many crawled upon their bellies in the
streets, and others dyed in the ways: it was an horrible thing to see many
walking quite stripped of flesh, nothing left but skin upon the bones. Their
ears, lips, cheeks, and noses were so shrunk up, as one might almost see
daylight through them, as through a piece of Paper. Through feebleness, they
could not carry their bodies: some went to the enemy disarmed, trailing a staff
in their hands: whiles provision lasted, none talked of going to the enemy, but
now when this was spent, then began their desolation and discontent: yet they
helped themselves as long as they could* They sowed in the sides of the walls,
and in all waste places, rapes, pease, and such seeds, and with this they made
shift to pass the Summer: But when this crop was spent, then it was as Venison
to them to feed on dogs, rats and mice; and when the City* was taken, there
were but two horses left alive: many were so pressed with hunger, as that they
did eat the flesh of dead carcasses. Finally, they boiled shoes, old leather*
and skins, and beat them together, and put them into a pot, and mingled all
sorts of matter together, which they could find: this was instead of bread;
and yet this villain and wicked cheater deceived them, telling them, God tried
them, to see whether they would be faithful and constant; and that certainly
the Father would deliver them in a short time. Now they that would depart out
of the City, to be delivered from these mischiefs, were to present themselves
before the King: and there this Robber took from them all that they had; and
when they were ransacked, he said, Now get you gone to the Heretics.

The King had yet provision of Victuals in his Palace, for about two Months;
but it was only for his Courtiers. They consulted how they might victual the
City. Then there stood forth one named Hansken Vander Langke-strate, he was one
of the Kings Secretaries, and one in whom he confided much: he undertook to
re-victual the City, and to bring in three hundred Soldiers to their
assistance, and all in fifteen days. He departed out of the City, and under
this pretense went unto the enemy; and for a certain sum of money sold the City
unto the Bishop, offering to lose his life if he did not accomplish i^: the
time for this Plot to be put in execution, was the even of S. John's day, at ten
a clock in the night; and that he would open the Gate unto them, provided they
came without noise, to the Gate of the Cross. Then this Purveyour returned unto
the City, and comforted the King, telling him, That he had well ordered his
business; and that within fifteen days they should have a recruit of Victuals
and Soldiers. When the day was come, he told the Watch, That this night their
aid and victuals should come; and therefore when they saw them approach, that
they should take heed that they made no noise, but be very quiet. At the very
time appointed, at ten a clock in the night, the Gate was opened, and the enemy
entered. They killed the Sentinels, and the Corpse du Guard, having got the Word.
Being thus entered into the City, the Trumpets sound an Alarm; suddenly the King
and his men put themselves into a posture to fight, and to repulse the enemy
back again to the Gate, which was now shut by some of the Citizens. The enemies
without broke up the Gates; for they heard how they charged upon their people
within: and being now entered in, they display their Colors. Those of the City
abode the brunt a little at first, and were drawn up in the Market place: the
Battle was very great. The King, Knipperdoling and Crechting, were taken: then
Rotman seeing no hope to escape, thrust himself into the middle of the enemies,
and there was run through, because he feared to be taken alive. But when the
Anabaptists heard that their King was taken, their courage failed them, and
they hid themselves here and there in Cellars, holes and Shop-bulks; yea, if it
had been possible, would have ran into mouse-holes. They were ten days in
pillaging the City, and they found in the Kings Palace provision for 200 men
for two Months: whereas the poor people were for a long time starved. This was
called, To have things in common; when as some had to eat, and others were
starved. This was like Ananias and Sapphira's dealing before the Apostle Peter.

Thus was the City of Munster taken, the 25 of June 1535. The King was three
days after, by a guard of Soldiers brought to a Castle three leagues from the
City, called Dulme. As soon as the Bishop perceived the King, he cried out, Oh
thou wretch! how have thou brought spoil and waste to me, and to my poor
people! The King readily and proudly answered, lifting up himself, and
despising the Bishop, said, Priest, we have not damnified thee one mite, but we
have delivered a strong City into thine hands, which is able to stand out
against all strength: yet if We have done thee damage, if thou will hearken
unto us, we will make make thee rich. The Bishop hearing that, could not
forbear laughing, and asked him, how he would do it? The King answered him, Get
Baskets made of Iron, and cover them over with Leather, and put me in one of
them, and cause me to be carried through the Country, and let no man see me,
but he that shall give thee a penny; and by this means, thou shall receive more
money then thou have spent in the War.

The better and most holy Anabaptists hung about their necks the mark and
ensign of their King engraven in Brass, marked with these three letters, D. W.
E. which in their language signified, The Word was made Flesh. The King had for
his Title, I John by the grace of God, and by virtue of the new Kingdom to
come in the Temple of God, Minister of Righteousness, etc.

Thus the King with his two Companions were carried Prisoners here and there
unto the Princes, by which means the Ministers of the Lantgrave had opportunity
to confer with the King, and to dispute with him about the principal Points,
viz. The Kingdom of Christ, The Magistrate, Baptism, The Incarnation of our
Lord, The Lords Supper, Marriage: and by testimonies of Scripture unto them, so
acted, as though in all things they changed not: notwithstanding all the
oppositions they made to defend their opinions, yet they yielded somewhat;
which the King did (as some thought) in hope to save his life: for at the
second time of their return, he promised them, if they would grant him his
liberty, to silence the Anabaptists, which were in great numbers in Holland,
Brabant, England, and Friseland, and to bring them in subjection to the
Magistrate.

The 20 of Jan. 1536. the King and his two Companions were brought back to
Munster, and put in several Prisons; the two next days were spent in holy
Remonstrances, to reduce them from their errors. The King acknowledged his
sin, and had recourse to Christ by prayer: the other two acknowledged not their
faults, but stood out. The next day the King was brought forth upon a Scaffold,
and tied to a post; where were two executioners with hot burning tongs: he
endured the three first pinchings of the tongs, without speaking word;
afterward he ceased not to call upon the mercy of the Lord. Thus for a whole
hour and more, was he torn and dismembered; and to dispatch him out of the
world, he was run through with a sword: his two Companions had the like end.
Their bodies were put into iron Cages, and hung upon S. Lamberts Tower, for a
perpetual memorial. Let none think we recite stories of the Anabaptists, which
are not to be believed, by adding thereunto of our own; God forbid that we
should so do: for there are many yet living, who were eyewitnesses of these
things, and present when they were done. I speak this, that none might be
hindered from getting profit by this History, which is true and certain, and
brought to light for the instruction of the people of God.

In the year 1535. upon the 3 of February, in the City of Amsterdam, in the
street of the Salines, in the house of one John Silert, who then was far from
home, there assembled seven men and five women, then called Anabaptists, among
whom there was one called Theodore Sartor, who was there inspired; he lay
stretched out flat upon the ground, for some space of time, before the other
brethren and sisters: who in the end awakened; and prayer being made with great
gravity, or rather fair hypocrisy, he then said, That he had seen God in his
Majesty; also that he had a vision of all things in heaven and in hell; and
that the great day of Judgment was now come: Afterward he pulled off all his
garments, not leaving so much as to cover his shameful parts withal. He
commanded the rest of his brethren and sisters to follow his example, upon this
pretense, for said he, The children of God must strip themselves, and put off*
whatsoever is made and born of the earth; inasmuch as truth is naked, and
cannot abide to be wrapped up in any thing: therefore, to show themselves
veritable and true, ought to unclothe themselves. The poor people hearing this,
put off their clothes; and being no ways ashamed, became quite naked. Theodore
commanded them all to imitate him: he leapt out of doors into the public quite
naked, as also did the rest of the men and women, who followed him, crying
after an horrible manner, Woe, woe, woe, Divine vengeance, Divine vengeance, etc.
and in this manner they ran furiously through the City, like mad people, crying
out so hideously as never was known.

Then the Citizens ran to take arms (for they knew not whether the City were
surprised by enemies, or what would become of this stir.) Finally, these
impudent people were taken being quite naked; and being questioned upon the 5
of March, these seven men were beaten and scourged: the first of them cried
out, Praise the Lord for evermore: another said, Lord, avenge the blood of
thine: the third, Open your eyes, etc. the fourth said, Woe, woe. Afterward the
women were brought to punishment: when they were taken, they offered them
garments, but they rejected them, saying, That the truth ought to be naked.
What men ever heard of such impudency or fury? In the ancient stories we read
of Adamites, who also went naked; but it was only among themselves, and at
their Festival days: but these far surpass them.

When Adam saw himself naked, he sought for covering; and finding nothing more
fit then leaves, he made use of those of a Figtree: but these, when as garments
were tendered unto them, they refused them; and like dogs ran without shame.
Behold what befalls those that leave the word of God, to cleave unto dreams
and Satanical illusions! but behold their madness, in that they dare attribute
so much villainy unto the holy Spirit of God, and to make him the author of
their nakedness: they ought to have in remembrance, with what gravity the
Apostle Paul commands women to have their heads covered in the Church: what
would he have said if he had seen or known women to run without shame quite
naked like Bitches, who commanded that women apparel themselves in decent
habit, with shamefacedness and modesty?

The things which were done by these Anabaptists in the Towns of St. Gall in
Switzerland, are not less hideous nor horrible then these, whereof we have
already heard. For in the year 1526, two brethren which came out of the same
womb, Thomas and Leonard Schitker, inhabiting near unto the town called Mulleg;
the 7. of February, by night there assembled a great number of Anabaptists in
their Fathers house, who spent all the night in preaching and doing marvelous
deeds, and receiving of visions: at Sunrising, upon the 8 of February, Thomas
took his brother Leonard, and set him in the midst of his kindred, and of all
the company, commanding him to fall down upon his knees: now as the rest
admonished him, to do no unbeseeming thing unto his Brother, he answered them,
That they needed not to fear, for he should do nothing there, but the will of
the Father: in the mean while unsheathing a Sword he cut off his brothers head,
who was upon his knees before them all. As all the company were smitten with
great fear, and made great and lamentable complaints, Thomas who had committed
this Murder, suddenly flies out of the Town, using horrible behaviors, as
the custom of the Anabaptists is to do.

This Enthusiast at that time came before the Consul in the town of St. Gall.
Mr. Joachim Vadian, an excellent man and renowned for piety and learning, being
present, this Anabaptist cried out fearfully before him, The day of the Lord is
at hand, the day of the Lord comes: he added further, that at the break of
day, there had been some great thing done, (but that he concealed the matter)
and that the will of the Father was accomplished, and that it had been steeped
in Gall and Vinegar: the Consul reproved him, and chid him sharply, because of
his fury and immoderate cries, commanding him to cloth himself, and to return
to his house, and to behave himself peaceably. Suddenly his villainous murder
was divulged, and he was apprehended and diligently examined by torture; and
afterward for his villainous fact, by the hand of the Magistrate executed and
put to death. This poor Anabaptist had forgot the Doctrine of the Apostle, 1 John 3.12, etc. but God by his righteous judgment and providence, suffered
such villainous and execrable deeds to be committed by these persons, that these
ways may be abominated.

There was found at Appasel in the Country of Switzerland, A she Messiah.
a woman, a sister of this Sect, who taught and persuaded many of her brethren,
that she was Christ the Messiah of women, and chose twelve Apostles.

That befalls these persons, which is common to such as once stray, and turn
aside from the right path, and the good old way: by how much further they are
off and distant from the right path, and the more progress they make; so much
the farther do they wander from the right way: after that they had built the
Tower of Babel, God so confounded their language, that they understood not one
another; and they are divided among themselves, yea, they have damned and
excommunicated one another, and made diverse Churches apart, without familiarity
or communion together. But not to weary the Reader with such diversity, I shall
only name fifteen.

1. In the first place, there is Thomas Muntzer with his rout. 2. There are the
Apostolical ones, as they call themselves. 3. The Spiritual ones, and separated
from the world. 4. The holy and sinless ones: these are the Prefectists. 5. The
Silentiaries. 6. The Praying ones, and wholly trusting in God. 7. The
Enthusiasts. 8. The great free Libertines. 9. The Brethren Huttikes. 10. The
Augustinians. 11. The Glorians, and Triumphant Anabaptists of Munster. 12.
Those of Melchior Hoffman. 13. The Meherlanders. 14. The Mennonites, the
disciples of Menno Simons. 15. The Franniques, which also within these few
days are divided.
Let us now come to behold some of their strange opinions; for that were a work
never to be done, to describe them all. We shall begin with Thomas Muntzer, of
whom mention was made in the beginning of the History.

Firstly, He wrote and taught publicly, that the Ministers and Preachers of
the Gospel, were not sent of God: and that they preached not the true word of
God, but were Scribes and Pharisees, preaching only the dead Letter of the
Scripture.

Moreover, he said, That the writing of the Old Testament, and the preaching of
the eternal word, was not the word of God, but was only the testimony thereof:
and that we must search for the word in the internal part, i. e. in our hearts,
where God has put it, that we need not go far to seek it from without us: The
Scribe-Ministers (says he) think that faith comes by the Scriptures and
preaching, but they are very far off: for all the Scriptures lead us hither,
that we must be taught and learned of God, Joh. 6.45. Isai. 54.13. Jer 31.34.

Answ.
It was very needful for these Anabaptists, to begin here to set up their Sect
and Faction: they must say and plainly affirm, that the Ministers are not sent
of God, that they might the more withdraw the poor people from them. The
Reasons which move them so to speak, as they pretend, are Paul's writing to
Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.12.
where he says, Be an Example, etc. whereby the Apostle shows it is needful
for the Minister to approve his calling by purity of life, 1 Timothy 3.2.
otherwise it will be vain and false; also the Bishop must be unblameable. Our
new Mennonists and Franniques are of the same opinion. But in the mean while,
who sees not that they endeavor above all things, to set up their own works
and righteousnesses, and Pharisee-like to judge and condemn all such as do not
as many works as they? It is many times so, that Harlots will boast themselves
more of their chastity then honest Matrons: so it was with the false Apostles
at Corinth, that they might bring the true Apostles of Christ into disrepute;
they so boasted of their own virtue and lowliness, as if the true Apostles were
in no wise to be compared with them. But the Apostle is in no wise astonished
at their vain and foolish braggings; yea, he plainly derided them, saying, We
dare not make ours of the number, nor compare our selves with some who commend
themselves: but they measuring themselves by themselves, and comparing
themselves with themselves, are not wise: as if the Apostle should have said,
they so please themselves in themselves, that they think and esteem, that there
are none in the World equal or to be compared with themselves: they consider
not the gifts wherewith others are endued, but their sight is so fixed upon
themselves and their own fair deeds, as that they are persuaded, that they are
the only ones, and the Nonesuch in the world. In the mean while, the Apostle
lively upbraideth them, saying, Such false Apostles are deceitful workers,
disguising themselves into Apostles of Christ; and no marvel, says he, for
Satan transformeth himself into an Angel of light; it is no great matter then,
if his Ministers transform themselves into the Ministers of righteousness:
whose end shall be according to their works. Moreover, who knows not well,
that Doctrine far surpasses works? so as if the Doctrine be not sound, pure,
and true; the works, how holy and fair soever they may be, will never prove the
calling of a false Prophet, that he is sent from God.

If it were lawful for us to boast, it should not be in our sanctity,
perfection, and mortification, as they do; but only in the pure mercy of God
through Jesus Christ: if so be that gravity and honesty of life, were the true
sign of the vocation to the Ministry, it would follow, that all honest and good
people should be Ministers of the Church; but that is well known to be false, 1
Cor. 7.10. nor can it be; for there is a command for every one to walk in the
calling wherein he is called, 1 Cor. 12.29. He asks also, Are all Apostles?
are all Prophets? are all Teachers? Every Christian may or ought to read, and
discourse of Scripture; it follows not therefore that all Christians are
Preachers and Ministers of the Churches, but only those which are lawfully
called; nor does the calling cease for any failing that may be found in the
life of the Called (which is not spoken to give occasion to make Ministers
negligent; (God forbid:) but the exhortation of the Apostle Paul, is always
necessary to the Ministers) no more then Peter ceased to be a true and lawful
Apostle, Acts 6 6. Act^ 13 3. 1 (...) 5 22. 1 (...) 4 14. 1 Timothy 1 6
when he so grossly failed, Gal. 2.11, 12. It is well known our Ministers are
called to Office by the voice and common consent of all the Church; and that
after fasting and calling upon the Name of God, according to Apostolical
institution, and are confirmed in their Office by imposition of hands: what
reason is there for these Sectaries to say, That their Ministers are called of
God, but ours only by the world and men? if their Ministers have a special
calling as the Apostles had, let them prove it by signs, miracles, gifts of
tongues, and Apostolical Doctrine, as they did: The Church has no need of your
Ministers; for the Doctrine of Repentance, Amendment of life, and of Remission
of sins in the Name of Christ, is abundantly declared in the Church of Christ:
to teach the same thing is superfluous; if you teach any other Doctrine, then
you and your Doctrine is accursed, and not to be heard.

I shall say no other thing, then what the Apostle Paul before spoke to the
like glorious Ministers as theirs be, Gal. 1.18. If their spirit be so full of
knowledge and light, so as they cannot contain themselves from preaching
without calling; why do they not preach where the Gospel was never yet
declared? they insinuate themselves into such places, where the Gospel has
been preached to the people, with great labor and hazard of life unto the poor
Ministers. It is a marvel, how they will vouchsafe to enjoy, and partake of the
labors of those Ministers, whom they so much hate: they secretly by fraud and
deceit seduce and disturb in such places the poor sheep of Jesus Christ, which
ought not to be withdrawn from their true Pastors. I pray all the Flock of
Christ, not to give heed to such strangers, but rather hearken to the voice of
the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. Heb. 13.17.

These Sectaries do defame and reproach the Ministers, and speak all evil of
them* but it is because they touch them at the quick; because they cry out upon
these Wolves, and pluck the sheepskins from off their backs, that none might
be surprised by their fair appearance. Seeing the Gospel Ministers are styled
Salt of the earth, none must think strange that the Salt biteth and pricketh,
and makes it self to be Salt: the Salt biteth not where there is no wound, but
it is felt where there is a raw place. It will appear then, that they have lost
their spiritual senses, who say, That our Ministers are not called of God: God
has put singular honor upon the Ministers; yea, what greater could he put
upon them, then by saying, He that hears you, hears me; and he that
rejects you, rejects me? the Lord not only by words, has recommended the
Ministers unto the Church; but also by example, has shown what honor and
reverence all ought to have them in. The holy Ghost could have taught the
Ethiopian Eunuch without the Ministry of man, Acts 8.
but he would maintain this order.

So Cornelius, God could have taught him by the Angel, Acts 10.5.
but he is bid to send for Peter. When our Lord called Paul, he could have
instructed him himself, yet he is sent to a mortal man, to receive the Doctrine
of Salvation, and Baptism: behold, a case which fell not out by rashness, that
an Angel of God should withdraw from entering upon the Ministry, Acts. 9 6.
and should send him to a man, a Minister, to preach unto him. Who with a good
Conscience dare then despise the true Ministry, so highly honored of God; and
to disgust men from the same, and to cause men to run after those which were
not lawful Ministers, but thieves, robbers, and grievous Wolves, which spare
not the flock of our Lord Jesus Christ?

Let us now come to the second Point: Muntzer, after he had spued out his
poison against the poor Ministers of Christ, he falls upon the word of the
eternal God; and there, that he may leave nothing entire, with open throat he
spits out his blasphemies. It is no marvel if he fall upon the Ministers of the
Word, to speak evil of them, seeing he dares so outragiously to set himself
against the very mouth of God* Behold his own words.

Object.
That the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, and the enternal preaching
of the word, is not the word of God; and that we must search for the word, in
the internal part in the heart; and that the Ministers are much deceived,
thinking that faith comes by reading of the Scriptures, or by hearing them
preached; seeing all the Scripture says, that they shall be taught of God.
These are his own words.

Answ.
We plainly confess, and are not so ignorant (thanks be to God) and who knows
not, that the external word, i. e. that the Letters written with ink upon
paper, by the hand of the Writer; and that the voice sounding out of the mouth,
is not the Word of God, inasmuch as it is written and spoken by man? yet we do
notwithstanding affirm, that the sense of these words written, and spoken by
the mouth of the Minister, is the true and indubitable Word of God: as it more
plainly appears, ^. 36.4.6, 8.
where the Prophet Jeremiah commands Baruch to write from his mouth all the
words of the Lord. The words of Jeremiah written with ink in a Book, are called
the Word of the Lord.

How often do we hear in the Prophets, Thus says the Lord! read these
Scriptures: Jer. 25.15. Jer. 20.33. 1 Pet. 1.23. Isa. 40.6. 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.
Deuteronomy. 10.18. Acts 4.31. Acts 6.2. Acts 8.14, 25. Acts 11.1. Acts 13.5, 7, 25.
Acts 17.13. Acts 18.11. Heb. 13.7. Ephesians. 1.13. We ought rather to give credit
to so many evident Testimonies of Scripture, then unto such Ravers, who do
nothing but rave and dream.

Muntzer cares not for that, but dares give the Apostle Peter the lie. Now
they which leave the Scriptures, finding out another means to come unto God,
through pride, they are deprived of their senses. They pretend unto Revelations
of the Spirit; and despising all reading, they mock at the simpleness of those,
which yet follow the dead and killing Letter (as they call it.) By what spirit
is it, by inspiration whereof they are so highly rapt, as that they dare reject
all the Doctrine of the Scriptures, as a babish and childish thing? They say,
It is the Spirit of God; but it is plain mockery so to speak. For they must
needs grant us, that the Apostles and the faithful in the Primitive Church,
were inspired by the Spirit of Christ; yet none of them durst contemn the Word
of God, and the holy Scriptures, but rather each of them had them in very great
reverence; as we may see it by their writings, which are furnished with many
testimonies from the Old Testament: and certainly thus was it promised by God,
through the mouth of the Prophet, Isa. 59.21. where we see, that the Lord
joined these two together, his Word and his Spirit: wherefore should we
separate, what God has by an inviolable bond conjoined?

Moreover, Paul, who was rapt up into the third heaven, 2 Cor. 12.4.
and there heard things unlawful for man to utter, notwithstanding, gave not
over diligent reading, nor profiting by the Books of the Old Testament,
Commanding Timothy to bring with him the Books which he had left at Troas with
Carpus. 2 Timothy 4.13. 2 Timothy 3.15. 1 Timothy 4.13.
Yea, he exhorts Timothy, who though he was an excellent Teacher, and well
instructed in the holy Scriptures, to give himself to reading: and what praise
does he put upon the Scripture! 2 Timothy 3.16. I would ask these men, whether
they have received another Spirit, then our Savior promised to give his
Disciples? they will not dare to vaunt of another spirit: now what Spirit our
Savior promised to send unto his Disciples, he shows plainly, when he says,
John 14.26.
This Spirit shall not speak of himself, but should bring to their remembrance
what they had formerly heard of him. It is not the Office of the holy Spirit,
that which Christ promised, to dream of dreams, of new and unknown Revelations,
or to hold forth new Doctrine: but it is the work of the Spirit of God, to
confirm us in that which he has already spoken, by the Prophets and Apostles;
seeing also that the Lord promises not to send us another Doctrine, saying,
Hold fast that which thou have, until I come, Revel. 2.24. Gal. 1.8, 9.
whereby it appears, that we ought diligently to travel, as well in hearing,
as in the reading of the holy Scripture, if we will feel the benefit and fruit
of the Spirit of God. Luke acknowledges the diligence of those of Berea in
searching the Scriptures, Acts 17.11. To this purpose tend these Scriptures: 2
Pet. 1.19. John 5.39. Luke 4.21. Matthew. 4.4. Ephesians. 6.16. Mat. 22.19. Luke 24.27.
John 2.22.

And Paul would have a Bishop to hold fast the faithful word, Titus 1.9, etc.
Apollos was mighty in the Scriptures, etc. Acts 14.24, 28.

If it were otherwise, how could we take heed to the deceits of Satan, who
daily transformeth himself into an Angel of light? whereupon should our faith
rest? we should be carried to and fro without any stability.

Object.
But they do allege, It were a great absurdity to subject the holy Spirit unto
the Scriptures, to whom all things are to be subjected.

Answ.
As if it were a shame and ignominy to the holy Ghost, to be always like unto
himself, and to be constant in the same word without wavering at all. If any
should reduce the Spirit to an Humane, or any other Rule, it were debased, yea
brought into servitude: but when we say, That the holy Ghost having once
spoken, is not mutable, and changes not discourse (now speaking one thing, and
then another, as men are wont to do) who will say, that we offer any injury to
the holy Ghost?

Object.
But they say, He is by this means examined; which belongs not unto men to do.

Answ.
It is very clear, that it is such an examination, as he has pleased to
establish in the Church; that we may not receive the spirit of Satan instead of
him: wherefore it must needs be, that the Spirit abide for ever, such as once
he has revealed and manifested himself to be in the holy Scriptures: It is no
shame nor opprobry to the Spirit, for any to say of him, That it is no
dishonor for him not to be mutable, nor to renounce himself. As for that which
they tax the Ministers, to be Ministers of the dead letter, one may plainly see
the Lords taking vengeance upon the outrage offered unto his holy Word; smiting
them with a spirit of giddiness, for having despised the true and only means of
coming unto God, which is the Scripture and the Word of God. In the passage of
the Corinthians where Paul says, The letter kills, and the Spirit
quickens; let any closely consider, against whom the Apostle disputes, 2
Cor. 3 6.
and they will understand his drift. It is very evident that Paul in this
place, had to do with false Apostles, who preached and extolled the Law without
Christ, and caused the people to recoil from Salvation purchased by Christ, and
the grace of the new Covenant, whereunto the Lord had promised to write his Law
in the heart of the faithful: Jer 31.33. Ezekiel. 11.19. Ezekiel 36. Heb 8.10.
the Law then being separated from Christ, as a body without a soul; and
nothing comes from it but death, to those that are under it: it does nothing
but beat and strike the ears, without any quickening the soul, until by faith
we are sent from it unto Christ, as from the Usher unto the Master; and then
the Law will be found such as David sings it, The Law of the Lord is perfect,
converting the soul; the testimony of the Lord is faithful, making wise the
simple: Psalm. 19 8.
the commandments of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart, etc. Thus must we
understand how it is said, The Letter kills: Paul calls the Law, The
killing Letter, and says, The Spirit quickneth; i. e. The Ministry of the
Gospel, which he opposes unto the naked Law; and he himself calls his
preaching, The Ministry of the Spirit: we must not understand this place as
those dreamers, who as often as they meet with an obscure place that makes
against them, say, The Letter kills, i. e. According as they say, to
understand the meaning of this Scripture this kills, but we must come to the
Spirit, i. e. to forge Allegories. Paul never thought of such fopperies, as we
may see in reading the same Chapter, 2 Cor. 3.8. Luke 24 27.
It is then wretchedly and wickedly done, to cast off the Scripture upon such
pretense of the Spirit, seeing our Lord gives us his Spirit to understand his
word: as we see Christ opened the understanding of the two Disciples, not by
making them wise in themselves, nor setting them to look for a new kind of
word, or natural and innate in them, in rejecting the Scriptures; but that they
might understand the Scriptures. After this manner the Apostle Paul exhorts
the Thessalonians not to quench the Spirit: he would not have them fly in the
air, after vain and unprofitable speculations, without the word of God, but
consequently he adds, despise not prophecy: thereby showing, that then the
spirit is quenched, and suffocated, when Prophecy is rejected; Psalm. 119 105.
what will those poor Souls answer, who have rejected the lanthorn, which God
has given to be a light unto their feet? We confess that the external word
preached by men, of it self, nor alone, cannot convert the heart, but the
Spirit of God must wo^k internally, to beget faith in us: now this is done in
good order by the preaching of the Gospel, as appears by Lydia the
Purple-seller, Act. 16.14. she heard Paul preach, but the Lord opened her
heart, to understand the things which Paul spoke: for this cause the preaching
of the Word is called seed; we know that if seed fall upon a spot of ground
which is desert, and not tilled, it is lost, without producing fruit: but on
the contrary, Luke 8.15.
falling upon soil tilled and well manured, it brings forth fruit in abundance.
So the word of God, if it fall upon the hard and rebellious brain, it remains
without fruit, as upon stony soil: but upon a heart prepared by the operation
of the Holy Ghost, then it brings forth much fruit; and as the Husbandman when
he has sown his seed, he can do no more, he cannot make his grain to grow, but
leaves it to God: so must the Ministers do; when they have preached and sown
the Word of God, they cannot make it grow, they must commend it unto God: as
the Apostle says, He that planteth is nothing, 1 Cor 3.7.
and he that waters is nothing, but it is God that must give the increase: he
does not therefore reject him that planteth, nor him that waters, that is to
say, the external Ministers; for he soon adds, We are co-workers or laborers
with God; ye are Gods husbandry, ye are Gods building. It appears that the
Ministers are joined in the work with God; inasmuch as God makes use of them
as instruments, and he works by his word, by giving virtue in the internal
man: one may see as plainly as daylight, the error of Muntzer, the first
father of these Anabaptists, and that there is no reason in his speech.

Our Mennonists have condemned their Father in this point, notwithstanding
there be others who maintain this opinion, or rather blasphemy, as some strange
spirits, the disciples of Sebastian Franque, who this day do renew the
question: yea, some little space of time since, one of the chief of that Sect,
whose name I shall forbear to declare, in the City of Frankfort, before several
honest people told me, and with might and main maintained, with diverse of his
disciples, That the earth never bare a more abominable Idol, then that which is
called the Bible; and that all the World doted upon it, looking therein for the
word of God, whereas we should look for it in our hearts: and one of them
redoubled it, and said in the presence of Mr. Alosco and of us all, What do you
talk so much of the Scripture! I assure you on my part, I have learned more by
seeing a Hen or a Capon killed, then ever I learned by all the Sermons and
Lectures of the Books that ever I read. Unto whom I answered, It must needs be
that you eat often of Hens and Capons, seeing you have learned so much by their
death: but I pray you, said I, What good did you ever learn thereby? he
answered, That he had learned to know, the obedience which Jesus Christ rendered
unto God his Father upon the Cross: and that as the fowl was slain without
making resistance, and that for the good and life of man; so was Jesus Christ
slain for the life of mankind: it was said then unto him, How do you know that
ever there was such an one as Jesus Christ, and that he died for man? do you
find that written in the Capons belly? the Turks also do kill Capons, but they
cannot read there, that Christ was their Savior. In the end they were very
angry, and like people deprived of their senses, when they were hampered by the
word of God, and by their own reasons. What man is there that would not wonder
at such foolish and irrational discourse? is it not just that such people
should be so handled, seeing they have rejected the word of the living God,
which the Angels themselves desire to pry into, that they should be sent to
School unto the bruit beasts.

Further, I come to the Proposition of Muntzer, who says, That the Ministers
are much deceived, thinking that Faith comes by hearing, and that it is
written, Brother shall not teach Brother any more, saying, Know the Lord; for
they shall all know me, from the least to the greatest of them, being all
taught of God.

Answ.
If Ministers be deceived by so thinking, then was Paul also deceived; Romans
10.14, 17.
for he thus spoke, How shall they believe, etc. yea, he says, that the
doctrine which was preached, was the word of faith: But one may easily see
their pretense, which is, Totally to make void the Scripture, and the Ministry
of the Gospel, to come unto Revelations. We have already showed that God will
instruct men by Ministers, Romans 10.8. the Eunuch is sent to Philip, Cornelius
to Peter, Paul to Ananias, etc. As for that passage of the Prophet, where it is
said, Brother shall not teach brother, etc. the Lord would not hereby banish
from out of the Church the Ministry of the Word, (God forbid) to draw men after
Visions and Revelations: Now they fail, in that they do not narrowly look into
the place; for the Prophet does not say totally, that they shall not teach no
more; but these are his words, They shall teach no more, saying, Know the Lord:
as if he should say, Ignorance shall not possess the judgments and
understandings of men, as formerly when they knew not who the Lord was: yea,
even in this restoration of the Church, the true knowledge of God should
become so common and vulgar, that all should know how that the Son of God, who
is the lively image of the Father, is descended here below upon earth, to be
united unto us, being made our Brother to guide us unto eternal life: We know
there is a double use of Teaching: one is for those who are altogether
ignorant, to whom the first rudiments, as points of Catechism, are to be h^ld
forth: there be others, who being entered in, must make further progress. Seeing
then that none has so profited, but that he has need further to be taught, so
it is the greatest part of our wisdom to become teachable. Paul shows how we
should profit by teaching, if we would be Christ's Disciples, saying, That God
has constituted Pastors and Teachers, Eph^^ 4.^1.
etc. that we be not unstable, children, tossed to and fro with all winds of
strange doctrine, etc. whereby it appears, that the Prophet never intended to
bereave their Church of an ornament so preaious and necessary: The Prophet
only would tell us, that God would manifest himself to small and great, and
that the Church should have children instructed and taught (...) God, as was
promised by Isaiah. This passage then is very cle^^ behold, the Prophet says,
They shall no more teach every man his neighbor, saying, Know the Lord; and
why? because, says he, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it
in their inward parts: he does not reject the external Ministry of the Word,
but he shows, that the knowledge of God comes not properly by the labor and
travel of men, but it is because the Lord engraveth the Law of his Word in the
understanding: Ministers by their preaching strike upon men's ears; and God by
engraving his Law, works upon and teaches their hearts, as he dealt with
Lydia at Paul's preaching. Therefore it is, Act. 16 1^.
that Jesus Christ, John 6.45. seeing the Jews to murmr, and storm against
the external Ministry of the Word, says, None can come unto me, except the
Father who has sent me draw him: It is written in (...) Prophets, And they
shall all be taught of God; whosoever then has heard, and learned of the
Father, comes unto me. Christ thereby shows, that those who have heard, and
learned of the Father, do not disdain and reject the Ministry; but they come
unto it, and receive profit thereby: and all this shows, that we are of our
selves altogether indisposed to come unto this knowledge of God; for otherwise
God would not promise, to cause us to walk in his statutes; and if it were in
our own power so to do, and that neither great ones by their wisdom, not little
ones by reason of their ignorance can mount so high, unless by the Holy Ghost
they be drawn: Behold, the true sense of the place, so woefully corrupted by
these first Anabaptists, and all they pretend unto, tends not, but after they
have deprived the Church of the Ministry, and the preaching of the Word, to
open the door unto Visions and Dreams, as they already have shown at Munster
and Amsterdam, as Muntzer their first father had begun unto them. Was it not a
pleasing thing to hear this always sounding from their mouths, The Spirit has
revealed it unto me, The Father has commanded me? and when any brought a
tes^imony of Scripture contrary to their dreams and visions, suddenly they
replied, What have we to do with the dead Letter, seeing we have the lively
word of God imprinted in a living spirit? as if the holy Ghost, who is the
Author of the holy Scriptures, could contradict himself. The Apostle Paul
foreseeing that such Sects would rise up, who would despise the preaching of
the Word; he adjureth his Disciple Timothy before God and the Lord Jesus, who
shall judge both quick and dead, to preach the Word, and to be instant in
season etc. Satan knows, that he must take off men from the Ministry of the
Word, when he will have them at his beck, to put into their heads what shall
seem good unto him: and therefore his labor is to bring men unto this, that
they might hold nothing certain; but that they finally being disturbed and
uncertain he might make them despair. Thus in the beginning he wrought with our
Mother Eve, denying the express word of God: the Lord had said, In the day that
you eat thereof, you shall dye the death. The Devil on the contrary denies it,
and says, No, no, you shall not dye: so n^w he labors to take from our eyes
the word of God; but what may we look for afterward, but that we may be
confounded, not knowing what side to turn unto? For if we acknowledge no more
the Scriptures to be the true word of God, which as the Apostle Paul says, Was
before time written for us, that we through patience and consolation of the
Scriptures, might have hope; what will our estate be? certainly we shall be
more miserabe then the beasts; and we must give up our selves to Dreams and
Fables, as those who have rejected this light, and must perish woefully.

Of the Dreams of the Anabaptists, and how they are condemned by the Word of
God.
MVntzer having thus profaned and rejected the word of God, he preached
dreams, very goodly revelations, Muntzer preaches dreams and revelations.
which he at his pleasure forged, as did the false Prophet Mahomet, saying,
that he had seen Angels, and gloried that he had talked with them: by this
means to cheat and deceive the poor ignorant people: but all was feigned and
counterfeit, to make music unto poor and inconstant fools: and the Apostle
Paul gives warning of such gallants, that we should take heed of them, saying,
Col. 2.18. Let no man beguile you of your reward, etc. Yea, the Scripture
forbids us lending ear to such dreamers: the Lord of Hosts speaking in the book
of Jeremiah, says thus, Jer. 23.16, 21, 22, 26, 27, 28.
Hearken not unto the words of the Prophets which prophecy unto you, etc. we
shall have intelligence of this in these last days: are they not in a dead
sleep, who will not be awakened by the noise of this strong hammer of the word
of God, which breaks the stones in pieces? who can be cleansed by such dung?
and what truth can come forth out of a lie? dreams have deceived many, and
those have fallen who have trusted to them. These words of God are true, and
sufficient to entangle all our dreamers and ravers, with all their celestial
visions, whereof they do falsely, and out of a certain malice vaunt. Let us then
reject such cheaters, and follow the counsel of God in his word; and we shall
always find it to be a strong buckler against all assaults. Prove. 30.^. Isai.
8.19, 20.
The Lord sends us to the Law, and to the Testimony: if they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no morning-light in them. And
when Dives desired, that the living might be taught by some other means,
besides the word of God, it was answered, That they had Moses and the Prophets,
let them hear them.

Moreover, Muntzer comes from thence to grapple with the sacrifice of the Son
of God, to vomit out his stinking blasphemies against it* saying, Ministers are
liars, when they say, That Jesus Christ has satisfied for us, Mun^zers denial
of Christ's sati^faction, and Justification by faith.
and that we are justified by faith alone without works: thus speak these
Scribes, when they mince unto men. These are his words, as they may be read in
his Books. But I pray you, is not this filthily to blaspheme the Son of God? it
will not only follow, that the Ministers are only delicious and mincing, and
make men's Consciences drousie; but also all the Prophets: For thus spoke Peter
in the house of Cornelius the Centurion, Act 10.43. Jer. 11.3.
All the Prophets bear witness unto Jesus Christ, That whosoever shall believe
on him, shall receive remission of sins through his name. Yea, John Baptist
held up the finger at Christ, Joh. 1.29* 36.
saying, Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the sin of of the World. Isai
53 7.
Isaiah witnesses and testifies, that Christ has surely born our
languishing, and sustained our dolours: what can be more plainly said, then
when he says, He has born the pain and punishment which was due unto us; and
that we are healed by his wounds? the same is affirmed by the Apostle Peter, 1
Pet. 2.24, and Jesus Christ himself says, Joh. 3.16 God so loved the World,
etc. The Apostle John testifies, 1 John 2.2. If any man sin, etc. so Paul,
Col. 1.20. He made peace, and reconciled us, by the blood of his cross. Read to
this purpose, 2 Cor. 5.21. and Romans 5.19. and diverse other Scriptures testify
unto this truth, so as nothing is more clear: and yet Muntzer dares to accuse
the Prophets and Apostles, with the Ministers, as those that flatter men's
Consciences, because they teach not righteousness by works. It is a marvel how
that sentence of the Apostle is forgotten, who says, That if we be justified
by the works of the law, Christ is dead in vain. We teach to do good works,
(...). 2.22.
and live holily, but not to be justified by them; and that we live only by
faith in Jesus Christ. Muntzer thinks to mend the matter, by saying, That
thus to preach Christ, (...) of j^stifi^ation makes not careless of w^ll-doi^g.
is the way to make men careless of doing well: but on the contrary to preach
Christ who dyed for our sins, and that he gave himself out of perfect love a
sacrifice for our Redemption, is the way to be stirred up with burning zeal to
good works. Furthermore we must not preach the Gospel as we please, but as it
is appointed of the Father, and as the Scripture testify, that the Apostles
preached it: of such men the Apostle Peter warns us, saying, That there shall
arise false Prophets, etc. 2 Pet. 2.2. Let notice be taken whether Muntzer and
his companions be not of that number, who dare not plainly say as much, but
they will say as we do; but being put unto it, they make Jesus Christ but an
half Savior, by bringing in good works. We say, That faith without works is
dead: but they justify us not before God, neither blot out our sins. As the
flame is not without light, otherwise it were not flame; Simile.
yet it is light burns not, it is the fire, and the flame only that does
lighten: so faith is not without works; but works burn not, i. e. take not away
sin; it is faith in Christ only: thus we speak of the virtue of the property of
faith, showing that those who have this true faith, cannot be lazy, so as out
of love to God, they should not do good works to glorify God, etc.

He likewise fell upon Marriage in a foolish and villainous manner, saying,
Rails against Marriage.
That the Marriage of Pagans and other ignorants and unbelievers was polluted
and unclean, and that it was fornication, and a very show of Satan: so as many
light spirits being moved, and spurred forward by this woeful doctrine, took
occasion to break many marriages; leaving houses desolate, and drew after them
silly poor women laden with lusts, 2 Timothy 3 6.
to leave their husbands, persuading them that the believing wife, i. e. after
their account, the rebaptized, ought not to abide with the unrebaptized
husband: Holding that a wife dwelling with her Gentile husband, is polluted and
defiled, and cannot be saved. They called the marriage of those that were not
of their Sect, whoredom, and the fleshly bed; and their marriages were
spiritual. The Apostle was of another mind, when he says, Marriage is
honorable, etc. But it may be they will say, H^b. 13 4.
This is to be understood of the Marriage of such, where both parties are
believers; and not of the believer with the unbeliever. But the Apostle Paul
takes off all objection, when he says unto the married, I command them; yet
not I, but the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.10, 12.
etc. what could be more plainly said, to prove the marriages of believers with
unbelievers, to be true marriages, though they were joined together in the time
of their unbelief? See how these poor people are become shameless, in laying
open their filthiness before all the world! who would not wonder to see such
spiritual people as these pretend themselves to be, to live upon the goods and
riches of whore-mongers! this is the honor that they put upon their Fathers
and Mothers, that begat and brought them forth, yea, and upon themselves.

As for the Apostolical Anabaptists, they are so called, because they follow
(as they say) the Apostles, Apostolical Anabaptists.
and Apostolical Church step by step. They regard the naked letter of the
Scripture, They walked as Vagabonds through the Country, and Regions, without
shoes, without staff, without girdle, and without money: they said, that they
were sent by God; and because Christ says, He that will enter into the Kingdom
of heaven, must become as a little child, they said, We must play the children
with Children, and therefore they so did: and because our Lord says, He that
leaves not all that he possesses, whether Wife, Children, Father, Mother,
Lands and Inheritance, etc. they often took slender occasions, and left their
Country, leaving their wives and children, and went as spiritual Lanskeneths:
they said, that a Christian ought not possess any thing as his own, and that it
was impossible for any to be both rich and a Christian.

Who would not wonder to see the foolishness of these poor people! they would
carry neither shoes, staff, nor money in their purses, like begging Friars:
they consider not the meaning of that Scripture. The use and practice of the
Apostles declare fully, that our Lord said that, to prevent his disciples from
being solicitous for things needful for their journey, seeing they should not
want, because the labourer is worthy of his hire: this Christ instructed them
in, when he said, When I sent you without purse, without scrip, without shoes,
lacked you any thing? Luke 22.35.
They said unto him, Nothing: he says unto them, Now he that has a purse, let
him take it, etc. As for preaching upon house-tops, what he had told them in
their ears; it is no more, but that what he had told them in secret, they
should preach openly. And as for washing of their feet, he would signify
nothing else thereby, but that out of love we should be helpful one unto
another: for then they had other kind of shoes then we have now, so as their
feet were soiled with traveling, and therefore they rightly washed their feet,
which now we have no use of, being shod after another manner. Our Anabaptists
who practice this, I would have them to consider, how comely this is: for it
may fall out through want of women, that men must wash their feet; which how
seemly it would be, let them judge. When Christ says, we must be as little
children, it is not said, We must be Children, and become foolish; but that we
should imitate the plainness and integrity which is in little children; and
that is it which the Apostle Paul holds forth, when he says, Be not children
in understanding, but in malice, etc. in understanding be men: and every where
in the Scriptures, their wanderings and vagations are condemned; for he says,
Whosoever takes not care of his own, 1 Timothy 5.8.
etc And let every one abide in the calling wherein he is called, etc.

As for the community of Goods, whereof they make so much, Plato taught it; the
Essenes had all things common; and this was sometimes practiced in Jerusalem:
but when it is said, Community of goods.
They had all things common, etc. Luke understands it of many, and not of all;
for is is manifest that all did not so, Act. 4.32.
because it is particularly specified of some, saying, And Joses also sold his
possession: if all sold their inheritances, there was no need of naming
particular persons, for particulars are comprised in the number of all: he
intends not that all the faithful sold all that they had, but as much as
necessity required: it was in the liberty of every one, as Peter told Ananias,
when the field was sold, was it not in thy power? etc. Act. 5.
It is very evident that Christians possessed proprieties, and that there were
some very rich, who left not their riches to put them into a common stock.
Abraham was very rich: this is not to be rejected, Genesis 24 33.
though in the Old Testament, for he is in the New Testament called the father
of the faithful. Yea, Christ's speech, Mat. 25.35. fully teaches us propriety in
goods.

So Paul, 1 Cor. 16.1. 2 Cor. 8.10. 2 Cor. 9, 6, 7. Romans 12.13. Gal. 6.6. This
communion was not in the Church of Ephesus, Ephesians. 4.28. neither in the Church
of the Philippians: see Phil. 4.18.

The Apostles charge concerning rich men, proves propriety, 1 Timothy 6.17 John
allows propriety, 1 John 3.17. so Heb. 10.34. Jam. 2.25. Theft is forbidden
by God, and therefore no community. Were not Isaac, and Jacob, and Job, and
Joseph of Arimathea, rich, and retained propriety in goods? Lazarus with his
two sisters retained their house. The women and Luke ministered of their goods
unto Christ: Dorcas, Lydia, Cornelius, had propriety in their estates, etc.
Much more is said to this purpose, but this may suffice.

Moreover, then the multitude of believers, for the most part, were very poor,
as Paul says, Brethren, you know your calling; not many noble, etc. This was
not done in a disorderly way, but in good order, it being committed unto the
Apostles, to distribute according to their judgment, to poor believers among
the Jews, who were hated, and had not means to get bread: and because they who
had estates were plundered, or were in danger of confiscation of their estates;
for this cause it may seem, the Holy Ghost timely set them a work, thus to
dispose, and expend their estates, which otherwise would have been lost at the
destruction of Jerusalem, by Titus and Vespasian, which came shortly after:
before which ruin, the Christians were retired from Judea, as Eusebius
recites: but these Anabaptists would put all the world in a confusion by their
community of goods, and that they might enjoy other men's labors: but it is
worse for them to bind all men unto it upon pain of damnation.

Of the Spiritual Anabaptists, who are separted from the world.
AS for the Anabaptists who call themselves Separated from the world, and are
wholly spiritual; they say, They will have nothing in common with the Gentiles,
as they call them, not Fasting, observation of days, life, eating and
drinking, etc. These establish a rule how plain their garments must be, of what
stuff, how long, how large, of what matter, and how for manner: they forbid the
use of all costly garments, calling such as use them Gentiles, and Pagans: when
they see any laugh or be cheerful, they cry, Woe unto you that laugh now, for
ye shall weep. They fetch continual deep sighs, and are always sad, they
reject all feastings and banquets at Weddings, all use of Music; and as for
that speech, Romans 12.1. they have it always in their mouths, Fashion not your
selves unto the world: they allege it, as if the Apostle had intended to
change the nature and property of all things, and as if so be he commanded us
to go upon our heads, because the Gentiles go upon their feet; or to speak with
our feet, and hear with our heels, because the Gentiles speak with their
mouths, and hear with their ears. Whereas the Apostle understands no other
thing, then that we should not imitate the world in that which is evil; which
the Apostle John says, Love not the world, nor the things that are in the
world: for all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eye, and the pride of life, is not of the Father. And the Apostle Paul
expounds this, Ephesians. 4.17. when he charge us that we should not walk as
the Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their understandings. It is folly in them
to draw these words from the true sense, to make them condemn a multitude of
things indifferent; as some of them will not put on a clean shirt upon Sunday,
because unbelievers do so: some will not call Monday or Tuesday, but the first
and second day of the week; binding their Consciences unto such things: they
make themselves ridiculous, because they condemn garments and trimmings, which
are not according to their Cut and Rule, by their Tailors, and according to
their pattern and fashion. We would not here let loose the reins to pomp and
vanity, but we say, We are not to condemn him, who is clothed according to his
Estate, and according to the custom of the Country; young people and all
according to the received custom, Gentlemen according to their ranks,
Merchants, and consequently all men of Estate according to their qualities. We
condemn, with the Apostle Peter, all sumptuousness, and vanities which are
unprofitable: notwithstanding we say, That when Princes and the like carry it
magnificently, they are not to be condemned as Pagans; for Christ and his
Apostles never gave us Rules for our garments. Let every one hold forth
mediocrity, and cut off all superfluity, for the profit of the poor. Meat and
drink is not less free to Christians, then garments, wherefore to forbid them,
is to hold forth the Doctrine of Devils, 1 Timothy 4.
as Paul says. What hurt can be found therein? when God shall by his blessing
give a Christian means, that he may make use of good meat and drink; and the
faithful receive it with giving of thanks, without gluttony, but with sobriety:
wherefore should any say, That this gift of God is a curse? Have not the
servants of the Lord, praised the Lord for it? as David for the Lords filling
of his Cup, ^
and spreading his Table. Was not Christ at Feasts and banquets with his
friends? there were none but the hypocritical Pharisees offended at it, calling
him Glutton and Drunkard. Paul says, He could tell how to abound, as well as
to want. If a believer has little, let him be contented without murmuring; if
he has much, let him use it with moderation and sobriety, and giving of
thanks; remembering that passage of the Apostle, Whether you eat or drink, do
all to the glory of God. They condemn all mirth and laughter as bad. Cor. 10.21.
It is true, Christ says, Woe unto you that laugh, for you shall mourn: yet
Paul exhorts to rejoice with them that rejoice; and Solomon says, There is a
time to laugh, Romans 12:14.
Eccles. 3. Abraham laughed, Genes. 18.10. and yet these men would banish all
mirth and laughter. All civil mirth is not to be condemned, nay, rather their
hypocritical sighings, and their sad and melancholy looks, are to be censured,
whereby they would, as more holy, extol themselves above other men: the
Kingdom of God consists not in these things; the Scripture no where condemns
honest mirth, but every where hypocrisies. In the time of Solomon, Israel held
a Feast for fourteen days together, because of all the goodness of God
vouchsafed to David his father. As mourning proceeds from adversity, so joy
from prosperity: which Jeremiah plainly holds forth, when he says, Lam. 5.1.
The joy of our heart is ceased, and our mirth is turned into mourning, etc.
They condemn also the honest banquets at Weddings, as unlawful and evil; and
yet we see the Scripture speaks often of the voice of the Spouse and
espoused: we read it no where condemned, either in the Old or New Testament.
Our Lord was not only at a Wedding being invited, but wrought there his first
Miracle, by turning water into wine: he sat down there, and his Disciples.

David says, God has made wine to make glad man's heart, Psalm. 104 1,
and oil to make his face shine: Feasts and Banquets which exceed Christian
modesty, are not to be commended. Lot made a feast to his two guests; and
Abraham did so at Isaacs weaning: who ever will read of the feast of the
faithful, let him read these Scriptures; Genesis 26.30. Genesis 43.34. Judge. 14 10,
12, 17. 2 Samuel 3.20. 1 Kings 3.15. Job 1.4, 5. It is said, Matthew made a
feast, where many Publicans were: Christ does not forbid them, yea, he fetches
a comparison from the Bride and Bridegroom, from the Wedding-Supper, and the
Wedding-Garments. Luke 14
We would not here encourage intemperance in any, but to show the liberty which
Christians have of the good Creatures of God, that none may condemn those, who
in Gods fear do make use of their liberty: the Kingdom of God lies not in such
observations; bodily exercise profiting little, but godliness being profitable
in all things. Moreo^^r, if we should reckon up all their Errors and several
Opinions, time would fail us to refute them.

There be some who hold re-baptizing so necessary as that without it none can
be saved: Nor will they salute any, nor give the hand, nor acknowledge any but
such to be their brethren: some hold it not so necessary, and make no scruple
to be found with honest people, and to account them as brethren: but their
number is but small.

Some account Childrens Baptism so bad, as that they will rather be dismembered,
and suffer, then to let their Children be baptized. Others suffer it as an
Ordinance, which neither hinders nor profits. Some account themselves holy
and pure; these are separated from others, and have all things in common; none
says among them, This is mine: and to have any thing in propriety, is
accounted a sin. Some have endured great torments, because they would not keep
Sundaies and Festival days, in despite of Antichrist: seeing they were days
appointed by Antichrist, they would not hold forth any thing which is like unto
him. Others observe these days, but it is out of charity.

Some say they are come so high, as that they cannot sin any more. The most
pure of them preach up the Cross, and persecution so high, that they seem to
make it an Idol, and a new Savior, putting of it in the place of Christ, for
salvation, as the Papists do their works. There be some who have daily some new
command from God, to make known unto their brethren and strangers. Some are
rapt into an ecstasy, and have their visage and countenance changed, lying upon
the ground certain hours. Some Tremble and Quake for two or three hours
together: after that, when they are come unto themselves, they prophecy and
speak strange things, as if they had been in another world, or as if they had
fallen from out of heaven: ^
and they account to have that in common with the Apostle, when he was taken up
into the third heaven.

Many cannot speak nor declare the great secrets, and Mysteries which they have
seen.

To so(...) this Ecstasy or Trance comes often, to others not so often, to
others of the^e not at all. Some among them fall down upon their faces, and
dream; others do not; but keep themselves to the Letter of the Scripture. Some
do nothing else but pray as the Friars do, and say, That they do hinder and
keep back, by their prayers, all the mischief which otherwise would befall the
world: these will not that evil should be resisted by any other ways then by
prayers; and in no sort will permit the use of arms.

John Denk did not admit of swearing by way of witness. Some hold not the
Trinity of persons in one Essence, saying, That the Son only is a person. Some
esteem of the Sacrament of the Lords supper as we do; but they preach it up so
highly, as that it will be very hard to find so much as two fit to communicate
therein; and therefore some are of opinion not to do it until their death. In
some places they banish and excommunicate all those, which will hear any
Preacher or Minister preach: they speak all the evil of them that may be,
calling them Scribes and Pharisees. Others endure that one may hear, see, and
read any thing: but in the mean while the manner of Ministers living pleases
them not. They have the Cross in such estimation, that they despise and reject
all those which are without it, and persecution, and say, That their case is
not good* for (say they) if they were in the Lords way, they would suffer
persecution: some therefore seek the Cross, others are of another opinion. And
many times they break fair households by separating the parties, when one of the
parties is excommunicated, the party which is not excommunicated must withdraw
from the other party: and their excommunications are for very small matters;
yea, when they are married one to another, they make them promise, that if one
of them come to be cast out of the Church, that the innocent party shall
withdraw from the nocent; and by this means their marriages are all
conditional: when one is thus separated, the party offended cannot be
remarried, if the other party being married be not delivered by the death of
his adjoynt: yea, sometimes it falls out, that some who have been
excommunicated, are received in again, and find their party married to
another; and there they must see their wives before their eyes to be unto
another man, and they themselves cannot remarry; yea though they have not the
gift of continence, they say unto them, as unto the Friars, that they must make
themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of heaven. Behold how the Devil makes
himself sport with these men! They are in mortal war with the Franiques: upon
this occasion the Mennonists have excommunicated the Franiques, because they
would not approve of these goodly marriages.

They say also, That when a man has sinned, though he does repent, that he is
to be excommunicated: and then if he does persevere therein, he shall be
received in again. Behold, the fair stir of Satan, how he plays the game with
these men, which follow not the true light of the Gospel. Our Lord be pleased
to give eyes to all the World, that they may take heed of these Sects, which
make men turn aside from the way of truth. So be it.

FINIS.
THere is now in the Press, and will very shortly be extant, an excellent and
useful Treatise, Entitled, The Righteous Man's Evidence for Heaven, etc. By
Mr. Timothy Rogers, Minister of the Gospel.


