FROM ROME: OR, Englands Alarm.

Wherein several Grounds to suspect the Prevalency or the Popish Interest are
seasonably suggested; Londons Ruin pathetically lamented; Arguments to
dissuade from the Popish Religion, are urged; And the Duties of Christians in
this time of Common Danger, and Distraction, persuaded.

Nostri adversarij etiamnum vivunt and quotidie audaciores fiunt; (...) di^ hoc
agunt, meditantur, ut exortum Evangelij lumen extinguant; antiquasqu^ tenebras
revocem, interea nos, qui initio unanimes per Dei gratiam Evangelium
annunciavimus, conversis armis in mutua vulnera ruimus; gratumque hostibus
spectaculum exhibemus: qui plus praesidij, atque fiduciae in concorta ^onibus
nostris quam man^ causae suae fundamento, tot aque art and (...) sua
colloc^nt. Brentius in Praefat: de Caena. Psalm. 119.120. My flesh trembles for
fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments.

Cant. 2.8. Every man has his Sword upon his thigh, because of (...) in the
night.

Psalm. 137.8. O daughter of Babylon who art to be destroyed, happy shall he
(...) that rewards thee, as thou have served us.

PRINTED in the YEAR

YDING FROM ROME; OR, Englands Alarm.
EVery faithful Minister of Christ, sustains the relation of a Watchman unto
the nation wherein he lives, Ezekiel. 2.^7 Act. 20.2^
as well as of a Pastor to the particular flock over which the Holy Ghost has
set him; and therefore not only ought to be of a public spirit, to observe the
first approaches of National calamities; but also of a courageous and faithful
spirit, to give warning of them. Being thus a debtor to my dear native Country,
and hearing round about me the noise of bloody Papists rallying together, and
preparing themselves to make a slaughter; and finding the fears and jealousies
of the Nation (lately awakened by the flames of London; and the instrument of
cruelty there discovered) beginning to abate, though their dangers are still
increasing upon them; I could not but present to the public view, these
awakening considerations and counsels following; if happily thereby true zeal
for the Protestant interest might be provoked; and the growing design of the
common enemy detected and retarded. For alas! ^
How can I endure to see the evil that shall come upon my people, and upon my
kindred? As Esther said in a like case of common danger: yea, were I sure of
personal safety in such a day of slaughter and desolation, yet how terrible a
thing would it be to stand upon the shore and see so glorious a Vessel as
England is, to be cast away! the Golden Candlestick removed, and the Doctrines
of Devils preached and professed in those places where Jesus Christ has been
so purely and sweetly worshipped.

O England! God has set watchmen upon thy walls who will not hold their peace
day nor night: Isai. 62*6.
and though men have (...) (...) they will cry (...) when (...) see thee in
danger.

If thou enquire of thy Watchmen in this night of thy trouble, as it is, Isai,
21.11, 12. (...) verum simul cum illo venit (...) ista crassier a^ terribili^r
Muscul in I^o. 1 King. 28.41.
Watchmen, what of the night? they all with one voice return the same answer,
The morning comes and also the night. There is indeed a glorious morning of
Salvation and Mercy, which will shortly dawn upon thee England; but before
that, there will be a night of dismal darkness and distress upon thy Children:
For we have heard a voice of trembling, of fear, and not of peace; we see every
man with his hands upon his lo^^s, as a Woman in travail, and all faces, are
turned into paleness: alas! for that day is great, so that none is like it, it
is even the day of Jacobs trouble; but he shall be delivered (...) of it. They
speak unto thee as (...) spoke to Ahab, arise, get thee up, for there is the
sound of abundance of Rain; and there came a shower indeed: and that there is a
sound of Judgment and wrath coming upon us will appear, if you have any
regard, either first, to the predictions of friends, or secondly, to the
preparations of enemies; or thirdly, to the present state and posture of things
among our selves at this day.

1. As for the predictions of friends, you have had many, both ordinary and
extraordinary.

First, Ordinary, upon the observations which the Messengers of God have made
of year barrenness, wantonness, and unchristian divisions, under the fullest
Gospel Light and liberty, that ever was enjoyed by an unthankful Nation,
amongst which I cannot omit what a grave and worthy Divine upon the ground
forementioned, for diverse years past, gave us warning of: And O that we had
been so wise and happy to have improved such a seasonable admonition! his words
are these*

(...) 2 d (...). p 429
Consider where you are, and among whom; are you not in your enemies quarters?
If you fall out, what do you but kindle a fire for them to warm their hands by?
aha! so would we have it say they; the Sea of their rage will weaken this bank
fast enough; you need not cut it off for them. The unseasonableness of the
strife betwixt Abraham's hardsmen and Lots, is aggrevated by the near
neighborhood of the Heathens to them, Genesis 13.7. And there was strife betwixt
them, and the Cananites and (...) dwelt in their land. To fall out when these
Idolaters look on, this would be Town talk presently, and put themselves and
their Religion both to shame. And I pray who have been in our Land all the
while the people of God have been scuffing? those that have curiously (...)
(...) among (...) World of it, such as have wit and malice enough to make use
of it for their wicked purposes; they stand on tip-toe to be at work, only we
are not yet quite laid up and disabled (by the soreness of those our wounds
which we have given our selves) from withstanding their fury; they hope it will
come to that, and then they will cure us of our wounds, by giving one if they
can, that shall go deep enough to the heart of our life, Gospel and all. O
Christians! shall Herod and Pilate put you to shame? they clapped up a piece to
strengthen their hands against Christ; and will not you unite against your
common enemy? it is an ill time for Mariners to be fighting, when an enemy is
boring a hole at the bottom of the Ship.

How often have you been told both from the Pulpet and Press, what the sad
fruit and issue of these things would be? and as God has given you timely
warnings of this enemy by your faithful Watchmen in an ordinary way, so that he
vouchsafed us some extraordinary ones too, amongst which I cannot here omit a
strange and remarkable passage, which for diverse years since, fell from the pen
of an English Prophet; and because I live to see one part thereof sadly
verified, and the other disposing it self toward it is accomplishment (if
providence step not out of it is ordinary path to prevent it. I shall transcribe
some of the most remarkable and bearing passages of it for you, my Author
having reproved the wantonness and vanity of Professors, particularly those of
London, breaks forth into this threatening and terrible prediction.

London was Troy novant, it is, Troy le grand, it will be Troy l'extinct. p.
227. M* Rreves Gods (...)
I see you bringing Pickaxes to dig down your own Walls, and Springing Mines to
blow up your own houses, and kindling sparks that will set all in a flame, page
223. They which were rich owners, must then wander abroad for relief, Dr. Usher.
and be glad to beg gratuities or be glad to kiss the feet of the adversary for
an Alms, out of his own fullness; and happy were I, if I could here make an
end, and the last post were arrived. But after all other extremities Conscience
at last comes to her punishment, this must be made a Captive. Men are not only
locked out of their houses, but out of their Temples; their goods are not only
enforced from (...), but they are deprived of the Pearl; their liberties are
not only lost, but the freedom of the Ordinances, pure Doctri^^ Worship and
Faith are in bondage, and the Soul enthralled* Men that will not permute a God,
and suffer their Faith to be new (...) either run or (...) for it. Your
looking-glass will be snatched away, your bright Diamond shivered in pieces;
this goodly City of yours all in sheards; ye may seek for a threshold of your
ancient dwellings, for a pillar of your pleasant habitations, and not find
them; nothing left but naked streets or naked fields of shelter, etc. But this
is but the misery of Stone-work, of arches, dormans, and roofs; but what will
you say when it comes (...) skin work, arms, necks and bowels? Ye which have
walked the streets in state, may then run the streets in destractions, with one
leg, or half an arm, they may beg the preservation of the rest of your members:
What inventions will ye then be put to, to save your lives? Your tears will not
rescue, nor your gold redeem you, but your veins must weep, as well as your
eyes; and your sides be watered, as well as your cheeks; when they allow you no
showers of rain, but showers of blood to wash your streets, when you shall see
no men in your Corporation, but the mangled Citizen; and hear no noise in the
street, but the cries and shreeks, yells and pants, of gasping, dying men: when
ye shall see your Kindred slain in one place, your Wives in another, your
Children in a third, and your selves at last (it may be) cut in two, to
increase the number of the dead carcasses.

As popolus as ye are, ye shall then be numbered to the Sword; as puissant as ye
are, the valiant shall be swept away, as fine fed as ye are, ye shall be fed
with your own flesh, and made drunk with your own blood; your politicians can
no longer help you, but have their subtle brains dashed in pieces with yours;
nor your Lecturers can no longer save you, but you must meet together at the
Congregation near the Shambles, when this great City shall be but a great
Chopping board, to quarter out the limbs of sinners, or the great Altar wherein
a whole City is to be Sacrificed Oh doleful day! when your breasts shall try
the points of Spears, your sides the keeness of the Swords, your hands the
weight of Pole-axes, your bodies made footstools, and your dead Carcasses
stepping-stones for truculent foes, to tread and trample on; when there will be
no pity upon the aged, nor compassion upon the young: but heaps upon heaps:
tumbling of garments in blood, and Sword made fat with slaughter. Oh! see what
a Crimson City, Crimson sins will make!

If you do escape the dint of the Sword, and your lives be give you for a prey;
Shall not your goods be made a prey? yes, some may be reserved out of the
greatest Massacre; when men ar^ weary with killing a retreat may be sounded,
and called off from the slaughter? yet can ye then challenge your own houses,
or bring your Keys to your old Chests? No, your titles gone, your interest
lost, ye have traded your selves out of your Estates, or sinned your selves out
of your proprieties: The Enemy is now housekeeper, Land-holder; ye have
forfeited all to the Sword; farewell Inheritances, Purchases, Leases, Wares,
Wardrobe, Furniture, Jewels. As you have gotten these goods unjustly, so they
shall be taken away unjustly; and if they be not slain in the heap* yet they do
but live to see their own misery, their sins have made them Bankrupts, they are
undone; ruined.

And Oh! if the loss of Money were the greatest mischief, but there is a
treasure of greater value in danger; there is not an absolute conquest made,
till the inner man be in fetters; thou must be a slave in principles: Oh! it is
an hard thing at that time to be a Jew inwardly to keep the girdle of truth
about thy loins; thou must then bare the fruit of the degenerate plant, or
strange vine: pour out the drink offerings of other Sacrifices, follow the
sorcery of the Mistress of Witchcrafts, or learn Magic with them that are
brought up in the Doctrine of Devils; thou must limp with the halting age: fit
thy mouth to answer the general shout. That great is Diana of the Ephesians:
thou must taunt thy own Father, spit in the face of thine own Mother, and hiss
away all thy true Brethren: thou must be divorced from thy own Faith, though
never so chaste, and deny Sarah to be thy Wife, though thy Espousals with her
were never so solemn. There will be no safety incontaminate faith: thou will be
either a Nicodemus to come to Christ by night: or if with Daniel thou open the
windows toward Jerusalem, thou will be cast into the Den of Lions. Thus far he.

An inundation of Popery was also predicted by the learned Bishop of Armagh,
immediately before his death, as is well known to many, Dr. Usher.
And where is the heart that has any spiritual sense or tenderness in it, that
trembles not in a fearful expectation of these things? Surely, Amos 3.^.
the Lord will do nothing, but he reveals his secrets to his Servants the
Prophets. This is one ground of fear.

2. And your fears cannot choose but increase, when you consider ^he preparation
and progress these enemies have already made, Have they been sleeping, think
you all this while? no, no, they have dug as deep as hell in their Counsels,
their numbers among us are already formidable, their combinations strong, their
confidences (...) and their Foreign assistants ready. Jer. 4.1^
As the keepers of a (...) are our enemies round about us; the Syrian before,
and the Philistine^ belieud to devour England wi^h open mouth. Jer. ^.17. Isai.
9.11.
Two considerable advantages they have already obtained: (first) the removal of
so many able and godly Ministers out of the way. This is done to their hands by
a sad providence: It is an old and true observation. That whosoever will
attempt the overthrow of Religion, must begin with the Ministry first. These
are set for the defense of the Gospel. It was the counsel that Adam Contzen (a
deep pated Achitophel of theirs) long since gave in this case; Suppress (says
he) the Ministers; (Et error cui patrocinium deerit, sine pugna concidet) and
then the error, that has none to patronize it, will fall of it self: So he
calls the precious truth of Jesus Christ; I dare not affirm that this was
intentionally done to open a door of opportunity to them, but that eventually
it is like to prove so, who that exercises reason sees not? when so many pious
Ministers went off the Stage, it was apparent enough what an opportunity these
men had to ascend it, and act their part.

Secondly, The destruction of our famous City, the strength and glory of the
Nation, which they have laid in the dust; a design no doubt, contrived in the
Popish Conclave: they well enough knew how able London was to give check to
their designs.

My heart bleedeth for thee London to see thee made of a City, an Heap, of a
defenced City, a Ruin; a Palace of strangers to be no City. And if they can
have their will, that which follows in the text should be added; It shall never
be built, If Parliaments will hearken to them, they will persuade like Rehum
and Shimsai, Ezra 4.14* that it may lie still in it is Ashes, and upon the same
pretentions, let search be made (say they) in the Book of Records of thy
Fathers, so shall thou find in the Book of Records, and know that this City is
a rebellious City, and hurtful unto Kings and Provinces, they that have moved
sedition within the same of old time; for which cause it was destroyed. But I
trust the Lord will make our Rulers wife, to discover their bloody intentions;
how speciously so ever p^lliated with pretenses of Loyalty and Fidelity.

A Lamentation for London.
But mean while Lond^n is ruined! that goodly mountain laid wasted the most
glorious City in all respects, that ever the Sun looked upon now a desolate
Wilderness! O London! who can sufficiently bewail thy misery! for mine own
part, as the Orator solemnizing a sad Funeral, desired to have learned
Mortality from another Subject, rather then that of Scaliger: So (might it have
pleased the Lord) I should have been glad to have learned the vanity of all
world (...) glory from another example, then that of London.

How does the City sit solitary, that was full of people? ^
she that was great among the Nations, and Princess among the Provinces! O
London! thou sealest up the sum and waste perfect in beauty: ^
Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day thou wast created until iniquity
was found in thee. Eze. 28 17* and 28.18.
Thy renown went forth among the Heathen for thy beauty for it was perfect
through the comeliness thy God had put upon thee. But thy heart was lifted up
because of thy beauty, thou did corrupt thy wisdom by reason of thy
brightness. Therefore the Lord has cast thee to the ground, and brought forth
a fire from the midst of thee, Lam. 1.8.
which has brought thee to ashes. London has greviously sinned, Lam. 1.12.
therefore is she removed; all that know thee among the People are astonished
at thee, thou art terror to them. London may now sit down by her Sister
Jerusalem in the dust, and say, Is it nothing to you, Lam. 1.21
all ye that pass by, see and behold, was there ever any sorrow like unto my
sorrow: which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day
of his fierce anger? They have heard that I sigh, ver. 22. Jer. 15.34
there is none to comfort me: all my enemies have heard of my trouble, they are
glad that thou have done it; thou will bring the day that thou have called, and
they shall be like unto me. Let all their wickedness come before thee, ver. 35.
and do unto them as thou have done unto me. Mine enemies have devoured me,
they have crushed me, and made me an empty vessel; they have swallowed me up
like a Dragon. The violence done unto me and to my flesh be upon Babylon, shall
the Inhabitants of London say. Remember O Lord, the Inhabitants of Babylon, in
the day of London, who said, Psalm. 137.7, 8.
Raze it raze it, even to ^he foundations. O daughter of Babylon, that are to
be destroyed, happy shall he be that rewards thee as thou have served us.

Let no man think that I endeavor to obscure the righteous Hand of God, which
is to be owned and trembled at in such a judgment. Though London must
acknowledge his Justice in all that is come upon her; yet the wickedness of
Instruments is not in the least to be excused thereby: God and man may concur
in the same action, and yet neither his Holiness have any fellowship with their
wickedness; nor their Injustice, be excused by his righteousness; Idem quod duo
faciunt non est idem, his work is perfect, for all his ways are judgment; a
God of truth, and without Iniquity; just and right is He, they have corrupted
themselves, Deuteronomy. 32.4.5. Will thou not confess London, that thy sins were the
sparks that ^indled thy flames? doubtless thou will, such was thy pride,
Epi^urism, Formality, and Barrenness under such precious waterings as thou once
enjoyedst, above all the Cities in the World, that thou may say, it is of
the Lords mercy, thine Inhabitants had not all perished with their Habitations,
and that God had not made thee like Sodom; for what could thou expect when
thy Lots were going, but that devouring flames were coming?

But to return from this sad (though necessary) digression; hereby it is
manifest the common enemy has obtained a singular, and long expected advantage
to their design; often have they in vain attempted it; but now God has
delivered it into their hands: Well might they rejoice as they did) to see it'^
flames ascend, and drink healths to it is ashes. For upon diverse politic
considerations it m^g^t easily be demonstrated that their cause and interest is
revived and warmed by that fire.

3. Lastly* it cannot but much more heighten our fears, if we consider the sad
posture that we are in at this day of our Emi^ent Danger. Three or four sad
particulars I shall here suggest, and let none think it to be a laying open of
our nakedness and weakness to the Enemies; for I shall tell them no news, in
telling you that,

1. They are much encouraged, in that the Ceremonies of their Religion find
such acceptance among us: It was long si^ce observed, That as the morning
ushers in the day, so the Ceremonies of any Religion, serve to bring in the
Religion it self; If we are heartily resolved against Popery* What do we with
their Garments, Gestures, Altars, Crosses, Liturgies, and Officers among us?
upon this reason the Divines of (...) withsto^d the Cerimon^es of INTERIM; of
which they give this account to (...) These ind^ff^rent things (say they) are
nothing els^ but the seed of corruption, Ep ad Mel
the nerves of Papistical Superstition, and the l^ttle p^ssages, by which the
adversaries endeavou^ to deep in^o our C^u^ches, that they may turn them off
the founda^ion To the same purpose the Divines of S^xon^ speak; Contet Sa^on
ed^t 1560
Satan (say they) from t^ose small beginning of the Ceremonies, makes progress
to ^he co^^uption of Doctr^ne it self If any say these are but groundless
(...), a fighting with our own shadows; the P^p^st themselves a^e more
charitable then such Obj^cters, and cannot but k^ow, that although we use these
Ceremonies, yet not in the same sense that they do. Pray hear what a Jesuit
has observed consern^ng it* Pro^estanism says Mr. (...) in his Preface S^ct.
20) waxes weary of it self* the professors of it, they espec^^lly of greatest
Worth Learning and Au^hority, Love, Temper and Moderation and are at this time
more unresolved where to fasten then at their Infancy of their (...) new face,
their Walls to speak a new language, their Doctrines to be altered in many
things. If it be again objected* this is but the groundless construction of a
peevish adversary. To conclude the controversy: here what a Prelate of our own
faith in the case, they are the words of the learned Primate of Ireland. Dr.
Usher of the Cerem. page 209.
The Kings and Queens of England (says he) imposed their Ceremonies, that
thereby they might decline the charge of Schismatics, wherewith the the Church
of Rome labored to brand them, seeing it did appear hereby, they only left
them in such Doctrinal points, wherein they left the truth. Again, hereby they
would testify, how far they would stoop to win and gain them, by yielding as
far as they might in their own way: But (says he) the experience of many years
has showed that this condescension has rather hardened them in their errors,
then brought them to a liking of our Religion; this being their usual saying,
if our Flesh be not good, why do you drink of our broth?

And have we not grounds for our fears, think you now, if we are blamed for our
jealousies, we must blame them that give cause for them. Would Bishops cast out
those Popish Ceremonies, our fears of Popery would be so much abated; but th^se
that nurse up these Romish brats we cannot but suspect to have too much love
for that Harlot that begot them.

2. We are at this day persecuting and suppressing the faithful in the Land,
even those that stand in the gap to intercede for it; and are the most
considerable persons, both for P^rts and P^e^y to oppose the d^si^nes of this
Enemy. How are we hacking at the Bow we stand upon? and pulling down our Walls,
while the Enemy lies round about them? Is this the time to stop the mouths of
so many able and Faithful Min^sters? to d^ive them into Corners, and not only
so, but to pull them out of those Corners too; and thrust them out of the
breach, w^ere they stand with P^ayers and Tears, which are their only weapons,
and the Nations best Defense against the common ene^y? Would any Physician that
regards the l^fe of his Patient, having to do with a (...) person that has but
little Blood and few (...), open a vein, and let cut a d^op thereof, it may be
you looked not upon them so, but (...) as the d^sease of England, then the good
blood (...): but God j^dges otherwise concerning them: (...), Job ^2. ult. You
think if you were once (...) of these, you should quickly be a prosperous
Nation: But verily* (...) Lord of (...) unto (...), we should have been as
Sodom we should have been like unto Gomorrah, Isai 1.9.

Ah! how little do our bold informers think whose work they are doing! little
do Constables think they are breaking down of the Wall and Gates of the Nation;
when breaking up the peaceable Meetings of Gods People. Poor men! did you but
see how the Papists laugh among themselves, to see their work so industriously
performed by your hands, it would surely cool your courage, and check your
irregular zeal: Alas! they are not so much afraid of your Swords, as of these
men's prayers. That Popish Queen of Scotland spoke out and professed she dreaded
more the Prayers of Mr. Knox (a godly Nonconformist) then an Army of ten
Thousand men. And will you so officiously serve them, by disarming so many ten
Thousands of your friends of their best weapons? Oh ungrateful England! do
thou thus requite the Saints for all the good they have been Instruments to
procure unto thee? Will thou make them enter an appeal in Heaven against thee,
in the words of the Prophet? Jerem. 18.20. Shall evil be recompensed for good?
for they have dug a pit for our Souls; remember O Lord, how we stood before
thee to speak good for them; and to turn away thy wrath from them.

3. Are not the professing part of the Nation at this day divided, both in
their judgments and affections? and what a singular advantage the enemy has;
thereby is obvious to every considering person; we have been often told, that
except the spirit of Love did speedily close up those unchristian breaches, the
common adversary would enter in at them, It was a worthy speech of Brentius
when the Divines of Germany were scuffling one with another, in the midst of
the Popish party; Tollenda merito, etc let all quarrelling and bitterness be
laid aside, and let us subject our judgments to our Lord Jesus Christ: Our
adversaries yet live and are daily more bold; night and day they labor to
extinguish the light of the Gospel which is risen among us, and to b^ing back
the ancient darkness; mean while we who in the beginning, by the grace of God;
professed the Gospel unanimousl^ turn our weapons one against another, and
exhibit a grateful spectacle to our enemies; who place more trust and
confidence in our contentions then in the vain foundation of their own Cause,
and all their own art and power.

I have a long time look^d upon our contentions, as upon a Blaz^ng Comet,
portending utter desolation, if the Lord heal it not speed^ly. Think upon this
you that fear the Lord, and tremble (...) his judgments: How have we beaten
our fellow servants? unsainted those that jumped not with us in our opinions?
this Saint was too high, and that too low; but here is an enemy, that like
Procrustes the tyrant, will cut you all of a length: Procrustes*
If you were ten thousand more then you are, you were no match for them, as
long as you lie in this posture. How easily did Gideon with his little handful;
vanquish the huge Host of the Medianites, when every man set his Sword to the
breast of his fellow, and instead of opposing him, slew every man his brother?
Judge. 7.22. I make no question but the Papists have blown up these sparks of
discention among us, to warm their own fingers by our flames; they have
animated and fomented that spirit of bitterness and wrath among us, as one that
sets two Cocks a fighting; that having killd each other, he may sup upon them
both at night. This was the sad posture of Jerusalem when the Enemy entered in
her Gates. O England! England! thy destruction is of thy self. If the hearts of
the Fathers be not turned to the Children, and the hearts of the Children to
the Fathers, what can we expect, but that God should come and smite the earth
with a curse? Mal 4. ult. Lord heal the breaches of England for it shakes.
Psalm. 60.2.

4. Fourthly and lastly, that which much appalls and daunts my spirit is, they
find us as deeply guilty of the abuse of the best mercies, as ever any nation
was. So that I am afraid this enemy will prove the Flagellum Dei, the scourge
of God, (as Totila of old, from his cruel persecution of the Christians was
called) to avenge our unthankfulness for those choice favors, which Heaven
has showered down upon his ungrateful Nation. Saint Jerome speaking of the
Churches enemies, By our sin^ (says he) our enemies are made strong; And
History tells us, that when Vespasian had conquered Jerusalem, he refused to
have the Crown set upon his head, saying I indeed am the Rod in the hand of
God, but it is their sins only that have subdued them. Upon what Nation under
Heaven has God more richly heaped his blessings, then upon England? and what
people have more wantonly abused them? or more contemptuously ^urned at the
tender mercies of him that conferred them? What (...) is it which deserves to
be styled matchless, transcendent, glorious, that Eng^and has not enj^yed? If
peace be it, we have had it: if Plenty, we have had it: If the Light of the
blessed Gospel shining in it is Meridian Splendour be it we have had it: But
Jesurun waxed fat and (...); O dreadful forerunner of National ruin! What was
it that gave the Saracen footing in the Eastern Empire, but the wantonness of
those Churches, abusing the Light which they enjoyed? how impatiently did the
people of God in former times, thirst for liberty to worship God purely! and
when they had obtained it, What was the use they made of it? horresco
referense, I tremble in speaking it; did we not play with our Light, fight with
our brethren by it, till God blowed out the Candle? and so (I wish I could say)
ended the quarrel.

We may say of our liberty, as the Philosopher speaks of waters, Suis terminis
difficile cont^nentur, they are difficultly kept within their bounds; why,
brethren did you think that God could suffer such precious mercies to run at
the waste spout much longer? Did you think he was weary of his mercies, to
continue them to such as little regarded them? or that it was not as grievous
to the blessed God, that his children should smite one another, as to see the
Enemy smiting them? no darkness is more formidable then that of an Eclipse,
which assaults the very vessels of light: no taste more unsavory then that of
sweet things when corrupted; and no sin more hideous, then that which darkens
the brightness of Gods love, and corrupts the sweetness of his mercy. O
Eng^^nd! thou have abused a darling attribute of God, thou have sinned against
the most deeply engraven Principle, and Law of Nature: The very irrational
Creatures, yea, the heaviest and dullest among them, the Ox and Ass are not so
deficient in gratitude to their owners, as thou have been to thy God, Isai.
1.3. justly therefore may be upbraid thee, and say, be astonished O ye Heavens
at this, and be ye horribly afraid, etc. Sic ne repend? Is this thy kindness to
the God of thy mercies? marvel not then if God pluck up the hedge of his
protection from about thee, and let in cruel foes upon thee, to chastise thee
for thine ingratitude; and though he will not make a full end of thee; yet may
he say concerning thee as of (...), 2 Chronicles. 12 7, 8. I will not u^terly
destroy them, but will grant them some deliverance, and my wrath shall not be
poured out upon Jerusalem by the hand of S^^shak; nevertheless they shall be
his servants, that they may know my ^ervice, and the serv^c^ of the Kingdoms of
the Countries. The Lo^d I trust, will not utterly forsake his dwelling place in
England; but verily I fear he may permit An^^ch^ist for a time to affl^ct us,
that we (...) know the difference between the sweet and easy yoke of Christ
which we would not endure, and the yoke of Antich^ist that shall gall our necks
and consciences with cruel servitude: And because we served not the Lord our
God with joyfulness and gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things,
that therefore we shall serve our Enemies, which (...) Lord shall send against
us, in hunger* and thirst, and (...) the want of all things; Deuteronomy. 28.47. that
so we may return to God with the Church, and say, as it is Isai. 26.19. ^ Lord
our God, other Lords besides thee have (...) dominion over u^, bu^ by thee
only, will we make mention of thy Name: and as Hos. 3 7. I will return to my
first husband, for it was be^ter wi^h ^ne th^n, (...).

These are some of the principal grounds of Englan^'s fear at this day, in
reference to the Popish p^^ty. Let the serious and considering Reader lay them
together* allow them but a j^st and even balance* and doubtless it will hereby
appear, tha^ how great soever our fears are, yet our dangers much exceed them.

Having thus hinted the grounds of our fears, what remains but that next I
address my self to the principal work d^sign'd in these Papers, which is to
call upon England to aw^k^ out of her dest^uctive security* and not to suffer
her enemies to surprise her sleeping? and I would do it in the words of the
Prophet, Zeph. 2.1, 2 Gather your selves together, yea, gather together, O
Nation not desired; before the decree bring forth, before the day pass as the
ch^ffe, before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon thee. O that I could
found this admonition so loud that all in the Nation might hear it! Had I any
h^p^s that these poor Papers might be honored with a glance of his Majesty's
Eye, I would as it were, prostrate my self at His feet, and cry as that woman
did, 2 King. 6.26. Help my Lord, O King.

Great Sir The Lord has done great things for you, An humble Address to the
King.
and You are scarcely capable doing a greater serv^ce for him and his People;
then vigorously to withstand the attempts and encrochments of the subtle and
formidable Enemy; in that it has pleased the Lord to move Your heart to send
forth Your Royal Proclamation against them, we accept it always and in all
places, with all tha^kfulness; and pray that he would not only secure Your
Royal Person from their attempts, but also make You a Shield to his People in
these Nations.

It is not hid from Your Majesty what a pe^fidi^us and bloody Enemy this is
whose principles as well as pr^ct^se tend to the subversion both of Kings and
Kingdoms. One of them affirms it lawful to mu^der any one (though his own
Prince) if the Pope hold him excommunic^ted; and another sets down rules how it
may be done, Mar^^
and thinks poisoning to be the best way What but Treason and Rebellion can
flow from those bloody D^ct^ines of the Popes, temporal Jurisd^ct^on over
Princes; and his power to d^ss^lve all Gathes and ^yes of Allegiance? so that
neither Your Person no^ Honor can be safe in their hands; or should Your Royal
Person be exempt from danger, yet if this Enemy prevail, How many (...)
innocent Subjects may fall by their merciless hands? what a field of blood will
they make Your Kingdom? and surely the (...) can never countervail the Kings
damage herein Esth. 6.16. Most gladly at Your Command, would we offer our lives
on the high places of the field against them, but to fall by treachery, and be
butchered in our beds, is horrible to think.

An humble ^upplica^n to the Parliment
And O that God would make our Honorable Representatives in Parliament still
vigilant to observe* and zealous to oppose the motions of this Enemy! we bless
the Lord for what you have already done, in detecting them so far; but yet we
cannot think our danger over, whilst they swarm in such numbers among us.
Hannibal was wont to say, Magis se a non pugnant^ Fabio, quam a pugnante
Marcello timere. he more feared Fab^us not fighting, then fighting, Marce^us. O
be as zealous for the Protestant Interest, as they are against it; if they dare
to smite with the fist of wickedness, we hope You will not be afraid to smite
them with the Sword of Justice. Remember what a matchless salvation was once
given to our English Parliament, I mean from the Powder Plot, that Catholic
Villainy, as one aptly calls it: Such a deliverance as ages past cannot
parrellel in any Hystory, and of which we may say, as the Hystorian in another
case, Si^n analibus non foret fabula videre^ur. Had it not been recorded in our
own Annals posterity would never believe it: They have indeed studiously
endeavored in their late Bold R^monstrance to hide from your eyes the goodness
of God in that deliverance, that so by forgetting his goodness, they might bury
in silence their own wickedness; we hope none of your actings against this
enemy, will be stained with lukewarmness; if justice be sprinkled with a
favorable hand, like a few drops of water upon fire; we doubt instead of
quenching, it will rather increase the flame. Rome is a ^ettle, the more gently
it is handled the more it stings. My Lords and Gentlemen, here is an enemy that
deserves your hottest zeal and greatest vigilance, much better then honest,
loyal Nonconformists, who plead with God night and day on your behalf.

It Is acknowledged they differ in lesser matters, from the established worship
of the Nations, but from the tolleration of such differences no public danger
can arise. Some differences in Opinion (says an Honorable Author) are as the
striving of one Israelite with another; ^
and those Moses quiets and parts them fairly; and some are ^^ke the Egyptian
striv^ng with the Israelites, whom Moses smites down. It was a noble Speech of
Anthony of B^urbon King of (...), to the Danish Ambassador; this King being a
Peer of France* and first Prince of the Blood, challenged the (...) Kingdom
during the French Kings minoraty: He told the Ambassador, that he hoped in a
short time to procure a free passage for the Gospel throughout France; the
Ambassador was pleased with (...); but desired that Luthers Doctrine, not
Calvin's, might pass for current: The King replied, Luther and Calvin agree in
forty Points, and differ but in one. Let those therefore that follow the tenets
of these two, unite their strength against the common enemy, and at better
leisure; in a more convenient season, compound their own differences: Grant
that Nonconformists be in an error, yet the difference is not fundamental: and
the Famous Empe^^^* Theod^si^s, did not only bear with the Novations, but
familiarly consult with their learned Pastors about Church Matters, though
differing in several Points of Discipline, and Constantine, although he made a
Law in terrorem, Soz. lib. ^ Cap, 12.
yet in point of execution he spared them. O that with one shoulder you might
support the tottering Interest of Christ in these Nations! and be styled the
Saviors of England in this time of danger; which will be a more Honorable
Title, then any other you are, or can be dignified with.

I would also propound it as matter of serious consideration to the Prelates;
Queries to the Bishops
Whether this be a time to vex and persecute the Conscientious and Faithful in
the Land, for Ceremonies and Trifles, when the substance of Religion lies
exposed? Will not the late dreadful Alarms by the Popish Party sound a Retreat,
and put an end to this work? suffer me to propound two or three Queries to your
Consciences.

Are not Papists hereby hardened in their errors, and confirmed in their cruel
and tyranical Impositions upon Consciencies whilst they England? If your way be
good, why is not theirs? magis and minus non (...) speciem; Is there not as
much strength in their Arguments of Fire and Faggot to convince you, as in your
Excommunications Imprisonments* Mulcts, and Penalties, to convince us of the
lawfulness of your Ceremonies? It Is said of Molin^us Bonifacius, that his silly
reasons for the Popes Supremacy did well enough, being propounded with a Sword
in his hand; a keen Sword will make a dull Argument cut to the quick; and if
you cannot answer such Arguments your selves, me thinks you should be tender of
urging them against others. Sure I am Confiscations, Imprisonments, and Death
are the most irrefragable Arguments for Popery; and it is a thousand pitties we
should tell the world, that the reformed Religion must be supported by the like
Artifices: It would better (...) in Spain, then Christ's intere^t in England. I
am su^e in the proper Cognizance of Antichrist: and O that it might remain with
them only. Hear what a man of your own Character ^aith, Liberty of Prophecy.
^. 109.
it is observed says Doctor Tailor, That the restraint of Prophesying and
imposing upon other men's understandings, being Masters of their Consciences,
and Lording it over their Faith, came in with the retinue and train of
Antichrist; that is, they came as other abuses and corruptions of the Church
did, when the Churches Fortunes grew better, and her Sons worse, and some of
their Fathers worst of all; for in the first three hundred years, there was no
sign of persecuting any man for his Opinion, though at that time there were
many horrid Opinions. -- A Wolf may as well give Laws to the understanding, as
he whose dictates are only propounded in violence, and written in blood: and a
Dog is as capable of a Law, as a Man, if there be no choice in his obedience,
no discourse in his choice, no reason to satisfy his discourse.

Are you not like to have the same measure, you mete to us, meted

Are not these very persons against whom you discharge your Cannons, aliquid
commune cum antichristo, a spice and tang of Popish Superstition in them; and
doubtless, they will as freely lay down their lives in defense of the
fundamental and weightier points of Religion, as their Places, Liberties* and
Earthly Comforts, for the lesser Circumstantial truths thereof: and is it not
pity, that you should (especially at such a time as this) suppress afflict and
silence such (...), whose abilities might now be improved to such singular
advantag^

^
But, Aquila non (...) muscas Lordly spirits scorn to (...) such mean
composures, or take notice of a creeping Pamphlet; let me therefore speak to
the Body of the People and especially to those among the People, who profess to
fear the Lord, and tremble at his Judgments* Will you shut your ears to
seasonable counsel also? Will you despise your dangers till you are surprised
by them? O England! Will thou not begin to (...), till thou art (...). Shall
thine Enemies find thee sleeping, and leave thee dead? Wretched England! here
is thy misery, that thou know not thy time; but as the fishes are taken in
an evil net, and as the birds are caught in the snare; so will thou be snared
in an evil time, when it falls on thee suddenly Eccle. 8.12. May I freely
express my apprehensions in tht Case; I much doubt thine Enemies have so
contrived and laid their design against thee, that (in their apprehensions at
least) all thy struglings now, are but as the flutterings of a bird in the net,
which instead of freeing, does but the faster entangle her. However if God at
last wlll but open thine eyes to seasonable Counsel, and persuade thine heart
to thy present duties, who can tell but the Lord may yet be gracious to his
Land, and spare his people.

It is not so much their confidence as our impenitence that is to be feared,
Human was as confident as they can be, and had cast Pur for the Jews as well as
they for us, Esth. 3.7. So was Ph^ra^h too when he said I will pursue; I will
pursue; God can quickly give their pregnant designs a miscarrying womb; so that
they which have conceived mischief shall bring forth but a lie; and thou that
fear continually because of the enemy, shall yet praise him and say, The
heathen are sunk down in the pit that they made; in the net which they hid is
their own foot taken: the Lord is known by the judgments which he executes;
the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands: Higgaion Selah, Psalm. 9.15,
16. and when the enemy comes in like a flood: the Spirit of thy God can set up
a Standard against him: if men cannot, winds and waves shall fight for thee, as
they have done in former exigencies.

O n^mium dilecte Deo cui militat ether
Et con^urati ve^^unt ad ^l^stica venti.
Only obey the Counsels of God, and let thine ear be circumcised* and as ever
you expect that a door of hope should be opened to you in this valley of Achor,
let these following Counsels be speedily and heartily practiced.

1. COUNSEL.
Abhor Popery and be eminent in your zeal against it. Rome is that Amalek, with
whom God will never make peace; neither should we: It was Queen Elizabeth's
Motto, No peace with Spain and ^t should be ours; No peace with Rome. My dear
Countrymen, I beseech you, be not deceived with any words; suffer not your
(...) to be circumvented by a Stratagem of the Enemy, let not (...), and
discontents which they endeavor to beget* and foment in you, against your real
friends, cause any of y^u to fall in with the Design and Interest of your
Enemies* it is a dangerous thing to comply with that Interest which God has
engaged himself against, and as sure as Christ sits at his Fathers r^g^t hand,
shall be destroyed: and what cause you have to abhor Popery: you will see by
that time I have showed you, that it is a FALSE: BLOODY: BLASPHEMOUS:
UNCOMFORTABLE: AND DAMNABLE RELIGION.

First, It is a False Religion, and that is reason enough to abhor it. You would
be loath to be cheated with counterfeit Coin (specially if you were to receive
your whole portion in it) how much more with a false Faith; when it amounts to
as much as all your souls are worth in another World! the falsity of the Popish
Religion (if it yet remain a question with any among us) may be thus evinced.

That Religion which is not built upon the Foundation of the

But the Popish Religion is not built upon the Foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, but stands in the wisdom of man; therefore the Pop^sh Religion is a
false Religion.

The Major Propositian is undeniable, and stands upon the Authority of these
Scriptures: Ephesians. 2 20. And are built upon the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles: Jesus Christ himself being the chief Corner Stone. 1 Cor. 2.5. That
your Faith should not stand in the wisdom of men: but in the power of God.
Isai. 8.20. To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to
this word: it is because there is no light in them.

The Minor Proposition is as evident: For (1) the Pap^sts themselves
acknowledge that their worshipping of Creatures, Mass, Purgatory, the Popes
Supremacy, and most other Doctrines, wherein they d^ffer from us, cannot be
confirmed by Scripture: (...). instic. mor. par. 2 d. lib. 4. ca. 18. (2) They
set up the Pope, as a Judge above the Scriptures, subjecting them to the Popes
authority: this many of their learned Doctors are not ashamed expressly to
affirm and d^f^nd, Pigh us. Hierarch, Lib. 1. Cap. 2, 3, 4 Card. Cus^a Epist.
7. ad B^h^m. Cocteus. H^llins etc. (3) They reproach and deprave the Scripture,
calling it an uncertain thing, dead letter an insufficient guide of it self,
without their traditions or unwritten Word* B^l^r. de ^ut. Scrip. (4) They add
to, and detract from the Scriptures at pleasure* Bellarmin says* Pontifficem
p^sse mutare pr^ ut ecclesiae expedit positi^a precepta Apostolorum, (i. e.)
(...) Pope can change the positive precepts of the Apostles, for the (...) of
the Church. (5) They will not stand to Scripture Trial and Judgment for the
Decision of Controversi^s, but cry out to the Fathers, to Counsels, to
Scoolmen, as appears in our own Acts and M^n. in multitudes of examples. (6)
They restrain the People by penalties from reading the Scriptures persuading
them to resolve their Faith into the Authority of the Pope, and believe
Implicity, as the Church believes, Ergo.

That Religion which ascribes the glory of man's salvation to himself, and not
to Christ alone, is a false Religion. But the Popish Religion

The Major is undeniable; the end of Religion is the glory of God; the
Christian Religion utterly excludes the glorying of man in himself, Romans 3.27
Where is boasting then? it is excluded; by what Law? of work^? nay, but by the
Law of Faith. Tit. 3.5. Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but
according to his mercy he saved us, etc.

The Minor is evident, for themselves teach, that the proper certainty of hope
is in merits, that certainty which is not presumption is of Alexand. A^^s.
quest. 3 d. 65. Merits (says another are the foundation of our hope,
Piliucius. tract. 23. n. 244. therefore,

That which is the Religion of Antichrist, is a false Religion; but the Popish
Religion, is the Religion of Antichrist, Ergo.

The Major is evident, for the Doctrine of Antichrist is a lie, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.
A mystery of Iniquity, ver. 7.

The Minor appears as evidently, in that the Notes and Characters by which
Antichrist is described and indigetated in Scripture agree to Popery, and to it
only. The Pop^ is that (...) Ano^^os that lawless one, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. He sits in
the Temple of God, challenging Supremacy over all Churches. He sits there as
God, exalting himself above all that is called God, ver. 4. They attribute to
him the Name of the Lord our God.

Oraclo vocis mundi m^dera^is h^benas,
Et merito in terris cr^^eris esse Deus. Sixty 4th.

His coming is after the working of Satan, with all power signs, and lying
wonders, of which there are numberless multitudes in Popery, their Legends
swarm with them. H^ has Hor^s as a Lamb, (viz) pretenses of meekness and
innocence but speaks (...). 13.11. He arose out of the earth, stirpium more,
after the manner of plants, growing by insensible degrees of this monstrous
greatness; to him only agree all the other Characters in Lev. 17. and alibi,
therefore,

That Religion which tolerate and countenances all manner of etc. is a false
Religion, but the Popish Religion tolerates and countenances these, and many
other fleshly lusts, therefore it is a false Religion.

The Major is doubted) may easily be proved by all those Scriptures which show
the purity of true Religion, as Jam. 1.27. ^ure Religion and undefiled before
God, etc. Tit. 2 12. teaching us that denying ungodliness, and world^y lust,
etc Psalm. 19 9. The fear of the Lord (which is there put for his worship) is
clean, etc

The Minor may be as easily proved from their own Hystories and Writings, and
many other credible Authors. As for their Pride, let an instance or two
suffice: Sir R^chard Baker in his Chron. page 30. tells us that Aldred Arch
Bishop of Canterbury, upon the repulse of his Suit by King William the first,
grew discontent, and offered to depart, when the King in awe of his
displeasure, staid him, fell down at his feet, desired pardon, and promised to
grant him his Suit; the King being all this while down at the Arch-B^shops
feet, the Nobles that were present put him in mind, that he should cause the
King to rise; nay says the Archbishop, let him alone, let him find what it
is to anger St. Peter: Ric^onius that proud Pap^st, was not ashamed to tell the
World in Print, that a Priest is as much above a King, as a King is above a
Beast; yea as God is above a Priest. Their Coveteousness is also insatiable,
all things are vendible at Rome, even the Blood of Christ is set to sale for
money they have vast Revenues from the very S^n^s and Brothels. The blindest
times took so much notice of their Covetousness, that though they du^st not
speak out, yet expressed their apprehensions, and just indignation against them
in Pictures. There was found in the Abbey of (...) (besides other Emblems tax^ng
Popish Prelates) the Picture of a Wolf, in a Monks Cowle, and shaven Crown,
preaching to a flock of Sheep, with these words coming in a pendant out of his
mouth, God is my witness, how I long for you (...) in my bowels; and underneath
was written: This hooded Wolf is the Hypocrite, (...) Wolf (...). Tom. (...)
of whom in the Gospel beware of False Prophets: this Picture was made two
hundred years before the Reformation by Luther. Another like this, was found at
Ptortzheim, only with this d^fference, that the Wolf was preaching to a flock
of Geese, every one holding in his Dill, a pair of praying beads. Prodigious
Lusts are found among them: they forbid Marriage, and scatter their Lusts like
bruit beasts promiscuously. St. Gregory commanded that their Priests should not
marry, but understanding what filthiness they committed, and finding in one
Fishpond, six thousand Heads of young Infants that had been murdered; he
repealed his decree: Yea, their own Writers tell us such stories of their
wickedness in this kind that I am ashamed my pen should English; the Learned
Reader may find more then enough in Bernard, Vallarins lives of the Popes p.
33.
in Cant. Sermon. 66. Alvarez. Peleg. de planct. Ecles. lib. 2. artic. 24 Peter
Aliacus, Talingenius, Corn^l^us Mus. etc. Most horrid murders are frequently
practiced by them, yea, and encouraged with promised rewards in Heaven.

Hospinian shows us how the Jesuits animate him, Hospin. hist. Jesu. p. 225.
whom they employ for the murdering of Kings; they bring him into a Chapel,
where the Knife lies wrapped upon a Cloth with agnus Dei engraven upon it; then
they open the Knife and sprinkle it with Holy Water, fastening to the Haft some
consecrated Beads, with this Indulgence, That so many Stabs as he gives the
King, so many Souls he saves out of Purgatory. They commend to him the Knife in
these words. O thou chosen Son of God, take to thee the Sword of Jephie
Sampson, David, Gideon, Judith of Maccabaeus, of Julius the second who defended
himself from the Princes by his Sword; go, and be wisely couragius and God
strengthen thy hand; then they all fall upon their knees with this prayer, Be
present, O ye Cherub^ms and Seraphims, be present ye Thrones, Powers, Holy
Angels, fill this Holy Vessel with Glory, give him the Crown of all the Holy
Martyrs; he is no longer ours, but your companion; and thou, O God strengthen
his arm, that he may do thy will; give him thy Helmet and Wings to fly from his
Enemies; -- then they show him a Crown of Glory, and say, Lord respect this thy
Arm, Executioner of thy Justice: -- then they tell him they see a Divine Luster
in his Face, which moves them to fall down and kiss his feet, and now he is no
more a mortal man, etc.

These, and all other lusts are indulged, even by the Doctrines and Principles
of Pap^sts; for, if venial sins do not render a man unworthy of the love of
God, are but trifles, toys, gnats, as B^llarmine calls them, Lib. 2. d. de
peccatore: If the Pope can get geeat Indulgencies, of which he has so many
kinds, Indulgencies for certain days, or years, some partial, some plenary;
for all sins, yea, ^teraum plena plenior for more then all; some for this life,
some for ever: What should hinder, but that they should take the bit in the
mouth (...) wickedness, as the Horse into the battle* especially adding what
Navarrus Cordubensis, ^
and others by Bellarmin's own confession, teach, that if men rush into sin,
upon the hope of such Indulgencies, they may be nevertheless absolved. But I
have stood too long upon this head; our Protestant Writers have clearly and
learnedly evinced the falsity of this Religion; only because many of their
Arguments are in Latin, I thought it not amiss to add somewhat for the
satisfaction of vulgar Readers.

2. Abhor Popery for it is a bloody Religion; Rev. 17.6. and I saw the woman
drunk with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus.
The Pope writes his Laws in Blood, wherever he erects his Throne; he is the
Son of perdition in an active, as well as in a passive sense. Poor England has
had experience of Popish cruelty, and so has Ireland too; in one of whose
Provinces 140000 Protestants were Massacred by them in the late rebellion.
Popish cruelty spares none, pities none; how have Protestants been compelled by
tortures to discover their dearest relations! Wives (being first defiled) have
been forced to give the deaths wound to their dear husbands, bloody villains,
putting the Sword into their hands, and guiding them in the execution: Godly
Christians compelled to carry Faggots, to burn their own Faithful Pastors:
Children of Eight years old, whipped to death for Religion: Yea, such has been
their rage against the sincere professors of the Truth that beyond all examples
of malice, (for pascitur in vivos livor post fata quiescit) they have not only
hunted after the living, but violated the Graves, and burnt the bones of dead
Saints: thus they dealt with Bucer, Fagius, Wickiffe* etc. O England! what
cause have thou to bless the Lord, for so long a respit from Papish cruelty!
thine own Hystories may sufficiently Inform thee, what rivers of precious blood
have streamed through thee, what flames of Martyrdom have raged within thy
Cities and Villages, when these ravenous Wolves, and bloody Tigers were let
loose to ravine in all thy borders? and what cause have thou to tremble at the
first approaches of these tur^ulent foes whose rage i^ boiled up to a greater
height then ever? and should they return upon thee again, (which Heaven
prevent) they would exceed all former examples of cruelty. Poor England! those
Knives which lately providence put into thine hand, were intended to be
sheathed in thy bowels: art thou able to endure such another bout, as the last
age did? Hear how one of the faithful Watchmen (now out of their reach)
expostulated upon same account with thee.

Can you (says he) endure to see a stranger to (...) Habitations and your
dwellings? to cast you out? for your pleasant and well tilled Fields to be made
a prey? for you to sow, and another to reap? impius has segetes, etc. for the
delicate Woman, upon whom the wind must not blow, that scarce dare venture to
set the sole of her foot upon the ground for tenderness* to be exposed to the
lusts and cruelty of an enemy; to be glad to fly away naked to prolong a
miserable life, which would gladly be parted with for death, were it not for
fear of the exchange? for the tender mother to look upon the child of her
womb, and consider, Must this child in whom I have placed the hopes of mine
age, (for omnis in Ascanio stat chari cura parentis) he that has been so
tenderly bred up, Must he fall into the rough hands of a bloody Soldier skilful
to destroy? It had been well for me if God had given me a miscarrying womb, and
dry breasts, rather then to bring forth Children unto Murderers. Or if you
could be safe, how could you endure to see the evil that shall come upon your
people, and the destruction of your kindred? I do not rhetorize and fawn to
draw affection, your Brethren are a sad Comment upon what I have spoken and
Ireland the Stage upon which you may see this Tragedy acted before your eyes.

3 O hate Popery, For it is not only a Bloody but a Blaspemous Religion. If we
be Christians indeed, the dishonor of Gods Name should affect us more then the
shedding of the warmest blood in our veins; this Scarlet Whore is full of the
Names ^f Blasphemy, 2d. Tome. Oper. Luth La^. p. 125
Rev. 17.3. Popery is a mere Rapsody of Blasphemies: Luther has gathered
several of their Blasphemous doctrines out of their own Cannons to our hands,
of which let a few suffice: 1. Papa and sui, etc. ( i. e.) The Pope and his,
are not bound to be subject and obedient to the Commands of God. 2, Soli
significari, etc. (i. e.) By the Sun is signified the Papal, and by the Moon
the Imperial, or Secular Power in the Christian Common Wealth. 3. Papam habere
in Scrinio pectoris sui, etc. (i. e.) That all Laws are in the Coffer of the
Popes breast, and full power over all Laws. 4. Si papa suae, etc. (i. e.) If
the Pope be so negligent of his own Salvation so negligent and remiss in his
Office, that he should draw innumerable multitudes to hell with him to be there
ever tormented; yet may no mortal man reprove him of any fault in so doing. 5.
Papam habere potestatem, etc. (i. e.) The Pope has power to commute and
dissolve vows made to God, and then if any man defer to pay his vow according
to Gods Command, he is not held guilty. 6. Quod non papa a Scriptura, ^
etc. (...) 7. Summa Summorum, etc. i. e. the sum of all their Comical Laws is
this, that the Pope is a God in the Earth Superior to all Celestial,
Terrestrial* Spiritual and Secular persons; that all things are his, and none
may say unto him, what do thou? I am loath to offend Christians ears with
more of their Blasphemous Tenants, this is enough to turn the stomachs of
Christians with indignation against them.

4. It Is a most uncomfortable Religion; it is impossible to get or keep true
peace of Consciencs in that way, Rev. 9 5, 6, And their torments was as the
torment of a Scorpion when he smites a man: And in those days, shall men seek
death, and shall not find it, but death shall fly from them: That is (says a
worthy Divine) the Consciences of poor sinners being stung with guilt and
horror of sin, and finding no satisfaction nor remedy in their way, shall be
endlesly perplexed and tortured with inward troubles of Spirit, which are like
the stinging of a Scorpion; so that they shall choose death rather then life:
For do but consider, 1. They are enemies to free grace and all
Gospel-preaching, Gardener would not have this gap of free grace opened to the
People: See (says Contzen a Jesuit) The fruit of Protestanism and their Gospel
preaching. Cont^. in Mat. 24.
2. They deprive the People of the Scriptures, wherein are treasured up all the
Cordial and Soul-reviving Comforts of a poor distressed sinner: If thy Law
(says David) had not been my delight, I should have perished in my affliction;
and again, This is my comfort in my affliction, thy word has quickened me,
Psalm 119.3. They lay the stress of their hopes of Salvation (as you have heard)
upon their own merits and the merits of others, like themselves: so that all
the comforts they build upon that Salvation, must needs be loose and delusory
things: dibile fundamentum fallit totus: every thing is as it is foundation is.
Lastly, They deny the possibility of the assurance of Salvation in this life;
and so consequently, their Consciences must be always cauterized and dead, or
fluctuating and dubious. O what Religion is this!

5. Lastly, It is a Damnable Religion; we have no ground from Scripture, to
conclude the salvation of any among them, that know the depths of Satan, and
live and dye in destructive Opinions. Hear what the Scriptures say, Rev. 17.8.
The beast that thou saw, was, and is not, and shall ascend out of the
bottomless pit, and go into perdition, and they that dwell on the earth, shall
wonder (whose Names are not written in the Book of Life from the foundation of
the World) when they see the beast that was, and is not, and yet is; 2 Thessalonians 2
21. And for this cause, God shall send them strong delusions that they should
believe a lie, that they (...) righteousness. When their sorest Plague shall
come (...) shall not have a heart given them to repent; but shall Blasphem^ the
Name of God because of them, Rev. 6 9. And therefore to shut up this first
Counsel, you that love the Lord has that by which he is so much dishonored it
will make your blood boil in your veins to (...) how he is crucified,
Dethroned, and trampled on by these his Enemies.

2 COUNSEL.
Use all proper preventive means to avert this threatening judgment; of which
sort I shall recommend these three in special.

Mourn for the abuse of former Light and Liberty, and say, O remember not
against us former Iniquities? let thy tender mercy speedily Psalm. 97.8. O
England! What a day of Mercy have thou had! how have thou been exalted to
Heaven with Capernaum! thou might once have worshipped God as purely as thou
would, you might have been as holy as you would; the lot of this generation
was cast upon such an happy nick of time, as is scarce to be found in the
Hystory of Ages past; but the most glorious morning has it is evening, the
brightest Sun its Clouds, and time of setting. We know not the time of our
Visitation, but were both wanton and barren under those precious Mercies. God
is now coming with his Ax in his hand, to hew down barren Trees. Nothing but
unfeigned repentance and speedy reformation can reprieve us. Romanae leges
paen^m peccanti d^ferunt. Nothing but those fruits can be a good sign of mercy
to England. And will you not yet mourn for the loss of such a day? such peace
neglected and not mourn! such liberties abused, and for their abuses removed
and not a tear! So many flourishing Churches broken, and the heart not broken!
So many shining Lights extinct, and none lays it to heart! Such black clouds
of Popish darkness and blood gathering over us, and none tremble! Lord! what
hearts have we? how wonderful is the stupifying power of sin! O ye professors
of England, that ye had known at least in that your day the things of your
peace! but now they are hid from your eyes. You once had those mercies, now you
have them not; and the Lord only knows whether ever you shall see them again. I
am out of hopes of them, till I see the people of God more humbled for the sins
that removed them.

Make up your breaches speedily; it is time (I think) when the (...) at them.
Hear (...) Christ, by (...) distinguished among your selves* Will you come and
be friends one with another? have you yet enough of your divisions? how do the
fruits of your Animosities, Contentions and Reproaches, rel^sh now with you? do
you see who God is sending (...) part you? can^t you yet pray together, mourn
together? strive with God together* Why then, can you go to Prison together?
Will you stand quietly at the stake together* What say you friends? you profess
to be the Children of the God of Peace and I am sure Christ is the Prince of
Peace, and the Gospel, the Gospel of Peace; and will not you be the Sons of
Peace? if you will not yet unite, let the ruin of England lie upon your score.
Do you make no more of the Commands of Christ the Credit of Religion, the
safety of the Nation; Ah! methinks, as Tertullian told Scapula, Si non vis tibi
parcere parce (...). If you have no pity for your selves have pity for the
Nation; don't sacrifice all to your unruly lusts. If you profess love to Christ,
and yet have no love for those in whom is his Image; if you pretend to be
Saints, and yet had rather hazard the honor of Christ, then deny your passions
and lusts, pray pull off your V^z^rds, fall into your places, and appear as you
are.

Brethren* I beseech you seriously to consider these three Particulars, and if
there be any force in them, or tenderness in your Consciences, let them at last
persuade you to love one another.

1. That Scripture makes your love to the Brethren a positive mark of your
regeneration, 1 Jo^n 3.14. We know that we are passed from death to life,
because we love the Brethren: he that loves not his Brother, abides in death.
And 1 John 5 1. Every one that loves him that began, loves him also that is
begotten of him. And to speak truth, it is (ordinarily) the clearest sign that
many poor Christians can find in their own breasts: upon the hazard therefore
of your own peace and assur^nce be it, if still you continue to bite and devour
one another. 2. I will farther ad that this endeared and mutual love of the
Saints is the charge, yea, the dying charge of Christ to them; they were some
of the last words of Christ in this World, Jo^. 15 12. This is my Commandment,
that ye love one another, as I have loved you. Dying charges are commonly
received with greatest Veneration, and men (what ever they neglect) will be
sure to fulfill the will of the Dead. So Genesis 50 ^^. When Joseph's Brethren were
afraid left (his father being now dead) he would remember the old injuries
they have done him, urge this pacifying Argument upon him, Thy Father did
command, before he dyed, saying, Forgive I pray thee now the trespasses of thy
Brethren. And ver. 21. you (...) it prevailed with him, He ^^mforted them and
spoke kindly un^o the^* O my Brethren! will you not lay down your private
differences and animosities when God threatens you with a common ruin? when a
common danger is upon you all? In the year 1607. when by the irruption of the
Sever^ Sea the Count^y in Somme^se^shire was overflown almost twenty miles in
length, and four miles in breadth and many persons drowned; it was then
observable says Mr. Full^r) that Creatures of contrary Natures, as Dogs and
Hares, Foxes, and Conies, yea Cats and Mice, Worthies of England in his farewell
^o Summersetshire.
getting up to the tops of some Hills dispensed at that time with their
^ntipathies remaining p^acably together, without sign of fear, or any violence
one toward another. My Readers thoughts will doubtless anticcipate me in the
application of this strange passage. Our want of Love has cut the banks and
let in an inundation of Calamities upon us, and a more fearful flood of
Judgments is yet expected; and will not such public dangers yet cause us to
d^pose our private d^fferences? shall we act below Dogs, Cats, and Foxes? shall
we prefer private Revenge before common safety? If so, I much doubt God will
still us, and part the fray in a more terrible manner then most think of I
doubt it may be said of us ere long, as he said who saw the dead carcasses of
Enemies that had been slain in a duel lie quietly together, as if they had
embraced each other, quanta amic^t^^ se invicem amplictantur, qui mutua
implacabil^ inimic^t^a perierunt? How lovingly do they embrace each other being
dead who perished through their mutual and implacable enmity? how justly may
the Lord sweep away this generation of Professors, and raise up others in their
room who will agree, and love one another better?

What shall I say more? If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort
of love, if any fe^^owship of the spirit, if any bowels and mercies fulfill ye
my joy, that ye be ^^ke minded, having the same love, being of one accord and
of one mind, Phil. 2.12.

Strive day and night with God by importunate prayers for the prevention of
those eminent judgments, but strive no more (...) with another; no more of
that work I pray. O it is a thousand pities to see the sheep of Christ to push
and gore each other. Non Secus ac Cum duo conversis inimica in prelia tauri
Frontibus incurren^ --
O rather put out as the Elect of God, bowels of mercy and compassion; let the
people of God be but once heartily uni^^d, and then Rom^ do thy worst.
Associate your selves, O ye people, and you shall be broken (...) ear, all ye
of far Countries* (...) ye shall be broken in pieces: take Counsel together,
and it shall come to naught: speak the word, and it shall not stand: for God is
with us.

Lie day and night at the throne of Grace, interceeding with God for your
selves, and for the Nation When Mr. Perkins said of his times, it is no less
suitable to these, Non sunt ista litigandi, sed orandi, tempora: these are not
times for contention, but Prayer: This will be a good omen of mercy and
deliverance at hand: we may say of the spirit of Prayer, as Christ said of the
budding of the Fig Tree, Mat. 24. when ye see the Fig Tree and all the trees of
the field put forth tender leaves, ye know that summer is nigh. So the reviving
and budding forth of the spirit of Prayer is a sign that Salvation is nigh? The
Psalmist kn^w the time to favor Sion was come, and that God would arise and
have mercy upon her, because he found a spirit of Compassion and Prayer (...)
Sion poured out, Psalm. 102.13, 14. When the decree for judgment is gone forth,
and God will not be stopped, he usually shuts up and (...) the spirits of praying
ones, Jer, 7.16. he never shuts out Pray^^ ^ll the case become desperate end
remediless, Jer. 15.1. O friends great is the efficacy of prayer, Prayer will
rain all your enemies: David put up but one petition against Achitophel, 'Lord
turn the council of Achitophel into foolishness, and it ruined both him and his
design, 2 Samuel 15.3. Prayers and Tears will do more then Guns or Swords, 2 Chronicles. 14.9.

O be not discouraged, because you presently see not the effects and returns of
your Prayers: your Prayers are hid though their answers be suspended, and be
confident in due time they shall be answered also. O how many millions of
prayers are upon the file in Heaven, as a Memorial before God upon this
account! not a good man all the World ever but joins with you in this cry,
Lord, raze the foundations of (...), pull down Babylon, and build up Sion. Yea;
the Prayers of thousands, who are now in Heaven, are yet to be answered in that
matter. For though we may say of their pesons as the Church speaks of Ab^a^am,
they know us not: yet we may say of their prayers as the Church speaks of Abel,
though they be dead, their Prayer^ are not dead, they live* and yet speak. O
then stir up your selves to take ^old of God, weep and make supplication.

Two th^^gs exceedingly discourage our spirits in prayer, great guilt in us and
l^ng delays of answers from God: against both these, the Lord has laid up
encouragements and sweet supports in the word, are we under great guilt? have
we abused mercies? so did Israel, Psalm. ^06.7, 8, 16, 17, 18, 19, 28. Yet mercy
comes tryumphing over all their unworthiness with a non obstante, ver. 44.
Nevertheless he regarded their affliction when he heard their cry. What though
England like Israel be a polluted Nation: yet Israel has not been forsaken,
nor Judah of his God: though their land was filled with sin against the holy
one of Israel, Jer. 51.5. or does God exercise your Faith and Patience by
delaying the returns of Prayer? so that you are ready to look at your Prayers
as lost. See another Nevertheless, in that case to raise up your hearts and
hopes, Psalm. 31.22. I said in my haste, I am cut off from before thine eyes:
Nevertheless, thou heard^st the voice of my supplication when I cried unto
thee. Up therefore every one in whom is the spirit of Prayer, pour out you^
hearts before him in this time of common danger, your God will hear you: but if
you are speechless now, it is a sad forerunner of death, and National ruin.

3. COUNSEL.
Prepare your selves for the worst, that if times should alter (for there are
changes in the right hand of the most high) yet your hearts may not be turned
back nor your steps decline from those paths of Truth and Holiness wherein you
have been egaged.

O cleave to the Lord with purpose of heart, and when fiery trials come
(whereof most serious and considering Christians are in a trembling
expectation) then do not basely d^ssert Christ in open (...) To do evil (says
M^telius) where there is neither pain (...) is easy and common, but to do good
in the face of (...) and truly noble* It was the saying of a (...) Though you
pluck my heart out of my (...) the truth out of my heart. O how is (...) and
your souls secured by your (...) fast what you have (...) yet save your Crowns.
(...) when hard put to it (...) enemies, Ego (...) worthy Preacher of (...)
this Article, viz. (...) without works (...) nor by the Turk, (...) and Monks,
(...) will they, ^ill they shall (...)

(...) much doubt the wantonness, Scepticisme, and contention^ of the
Professors of this age, have so weakened the Authoro^^ and Reputation of
Religion in the World, that God will once more call for Christians Blood to
Seal his Truths, and convince the World that there is reality in Godliness: And
if it should come to that: I (...) to think what shrinking will be among
Professors. ^o prevent which, all that I shall add shall be in these two
words, (...) See the ground you stand on be good. I do not speak of the Cause,
for it is beyond dispute, the most glorious cause that was ever sealed by the
blood of any Witness: but of your Condition. O see that be good also! look to
it that you dye in, as well as for the Faith, are you upon sure and safe
grounds, as to your eternal state? if not but that you be still dubious, it is
time to make both sure* and quick work. 2. Stand your ground, he deserves to be
hanged in everlasting chains in Hell, that relinquishes such a Cause and such a
Christ on earth. Christian, I would fain know, how thou can (...) close up
thy life more honorably, or more comfortably, then by offering it up in
defense of the precious truths of Christ, against his bold and blaspheming
enemy? the very Heathens heated with love of their Country have made many brave
and bold adventures for (...)* and will you shrink? O take unto you the whole
Armor of God, th^^ you may be able to withstand in the evil day; Ephesians. 16.13.
and having done all, to stand.

FINIS.

