SEVERAL LAWS AND ORDERS Made at the GENERAL COURT OF ELECTION Held at Boston
in NEW ENGLAND the 29th. of April 1668.
PRinted and Published by their Order. EDWARD RAWSON. Secr.

WHereas sundry Complaints have been made of much inequality in the annual
Assessments to public charges, the several Towns, and Counties not paying in a
just proportion one to another, as is the true intent of the Law Title Charges;
It is therefore Ordered by this Court and the Authority hereof, that henceforth
from time to time, there shall be some meet, able, faithful and judicious men
chosen and Authorized by this Court, viz. two in the County of Essex; two in
Suffolk; two in Middlesex, and two in Norfolk, who meeting together with the
Commissioners of the several Towns, they or the major part of them so met
together, shall have the absolute and final determination of the just
proportion of each Town, and of each person and estate therein, so as that
there may be a just and equal proportion between County and County, Addition to
the Rule for equal Assessments
Town, and Town Merchants and Husbandman, with all other Handicrafts as much as
in them lie; And whereas there are several Merchants and others, Traders, that
do bring in considerable quantities of Goods among us, do gain great Estates
thereby, yet they pass away without paying their dues to the Public, It is
therefore Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that henceforth from
time to time there shall be appointed and empowered by this Court, two or more
meet able and judicious persons in the several Sea port Towns of this Colony,
viz. in Salem, Charlstown, Boston, and Portsmouth, who from time to time, in
their several Towns, shall repair to all Warehouses or other places where any
foreign Goods or Commodities are put on shore in any of our Harbors, or are
sold or retailed on board of any Ship, Shallop or other Vessel, and require of
the Merchant, Owner or other retailer thereof, the sight of his Invoyces, or
other just and true account of all Goods by them in ported, as abovesaid, and
in case any Merchant, Retailer, or other Trader as abovesaid, shall refuse to
show their Invoyces, or other just account of their Goods by them imported, and
that on Oath to be taken, before a Magistrate if required, in all such cases it
shall be in the liberty of the two Commissioners empowered in that Town as above
is expressed, and by this Court they are Authorized and Empowered, to assess
such Merchant, or other Trader or Traders as to them shall seem meet, according
to their own will and doom, and accordingly shall give warrant to the Constable
of the Town, to levy of them 1 d. per li. to be paid in to the Public Treasury
as the Law requires.

And it is also Ordered by the Authority aforesaid, that the meeting of the
Commissioners in the several Towns, with those appointed by this Court this
present year at Boston, the first third day of the week in the 7 ^^ Month, the
fourth day at-Cambridge, the sixth day at Salem, and the second day of the week
next following at Salisbury, at eight of the clock in the morning, to perform
the service and trust hereby committed to them, to which meetings the
Commissioners, for the several Towns shall bring with them a list fairly
written of all persons and estates, every man's estate distinctly, and not in
the gross sum only and the several parcels thereof, with the value put upon it,
that so a full and exact Examination may be made, and an equal imposition put
upon the inhabitants of this Colony, and the cause of those Complaints, that
one is eased, whilst another is burdened, may hereafter be removed.

And for County Commissioners, County Commissioners.
This Court do Nominate and appoint Capt. Hope-full (...) and Ensign Daniel
Fisher for Suffolk, Capt. Edward Johnson and Capt. John Wayt for Middlesex,
Lieutenant Samuel Apleton and Lieutenant Oliver Purchis for Essex, Capt. Thomas
Bradbury and Mr. Samuel Dalton for Norfolk.

And for Sea port Towns, Mr. Anthony Stodard, and Capt William Davis for
Boston, Commissioners for Sea ports
Capt. John Allen, and Mr. Jacob Green for Charlstown, Mr. Edmund Batter, and
Mr. Henry Bartholmew for Salem, Mr. Elias St^^eman, and Mr. Nathaniel Friar for
Portsmouth.

Trade with Indians.
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, Trade with indians for
Peltry and Ammunition regulated.
that, henceforth every Person, that is or shall be allowed by the Treasurer of
the Country to trade Peltry or Skins with the Indians, shall have liberty to
sell unto any Indian or Indians, not in hostility with us or any of the English
in New England, Powder, Shot, Lead, Guns, ((...).) hand Guns, Rapier or Sword
blades, Provided he or they pay unto the Country Treasurer every half Year in
(...) a pound for every pound of Powder, (...) for every ten pound of (...)
Lead, three shillings for every Gun, three shillings for every (...) of Rapier
or Sword blades, Every allowed (...) paying to the Country Treasurer several
(...) appointed, etc.
and to proportionably for any quantity that he or they shall sell to any
Indian or Indians and every such Person allowed to trade as aforesaid, shall
upon Oath deliver to the (...) and past account of the particulars of the
abovementioned Commodities, by him or them sold onto any Indian or Indians. And
it is further Ordered that any person allowed as before, that shall be
convicted before (...) Magistrate, or County Court of selling or bartering, any
of the forementioned Commodities, unto any Indian whereof he or they have not
given a true and just account, and made due payment unto the Treasurer as is
above expressed, every such person or persons shall forfeit to the public
Treasury, five pounds sterling for every pound of powder, five pounds for every
ten pounds of shot or lead, ten pounds for every Gun great or small, and ten
pounds for every dozen, of Rapier or Sword blades, (...) so proportionably for
any quantity of the aforesaid Commodities, sold or bartered by him or them unto
any Indian or Indians, and all persons except such as are allowed are hereby
prohibited from selling any of the forementioned Commodities, unto any Indian
or Indians, upon the penalty expressed, in the Law (...) Indians Sect. (...)
And this Order to continue in force during the Courts pleasure, any Law or
Order to the contrary notwithstanding.

Impost on Wine and Strong Liquors.
WHereas the General Court has formerly for good (...) laid an Impost upon
Wines and strong Impost on Wine strong Liquors.
(...). It is (...) Expedient by this Court for good causes and (...) all
Cider, Mum, Ale and Beer, Impost on Ale and Beer 2 s. 6 d per Hogshead.
sold in public (...) such things, that is to say two shillings sixpence per
Hogshead upon all (...) and Beer, and (...) shillings per Hogshead upon all
Mum, and so in proportion thereto, (...) each of them (...) greater (...)
quantities, Mum 5 s. per Hogshead.
(...) does further Order that these Rates (...) Sums abovesaid (...) Treasurer
of the Country or to his (...) in money by every person (...) to keep (...) or
House of public entertainments within this Jurisdiction whatsoever; And to
that end every person (...) Ordered and Required to keep a (...) and just
account of (...) they shall sell from time to time, and that at the end of
every (...) or Week, being thereto required, after the publication hereof, they
shall present the said account to the Treasurer abovesaid upon Oath if
required, or to his assign and pay all the Money due hereby, and in case any of
the persons licensed as abovesaid, shall (...) or neglect to do what is above
Ordered upon conviction before any two Magistrates, or Court of that County,
where the offense is committed, shall pay treble damage to the County, or
forfeit his or their license, at the discretion of that Authority that shall
take cognizance thereof

Treasurer and his Assistants to farm the Imposts.
IT is Ordered and by this Court Enacted that the Treasurer of the Country with
the assistance of Capt. Treasurer and his Assistants to let and set to farm the
Imposts etc.
Daniel Gookin, Mr. Anthony Stoddard, and Mr. John Richards, be, and is hereby
empowered and authorized, to Rent, Set or to Farm, let, for the use and in the
behalf of the Country, for one or more years not exceeding three years, all
these particulars following, Viz. 1. The Impost of Wine, Brande, and Rhum. 2.
The benefit of Beaver, Furrs, and Peltry with the Indians. 3. The Rates of
drawing of Wines from Vintners. 4. The Rates upon Beer, Cider, Ale, Mum, from
public Sellers. 5. The benefit of selling Ammunition to Indians.


Wines and strong liquors imported to be entered with the Officer.
FOr the better Explanation and effectual Execution of the Law tit. Impost,
Wines and strong Liquors imported to be entered with the Officer.
page 39. It is Ordered and Enacted by this Court and the Authority thereof
that all wines and strong waters imported into this jurisdiction, according to
that Law, be entered with the Officer in particulars, both for quantity and
quality before any of it be landed, upon the penalty of the forfeiture of all
that is landed before it be entered; It is Ordered that the Impost required by
Law, be paid to the Officer in Money or the best of the specie at Money price.

It is further Ordered that the Committee Authorized by this Court, to make
improvement of this Impost or any three of them, are hereby Authorized to
appoint and constitute Officers, make Orders, and give such directions as shall
be necessary, for the effectual receiving the said Impost, and the Rate imposed
by this Court, upon the Retaylers of Wine, Beer, Ale, Mum, and Cider, and the
business of giving liberty to trade for Peltry, and selling Powder, Shot, Lead
and Guns, and other Arms to the Indians.

Seasonable transcribing and delivery of matters of public concern by the
Secretary.
WHereas by reason that the Orders of this Court referring to the
Commissionating, Order for the seasonable transcribing and delivery of matters
of public concern by the Secretary
Appointing, and Impowring any particular person or persons for any special
trust, negotiation or other matter as from time to time do arise, are (...) of
this Court is many times disapointed, and damage to the Public (...) accrue;

It is therefore Ordered by this Court, that the (...), from time to time
within ten days after the end of every Sessions of the General Court, To the
Marshal General.
shall copy out all such special Orders of this Court as abovesaid, and deliver
the same to the Marshall General, who shall receive the same at the Secretaries
house, and take Order for the speedy and certain conveyance thereof, to those
whom they are especially directed unto, and for such Orders as do require a
more speedy dispatch then the time above limited, the Officers above named
shall accordingly hasten the same,

Also the Marshal General shall from time to time receive all warrants, Marshal
General to attend the Treasurers and Secretaries direction, etc.
that are to be sent to the several Towns, from the Country Treasurer, as also
the Laws that are at any time to be published, either printed or written, and
cause them to be delivered according to the direction given him from the
Treasurer or Secretary.

The best improvement of Stone Horses.
WHereas the breed of Horses in the Country is utterly spoiled, whereby that
useful Creature will become a burden, which otherwise might be benificial, and
the occasion thereof is conceived to be through the smalness and badness of
Stone Horses and Colts that run in Commons and Woods; For prevention whereof
this Court does Order and Enact, Order for the best improvement of Stone Horses
and be it Ordered and Enacted by the Authority hereof, that no Stone Horse
above two years old shall be suffered to go in Commons and Woods at liberty,
unless he be of comely proportion, and sufficient stature, not less then
fourteen hands high, reckoning four inches to a handful, and such a Horse to be
viewed and allowed, by the major part of the Select men of the Town where the
owner lives; and if any person or persons turn any Stone Horse upon the Commons
or at Liberty, or in the Woods, being not viewed and allowed as before, he or
they shall forfeit Twenty shillings a Month, for every Stone horse running at
liberty, after he is a two years old, which penalty is to be taken by warrant,
of the Select men and employed to the Towns use, and if the Select men of any
Town do neglect their duty in taking their fines, and viewing such as are
brought in according to this Law, they shall forfeit Twenty shillings to the
County Treasurey; and this Law to be in force the first of October next.

The prises of Horses for the Country Rate.
WHereas the prizes of Horses and Mares in the Country Rate, has been recconed
at Ten pounds per Horse and Mare, which has been for a good space much more
than upon an equal consideration, Order regulateing prises of Horses, in the
Country Rate.
above their worth for the general, for the more equal and just proceeding in
Country Rates for the future; It is therefore Enacted by the Authority of this
Court, that all Horses and Mares of 3 years old, and upward, shall be recconed
at five pounds per Horse and Mare, and all under that age, as two years old,
etc. at three pounds per Colt, and all of a year old, etc. at Thirty shillings
per Colt, etc.

Order to build a dry Dock.
WHereas this Court in October 1667. granted liberty to any person to build a
dry Dock in Boston or Charlstown, Order and encouragement to build a dry Dock
reference unto the said Order being had; It is Ordered by this Court that if
any person see cause to set upon building such a dry Dock, and shall finish the
same within one year after the next session of this General Court, such person
shall have the sole advantage of such Dock to himself, heirs, and assigns
after the said Dock shall be finished, and it is Declared that no other person
shall be allowed to undertake the building of a dry Dock in this Jurisdiction
for the space of twenty one years*, after the finishing of the first Dock
undertaken, provided such undertaker keep and maintain the said Dock in such
repair at all times as my attend the end proposed. FOR (...) of an Order
bearing date, Fishermens liberty to cut flakes regulated
1646. and the Repealing of (...) or giving a liberty to Fishermen according to
a reservation (...) cut down wood for flakes or stage and other uses, about
(...), that it is intended only in that Order to give liberty to (...), and
come only to make Fishing Voyages, and not to Fisherman (...) Inhabitants, who
are not to trespass upon any person in their (...) liable to make satisfaction
with damages, as in any other (...) no way restraining Fishermen in Common
Lands, any (...) or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

FINIS.
AT A GENERAL COURT HELD AT BOSTON, April 29. 1668.
WHereas Thomas Gold, William Turner, and John Farnham Senior, Obstinate and
Turbulent Anabaptists: Have some time since Combined themselves with others in
a pretended Church Estate* without the knowledge or approbation of the
Authority here Established, at the Law requires, to the great grief and
offense of the godly Orthodox; some of themselves being persons Excommunicated
from the Churches to which they formerly belonging; have also Constituted among
themselves, Officer or Officers, to carry on all Administrations in their
pretended Church Society, Contrary also to the Law in that case provided viz.
that such Officers should be Able, Pious and Orthodox: For which irregularities
they have been Convented before several Courts, and about two years since were
enjoined by this Court to desist from the said practice, and to return to our
allowed Church Assemblies, which they have not in the least attended.

The Council in March last, desirous (after long forbearance) to use the
utmost means to convince and reduce them* entreated the assistance of diverse
Elders, who in the meeting house at Boston did publicly endeavor the same,
this Court considering with how great Pertenacy and presumption the said Thomas
Gold and company had continued their Scismattical assembling together, the
Order of this Court notwithstanding, judged it necessary to Convent the said
Thomas Gold, William Turner and John Farnham Senior, before them, that from
themselves the Court might understand what Effect the endeavors of the said
Elders had taken with them: where the said persons did in open Court assert
their former practice to have been according to the mind of God, and that
nothing that they had heard convinced them to the contrary; which practice,
being also otherwise circumstanced, with making Infant Baptism a Nullity, and
thereby making us all to be unbaptized persons, and so consequently no Regular
Churches, Ministry or Ordinances and also renouncing all our Churches as being
so bad and corrupt, that they are not fit to be held Communion with, denying to
submit to the Government of Christ in the Church, and entertaining of those
that are under Church Censure, thereby making the discipline of Christ in his
Churches to be of none effect, and manifestly tending to the disturbance and
destruction of these Churches; the which practice of theirs upon examination
before the Court they profess themselves still resolved to adhere unto: all
which to allow, would be the setting up a free-scool for seduction into ways
of Error, and casting off the Government of Christ Jesus in his own
appointments, with a high hand, and opening a door for all sorts of
abominations to come in among us, to the disturbance not only of our
Ecclesiastical enjoyments, but also contempt of our Civil Order, and the
Authority here established, does manifestly threaten the dissolution and ruin,
both of the peace and order of the Churches and the Authority of this
Government: which our duty to God and the Country does oblige us to prevent, by
using the most compassionate effectual means to attain the same; all which
considering, together with the danger of disseminating their errors and
encouraging presumptuous irregularities, by their example should they continue
in this Jurisdiction, this Court does judge it necessary that they be removed
to some other part of this Country or else where: And accordingly does order
that the said Thomas Gold, William Turner, and John Farnham senior; do before
the twentieth of July next remove themselves out of this Jurisdiction, and that
if after the the twentieth of July, the said Thomas Gold, William Turner, and
John Farnham senior, or either of them be found in any part of this
Jurisdiction, without License first had and obtained from this Court or the
Council, he or they shall forthwith be apprehended and committed to prison, by
warrant from any Magistrate; there to remain without bail or main prize until
be or they shall give sufficient security to the Governor or any Magistrate,
immediately to depart the Jurisdiction and not to return as abovesaid: And all
Constables and other Officers are required to be faithful and diligent in the
execution of this Sentence And it is further Ordered that the keepers of all
prisons whereto the said Thomas Gold, William Turner and John Farnham senior,
or any of them shall be Committed, shall not permit any resort of company of
more then two at one time, to any of the said persons. And although we might
expect that our indulgence till the twentieth of July, might prevail with them
to refrain their offencive practices, during the time permitted them to
continue amongst us, yet our experience of their high Obstinate and
Presumptious carriages does gage us to prohibit them any further meeting
together on the Lord's Day, or upon any other days, upon pretense of their
Church estate or for the administration or exercises of any pretended
Ecclesiastical function as dispensation of the Seals or preaching; wherein if
they shall be taken offending they shall be imprisoned till the tenth of July
next and then left at their liberty, within ten days to depart the
Jurisdiction upon penalty as abovesaid.

Edward Rawson Secret.

FINIS.

