(...) and who can promise himself with Hezekiah ^ere shall be truth and peace
in my days. Peace may fail thee, but let not Truth. ^very good Christian may
and should say, ^ith the good King, there shall be truth in my days, if not
Peace and Truth, as to revive the love of it. I will hold it fast by ^ith, hold
it forth by practice, praise God ^ayly for it, and venture all in defense (...)
it* so did the Martyrs, whose memory ^s sweet, whose reward is great. It is
better suffering for truth, then with truth: yet ^f truth must suffer or can
die, better it is to die with Truth, then outlive it.

But that truth may live, and we live by Truth, let us magnify God much for
Truth, for his Word and good Books that ^pring thence. Some probably may say,
it is enough to praise God for his Word, other Books are not (...). Will thou
praise God for the sea and be thankful for the rivers and springs? Will thou
lift up thy voice for the great waters, and be silent for the ^^lver drops and
showrs? If the former rain affect thee, be not ungrateful for the latt^r. God
would have men to value his ser^^ants, and praise him for their labors.

But they have errors in them.

Be it so, shall we refuse to praise God for the flowers and the corn, because
there be ^^me weeds in the garden, and thistles in ^he field? Prejudice not thy
self, buy, read, take thy delight, here is a garden without weeds, a corn field
without either cockle or ^ar^^l, thorn or thistle. Art thou a Sincere Convert
^here are truths suitable, solid and wholesome, thou may feed and feast
without fear.

The Author is one of singular piety, inward acquaintance with God, skilled in
the deceits of men's hearts, able to enlighten in the dark corners of the little
world, and to give satisfaction to staggering spirits. His work needs not the
purple of another commendation to adorn it. But because Custom* not
necessity, for it is truths prerogative to travel without a pass port (I say)
because custom causes truth to crave and to carry Epistles commendatory;
know that the work is weighty, quick and spiritual: and if thine eye be single
in perusing it, thou sha^^ find many precious souls-searching, soul-quickning,
and soul-enriching truths (...) yea, be so warned and awakened, as that thou
can not but bless God for the man and matter, unless thou be possessed with a
dumb Devil.

To conclude, Christian Reader, take heed of unthankfulness, spiritual mercies
should have the quickest and fullest praises. Such is this w^^k, thou (...) if
not, thou contrabutedst nothing to the birth of it; it is a preventing mercy. By
it and others, of the same nature, God has made knowledge to abound, the
waters of the sanctuary are daily increased and grown deep. Let not the waters
of the Sanctuary put out the fire of the Sanctuary. If there be no praise,
there is no fire, if thy head be like a winters Sun full of light, and heart
like a winters earth without fruit, fear left thy light end in utter darkness,
and the tree of knowledge, deprive thee of the tree of life. The Lord grant
that thou may find such benefit by this work, as that thy heart may be
ravished with truth, and raised to praise God to purpose, and made to pray.
Lord still send forth thy light and truth, that they may lead us. So prays

Thine in Christ, W. Greenhill.

AN INTRODUCTION to the Work.
THe knowledge of Divinity is necessary for all sorts of men, both to settle
and establish the good, and to convert and fetch in the bad. Gods principles
pulls down Satan false principles set up in men's heads, loved and believed
with men's hearts, and defended by their tongues whilst strong holds remain
unshaken, the Lord Jesus is kept off from conquering of the soul.

Now spiritual Truths are either such as tend to enlarge the understanding, or
such as may work chiefly upon the affections. I pass by (in this known age) the
first of these and (being among a people whose hearts are hard enough) I being
with the latter sort: For the understanding, although it may literally, yet it
never savingly entertains any truth, until the affections be therewith smitten
and wrought upon.

I shall theref^re here prosecute the un^^lding of these Divine princip^es.

First, that there is one most glorious God.

Secondly that this God made all mankind at first in Adam, in a most glorious
(...).

Thirdly, that all mankind are now f^llen from that estate, into a bottomless
gulf of sin and misery.

Fourthly, that the Lord Jesus Christ is the only means of Redemption out of
this estate.

Fif^hly, that those that are saved out of this woeful estate by Christ, are
very few, and those few are saved by much difficulty.

Sixthly, that the greatest cause why so many die, and perish in this estate,
is from themselves either.

1. By reason of their bloody Ignorance they know not their misery: or 2. By
reason of their carnal security, they feel not, they groan not under their sin
and misery. 3. By reason of their carnal confidence, they seek to help
themselves out of their misery by their own duties, when they see or feel it:
or, 4. By reason of their false faith whereby they catch hold upon and trust
unto the merits of Christ too soon, when they see and feel they cannot help
themselves*
THE SINCERE CONVERT.
CHAP. I. There is one most glorious GOD.
EXODUS 33.18. I beseech thee, show me thy glory.
THIS is the first Divine Truth, and there are these two parts considerable in
it.

1 That there is a God.

2. That this God is most glorious.

I will begin with the first (...) and prove (omitting many philosophical
^rguments) that there is a God, a true God; for every Nation almost in the
world, u^til Christ's coming, had a several God, Some worshipped the Sun, some
the M^^n, called by Ezekiel, The Queen of heaven; Plin. lib. 1. na^. Hist.
which some made cakes un^o; some the whole heavens, as some worshipped the
fire some the brute beasts, some Baal, some Mol^ch. The Romans, says Virro,
had six thousand Gods* who impriso^ing the (...) of nature, Romans 11.
were given up to sin against nature: either to worship Idols, of man's
invention, as the ignorant: or God and Angels in those Idols, as the learned
did: but these are all false Gods.

I am now to prove that there is one true God, the being of beings, or the
first being. Although the proving of this point seems needless, because every
man runs with the cry, and says, There is a God, yet few thoroughly believe
this point. Many of the children of God, who are best able to know men's hearts,
because they only study their hearts, feel this tempations; is there a God?
bitterly assaulting them sometimes. The devil will sometimes undermine, and
seek to blow up the strongest walls and bulwarks. The light of nature indeed
shows that there is a God: but how many are there, that by foul sins against
their conscience, blow out and extinguish almost all the light of nature? And
hence, though they dare not conclude, because they have some light, though dim*
yet if they saw their heart, they might see it secretly suspect and question,
Whether there be a God? But grant that none questions this truth, yet we that
are builders, must not fall to a work without our main props and pillars. It
may appear therefore, that there is a God, from these grounds.

First, from the works of God, Romans 1.20. when we see a stately house, although
we see not the man that built it, although also we know not the time when it
was built, yet will we conclude thus. Surely some w^se Artificer has been
working here. (...) we when we behold the stately theater of Heaved and Earth
conc^ude other but that the finger arms, and wisdom of God has been here,
although we see not him tha^ is invisible, and although we know not the time
when he began to build? Every creature in heaven and earth is a loud preacher
of this truth. Who set those candles, those torches of heaven on the table? Who
hung out those lanterns in heaven to enlighten a dark world? Who can make the
stature of a man but one wiser then the stone out of which it is hewn? Could
any frame a man, but one wiser and greater then man? Who taught the birds to
build their nests, and the bees to set up and order their Commonwealth? Who
sends the Sun post from one end of heaven to the other, carrying so many
thousand blessings to so many thousands of people and Kingdoms? What power of
man or angels, can make the least ^ile of grass, or put life into the le^st
fly, if once dead? There is therefore a power above all created power, which
is God.

Secondly, from the Word of God. There is such a majesty stirring, and such
secrets revealed in the word, that if men will not be wilfully blind, they
c^^not but cry out. The voice of God, and not the voice of man. Hence Calvin
undertakes to prove the Scripture to be the Word of God, by reason, against all
Atheists under heaven. Have thou not thought sometimes at a Sermon, the
Minister ^ath spoken to none but thee, and that some or other has told the
Minister what thou have sad, what thou have done, what thou have thought? Now
that word which tells thee the thoghts of thy heart, can be nothing else but
the word of an all-seeing God that searches the heart.

Again, that word which quickens the dead is certainly God Word; but the word
of God ordinarily preached, quickneth the dead* it makes the blind to see, ^he
dumb to speak, the deaf to hear, the lame to walk; those that never felt their
sins to load them, to mourn; those that never could pray, to breath out
unutterable groans and sighs for their sins.

Thirdly, from the children begotten of God. For we may read in men's foreheads,
as soon as ever they are born, the sentence of death: and we may see by men's
lives, what hellish hearts they have. Now there is a time that some of this
monstrous brood of men, are quite changed, and made all new: they have new
minds, new opinions, new desires, new joys, new sorrows, new speeches, new
prayers, new lives, and such a difference there is betwixt these and others,
that they are hated by others, who ^^ved them well while they loved their ^ins:
and whence came this strange change? ^s it from themselves? No: for they hated
this new life, and these new men once themselves. Is it because they will be
credited thereby? No: is it to be hated of father, mother, friends, and
maligned every where? Is it out of simplicity? Or are their brains grown
crazie? They were indeed once fools, and I can prove them all to be Solomon's
fools: but eve^ simple men have been known to be more wise for the world, after
they have been made new. But lastly, is it now from a slavish fear of hell,
which works this alteration? Nothing less: they abhor to live like slaves in
Bridewell, to do all for fear of the whip.

Fourthly, from Gods Register or Nota^^e which is in every man: I mean the
conscience of men, which tells them there is a God; and although they silence
it sometimes, yet in thunder-time, or great plague, as Pharao; or at the day of
death, then they are near Gods Tribunal, when they acknowledge him clearly. The
fearful terrors of conscience prove this, which like a Bailliffe arreists men
for their deb^s; Ergo, there is some creditor to set it on sometime like a
^ang-man, it torments men; Ergo, there is some strange Judge that gave it that
command: Whence arise these dreadful terrors in man? Of themselves? No, surely:
all desire to be in pe^c, and so to live and sleep in a whole skin. Comes it
from melancholy? No: for melancholy comes on by degrees. These terrors of
conscience surprise the soul suddenly at a Sermon, suddenly after the
committing of some secret foul sin. Again, melancholy sadness maybe cured by
Physic; but many Physicians have given such men over to other Physicians*
Melanch^ly sadness may be born, but a wounded spirit who can bear? Thus ye see
that there is a God But who ever saw God, that every one is bold to affirm that
there is a God? Indeed his f^ce was never seen by mo^tal man, but his
back-parts have been seen, are seen, and may be seen by all the world, as has
been proved.

Object. All things are brought to pass by second causes. ^bject.


Answ. 1. What though? Is there no Master in the house, ^
bec^u^e the servants do all the work? This great God maintains state by doing
all by the cre^tures subjections; yet sometimes we may cry out in beholding
some special pieces of his administration, Here is the finger of God*

2. What though (...) be much confusion see an harmony in this discord of
things. God is now like a wise Carpenter, but hewing out his work. There is a
lumber and conf^sion seemingly amongst us, let us stay till the day of
judgment, and then we shall see infinite w^sdom in fitting all his for his own
gl^ry, and for the good of his people.

Object. But if there be a God why hears he nor his peoples prayers? Object.
Why does he forget them when they have most need of him?

I answer: Answ.
Noah's dove returns not presently with an oli^e branch of peace in his mouth.
Prayers sometime that speed well, return not presently, for want of company
enough, to fetch away that abundance of mercy which God has to give. The Lord
ever gives them their asking in money or money-worth, in the same thing or a
better. The Lord ever gives his importunate beggars their desires, either in
pence, by little and little, or by pounds: Long he is many times before he
gives, but pays them well for their waiting.

This is an use of repr^of ^o all Atheists, opinion or practice. A discovery
of Atheism


First in opinion, such as either conclud, or suspect there is no God. Oh
blasphemous thought! Are there any such men? Men? Nay, beasts; nay, devils; nay
worse then devils; for they believe and tremble. Yet the fool has said in his
heart, there is no God, Ps. 1^.1. Men that have little heads little knowledge,
without hearts, as scholars sometimes of weak brains, seeing how things come by
second causes, though they might believe their books, yet cannot ra^^e their
dull thoughts to the beholding of a first cause. Great Politicia^s are like
children always standing on their heads, and shakin^ their heels against
heaven: these think Religion to be but a piece of policy, to keep people in aw*
Profane persons, desiring to go on in sin, without any rub or check for sin,
blow out all the light of nature, wishing there were no God to punish, and are
willing to suspect that which is not. Those also that have sinned secretly,
though not openly against nature, or the light of conscience: God smites men
for incest, sodomy, self-pollution, with dismal blindness. Those also that are
notorious worldlings, that look no higher then their barns, no further then
their shops* the world i^ a pearl in their eye, they cannot see a God.

Lastly, I suspect those men that never found out this thief, this sin, that
was bred and born with them, nor saw it in their own hearts; but ^here it lies
still in some dark corner of their souls to cut their throats: these kind of
men sometimes suspect there is no God. O this is a grievous sin; for if no God,
no heaven, no hell, no Marty^s, no Prophets, no Scriptures, Christ (...) shame
or sorrow, and to say the Lords Prayer without understanding; to hear the word
that thou may only know more, and not that thou may be affected more. Oh,
these carcasses of holy duties, are most odious sacrifices before God.

2. He is a living God, whereby he lives

3. He is an infinite God, whereby he is without limits of being, 2 Chr. 6.8*
Horrible then is the least sin that strikes an infinite great God, and
lamentable is the estate of all those with whom this God is angry* thou have
infinite goodness to forsake thee, and infinite power and wrath to set against
thee.

4. He is an Eternal God, without beginning or end of being, Psalm. 80.1. Great
Esau sell away an ever^^sting inheritance for a little pottage, for (...) and
the pleasure of it.

5* He is an all suffi^ient God, Genesis 17. God, but you are loath to take the
pains to find him, or to be (...) cost to purchase him with the loss of all?
Here is infinite, Eternal, present sweetness, goodness, grace, glory, and
mercy to be found in this God. Why (...) you from mountain to hill? why spend
you your money, your thoughts, time, Endeavors, on things that satisfy no^?
Here is thy resting place. Thy clothes may warm thee, but they cannot feed
thee, thy meat may feed thee, but cannot heal thee, thy Physic may heal thee
but cannot maintain thee, thy money (...) ma^n^ain thee, but cannot comfort
thee, when distresses of Conscience and anguish of heart come upon thee: This
God is joy in sadness, light in darkness, li^e in death, Heaven in hell. Here
is all thine eye ever saw, thine heart ever desired, thy tongue ever asked, thy
mind ever conceived. Here is all light in this S^n and all water in this Sea,
out of (...), as ou^ of a Crystal fountain, thou shall drink down all the
refined sweetness of all creatures in heaven and earth, for ever and ever. All
the world is now seeking etc crying* ou^ themselves for rest, here on^y (...)
can be found,

6. He is an Omnipotent God, whereb^

7. He is an all-seeing God: He knows

^. He is a true God, whereby he means (...) as ^e says. Let every Child of
God (...) know to his comfort, that those (...), which he has not under
feelings, (...) under a promise, shall one day be all (...)* good, and ^et all
wicked men know* (...) threatening God has denunced, (...) ever Arrows are in
the bow-string, (...) one day fly, and hit a (...) deep, (...) ^he longer the
Lord is a drawing the deeper wound will Gods arrow (that is, Gods threatening)
make.

9. He it a^ holy God, be not ashamed If the righteous, that is, those that be
most holy, be scarcely saved, where shall the un^godly and sinner appear, 1
Pet. 4 ^8. Where? Not before Saints and Angels, for holiness is their trade:
Not before the face of the man Christ Jesus* for ho^inesse was his meat and
drink; Not before the face of a blessed God, for holiness is his nature: Not
in heaven, for no unclean thing crawls there, they shall never see God, Christ,
Saints, Angels, or Heaven to their comfort, that are not holy: wear therefore
that as thy crown now, which will be thy glory in heaven, and if this be to be
vile, be more vile.

just and merciful God, just in himself, and so w^^l punish all sin; merciful
in the face of Christ, and so will punish no sin. A just God against an hard
hearted sinner. A merciful God toward an humble sinner. God is not all mercy
and no justice, nor justice and no mercy. Submit to him, his mercy embraces
thee. Resist him, his justice pursues thee. When a Child of God is humbled
indeed, commonly he makes God a hard-hearted cruel God, loath to help; and
says, Can such a sinner be pardoned? A wicked man that was never humbled,
makes God a God of ^louts, one that howsoever he speaks heavy words, yet he is
a merciful God, and will not do as he says, and he finds it no difficult work
to believe the greatest sin may be pardoned: conceive therefore of him as you
have heard.

Thirdly, God is glorious in his Persons, which are (...); Father begetting*
Son begotten, and the holy Gh^st the third person proceeding. Here the Father
is called the Father of glory, Ephesians. 1. Christ is called the Lord of glory, 1
Cor. 2. and the Spirit is called the Spirit of glory, 1 Pet. 4 the Father is
glorious in his great work of Election, the Son is glorious in his work of
Redemption; the holy Ghost is glorious in hi^ work of Application the Father is
glorious in choosing the house, the Son is glorious in buying the house, the
Spirit is glorious in dwelling in the house, that is, the heart of a poor lost
sinner.

4. He is glorious in his works, in hi^ works of C^eation, and in his works of
providence and government: wonder therefore that he should so vouchsafe to loo^
upon such worms, such dung-hills, such Lepers as we are, to provide, protect,
to slay his Son, to call, to strive, to wait; (...) give away himself and all
that he is wor^^ unto us. O fear this God when ye come before him. People come
before God in prayer, as before their fellows, or as before an Idol. People
tremble not a^ his voice in the word. A King or Monarch will be served in
state, yet how rudely, how slovenly do men go about every holy duty.

Thus much of the first principal head that there is one most glorious God. Now
we are to proceed to the second, viz.

CHAP. II.
THat this God made all mankind at f^rst, in a most glorious and happy estate,
like unto himself.

For the opening of which assertion, I have chosen this Text, (...).
Eccles. 7.29. God made man righteous, which clearly demonstrates, That God
made all mankind at first in Adam, in a most glorious, happy, and righteous
estate. Man when he came first out of Gods mint, shined most glorious. There is
a marvelous glory in all creatures (the servants and houshold^ (...) of man)
therefore there was a greater glory in man himself, the end of them* God
calls a Parliament, and gather^ a Counsel when (...) was to be made, and
said: Come let us make man in our own Image: as (...) all the wisdom of the
Trinity should be seen in the creation of man.

Wherein did the glory or blessedness of man appear. Quest.


In the impression of Gods Image upon him, Genesis 1.26. Answ.
Can there be any greater glory for Joseph, for a subject, then to be like his
Prince?

What was the Image of God?

The Schoo^-men and Fathers, Quest.
have many curious (yet not necessary) though difficult questions about this:
Answ.
I will omit all theirs, and tell you only what is the Apostles judgment, Col.
3.20. out of which this general description of Gods Image may be thus gathered.
Ephesians. 13.


It is man's perfection of holiness, resembling Gods admirable holiness, The
Image God i^ man.
whereby only man pleases God.

For all other inferior creatures did (...) the works and footsteps of Gods
Power, Wisdom, Goodness, whereby a^l these attributes were seen. Now the most
perfect attributes of God, that is, his holiness, that he would have only
appear in, and be made manifest by man, his best inferior creature, as a Kings
wisdom and bount^ appears in managing the affairs of (...) in Image of God
appeared in these four particulars.

1. In man's understanding, this was like unto Gods. Now Gods Image here chiefly
consisted in this particular, viz. As God saw himself, and beheld his own
infinite endless glory and excellency, so man was privy to Gods excellency, and
saw God most gloriously; as Moses, though a sinful man, saw him face to face,
much more Adam, a perfect man. God loving man, could do no less then reveal
himself to man.

2. In his affections, the Image of God chiefly appeared in two things.

First, as God seeing himself, loved himself: So Adam seeing God, loved this
God more then the world, more then himself; as iron put into the fire seems to
be nothing but fire; so Adam being beloved of God, was turned into a lump of
love, to love God again:

Secondly, as God delighted in himself, so did Adam delight in God, took sweet
repose in the bosom of God. Me think I (...). Adam wrapped up in the continual
ecstasies in having this God.

3. In his will, the Image of God chie^^y appeared in two things.

1. As God (...)

2. As God willed nothing but good; so did Adam will nothing but good, for Gods
will was his.

4. In his life, Gods Image did appear thus: that even as God, i^ he had
assumed man's nature, would have lived outwardly; so did Adam, for God would
have lived acc^rding to his own will, law and rule: So did Adam* Adams body was
the lantern through which holiness, like a lamp burning in heart, shined; this
was Gods Image; by means of which (as it is said in the description) he pleased
God, similitude being the ground of love ^ and hence God did most dearly love
him, and highly honor him, to be Lord over all creatures: hence no evil could
hurt him here was no sorrow, no sickness, no tears, no fears, no death, no
hell, nor ever should have been, if there he had stood.

Object. How was this estate ours? Obj^.


Answ. Answ.
As Christ's righteousness is a believers by imputation, though he never
performed it himself: so Adams righteousness and image was imputed to us, and
accounted ours; for Adam received our ^^ock or patrimony to keep it for us, and
to convey it to us: Hence he proving banquet out, we lost it. But we had it in
his hands, as an orphant may have a great estate left him, though he never
receive one penny of it from him that was his Guardian, that should have kept
it for him, and conveyed it to him.

Adam might have pleaded for himself, and have said; Although I have sinned,
yet it is but one, and the first fault. Lord, behold I am thy first born, Oh,
pity my poor posterity. who are for ever undone, if thou forgivest not, Yet see
one sin weighs him down, and (...) posterity (as we shall hear) into eternal
ruin!



as for great Princes children, to become such. One never in favor with the
Prince, grievs not as he does that was once in favor, but now cast out. Man is
now rejected of God, that was beloved of God: he is now a runagate up and down
the earth, that was once a Prince and Lord of all the World. This is one
aggravation of the damneds sorrows: Oh, the hopes, the means, the mercies, that
once I had. Can these, do these lament for the loss of their bare hopes, and
common mercies? Lord, what hearts then have men that cannot, do not, that will
not lament the (...) of such special high favors, now gone which once they had.
It is said, that those that saw the glory of the first Temple, wept when they
saw the glory of the second, and how inferior it was to the first. You that
either have the Temple of God begun to be repaired in you, or not begun at all.
Oh, think of the Temple burnt, the glory of God* now vanished and lost.

This speaks comfort to all Gods people. Adams posterity were perfectly
righteous in him, then thou that art of ^he blood Royal, and in Christ, art
pe^^ectly righteous in him much more; ^n ^s much as the righteousness of the
second Adam exceeds the first, so are thou more ^appy, more holy in the second
Adam, then ever the first in himself was: He might loose all his righteousness,
but the second Adam cannot, has not; so that if Christ may be damned, then
thou may, else not.



A^ threefold reprehension.
1. Such as are ashamed of holiness. Lord, what times are we fallen into now?
The Image of God, which was once men's glory, is now their shame; and sin, which
is men's shame, is now their glory. The world has raised up many false reports
of holy courses, calling it folly and preciseness, pride, hypocrisy, and that
whatsoever shows men may make, they are as bad as the worst, if their sins were
written in their foreheads. Hence it comes to pass, that many a man, who is
almost persuaded to be a new man, and to turn over a new leaf, dares not, will
not for shame of the world, enter upon religious courses: What will they think
of me then? says he* Men are ashamed to refuse to drink healths, and hence
maintain them lawful. Our gallants are ash^m^d to stay a mile behind the
fashion* hence they will defend open and naked breasts, and strange apparel, as
things comely. O^ time servers! that have some conscience to desire to be
honest, and to be reputed so, yet conform themselves to all companies; if they
hear others swear, they are ashamed to reprove them; they are ashamed to enter
the lists of holy discourse in bad company, and they will pretend discretion,
and we must nor cast pearls before swine; but the bottom of the business is,
they are ashamed to be holy. O fearful! Is it a shame to be like God? O sinful
wretches! It is a credit to be any thing but religious, and with many Religion
is a shame* I wonder with what face thou dare pray, or with what look thou will behold the Lord of glory at the last day, who art ashamed of him now, that
will be admired of all men, angels and devils then? Do thou look for wages
from Christ, that art ashamed to own Christ, or to wear his livery!

2. It reproves them that hate holiness which is more then to be ashamed of it.

3. It reproves them that content themselves with a certain measure of
holiness. Perfect holiness was Adams image, whereby he pleased God, and shall a
little holiness content thee?

Now there are these three sorts of them.

1. The formalist, ^
who contents himself with some holiness, as much as will credit him.

The form and name of Religion* is b^n^s, ^easure of holiness, and go no
further.
honor sometines: but the power and practice of, it is onus, a burden* hence
men take up the first, and shake off the second. And indeed the greatest patt
take up this course, if they have no goodness, they should be the shame, scorn*
and table-talk of the times; therefore every man will for his honors sake, have
his frame. Now this form is according to the mould wherein he is cast. If his
acquaintance be but civil, he will be like them: if they be more exact, as to
pray, read, confer, he will not stay one inch behind them: If to be b^tter then
his companions, to bear the bell before them will credit him, he will be so
what ever it cost him; but yet he never will be so exact in his courses as to
be hated for it, unless he perceives the hatred he contracts from some men,
shall be recompensed with the more love and credit by other men. He disguiseth
himse^f according to the places, or company he comes into. King Juash was a
good man, so long as Jeboiada the Priest lived. If a little Religion will serve
to credit men, that shall serve for that time* if more in another place, you
shall then have them commending good men, ^
good sermons, good books and drop forth two or three good sentences: what will
they think of him then? They cover themselves over with these fig leaves of
common honesty to cover their nakedness yet they had (...) all their courses
over with honesty, that they may catch, for they (...) only for credit (...)

One may trap these people (...)* Follow them in their private houses, (...)
end is worldinesse, passion, loosnesse; and to their private chambers, there
they ordinarily neglect or shuffle, over duties to their private vain thoughts.
In this cyting house, you shall the^ see these Stage Players, their shop-windows
are shut* here no honesty is to be seen scarce (...) because their gain, their
respect comes (...) is door* where (...) beholds them. (...) either Minister,
or (...), search, try, discover, accuse, and condemn these men, as rotten
(though g^^ded) post, as unsound, hallow-hearted wretches, their hearts will
swell like ^oad^* and (...) like snakes, and hard like dogs against them that
thus censure them, because they rob them of their God they served, their gain
is gone.

2. The guilty self-condemned sinner, that go^th fur^her then (...) formalist,
and contents themse^ves with so much holiness as will quite them: and hence all
the Heathen have had some Religion, because they had some conscience to trouble
them. This man, ^
if he has live^ in foul sins, and begins to be wrackt and troubled for them,
he will then confess an^ forsake those roaring sins: but how? A^ a dog does his
meat, not because he hate^ his carrion, but because he fears the cudgel^ he
performs holy duties, not because he will use them, but because he mu^^ use
them, there is no quye^ else. If con^science be st^ll, he omits duties: If
con^science (...) and stir, he falls to duties and so has his good mood, as
conscienc^ has his fits. They b^ast and crow ove^ hypo^rites, because holiness
they have is not a bare show: No, but it is to stop thy conscience, and only to
quiet the clamors of that. Thou do bribe, and so quiet (the Bailiff) thy
conscience, by thy praying, hearing, and sorrowing; but God thy Judge has
heavy things to lay to thy charge, before whom thou shall shortly wi^h dread
appear.

3. The pinching devote hypocrite, that What he should do to inherit eternal
life? The^^ people set up such a man in their thought^ to be a very honest man,
an^ one doubtle^^ that shall be saved: and hence they wi^^ take him to be their
copy and sampler, and labor to do as he does, and to live just as he lives,
and to hold opinions as he holds, and so hope to be saved. They will ask very
inquisitively, What is the least measure of grace, and the least gr^^n of
faith? And the best Sermons are not such as humble them most, but such as
flatter them best, wherein they may hear how well good desires are accepted of
by God: which if they hear to be of that virtue to save them, God shall be
served only with good desires, and the devil indeed all their lifetimes

Thus they pinch God: they labor not after so much holiness as will honor
Christ, but after just so much as will bear their charges to heaven, and save
themselves. For this is one of the greatest differences* betwixt a child of God
and an hypocrite. In their obedience, the one takes up duties ou^ of love to
Christ, to have him, and hence he mourns daily, because Christ is no greater
gainer by him: the other out of love to himself, merely to save his own soul;
and hence he mourn^ for his sins, b^c^use they (...) damn him. Remember that
p^ace (...), 1 Cor. 15 (...).

Lastly, labor to get this Image of G^d renewed again. Honest men will labor
to pay their debts: this is Gods (...) heavens* (...), angels fashion (...)
when the (...) Jesus shall (...). Then (...) superscription and Image of the
devil, (...) not the Image of God upon thee, God (...) Christ will never own
thee (...) Labor therefore to have Gods Image (...) stored again, and (...)
wash out (...) not, as many do, to purchase such (...) such a grace first: but,

1. Labor to mortify and subdue (...) sin which is opposite in thine heart to
(...) (...). How to gain the Image of God.
First, put off the old man, and (...) put on the new, Ephesians. ^.

2. Labor (...) me^ting tender hear^ for the (...) Gold is then only (...)
receive the impre^ssion, when it is (...) is melted. When thine heart is (...)
therefore at a Sermon, cry ou^, Lord now (...), now imprint thine Imag^ upon me.

3. Labor to se^ the Lord Jesus in (...). For as wicked men looking upon the
evil ex^m^le of great ones in (...) world, Romans 6.7.
that will be at them out, gr^w like them in villa^^; so the very beholding the
glorious grace in Christ, this great Lord of g^ory transform to me^ into his
Image. 2. Cor. ^.17.18. As the glass set full against the Sun receives not
only the beams, as all other dark bodies do, but the image of the Sun: so the
understanding with open face beholding Christ, is turned into the Image and
likeness of Christ. Men now a days look only to the best men's lives, and see
how they walk, and rest here. O look higher to this blessed face of God in
Christ, as thine own. As the application of the seal to the wax imprints the
Image, so to view the grace of Christ, as all thine, imprints the same Image
strongly on the soul. I come now to the third principal head, in order, which I
shall insist upon, out of, Romans 3.23. All have sinned, and are deprived of the
glory of God. Whence observe.

CHAP. III.
THat all mankind is fallen by (...), from that glorious estate he was made in,
into a most woeful and miserable condition. The devil abusing the Serpent, and
man abusing his own free will* overthrew Adam* and in him all his posterity by
sin, Gen 3.1.2, 3. etc.

Now man's misery appears in these two things*

1. His misery, in regard of sin.

2. His misery, in regard of the consequents of sin.

1. His misery in regard of sin, appears in these particulars.

1. Every man living is born guilty of Adams sin. Now the justice and equity of
God in laying this sin to every man's charge, though none of Adams posterity
personally committed it, appears thus.

First, if Adam standing, all mankind had stood; then it is equal that he
falling, all his posterity should fall. All our estates were ventured in this
ship* therefore, if we should have been partakers of his gains, if he had
continued safe, it is (...) we should be partakers of his loss too.

2. But secondly, we are all in Adam* as a whole Country in a Parliament Man,
the whole Country does what he does; And* although we made no par^icular
choice of Adam to stand for us, yet ^he Lord made it for us; who being goodness
it self, bears more good will to man, than he can or could bear to himself; and
being wisdom it self, made the wise^^ choice, and took the wisest course for
the good of man: For this made most for men's safety and quiet; for if he ha^
stood, all fear of losing our happy, estat^ had vanished, whereas if every man
ha^ been left to stand or fall for himself, a man would ever have been in fear
of falling.

And again, this was the sure way ^o have all men's estats preserved; for having
the charge of the estates of all men, that ever should be in the world, he was
the more pressed to look the more about him, and so to be more watchful, that
he be not robbed, and so undo and procure the curses of so many thousands
against him. Adam was the head of mankind, and all mankind naturally are
members of that head: and if the head invent and plot treason, and the head
practice treason against the King or state, the whole body is found guilty, and
the whole body must needs su^fer. Adam was the poisoned root and cistern of all
mankind, now the branches and stre^ms being in the root and spring originally,
they therefore are tainted with the same poisonous principles. If these things
satisfy not, God has a day coming wherein he will reveal his own righteous
proceedings before m^n and Angels, Romans 2.4.

Oh, that men would consider this sin, and that the consideration of it could
humble peoples hearts. If any mourn for sin, it is for the most part for other
soul and actual sins, few for this sin, that first m^de the breach and b^gan
the controversy betwixt God and man. Next unto the sin* against the holy
Ghost, and contempt of the Gospel, this is the greatest sin that cries
lowdest in God ears for vengeance: The horrible na^ture of the first sin.
(...) and (...) against worlds of men. For now men's sins (...) against God in
their base and (...) but this sin was committed against ^ight when man was at
the (...) preferment. Rebellion of a traitor (...) dunghill, is (...) great as
of a favorite in the Court. Little sins against (...) are more horrible. No sin
by any man committed, was ever against so much ligh^ as Adam had. This sin was
the first th^^ ever displeased God. Drunkenness deprives God of the glory of
sobriety: whoring of chastity^ but this sin darke^^^^ verry Sun, defaces all
the Image (...) the glory of man, and the glory of God (...) man. This is the
first sin that ever did th^^ a mischief. This sin, like a great Captai^ has
gathered together all those troup^ and swarms of sins that now take hold upon
thee. Thank this sin for an hard hear^ thou so much complained of: thank this
s^ for that hellish darkness that oversp^ea^ thee. This has raised satan,
death, judg^ment hell and heaven against thee.

The ha^^ousnesse of Adams sin.
O consider those fearful sins tha^ a pack^ up in this one evil.

1* Fearful apostacy from God, (...) devil.

rebellion against God, Go^ greatest enemies part against God.

3. Woeful (...), in suspecting Gods (...) to be true.

4. Fearful blasphemy in conceiving

5. Ho^rible pride, in thinking to make

6. Fearful contempt of God, making

7. Horrible unthankfulness, when God (...) given him all but one tree, and yet
he

8. Horrible theft, in taking that which (...) one of his own.

9. Horrible idolatry, in doing upon, and loving the creature more th^n God
(...) Creator who is blesse^ forever.

You therefore that now (...), no man ^an say black is your (...) you have
lived (...) all your days, look upon this one (...) sin, (...) a full view of
it, which ^ou have never shed one ear for as (...) see thy misery by it, and
wonder at (...) pa^ience. He has spa^^d thee who (...) born bra^ded within,
and have lived (...) of it* and must perish for ever for it, (...) Lord from
heaven pity thee not.

Secondly, dead in sin.
But here is not all, consider secondly, every man is born stark dead in sin,
Ephesians, 2.1. he is born empty of every inward principle of life, void of all
graces, and has no more good in him (whatsoever h^ thinks) then a dead Carrion
has. And hence he is under the power of sin, as (...) dead man is under the
power of death* and cannot perform any act of life: their bodies are living
coffins to carry a dead soul up and down in.

It Is true (I confess) many wicked men do many good actions, Best action of
the wicked, how sinful.
as praying, hearing, almsdeeds, but it is not from any inward principle of
life. External motives like p^u^^ates, on a dead (yet artificial) clock set
them a running. Jehu was zealous, but it was only for a Kingdom: the Pharisees
gave alms only to be seen of men. If one write a Will with a dead man's band
deceased, that Will can hold no Law, it was not his Will, because it was not
write by him, by any inward principle of life of his own. Pride makes a man
preach, pride makes a man hear* and pray sometimes. Self-love st^rs up strange
desires in men* so that we may say, this is none of Gods Act by his grace in
the soul but pride and self-love. (...) a dead (...) to the fire, and ^^afe
him, and rub him you may produce some hea^ by this ex^ernall working upon him:
but take him from the fire again, and he is soon cold: (...) many a man that
lives under a sound Minister, under the lashes and kn^cks of ^chiding, striving
conscience, h^ has ^^me heat in him, some affections, some ^ears, some
desires, some sorrows stirred, yet take him from the Min^ster, and his chafing
conscience, and he grows cold again presently, because he wants an inward
principle of life.

Which point might make us to take Exodus 12.30. that there was a great cry in
Egypt, for there was not an house wherein there was not one found dead. Oh,
Lord* in some towns and families what a world of these are there? Dead husband;
dead wife, dead servants, dead children, walking up and down with their sins
(as Fame says, some men do after death) with their grave clothes about them,
and God only knows whether ever they shall live again or not. How do men lament
the loss of their dead friends? O^, thou have a precious sou^ in thy bosom
stark dead, therefore lament thine estate, and consider it seriously.

First, a dead man cannot stir, How every natural man is dead while he lives.
nor offer to stir. A wicked man cannot speak one good word, or do any good
action, if heaven it self ^id lie at stake for doing of it, nor offer to shake
off his sins, nor think one good thought. Indeed he may speak and think (...)
good things, but he cannot have good speeches, nor good thoghts: as in holy man
may think of evil things, as of the (...) of the times, yet the thought of
those evil things i^ good, not evil, so e contra.

Secondly, a dead man fears no dangers,

Thirdly, a dead man cannot be drawn

Fourthly, a dead man is stark blind, Matthew. 23.37.38.
and stark deaf and hears nothing: he cannot taste any thing; so a natural man
is stark blind, he sees no God, no Christ, no wra^h of the Almighty, no glory
of heaven: He hears the voice of a man^ but he hears not the voice of God
in a Sermon ^^he ^avoreth not the things of Gods Spirit.

the flames o^ hell break out upon him.

Sixthly, a dead man is a speechless man, he cannot speak, unless it be like

Seventhly, he is a breathless man: a natural man may say a prayer, or devise

Eighthly, a dead man has lost all beauty;

Ninthly, a dead man has his worms gnawing him; so natural men have the

Lastly, dead men want nothing but Abraham loved Sarah well while living, yet
when she was dead, he seeks for a burying place for her to ca^^y her out of
his sight: so God may let some fearful judgment loose, and say to it, Take
this dead soul out of my sight, etc. It was a wonder, that Lazarus though lying
but four days in the grave, should live again. O wonder thou that ever God
should let thee live, that have been rotting in thy sin twenty, thirty, perhaps
sixty years together*

Fullness of sin.
III. Every natural man and woman is born full of all sin, Romans 1.29. as full as
^ Toad is full of poison, as full as ever his skin can hold* Mind, Will, Eyes,
Mouth; every limb of his body, and every piece of his soul is full of sin;
their hearts are bundels of sin: hence Solomon says, foolishness is bound upon
the heart of a child; whole treasures of sin, An evil man (says Christ) out of
that evil treasure of his heart brings forth evil things; Nay, raging seas of
sin, Isaiah 20. Nay world^ of sin: Ja^. 3.9.
The tongue is a world of mischief: what is the heart then? for out of the
abundance of the heart, the tongue speaks: so that look about thee and see,
what ever sin is broached and runs out of any man's heart into his life through
the whole world, all those sins are in thine heart, thy mind is a nest of all
these foul opinions, heresies, that ever were vented by any man; thy heart is a
^^inking sink hole of all Atheism, Sodomy, Blasphemy, Murder, Whoredom*
Adultery, Witchcraft, Buggerie; so that if thou have any good thing in thee, it
is but as a drop of Rosewater in a bowl of poison, where fallen, it is all
corrupted.

It is true thou feel not all these things stirring in thee at one time, no
more then Hazael thought he was or should be such a blood-sucker* when he asked
the Prophet Elishah if he were a dog, but they are in thee like a nest of
snakes in an old hedge. Although they break not out into thy life, they ly
lurking in thy heart, they are there as a filthy puddle in a barrel, which
runs not out, because thou happily want the temptation or occasion to broach
and tappe thine heart, or because of Gods restraining grace, by Fear and shame,
Education, good company, thou art restrained and builded up: and therefore when
one came to comfort that famous picture, pattern and monument of Gods justice
by seven years horror and grievous distress of conscience, Francis Spire.
when one told him he never had committed such sins as Manasses, and therefore
he was not the gre^test sinner since the Creation, as he conceived; he replied
that he should have been worse then ever Manasse^ was, if he had lived in his
time, and been on his throne.

Master Bradford would never look upon any ones l^wd life with one eye, but he
would pres^ntly return within his own breast with the other eye, and say, In
this my vile heart remains that sin, which without Gods special grace I should
have committed as he. O me thinks this might pull down men's proud conceits of
themselves, especially such as bear up and comfort themselves in their smooth,
honest civil life, such as through education have been washed from all foul
sins, they were never tainted with whoredom, swea^ing, drunkenness, or
profaneness, and here they think themselves so safe, that God cannot find in
his heart to have a thought of damning them.

Oh, consider this point, which may make thee pull thine hair from thine head,
(...) thy clothes to sackcloath, and run up and down with amazement and
palenesse of thy face, and horror in thy conscience, and tears in thine eyes.
What though thy life be smooth what though thy outside, thy sepulcher be
paint^d; Oh thou art full of rottenness of sin within. Guilty not before men
as the sins of thy life make thee, but before God of all the sins that swarm
and roar in the whole world at this day, for God looks (...) heart; guilty thou
art therefore of heart-whoredom, heart-sodomy* heart-blasphemy,
heart-drunkennesse, heart-buggery, heart-oppression, heart-idolatry, and these
are the sins that terribly provoke the wrath of A^mightie G^d against* thee,
Isai. 56 17. For the iniquities of his coveto^sness (says our Translation) I
smote him: but the Hebrew endteth it better, for the iniquity of his
conscience (which is the sin of the heart and nature (I smote him. As ^ King is
angry, and musters up his arm^e against rebels, not only who brings his
soldiers out to sight, but who keeps soldiers in their trenches ready for
to fight. These sins of thine heart are already armed to fight against God, at
the watch^word of all-arm of any temptation. Nay, I dare affirm, and will
prove it, that these sins provoke God to anger, and are as bad, if not worse,
then the sins of thy life.

1. The sin of thine heart and nature, it is the cause the womb that
contains, Sins of the heart worse then sins of the life.
breeds, brings forth, sucketh all the bitter, all the troup of sins that
are in the life; and therefore giving life and being to all other, it is the
greatest sin.

2. Sin is more abundantly in the heart life. An actual sin is but a little
breach made by the sea of sin in thine heart, where all sin, all poison is met
and mingled together. Every actual sin is but a shred broken off from the
great bottom of sin in the heart: And hence Christ says: Out of the abundance
of the heart, the mouth speaks: and out of the evil treasure of the heart we
bring forth evil things. A man spending money, I mean sin in the life, is
nothing to his treasure of sin in the heart.

3. Sin is continually in the heart: Actual sins of the life flies out like
sparks and vanish, but this brand is always glowing within, the Toad spits
poison sometimes, but it retains and keeps a poysonfull nature always. Hence
the Apostle calls it sin that dwells in me, that is, which always lies and
remains in me, so that in regard of the sins of thy heart thou do rent in
pieces and break, 1. All the laws of God. 2. At one clap. 3 Every moment of
thy life: Oh, me thinks the thought of this might rent an heart of Rock in
pieces, to think I am always grieving God at all times, whatsoever I do.

4. Actual sins are only in the life and outward porch, sins of the heart are
within the inward house. One enemy within the City, is worse then many without:
A traitor on the throne is worse then a traitor in the open field. The heart is
Christ's throne. A Swine in the best room is worst then in the outward house.
More I might say, but thus you see, sins of the life are not so bad, nor
provoke Gods wrath so fiercely against thee, as the sins of thine heart. Mourn
therefore not so much, that thou have not been so bad as others are, but look
upon thy black feet, look without thine own heart, and lament that in regard of
the sins, there thou art as bad as any; mourn not so much merely that thou have
sinned, as that thou have a nature so sinful; that it is thy nature to be
proud, and thy nature to be vain and deceitful and loath, not only thy sins,
but thy self for sin, being brim-full of unrighteousness. But here is not all,
consider fourthly:

4. That what ever a natural man does; as the i^side is full, Every action is
sinful as coming from a natural man. Luke 15 16.
so the outside is nothing else but sin, at least in the sight of an holy God,
though not in sight of blind sinful men. Indeed he may do many things which
for the matter of them are good, as he may give alms, pray, fast, come to
Church, but as they come from him they are sin; as a man may speak good words,
but we cannot endure to hear him speak, because of his stinking breath which
defiles them: some actions indeed from their general nature are indifferent,
for all indifferences, ly in generals, but every deliberat action considered
Indiv^due with all its circumstances, as time, place, motive, end, is either
morally good, or morally evil, as may be proved easily; morally good in good
men: morally evil in unregenerat and bad men. For let us see particular
actions of wicked men.

1. All their thoughts are only evil, and Genesis 6.5.

words are sins, Ps. 50.16. their mouths are open sepulchers, which smell
filthy when they be opened.

civil actions are sin, as their eating, drinking, buying, selling, sleeping,
ploughing, Prove 21.41

religious actions are sins, as coming to Church, Isai. 13.14.
praying, Prove. 15.8.9.28.9. fasting and mourning: roar and cry out of thy self
till doomsday, they are sins. Isa. 58.

5. All their most zealous actions are Jehu who killed ^ll Baals Priests,
because his action was outward^y and materially good, therefore God rewarded
him with temporal favors: but because he had a hawks eye, to get and settle a
Kingdom to himself by this means, and so was theologically evil, therefore God
threatens to be revenged upon him. 2. King. 10.

wisdom is sin. Oh, men are often commended for their wisdom, wit, and parts;
yet those wits, and that wisdom of theirs is sin Romans 8. The wisdom of the
flesh, is enmity against God.

Thus all they have (...) do, are sins: for how can he do any good act^on whose
Person is filthy? A corrupt tree cannot bring forth good fruit: Thou art out of
Christ, therefore all thy good things, all thy kindnesses done unto the Lord,
and for the Lord, as thou think, are most odious to him. Let a woman seek to
give all the content to her husband that may be, not out of any love to him,
but only out ^f love to another man, he abhors all that she does. Every
wicked man wants ^n inward principle of love to God and Christ; and
therefore, though he seeks ^o honor God never so much, all that he ^^th,
being done out of love to himself, God abhors all that he performs. All
the good things a wicked man does, are for himself, either for self-credite, or
self-ease, or self-contentmen^, or self-safety. He sleeps, prays* heare^h,
speaks, professes for himself alone; hence acting ^lwayes for himself, he
commits the h^ghest degree of idolatry, he plucketh God out of his throne,
and makes himself a God* because he makes himself his last and in every
action: for a man puts himself i^ the room of God, as well by making himse^f is
finis ultimu, as if he should ^ak^ himself primum principium. Jer. 20.13.
Sin (...) a fors^king, or dep^rting from God. Now every natural man remai^ing
always in a state of separation from God, because he always wants the bond
of union which is faith, is always sinning, Deuteronomy. 28*
Gods curse lies upon him; therefore he brings out nothing but briers and
thorns.

Object:
Object. But thou will say, if our praying and hearing be sin, Answ.
why should we do these duties; Why good duties must be re^formed, though we
sin in doing them.
we must not sin?

Answ. 1. Good duties are good in themselves, although coming from thy vile
hearts, they are sins.

2. Ill is less sin to do them, then to omit them; therefore if thou will go to
hell, go in the fairest path thou can in thither.

3. Venture and try, it may be God may hear, not for thy prayers sake, but for
his Names sake. The unjust Judge help the poor widow, not because he loved her
or her suit, but because of her importunity; and so be sure thou shall have
nothing if thou do not seek: what though thou be a dog, yet thou art
alive, and art for the present under the table. Catch not at Christ, snatch not
at his bread, but wait till God give thee him; it may be thou may have him
one day. Oh, wonder then at Gods patience, that thou live one day longer, who
have all thy lifetime like a filthy ^oad, spit thy venom in the face of God,
that he ha^h never been quiet for thee. Oh, look upon the black bill that will
one day be put in against thee, at the great day of account, where thou must
answer with flames of fire about thine ^^rs, not only for thy drunkenness, thy
bloody oaths, and whoring; but for all ^^e actions of thy short life, and just
so many actions, so many sins.

Thou have painted thy face over now with good duties, and good desires, and a
^ittle honesty amongst some men, is of that worth and rarity, that they think
God is beholden to them, if he can get any good action from them. But when thy
painted face shall be brought before the fire of Gods wrath, then thy vileness
shall appear before men and angels. Oh, know (...), that as thou do nothing
else but sin, ^o God heaps up wrath against the dread^ul day of wrath.

Thus much for man's misery, in regard of sin.

Now follows his misery, in regard of ^he consequents or miseries that follow
upon sin. And these are, 1. Present. 2. Future.


First, man's present miseries that already ly on him for sin, are these seven,
that is,

First, God is his dreadful enemy, Man's present misery.
Psalm. 5.5.

Quest. How may one know another

Answ. 1. By their looks. 2. By their threats. 3. By their blows. So God:

1. Hides his face from every natural man, and will not look upon him, Isai.
59.2.

2. God threatens, nay curses every natural man, Gal. 3.10.

3. God gives them heavy bloody lashes on their souls and bodies.

Never tell me therefore, that God blesses thee in thine outward estate: no
greater sign of Gods wrath, then for the Lord to give thee thy swinge, as a
father never looks after a desperate son, but lets him run where he
pleases. And if God be thine enemy, then every creature is so too, both in
heaven and earth.

God has forsaken them and they have lost God, Ephesians ^.12. It is ^^id, that in
the grievous famine of Samaria, Isai. 55.
doves dung was sold at a large price, because they wanted bread. Oh, men live
and pine away without God, without bread; and therefore ^he dung of worldly
contentments are esteemed so much of. Thou have lost the sight of God, and the
favor of God, and the special protection of God, and the government of God.
Cains punishment lies upon thee in thy natural estate: thou art a runagate
from the face of God, and from his face thou art hid. Ma^y h^ve grown mad to
see (...) houses burnt, and all their goods lost. Oh, but God the greatest good
is lost. This loss made Saul cry out of distress of conscience, 1. Sam. 28 15.
The Philistians make war against me, and God is departed from me The loss of
the sweetness of whose presence, for a little while only, made the Lord Jesus
himself cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? whereas thou have
lost God all thy lifetime. Oh, thou have an heart of brass, that can not
mourn for his absence so long. The damned in hell have lost God, and know it,
and so the plague of desperate horror lies upon them. Thou have lost God here,
but know it not, and the plague of an hard heart lies upon thee, and thou
can not mourn for this loss.

Thirdly, they are condemned men, Treason, treason, against the most high God,
and condemned by Justice and Mercy by the Gospel; which c^yeth, Murder murder
against the Son of God. John 3.18. so that every natural man is damned in
he^ven, and damned on earth. God is thy all-seeing terrible Judge* conscience
is thine accusers, an heavy witness his word is thy ^ayle: thy ^ust are thy
fetters^. In this Bible is p^o^unced and will thy doom, thy sentence: Death is
thy hang-ma^; and that fire that shall never go out, thy torment. The Lord has
in his infinite patience reprived thee for a time* O take heed* and get a
pardon, before the day of execution come.

Acts 28.22.
He is a bound slave to satan, Ephesians 2.3. for his servants ye are whom ye obey
says Christ. Now every natural man does the devils drugery, and carries the
devils pack: and howsoever he says, h^ defieth the devil, yet he sins, and so
does his work* Satan has overcome and conquered all men in Adam, and therefore
under his bondage and dominion. An^ though he cannot compel a man to si^
against his own will, yet he has power.

First, to present and allure a man^ heart by a sinful temptation.

Secondly, to follow him with it, if (...) first he be something sly of it.

Thirdly, to disquyet and wrack him if he will not yield, as might be made t^
appear in many instances.

Fourthly, besides he knows men's humors, as poor wandering beggarly gentlemen
do their friends, Man's fearful slaverie under satan.
in necessity (yet in seeming court^sie) he visits and applye^ himself unto
them, and so gains them as his own. Oh, he is in a fearful slavery who is under
satan's dominion, who is.

1. A secret enemy to thee.

2. A deceitful enemy to thee, that will make a man believe (as he did Evah)
even in her integrity, that he is in a fair way, yet most miserable.

3. H^ is a cruel enemy, or Lord over them that be his slaves, 2 Cor. 4.3. he
gaggs them, so that they cannot speak, as that man that had a dumb devil,
neither for God, not to God in prayer: he starves them, so as no Sermon shall
ever do them good. (...) robs them of all they get in Gods ordinances; within
three hours after the marke^, the Sermon is ended*

4. He is a strong enemy, Luke 1^.21. so that if all the devils in hell are
able to keep men from coming out of their sins, he will: so strong an enemy,
that he keeps men from so much as sighing or groaning under their burdens and
bondage, Luke 11* 21. When the strong mam keeps the palace, his goods are in
peace.

Fifthly, He is cast into utter darkness, 2. Pet. 2.10.
so satan does natural men, 2 Cor. 4.3.4. They see no God, no Christ: they see
not the happiness of the Saints in light: they see not these dreadful torments
that should now in this day of grace awaken them, and humble them, Oh, those
bypath which thousands wandered from God in: they have no lamp to their feet,
to show them where they err. Thou that art in thy natural state, art born
blind, and the devil has binded thine eyes more by sin, and God in justice
has blinded them worse for sin, so that thou art in a corner of hell, because
thou art in utter darkness, where thou have not a glimpse of any saving truth.

They are bound hand and foot in this estate, and cannot come out, Romans 5.6. 1
Cor. 2.14. for all kind of sins, like ch^ins, have bound every part and faculty
of man, so that he is sure from stirring* and these are very strong in him,
they being as dear as his members, nay his life, Col. 3.7. so that when a man
begins to forsake his vile courses, and purposes to become a new man,
devils fe^c^ him back, world inticeth him, and locketh him up; and flesh says,
Oh, it is too stric^ a course, and then farewell me^ry days, and good
fellowship. Oh, thou may wish and desire to come out sometime^* but can
not put strength to thy desire, nor endure to do it. Thou may hang down thy
head like a bul^-rush for sin* but thou can nor repent of sin: thou may
presume, but thou can not believe: thou may come half way* and forsake
some sins, not all sins: thou ma^es^ com^ an^ k^^ck at heavens ga^e, as the
foolish vi^i^ins did, but not ente^ in and pass thr^ugh the gate: thou m^yest
(...) the land of Canaan, and take much pain^ to go into Canaan, and thou
may taste of the bunches of graps of that good land, but never enter into
Canaan, into heaven: but thou lie bound hand and foot in this woeful estate,
and here thou must ly and rot like a dead carcass in his grave, until the
Lord come and roll away the stone, and ^id thee come out and live.

Lastly, They are ready every moment God is a consuming fire against thee, and
there is but one paper wall of thy body between thy soul, and eternal flames.
How soon may God stop thy breath, th^re is nothing but that between thee and
hell; if that were gone, then farewell all. Thou art condemned, and the muffler
is before thine eyes, God knows, how soon the ladder may be turned: thou
hang^st but by one rotten twined thread of thy life, over the flames of hell
every hour. Man's future miseries


Thus much of man's present miseries.

Now follows his future miseries,

They must die, either by a sudden, sull^n, or desperate death, Psalm. 89.48.
which though it was to a child of God a sweet sleep, yet to the wicked it is a
fearful curse pr^ceeding from Gods w^ath, whence like a lion, ^he tears body
and soul asunder. Death comes hissing upon them like a fiery dragon wi^h the
sting of vengeance in the mou^h of it: It puts a period to all their worldly
contentments, which then they must forsake, and carry nothing away wi^h (...)
bu^ a rotten winding she^t. It is the beginning of all all their wo^: It is the
C^ptain that first strikes the stro^k, and then armies of endless woes (...),
Rev. 6.^. Oh, thou had be^^et be (...) a dog then a man, for there is an end
of their tr^ubles, when they are dead and gone; they ^all now as men from a
sleep, they know not where they (...) go N^w (...) is too late, e^p^cial^y if
thou have ^^ved under means before. It ^s either a cold repentance, when the
b^dy is weak, and the heart sick; or an hypocritical repentance, only for fear
of hell, and therefore thou say, Lord Jesus, receive my soul, Nay, commonly
then men's hearts are most hard, and therefore men die like lambs, and cry not
out. Then it is hard plucking thy soul from the devils hands, to whom thou have
given it all thy life by sin: and if thou do get it back, do thou think
that God will take the devils leavings? Now thy day is past, and darkness
begins to overspread thy soul: Now flocks of devils come into thy chamber,
waiting for thy soul to fly upon it, as a ma^^ive dog, when the door is opened.
And this is the reason why most men die quietly that lived wickedly; because
satan then has them as his own prey: like pirates that let a ship pass by that
is empty of goods, they shoot commonly at them that are richly laden. The
Christians in ^ome parts of the Primitive Church, took the Sacrament every day,
because they did look to die every day. But these times wherein we live, are so
poisoned and g^utted with their ^ase, that it is a rare thing to see the man
that looks death sted^ast^y in the face one hour together. But death will lay a
bi^ter stroke on these one day:

II. After death they appear before the Lord to judgment, Heb. 9.27. their
bodies indeed for in their graves, but their souls r^^urn before the Lord to
judgment, Eccles. 12.7 The general Judgment is at the end of the world, when
both body and soul appears before God and all the world, to an account: But
there is a particular judgment that every man meets with after this life,
immediately at the end of this ^ife, where the soul is condemned only before
the Lord.

You may perceive what this particular judgment is thus, by these four
conclu^^^ns.

1. That every man should die the first day he was born, is clea^^^ ^or the
wages of sin, is death; in justice therefore it should be paid a sinful
creature as soon as he is born.

Tim. 4. He is the Savior of all men; that is, not a Savior of ete^nal
preservation out of hell, but a Savior of temporal reservation from dropping
into hell.

2 Cor. 6.2.

He that judges himself, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. ^1.31. shall not be judged
of the Lord. Now wicked men will not judge and condemn themselves in this life,
therefore at the end of it, God will jugde them. All natural men are lost in
this life, but they may be found, and recovered again; but a man's loss by death
is ^^recoverable because there is no me^^^s after death to restore them: There
is no friend to persuade, no Minister to preach by which faith is wrought, and
men get Christ. There is no power of returning or repenting then; for night is
come, and the day is past. Again, the punishment is so heavy, that they can
only bear wrath, so that all their thoughts and affections are taken up with
the burden. And therefore Dives cries out, I am tormented. Oh, that the
consideration of this point might awaken every secure sinner, What will become
of thine immortal soul, when thou art dead? Thou say, I know nor, I hope
well. I tell thee therefore that which may send thee mourning to thine house,
and quaking to thy grave, if thou die in this estate, thou shall not die like
a dog, not yet like a toad, but after death comes judgment; then farewell
friends, when dying; and farewell God for ever, when thou art dead.

Now the Lord open your eyes to see the terrors of this particular judgment,
The^ error of man's particular judgment.
which if thou could see, unless you were mad, it would make you spend whole
nights and days, in seeking to set all even with G^d.

I will ^ho^ you briefly the manner and nature (...) in these particulars.

1. Thy soul shall be dragged out of thy b^dy, as out of a stinking pri^on, by
the devil the J^yler, into some place within the bowels of the third heavens,
and there thou shall stand stripped of all friends, all comfort, all creatures,
before the presence of God, Luke 19.27. as at the Assizes, first the jay^or
brings the prisoner out.

2. Then thy soul shall have a new Rev. 6. ult.

Ps 50.21. as letters writ with juce of Oranges cannon be read until it be
brought unto the fire, and then they appear: thou can not read that bloody
bill of indictment thy consci^nce has against thee now; but when thou shall
stand near unto God: a consuming fire. ^hen what a heavy reckoning will
appear. (...) man be thou have left many sins now, and go so far, and
profitest so much, that no Christian can discern thee; nay, thou think thy
self in a safe estate; but yet there is one leak in thy ship that will (...)
thee: there is one secret hidden sin in thine heart, which thou live in, as
all unsound people do, that will d^mne thee. I tell thee, as soon as ever thou
art dead and gone, then thou shall see where the knot did bi^d thee, where thy
sin was that now has spoiled thee for ever, and then thou shall grow mad to
think, O that I never saw this sin I loved, lived in, p^o^ted, perfected mine
own eternal ruin by, until now, when it is too late to amend.

4. Then the Lord shall take his everlasting Depart thou cursed. Thou shall see
indeed the glory of God that others find; but to thy greater sorrow, shall
never taste the same, Luke. 13, 28.

5. Then shall God surrender up thy forsaken soul into the hands of devils, who
being thy Jaylors, must keep thee till the great day of account; so that as thy
friends are scrambling for thy goods, and worms for thy body, so devils shall
scramble for thy soul* For as soon as ever a wicked man is dead, he is either
in heaven or in hell. Not in heaven, for no unclean thing comes there: if in
hell, then amongst devi^s: there shall be thine eternal lodging 1 Pet. 3, 19.
And hence thy forlorn soul shall ly mourning for the time past, now too late
amazed at the eternity of sorrow that is to come, waiting for that fearful
hour, when the last trumpet shall blow, and then body and soul meet to bear that
wrath, that fire that shall never go out. Oh, therefore suspect and fear the
wor^^ of thy self now: ^hou have seldom, or never, or very (...), troubled
thine head about this matter, whether Christ wh^ save thee or not: Thou have
such strong hopes and confidenc^s already, (...) will: Know that it (...) thou
mayes^ be deceived: and if (...) when thou sh^^^ know thy doom after death,
thou (...) not get an hour more to make thy (...) in with God, a^tho^gh thou
(...) weep tears of blood. If eit^er the (...) of ignorance shall be before
thine eyes, like an hand-kercher,, about the face of one condemned; or if thou
art p^nioned with any lust; or if thou make thine own pardon; proclaimest
(because thou art sorry a little for thy sins, and resolvest nev^r to do the
like again) peace to ^hy soul, thou art one that after death ^halt appear
before the Lord to judgment: Thou that art thus condemned now, dying so, shall
come to thy fearful execution after death.

There shall be a general judgment of ^oul and body at the end of the world,
wherein they shall be arraigned and condemned before the great Tribunal seat of
Jesus Christ, Jude ^4.15. 2. Col. 5.10. The hearing of judgment to come, made
Felix to tremble: Nothing of more efficacy to awaken a secure sinner, then sad
thoughts of this fiery day.

But thou will ask me, Object.
how it may be proved that there will be such a day?

I answer, Gods justice calls for it, Answ.
this world is the stage wh^re Gods patience and bounty act their parts, and
hence every man will profess and conceive, because he feelth it, that God is
merciful; Why there must be a day of judgment.
but Gods justice is questioned: men think God to be all mercy, and no justice;
all ^oney, and no sting. Now the wicked prosper in all their ways, are never
puni^hed, but live and die in peace, whereas the godly are daily afflicted and
reviled, Therefore because this Attribute suffers a total eclipse almost ^^ow,
there must come a day wherein it m^st shine out before all the world in the
glory of it* Romans 2.5.

The second reason is from the glory o^ Christ: He was accused, arraigned,
condemned by men, therefore he shall be the judge of men, John 5.27. for this
(...) an ordinary piece of Gods providence toward his people, the same evil he
casts them into now, he exalts them into the contrary good in his time. As the
Lord has a purpose to make Joseph ruler over all Egypt, but first he makes
him a slave, God had a meaning to make Christ Judge of men, therefore first he
suffers him to be judged of men.

Quest. Object.
But when shall this judgment day be?

Answ. Though we cannot tell the day and hour particularly, Answ.
yet this we are sure of, that when all the Elect, are called, for whose ^ake
the world stands, Isa. 1.9. when these pillars are taken away, then woe to the
world, as when Lot was taken out of Sodom; then was Sodom burnt* Now it is not
probable that this time will come as yet: for first Antichrist must be
consumed; and not only the scattered visible Jews, but the whole body of the
Israelites must first be called, and have a glorious Church here upon earth,
Ezekiel. 37. This glorious Church Scripture and reason will enforce, which when it
is called, shall not be expired as soon as it is born, ^ut shall con^inue many a
year.

Quest. But how shall this judgment be? Quest.


Answ. The Apostle describes it, Answ.
^. These. 4.16, 17.

1. Christ shall break out of the third

2* Then shall the voice of the Archangel Arch angel is Jesus Christ himself,
as the Scripture expounds, being in the clouds of heaven; He shall with an
audible Heaven-shaking shout, say, Rise you dead and come to judgment, even as
he called to Lazarus, Lazarus arise.

3. Then the T^ump shall blow, and Exodus 19. Its said the trumpet sounded, much
more louder shall it now sound when he comes to judgment, that have broken the
law.

4. Then shall the dead arise. 1. The bodies Enoch be translated and changed, ^
Cor* 15.

5. When thus the Judge and Justices are upon the bench at Christ's right hand
one their Thrones, then shall the guilty Prisoners be brought forth, and come
out of their graves, like filthy toads, against this terrible storm. Then shall
all the wicked that ever were, or ever shall be, stand quaking before this
glorious Judge^ with the same bodies, feet, hands, to receive their doom.



1. Consider who shall be thy Judge, why, mercy, pi^ty, goodness it self, even
Jesus Christ, that many times held out his bowels of compassion toward thee. A
child of God may say, Y^^der is my brother, friend, husband. But th^^ may
say, yonder is mine enemy. He may say at that day, Yonder is he that (...) his
blood to save me: Thou may say, Yonder (...) comes whose heart I have
pierced with my sins, whose blood I have despised. They may say, O come, Lord
Jesus, and cover me under thy wings: But thou shall then cry out, O rocks, fall
upon me, and hide me from the fac^ of the La^b.

Thesse 1.7. He shall come in flaming fire, the heavens shall be on a flame: the
elements shall melt like scalding lead upon thee. When an house is on fire at
midnight in a town, what a fearful cry is there made? When all the world shall
cry, Fire, fire, and run up and down for shelter to hide themselves, but cannot
find it, but say: O now the gloomy day of blood and f^^e is come: here is for
my pride, here is for my o^^hes, and the wages for my drunkenness, security,
and neglect of (...)

3. (...) regard of the heavy ^ccusations as secret whoredom, Eccle^ ult. ^^.
self-pollution, speculative wantonness, men with men, women with women, as the
Apostle speaks, Romans 1. Why at this day, all the world shall see and hear
these privy pranks, then the books shall be opened. Men will not take up a foul
business, nor end it in private; therefore there shall be a day of public
hearing: things shall not be suddenly shuffled up, as carnal thoughts imagine,
viz. That at this day, first Christ shall raise the dead, and then the
separation shall be made, (...) the Sentence past* and then suddenly the
judgment day is done: No, no, it must take up some large quantity of time,
that all the world may see the secret sins of wicked men in the world; and
therefore it may be made evident from all Scripture and reason, that this day
of Christ's kingly Office in judging the world, shall last happily longer then his
private administration now (wherein he is less glorious) in governing the
world. Tremble thou time-server, tremble thou hypocrite, tremble thou that
live in any secret sin under the all-seeing eye of this Judge: thine own
conscience indeed shall be a sufficient witness against thee, to discover all
thy Sins a^ thy particular judgment* but all the world shall openly see thine
hidden close courses of darkness, to thine everlasting shame at this day.

4. In regard of the fearful Sentence that then shall be passed upon thee;
Depart thou cursed creature into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and
his angels, Thou shall then cry out, O mercy, Lord: O a little mercy. No, will
the Lord Jesus say: I did indeed once offer it you, but you refused, therefore
Depart. Then thou shall plead again, Lord, if I must depart, yet bless me
before I go. No, no, Depart, thou cursed. Oh, but Lord, if I must depart
cursed, let me go to some good place. No, Depart, thou cursed into hells fire.
Oh, Lord, that is a torment I cannot bear: but if it must be so, Lord, let me
come out again quickly* No, Depart, thou cursed, into everlasting fire. Oh,
Lord, if this be thy pleasure, that here I must abide, let me have good company
with me. No, Depart, thou cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil
and his angels. This shall be thy sen^^^ce. The hearing of which may make the
^ocks to rent* so that go on in thy sin, and prosper; despise and scoff at Gods
Ministers, and prosper; abhor the power and practice of Religion, as a too
precise course, and prosper; yet know it, there will a day come when thou shall
meet with a dreadful Judge, a doleful Sentence. Now is thy day of sinning, but
God will have shortly his day of condemning.

When the Judgment day is done, then the fearful wrath of God shall be poured
out, and piled upon their bodies and souls, and the breath of the Lord like a
stream of brimstone shall kindle it, and (...) burning, and none shall ever
quench it. This is the execution of a sinner after judgment, Rev. ^1.^.
Where^^ consists the wrath of God.


Now this wrath of God consists in these things.

1. Thy soul shall be banished from the face and blessed sweet presence of God
and Christ, and thou shall never see the (...) of God more. It is said, Acts
20. that they wept sore, because they should see Paul's face no more: Oh, thou
shall never see the face of God, Christ, saints nor ange^^ more. O heavy doom,
to famish and pine away for ever without one bit of bread to comfort thee, one
smile of God to refresh thee. Men that have their sores running upon them must
be shut up from the presence of men sound and whole. Oh, thy sins like
plague-sores run on thee, therefore thou must be shut out like a dog from the
presence of God and all his people, 2 These. ^.^.

2. God shall set himself like a consuming infinite fire against thee, and tread
thee under his feet, who have by sin troad him and his glory under foot all thy
life. A man may devise exquisite torments for another, and great power may make
a little stick to lay on heavy strokes; but great power stirred up to strike
from great fury and wrath, makes the stroke deadly. I tell thee all the wisdom
of God shall then be set against thee to (...) torments for thee, Mich. 1.3.
there was never such wrath felt or conceived as the Lord has devised against
thee that live and dyest in thy natural est^te. Hence it is called wrath to
come, 1 These. 1. ult. The torment which wi^dom shall devise, the almighty power
of God shall indict upon thee, so as there was never such power seen in making
the world, as in holding a poor creature under the wrath, that holds up ^he
soul in being with one hand, and bears it with the other, ever burning like
fire against a creature, and yet that creature never burnt up, Rome. 9.22.
Think not this cruelty, it is justice; what cares God for a vile wretch whom
nothing can make good while it lives. If we have been ^^ng in h^wing a block,
and we can make ^o meet vessel of it, pot it to no good use (...) our selves,
we cast it into the fire: God shows thee by Sermons, sickness, losses and
crosses, sudden death, mercies and miseries, yet nothing makes thee better,
what should God do with thee, but cast thee ^ence? Oh, consider of this wrath
before you feel it. I had rather have all the world burning about mine ears,
then to have one bl^^^ing frown from the blessed face of an infinite and
dreadful God. Thou can not endure the torment of a little kitchen fire upon
the t^p of thy finger, not one half hour together: how will thou bear the fury
of this infinite, endless consuming fire in body and soul throughout all
eternity?

3. The never dying worm of a guilty conscience shall torment thee, as if thou
h^dst swallowed down a living poysonfull snake, which shall ly gnawing and
biting thine heart for sin past, day and night. And this worm shall torment by
showing the cause of thy misery; that is, that thou did never care for him
that should have saved thee. By showing thee also thy sins against the Law. By
showing thee thy sloth, whereby thy happiness is lost. Then shall thy
conscience gnaw, to think, so many nights I went to bed without prayer, and so
many days and hours I spent in feasting, and foolish sporting. Oh, if I had
spent half that time, now misspent, in praying, in mourning, in meditation;
yonder in heaven had I been. By showing thee also the means that thou once
had to avoid this misery: Such a Minister I heard once, that told me of my
particular sins, as if he had been told of me: Such friend persuaded me once to
turn over a new leaf. I remember so many knocks God gave at this iron heart of
mine: So many mercies the Lord sent: But, oh! no means could prevail with me.

Lastly, by showing thee how easily thou might have avoided all these
miseries. Oh, once I was almost persuaded to be a Christian! but I suffered my
heart to grow dead, and fell to loose company, and so lost all. The Lord Jesus
came unto my door, and knocked: and if I had done that for Christ, which I did
for the devil many a time, to open at his knocks, I had been saved. A thousand
such bites will this worm give at thine heart, which shall make thee cry out: O
time, time! O Sermons, Sermons! O my hopes, and my helps are now lost, that
once I had to save my lost soul!

4. Thou shall take up thy lodging for

5. Thou shall be filled with final despair. I might once have had mercy, and
Christ; but no hope now ever to have one glimpse of his face, or one good look
from him any more.

Thou shall vomit out blasphemous oaths and curses in the face of God the
Father for ever, and curse God that never elected thee, and curse the Lord
Jesus that never shed one drop of blood to redeem thee, and curse God the holy
Ghost that passed by thee, and never called thee, Rev- 10, 9. And here thou
shall ly and weep, and gnash thy teeth in spite against God and thy self, and
roar and stamp, and grow mad, that there thou must ly under the curse of God
for ever^ Thus, I say, thou shall ly blaspheming, with Gods wrath, like a pile
of fire on thy soul burning; and floods, nay seas, nay more, seas of tears (for
thou shall for ever ly weeping) shall never quench it. And here, which way
soever thou look, thou shall see matter of everlasting grief. Look up to
heaven, and there thou shall see (oh!) that God is for ever gone. Look about
thee, thou shall see devils quaking, cursing God: and thousands, nay millions
of sinful damned creatures crying and roaring out with dole^ul shrikings; Oh,
the day that ever I was born! Look within thee, there is a guilty conscience
gnawing. Look to time past: Oh, those golden days of grace, and sweet seasons
of mercy are quite lost and gone! Look to time to come, there thou shall behold
evils, troops and swarms of sorrows and ^oes, and raging waves, and billows of
wrath coming roaring upon thee. Look to time present: O not one hour or moment
of ease or refreshing, but all courses meet together, and feeding upon one poor
lost immortal soul, that never can be recovered again. No God, no Christ, no
Spirit to comfort thee. No Minister to preach unto thee: no friend to weep away
thy continual tears: no Sun to shine upon thee: nor a bit of bread: not one
drop of water to cool thy tongue.

This is the misery of every natur^l man. Now do not you shift it from thy
self, and and say, God is merciful. True, but it is to very few, as shall be
proved. It is a thousand to one, if ever thou be one of that small number whom
God has picked out to escape his wrath to come. If thou do not get the Lord
Jesus to bear this w^ath, farewell God, Christ and Gods mercy for ever. And I
am sure that it is no common evil which God gives to every wicked man: If
Christ had shed seas of blood, set thine heart at rest, there is not one drop
of it for thee, until thou come to see, and feel, and groan under this
miserable estate. I tell thee, Christ is so far from saving thee, that he is
thine enemy. If Christ were here, and should say, Here is my blood for thee, if
thou will but ly down and mourn under the burden of thy misery: and yet for all
his speeches, thy dry eyes weep not, thy stout heart yields not, thy hard
heart mourns not, as to say: Oh, I am a sinful, lost, condemned, cursed, dead
creature: What shall I do? Do thou not think but he would turn away his face
from thee, and say: Oh, thou stony hard-hearted creature, would thou have me
save thee from thy misery, and yet thou will not groan, sigh and mourn for
deliverance to me out of thy misery? If thou likest thine estate so well, and
prizest m^ so little, perish in thy misery for ever.

Oh, labor to be humbled day and night under this thy woeful e^^ate. The scope
of knowing our miseries, is to be humbled.
Thou art guilty of Adams griveous sin; will this break thine heart? No. Thou
art dead in sin, and top full of all sin; will this break thine heart? No.
Whatsoever thou do, have done, shall do, remaining in this estate, is sin;
will this break thine heart? No. God is thine enemy, and thou have lost him,
will this break thine heart? No. Thou art condemned to die eternally, satan is
thy jailer, thou art bound hand and foot in the bolts of thy sins; and cast
into utter darkness, and ready every moment to drop into hell; will this break
thine heart? No. Thou may die, and after that appear before the Lord to
judgment, and then bear Gods everlasting insupportable wrath a which renteth
the rocks, and bu^neth down to the bottom of hell; will this break thine hard
heart, man? No. Then farewell Christ for ever; never look to see a Christ,
until thou do come to feel thy misery, thy misery out of Christ.

Labor therefore for this, and the Lord will reveal the brazen Serpent, when
thou art in thine own sense and feeling, stung to death with thy fiery serpents.

So I come to open the fourth principal point, viz.

CHAP. IV.
THat the Lord Jesus Christ is the only means of redemption and deliverance out
of this estate, Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we have redemption through his blood. Which
plainly demonstrateth, that

Jesus Christ is the only means of man's Redemption and deliverance ou^ o^ his
bondage and miserable estate. And this is the doctrine I shall now insist upon.

When the Israelites were in bondage and misery, he sends Moses to deliver
them. When they were in Babylon, he stirs up Cyrus to open the prison gates
to them. But when man is in misery, he sends the Lord JESUS, God and Man, to
redeem him, Acts 4.12.

Quest.
Quest. How does Christ redeem man out of this misery.

Answ.
Answ. By paying a price for them, 1 Cor. 6. ult. Gods mercy will be manifested
in saving some, and his justice must be satisfied, by having satisfaction or
price made and paid for man's sin.

Hence Christ satisfies Gods justice.

How men are redeemed.
A surety stands in the room of a debtor, Heb. 7.22. As the first Adam stood
in the room of all mankind fallen; so Christ stands in the room of all men
risin^, or to be restored again.

Secondly, by taking from them, i^ Cor. 5.2^* Hence Luther said, Christ was the
greates^ sinner by imputation.

Gal. 3.13. Christ drinks up the cup of all the elect at one draught, which
they should have been supping, and drinking and sw^lling, and tormented with
millions of years.

Fourthly, by bringing into the presence Dan. 9.2.
Romans 5.11. for this also Gods Justice required ( perfect conformity) to the
Law, as well as ( perfect satisfaction) suffered for the wrong offered to the
Lawgiver, Justice thus requiring these four things. Christ satisfies justice
by performing them, and so pays the price.

II. Christ is Redeemer by strong hand. Turkey, and then because he cannot come
to his own Prince himself, he is fetched away by strong hand*

Here is encouragement to the vilest sinner, and comfort to thy self
succourless, time and endeavors upon these duties and strivings that have been
but poor Phisicians to them. Oh look up ^^re to the Lord Jesus, who can do that
cure for thee in a moment, which all creaturs cannot do in many years. What
bolts, what strong fetters? what unruly lusts, temptations, and miseries art
thou locked into? Behold the Deliverer is come out of Sion, having satisfied
justice, and paid a price to ransom poor captives, Luke (...) with the keys of
heaven, hell, and thy unruly heart, in his hand, to fetch thee out with great
mercy and strong hand; who knows but thou poor prisoner of hell, thou poor
captive ^f the devil, thou poor sh^kled sinner, may be one whom he is come
for? Oh, look up to him, sigh to heaven for de^iverance from him, and be glad
and rejoice at his coming.

This strikes terror to them, that though everlasting burnings, and tear thy
hair, and cu^se thy self: from hence might I have been delivered, but I would
not. Has Christ delivered thee from hell, and has he no^ d^livered thee from
thine alehouse? Has Christ delivered thee from satan's society, when he has
not delivered thee from thy loose company yet? Has Christ delivered thee from
burning, when thy faggots, thy sins grow i^ thee? Is Christ's blood thine that
make no more account of it, nor feel no more virtue from it, then in the
blood of a chicken? Art thou redeemed? Do thou hope by Christ to be saved,
that did never see, nor feel, nor sigh under thy bondage? Oh, the devils will
keep holy day (as it were) in hell, in respect of thee, who shall mourn under
Gods wrath, and lament. Oh, there was a means to deliver us out of it; but thou
shall mourn for ever for thy misery. And this will be a bodkin at thine heart
one day, to think there was a Deliverer, but I, (wretch) would none of him.

Here likewise is matter of reproof, to harm. I^ they be troubled about their
estates, then they lick themselves who^e by their mourning, repenting, and
reforming. O^, poor stubble, can thou stand before this consuming fire
without sin? Can thou make thy self a Christ for thy self? Can thou bear,
and come from under an infinite wrath? Can thou bring in perfect
righteousness into the presence of God? This Christ must do, else he could not
satisfy and redeem And if thou can not do thus, and have no Christ, desire
and pray, that heaven and earth shake, till thou have worn thy tongue to the
stumps; endeavor as much as thou can, and others commend thee for a diligent
Christian: mourn in some wilderness till doomsday: dig thy grave there with
thy nails: weep buckets full of hourly tears, till thou can weep no more:
Fast and pray till thy skin and bones cleave together: promise and purpose with
full resolution to be better; nay, reform thy head, heart, life and tongue, and
some, nay all sins: live like an angel, shine like a Sun, walk up and down the
world like a distressed pilgrim going to another Country, so that all
Christians commend and admire thee. Die ten thousand deaths: ly at the fire
back in hell so many millions of years as there be piles of grass on the earth,
or sands upon the sea shore, or stars in heaven, or mo^s in the Sun; I tell
thee, not one spark of Gods wrath against thy sin, shall be, can be quenched by
all these duties, nor by any of these sorrows or tears, for these are not the
blood of Christ. Nay, if all the Angels and Saints in heaven and earth should
pray for thee, these cannot deliver thee; for they are not the blood of Christ.
Nay, God as a Creator, having made a ^aw, will not forgive one sin without the
blood of Christ. Nay, Christ's blood will not do it neither, if thou do join
never so little, that thou have or do unto Jesus Christ, and make thy
self, or any of thy dut^es, copartners with Christ in that great work of
saving thee. Cry out therefore, as that blessed Martyr did, None but Christ,
none but Christ.

Take head of neglecting or rejecting so great salvation by Jesus Christ. Take

But thou will say, Object.
This means of redemption is only appointed for some, it is not intended for
all, therefore not for me, therefore how can I reject Christ?

It is true, Answ.
Christ spent not his breath to pray for all, John 17.9. much less his blood
for all; therefore he was never intended as a Redeemer of all: but that he is
not intended as a deliverer of thee. The offer of Christ universal and why.
How does this follow? How do thou know this?

But secondly, I say though Christ be not intended for all, yet he is offered
unto all, and therefore unto thee. And the ground is this chiefly.

The universal offer of Christ arriseth not from Christ's priestly office,
immediately but from his Kingly Office, whereby the Father having given him all
power and dominion in heaven and earth, he hereupon commands all men to stoop
unto him, and likewise bids all his Disciples and all their successors to go
and preach the Gospel to every creature under heaven, Mat. 28.18 19. For Christ
does not immeditatly offer himself unto all men as a Savior, Mat. 19.15.
whereby they may be encouraged to serve him as a King: but first as a King
commanding them to cast away their weapons and stoop unto his Scepter, and
depend upon his free mercy, acknowledging, if ever he save me, I will bless
him: if he damn me, his name is righteous in so dealing with me.

But that I may fasten this exhortation The offering of Christ universal and
wherein


1. The Lord Jesus is offered to every particular person: which I will show
thus, what have thou to say against it, that thou do doubt of it? It may may
be thou will plead.

Oh, I am so ignorant of my self, God, Christ, or his will, that surely the
Lord offers no Christ to me. Prove. 9.8.


Yes, but he does, though thou lie in utter darkness. Our blessed Savior
glorified his Father for revealing the mystery of the Gospel to simple men,
neglecting those that carried the chief reputation of wisdom in the world. The
parts of none are so low, 2 Cor. 5.20.
as that they are beneath the gracious regard of Christ. God bestows the best
fruits of his love upon mean and weak persons here, that he might confound the
pride of flesh the more. Where it pleases him to make his choice and to exalt
his mercy, Prove. 1.22, 23.
he passes by no degree of wit, though never so incapable:

But thou will say, Object.
I am an enemy to God, and have ane heart so stubborn and loath to yield: I
have vexed him to the very heart by my transgressions.

Yet he beseeches thee to be reconciled. Put case thou have been a sinner,
Answ.
and rebellious against God, yet so long as thou art not found amongst
malicious opposers, and underminers of his truth, never give way to despairing
thoughts, thou have a merciful S^viour.

But I have despised the means of reconciliation, and rejected mercy. Object.


Yet God calls thee to turn, Answ.
Thou have (...) the harlot with many lovers* yet (...) again to me, says the
Lord, Jer. 3.1. Cast thy self into the arms of Christ, and if thou perishest,
perish there; if thou do^^ not, thou art sure to perish, if mercy ^e to he had
any where, it is by seeking in Christ, not by running from him. Herein
appears Christ's love to thee, that he has given thee an heart in some degree
senseble: he might have given thee up to hardness, security and prophanness, of
all spiritual judgments the greatest. But he that died for his enemies, will
in no wise refuse those, the desire of whose soul i^ toward him. When the
Prodigal set himself to return to his father, his father stays no^ for him,
but meets him in the way. If our sins displease us, they shall never hurt us,
but we shall be estimed of God to be that which we desire and labor to be,
Psalm. 145.19.

But can the Lord offer Christ to me, so poor, Object.
that have no st^eng^h, no faith no grace, nor sense of a^y povert^?

Yes even to thee: why should we except our selves, Answ.
when Christ does not except us? Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy
laden We are therefore poor, because we know not our riches. We can never be in
such a condition, wher^in their will be just cause of utter despair. He that
fitteth in darkness and ^^eth no light, no light of comfort, no light of Gods
countenance, Yet let him trust in the Name of the Lord. Weakness does not debar
us from mercy; nay, they (...) God the more. The husband is bored to bear with
the wife, as being the weaker vessel: and shall we think God will exempt himself
from his own rule, and not bear with his weak spouse?

But is this offer made to me that cannot love prize, no^ desire the Lord
Jesus? Object.


Yes, to thee: Answ.
Christ knows how to pity us in t^is case. We are weak, but we are his. A
father looks not so much at the blemishes of his child, as at his own nature
in him; so Christ finds matter of love from any t^ing of his own in us* A
Christians carriage toward Christ may in ma^y things be very offensive, and
cause much strangene^s, yet so long as he ^eso^veth not upon any known evil,
Christ will own him, and ^e Christ.

Oh! but I have fallen from God often, Object.
^ince he has enlightened me: and does ^e reader Christ to me?

Thou must know, that Christ has Answ.
^arried every believing soul to himself, and that where the work of grace is
begun, sin loses strength by every new fall. If there be a spring ^f sin in
thee, there is (...) spring of mercy in God, and a fountain ^ayly opened to
wash thy unc^eanness in: Adam indeed lost all by once sinning; (...) we are
under a better covenant, a covenant of mercy; and are encouraged by the Son to
go to the Father every day for the sins of that day.

Object.
If I was willing to receive Christ, I might have Christ offered to me. But will
the Lord offer him to such an one as desires not to have Christ?

Answ.
Yes, says our Savior, I would have gathered you, as the hen gathers he^
chickens under her wings, and you would not. We must know, a certain power
cannot only bring something out of nothing but contrary out of contrary: of
unwil^ling, God can make us a willing people There is a promise of pouring
clean water upon us: And Christ has taken upon him to purge his Spouse, and
make her (...) for himself.

What have thou now to plead again this strange kindness of the Lord, in (...)
Christ to thee? Thou will say, may be.

Object.
Oh, I fear time is past: Oh, time past: I might once have had Christ, (...) now
mine heart is sealed down with har^^ness, blindness, unbelief. Oh! time now
gone.

Answ.
No, not so, see Isai. 65 1.^, 3. A^ the day long God holds out his (...) to a
backsliding and rebellious peop^^

soon quenched; and his zeal soon spent; they hold not out. Whereas I am
constant and preserve in godly courses.

So did that young man, yet he was a graceless man, Matthew. 19.20. Answ.
All these things have I done from my youth: what lack I yet?

It is true, Hypocrites may preserve, Object. 13.
but ^^ey know themselves to be naught all the while, and so deceive others,
but I am persuaded that I am in Gods favor, and and in a safe and happy estate,
since I do all with a good heart for God.

This thou may verily think of thy self and yet be deceived, and damned,
Answ*
(...) go to the devil at last* Prove. 13.12.
There is a way (says Solomon) that seems right to a man, but the end
thereof is the way of death. For he is an hypocrite, not only that makes a
seeming outward show of what he has not, but also that has a true show of
what indeed there is not. The first sort of Hypocrites deceive others only; the
latter, having some inward, yet common work deceive themselves too, James 1.26.
If any man seem to be Religous (so many are, and so deceive the world) but it
is added, deceives his own soul. Nay, thou may go so fairly, and live so
honestly, that all the best Christians about thee may think well of thee, and
never suspect thee, and so may pass through the world, and die with a
deluded comfort; that thou shall go to heaven, and be canonized for a Saint in
thy funeral Sermon, and never know thou art counterfeit, till the Lord b^ingeth
thee to thy strict and last examination, and s^ thou receivest that dreadful
sentence* (...) ye cursed. So it was with the five (...) virgins, that were
never discovered by (...) wise, nor by themselves, until the gate of grace was
shut upon them. If thou have therefore no better evidences to show for thy
self, that thine estate is good, then these; I will not give a pins point for
all the flattering false hopes of being saved. But it may be thou have never
yet come so far as to this pitch: and if not, Lord! what will become of thee?
Suspect thy self much: and when in this ship-wrak o^ souls thou see so many
thousands sink, cry out and conclude: It is a wonder of wonders, and a thousand
to one, if ever thou come safe to shear.

better use of it, Luke 13, ^^. Seeing that many shall seek, and not (...);
therefore* says he, str^ve to enter in at the strai^ gatepunc; venture at
least, and try what the Lord will do for thee.

Wherein does a child of God (and so ^ow may I? Object.
) go beyond these hypocrites (...) go so far?

In three things principally. Answ.


First, no unregenerate man, though he Wherein a child of God goes beyond an
hypocrite.
but he lives in some one sin or other, secret or open, little or great. Judas
went far, but he was c^vetous. Herod went far, but he loved his Herodias. Every
dog has his kennel, every swine has his swill, and every wicked man his lust:
for no unregenerate man has fruition of God to content him. And there is no
man's heart but it must have some good to content it; which good is to be found
only in the fountain of all good, and that is God: or in the cistern, and that
is in the creatures. Hence a man having lost full ^o^tent in God, he seeks
for, and feeds upon contentment in the creature, which ^e makes a God to
him; and here lye^^ his lust or sin, which he must needs live (...). Hence, ask
those men that go very far, ^od take their penny for good silver, and ^ommend
themselves for t^eir good de^^es: I say, ask them, if they have no sin* Yes,
say they, who can live without sin? So they give way to sin, and therefore live
in sin: Nay, commonly all the duties, prayers, care, and zeal of the best
hypocrites, are to hide a lust, as the whore in the Proverbs, that wipeth her
mouth, and goes to the Temple, and pays her vows: O^ to feed their lusts, as
Je^u hi^ zeal against Baal, was to get a Kingdom, There remains a root of
bitterness in the best hypocrites, which howsoever it be lopt off sometimes by
sickness, or horror of conscience; and a man has purposes never to commit it
again, yet there it secretly lurketh: and though it seems to be bound, and
conquered by the Word; or by prayer, or by outward crosses, or while the hand
of God is upon a man, yet the inward strength and power of it remains still:
and therefore when temptations, like strong Philisti^s, are upon this m^n again
he breaks all vows, promises, bonds of God, and will save the life of his sin.

Scribes and Pharisees, and so like zealous Paul, before hi^ conversion, they
fasted, and prayed, an^ kept the Sabbath, but they rested in their legal
righteousness, and in the performance of these and the like duties. Take the
best hypocrite that has the most strong persuasions of Gods love to him, and
ask him, Why he hopes to be saved? He will answer: I pray, read, hear, love
good men; cry out of the sins of the time. And tell him again, that an
hypocrite may climb these stairs, and go as far. He will reply, True indeed,
but they do not what they do with a sound heart, but to be seen of men. Mark
now how these men feel a good heart in themselves, and in all things they do,
and therefore feel not a want of all good, which is poverty of spirit, and
therefore here they fall short, Isai. 66, 2. There were diverse hypocrites
forward for the worship of God in the Temple, but God loathes these, because
not pure in spirit, to them only it is s^id, The Lord will look. I have seen
many professors very forward for all good duties, but as ignorant of Christ,
when they are sifted, as blocks. And if a man (as few do) know not Christ, he
must rest in his duties, because he knows not Christ, to whom he must go, and
be carried, if ever he be saved. I have heard of a man that being condemned to
die, thought to be saved from the gallows, and to save himself from hanging,
by a certain gift, he said he had, of whistling: so men seek to save themselves
by their gifts of knowledge, gifts of memory, gifts of prayer: and when they
see they must die for their sins, this is the ruin of many a soul, that though
he forsake Egypt, and his sins, and fleshpots there; and will never be so as
he has been, yet he never comes into Canaan, but loses himself and his soul
in a wilderness of many duties, and there perishes.

Thirdly, if any unregenerate man come unto Christ, he never gets into
Christ; that is, never takes up his eternal rest, and lodging in any thing
else but Jesus Christ, Heb. 4.4. Judas followed Christ for the bag* he would
have the bag, and Christ too. The young man came unto Christ to be his
Disciple, but he would have Christ and the world too. They will not content
themselves with Christ alone, nor with the world alone, but make their markets
out of both, like whor^sh wives, that will please their husbands and others
too. Men in distress of conscience, if they have comfort from Christ, they are
contented: if they have salvation from hell by Christ, they are contented: but
Christ himself contenteth them not. Thus far an hypocrite goes not. So much
for the first doctrine observed out of the Text. I come now to the second.

Do^t. 2. That those that are saved are saved with much difficulty: or it is a
wonderful hard thing to be saved.

The gate is strait, and therefore a man must sweat and strive to enter: both
the ent^ance is difficult, and the progress of sa^vation too. Jesus Christ is
not got with a wet finger. It is not wishing and desiring to be saved, will
bring men to heaven: hells mouth is full of good wishes. It is not shedding a
tear at a Sermon, or blubbering now and then in a corner, and say over thy
prayers, and crying Gods mercy for sins, will save thee. It is not, Lord, have
mercy upon us, will do thee good. It is not coming constantly to Church; these
are easy matters. But it is ^^ough work, a wonderful hard matter to be saved 1
Pet 4.18. Hence the way to heaven is compared to a race, where a man must put
forth all his strength, and stretch every limb, and all to get forward. Hence a
Christians life is compared to wrestling* Ephesians. 6.12. All the policy and power
of hell buckle together against a Christian, therefore he must look to himself,
or else he falls. Hence it is compared to fighting* 2. Tim. 47. A man must
fight against the devil, the world, himself, who shoot poisoned bullets in the
soul: where a man must kill, or be killed. God has not li^ed the way to Christ
with velvet, nor stre^^ed it with rushes: he will never feed a sloathful humor
in man, who will be saved, if Christ and heaven would drop in their mouths,
and if any would bear their charges thither. If Christ might be bought for a
few cold wishes and lazy desires, he would be of ^mal reckoning amongst men;
who would say, Lightly come, lightly go? Indeed Christ's yoke is easy in it
self, and when a man is got into Christ, nothing is so sweet: but for a carnal
dull heart, it is hard to draw in it: for,

There are four strait gates which every one must pass through, before he can
enter into heaven.

F^^r strait gates (...) passed through, (...) can enter into heaven.
There (...) first, the strait ga^e of humiliati^n. God saves none but first
he humbles them: ^ow it is hard to pass through the gates and flames of hell,
for ^n heart as stiff as a stake to bow, as hard as stone to bleed for the
least prick, not to mourn for one sin, but all sins, and not for a fit, but all
a man's lifetime. Oh* it is hard for

2. The strait gate of faith, Ephesians. 1, 19. It is an easy matter to presume, but
hard to believe in Christ. It is easy for a man that was never humbled, to
believe and say, It is but believing: but it is an hard matter for a man
humbled, when he sees all his sins in order before him, the devil and
conscience roaring upon him, and crying out against him, and God frowning upon
him, now to call God Fathere, is an hard work, Judas had rather be hanged then
believe. It is hard to see a Christ, as a rock to stand upon, when we are
over-whe^med with sorrow of heart for sin. It is hard to prize Christ above ten
thousand worlds of pea^^. It is hard to desire Christ, and nothing but Christ:
hard to follow Christ all the day long, and never be quiet till he is got in
thine arms, and then with Simeon to say, Lord* now let thou thy servant
depart it peace.

3. The strait gate of repentance. It is an easy matter for a man to confess a
man's self to be a sinner, and to cry God forgiveness until next time: but to
have a bitter sorrow, and so to turn from all sin, and to return to God, and
all the ways of God, which is true repentance indeed, this is hard.

4. The strait gate of oppositions of devils, the world, and a man's own self,
to look toward Christ and heaven.

Hence learn, that every easy way to

The false ways to heaven discovered.
Now there are nine easy ways to heaven (as men think) all which lead to hell.

1. The common broad way, wherein a whole Parish may all go a breadth in it.

education, whereby many wild natures are by little and little tamed, and like
wo^ves are chained up easi^y while they are young.

3 Balaams way of good wishes, whereby My son, give me thine heart. The heart
is all in all, and so long they hope to do well enough. Poor deluded creatures
thus think to break through armies of sins, devils, temptations, and to break
open the very gates of heaven with a few good wishes: They think to come to
their journeys and without legs, because their hearts are good to God.

formality, whereby men rest in the performance of most, or of all external
duties without inward life, Mark i.14. Every man must have some Religion, some
fig leaves to hide their nakedness. Now this Religion must be either true
Religion, or the false one; if the true, he must either take up the power of
it, but that he will not, because it is burd^n^om: or the form of it, and this
being easy, men embrace it as their God, and will rather lose their lives,
then their Religion thus taken up. This form of Religion is the easiest
Religion in the world, partly because it eases men of trouble of conscience,
quieting that. Thou have sinned, says conscience, and God is off^^d^d, take a
book and pray, keep thy con^cience b^tter, and bring thy Bible with thee. N^w
conscience is silent, being charmed down with ^he form of R^lig^on, as the
devi^ is driven away (as they say) with holy water: partly also because the
form o^ Religion credite^h ^ man, par^ly bec^u^e it is easy in it ^elf, it is
of a light c^rriage, being but ^he shadow and picture of the substance of
Religion* as now, what an easy matter is it, to come to Church? They hear (at
least outwardly) very attentively, an hour and more; and then to turn to
proof, and to turn down a leaf, here is the form. But now ^o spend Saturday at
night, and all the whole Sabbath day morning in trimming the Lamb, and in
getting oil in their heart, to meet the bridegroom the next day, and so meet
him in the word, and therefore to tremble at the voice of God, and suck the
breast while it is open; and when the word is done, to go aside privately, and
there to chew upon the Word, there to lament with tears all the vain thoughts
in duties, deadness in hearing, this is hard, because this is the power of
godliness: and this men will not take up: so for private prayer, what an easy
matter it is for men to say over a few prayers out of some devout book, or to
repeat some old prayer got by heart since a child, or to have two or three
short-winded wishes for Gods mercy in the morning and at night; this form is
easy: but now to prepare the heart by serious meditation of God and man's self
before he prays, then to come to God with a bleeding hunger-starved heart, not
only with a desire, but with a warrant. I must have such or such a mercy, and
there to wrestle with God, although it be an hour or two together for a
blessing, this is too hard; men think none do this, and therefore they will not.

Fifthly, the way of Presumption, out unto them. There is no word of comfort in
the book of God intended for such as regard iniquity in their hearts, though
they do not act it in their lives. Their only comfort is, that the sentence of
damnation is not yet executed upon them.

Sixthly, the way of sl^th, whereby men lie still, and say, God must do all; If
the Lord would set up a Pulpit at the Alehouse door, it may be they would hear
oftener. If God will always thunder, they will always pray* if strike them now
and then with sickness, God shall be paid with good words and promises ^now,
that they will be better if they live, but as long as peace lasts, they will r^n
to hell as fast as they can; and if God will not catch them, they care not,
they will not return.

Seventhly, The way of carelessness, those have a (...) to live, and yet are
dead.

moderation, or hon^st discretion, Rev. 3.16. which indeed is nothing but
luke-warmness of the soul, and that is, when a man contriveth and cutteth out
such a way to heaven, as he may be hated of none, but please all, and so do
any thing for a quiet life, and so sleep in a whole skin. The Lord says, He
tha^ will live godly, must suffer persecution. No, not so, Lord. Surely (think
they) i^ men were discreet and wise, it would prevent a great deal of trouble
and opposition in good courses. This man will commend those that are most
zealous, if they were but wise: if he meet with a black mouthed swearer, he
will not reprove him, lest he be displeased with him. If he meet with an honest
man, he will yield to all he says, that so he may commend him: And when he
meets them both together, they shall be both alike welcome (what ever he
thinks) to his house and table, because he would fain be at peace with all
men.

self-love, whereby a man fearing terribly he shall be damned, The way of
self-^^ve.
uses diligently all means whereby he shall be saved. Here is the strongest
difficulty of all, to row against the stream, and to hate a man's self, and then
to follow Christ fully.

I now come to the sixth general head purp^sed in order to be considered.

CHAP. VI.
THat the grand cause of men's eternal ruin; or why so many are damned, and so
few saved by Christ, it is from themselves, Ez^k 3^ 11. Why will ye die?

The great cause why so many people die and perish everlastingly, is, because
they will. Every man that perishes, is his own bu^cher, or murderer, Matthew.
^3.27. Hos. 13.9. This is the point we purpose to prosecute at the present.

The question here will be, Quest.
how men plot and perfect their own ruin? Answ.


By these four princ^pal means, How men plot their own ruin.
which are the four great rocks that most men are split upon; and great
necessity lies upon every man to know them* for when a powder plot is
discovered, the danger is almost past. I say there, are these four causes of
man's eternal overthrow, which I shall handle largely, and make use of every
particular reason when it is opened and finished.

First, by reason of that bloody black ignorance of men, whereby thousands
remain woefully ignorant of their spiritual estate, not knowing how the case
stands between God and their souls; but thinking themselves to be well enough
already, they never seek to come out of their misery, till they perish in it.

Secondly, by reason of man's carnal security,

carnal confidence, whereby they shift to s^ve themselves by their own duties
and performances when they feel it.

Fourthly, by reason of man's bold presumption,

I will begin with the first reason, and discover the first train whereby men
blow up themselves, Ignorance the first general reason of man's ruin.
which is this: They know not their misery, not that fearful acccursed forlorn
estate wherein they ly; but think and say, they shall do as well as others; and
therefore when any friend persuades them to come out of it, and shows them
the danger of remaining in such a condition: What is their answer? I pray you,
save your breath to cool your broth (...) very fat shall stand on his own
bottom: Let me alone, I hope I have a soul to save as well as you, and shall be
as careful of it as you shall, cr^^^n ^e: you shall not answer for my soul: I
hope I shall do as well as the precisest of you all. Hence likewise, if the
Minister come home to them, they go home with hearts full of outcries against
the man, and their tongue dipped in gall against the Sermon. God be merciful unto
us: if all this be true, here is harsh doctrine enough, to make a man run out
of his wits, and to drive men to despair. Thus they know not their misery; and
not knowing, they are lost and condemned crea^ures under the everlasting wrath
o^ God. They never seek, pray, strive* or follow the means whereby they may
come out of it, and so perish in it, and never know it, till they awake with
the flames of hel^ about their ears. They will acknowledge indeed, many of
them, that all men are born in a most miserable estate, but they never apply
particularly that general truth to themselves, saying, I am the man. I am now
under Gods wrath, and may be snatched away by death eve^ie hour, and then I am
undone and lost for ever.

Now, there are two sorts of people that are ignorant of this their misery.

First, the common sort of profane, blockish, ignorant people.

Secondly, the finer sort of unsound hollow professors, that have a peacoks
pride, that think themselves fair, and in a very good estate, though they have
but one feather on their breast to boast of.

I will begin with the first sort, and show you the reasons why they are
ignorant of their misery, that is for these four reasons.

First, sometimes because they want the saving means of knowledge. There is no
faithful Minister, no compassionate Lot, to tell them of fire and brimstone
from heaven, for their crying sins. There is no Noah to forwarn them of a
flood: There is no messenger to bring them tidings of those armies of Gods
devouring plagues and wrath, that are appro^ching near unto them, They have no
pilots, poor forsaken creatures, to show them their rocks. They have either no
Minister at all to reach them, either because the Parish is too poor, or the
Church-living too great to maintain a faithful man (the strongest asses
car^ying the greatest burdens commonly (O ^^ful Physicians! Sometimes they be
profane, and cannot heal themselves, and sometimes they be ignorant. And know
not what to preach, unless they should follow the steps of Master Latimers
Friar, or at the best, they shoot off a few pot guns against gross sins: or if
they do show men their misery, they lick them whole again, with some comtable
ill applied sentences: (but I hope better things of you, my brethren) the man's
Patron may happily storm else. Or else they say commonly, thou have sinned, but
comfort thy self, despair not, Christ has suffered: And thus skin over the
wound, and let it fester within, for want of cutting it deeper. I say therefore
because they want a faithful watch man to cry, Fire, fire, in that sleepy
estate of sin and darkness wherein they ly; therefore whole Towns, Parishes,
generations of men, are burnt up, and perish miserably, Lament. 2.14.

S^condly, because they have no leisure to consider of their misery, when they
have the means of revealing it unto them, as Felix, Acts 24.25. Many a man has
many a bitter pill given him at a S^rmon, but he has not leisure to chow upon
it. One man is taken up with suits in Law, and another almost eaten up with
suretiship, and ca^king cares how to pay his debts, and provide f^r his own:
another has a great charge, and few friends, and he says, the world is hard*
and hence, like a mole, too^eth in the earth, week days and Sabb^th days: the
world thus calling them on one side, and lusts on another, and the devil on the
other side, they have no leisure to consider of death, devil, God, nor
themselves, hell, nor heaven, The Minister cries and knocks without, but
there is such a noise and number of tumultuous lusts and vain thoughts in their
hearts and heads, that all good thoughts are sad unwelcome guests, and are
knocked down presently.

Thirdly, because if they have leisure, they are afraid to know it. Hence
people cry out of Ministers, that they dam^ all, and will hear them no more,
and they will not be such fools as to believe all that such say; the reason is,
they are afraid to know the worst of themselves; they are afraid to be cut, and
therefore cannot endure the Chirurgien; They think to be troubled in mind, as
othe^s are, is the very high rode to despair; and therefore if they do hear a
rale, how one after hearing of a Sermon grew distracted, or drowned, or hanged
himself, it shall be an item, and a warning to them, as long as they live, for
troubling their heads about such matters. Men of guilty consciences (hence)
fly from the face of God, as prisoners from the Judge, as debtors from the
creditor. But if the Lord of Hosts can catch you, you must and shall feel with
horro^ of heart that which you fear a little now.

Fourthly, because if they be free from this foolish fear, they cannot see
their misery, by reason that they look upon their estates through false
glasses, and by virtue of many false principles in their minds, they cheat
themselves.

Which false principles, are these principally: I will but name them.

First, they conce^ve, God that made

Secondly, because they feel no misery,

Thirdly, because God blesses them

Fourthly, because they think sin to be no great evil, for all are sinners, for
this cannot mischieve them.

Fifthlie, because they think Gods mercy

Sixthly, because they think Christ died for all sinners, and they confess
themselves

Seventhly, because they hope well, and

Eighthly, because they do as most do, they doubt not for their parts, but doing
as such do, they shall die happily, as others have done.

Ninthly, because their desires and hearts are good, as they think.

Tenthly, because they do as well as God will give them grace, and so God is in
the fault only, if they perish.

These are the reasons and grounds upon which profane people are deceived.

Now it follows to show the ground on which the finer sort mi^c^rry.

Secondly, hollow professors cheat and cozen their own souls. It is in our
Church as it is in an old wood, where there are many tall trees, yet cut them
and search them deeply, they prove pithless, sapless, hollow, unsound
creatures. These men twist their own ru^ne with a finer thread, and can guggle
better then the common sort, and cast mists before their own eyes, and so cheat
their own souls. It is Ministe^s first work to turn men from darkness into this
light, Acts 26 18* and the Spirits first wo^k to convince men of sin, John 16 9
And therefore it is peoples main work to know the wo^st at first of themselves,
How men ^ome to be deceiv^d about their spiritual estates.


Now the cause of these men's mistaking, is threefold.

First, the spiritual madness and drunkenness of their understanding.

Secondly, the false bastard peace begot (...) nourished in the conscience.

Thirdly, (...) and secret distempers of the will.

First, there are these seven drunken distempers in the understanding or mind
of man, whereby he comes to be most miserably deceived.

First, the understandings arrogancy. You shall never see a man mean and vile
in his own eyes deceived, Psalm. 25.9. but a proud man or woman is often
cheated. Hence proud Haman thought surely he was the man whom the King would
honor, when in truth it was intended for poor Mordecay. For pride having once
overspread the mind, it ever has this property, it makes a penny stand f^r
a pound: a spark is blown up to a flame: it makes a great matter of a little
seeming grace: and therefore the proud Pharisee, when he came to reckon with
himself, he takes his poor counter, that ^s, I am not as other men, nor as
this Publican and sets it down for a thousand pound; that is, he esteems
of himself, as a very rich man for it. So many a man, because he has some
good thing in himself, as, he is pitiful to the poor, he is a true man, though
a poor man, he was never given to wine of women. He magnifieth himself for this
tittle, and so deceives and over-reckoneth himself. There are your
Bristow-stones like diamonds, and man^ cheaters cozen Country folks with the^
that desire to be fine, and know not what diamonds are. So many men are
desirous to be honest, and to be reputed so not knowing what true grace means:
therefore Bristow-stones are pearls in their eyes. A little seeming grace
shines so bright in their eyes, that they are half bewitched by it, to think
highly of themselves, although they be but glittering seeming jewels in a
swines snout. A cab of doves dung was sold in Samaria in its time of famine, at
a great rate: A man living in such a place, where all about him are either
ignorant, or profane, or civil, a little moral honesty (dung, in respect of
true grace) goes a great way, and is esteemed highly off, and he is as honest
a man as ever lived. A man that looks through a red glass, all things appear
red: A man looking upon himself through some fair spectacles, through some one
good thing that he has in himself, appears fair to him. It is said* Luke,
20. ult. the Pharisees devoured widows houses. Might not this racking of rents
make them question their estates? No. Why? They for pretense made long prayers:
so many men are drunk now and then, but they are sorry: they cannot but sin, but
their desires are good: they talk idle^y, but they live honestly: they do ill
^ometimes, but they mean well. Thus when some good things are seen in
themselves, pride pu^teth them with an overweening conceit of it, and so they
cozen their own souls.

Secondly, the understandings obstinacy, whereby the mind having been long am
in a good estate, will not suffer this conceit to be plucked out of it. Now your
old rooted, yet roo^en professors, having grown long in a good conceit of
themselves, will not believe that they have been fools all their lifetime, and
therefore now must pull down, and lay the foundation again: And hence you shall
hear men say of a faithful Minister that does convince and condemn them, and
their estate, to be most woeful: What? shall such an upstart teach me? Does he
think to make me dance after his pipe, and to think that all my good prayers,
my faith, my charity, have been so long abominabe and vile before God? No
silver can bribe a man to cast away his old traditional opinions and conceits,
whereby he cheateth himself, till Christ's blood do it, 1. Pet. 18. And hence
the woman of Samaria, objected this against Jesus Christ, that their old
Fathers worshipped in that mountain, and therefore it was as good a place as
Jerusalem, the place of Gods true worship, John 4.20. Men grow crooked and aged
wi^h good opinions of themselves, and can seldom, or never, he set str^ight
again. Hence such kind of people, ^^ough they would fain be taken for honest
religious Christians, yet will never suspec^ their estates to be bad
themselves, neither can they endure that any other should search or suspect
them to be yet rotten at the heart. And are not those wares and commodities
much to be suspected, nay concluded to be stark naught, which the seller will
needs put upon the chap-mam, without seeing or looking on them first? It is a
strong argument we produce against the Papists Religi^n to be suspected to be
bad, because they obtrude their opinions on their followers, to be believed
without any hesitation or dispute about them, either before or after they have
embraced them: certainly thy old faith, thy old prayers, thy old honesty, or
form of piety, are counterfeit wares, that cannot endure searching, because
thou will not be driven from this conceit: I am in a good estate. I have been
so long of this good mind, and therefore will not begin to doubt now. It is to
be feared, that such kind of people (as I have much observed) are either
notoriously ignorant, or have sometime or other fallen into some horrible
secret grievous sins, as whore^ome, oppression, or the like, the guilt of which
lying yet secretly on them, makes them fly from the light of Gods truth, which
would find them out, quarelling both against it, and the Ministers that preach
it, Romans 2.^. And therefore as it is with thieves, when they have any stolen
goods brought within doors, they will not be searched or suspected, but say,
they are as honest m^n as themselves that come to search; for they fear if they
be found out; that they shall be troubled before the Judge, and may hardly
escape with their lives: so many old professors* when the Minister comes t^
search them, they clap to the doors upon the man, and truth too* and say, they
hope to be sa^ed, as well as the best of them all. The reason is, they are
guilty, they are loath to be troubled, and cast down, by seeing ^he worst of
themselves; and think it is ^ard for them to go to heaven, and be saved, if
they h^ve been in a wrong way, all ^ver lifetime. An honest heart will cry
after the best means, Lord, search me, John 3.20. and open all the doors to the
^^ter^ainment of the straightest, strictest truths.

Thirdly, the understandings obscurity, or ignorance of the infinite*
exactnes^, glorious purity, and absolute perfection of the Law of God: whence
it comes to pass, that this burning lamp, or bright Sun of Gods Law, being set
in their minds, rotten grounds of their own righteousness, doing some things
according to the Law of God, shines and glistereth gloriou^^y in their eyes,
in the dark nightime of dismal darkness; by doing of which, they think they
please God, and their estates are very good. I was alive, says Paul, Rom 7.9.
without the Law: and he gives the reason of it, because sin did but sleep in
him, like a cutthroat in an house, where all is quiet. Before the Law came, he
saw not that deadly sec^et coat of corruption, and that letter of rebellion
that was lurking in his heart, and therefore thought highly of himself for his
own righteousness. The Gospel is a glass to show men the face of God in Christ,
2. Cor. 2. ult. The Law is that glass that shows a man his own face, and what
he himself is: Now if this glass be taken away* and not set before a deformed
heart, how can a man but think himself fair? And this is the reason why civil
men, formaists, almost every one, think better of themselves then indeed they
are, because they reckon without their (...); that is, they judg^ of the
number, nature, and greatness of their sins by their own books, by their own
reason: They look not Gods debt-book, Gods exact laws over, and compare
themselves therewith: If they did, it would amaze the stoutest heart, and pluck
dow^ men's plumes, and make them say: Is there any mercy so great as to pass by
such sins, and to put up such wrongs, and to forgive such sins and debts, one
of which a^one may undo me, much more so many?

Fourthly, the understandings security, sleepiness, whereby men never reflect
upon their own actions, nor compare them with the rule: Although they have
knowledge of the Law of God, yet it is with them, as it is with men that have a
fair glass before them, but never beholding themselves in the glass, they never
see their spots. This is the woe of most unregenerate men: they want a
re^^ecting power and light, to judge of themselves by, Jer. 8.6. You sha^ have
them think on a Sermon, Here is for such an one, and such an one is touched
here: when it may be the some Sermon principally speaks of them. But they
never say, this concerns me. I was found out through the goodness of the Lord
to day: and surely the man spoke unto none but unto me, as if some body had
told him what I have done. And hence you shall find out many lamb Christians,
that will yield to all the truths delivered in a Sermon, and commend it too;
but go away, and shake off all the truths that serve to convince them. And
hence many men, when they examine themselves in general, whether they have
grace or no, whether they love Christ or no; they think yes, that they do with
al^ their hearts; yet they never have this grace, or any other, what ever they
think; because they want reflecting light to judge of generals, b^ their own
p^rticula^ courses. For te^l these men, that he that loves another truly,
will often think of him, speak of him, rejoice in his company, will not w^ong
him willingly in the least thing. Now ask them if they love Christ th^^* If
they have any reflecting of light, they will s^e where they have one thought of
Christ, they have thousands on other things. R^joice* nay, they are weary of
his company, in word* in prayer* And that they do not only wrong him, but make
a light matter of it; when it is done, all are sinners and no man can live
without sin. Like a sleepie man (fire burning in his bed-straw) he c^yeth not
out, when others happily lament his estate, that see a far off, but cannot help
him, Isai. 42.25. A man that is to be hanged the next day, may dream over night
he shall be a King: why? because he is asleep, he reflecteth not on himself.
Thou may go to the devil, and be damned, and yet ever think and dream that
all is well with thee. Thou have no reflecting light to judge of they self.
Pray, pray therefore that the Lord would turn your eyes inward; and do not let
the devil and delusion shut you out of your ^wn house, from seeing what Court
is kept there every day.

Fifthly, the understandings impeity, If any be saved I shall no doubt be one,
Isa. 26.10 11. Men will not behold the majesty of God in the lives of his
people: many a man being too light, but desirous to go and pass for current,
weighs himself with the best people, and thinks, what have they that I have
not? what do they that I do not? And if he see they go beyond him, he then
turns his own ballan^e with his finger, and makes them too light, that so he
himself may pass for weighty.

And his vilifying of them and their grace, judging them to be of no other
mettel then other men, appears in three particulars.

First, they raise up false (...) of Gods people, and nourish (...) of evil
committed by them, they will conclude* they be all such. If they see no
offensive sin in any of them, they are then reputed a pack of hypocrites. If
they are not so uncharitable (having no grounds) they prophecy, they will
hereafter be as bad as others, though they carry a fair flowrish now.



degree of grace then themselves, yet they dare be bold to think and say, their
hearts are as up^ight, though they be not so perfect as others are. And so
vilify the grace that shines to the best men, by making this gold to d^ffer
from their own copper, not (...), but gradu^^ly: and hence they deceive
themselves miserably; not bu^ that one ((...)) or sincere Christian differs
from another in glory: I speak of those m^n only that never were fixed in so
high a Sphere, as true honesty dwells, yet falsely father this bad conclusion,
that they are upright for their measure, that they have not the like measure of
grace received, as others have.

Sixth^y, the understandings idolatry, Romans 10.3.

And the mind comes to set up her image thus.

First, the mind is haunted and pursued with troublesome fears of hell:
conscience Law tells him, he that die; and death appears and tells him,
he must shortly meet with him: And if he be taken away in his sins, then comes
a black day of reckoning for all his privy pranks: a day of blood horror,
judgment, and fire, where no creature can comfort him. Hence says he, Lord,
keep my soul from these miseries: he hops it shall not prove so evil with him,
but fears it will.

Secondly, hereupon he desires peace

Thirdly, that he may have ease, he Grace, which is meat and drink to an holy
heart, is but Physic to this kind of men, to ease them of their fears and
troubles.

Hereupon being ignorant of the height of ^i^e grace, he fancieth to himself
such a measure of common grace, to be true grace: As, if he forseth himself
ignorant of that which troubles him, so much knowledge will I then get, says
he. If some foul sins in his practice trouble him, these he will cast away, and
so reformeth: If om^ssion of good duties molesteth him, he will hear better;
and buy some good prayer book, and pray oftener: And if he be persuaded such a
man is a very honest man, then he will strive to do as he does, and now he is
quieted.

When he has attained unto this pitch of his own, now he thinks himself a
young beginner, and a good one too, so that if he dies, he thinke^h he shall do
well; if he lives, he thinks and hops he shall grow better: and when he is
come to his own pitch, here he sets down his state fully sati^fied. And now
if he be pressed to get into the estate of grace, his answer is, That is not to
be done now, he th^nke^h God, that care is past. The truth is, beloved, it is
too high for him, his own legs could never carry him chi^h^r, all his grace
coming by his own working, not by God Almighties power. Let a man have false
weights, he is cheate^ grievously wi^h light gold: why? because his weights are
too light: So these men have too light w^ights, to judge of the weight of true
grace; therefore light, clipped cracked pieces cheat them. Hence you shall have
those men commend pithless, sapless men, for very honest men, as ever brake
bread: why? they are just answerable to their weights. Hence I have not much
wondered at them, who maintain that a man may fall away from true grace. The
reason lies here. They set up to themselves such a common work of grace to be
true grace; from which, no wonder that a man may fall. Hence Bellarmine says:
That which is true grace, veritate essentia, only may be lost, not that grace
which is true, veritate firmae soliditatis; which letter being rightly
understood, may be called special, as the other common grace. Hence also you
shall have many professors hearing an hundred Sermons, never moved to grow
better. Hence likewise you shall see our common Preachers comfort every one a
most that they see troubled in mind, because they think presently they have
true grace: Now they begin to be sorrowful for their sins. It is just according
to their own light weights.

For the Lords sake, take heed of this deceit. True grace, I tell you, it is a
rare pearl, a glorious Sun clouded from the eyes of all but them that have it,
Rev. 2.18. A strange, admirable, almighty work of God upon the soul, which no
created power can produce, as far different in the least measure of it, from
the highest degree of common grace, as a devil is from an angel; for it is
Christ living, breathing, reigning, fighting, conquering in the soul? Down
therefore with your idol grace, your idol honesty: True Grace never aims at a
pitch, it aspireth only to perfection, Phil. 3.12.3. And therefore Chrysostom
calls (...) Paul, insatiabili^ De^cultor: A greeedy, insatiable, devouring
worshipper of the Lord Almighty.

Seventhlie, the understandings error, (...) another cause of man's ruin.

And that is seen principally in these five things, these five errors or false
conceits.

First, in judging some trouble of mind, some light sorrow for sin, to be true
repentance; and so thinking they do repent, hope they shall be saved: for sin
is like sweet poison while a man is drinking it down* by commi^ting of it,
there is much pleasure in it, bu^ after the committing of it, there is a sting
in it, Prove. 23.31.32. Then the time comes when this poison works, making
the heart fewe^ with grief, sorry they are at the heart, they say for it: and
the eyes drop, and the man that committed sin with delight, now cries out with
grief in the bitterness of his soul: O that I, ^east what I (...) had never
committed i^, Lord, mercy mercy, Prove. 5.3* 4.11, 12. Nay, it may (...) they
will fast, and humble, and afflict their souls voluntarily for sin, and now
they think they have repented, Isa. 58.3. And hereupon, when they hear that all
that sin shall die, they grant this is true indeed, except a man repent, and so
they think they have done already. This is true, At what time (...) a sinner
repents, the Lord will bl^t out his iniquities. But this repentance is not
when a man is troubled somewhat in mind for sin, but when he comes to mourn
for sin, as his greatest evil, as if he should see all his goods and estate on
a light fire before him; and that not for some sins, but all sins little and
great; and that not for a time, for a fit and away (a land-flood of sorrow) but
always like a spring never dry, but ever running all a man's lifetime.

Secondly, in judging the striving of conscience against sin, to be the
striving of the flesh against the spirit; and hence come these speeches from
carnal black mouths: The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak. And hence
men think, they being thus compounded of flesh and spirit, are regenerate, and
in no worse estate then the children of God themselves* as sometime I once
spoke with a man that did verily think, that Pilate was an honest man, because
he was so unwilling to crucify Christ, which unwillingness did arise only from
the restraint of conscience against the ^^ct. So many men judge honestly yet
simply, upon such a ground of themselves; they say, they strive against their
sins: but Lord be merciful unto them, they say the flesh is fra^l: and hence
Armin^us gives a di^erse interpretation of the 7. cap. of the Romans, from
ordinary Divines; concerning which, Paul speaks in the person of an
unregenerate man because he observed diverse gr^celess persons as (he says
himself) having fallen, and falling commonly into sins against conscience, to
bring that chapter in their own defense and comfort, because they did that
which they allowed not, verse 15 and so it was not they, but sin that dwelled
in them.

And so many amongst u^know they should be better, and strive that they may
grow better, but through the power of sin, cannot; conscience tells them they
must not sin, their hearts and lusts say they must sin; and here forsooth is
flesh and spirit. Oh, no, here is conscience and lust only by the ears
together. Which striving, Herod Balaam, Pilate, or the vilest reprobate in the
world may have. Such a war argues not any grace in the heart, but rather more
strength of corruption, and more power of sin in the heart; ^s* It is no wonder
if a horse run away when he is loose, but when his bit and bridle is in his
mouth; now to be wild, argues he is altogether untamed and unsubdued. Take
heed therefore of judging your estate to be good* because of some backwardness
of your hearts to commit some sins, though little sins: for thy sins may be,
and it is most certain, are more powerful in thee, then in others that have
not the like struglings, because they have not such cheks as thou have to
restrain thee. Know therefore that the striving of the Spirit against the
flesh, is against sin, because it is sin: as a man hates a toad, thought he be
never poisoned by it: But the striving of thy conscience against sin is only
against sin, because it is a^ troubling, or a damning sin. The striving of the
Spirit against the flesh is from a deadly hatred of sin. Romans 7.15. But thy
striving of conscience against sin, is only from a fear of the danger of sin:
for Balaam had a mind to curse the Israelites for his money sake; but if he
might have had a^ house full of silver and gold (which is a goodly thing in a
covetous eye) it is said he durst not curse them.

Thirdly, in judging of the sincerity of the heart by some good affection in
the heart. Hence many a deluded soul reasons the case out thus with himself.
Either I must be a profane man, or an hypocrite or an upright man. Not
profane, I thank God, for I am not given to whoring* drinking, oppression,
swearing: nor hypocrisy, for I hate these shows: I cannot endure to appear
better without, then I am within, therefore I am upright. Why? Oh! because mine
heart is good, mine affections and desires within, are be^ter then my life
without: and what ever others judge of me, I know mine own heart, and the heart
is all that God desir^^h. And thus they fool themselves Prove. 28.^6. This is
one of the greatest causes and grounds of mistake amongst men that think best
of themselves: they are not able to put a difference between the good desires,
and strong affections that arise from the love of Jesus Christ.

Self-love will make a man seek his own good and safety* hence it will pull a
man out of his bed betimes in the morning, and call him up to pray: it will
take him and carry him into his chamber toward evening, and there privately
make him seek, and pray, and ^ug hard for pardon, for Christ, for mercy, Lord
evermore give us of this bread. But the love of Christ makes a man desire
Christ and his honor for himself, and all other things for Christ. It is true
the desires of sons in Christ by faith, are accepted ever; but the desire of
servants, men that work only for their wages out of Christ, are not.

Fo^^^hly, in judging of Gods love to them, (...) aiming sometimes at the glory
of God. Is this possible, that a man should aim at Gods glory, and yet perish?
Ye^, and ordinary too. A man may be liberal to the poor, 2. Kings. 10.11.
maintain the Mi^istry, be forward. and stand for good things: whence he may
not doubt but that God loves him. But here is the difference, though a wicked
man may make Gods glory in some particular things, his end, yet he never makes
it in his general course his utmost and last end, A subtle apprentice may do
all his Masters work, but he may take the gain to himself, or divide it betwixt
his Master and himself, and so may be but a knave, as observant as he seems
to be: So a sub^i^ heart (yet a vile vi^^^nous heart) may forsake all the
world, as Judas did; may bind himself apprintice to all the duties God
r^quireth outwardly at his hands, and so do good works: but what is his last
and (...) is that he might gain respect or place, or that Christ may have some
part of the glory: and he another Simon Mag^^, would give any mo^^y sometimes
that he could pray so well, know so much, and do as others do, and yet his last
end is for himself* but how can you believe. if you seek not that glory that
comes from God? says Christ. There is many seek the honor of Christ; but do
you seek his honor only: Is it your last end where you rest, and seek no more
but that? If thou would know whether thou make Christ's glory thy last end,
observe this rule.

If the^ art more grieved for the eclip^^ of thine own honor, and for thine own
losses, then for the loss of Gods honor: it is an evident sign thou love it
not, desire it not as thy chiefest good, as the last end, for thy summum
^onum; and therefore do not seek Gods honor, in the pri^^^ and chiefest
place. Sin troubled ^aul more then all the plagues and miseries of the world.
Indeed, if thy name he do shed with disgrace, and thy will be ^r^ssed, thine
heart is ^rieved and disquieted; but the Lord may loose his honor daily by
thine own sins, and those that be round about thee; but no^ a ^ear, not a sigh,
not a groan, to behold such a spectacle. As sure as the Lord lives, thou
seek not the Lords Name, or honor, as thy greatest good.

Fifthlie, in judging the power of sin t^o be but infirmi^y for if any thing
trouble an unregenerate man, and, makes him call his estate into question, it
is sin either in the being or power of it. Now sin in the being, ought not,
must not, make a man question his estate, because the best have that left in
them that will humble them, and make them live by faith; therefore the power of
sin only can trouble a man. Now if a man do judge of this to be only but
infirmity, which the best are compassed about wi^hall, he cannot but ly down
securely, and think himself well. And if this error be settled in one that
lives in one known sin, it is very difficult to remove* for let the Minister
cast ^he sparks of hell in their faces, and de^ounce the terror of God against
them, they are never stirred. Why? because they think, Here is for you that
live in sin: But as for themselves, although they have sins, yet they strive
against them, and so cannot leave them: for we must have sin as long as we live
here, they say. Now mark it, there is no surer sign of a man under the bloody
reign, and dominion of his lusts and sins then this; that is to give way to
sin, (though never so little and common) not to be greatly troubled for sin
(for they may be a little troubled) because they cannot overcome sin, I deny
not, but the best do sin daily, but this is the disposition of Paul, and every
child of God he mourns not the less, but the (...) they think the Lo^d
looks not for it at their hands. Now satan gives men liberty in their sinful
courses, and this liberty begets peace, and this peace (...) them think well
of themselves, 2. (...) 2.19. There is many rotten (...) in these days, that
indeed will not open their mouths against the sincere hearted people of God,
yet they walk loosely, and take too much liberty in their speeches, l^berty in
their thoughts, liberty in their desires and de^ights, liberty in their
company, in their (...), and that sometimes under a pretense of Christian
liberty and never trouble themselves with these needless controversies, to what
end, or in what manner do I use these things? Whereas the righteous man fears
always, considering there is a snare for him in every lawful liberty. May not I
sin in my mirth, in my speaking, in my (...)* Oh! this libe^ty that the devil
gives, and the world takes, before most men with a foolish opinion, that all
is well with them.

Thirdly, by giving the soul good diet, meat and drink enough, what dish he
likes best. Let a Master give liberty; yet his servant is not pleased, unless
he has meat and drink and food; so there is no wicked man under heaven, but as
(...) takes too much liberty in the use of lawful things, so he feeds his
heart with some unlawful secret ^ust, though all the time they live in it, it
may be, it is unknown to them, Luke 16. D^^^^ had his d^sh* his good (...), and
so ^^ng himself (...) and bade his sou^ take his ^ase, and (...) ye^, observe
this diet is poisoned (...) self, but ever commended to the soul (...)
wholesome, good and lawful. They christen sin with a new name, as Popes are at
their election: if he be bad, they call him sometimes Pius, if a coward, (...),
etc. So covetousness is good husbandry: company keeping, good neighbor-hood:
lying to save their credit from cracking, but an handsome excuse: And hence the
soul goes peaceably on, and believes he is in a good estate.

Fourthly, by giving the soul rest and sleep, that is cessation sometimes from
the act of sin: Hence they are hardly persuaded, that they live in sin, because
they cease sometimes from the act of sin; as no man does always swear, nor is
he always drunk, nor always angry. They think, only their falls in these, or
the like sins, are slips and falls which the best man may have sometimes, and
yet be a dear child of God. Oh! ^a^an will no^ always set men at his wo^k: for
if men should always have their cups in their hands, and their queans in their
arms: if a covetous man should always root in the earth, and never pray,
never have good thoughts, never keep any Sabbath; if a man should always speak
idl^ly, and (...) a good word drop from him, a man's ^^^science would never be
quiet, but (...) him up from what he does, but by gi^^ng him respite from
sinning for a time, satan gets stronger possession afterward, as Matthew.
1^.43. When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, it returns worse.
Samsons strength always remained, and so does sins strength in a natural man,
but it never appears until temptation come.

Fifthly, by giving the soul fair promises of heaven and eternal life, (...)
fastening them upon the heart. Most men are confident, their estate is good, and
though God kills them, yet will they trust in him, and cannoth be beaten from
this. Why? Oh! satan bewitcheth them. For as he told Evah by the serpent, she
should not die; so does he insinuate his persuasions to the soul, though it
live in sin, he shall not di^^ut to do well enough, as the precisest. Satan
gives thus good words, but woeful wages, the eternal flashes of hell.

II. By false Teachers* Who partly by their loose examples, partly by their
flattering doctrines in public, and their large charity in private, dawbing up
every one (especially that is a good friend unto them) for honest and religious
people, and if they be but a little troubled, applying comfort presently, and
so healing them that should be wounded, and (...) telling them roundly of their
Hero^das, (...) John Baptist did Herod. Hereupon the judge themselves honest,
because the Mi^nister will give them the beggarly pasport, and so they go out
of the world, and die like lambs, being woefully cheated, Matthew. 24.11. Look
abroad in the world, and see what is the reason so many feed their hearts with
confidence they shall be saved, yet their lives condemn them, and their hearts
acquit them: the reason is, such and such a Minister will go to the Alehouse,
and he never prays in his family, and he is none of these precise hot people,
and yet as honest a man as ever lives, and a good Divine too. Aha^ was
miserably cheated by four hundred false Prophets. Whilst the Minister is of a
loose life himself: he will wink at others, and their faults, lest in reproving
them, he should condemn himself, and others should say unto him; Physician,
heal thy self. Thieves of the same company will not steal from one another,
lest they trouble thereby themselves: and hence they give others false carts to
sail by, ^ fall rules to live by, their unconscionable large charity, is like a
gulf that (...) allows ships (souls I mean) tossed (...) tempests, and not
comforted, Isa^. ^4.7.8. And hence all being fish that ^ometh to their net, all
men think so of ^^emselves.

III. A false spirit. This is a third Romans 8.16. (...) there is a false spirit,
just like the true (...), witnessing that they are the sons of God; 1. John. 4
1. we are bid, try the spi^its: now if these spirits were not like Gods true
Spirit, what needs trial? As, what need one ^ry whether dirt be gold, which
are so unlike to each other? And this Spirit I take to be set down, Matthew.
^4.23. Now look as the true Spirit witnesses, so the false spirit, being like
it, witnesses also.

First, the Spirit of God humbles the soul. So before men have the witness of
false spirit, they are mightily cast down (...) dejected in spirit; and
hereupon they (...) for ease, and purpose to lead new (...), and cast away the
weapons, and sub^it, Psalm. 66.3.

Secondly, the Spirit of God in the ^ospel reveals Jesus Christ and his false
spirit ^^scovereth Christ's excellency and willingness to receive him, if he
will but come in. It fares with this soul, as with Surveyors of lands, that
take an exact compass of other men's grounds, of which they shall never enjoy a
foot. So did Balaam, Number. 24.5.6. This false spirit shows them the glory of
heaven, and Gods people.

Heb. 6. and the soul breaks out into a passionate admiration: Oh! that ever
there should be any hope for such a vile wretch as ^ am, and have been! And so
joyeth exceedingly, like a man half way wrapped up into heaven.

my God, and Christ, my sweet Savior, and now it doubts not but it shall be
saved* Why? because I have received much comfort after much sorrow and
doubting, Hos. 8.2.3. and yet remains a deluded miserable creature still, But
here mark the difference between the witness of each spirit. The false spirit
makes a man believe he is in the state of grace, and shall be saved, because he
has tasted of Christ, and so has been comforted, and that abundantly: But the
true spirit persuades a man, his estate is good and safe, because he has not
only tasted, but bought this Christ, as the wise merchant in the Gospel, that
rejoiced he had found the pearl, but yet stays not here, but sells away
all, and buyeth the pearl. Like two Chapmen that come to buy wine, the one
tastes it, and goes away in a drunken fit, and so concludes it is his: So a
man does that has the false spirit: but the true spirited man does not only
taste, but buyeth the wine, although he does not drink it all down, when he
comes to taste it: yet he having been incited by tasting to buy it* now he
calls it his (...): so a child of God tasting a little of God, and a little
of Christ, and a little of the promises at his first conversion, although he
tastes not all the sweetness that is in God, yet he forsakes all for God, for
Christ, and so takes them lawfully as his own.

Again, the false spirit having given a man comfort and peace, suffers a man
to rest in that estate; but the true Spirit having made the soul t^ste the love
of the Lord, stirs up the soul to do a work mightily for the Lord. Now the
soul cries out. What shall I do for Christ that has done wonders for me? If
every hair of my head were a tongue to speak of his goodness, it were too
little, Nehem. 8.10. The joy of the Lord is our strength, Psalm. 51.12. Uphold
me with thy free spirit^ or as the Chaldean paraphrase has it, thy kingly
spirit. The spirit of adoption in Gods child is no underling, suffering men to
ly down, and cry, My desires are good, but flesh is frail. No, it is a kingly
spirit that reigns where it lives.

False applying of true promises, is the last cause of false peace. And when a
man has Gods Spirit within, and Gods hand and promise (as he thinks) for his
estate, now he thinks all safe. This did the Jews, they said, We have Abraham
to our father: and so reputed themselves safe* God having made them promise: I
will be a God of thee, and of thy seed. But here is a difference between a
child of Gods application of them and a wicked man's: the first applies them so
to him, as that he lives upon them, and nothing but them: and to whom does the
dug belong, Psalm. 38* 19.
but to the child that lives upon it? The other lives upon his lusts and
creatures, and yet catches hold on the promise.

By these four means is begot a bastard false peace.

Thus much of the second cause of man's deceiving himself; false peace in the
conscience.

Now follows the third.

of the will, which is the third cause why men deceive themselves, which are
many, I will only name three.

First, when the will is resolved to go on in a sinful course, and then sets
the understanding a work to defend it: whence it fares with the soul, as with
a man that comes to search for stolen goods, who having received a bribe
aforehand, searches every where but where it is, and so the man is never
found out to be what he is: So a man having tasted the sweetness of a sinful
course (which pleasure bribes him) he is contented to search into every corner
of his heart, and to try himself, as many do* except ther^ where his darling
lust lies, he sits upon that, and covers it willingly from his own eyes,
as Rachel did upon ^^ollen goods, and so never finds out himself, ^ohn 3.20.
A man that has a mind to sleep quietly, will cause the curtains to be drawn,
and will let some light come in, but shuts out all that, or so much as may
hinder him from sleeping: So a man having a mind to sleep in some particular
sinful course at his ease, will search himself, and let some light come into
his mind.

And hence many profane persons, that know much, their opinions are orthodox,
their discourse savory, yet do they know little of themselves, and of those
sins and lusts that haunt them, which they must part with, because this light
troubles them, it hinders them from sleeping in their secure estate, and
therefore they draw the curtain here. Hence many men that live in those sins of
the grossest usury, finding the gain, and tasting the sweet of that sin, will
read all books, go to all those Ministers they suppose that hold it lawful, and
so pick up and gather reasons to defend the lawfulness of the sin, and so
because they would not have it to be a sin, find out reasons whereby they think
it no sin: but the bottom is this, their will has got the bribe, and now the
understanding plays the Lawyer; and hence men live in the most crying sins,
and are sure to perish, because they will not know they are in an error.

Secondly, when the will sets the understanding a work to extenuate and
lessen sin; for many when they see their sin, yet makes it small, by looking at
the false end of their optic glass, they think such small matters never make
any breach between the Lord and their souls. Hence they say, The best man
sins seven times a day: and who can say my, heart is clean? What is the
reason that a child of God has little peace many times after commission of
small sins? Oh! it is because they see the horrible nature of the least sin,
small wrongs against so dear, The second reason why men ruin themselves.
so great a friend as the Lord is, it cutteth their hearts; yet a carnal heart
is never troubled for great sins, because they make a light matter of them.

Thirdly, wilful ignorance of the horrible wrath of God. Hence men rush on in
sin, as the horse in the battle. Hence men never fear their estates, because
they know not Gods wrath hanging over them. Coldest snakes when they are frozen
with cold, never sting nor hurt, one may carry a nest of them in his bosom; but
bring them to the fire, then they hiss and sting: so sin, when it is brought
near Gods wrath (that devouring fire) it makes men cry out of themselves, Then
I am undone: Oh! I am a lost creature! But being not thus heated, sin never
makes a man cry out of himself.

These are the causes why men are ignorant of their woeful miserable e^tate,
which ignorance is the first rock, or the first powder plot that spoileth
thousands.

Yet there are three more dangerous, because more secret.

Now follows the second reason of men's ruin. By reason of man's carnal
security, whereby men cannot be affected with, not so much as have hearts to
desire to come out of their misery, when they know it; for if a man's mind
understand his misery, yet if the heart be hard or sleepy, and not affect^d,
lo^den, wounded, humbled, and made to groan under it, he will never greatly
ca^e to come out of it, Isai. 29.9.10. Now this is the estate of many a soul,
he does know his misery but by reason of the sleepy, secure, senseless spirit of
slumber, he never feels it, nor mourns under it, and so comes out of it.



Because God pours not out the full measure of his grace upon men, because he
kindles not the pile of wrath that lies upon men: it is reserved and
concealed, not revealed from heaven, and so long, let God frown, Ministers
threaten, and smaller judgments drop, yet they will never seek shelter in
Jesus Christ, but sleep in their sins, until God rain down floods of horror,
blood, fire; until Gods arrows stick in men's hearts, ^hu^. 1.2.
they will never seek out of themselves unto Jesus Christ, Eccles. 8.11. So
long as Gods plagues were upon Pharao, he gives fair words, and Moses must be
sent to pray for him: but when Gods hand is taken away, now Ph^ra^h^ hearts is
hardened. So long as Gods sword is in his scabberd, men have such stout hearts,
that they will never yield: God must wound and cut deep, and stab, and thrust
to the very heart, else men will never yield, never awaken, till Gods fists be
about men's ears, and he is dragging them to the stake. Men will never awake and
cry for a pardon and deliverance of their woeful estate.

Secondly, because if they do in part feel, and so fear Gods wrath, they put
away the evil day far from them, they hope they shall do better hereafter, and
repent some other time; and therefore they say, Soul eat, drink, follow thy
sports, cups, queans: thou have a treasure of time, which shall not be spent in
many years, Isai. 22.12.13. That looks as it is with the wax, let it be of
never so pliable a disposition, and the fire never so hot, yet if it be not
brought near the fire, and be held in the fire, it never melts, but still
remains hard; so it is here. Let a man or woman have never so gentle or
pliable a nature, and let Gods wrath be never so hot and dreadful in their
judgments, yet if they make not the day of what prefer to them, if they see it
not ready every m^ment to light upon their hearts, they are never melted, but
they remain hard hear^ed, secure, sleepie wretches, and never groan to come out
of their woeful estate* and this is the reason why many men that have guilty
consciences, though they have many secret wishes, and purposes to be better,
yet never cry out of themselves, nor never seek earnestly for mercy, till they
ly upon their deathbed; and then, oh, the promises that they ply God with! Try
me, Lord, and restore me once more to my health, and life again, and thou shall
see how thankful I will be, because that now they apprehend wrath and misery
Heb. 3.13.

Thirdly, because they think they can bear Gods wrath, though they do conceive
it near at hand, even at the very doors: men think not that hell is so hot, nor
the devil so black, nor God so terrible as indeed he is. And hence we shall
observe the Prophets present Gods wrath as a thing intolerable before the eyes
of the people, that thereby they might quench all those cursed conceits of
being able to bear Gods wrath, Nehem. 1.6. And hence we shall have many men
desperately conclude, they will have their swinge in sin, and if they perish,
they hope they shall be able to best it: It is but a damning, they think, and
hence they go on securely. O poor wretches! the devil scares and fears all the
world, and at Gods wrath the devils quake* and yet secure men fear it not, they
think hell is not so horrible a place:

woeful and miserable condition, yet they desire not to come out of it. Although
men find hard lodging in the world, hard times, hard friends, hard hearts, yet
they make a shift with what they find in this miserable Inn, until they come
to hell, for such a man pursued by outward miseries, or inward troubles there
stays. O miserable man! that makes shift till he come to hell. They may hear
of the happy estate of Gods people, but not knowing of it experimentally, they
stay where they are, John 4.14.

Take a Princes child, and bring it up in a base house or place, it never
aspireth after a Kingdom or Crown: So men hatched in this world, knowing no
better an estate, never cast about them to get a better inheritance, then that
they scramble for here* Wives mourn for the long absence of their beloved
husbands, because they know them, and their worth. God may absent himself from
men, weeks, months, years, but man shed not one tear for it, because they
never tasted the sweetness of his presence* It is strange to see men take more
content in their cups and carts, pots and pipes, dogs and hawks, then in the
fellowship of God and Christ in the word, in prayer, in meditation, which
Ordinances are burden, and prisons unto them* What is the reason of it (...).
Is there no more sweetness in the presence of Gods smiling in Christ, then in a
filthy whore? Yes: but they know not the worth, sweetness, satisfying goodness
of a God; yet into fresh waters they will never return, because now they taste
a large difference betwixt each estate. So it is here, if men did but once
taste of the happiness of Gods people, they would not for a thousand worlds be
one half hour in their wild loose sea again.

Prove. 11.32. Jer. 48.11. The Israelites wished that they were at their onyons
and garlic again in Egypt. Was there no Canaan? Yes but they wished thus,
because there were walls built up to heaven, and giants sons of Anack in the
land, difficulties to overcome. O slothfu^l hearts! Secondly because God
sometimes put them to straits, and denied them what they sought for, they were
of such a waspish, teastie sullen spirit, that because the Lord had them not
always on his knees, they would run away: So many a man meets with sorrow
enough in his sinful dropsi^, drunken estate; he hears of heaven and a
better estate, yet why goes he to his lusts and fleshpots again? Oh! because
there are so many difficulties and blocks and hindrances in his way, and
because they pray and find not ease, therefore they ea^, drink, laugh, sport
and sleep in their miserable estate sti^l, Ma^h. 7.14. Therefore men walk in
the broad way, because the other way to life is strait and narrow: it is a
plague, burden, a prison, to be so strict: men had rather ^it a^most an hour in
the stocks, then be an hour at prayer: me^ had rather be damned at last, then
swea^ it out, and run through the race to receive a Crown, and hence men remain
secure.

Sixthly, because of the strange strong their pleasure of sin, must follow it
as their Captain, though they go marching on to eternal ruin: nay, though
Doms-day should be to morrow, yet they must, and will serve their lusts. As the
Sodomites when they were smitten with blindness* Romans 1. ^ ult.
which tormented their eyes, as though they had been pricked with thorns* for
so the Hebrew word signifies, even when destruction was near, they groped for
the door. Men cannot but sin though they perish for sin; hence they remain
secure.

Cain, men are runagates from the face of God. Men think they shall never find
mercy when all is done* hence they grow desperately sinful, like those Italian
Senators, that despairing of their lives (when upon submission they had been
promised their lives) yet being conscious of their villainy, made a curious
banquet, and at the end of it, every man drank up his glass of poison, and
killed himself: So men feeling such horrible hard hearts, and being privy to
such notorious sins, they cast away lives, and heaven and souls for lust, and
so perish woefully, because they lived desperately, and so securely.

Eighthly, because men nourish a blind* false, flattering hope of Gods mercy:
hence many knowing and suspecting that all is naught with them, yet having some
hope they may be in a good estate, and God may love them: hence they ly down
securely, and rest in their flattering hope. Hence observe, those people that
seldom come to a conclusion, to a point, that either they are in the state of
grace or out of it, that never come to be affected, but remain secure in their
condition, they commonly grow to this desperate conclusion, that they hope God
w^ll be merciful unto them; if not, they cannot help it: Like the man that had
on his target the picture of God and the devil: under that first he writ, Si tu
non vis, If thou (...) not. Under the other he writ, Ipse rogitat. Here is one
will.

Ninthly, because men bring not their hearts under the hammer of Gods word to
be broken: they never bring their consciences to be cut. Hence they go on still
securely with festered consciences. Men put themselves above the word, and
their hearts above the hammer: they come not to have the Minister to humble
them, but to judge of him, or to pick some pretty fine thing out of the word,
and so remain secure sots all their days: for if ever thy heart be broken, and
thy conscience be awaked* the word must do it: but people are so Sermon
trodden, that their hearts, like foot-paths, grow hard by the word.

Tenthly, because men consider not of Gods wrath daily; nor the horrible
nature of sins, men chew no^ these pills: hence they never come to be affected
nor awakned.

Awaken therefore all you secure creatures; Use.
feel your misery, that so you may get out of it. Do thou know thine estate
is naught, and that thy condemnation will be fearful, if ever thou do perish;
and is thine heart secretly secure, so damnably dead, so desperately hard, that
thou have no heart to come out of it* what? no sigh, no tears, can thou
carry all thy sins upon thy back, like Sampson the gates of the City, and make
a light matter of them? Do thou see hell fire before thee, and yet wilt
venture? Art thou worse then a beast which we cannot beat nor drive into the
fire, if there be any way to escape? oh, get thine heart to lament and mourn
under thy miseries, who knows then but the Lord may pity thee? But, oh, hard
heart! thou c^nst mourn for losses and crosses, burning of goods and houses,
yet though God be lost, and his image burnt down, and all is gone, thou can
not mourn. If thine heart were truly affected, the pillow would be washed
with thy tears, and the wife in thy bosom would be witness to thine heart
breakings in midnight for those sins which have grieved the spirit of God many
a time, thou could not sleep quietly, nor comfortably without assurance. If
you were sick to death. Physicians should hear how you do; and if you were
humbled, we should hear you in the bitterness of your spirits cry out. What
shall we do? but know it, thou most mourn here or in hell. If God broke David's
bones for his adultery, and the angels backs for their pride; the Lord if ever
he saves thee will break thine heart too.

Quest. But thou will say, Quest.
How shall I do to get mine heart affected with my misery?

Answ. Take a full view of thy misery, Answ.
^. How to get a broken heart.
Take special notice of the Lords readiness and willingness to receive thee yet
unto mercy: for two things harden the heart. 1. False hope whereby a man hopes
he is not so bad, as indeed he is. 2 No hope whereby a man when he sees
himself so notoriously bad, thinks there is no willingness in the Lord to
pardon or receive such a monster of man to mercy, and if neither the hammer
can break thy stony heart, nor the Sunshine of mercy melt it, thou have an
heart worse then the devil, and a^t a spectacle of the greatest mercy. 1 In
regard of sin. 2. In regard of Gods wrath.

First, in regard of sin. Thou have sinned and that grievously against a great
God, thou make no great matter of this: No, but though it be no load to thee,
it is a load on the Lords heart, Isaiah, 1.24. and time will come he will make
the whole sinful world by rivers of fire and blood to know what an evil it is.

For 1 In every sin thou do strike God, and sting a dagger at the heart of
God. 2. In every sin thou do spite against God: for if there were but one
only thing wherein a man could do his friend a displeasure, was not here spite
seen i^ he had that thing? Now tell me, has not the Lord been a good friend
unto thee, Tell me, wherein has he grieved thee? And tell me, in what one
thing can thou please the devil, and do God a displeasure, but by sin? Yet, O
hard heart, thou make nothing of it; but consider thirdly, in every sin thou
do dis-throne God, and sets thy self above God* for in every sin, this
question is put* whose will shall be done, Gods will or man's? Now man by sin
sets up his own will above the Lords and so kicks God, (blessed for ever,
adored of millions of Saints and Angels) as filth under his feet. What, will
this break your hearts?

Consider then of Gods wrath, the certainty of it, the unsupportableness of
it, how that dying in thy sins, and secure estate, it shall fall, for when men
cry, Peace, Peace, 1 These. 5.3.4. 1 Cor. 5.19.
then comes sudden destruction at unawares; pray therefore to God to reveal
this to thee, that thine heart may break under it. Secondly, consider of the
Lords mercy and readiness to save thee, who has prepared mercy, and entreats
the^ to take it; and waits every day for thee to that end.

The third Reason of man's ruin is, that carnal confidence, whereby men seek to
save themselves, 3. General reasons of man's ruin.
and to scramble out of their miserable estate by their own duties and
performances, when they do feel themselves miserable: the soul does as those.
Hos. 5.13. when men they be wounded and troubled, they never look after Jesus
Christ, but go to their own waters to heal themselves, like hunted Hearts when
the arrow is in them, Romans 9.31* 32.

For the opening of this point, I shall show you these two things.

1. Wherein this resting in duties appears.

2. Why do men rest in themselves.

First, this resting in Duties appears in these eleven degrees.

1. The soul of a poor sinner, if ignorantly bred and brought up, Wherein men's
resting in duties appears.
rests confidently in superstitious vanities. Ask a devout Papist, how he
hops to be saved? He will answer, By his good works. But enquire further,
What are these good works? why? for the most part superstitious ones of their
own inventions (for the crow thinks her own bird fairest (a^ whipping
themselves, pilgrimage, fasting* mumbling over their Pater nosters, bowing down
to images and crosses,

Ismaels, scoffing (...) the best men, yet these are confident they shall be
saved. Why? (they say) they are no Papists; hang them, they will die for their
Religion, and rather burn then turn again, by the grace of God. Thus the Jews
boasted, they were Abraham's s^^d so our carnal people boast: Zeph. 4.11.
Am not I (...) good Protestant? Am I not baptized Do not I live in the Church,
and therefore resting here, hope to be saved? I remember a Judge, when one
pleaded once with him for his life, that he might not be hanged, beause he was
a Gentleman* he told him, that therefore he should have the gallows made
higher for him: So when thou pleadest, I am a Christian, and a good Protestant,
yet thou will drink and swear, and whore, neglect prayer, and break Gods
Sabbath, and therefore thou hopest to be saved: I tell thee, thy condemnation
shall be greater, and thy plagues in hell the heavier.

3. If men have no peace here, then they (...) to, and rest in the goodness of
their insides: you shall have many a man, whom if you follow to his chamber, you
shall find very devote, and they pray heartily for the mercy of God, and
forgiveness of sins: but follow them out of their chambers, watch their
discourses, you shall find (...) frothie and vain, and now and then powdered
with faith, and truth, and obscene speeches. Watch them when they are cros^,
you shall see them as angry as wasps, and swell like turkies, and so spit out
their venom like dragons. VVatch them in their journeyes, and you shall see them
shoot into an alehouse, and there ^wi^l and swagger, and be familiar with the
scum of the Country for profaneness, and half drunk too sometimes. Watch
them on the Lords day, take them out of the Church once, and set aside their
best clothes, they are the same then as at another time: and because they must
not work nor sport that day, they think they may with a good conscience, ^^eep
the longer on the morning. Ask now such men how they hope to be saved, seeing
their lives are so bad? They say, though they make no such shows, they know
what good prayers they make in private: their hearrs, they say, are good. I
tell you, brethren, he that trusts to his own heart, and his good desires,
and so rests in them, is a fool. I have heard of a man that would haunt the
taverns, and ^heaters, and whore-houses at London all day, but he durst not go
forth without private prayer in the morning, and then would say at his
departure; Now devil do thy worst: and so used his prayers (as many do) only as
charms, and spells against the poor weak cowardly devil, that they think dares
not hurt them, so long as they have good hearts within them, and good prayers
in the chamber: and hence they will go near to rai^e against the Preacher, as
an harsh Master, if he do not comfort them with this, that God accepts of
their good desires.

4. If their good hearts cannot quiet them* but conscience tells them, they
are unsound without, and rotten at core within, then men fall upon reformation;
they will leave their whoring, drinking, cozening, gaming, companie-keeping,
swearing* and such like roaring sins, and now all the Country says, he is
become a new man, and he himself thinks he shall be saved, ^. Pet. 2.20. They
escape the pollutions of the world, as swine that are escaped and washed from
outward filth, yet the swinish nature remains still, like mariners that are
going to some dangerous place ignorantly, if they meet with storms, they go not
backward, but cast out their goods that endanger their ship, and so go forward
still: so many a man, going toward hell, is forced to cast out his lusts and
sins, but he goes on in the same way still for all that. The wildest beasts as
(staggs) if they be kept waking from sleep long, will grow tame; so conscience
giving a man no rest for some sins he lives in, he grows tame. He that was a
wild Gentleman before, remains the same man still, only he is made tame
now; that is, civil and smooth in his whole course: and hence they rest in
reformation, which reformation is commonly but of some troublesome sin, and it
is because they think it is better following their trade of sin at another
market: and hence some men will leave their drinking, and whoring, and turn
covetous, because th^re is more gain at that market, sometimes it is because
sin has left them, as an old man.

5. If they can have no rest here, they get unto another starting hose, they go
to their humiliations, repentings, tears, sorrows, and confessions. They hear a
man cannot be saved by reforming his life, unless he come to afflict his soul
too* H^ must sorrow and weep here, or else cry out in hell hereafter. Hereupon
they betake themselves to their sorrows, tears, confession of sins, and now the
wind is down, and the tempest is over and they make themselves safe, Math. 11
2^. They would have repented: that is the Hea^hen, as Beza speaks, when any
wrath was kindled from heaven, they would go to their sack c^oath and sorrows,
and so th^ught to pacify Go^^ anger again, and here they rested so it is with
many a man. Many people have sick fits and qualms of conscience, and then they
do as crows, that give themselves a vomi^, by swallowing down some stone when
they are sick, and then they are well again: so when men are troubled for their
sins, they will give themselves a vomit of pra^er, a vomit of confession, and
humiliation, Isai. 58.5. Hence (...) (...)


