SEVERAL LAWS AND ORDERS Made at Several GENERAL COURTS In the Years 1661.
1662. 1664.
PRinted and Published by Order of the General Court held at Boston the 19th of
October, 1664.
By EDWARD RAWSON Secr.
OCTOBER 14. 1654.
IT is Ordered, That the Keeper of the Prison for the time being, Keepers
liberty to take Bail.
shall henceforth have the same liberty that the Marshall has in all Civil
Cases; to take sufficient Bail after Commitment, as the Marshall might before
Commitment.

MAY the 22d, 1661.
THe Court understanding there is much Inequality, in that diverse are freed
from those watches, whereof all do receive equal benefit; for an explication of
the Law concerning Constables Watches, Do Order, That the Magistrates, Persons
exempted from Constables Watches
Deputies of this Court, for the time being, Elders of Churches, the Public
sworn Officers of the Country, with the Commission Officers in each Trained
Band, be freed from all ordinary Watches and Wards of the Constables, and no
other Persons; excepting such persons as shall have special and personal
freedom, by Order of this Court, any former Order, Grant or Custom
notwithstanding.

DECEMBER 31st 1661.
UPon Complaint of the great abuses that are daily committed by Retailers of
Strong Water, Rhums etc. both by the stillers thereof, and such as have it
from foreign parts: None to still or retail strong liquors without license.
This Court do therefore Order, that henceforth no Person or Persons shall
practice the craft of stilling strong water, nor shall sell or retail any by
less quantyties then a quarter cask, and the same to be delivered not at
several times or in several parcels, but at one time, without covin or fraud,
excepting only such as shall be allowed annually by the County Courts
respectively, on penalty of five Pounds forfeiture, for every time that any
Person, or Persons shall be legally convicted thereof, any Law, Usage or
Custom, or former licenses to the contrary notwithstanding, provided always
this Law shall not prohibit such Merchants as have strong liquors from foreign
parts in Cases from selling the same by the whole Case, either to such as are
going to Sea, or to Masters of families of good report.

MAY 7th 1662.
THis Court does Order, as an encouragement to persons to destroy Woolves, That
henceforth every person killing any Woolf, Encouragement to kill woolves.
shall be allowed out of the Treasury of that County where such woolf was
slain, Twenty shillings, and by the Town Ten shillings, and by the Country
Treasurer Ten shillings: which the Constable of each Town (on the sight of the
ears of such Woolves being cut off) shall pay out of the next Country rate,
which the Treasurer shall allow.

WHereas the Laws published concerning Fences, and Cattle, being in this second
Edition transported from their first order and method, much difficulty does
many times arise concerning the true meaning thereof, whereby great damages do
acrue to many of the Inhabitants, and Consequently to the Country, for
prevention whereof, This Court does Order and Enact, that where any cattle
shall trespass on any Propriety, Owners of fence to pay damage in case, etc.
not appearing to be sufficiently fenced against swine sufficiently yo^ked and
ringed, or Cowes, and such cattle as will be restreined by a sufficient fence
in the judgment of the viewers of fences as page the 11th. Sect. 6^^. in all
such cases the owners of the fence or of the land, shall bear all such damages
As to them thereby sustained, any thing in the said Order or any other Law,
Custom or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

OCTOBER 8. 166^.
WHereas the Law title Treasurers does not so fully explain it self as it
intended in Order to the execution of the same, in reference to County
Treasurers, This Court declares, that the same power and direction given to the
Country Treasurer in his Place, is likewise intended to the County Treasurer in
his place and limits, Country and County Treasurers direction alike, etc.
for the better discharge of his duty, and that every Constable be trusted with
the Collecting of any County Rate, which does not within his year pay in his
respective County Rate, and make up his accounts with the Treasurer from which
he had his Warrant so to do, such Constable shall forfeit to the County forty
shillings for his defect, and be liable to clear his accounts within two
months; and that every County Treasurer shall present the names of such
Constables as shall neglect their duty, to the next County Court, and that Corn
or other goods paid into the County Treasurers, shall be at the same prizes
that this Court shall from time set for the Country Rate from year to year, any
custom or usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

MAY 18th 1664.
THis Court being sensible of the great increase of Profaneness amongst us,
especially in the younger sort, taking their opportunity by meeting together in
places of public entertainment, to corrupt one another by their uncivil and
wanton carriages, rudely singing and making a noise, to the disturbance of the
family, and other guests, if any be in the house. This Court do therefore
Order, and hereby Enact, that no Person or Persons whatsoever, do presume
either in word or deed, to carry it uncivilly or wantonly, Penalty for rude
singing in Taverns, etc.
singing rudely or making a noise to the disturbance of the family or any other
guests, in any place of public entertainment, on penalty of paying five
shillings for every offense against this Law, being thereof legally convicted
before my Court, Magistrate, or Commissioner, and where sundry persons are in
the same company where any such rude and uncivil carriages are acted, and the
particular person or persons unknown, every of the said persons shall be liable
to the like penalty, unless they can attest their innocence, and do freely give
in their testimony against the nocent: and if any person allowed to keep a
house of public entertainment shall suffer such carriages by any person or
persons, and not legally prosecute the same before Authority on legal
conviction thereof before the County Court of whom they had their license, they
shall be debarred of any further reneual thereof.

AUGUST 3d 1664.
IN Answer to that part of His Majestyes Letter, of June 28 1662, Concerning
Admission of Freemen. This Court does Declare, Order relating to the manner of
admission to fredome.
That the Law prohibiting all Persons, except Members of Churches, and that
also for allowance of them in any County Court, are hereby Repealed, And do
hereby also Order and Enact, That from henceforth all English men presenting a
Certificate under the hand of the Ministers, or Minister of the Place where
they dwell, that they are Orthodox in Religion, and not Vicious in their Lives,
and also a certificate under the bands of the Select men of the place, or of
the major Part of them, that they are Freeholders: and are for their own
propper Estate (without heads of Persons) Rateable to the Country in a single
Country Rate, after the usual manner of valuation in the place where they
live, to the full vallue of Ten shillings, or that they are in full Communion
with some Church amongst us; It shall be in the Liberty of all and every such
Person or Persons, being twenty four years of age, Householders, and settled
Inhabitants in this Jurisdiction, from time to time to present themselves and
their desires to this Court, for their addmittance to the freedom of this
commonwealth, and shall be allowed the privilege, to have such their desire
Propounded and put to Vote in the General Court, for acceptance to the freedom
of the body pollitick, by the sufferage of the major part according to the
Rules of our Patent.

WHereas in the Law Book title Millitary, Sect. 11. the three Chief Military
officers in each Town, except Boston, together with the Magistrates or Deputies
thereof, are appointed a Committee of Militia for such Towns, without
mentioning the Officers of Horse to be of the said Committee. This Court does
Declare, Officers of Horse to be added to the Committee of Militia, in the
towns where they live.
that the Commission Officers of Horse, in the Towns where they dwell, shall be
added thereto, and hereby are appointed and empowered, to be of the Committee of
Militia, for such towns where they dwell, any Law or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding.

OCTOBER 19. 1664
FOrasmuch as several Persons who from time to time are to be made freemen,
live remote and are not able without great trouble and charge to appear before
this Court to take their respective Oaths; It is therefore Ordered, that
henceforth it shall be in the power of any County Court, County Courts power to
give the Oath of freedom.
to administer the Oath of Freedom to any persons approved of by the General
Court, who shall desire the same, any Law or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding.

THe Court understanding, that the late Law made in October 1663. For the
regulating of Elections, is not so satisfactory to the Freemen as was expected;
and for some other reasons which have been alleged; Do judge meet to Order,
that the said Law shall and is hereby Repealed, Order regulating Elections
Repealed, and Elections to be in Statu quo
and that Elections shall henceforth run in the ordinary course as formerly.

FOr as much as complaints have been made to this Court of very great
Inequality in keeping and maintaining of Military Watches, the burden of that
service lying mainly if not altogether upon such as bear arms, when several
persons of good estate are free, Such as are liable to Constables Watches are
alike liable to Military Watches, etc.
all which considered; It is Ordered, That henceforth all persons whatsoever,
within this Jurisdiction, who are liable to serve in Constables watches, shall
also be liable to the like service in all Military watches, either in their own
persons or by a sufficient supply to be made by all such persons as aforesaid,
or shall pay twelve pence in money, and that under the penalty of five shillings
for every such neglect, to be levied by the Clark of each Company, by warrant
under the hand of the chief Officer of the same.

FINIS

