A PLATFORM OF CHURCH DISCIPLINE GATHERED OUT OF THE WORD OF GOD: AND AGREED
UPON BY THE ELDERS: AND MESSENGERS OF THE CHURCHES ASSEMBLED IN THE SYNOD AT
CAMBRIDGE IN NEW ENGLAND To be presented to the Churches and General Court for
their consideration and acceptance, in the Lord.

The Eight Month Anno 1649

Psalm: 84 1. How amiable are thy Tabernacles O Lord of Hosts?

Psalm: 26.8. Lord I have loved the habitation of thy house and the place where
thine honor dwells.

Psalm: 27.4. One thing have I desired of the Lord that will I seek after, that
I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the d^yes of my life to behold the
Beauty of the Lord and to inquire in his Temple.

Printed by S G at Cambridge in New England and are to be sold at Cambridge and
Boston Anno Dom: 1649.

THE PREFACE
THE setting forth of the Public Confession of the Faith of Churches has a
double end, and (...) to pup^ck ed^fication* first the (...) of the faith (...)
it se^f: secondly the holding forth of Unity and Harmony, (...), and w^^h other
Churches. Our Churches (...), as (by the grace of Christ) we bel^^ve and
profess the same Doctr^ne of the truth of the Gospel, which generally is
received in all the reformed Churches of Christ in Europe: so especially, we
desire not to vary from the doctrine of faith, and truth held forth by the
churches of our native country. For though it be not one native country, that
can breed us all of one mind; nor ought we for to have the glorious faith of
our Lord Jesus with respect of persons: yet as Paul who was himself a Jew,
professed to hold forth the doctrine of justification by faith, and of the
resurection of the dead, according as he knew his godly countrymen did, who
were Jews by nature (Gal. 2.15. Acts 26.6, 7.) s^^ we, who are by nature,
English men, do desire to hold forth the same doctrine of religion (especially
in fundamentalls) which we see and know to be held by the churches of England,
according to the truth of the Gospel

The more we d^scern, (that which we do, and have cause to do with
incessant mou^ning and trembl^ng) the unkind, and unbrotherly, and unchr^stian
contentions of our godly brethren, and countrymen, in matters of
church government: the more ernestly do we desire to see them joined together
in one common faith, and our selves with them. For this end, having perused the
public confession of faith, agreed upon by the Reverend assembly of Divines at
Westminster, and finding the sum and substance thereof (in matters of doctrine)
to express not their own judgments only, but ours also: and being likewise
called upon by our godly Magistrates, to draw up a public confession of that
faith, which is constantly taught, and genera^y professed amon^st us, we
thoug^^ good to present unto them, and with them to our churches, and with them
to all the ^^urches of Christ abroad, our professed and hea^^y assent and
attestation to the whole confession of faith (for substance of doctrine) which
the Reverend assembly presen^ed to the Rel^gious and Honorable Parlime^t of
England: Excepting only some sections in the 25 30 and 31. Chapters of their
conf^ssion, which conc^^n poin^s of controversy in church-disciplin^* Touching
which we^ refere our selves to the draught of church-discpline in the ensueing
treatise.

The truth of what we here declare, may appear by the unanimous vote of the
Synod of the Elders and messengers of our churches assembled at Cambridg, the
last of the sixth month, 1648. which jointly passed in these words; This Synod
having perused, and considered (with much gladness of heart, and thankfullness
to God) the confession of faith published of late by the Reverend Assembly in
England, do judge it to be very holy, orthodox, and judicious in all matters
of faith: and do therefore freely and fully consent thereunto, for the substance
thereof. Only in those things which have respect to church government and
discipline, we refer our selves to the platform of church discipline, agreed
upon by this present asse^bly: and do therefore think it meet, that this
confession of faith, should be commended to the churces of Christ amongst us,
and to the Honored Court, as worthy of their due consideration and acceptance.
Howbeit, we may not conceal, that the doctrine of vo^ation expressed in Chap
10. S 1. and summarily repeated, Chap 13. and 1. passed not without some
debate. Yet considering, that the term of vocation, and others by which it is
described, are capable of a large, or more strict sense, and use, and that it
is not intended to bind apprehensions precisely in point of order or method*
there has been a general condescendency thereunto.

Now by this our professed consent and free concurrence with them in all the
doctrinalls of religion, we hope, it may appear to the wo^ld, that as we are
a remnant of the people of the same nation with them: so we are professors of
the same common faith, and fellow-heyres of the same common salvation. Yea
moreover, as this our profession of the same faith with them, will exempt us
(even in their judgme^ts) from suspicion of heresy: so (we trust) it may
exempt us in the like sort from suspicion of schism: that though we are forced
to dissent from them in matters of church discipline: Yet our dissent is not
taken up out of arrogance of spirit in our selves (whom they see willingly
condescend to learn of them:) neither is it carried with uncharitab^e
censoriousness toward them (both which are the proper, and essential
charracters of schism) but in meekness of w^sdom, as we walk along with them,
and follow them, as they follow Christ: so where we conceiv^ a different
apprehention of the mind of Christ (as it falls out in some few points
touching church order) we still reserve due reverence to them (whom we judge
to be, through Christ, the glorious lights of both nations:) and only crave
leave (as in spirit we are bound) to follow the Lamb withersoever he goes,
and (after the Apostles example) as we believe, so we speak^.

And if the example of such poor outcasts as our selves, might prevail if not
with all (for that were too great a blessing to hope for) yet with some or
other of our brethren in England, so far as they are come to mind and speak
the same thing with such as dissent from them, we hope in Christ, it would not
only moderate the harsh judg^ng and condemning of one another in such
differences of judgment, as may be found in the choysest saints: but also
preven^ (by the mercy of Christ) the peril of the distraction and destruction
of all the churches in both k^ngdoms. Otherwise* if brethren shall go on to
bite and devour one another, the Apostle feared (as we als^, with sadness of
heart do.) it will tend to the consum^ng of them, and us all: which the Lord
prevent.

We are not ignorant, that (besides these aspersions of Heresy and Schism)
other exceptions also are taken at our way of church government: but (as we
conceive) upon as little g^ound.

As 1 That by admitt^ng none into the fellowsh^p of our Church, but saints by
calling, we Rob many parish-churches of their best members, to make up one of
our congregations: which is not only, to gather churches out of churches (a
thing unheard of in Scripture:) but also to weaken the hearts and hands of the
best Ministers in the parishes, by dispoyling them of their best hearers.

2 That we provide no course for the gayning, and calling in, of ignorant, and
erroneous* and scandalous persons, whom we refuse to receive into our
churches, and so exclude from the wholesome remedy of church discipline.

3 That in our way, we sow seeds of division and hindrance of edificatio^ in
every family: whilst admitting into our churches only voluntaries, the husband
will be of one church, the wife of another: the parents of one church, the
children of another the ma^ster of one church, the servants of another. And so
the parents and masters being of different churches from their children and
servants, they cannot take a just account of their profiting by what they
hear, yea by this means the husbands, parents and masters, shall be
chargable to the maintenance of many other churches, and church officers,
besides their own: which will prove a charge and burden unsupportable.

But for Answer, as to the first: For gathering churches out of churches, we
cannot say, that it is a thing unheard of in Scripture. The first christian
church was gathered out of the Jewish church, and out of many Synagogues in
that church, and consisted partly of ^he Inhabitants of Ierasalem, partly of
the Galileans: who though they kept some communion in some parts of public
worship wi^h the Temple: yet neither did they frequent the Sacrifices, nor
repair to the Sanedrim for the determining of their church-causes: but kept
entire and constant communion with the Apostles church in all the ordinances of
the gospel. And for the first ch^istian church of the Gentiles at Antoch, it
appears to have been gathered and constituted partly of the d^spersed
brethren of the church at Jerusalem (whereof some were men of Cyprus, and
Cyrene) and partly of the beleiving Gentiles. Acts. 11.20, 21.

If it be said the first christ^an church at Jerusalem, and that at Antioch
were gathered not out of any christian church, but out of the Jewish Temple and
Synagogues, which were shortly after to be abolished: and their gathering to
Antioch, was upon occasion of dispersion in time of persecution.

We desire, it may be considered, 1 That the members of the Jewish Church were
more strongly and straightly tied by express holy covenant, to keep fellowsh^p
with the Jewish church, till it was abolished, then any members of christian
parish-churches are w^nt to be tied to keep fellowship with their
par^sh-churches. The Episcopal Canons, which bind them to attend on their
parish church, it is likely they are now abolished with the Episcopacy. The
common Law of the Land is satisfied (as we concive) if they attend upon the
worship of God in any other church though not w^thin their own parish. But no
such like covenant of God, nor any other religious tie lies upon them to
attend the worship of God in their own par^sh church, as did lie upon the Jews
to attend upon the worship of God in their Temple and Synagogues.

2 Though the Iew^sh Temple Church at Jerusalem was to be abolished, yet that
does not make the desertion of it by the members, to be lawful, till it was
abol^shed. Future abolition is no warrant for present desertio^: unless it be
lawful in some case wh^lest the church is yet in present standing to desert
it; to wit, either for avoiding of present polutions, or for hope of greater
edification, and so for better satisfaction to conscience in either, future
events (or foresight of them) is not disolve present relations. Else wives,
children, servants, might desert their husbands, parents, masters, when they be
mortally sick.

3 What the members of the Jewish church did, in joining to the church at
Antioch, in time of persecution, it may well be concived, the members of any
christian church may do the lik^, for satisfaction of conscience. Peace of
conscience is more desirable, then the peace of the outward man: and freedom
from scruples of conscience is more comfortable to a sincere heart, then
freedom from persecution.

If it be said, these members of the Christian Church at Jerusalem, that joined
to the church at Antioch, removed their habitations together with their
relations: which if the brethren of the congregationall way would do, it wo^ld
much abate the grievance of their departure from their presbyteriall churches.

We verily could w^sh them so to do, as well approving the like removal of
habitations, in case of changing church-relations (provided, that it may be
done without too much detriment to their outward estates) and we for our
parts, have done the same. But to put a necessity of removal of habitation in
such a case, it is to foment and cherish a corrupt principle of making civil
cohabitation, if not a formal cause, yet at least a proper adjunct of
church-relation; which the truth of the Gospel does not acknowledge. Now to
foment an error to the prejudice of the truth of the Gospel* is not to walk
with a right foot according to the truth of the Gospel, as Paul judges, Galat.
2.14.

4 We do not think it meet, or safe, for a member of a presbyteriall Church
(...) to desert his relation to his Church, betake himself to the fellowship of
a ^^^gregationall Church, though he may d^scern some defect in the estate, or
govern^^^t of his own.

^or 1. Faithfullness of brotherly love in Church-relation, requires, that
(...) members of the Church should first convince their brethren of their
sinful (...), and duly wait for their reformation, before they depart from
them. For (...) must take such a course for the healing of a private brother,
in a way of ^^otherly love, with much meekness, and patience: how more more
ought we (...) to walk with like tendrness, toward a whole church.

^gain 2 By the hasty departure of sound members from a defective church*
^^^ormation is not promoted, but many times retarded, and corruption increased.
^heras on the contrary, while sincere members breathing after purity of
refor^ation abide together, they may (by the blessing of God upon their
faithful ^^deavours) prevail much with their Elders, and neighbors toward a
reforma^^^n; it may be, so much, as that their Elders in their own church shall
receive (...) to the Seals, but visible saints: and in the Classis shall put
forth no ^^thoritive act (but consultative only) touching the members of other
churches: (...) touching their own* but with the consent (sile^t consent at
least) of their own ^^urch: which two things, if they can obteyn with any
humble, meek, holy* ^^^thfull endeavors, we co^ceiv, they might (by the grace
of Christ) find liber^^ of conscience to continue their relation with their own
presbyteriall church* ^^thout scruple.

5 But to add a word further, touching the gathering of Churches out of
^hurches, what if there were no express example of such a thing extant in the
Scrip^^res? that which we are wont to answer the Antipaedobaptists, may
suffice hear: it is (...), ^f any evidence thereof may be gathered from just
co^sequenc of Scripture light* (...) his judgme^^ conce^ning this case, passes
(for ought we know) without ^^^cep^io^, which he gave (...) 4 book of
co^sc^e^^e in Ans to ^ Qu: (...) ^4. Number 16. If any (says he) wronged with
unjust vexation, or providing for his own edi^^catio^ or in testimony against
sin^ depart from a church where some evils are ^^llerated, and join himself to
another more pure, yet without co^demning of (...) church he leaves, he is not
therefore to be held as a schismatic, or as guilty (...) any other sin. Where
the Tripartite d^sjunction, which the jud^cious (...) puts, declares the
lawfullness of the departure of a Churchmember from (...) church, when either
through wearyness of unjust vexation, or in way of provision for (...) own
edification, or in testimony against sin, he joyneth himself to another
congrega^^on mo^e reformed. Any one of these, he judges a (...) and l^wfull
cause of depa^ture* Though all of them do not concur together. Neither will
such a practice dispoyle the best Ministers of the parishes of their best
hea^ers.

For 1 Sometimes the Min^sters themselves are will^ng to join with their better
sort of hearers, in this way of reformation: and then they and their hearers
cont^nue still their Church relation together, yea and confirm it mo^e st^i^tly
and strongly, by an express renewed covenant, though the Ministers may still
cont^nue their wonted preaching to the whole parrish.

2 If the M^nisters do d^slike the way of those, whom they otherwise count
their best members, and so refuse to join with them therein; yet if those
members can procure some other Ministers to join with them in their own way,
and st^ll cont^nue their dwell^ng together in the same town, they may easily
order the times of the public assembly, as to attend constantly upon the
minist^y of their former Church: and either after or before the public
assembly of the parish take an opportunity to gather together for the
admin^stratio^ of Sacraments; and Censures, and other church ordinances amongst
themselves. The first Apostolic church assembled to hear the word with the
Jewish church in the open courts of the Temple: but afterward gathered
together for breaking of bread, and other acts of church order, from house to
house.

3 Suppose, Presbyteriall churches should communicate some of their best gifted
members toward the erecting and gathering of another church: it would not
forthwith be their detriment, but may be their enlargment. It is the most noble
and perfect work of a l^ving creature (both in nature and grace) to propagate,
and multiply his kind: and it is the honor of the fa^thfull spouse of Christ,
to set forward the work of Christ as well abroad as at home. The church in
Cant. the 8.8. to help forward her little sister-church* was w^lling to part
with her choyse-materialls, even beams of Cedar, and such precious living
stones, as weer fit to build a Silver palace. In the same book, the church is
compared sometime to a garden, sometime to an orchard, Cant 4.12, 13. No man
planteth a garden, or orchard, but seeks to get the choysest herbs, and
plants of his neighbors, and they freely impart them: nor do they account it
a spoil to their gardens, and orchards, but rather a glory. Nevertheless we
go not so far: we neither seek* nor ask the choyse-members of the parishes but
accept them being offered.

If it be sa^^, they are not offered by the M^nisters, nor by the parish
churches (who have most right in them) but only by themselves.

It may justly be demanded* what right, or what power have either the
ministers, or parish church over them? Not by solemn church covenant: for that,
though it be the firmest engagement, is not owned, but rejected. If it be, by
Theit joining with the parish, in the calling and election of a minister to
such a congregation at his first coming, there is indeed just weight in such
an engagement: nor do we judge it safe for such to remove from such a
minister, unless it be upon such grounds, as may justly give him due
satisfaction. But if the unio^ of such members to a parish Church, and to the
ministry thereof, be only by cohabitation within the precincts of the parish,
that union, as it was founded upon humane law: so by humane law it may easily
be released. Or otherwise, if a man remove his habitation, he removes also the
bond of his relation, and the ground of offense.

4 It need not to be feared, that all best hearers of the best ministers, no
nor the most of them, will depart from them upon point of church-governme^t.
Those who have found the presence and power of the spirit of Christ breathing in
their ministers, either to their conversion, or edification, will be slow to
change such a ministry of faith, and holiness, for the liberty of
church order. Upon which ground, and sundry other such like, their be doubtless
sundry godly and judicious hearers in many parishes in England that do and
will prefer their relation to their ministers (though in a presbyteriall way)
above the Congreg^tionall confoederation.

5 But if all, or the most part of the best hearers of the best ministers of
parishes, should depart from them, as preferring in their judgments, the
congregationall way: yet, in case the congregationall way should prove to be of
Christ, it will never greiv the holy hearts of godly ministers, that their
hearers should follow after Christ: yea many of themselves (upon due
deliberation) will be reaedy to go along with them. It never greived, nor
troubled John Baptist that his best disc^ples, departed from him to follow
after Christ. Joh. 3. But in case the cong^egationall way should prove to be,
not the institution of Christ (as we take it) but the inve^tion of men: then
doubtless, the presbyteriall form (if it be of God) will swallow up the other
as Moses rod devoured the rods of the Egyptians. Nor will this put a necessity
upon both the opposite parties, to sh^ft for themselves, and to seek to
supplant one another: but only, it will call upon them (...) to seek and to
follow the truth in love, to attend in faithfullness each unto his own flock,
and to administer to them all the holy things of God, and their port^o^ of food
in due season: and as for others, quietly to forbear them, and yet to instruct
them with meekness that are contrary handed: leaving it to Christ (in the use
of all good means) to reveal his own truth in his own time: and mean while
endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. Phi^ip.
3.15, 16. Ephesians. 4 3.

To the 2 Exception, That we take no course for the gayning and healing and
calling in of ignorant and erroneous, and scandalous persons, whom we refuse
to receive into our churches and so exclude them from the re^midy of
church-disc^plie

We conceive the receiving of them into our churches would rather loose and
corrupt our Church^s, then gain and heal them. A little leaven laid in a lump
of dough, will sooner leaven the whole lump, then the whole lump w^ll sweeten
it. We therefore find it safer, to square rough and unhewen ston^s, before the
^e laid (...) the bu^lding, ^ather then to hammer and (...), when they lie
(...).

And accord^ngly, two means (...) scandalous. 1 The public min^stery of the
(...) are invited by counsel, and required by wholesome laws ^o atten^. And ^he
(...) is the power of God to salvation, to the calling and (...) 2 (...)
conf^^ren^e, and conviction by the Elders, and (...) church whom they (...)
more respectively hearken unto, when they see no h^p^ of enjoying church
f^llowsh^p, or participation in the Sacraments for themselves, or their (...),
till they approve their judgments to be sound and or^hodox, and th^i^ lives
subdued to some hope of a godly conversation. What can Classical discipline, or
ex^o^mun^cati^n it self do more in this case.

The 3 Exception wrappeth up in it a th^ee fold domestical inconvenience: and
each of them meet to be eschewed. 1 Disunion in families between each relat^on:
2 D^sappo^ntme^t of edificat^o^, for want of opportunity in the governors of
familyes to take account of things heard by their children and servants.

3 Disbursments of chargeable maintenance to the several churches, whereto the
several persons of their familyes are joined.

All which inconven^ences either do not fall out in cong^egationall-churches;
or are easily redressed. For none are orderly admitted into
congregational-churches, bu^ such as are well approved by good testimony, to be
duly observant of family-relations. Or if any otherwise disposed should creep
in they are either orde^ly healed, or duly removed in a way of Ch^^st. Nor are
they admitted, unless they can g^ve some good account of their profiting by
ordinances, before the Elders and brethren of the church: and much more to
their pa^e^^s, and masters. Godly Tutors in the university can t^ke an account
of their pupills: and godly householders in the C^tty can take account of their
children and servants, how they profit by the wo^d they have heard in several
churches: and that to the greater edification of the whole family, by the
variety of such administrations. Bees may bring the more honey, and wax into the
hive, when they are not limited to one garden of flowers, but may fly abroad to
many.

Nor is any charge expected from w^ves, children, or servants to the
maintenance of congregationall churches, further then they be fu^n^shed with
personal estates, or earn^ngs, which may enable them to contribute of such
things as they have, and not of Such as they have not. God accepts not
Robbery for a sacrifice. And though a godly his sholder may (...) take himself
bound in conscience, to contribute it any such Church, whereto his wife, or
children, or servants are stand in relation: yet that (...) not aggravate the
(...) of his charge, (...) more then if they were received members of the same
Church whereto himself is related.

But why (...) we (...) to plead exemptions from exceptions? the Lord help all
his (...) (whether presbyterian, or congregational) to judge and shame our
selves (...) the Lord for (...) our former complyances to greater (...) in
Church Government, then are to be found either in the congregational, or
presbyteriall way. And then surely, either the Lord will clear up his own
(...) to us, (...) so ^^ame, and (...) to our mind, and (...) way, (Ezekiel.
43.10, 11.) or else we shall learn to bear one (...) burdens in a spirit of
meekness. It will then (...) us, so to (...) discipline of Christ, as to detest
the d^sciples of Christ: so to contend for the (...) of Christ, as to crucify
the living members of Christ (...) to divide our selves about Church communion,
as through breaches to open a wide gap for a (...) of Antichristian and
profane malignity to swall^w up both Church and C^vil state.

What shall we say more? (...) difference about Church Order becom^ the inlett
of all the (...) k^ngdom? ha^^ the Lord indeed left us to such hardness of
heart, that Church-(...) shall become a sna^e to Zion, (as sometimes Moses was to
Egypt, Exodus 10.7.) that we cannot leave consisting and contending about it,
(...) the k^ngdom be d^stroyed? and not the Lord Jesus, when he dedicated his
suffe^ings for his (...) his also unto his Father, make it his ca^^est and
(...) for us in this world, that we all might be one in him? John. 17 20, 21,
22, 23. And is it possible, that he (whom the Father heard always, John.
11.42. should not have this last most solemn prayer heard, and granted? or,
(...) it be g^^unted for all the sa^nts elsewhere, and not for the saints in
England; so that amongst them disunion shall grow even about Church-union, and
communion? If it be possible, for a little faith (so much as a grain of
mustardseed) to remove a mountain: is it not possible, for so much strength of
faith, as is to be found in all the godly in the kingdom, to remove those
Images of jealousy, and to cast those stumbling-blockes out of the way, which
may hinder the free passage of brotherly love amongst brethren? It is true
indeed, the National covenant does justly engage both parties, faithfully to
endeavor the (...) extirpation of the Antichristian Hierarchy, and much more
of all Blasphemies, Heresies, and damnable errors. Certainly, if
congregational discipline be Independent from the inventions of men, is it not
much more Independ^nt from the delusions of Satan? what fellowship has Christ
with B^lial? light with darkness? truth with error? The faithful Jews
needed not the help of the Samaritans, to Readify the Temple of God: yea they
rejected their help when it was offered, Ezra 4. the 1, 2, 3. And if the
congregationall way be a way of truth (as we believe) and if the brethren
that walk in it be zealous of the truth, and hate every false way (as by the
rule of their holy discipline they are instructed, 2 John. 10, 11.) then
verily, there is no branch in the National covenant, that engages the
covenanters to abhore either Congregationall Churches, or their way: which
being duly administered, do no less effectually extirpate the Antichristian
Hierarchy, and all Blasphemies, Heresies, and pernicious errors, then the
other way of discipline does, which is more generally and publicly received
and ratifyed.

But the Lord Jesus commune with all our hearts in secret: and he who is the
King of his Church, let him be pleased to exercise his Kingly power in our
spirits, that so his kingdom may come into our Churches in Purity and Peace.
Amen Amen

CHAPTER I. Of the form of Church Government; and that it is one, immutable,
and prescribed in the Word of God.
1 Ecclesiastical Polity or Church Government, or discipline is nothing else,
Ezekiel 43.11 Col. 2, 5 1 Timothy 3 15
but that Form and order that is to be observed in the Church of Christ upon
earth, both for the Constitution of it, and all the Administrations that
therein are to be performed.

2 Church Government is Considered in a double respect either (...) of the
parts of Government themselves, or necessary Circumstan^^^ hereof. The parts of
Government are prescribed in the word, Hebr 3, 5, 6
because the Lord Jesus Christ the King and Lawgiver of his Church, is no less
faithful in the house of God then was Moses, Exodus 25 40
who from the Lord delivered a form and pattern of Government to the Children
of Israel in the old Testament: 2 Timothy 3 16
And the holy Scriptures are now also so perfect, as they are able to make the
man of God perfect and thoroughly furnished unto every good work; and therefore
doubtless to the well ordering of the house of God.

3 The parts of Church Government are all of them exactly described in the
word of God being parts or means of Instituted worship according to the second
Commandment: 1 Timothy 3 15 1 Chronicles 15 13. Ex 20 ^ 1 Timothy 6 13 ^ 16. Heb 1^ 17 18.
1 Cor 15 24.
and therefore to continue one and the same, unto the apearing of our Lord
Jesus Christ as a kingdom that cannot be shaken, until he shall deliver it up
unto God, even the Father. So that it is not left in the power of men,
officers, Deuteronomy 12 32. Ezekiel 43 ^. 2 Kings 11.31 32 33
Churches, or any state in the world to add, or diminish, or alter any thing in
the least measure therein.

4 The necessary circumstances, as time and place etc belonging unto order and
decency, 1 King 12 ^:28.29.
are not so left unto men as that under pretense of thou, Is^i ^^ 13. Col 2 22
23 Acts 15 28
they may (...) own Inventions upon the Churches: Being Circumscribed in the
word with many General limitations; when they are dete^mined in respect of the
matter to be neither worship it self, M^tt 15 9 1 Cor 11 23 ^ 8 34.
nor Circumstances seperable from worship: in respect of their end, they must
be done unto edification: in respect of the manner, 1 Cor 14 26 1 Cor 14 40 1
Cor 11 14 1 Cor 11 16 1 Cor 14 12 19. Acts 15 2^.
decently, and in order, according to the nature of the things them selves, and
Civil, and Church Custom* does not even nature it self teach you? yea they,
are in some sort determined particularly, namely that they be done in such a
manner, as all Circumstances considered, is most expedient for edification: so,
as if there be no error of man concerning their determination, the
determining of them is to be accounted as if it were divine.

CHAP. II. (...) of a particular visi^le Church.
Ephesians 1 ^2 23 and 5 25 26 30. Heb 12 23.
THe Catholic Church, is the whole company of those that are elected, redeemed,
and in time effectually called from the state of sin and death unto a state of
Grace, and (...) Jesus Christ.

2 This church is either Triumphant, or Militant. Triumphant, Rom 8 17. 2 Timothy 2
12 C 4 8. Ephesians 6 12 13.
the number of them who are Gloryfied in heaven: Militant, the number of them
who are conflicting with their enemies upon earth.

3 This Militant Church is to be considered as Invisible, and Visible
Invisible, 2 Timothy ^ 19. Rev 217. 1 Cor. 6 17 Ephesians 3 1^. Rom 1.^* 1 These ^ 8. Isay
2* 2^. 2 Timothy 6.12.
in respect of their relation wherein they stand to Christ, as a body unto the
head, being united unto him, by the spirit of God, and faith in their hearts:
Visible, in respect of the profession of their faith, in their persons, and in
particular Churches: and so there may be acknowledged an universal visible
Church.

4 The members of the Militant visible Church, considered either as not yet in
church order, Acts 19 1. Colos 2.5. Matt 18.17. 1 Cor 5 1^
or as walking according to the church order of the Gospel. In order, and so
besides the spiritual union, and communion, common to all bel^evers, they enjoy
more over an union and communion ecclesiasticall-Politicall: so we deny an
universal visible church.

5 The state of the members of the Militant visible church (...) in order, was
either before the law, Oeconomical, Genesis 18.19 (...) Exodus: 19 6.
that is (...) the coming of Christ, only congregational. (The (...)
Independent, we approve not:) Therefore neither national, provincial, nor
classical. 1 Cor: 14.13 1 Cor: 14.36 1 Cor. 1 2. 1 Cor: 12 27. Exo: 19 5 6
Deuteronomy: 29:1. and ^ to 15 Acts. 2.42. 1 Cor 14 26.


6 A Congregational-church* is by the institution of Christ a part of the
Militant-visible-church, consisting of a company of Saints by calling, united
into one body* by a holy covenant, for the public worship of God, and the
mutual edification one of another, in the Fellowship of the Lord Jesus.

CHAP. III. Of the matter of the visible Church Both in aspect of Quality and
Quantity.
THe matter of a visible church are (...) by c^lling. 1 (...): 1 ^ Ephe 1 1.


2. By Saints, we understand,

1 Such, Hebr: 6.1. 1 Cor. 1 5. Romans 15 14. Isai: 50 ^6-17. Act ^ 37. Matt: 3
6. Romans 6 17. 1 Cor. 1 2. Phillip. 1 1. Collos 1 2.
as have not only attained the knowledge of the principle of Religion, and are
free from gros and open scandals, but also do together with the profession of
their faith and Repentance, walk in blameles obedience to the word, so as that
in charitable discretion they may be accounted Saints by calling, (though
perhaps some or more of them be unsound, and hypocrites inwardly:) because the
members of such particular churches are commonly by the holy ghost called
Saints and faithful brethren in Christ, Ephesians. 1 1. 1 Cor 52 ^3 Rev. ^ ^^ 15
and 20. Ezekiel. 44.7 and 9. and chap. 23 38 ^9. Number ^9 and 20. Hagg. 2 13 14. 1
Cor. 11 1^ 2^ (...) and 14. (...) 2 21 1 (...) 5 1^ Ier. 14 (...). 5 4. 2 Cor.
12 21. Re^ 2 ^^ 5. ^. ^^ ^^.
and sundry churches have been reproved for receiving, and suffering such
persons to c^ntinu in fellowship amongst them, as have been offensive and
scandalous: the name of God also by this means is Blasphemed: and the holy
things of God defiled and Profaned, the hearts of godly grieved: and the
wicked themselves hardened: and helped forward to damnation* the example of such
does endanger the sanctity of others. A little Leaven Leaveneth the whole lump.

2 The children of such, who are also holy.

3 The members of churches though orderly constituted, may in time degenerate,
and grow corrupt and scandalous, which though they ought not to be tolerated in
the church, yet their continuance therein, through the defect of the execution
of d^scipline and Just censures, does not immediately d^ssol^ the being of the
church, as appears in the church of Israel, and the churches of Galatia, and
(...) Pergamus, and Thyati^^.

4 The matter of the Church in respect of its quantity (...) be of greater
number when may ordinarily meet together (...) in one place: 1 Cor ^4 2^
Matt 28 37
not ordinarily fewer, then may conveniently carry on Church-work. Hence when
the holy Scripture makes mention of the Saints combined into a church estate,
in a Town or City, where was but one Congregation, Rom 16 1 1 These 1 1 Rev 2 ^
c 3 7
it usually calls those Saints [ the church] in the singular number, at the
church of the Thessalonians the church of Smyrnae, Philadelphia, and the like:
But when it speaks of the Saints in a Nation, or Province, wherein there were
sundry Congregations, It frequently and usually calls them by the name of
churches in the plural number, 1 C^r 16 1 19 Gal 1.2 2 Cor 8 1. 2 These 2, 14
as the [ churches] of Asia, Galatia, Macedonia, and the like: which is further
confirmed by what is written of sundry of those churches in particular, how
they were Assembled and met together the whole church in one place, as the
church at Jerusalem, the church at Antioch, Acts 2 46 c 5 12. c 6 2. Acts 14,
2^ c 15 38. 1 Cor 5.4. c 14.23. Rom 16.1
the church at Corinth, and Ceuchrea, though it were more near to Corinth, it
being the port thereof, and answerable to a Village, yet being a distinct
Congregation from Corinth, it had a church of its own as well as Corinth had.

5 Nor can it with reason be thought but that every church appointed and
ordained by Christ, had a ministry ordained and appointed for the same: and
yet plain it is, that there were no ordinary officers appointed by Christ for
any other, then Congregational churches: Elders being appointed to feed, not
all flocks, but that particular flock of God over which the holy Ghost had made
them overseers, Acts 20 28.
and that flock they must attend, even the whole flock: and one Congregation
being as much as any ordinary Elders can attend, therefore there is no greater
Church then a Congregation, which may ordinarily meet in one place.

CHAP: IV. Of the Form of A Visible Church and of Church Covenant.
SAints by Calling, must have a Visible-Political-Union amongst themselves, ^
Cor ^^ 2^. 1 Timothy 3 15.
or else they are not yet a particular church: as those similitudes hold forth
which the Scripture makes use of, (...) show the nature of particular Churches:
As a Body* A building, or House, Hands, Eyes, Feet, Ephe 2 22 1 Cor 1.15 16 27.
and other members must be united, or else, remaining separate are not a body.
(...)* Timber, though squared, hewn and pollished, are not an house until
they are compacted and united: so Saints or believers in judgment of charity,
are not a church, unless Orderly knit together.

2 Particular churches cannot be distinguished one from another but by their
forms. Ephesus is not Smyrna, and Pergamus Thyatira, but each one a distinct
society of it self, Rev ^
having officers of their own, which had not the charge of others: Virtues of
their own, for which others are not praised: Corruptions of their own, for
which others are not blamed.

3 This Form is the Visible Covenant, Agreement, Exodus ^9 ^ ver 8. Deu 29 12 13.
Zach ^1 14. cap ^ 1^
or consent whereby they give up themselves unto the Lord, to the observing of
the ordinances of Christ together in the same society, which is usually called
the Church Covenant; For we see not otherwise how members can have
Church Power one over another mutually.

The comparing of each particular church unto a City, Ephe 2.^9 2 Cor ^1 ^
and unto a Spouse, seems to conclude not only a Form, but that that Form, is
by way of Covenant.

The Covenant, Gen 17.^. Deu 29 1^ 13. Ephe ^.12 29.
as it was that which made the Family of Abraham and children of Israel to be a
church and people unto God, so is it that which now makes the several
societyes of Gentil-believers to be churches in these days.

4 This Voluntary Agreement, Confine or Covenant (for all these are here taken
for the same): Although the more express and plain it is, the more fully it
puts us in mind of our mutual duty, and stirs us up to it, and leaves
less room for the questioning of the Truth of the Ch^^ch-estate or a Company
of pro^essors, and the truth of membership of particular persons: yet we
conceive, the substance of it is kept, where there is (...) real Agreement and
consent, of a company of faithful persons to meet constantly together in one
Congregation, for the public worship of God, and their mutual edification:
which real agreement and consent they do express by their constant practice in
coming together for the public worship of God, and by their religious
subjection unto the ordinances of God there: Exodus 19 5 to 8 and 24 3 17. Josh
24 18 to 24 Psalm ^0 5. Neh 9 38 c 10 1. Gen 17. Deu 29.
the rather, if we do consider how Scripture covenants have been entered into,
not only expressly by word of mouth, but by sacrifice; by hand writing, and
seal; and also sometimes by silent consent, without any writing, or expression
of words at all.

5 This form then being by mutual covenant, it follows, it is not faith in
the heart, nor the profession of that faith, nor cohabitation, nor Baptism; 1
Not faith in the heart? because that is invisible. 2 not a bare profession;
because that declares them no more to be members of one church then of
another: 3 not Cohabitation; A^hiests or Infidels may dwell together with
beleivers: 4 not Baptism; because (...) presupposseth a church estate, as
circumcision in the old Testament, which gave no being unto the church, the
church being before it, and in the wilderness without it* seals presuppose a
covenant already in being, one person is a complete subject of Baptism: but one
person is incapable of being a church.

Act 2 47. and 9 26. Matt 3 13 14 15. and 2^ 19 20. Psalm 133.^ 2 3 and 87 7
Matt 18 ^0. ^ John 1 3.
6 All believers ought, as God gives them opportunity there unto, to endeavor
to join themselves unto a particular church and that in respect of the honor
of Jesus Christ, in his example, and Institution, by the professed
acknowledgment of, and subjection unto the order and ordinances of the Gospel:
as also in respect of their good of communion founded upon their visible union,
and containd in the promises of Christ's special presence in the church: whence
they have fellowship with him, and in him one with an other: also for the
keeping of them in the way of Gods commandments, Psalm 119 last ^ Pet 2.25 Ephesians 4
16 Ioh 22 24.25. Matt 1^ ^ 16 17.
and recovering of them in case of wand^ing, (which all Christ's sheep are
subject to in this life), being unable to return of themselves; together with
the benefit of their mutual edification, and of their posterity, that they may
not be cut of from the privileges of the covenant* otherwis, if a believer
offends, he remains destitute of the remedy provided in that behalf, and
should all believers neglect this duty of joining to all particular
congregations: it might follow thereupon, that Christ should have no visible
political churches upon earth,

CHAP V. Of the first subject of church-powr or, to whom church power does first
belong. M^tt 28 1^ Rev 3 7. Isai 9 6. John 20 21 23. 1 Cor 1^ 32. Titus 1 5. 1
Cor 5 12.

THe first subject of church power, is either Supreme, or Subordinat, and
M^nisterial* the Supreme (by way of gift from the father) is the Lord Jesus
Christ* the Ministerial* is either extraordinary* as the Apostles, Prophets,
and Evangilists: o^ Ordinary; as every particular Congregational church.

2 Ordinary church power, is either the power of office, that is such as is
proper to the eldership: or, power of privilege, such as be longs unto the
brotherhood* the latter, is in the brethren formally, and immediately from
Christ, that is, (...) 12 4 8. Acts 1 23 ^ 6 3 4 C 14 23. 1 Cor 12 29 30.
so as it may according to order be acted or excercised immediately by
themselves: the former, is not in them formally or immediately, and therefore
cannot be acted or excercised immediately by them, but is said to be in them,
in that they design the persons unto office, who only are to act, or to
exercise this power.

CHAP. VI. Of the Officers of the Church, and especially of Pastors and
Teachers.
A Church being a company of people combined together by covenant for the
worship of God, it appears thereby, that there may be the essence and being of
a church without any officers, seeing there is both the form and matter of a
church, which is employed, Acts 1.
when it is said, the Apostles ordained elders in every church,

2 Nevertheless, though officers be not absolutely necessary, Romans ^0 ^. Ier 3
15 1 Cor 12 2^ Ephe 4 11 Psalm 6^ 18 Ephesians 4.^ 11
to the simple being of churches, when they be called: yet ordinarily to their
calling they are, and to their well being: and therefore the Lord (...) tender
compassion has appointed, and ordained officers which (...) would not have
done, if they had not been useful and needful for the church; yea, being
ascended into heaven, Ephesians 4 12 13
he received gifts for men, and gave gifts to men, whereof officers for the
church are Justly accounted no small parts, 1 Cor 12 23 Ephesians ^ 11 G^ 1 Act 8 6
26 19. Cor ^8 Rom ^1 78.
they being to continue to the end of the world, and for the perfect^ng of all
the Saints.

3 These officers were either extraordinary, or ordinary, extraordinary as
Apostles, Prophets* Evangilists* ordinary as Elders and Deacons.

The Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, as they were called extraordinarily
by Christ, so their office ended with them selves whence it is, 1 Cor 4 9^
that Paul directing Timothy how to carry along Church-Administrations, Gives
no direction about the choice or course of Apostle^, 1 Timothy 3 1.2 (...)
Prophets, or Evangelists, but only of Elders, and Deacons* and when Paul was
to take his last leave of the church of Ephesus, he committed the care of
feeding the church to no other, but unto the Elders of that church. The like
charge does Pete^ commit to the Elders.

1 Timothy 3 2 Phi^ 1 1. Acts 20 17 28. 1 Timothy 5 17.
4 Of Elders (who are also in Scripture called Bishops) Some attend chiefly to
the ministry of the word, As the P^stors and Teachers Others, attend especially
unto Rule, who are therefore called Ruling Elders.

Ephesians 4 11. Rom 12 7 8. 1 Cor ^2 8
5 The office of Pastor and Teacher, appears to be distinct. The Pastors special
work is, to attend to exhortation: and therein to Administer a word of Wisdom
the Teacher is to attend to Doctrine, and therein to Administer a word of
Knowledge: and either of them to administer the Seals of that Covenant, unto
the dispensation whereof the are alike called: 2 Timothy 4 1 2 Tit 2 9
as also to execute the Censures, being but a kind of application of the word,
the preaching of which, together with the application thereof they are alike
charged withal.

6 And for as much as both Pastors and Teachers are given by Christ for the
perfecting of the Saints, Ephesians 4 11 12 Cap 1 22 23
and edifying of his body, which Saints, and body of Christ is his church;
Therefore we account Pastors and Teachers to be both of them church officers;
and not the Pastor for the church: and the Teacher only for the Schools, Though
this we gladly acknowledge, that Schools are both lawful, profitable, and
necessary for the trayning up of such in good Litrature, ^ Sam ^0 12 v 19 20 2
king 2 3 v 15.
or learning, as may afterward be called forth unto office of Pastor or
Teacher in the church.

CHAP VII. Of Ruling Elders and Deacons.
Rom 12 7 9. 1 Timothy 5 17. 1 Cor 12 28.
THe Ruling Elders office is distinct from the office of Pastor and Teacher. The
Ruling Elders are not so called to exclude the Pastors and Teachers from
Ruling, because Ruling and Governing is common to these with the other; Heb 13
17 1 Timothy 5 17
whereas attending to teach and preach the word is peculiar unto the former.

1 Timothy 5, ^7.
2 The Ruling Elders work is to join with the Pastor and Teacher in those acts
of spiritual Rule

which are distinct from the ministry of the word and Sacraments committed to
them* of which sort, these be, as follows. 2 Chro. 23 19. Rev 21 12. 1 Timothy 4
14. Mat 1^ 17. 2 Cor 2 7, 8 Act 2.6
I to open and sou^^ the doors of Gods house, by the Admission of members
approved by the church: by Ordination of officers chosen by the church: and by
excommunication of notorious and obstinate offenders renounced by the church:
and by restoring of poenitents, forgive^ by the church. II To call the church
together when there is occasion, and seasonably to dismiss them again. III To
prepare matters in private, Acts ^1.28 22, 23.
that in public they may be carried an end with less trouble, and more speedy
dispatch. IV To moderate the carriage of all matters in the church assembled*
as, to propound matters to the church, Acts 6.2.3 c 13. v 15 2 Cor 8.10 Heb
1^.7, 7 2 These 2.10 11.12
to Order the season of speech and silence; and to pronounce sentence according
to the mind of Christ, with the consent of the church. V To be Guides and
leaders to the church, in all matters what-soever, pertaining to church
administrations and actions. VI To see that none in the church live
inordinately out of rank and place; without a calling, or Idly in their
calling. VII To prevent and heal such offenses in life, Acts 20.28 v 32. 1 These
5.12 Jam. 5.14 Acts 20.20
or in doctrine; as might corrupt the church. IIX To feed the flock of God with
a word of admonition. IX And as they shall be sent for, to visit, and to pray
over their sick brethren. X and at other times as opportunity shall serve
thereunto.

3 The office of a Deacon is Instituted in the church by the Lord Jesus*
sometime they are called Helps. Act 6.3. v 6 P^il 1.1 1 Timothy ^.8 1 Cor 12.28 1 Timothy 3.^, 9.


The Scripture tells us, how they should be qualified: Grave, not double
tongue^, not given to much wine, not give^ to filthy lucre* they must first be
proved and then use the office of a Deacon, being found Blameless.

The office and work of the Deacons is to receive the offerings of the church,
gifts given to the church, Acts 4.36, c 6.2.3 c 6.2
and to keep the treasury of the church: and therewith to serve the Tables
which the church is to provide for: as the Lords Tab^e, the table of the
ministers, Rom 1^.8
and of such as are in necessity, to whom they are to distribute in simplicity.

4 The office therefore being limited unto the care of the temporal good
things of the church, 1 Cor 7.17
it extends not unto the attendance upon, and administration of the spiritual
things thereof, as the word, and Sacraments, or the like.

5 The ordinance of the Apostle, and practice of the church, 1 Cor 16.1.2.3
commends the Lords day as a fit time for the contributions of the Saints.

1 Co^ 1^.28 Ephesians 4.3.11 Acts 20.2^
6 The Instituting of all these officers in the Church, is the work of God
himself; of the Lord Jesus Christ; of the holy Ghost* and therefore such
officers as he has not appointed, are altogether unlawful either to be placed
in the church, or to be retained therein; and are to be looked at as humane
creatures, mere Inventions and appointments of man, to the great dishonor of
Christ Jesus, the Lord of his house, the King of his church, whether Popes,
Patriarchs* Cardinals, Arch-bishop^, Lord bishops, Archdeacons, Officials,
Commissaries* and the like. These and the rest of that Hierarchy and Re^inue, ^
not being plants of the Lords planting, shall all be certainly be rooted out,
and cast forth.

7 The Lord has appointed ancient widows, (where they may be had) to minister
in the church, 1 Timothy 5.9, 10.
in giving attendance to the sick, and to give succor unto them, and others,
in the like necessities.

CHAP: IIX. Of the Electon of Church-Office^s.
NO man may take the honor of a Church Officer unto himself, but he that was
called of God, Act. 5.4
as was Aaron.

2 Calling unto office, is either Immediate, by Christ himself: such was the
call of the Apostles, Galat 1.1 Acts 14.23 cap 6.3
and Prophets: this manner of calling ended with them, as has been said: or
Medi^^^, by the church.

3 It is meet, that before any be orda^ned or chosen officers, they should
first be Tried and proved; 1 Timothy 5.22 c^p 7 10 Acts 16.2 cap 6.3
because hands are not suddenly to be laid upon any, and both Elders and
Deacons must be of honest and good report.

4 The things in respect of which they are to be Tried, are those gifts and
virtues which the Scripture requires in men, that are to be elected into such
places. viz, that Elders must be blameless, sober, apt to teach, and endued
with such other qualifications as are laid down, 1 Timothy: 3 and 2. Tit: 1, 6 to
9. Deacons to be fitted, as is directed, Acts. 6, 3. 1 Timothy: 3 8, to 11.

Act 14.23 c 1.23. c 6 3.4.5.
5 Officers are to be called by such Churches, whereunto they are to min^ster*
of such moment is the preservation of this power, that the churches excerc^sed
it in the presence of the Apostles.

Gal ^.13
6 A Church being free cannot become subject to any, but by a free election;

Yet when such a people do choose any to be over them in the Lord, then do they
become subject, Hebr. 13.17
and most willingly submit to their ministry in the Lord, whom they have so
chosen.

7 And if the church have power to choose their officers and ministers, then in
case of manifest unworthyness, Romans 16.17
and delinquency they have power also to depose them. For to open, and shut: to
choose and refuse; to constitute in office, and remove from office: are acts
belonging unto the same power.

8 We judge it much conducing to the wel-being, and communion of churches,
that where it may conveniently be done, Cant. 8.8, 9
neighbour-churches (...) withal, and their help made use of in the trial of
church officers, in order to their choice.

9 The choice of such Church Officers belongs not to the civil-magistrates,
as such, or diocesan-bishops, or patrones: for of these or any such like, the
Scripture is wholly silent, as having any power therein.

CHAP: IX. Of Ordination, and Imposition of hands.
Church Officers are not only to be chosen by the Church, Acts. 13.^ cap 14.23
1 Timothy 5.22
but also to be ordained by Imposition of hand, and prayer* with which at the
ordination of Elders, fasting also is to be joined.

2 This ordination we account nothing else, Number. 8.10 Act. 6.5.6 cap 13.2, 3
but the solemn putting of a man into his place and office in the Church
wher-unto he had right before by election, being like the installing of a
magistrate in the common wealth.

Ordination therefore is not to go before, but to follow election* Acts. 6.5.6
cap 14.23
the essence and substance of the outward calling of an ordinary officer in the
Church, does not consist in his ordination, but in his voluntary and free
election by the Church, and in his accepting of that election* wher-upon is
founded the relation between Pastor and flock, between such a minister, and
such a people.

Ordination does not constitute an officer, nor give him the essentials of his
office. The Apostles were elders, without Imposition of hands by men: Paul and
Barnabas were officers, before that Imposition of hands. Acts. 13.3. The
posterity of Levi were Pre^sts, and Levits, before hands were laid on them by
the Children of Israel.

1 Timothy 4.^4 Acts 23.3 1 Timothy 5.22
3 I^ such Churches where there are Elders, Imposition of hands in ordination is
to be performed by those Elders.

4 In such Churches where there are no Elders, Imposition of hands may be
performed by some of the Brethren orderly chosen by the church thereunto* (...)
^ 10
For if the people may elect officers which is the greater, and wherein the
substance of the Office consists, they may much more* occasion and need so
requiring) impose hands in ordination, which is the less, and but the
accomplishment of the other.

5 Nevertheless in such Churches where there are no Elders, and the Church so
desire, we see not why Imposition of (...) may not be performed by the E^ders
of other Churches. Ordinary officers laid hands upon the officers of many
Churches: The presbytery at Ep^^sus laid hands up in (...) an Evangelist. The
presbytery at Antioch laid hands upon Paul and B^rnabas. 1 Ti^ 4.^4 Acts. 13.^


1 Pe^. 5.2 Acts 20.2^
6 Church Officers, are officers to one church, even that particular, over which
the Holy Ghost has made them overseers* Insomuch as Elders are commanded to
feed, not all flocks, out that flock which is co^mited to their faith and
trust, and depends upon them. Nor can constant residence at one congregation,
be necessary for a minister, no no^ yet lawful, if he be not a minister to one
congregation only, but to the church universal: because he may not attend one
part only of the church, Acts 20.28
whereto he is a minister* but he is called to attend unto all the flock.

7. He that is clearly loosed from his office-relation unto that church whereof
he was a minister, cannot be looked at as an officer, no^ perform any act of
Off^ce in any other church unless he be again orderly called unto Office: which
when it shall be, we know nothing to hinder* but Imposition of hand also in
his (...) ought to be used toward him again. For so Paul the Apostle received
(...) of hands twice at least, from Ananias. Acts* 9.17. and Acts. 13.3.

CHAP X. Of the pow^^ of the Church, and its Presbytery.
(...) 2.6 Ephesians 1.21, 22 Is^y 9.6 Mat^ 28.18
Supreme and Lordly power over all the Churches upon earth, does only belong
unto Jesus Christ, who is King of the church, and the head thereof. He has the
Government upon his shoulders, and has al power given to him, both in he^ven
and earth.

2 A Company of professed believers Ecclesastically Confoederat, as they are a
church before they have officers, and without them; so even in that estate,
Acts 1.2^ c: 14.13 c: 6.3, 4 M^t: 1^.1^ 1 Cor, ^.4.^
subordinate (...) and power under Christ deligated to them by him, does belong
to them, in such a man^er as is before expressed. ^. 5 ^2. and as flowing from
the very nature and Essence of a church: It being natural to all bodies, and
so unto a church body, to be furnished with sufficient power, for its own
preservatio^ and subsista^ce.

3 This Government of the church, is a mixed Government (and so has been
acknowledged long before the term of Indepe^dency was heard of:) In respect of
(...), the head and King of the church, and the Sovereign power residing in
^im, and exercised by him, Rev ^3.7 1 Cor 5.12
it is a Mona^chy: In respect of the body, or Bro^herhoo^ of the church, and
power from Christ granted unto them, it resembles a Democracy, 1 Timothy 5.1^
In respect of the (...) and power comited to them, it is an Aristocracy.

4 The Sovereign power which is peculiar unto Christ, is exercised. I In
calling the church out of the world unto holy fellowship with himself II In
instituting the ordinances of his worship, Gal 1.4. Rev 5.8, 9 Matt 28.20 Ephesians
4.8.1^ Jam 4.12 Is^y 33.22 1 Timothy 3.1^. 2 Cor 1^.4* 5 Is^y 32.2 Luk^ 2.51*
and appointing his ministers and officers for the dispensing of them. III In
giving laws for the ordering of all our ways, and the ways of his house. IV
In giving power and life to all his Institutions, and to his people by them. V
In protecti^g and delivering his church against and from all the enemies of
their peace.

5 The power granted by Christ unto the body of the church and Brotherho^^, is
a prerogative or privilege which the church does exercise: I In Ch^^sing their
own ^fficers, whether Elders, or Deacons. II In (...) of their own members and
therefore, there is great reason they should have power to Remove any from their
fellowship again. Acts 6.5.^ c 14.23 c 9.26
Hence in ca^e of offense any one brother has power to convince and Admonish an
offending brother: and in case of not hearing him, to take one or two more to
^^tt on the Admonition, Matt 18.1^* 16, 17
and in case of not hearing them, to proceed to tell the church: and as his
offense ^^y requ^re the whole church has power to proceed to the public
Censu^^ of him* whether by (...), or Excomun^cation: Tit 3.^0 C^ll 4.^^ (...)
18.^^ 2 Cor 2.7, 8
and upon his repentance to restore him* again unto his former communion.

6 In case (...) Elder offend incorrigibly the matter s^ requiring, as the
church had power to call him to office, so they have power according to order
(the counsel of other churches where it may be had, Collo 4.1^ Rom 16.17
directing thereto to remove him from his Office: and being now but a member, in
case he add co^tumacy to his sin,

the Church that had power to receive him into their fellowship, has also the
same power to cast him out, Matt. 13.17
that they have concerning any other member.

1 Timothy 5.17 Hebr. 13.17 ^ These. 5.12
7 Church Government, or Rule, is placed by Christ in the officers of the
church, who are therefore called R^l^ers, wh^le they rule with God: yet in case
of mal-administration, they are subject to the power of the church, according
as has been sa^d before, the H^ly Ghost frequently, Romans 12.8 1 Timothy 5.17 1
Cor. 12.28 29. Hebr. 13 7.17.
yea always, where it mentions Church-Rule, and church government, ascribes
it to Elders: whereas the work and duty of the people is expressed in the phrase
of obeying their Elders; and submiting themselves unto them in the Lord: so as
it is manifest, that an organick or complete church is a body politic,
consisting of some that are Governors, and some that are governed, in the Lord.

8 The power which Christ has committed to the Elders is to feed and rule the
church of God, Acts. 20.28 cap 6.2 Number. 16.12 Ezekiel. 46.10 Acts. 13.15
and accordingly to call the church together upon any weighty occasion, when
the members so called, without just cause, may not refuse to come: nor when
they are come, depart before they are dismissed: nor speak in the church,
before they have leave from the elders: Hosh* 4.4.
nor continue so doing, when they require silence, nor may they oppose nor
contradict the judgment or sentence of the Elders, without sufficient and
weighty cause because such practices are manifestly contrary unto order, and
government, and in-lets of disturbance, and tend to confusion.

Rev. 2.2 1 Timothy 5.19 Acts. 21.18 22, 23 1 Cor. 5.4* 5
9 It belongs also unto the Elders to examine any officers, or members, before
they be received of the church: to receive the accusations brought to the
Church, and to prepare them for the churches hearing. In handling of offenses
and other matters before the Church they have power to declare and publish the
Counsel and will of God touching the same, Number. 6.23, to 26.
and to pronounce sentence with consent of the Church: Lastly they have power,
when they dismiss the people, to bless them in the name of the Lord.

10 This power of Government in the Elders, does not any wise prejudice the power
of privilege in the brotherhood; as neither the power of privilege in the
brethren, does prejudice the power of government in the Elders; Acts. 14.15 ve.
23. c 6.2 1 Cor. 5.4 ^ Cor. 2.6* 7
but they may sweetly agree together, as we may see in the example of the
Apostles furnished with the greatest church-powr, who took in the concurrence
and consent of the brethren in church-administrations.

Also that Scripture, 2 Cor 2.9. and chap 10:6. do declare, that what the
churches were to act and do in these matters, they were to do in a way of
obedience, Hebr. 13.17
and that not only to the direction of the Apostles, but also of their ordinary
Elders.

11 From the premises, namely, that the ordinary power of Government belonging
only to the elders, power of privilege remains with the brotherhood, (as power
of judgment in matters of censure, and power of liberty, in matters of liberty:)
It follows, that in an organick Church, and right administration; all church
acts, proceed after the manner of a mixed administration, so as no church act
can be consummated, or perfected without the consent of both.

CHAP: XI. Of the maintenance of Church Officers.
THe Apostle concludes, that necessary and sufficient maintenance is due unto
the ministers of the word: 1 Cor. 9.^^ 15. Matt. 9.3^. c 10.10 1 Timothy 5.18
from the law of nature and nations, from the law of Moses, the equity thereof,
as also the rule of common reason* moreover the scripture does not only call
Elders laborers, and workmen, but also speaking of them does say, Gala. 6.6.
that the labourer is worthy of his hi^e: and requires that he which is taught
in the word, should communicate to him, in all good things; 1 Cor. 9.9 verse.
14. 1 Timothy 5.1^
and mentions it as an ordinance of the Lord, that they which preach the
Gospel, should live of the Gospel; and forbideth the muzling of the mouth of
the ox, that treads out the corn.

2 The Scriptures alleged requiring this maintenance as a bounden duty, and
due de^^, and not as a matter of alms, and free gift therefore people are not
at liberty to do or not to do, what and when they pleas in this matter, no
more then in any other commanded duty, and ordinance of the Lord: but ought of
duty, to minister of their carnal things to them, Rom 15.^^* 1 Cor. 9.11*
that labor amongst them in the word and doctrine, as well as they ought to
pay any other work men their wages, or to discharge and satisfy their other
debts, or to submit themselves to observe any other ordinance of the Lord.

3 The Apostle, Gala. 6.6
Gal: 6, 6. injoyning that he which is taught communicate to him that teaches
in all good things: does not leave it arbitrary, what or how much a man shall
give, or in what proportion*

but even the later, as well as the former, is prescribed and appointed by the
Lord. 1 Cor. 16.2


4 Not only members of Churches, but all that are taught ^n in the word, are to
contribute unto him that teaches, in all good things. Galat. 6.6
In case that Congregations are defective in their contributions, Act. 6.3.4
the Deacons are to call upon them to do their duty: if their call suffices
not, the church by her power is to require it of their members, and where
church-powr through the corruption of men, does not, or cannot attain the end,
the Magistrate is to see ministry be duly provided for, Neh. 13.11
as appears from the commended example of Nehemiah. The Magistrates are
nursing fathers* and nursing mothers, and stand charged with the custody of
both Tables; Isay. 49.23
because it is better to prevent a scandal, that it may not come and easier
also, then to remove it when it is given, 2 Cor. 8.13 14
Its most suitable to Rule, that by the churches care, each man should know his
proportion according to rule, what he should do, before he do it, that so his
judgment and heart may be satisfied in what he does, and just offense
prevented in what is done.

CHAP: XII. Of Admission of members into the Church.
2 Chronicles. 23.19. Mat. ^3.25. and 22.12
THe doors of the Churches of Christ upon earth, do not by Gods appointment
stand so wide open, that all sorts of people good or bad, may freely enter
therein at their pleasure; but such as are admitted thereto, as members ought to
be examined and tried first; whether they be fit and meet to be received into
church-society, or not. The Eunuch of Aethiopia, Acts. 8.37
before his admission was examined by Philip, Rev. 2.2
whether he did believe on Jesus Christ with all his heart the Angel of the
church at Ephesus is commended, for trying such as said they were Apostles and
were not. Acts 9.26
There is like reason for trying of them that profess themselves to be
beleivers.

The officers are charged with the keeping of the doors of the Church, Rev.
21.12 2 Chr 23.19
and therefore are in a special man^er to make trial of the fitnes of such who
enter. Twelve Angels are set at the gates of the Temple, lest such as were
Ceremonially unclean should enter therinto.

Act 2.3^ to 4^. c 8.3^
2 The things which are requisite to be found in all church members, are,
Repentance from sin, and faith in Jesus Christ. And therefore these are the
things whereof men are to be examined, at their admission into the church and
which then they must profess and hold forth in such sort, as may satisfy
^ati^nall charity that the things are there ^ndeed. John Baptist admitted men
to Baptism, Matt 3.6.
confessing and b^w^yling their sins: and of other it is said, that they came,
Acts ^9.^*
and confessed, and showed the^r deed^.

3 The weakest measure of faith is to be accepted in those that desire to be
admitted into the church: because weak christians if sincere* have the su^stance
of that faith, Rom ^4.1
repentance and holiness which is required in church members: and such have
most need of the ordinances for their confirmation and growth in grace The Lord
Jesus would not quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed, M^tt
12.20.
Is^y 40.1^.
but gather the tender lambs in his arms, and carry them gently in his bosom.
Such ch^rity and tenderness is to be used, as the weakest christian if sincere,
may not be excluded, nor discouraged* severity of examination is to be avoided.

4 In case any through excessive fear, or other infirmity, be unable to make
their personal relation of the^r spiritual estate in publ^ck, it is sufficient
that the Elders having received private satisfaction, make relation thereof in
publ^ck before the church, they testifying their assents thereunto; this being
the way that tends most to edification. But whereas persons are of better
abil^tyes, there it is most exp^dient, that they make their ^elat^^n, (...)
66.^^
and confessions personally with their own mouth, as David professes of
himself.

5 A personal and publ^ck confession, and declaring of Gods manner of work^ng
upon the soul, is both lawful, expedient, and useful, in sundry respects, and
upon sundry grounds. Those three th^usands. Acts 2.37.41 Before they were
admitted by the Apostles, did manifest that they were pricked ^n the^r hearts
at Peter's sermon, together with earne^ desire to be del^vered from their sinn^,
which now wounded their consciences, and their ready receiving of the word of
promise and exhortation. We are to be ready to render a reason of the hope
that is in us, to every one that asks u^: 1 Pet 3.1^
therefore we must be able and ready upon any occasion to do this and show our
(...), because these are the reason of a well grounded hope* He^r 11.1 (...)
1.^^.
I have not hidden thy righteousness from the g^e^t congregation. Psalm. 40.10.

6 This profession of faith and repentance, as it must be made by such at their
admission, that were never in Church-society before: so nothing hinders, but
the same way also be performed by such as have formerly been members of some
other church, and the church to which they now join themselves as members, may
lawfully require the same. Those three thousand. Acts. 2. which made their
confession, were members of the church of the Jews before, so were they that
were baptized by John. Matt. 3.5.6 Gallat. 2* 4 ^ Tim. 5.24
Churches may err in their admission: and persons regularly admitted, may fall
into offense. Otherwise, if Churches might obtrude their members, or if
church members might obtrude themselves upon other churches, without due
trial, the matter so requiring, both the liberty of churches would hereby be
infringed, in that they might not examine those, concer^ing whose fitness for
communion, they were unsatisfied: and besides the infringing of their liberty, ^
the churches themselves would u^avoidably be corrupted, and the ordinances
defiled, whilst they might not refuse, but must receive the unworthy: which is
contrary unto the Scripture, teaching that all churches are sisters, and
therefore equal.

7 The like trial is to be required from such members of the church, as were
born in the same, or received their membership, and were baptized in their
infancy, or minority, by virtue of the covenant of their parents, when being
grown up unto years of discretion they shall desire to be made partakers of
the Lords supper: unto which, because holy things must not be given unto the
unworthy, Matt. 7.6 ^ Cor. 11.27
therefore it is requisite, that these as well as others, should come to their
trial and exami^ation, and manifest their faith and repentance by an open
profession thereof, before they are received to the Lords supper, and otherwise
not to be be admitted there unto.

Yet these Church Members that were so born, or received in their childhood,
before they are capable of being made partakers of full communion, have many
privileges which others* not church-me^bers* have not: they are in covenant
with God; have the seal thereof upon them, viz. Baptism; and so if not
regenerated, yet are in a more hopeful way of attayning regenerating grace,
and all the spiritual blessings both of the covenant and seal; they are also
under Church-watch and consequently subject, to the reprehensions, admonitions,
and censures thereof, for their healing and amendment, as need shall require.

CHAP: XIII. Of Church Members their removal from one Church to another, and
of letters of reco^mendation, and dismission.
Church Members may not remove or depart from the Church, and so one from
another as they please, Hebr. ^^ ^
nor without just and weighty cause but ought to live and dwell together: for
as much as they are commanded, not to forsake the assembling of themselves
together. Such departure* tends to the dissolution and ruin of the body: as
the pull^ng of stones, and pieces of timber from the building, and of members
from the natural body, tend to the destruction of the whole.

2 It is therefore the duty of Church Members, in such times and places when
counsel may be had, to consult with the Church whereof they are members, about
their removal, Prove. ^^ ^^
that accordingly they having their approbation, may be encouraged or otherwise
desist. They who are joined with consent, should not depart without consent,
except forced thereunto.

3 If a members departure be manifestly unsafe, and sinful, the church may not
consent the^unto: for ^n so doing, Rom 14.23. 1 Timothy 5.22. Acts 2^.14.
they should not act in faith: and should partake with him in his sin. If the
case be doubtful and the person not to be persuaded, it seems best to leave
the matter unto God, and not forcibly to detayn him.

4 Just reasons for a members removal of himself from the church are, I If a
man cannot cont^nue without partaki^g in sin^. Ephe. 5.1^ Acts 9.25. and ver
29.30 chap 8.1
II In case of personal persecution, so Paul departed from the disciples at
Damascus. Also, in case of general persecution, when all are scattered. III In
case of real and not only pretended, w^nt of competent subsistence, a door
being opened for better supply in another place, Nehe ^3.^^
together with the means of spiritual edification. In these, or like cases, a
member may lawfully remove, and the church cannot lawfully detayne him.

5 To separate from a Church, either out of contemp^ of their holy fellowship,
2 (...) 4.^^
or out of coveteousness* or for greater inlargements with just grief to the
church; or out of schism, or w^nt of (...); and out of a spirit of contention
in respect of some unkindness, Rom 16.^^ Jude. 1^.
or some ev^ll only conceived*

or indeed, in the Church which might and should be tolerated and healed with a
spirit of meekness, E^h 4.2.3 Coll 3.1: (...) 6.1.^
and of which ev^ll the church is not yet co^vinced, (though perhaps himself
be) nor admonished: for these or like reasons to withdraw from public
communion, in word, or seals, or censures, is unlawful and sinful.

6 Such members as have orderly removed their habitation ought to join
themselves unto the church in order, Isay 56.8 Acts 9.26
where they do inhabit if it may be* otherwise, they can neither perform the
duties, nor receive the privileges of members; such an example tolerated in
some, is apt to corrupt others; which if many should follow, would threaten the
dissolution and confusion of churches, 1* Cor. ^4.33
contrary to the Scripture.

Acts. 18.27
7 Order requires, that a member thus removing, have letters testimonial; and of
dismission from the church whereof he yet is, unto the church whereunto he
desires to be joined, lest the church should be deluded; that the church may
receive him in faith; and not be corrupted, by receiving deceivers, and false
brethren. Until the person dismissed be received into another church, he
cease not by his letters of dismission to be a member of the church whereof he
was. The church cannot make a member no member but by excommunication.

8 If a member be called to remove only for a time, where a Church is, Rom
16.1, 2 ^ Cor. 3.1
letters of Recommendation are requisite, and sufficient for communion with
that church, in the ordinances, and in their watch: as Phoebe, a serva^t of the
church at Cenchrea, had letters written for her to the church of Rome, that
she might be received, as becomes saints.

9 Such letters of Recommendation and dismission were written for Apollos: For
Marcus to the Colosia^s; for Phoebe to the Roma^es; for sundry others to other
churches. Acts. 18.27 Coll 4.10. Romans 16.1
and the Apostle tells us, that some persons, not sufficiently known
otherwise, have special need of such letters, though he for his part had no
need thereof. The use of them is to be a benefit, ^ Cor. 3.1.
and help to the party, for whom they are written; and for the furthering of
his receiving amongst the Saints in the place whereto be goes; and the due
satisfaction of them in their receiving of him.

CHAP: XIV. Of excommunication and other Censures.
^
THe Censures of the church, are appointed by Christ, for the preventing,
removing,

and healing of offenses in the Church: Jude. 29. D^ut. 13.11 1 Cor. 5.6 Romans
2.24
for the reclayming and gayning of offending brethren: for the deterring of
others from the like offenses: for purging out the leaven which may infect the
whole lump: for vindicating the honor of Christ, and of his church, and the
holy profession of the gospel: and for preventing of the wrath of God, Rev.
2.14.15, 16, and 20
that may justly fall upon the church, if they should suffer his covenant, and
the seals thereof, to be profaned by notorious and obstinate offenders.

2 If an offense be private (one brother offending another) the offender is to
go, Mat. 5.23.24 Luke 17.3, ^
and acknowledge his repentance for it unto his offended brother, who is then to
forgive him, but if the offender neglect or refuse to do it, the brother
offended is to go, and co^vince and admonish him of it, between themselves
privately: Matt. ^8.1^
if thereupon the offender be brought to repent of his offense, the admonisher
has won his brother, but if the offender hear not his brother, the brother
offended is to take with him one or two more, V 16
that in the mouth of two or three witneses, every word may be established,
(whether the word of admonition if the offender receive it, or the word of
complaint, if he refuse it:) for if he refuse it, V 1^
the offended brother is by the mouth of the Elders to tell the church, and if
he hear the church, and declare the same by penitent confession, he is
recovered and gained; and if the church discern him to be willing to hear, yet
not fully co^vinced of his offense, Tit. 3.10*
as in case of heresy; They are to dispe^ce to him a public admonition; which
declaring the offe^der to ly under the public offense of the church, does
thereby withold or suspend him from the holy fellowship of the Lords supper,
till his offense be removed by penitent confession. M^tt. 18.1^
If he still continue obstinate they are to cast him out by excommunication.

3 But if the offense be more public at first, and of a more heinous and
criminal nature, to wit, such as are condemned by the light of nature; 1 Cor
5.4^* 5. and v 11.
then the church without such graduall proceeding, is to cast out the offender
from their holy communion, for the further mortifying of his sin and the
healing of his soul, in the day of the Lord Jesus.

4 In dealing with an offe^der, great care is to be taken, that we be neither
overstrict or rigorous, nor too indulgent or remiss: our proceeding herein
ought to be with a spirit of meekness, Galat 6 1.
considering our selves left we also be tempted; and that the best of us have
need of much forgiveness from the Lord. Yet the wini^g and heali^g of the
offe^ders soul, M^t 18.24* 25 (...) 6.14
being the end of th^se e^deavours, we must not daub with u^tempered mortar,
nor heal the wounds of our brethren s^eightly, on some have compassion others
save with fear.

Matt 1^.1^. 2 Cor. ^.11. ^ The. 3.6.14
5 While the offender remayns excommunicate, the Church is to refrayn from all
member-like communion with him in spiritu^ll things, and also from all familiar
communion with him in civil thing, farthe^ then the necessity of natural, or
domest^cal, or civil relatio^s do require: and are therefore to forbear to eat
and dri^ke with him, that he may be ashamd.

6 Excommunication being a spiritual punishment, it does not prejudice the
excommunicate in, nor deprive him of h^s civil rights, and therefore touches
not princes, or other magistrates, in point of their civ^l dignity or authority
And, 1 Cor 14* 24 25.
the excommunicate being but as a publ^can and a heathen* heathens being
lawfully permitted to come to hear the word in church assemblyes; we
acknowledge therefore the like liberty of hearing the word, ^ These 3.14
may be permitted to persons excommunicate, that is permitted unto heathen. And
because we are not without hope of his recovery, we are not to account him as
an enemy but to admonish him as a brother.

7 If the Lord sanctify the censure to the offender, so as by the grace of
Christ, he does testify h^s repentance, with humbl^ confession of his sin, ^
Cor 2.7, ^
and judging of himself, giv^ng glory unto God; the Church is then to forgive
him, and to comfort him, and to (...) him to the wonted brotherly communion,
which formerly he enjoyed with them.

8 The suffering of profane or scandalous livers to continue in fellowship, and
partake in the sacrament, is doubtless a great sin in those that have power in
their hand, (...) ^.14, 15. ver. 20
to red^ess it; and do it not. Nevertheless, inasmuch as Christ and his
Apostles in their times, and the Prophets and other godly in theirs, Mat 23.3.
(...) 3.^
did lawfully partake of the Lords commanded ordinances in the Jewish church,
and neither taught not practiced separation from the same, though unworthy ones
were permitted therein; and inasmuch as the faithful in the church of Corinth,
wherein were many unworthy persons, and practices, are never commanded to absent
themselves from the Sacraments, ^ Cor. ^ chap 15.12
because of the same: therefore the godly in like cases, are not presently to
separate.

9 As separation from such a Church wherein propha^e and scandalous livers are
tolerated, is not presently necessary: so for the members thereof, otherwise
worthy, hereupon to absta^n from communicating with such a church, in the
participation of the Sacraments, i^ unlawful For as it were unreasonable for
an in^ocent person to be punished, ^ Chron. ^0 ^8. (...) ^^.25.
for the faults of other, wherein he has no hand, and whereunto he gave no
consent: for ^s it more unreasonable, that a godly man should (...), and punish
himself in not coming for his portion in the (...) of the seals, as he
ought, because others are suffered to come, that ought not: especially,
considering that himself does neither consent to their sin, nor to their
approaching to the ordinance in their sin, nor to the neglect of others who
should put them away, and do not: ^
but on the contrary does heartily mourn for these things, modestly and
seasonably stir up others to do their duty. If the Church cannot be reformed,
they may use their liberty, as is specified, chap: 13. sect: 4. But this all
the godly are bound unto, even every one to do his endeavor, according to his
power and place, that the unworthy may be duly proceeded against, by the Church
(...) whom this matter does appertain^.

CHAP: XV. Of the communion of Churches one with another.
ALthough Churches be distinct, and therefore may not be confounded one with
another: and equal, Rev 1.4^* Cant. 8.^. Rom 1^.16. 1 Co^ 16.1^ Acts 15, 2^
Rev ^.^
and therefore have not dominion one over another: yet all the churches ought to
preserve Church Communion one with another, because they are all united unto
Christ, not only as ^ mystical, but as a political head; whence is derived a
communion suitable thereunto.

2 The communion of Churches is exercised sundry ways.

I By way of mutual care in taking thought for one another welfare.. Cant
8.8*


II By way of Consultation one with another, when we have occasion to require
the judgment and counsel of other churches, touching any person, or cause
wherewith they may be better acquainted then our selves. As the church of
Antioch consulted with the Apostles, and Elders of the church at Jerusalem,
about the question of circumcision of the gentiles, Acts 1^.^
and about the false teachers that broached that doctrine. In which case, when
any Church wants light or peace amongst themselves, Acts 15.6.
it is a way of communion of churches (according to the word) to meet together
by their Elders and other messengers in a synod, to consider and argue the
points in doubt, or difference, ver: 22.23*
and having found out the way of truth and peace, to commend the same by their
letters and messengers to the churches, whom the same may concern.

But if a Church (...) with d^vision amongst (...), or ly under any open (...),
and yet ref^se to consult (...), for healing or re^oving of the same; ^t is ^
matter of just off^^ce both to the Lord Jesus, and to other ch^rches, as
bewraying too much want of mercy and faithfulness, not to seek to bind up the
breach^, and wounds of the church and brethren; Ezekiel 34.4.
and therefore the state ^f such a church calls aloud upon other churches, to
excert^se a f^ller act of brotherly communion, to wit, by way of admonition.

III A third way then of communion of churches is by way of admonition, to
w^tt, in case any public offense be found in a church, which they either
discern not, or are slow in proceeding to use the (...) for the remov^ng and
healing of. ^^ll 2.11 to 14.
Paul had no authority over Peter, yet when he saw Peter not walking with a
right foot, he publicly rebuked him before the church: though churches have no
more authority one over another, then one Apostle had over another; yet as one
Apostle might admonish another, so may one church admonish another, and yet
without usurpation. In which (...), if the church that lies under offense do
not harken to the church which does admonish he^, Math 18* 15* 16.17. by
proportion
the church is to aquai^t other neighbour-churches with that offense, which the
offending church st^ll lies under, together with their neglect of the
brotherly admonition given unto them; whereupon those other churches are to join
in seconding the admonition formerly give^: and if still the offe^ding church
con^^nue in obstinacy and impenitency, they may forbear communion with them;
and are to proceed to make use of the help of a Synod, or counsel of
neighbour-churches walki^g orderly (if a ^reater cannot convenie^tly ^e had)
for their conv^ction. If they hear not the Synod, the Synod having d^clared
them to be obstinate, particular churches, approving and accept^ng of the
judgment of the Synod, are to declare the sentence of non-co^munion
respectively concerning them: and thereupon out of a rel^gious care to keep
their own communion pure, they may justly w^thdraw themselves from
participation with them at the Lords table, and from such other acts of holy
communion, as the communion of churches does otherwise allow and require.
Nevertheless, if any members of such a church as lies under public offense;
do not consent to the offense of the church, but do in due sort bear witness
against it, they are st^ll to be received to wonted c^mmunion: (...) 18.25
for it is not equal, that the innocent should suffer with the offensi^e.

Yea furthermore; if such innocent members after due waiting in the use of all
good means for the healing of the offense of their own church, shall at last
(with the allowa^ce of the counsel of ne^ghbour-churches) withdraw from the
fellowsh^p of their own church and offer themselves to the fellowsh^p of
another; we judge it lawful for the other church to receive them being
otherwise fit) as if they had been orderly dismissed to them from their own
church.

IV A fourth way of communion of churches, is by way of participation: the
members of one church occasionally coming unto another, we willingly admit
t^em to p^rtake with us at the Lords table, it being the seal of our communion
not only with Christ, nor only with the members of our own church, but also
with all the churches of the saints: in which regard, 1 Cor ^2.^^
we refuse not to baptize their children presented to us, if either their own
minister be absent, or such a fruit of holy fellowship be desired with us. In
like case such churches as are furn^shed with more ministers then one, do
willingly afford one of their own ministers to supply the place of an absent or
sick minister of another church for a needful season.

V A fifth way of Church Communion is, Rom 16.^
by way of recomendation when a member of one church has occasion to reside in
another church; if but for a season, we commend him to their watchful
ffellowsh^p by letters o^ recommendation: but if he be called to settle his
abode there, we commit him according to his desire, Acts ^^.27
to the ffell^wship of their covenant, by letters of dismission.

VI A sixth way of Church Communion, is in case of Need, to minister relief^ and
succor one unto another: Acts 11.22
either of able members to furnish them with officers* or of outward support to
the necessityes of poorer churches; verse 29. Rom 13.26.27
as did the churches of the Gentiles contribute liberally to the poor saints at
Jerusalem.

3 When a compa^y of beleivers purpose to gather into church fellowship, it is
requisite for their safer proceeding, and the maintaining of the communion of
churches, that they signify their intent unto the neighbour-churches, (...)
proportion.
walking according unto the order of the Gospel, and desire their presence, and
help, and right hand of fellowship which they ought readily to give unto them,
when their is no just cause of excepting against their proceedings.

4 Besides these several ways of communion, there is also a way of
propagation of churches; when a church shall grow too ^^m^rous, it is a way,
and fit season, to propagate one Church out of an other, Is^y 40.20. Deuteronomy 8.8,
9.
by sending forth such of their members as are willing to remove, and to
procure some officers to them, as may enter with them unto church estate
amongst themselves: as Bees, when the hive is too full, issue forth by swarms,
and are gathered into other hives, so the Churches of Christ may do the same
upon like necessity; and therein hold forth to the^ the right hand of
fellowship, both in their gathering into a church; and in the ordination of
their officers.

CHAP: XVI. Of Synods.
SYnods orderly assembled, and rightly proceeding according to the pattern,
Acts. 15. we acknowledge as the ordinance of Christ: Acts 15.2. ^^.15.
and though not absolutely necessary to the being, yet many times, through the
iniquity of men, and perverseness of times necessary to the wel-being of
churches, for the establishment of truth, and peace therein.

2 Synods being spiritual and ecclesiastical assemblyes, are therefore made up
of spiritual and ecclesiastical causes. The next efficient cause of them
under Christ, is the power of the churches, sending forth their Elders, other
messengers; who being met together in the name of Christ, Acts ^5^2, 3
are the matter of the Synod: and they in argueing, ver^ 6.
debating and determining matters of religion according to the word, verse 7. to
23
and publishing the same to the churches whom it concerns, do put forth the
proper and formal acts of a Synod; to the convictio^ of errors and heresye,
verse 31. Act^ 104.15
and the establishment of truth and peace in the Churches, which is the end of
a Synod.

3 Magistrates, have power to call a Synod, by calling to the Churches to send
forth their Elders and other messengers, to counsel and assist them in mattters
of religion: 2 Chronicles 29.4.5. to 11.
but yett the constituting of a Synod, is a church act, and may be transacted
by the churches, even when civil magistrates may be enemies to churches and to
church-assemblyes. Acts 1^


4 It belongs unto Synods and counsels, to debate and determine controversies
of faith, Acts 15.1.2 6.^ 1 Ch^o 1^.13.
and cases of conscience; to clear from the word holy directions for the holy
worship of God, and good government of the church* to bear witness against
^^d-ad^^nistration and Corruption in doctrine or man^ers in any particular
Church, 2 Chronicles ^9.6.7. Acts 15.24 verse 2^*29
and to give directions for the reformation thereof: Not to exercise
Church Censures in way of discipline, nor any other act of church authority or
jurisdiction: which that presidentiall Synod did forbear.

5 The Synods directions and determinations, so far as consonant to the word
of God, are to be received with reverence and submission; not only for their
agreement therewith (which is the principal ground thereof, and without which
they bind not at all:) ^ut also secondarily, for the power whereby they are made,
Acts. 15.
as being an ordinance of God appointed thereunto in his word.

6 Because it is difficult, if not impossible, for many churches to com
altogether in one place, in all their (...) universally: therefore they may
assemble by their delegates or messenger^, as the church of Antioch went not
all to Jerusalem, Acts 15.^
but so (...) men for that purpose. Because none are o^ should be more (...) to
know the state of the churches, nor to advise of ways for the good thereof
then Elders; therefore it is fit that in the choice of the messengers for such
assembl^es, they have special respect unto such. Yet in a^ much as not only
Paul and Barnabas, Acts 15.2 verse 22* 23*
but certain others also were sent to Jerusalem from Antioch. Acts. 15* and
when they were come to Jerusalem, not only the Apostles and Elders, but other
brethren also di^ assemble, and meet about the matter; therefore Synods are to
consist both of Elders, and other church members, endued with gifts, and sent
by the churches, not excluding the presence of any brethren in the churches.

CHAP: XVII Of the Civil Magistrates power in matters E^c^esiastic^l.
IT is lawf^ll, profitable, and necessary for christians to gather themselves
into Church estate, and therein to exercise all the ord^na^^es of christ
according unto the word, Act 2.41.47 cap 4.^* 2, 3
although the consent of Magistrate co^ld not be had thereunto; because the
Apostles and christ^ans in their time did frequently thus practice, when the
Magistrates being all of them Jewish or pagan, and mostly persecuting enemies,
would g^ve no countenance or consent to such matters.

2 Church Government stands in no opposition to civil govenment of
co^mon-welths, ^ohn 18* ^^
nor any intrencheth upon the authority of Civil Magistrates in their
jurisdictions; John 1^.36 Acts ^5.8.
nor any whit weakneth their hands in governing; but rather strengthens them,
and furthereth the people in yielding more hearty and conscionable obedience
unto them, whatsoever so^e ^ll affected persons to the ways of Christ have
suggested, to alienate the affections of Kings and Princes from the ordinances
of Christ; as if the kingdom of Christ in his church could not rise and stand,
without the falling and weakening of their government, which is also of Christ:
whereas the contrary is most true, that they may both stand together and
flourish the one being helpful unto the other, (...) 4^.23.
in their distinct and due administrations.

3 The power and authority of Magistrates is not for the restrai^ing of
churches, or any other good works, but for helping in and furthering thereof;
Rom 13.4. 1 Timothy 2.2.
and therefore the consent and countenance of Magistrates when it may be had, is
not to be slighted, or lightly esteemed; but on the contrary; it is part of
that honor due to christ^an Magistrates to desire and crave their consent and
approbation therein: which being obtained, the churches may then proceed in
their way with much more encouragement, and comfort.

4 It is not in the power of Magistrates to compel their subjects to become
church members, and to partake at the Lords table: for the priests are
reproved, Ezekiel 44.7, 9
that brought u^worthy ones into the sa^ctuarie: then, as it was unlawful for
the priests, so it is as unlawful to be done by civil Magistrates. 1 Cor 5.11
Those whom the church is to cast out if they were in, the Magistrate ought not
thrust into the church, nor to hold them therein.

5 As it is unlawful for church officers to meddle with the sword of the
Magistrate, so is it u^lawfull for the Magistrate to meddle with the work
proper to church officers* Matthew ^0.25.26.
the Acts of Moses and David, who were not only Princes, but Prophets, were
extraord^nary; therefore not imitable. 2 Chronicles 26 16.17.
Against such usurpation the Lord witnessed, by smiting Uzziah with leprosy,
for presuming to offer incense

6 It is the duty of the Magistrate, to take care of matters of religion, and
to improve his civil authority for the observing of the duties commanded in the
first, Psalm* 82.2.
as well as for observing of the duties commanded in the second table They are
called Gods. The end of the Magistrates office, is not only the quiet and
peaceable life of the subject, 1 Timothy 2.^* 2
in matters of righteousness and honesty, but also in matter* of godliness, yea
of all godliness. Moses, Joshua, David, Solom^^* Asa, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah,
Josiah, 1 Kings 15.14. c 22.4^ 2 King 12.3 c 14.4. c 15.35. 1 Kings 20.42. Job
29.25. c 3^.26.28. Ne 1^ Jonah 3.7. Ezra 7. (...) 3.^^.
are much commended by the Holy Ghost, for the putting forth (...) authority in
matters of religion: on the contrary, such Kings as have been failing this way,
are frequently taxed and reproved by the Lord. and not only the Kings of Judah,
but also Job, Nehemiah, the king of Niniveh, Darius, Artaxerxes, Nebucadnezar,
whom none looked at as types of Christ, (thouh were it so, there were no place
for any just objection*) are co^me^ded in the book of God, for exercising their
authority this way.

7 The object of the power of the Magistrate, are not things merely inward, and
so not subject to his cognizance and view, as unbeleife hardness of heart,
erroneous opinions not vented; but only such things as are acted by the outward
man; neither is their power to be exercised, in commanding such acts of the
outward (...), and punnishi^g the neglect thereof, as are but mere inve^tions,
and devices of men; 1 Kings 2^* 2^. verse 4^.
but about such acts, as are commanded and forbidden in the word; yea such as
the word does clearly determine, though not always clearly to the judgment of
the Magistrate or others, yet clearly in it self. In these he of right ought
to putt forth his authority, though oft-times actually he does it not. Deuteronomy 13.
1 Kings 2^.28. verse 42. Dan 3.29. Zach 13.^^ Neh 13.2^* 1 Timothy 2.2. Rom (...)


8 Idolatry, Blasphemy, Heresy, venting corrupt and pernicious opinions, that
destroy the foundation, open contempt of the word preached, profanation of the
Lords day, d^sturbing the peaceable administration and exercise of the worship
and holy things of God, and the like, are to be restrained, and punished by
civil authority.

9 If any church one or more shall grow schismatic, rending it self from the
communion of other churches, or shall walk incorrigibly or obstinately in any
corrupt way of their own, contrary to the rule of the word; in such case, the
Magistrate is to put forth his coercive power, as the matter shall require.
Joshua ^^*
The tribes on this side Jordan intended to make war against the other tribes,
for building the altar of witness, whom they suspected to have turned away
therein from following of the Lord.

FINIS
A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS IN THIS, (...).
CHAP I Of the Form of Church Government in general, and that it is one,
(...), and prescribed in the word of God. Page 1 CHAP II Of the nature of the
Catholic Church in general^, and in special of a particular visible Church.
Page 2 CHAP III Of the matter of the visible Church, both in respect of quality,
and quantity. Page 3 CHAP IV Of the Form of a visible Church, and of
Church Covenant. Page 4 CHAP V Of the first subject of Church-powr, or to whom
Church-powr does first belong. Page ^ CHAP VI Of the Officers of the Church, and
specially of Pastors and Teachers. Page 7 CHAP VII Of Ruling Elders, and
Deacons. Page 8 CHAP IIX Of Election of Church Officers. Page 10 CHAP IX Of
Ordination, and Imposition of hands. Page 11 CHAP X Of the power of the Church,
and its pres^itery. Page 12 CHAP XI Of the maintenance of Church Officers. Page
15 CHAP XII Of the Admission of members into the Church. Page 16 CHAP XIII Of
Church Members their removal from one Church to another, and of letters of
Recommendation and dismission. Page 19 CHAP XIV Of Excommunication, and other
Church Censures. Page 20 CHAP XV Of the Communion of Churches one with another.
Page 23 CHAP XVI Of Synods. Page 27 CHAP XVII Of the civil Magistrates power in
matters ecclesiastical. Page 28
Errata The faults escaped in some of the books thus amended
Note that the first figures stands for page the next for line page 8 19* r
they. 10 11. r not, be. 13.26. r admission. p. 16.28. r Philip. 17.5. r Acts.
19.18.18.28 r not be adm* 19. r one. r to. 21.21. r convinced* 25.35. r there*


